Semantics for the Music Industry: the Development of the 

Music Business Ontology (MBO) 

Frank Schumacher 

University of Leipzig 
Augustusplatz 10  

04109 Leipzig, Germany  

+49 3419732256  

Ronny Gey 

University of Leipzig  

Augustusplatz 10  

04109 Leipzig, Germany  

+49 3419732256  

Stephan Klingner 
University of Leipzig 

Augustusplatz 10 

04109 Leipzig, Germany  

+49 3419732278 

fs@informatik.uni-leipzig.de 

gey@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

klingner@informatik.uni-

leipzig.de 

internet-based  distribution  services  and  marketing  channels  [1], 
used by many, often small and independent players [2].  

Due to legal specifics of the music industry such as copyrights or 
royalties and the corresponding heterogeneous international structures administrative tasks in general have an inherent complexity. 
As  smaller  stakeholders  often  lack  financial  capacities,  an  effec-
tive, domain specific software supporting these tasks is not available  for  the  majority  of  players.  This  results  in  manifold  manual 
and  time-consuming  activities,  limiting  productivity  and  quality. 
The  changing  value  chain,  the  new  worldwide  distribution  channels  and  multitude  of  options  regarding  devices  and  services  [3] 
therefore require efficient and effective software solutions for the 
management  of  music  data.  It  is  important  to  ensure  that  new 
solutions are also affordable for small players and can be integrated seamlessly into the existing IT-infrastructure. 

The  open  as  well  as  structuring  concepts  of  the  Semantic  Web 
provide the necessary flexibility and capabilities to overcome the 
heterogeneity  of  the  domain  without  the  need  of  establishing  a 
standard. Rather an open,  common language shall  be introduced, 
which is free to use and can be extended by all players. Therefore, 
we propose the Music Business Ontology (MBO) as a solution for 
the current challenges of the music industry. 

Our aim is to present an overall approach, containing the methodology of identifying domain-specific challenges, the deduction of 
an  adequate  technical  basis  and  the  presentation  of  prototypical 
tools as possible solutions of these challenges. 

The  contribution  of  this  paper  is  twofold.  First,  we  present  the 
results of a qualitative analysis of the music industry. Second, the 
MBO  as  a  solution  is  presented.  To  be  able  to  specify  general 
findings  and  to  deduce  and  develop  adequate  solutions,  we  applied  the  following  methodical  approach,  consistent  with  the 
structure of the paper. First a qualitative analysis was  conducted, 
consisting  of  various  interviews  with  domain  experts  to  identify 
and  specify  the  major  challenges  of  the  music  industry.  The  results are described in chapter 2. To identify concepts relevant for 
the  MBO,  a  multitude  of  technical  standards  were  analyzed  (see 
Chapter  3).  Based  on  the  results  chapter  4  describes  the  main 
concepts of the MBO as our proposed solution for the challenges 
of  digitalization  in  music  business  processes.  To  illustrate  its 
practical use, Chapter 5 introduces various supporting tools based 
on the MBO. Chapter 7 concludes the paper. 

2.  QUALITATIVE APPROACH 
To ensure openness and objectivity towards our research subject, 
we  decided  to  approach  our  field  of  study  in  a  qualitative  and 
explorative  manner [4]. This first step was driven by our interest 

ABSTRACT 
In  the  paper  we  show  the  development  of  the  Music  Business 
Ontology  (MBO).  The  MBO  was  developed  in  reaction  to  problems  towards  data  and  communication  in  the  music  industry. 
Based on a qualitative pre-study we analyzed the music industry, 
its players and data and software in use. First, we identified typical  services  and  data  formats.  Consequently,  we  extracted  concepts and properties from the music business. The development of 
software  tools  for  the  music  business  serving  well-defined  tasks 
followed  the  design  of  the  ontology.  As  a  result,  the  MBO  increases transparency of the music business as well as it serves for 
a  better  understanding  of  the  music  business  itself  among  its 
actors. The introduction of the Music Business Ontology changes 
the  way  actors  and  systems  in  the  music  business  interact  with 
each  other.  It  decreases  the  need  for  different  interfaces  and  formats and thus considerably reduces complexity. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
E.2 [Data Storage Representation]: Linked representations. 

H.3.5 [Online Information Services]: Web-based services.  

J.5 [Arts and Humanities]: Performing arts. 

General Terms 
Management, Documentation, Standardization. 

Keywords 
music  business  ontology,  ontology  development,  ontology  dis-
semination, music industry 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
The digitalization has led to many disruptive changes in the music 
industry,  resulting  in  a  multitude  of  challenges.  Whereas  mainly 
traditional  distribution  channels  (physical,  radio)  were  used  by  a 
few major players in the past, the market is much more fragmented  nowadays.  Digitalization  of  production,  marketing  and  distribution processes of music favored the emergence of a multitude of 

SEM '14, September 04 - 05 2014, Leipzig, AA, Germany 
Copyright is  held by  the  owner/author(s). Publication  rights licensed  to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-2927-9/14/09...$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2660517.2660531 


music industry specific processes, to highlight the power relationships  and  networks  of  the  different  actors  and  to  discover  the 
technologies in use in terms of software, data formats and stand-
ards.  Our  goal  was  to  identify  the  issues  the  music  industry  is 
confronted with nowadays - generally and with a focus on technological issues in the realm of software and data formats. 

Between October 2013 and June 2014, we conducted eight qualitative  expert  interviews  [5]  based  on  a  semi-structured  question-
naire.  We  interviewed  employees  and  owners  of  labels  and  pub-
lishers,  mostly small and  medium  sized  companies  (SMEs). Fur-
thermore,  we  interviewed  representatives  of  collecting  societies 
and the organization  of independent  music  organizations  (VUT - 
Verband  unabhangiger  Tontragerunternehmen)  in  Germany.  We 
asked  the  interviewees  about  their  daily  work  processes,  about 
their  communication  patterns,  and  about  their  network  of  clients 
and suppliers. These questions were followed by the collection of 
issues  they  are  struggling  with  in  their  daily  work.  Finally,  we 
asked  the  interviewees  question  about  software  tools  they  are 
using and the issues around the use of the software. Subsequently, 
the  interview  material  (audio  recordings)  was  transcribed.  To 
complete, detail and discuss the findings, we organized two workshops  with  the  interviewees:  a  label  specific  and  a  publisher 
specific workshop. Primary goal of the workshops was to analyze 
the  actual  working  processes  in  the  organizations  with  a  special 
focus on communication, data and (software) tools. The interview 
transcriptions and the results of the workshops were then forwarded into an analysis following the grounded theory approach [6]. If 
necessary,  we  conducted  further  interviews  during  the  analysis 
phase  to  strengthen  our  argumentation  by  focusing  on  detailed 
questions, which arose in the former interviews. 

Our  data  analysis  showed  several  results.  First  of  all,  labels  and 
publishers  nowadays  are  confronted  with  a  growing  amount  of 
possible business models and revenue channels. Our interviewees 
reported  that todays distribution channels  are  manifold.  In  addition to the well-known  Vinyl and  CD, a large  amount of  various 
digital  download  and  streaming  channels  are  available.  The 
efficient  and  economical  sensible  use  of  these  distribution  channels is challenging but crucial. All of these digital options significantly increase administration costs, a great challenge particularly 
in  the  light of stagnating or  even declining revenues on  the  label 
side. Further, it can be assumed, that the aggregated market share 
of the various digital distribution channels continues to increase in 
the  future.  In  addition,  required  efforts  and  thus  marketing  expenses increase  as well,  since online  marketing  and social  media 
complement  conventional  marketing  channels.  Consequently, 
labels and publishers are confronted with an increased administrative workload to use the multitude of economically smaller distribution channels. 

Moreover, problems with technology like data redundancy, missing or error-prone standard software or interface incompatibilities 
were frequently reported throughout the interviews. Our respondents also mentioned the need for holistic software covering  more 
than  only  one  specific  aspect  of  the  music  business.  As  a  result, 
labels  and  publishers  spend  a  big  amount  of  their  time  manually 
controlling,  editing  and  transferring  data  from  one  system  to 
another.  Differing  formats  lead  to  manual  data  transfers  and  a 
reuse of data is clearly missing. The lacking technological equivalents  in  face  of  the  developments  of  the  music  industry  and  its 
markets leave the actors in the industry with a high administrative 
burden due to missing technological solutions. This lack of technologies led us to the conclusion that widely accepted data schemas and software tools based on these schemas have to be devel-

oped in order to support the operational tasks of musicians, labels 
and publishers. 

3.  TECHNICAL APPROACH 
Based on the described situation in the music business, we chose 
to start the development of a standard data schema as a common 
ground  for  future  developments  of  software  tools.  As  a  suitable 
solution for data representation, we chose to base our strategy on 
the  semantic  web  technology  [7]  by  developing  an  ontology  for 
the music business. Ontologies are considered as a formal specification  of  a  shared  conceptualization  [8].  An  ontology  forms  the 
heart of any  system  of  knowledge  representation  for  that  domain 
[9]. The starting point of our understanding of a shared conceptualization  of  the  music  business  is  based  on  the  interviews  and 
workshops  we  conducted  in  our  qualitative  study.  Thereby,  we 
could get an overview of the common actors, of legal, professional  and  commercial  institutions  of  the  music  market  as  well  as 
common  software,  communication channels  or interfaces used  in 
the music industry.  

Regarding  software  and  the  interfaces  between  information  sys-
tems,  the  interviewees  mentioned  numerous  software  tools  they 
are  actually  using  or  at  least  are  aware  of.  In  a  second  step,  we 
used  this  information  to  start  exploring  software,  data  standards 
and application programming interfaces (API) currently in use in 
the music industry. While researching their websites we could get 
information  from  most  of  the  software  developers  or  service 
providers.  Amongst  others  we  included  services  like  Jamendo, 
MusicBrainz,  Zebralution,  Phononet,  MusicScout,  Echonest  or 
Gracenote in our analysis. Further, we were fortunate to cooperate 
with the German collecting societies GEMA and GVL by consulting  their  data  formats  and  diverse  application  forms  for  artist  or 
work registration. 

After  the identification of  the  different services  and data formats 
available, we analyzed each of them in order to develop a semantic vocabulary, which is based on a common language represented 
in  the  different  services  and  formats.  Within  each  format  or  service  we  identified  the  different  real  world  concepts  of  the  music 
business  (e.g.  label,  release,  or  royalty  statement).  The  concepts 
are  represented  with  identifiers  (e.g.  label_id,  release_id)  and 
properties (e.g. label_name, label_url, release_title, release_artist), 
which  are  linked  to  the  concepts.  We  then  compared  the  use  of 
concepts  and  properties  throughout  the  different  music  services 
and  formats.  If  the  concept  was  represented  consistently  in  most 
of  the  music  services  and  formats,  we  directly  integrated  the 
concept in our ontology. If the concept was differently represent-
ed, we profoundly analyzed the concept and the associated properties by  consulting  our  music business  experts in the team. Based 
on  our  analysis  we  then  chose  an  understanding  of  concept  and 
properties and integrated it in our ontology. As a result, we developed the Music Business Ontology (MBO) 

Once  the  first  ontology  draft  was  designed,  we  directly  moved 
forward to promote the ontology by developing practical software 
tools for well-defined tasks of the music business. These tools are 
based  on  the  data  schema  of  the  music  business  ontology.  We 
decided to start with the tool development straight away since we 
assume  that  the  music  business  experts  rather  inspect  the  Music 
Business Ontology in its practical use incorporated into a software 
than  analyzing  the  schema  itself.  Further,  by  using  the  software 
tools  we  directly  follow  the  path  of  knowledge  sharing  of  an 
ontology  by sharing our knowledge  about music business and its 
processes. 


THE MUSIC BUSINESS ONTOLOGY  
Based on the previously identified concepts and terminologies, we 
started  to  develop  the  Music  Business  Ontology  (MBO).  In  our 
development we were inspired by the well-known Music Ontology [10]. Where the Music Ontology rather focusses on the music 
itself  the  MBO  focuses  on  the  business  aspects  of  music.  For 
example,  you  can  store  information  about  the  authors  and  their 
share of a work or the royalty statements of distributors and copyright  societies.  All  information  is  stored  in  triples,  whereas  the 
MBO describes the vocabulary to store this information. 

Currently, we are developing a first beta  version of the MBO. In 
its current state it contains 29 concepts of which 16 are subclasses 
of  existing  classes  (9  of  them  stem  from  other  ontologies)  and  5 
classes are linked with owl:sameAs to other ontologies. Addition-
ally,  we  have  130  properties  in  the  MBO.  Due  to  constant  additions and  revisions, this  numbers are subject to change. The  process of updating and maintaining the MBO will be realized in an 
open  and  community  driven  manner.  We  further  integrate  concepts of existing ontologies, like  friend of a friend or dbpedia. In 
this chapter, we give an overview of the main concepts and classes of the MBO, as well as some usage examples. 

In  Figure  1,  we  depict  the  structure  of  the  main  classes  of  the 
MBO. It differs from the music ontology in the way that we structure the classes according to the products that are created from the 
musical works. This means that not only the work and the recording  is  covered,  but  also  the  albums  or  different  releases  (e.g. 
physical  and  digital).  We  also  distinguish  between  the  different 
kind  of  authorships  of  a  musical  work,  such  as  the  composer, 
lyricist  and  arranger  or  the  performing  artist.  In  modern  music, 
those persons are often the same,  but not in  all cases.  Especially 
when  it  comes  to  sharing  royalties,  an  exact  differentiation  between the persons involved in the creation of a song is mandatory. 
With this structure, we have a good basis to extend the MBO with 
more business-related concepts and any future business model that 
might arise. Such  concepts,  like live  events, will be added in  the 
future and will be linked to the base structure (in the example of a 
live event to the performing artist). 

of  musicbrainz.org 

When  we  decided  about  the  initial  structure  of  the  MBO,  the 
structure 
example. 
Musicbrainz.org  is  an  active,  widely  used  and  open  music  meta 
data repository. They build a very exact structure of the business 
items, such as artists, releases and recordings that can be used as a 

served 

as 

an 

basis to attach business related data, such as authorship or royalty-
fees. 

For  business  data,  we  start  with  the  integration  of  royalty  statements  from  music  distributors  and  usage  statements  from  the 
German  copyright  society  GEMA  (although  the  data  from  the 
other societies should fit as well). The MBO is designed to allow 
further  additions  of  business  relevant  meta  data.  We  are  aware 
that the ongoing changes in the music business have to be reflected in the MBO as well. 

One of the core classes is mbo:Artist. This class describes a music 
performer,  whether  a  single  person  or  a  group  of  persons  like  a 
band  or  a  choir.  There  are  also  subclasses  like  mbo:ArtistPerson 
and mbo:ArtistGroup if those types need to be distinguished. For 
example,  this  is  the  case  for  the  mbo:CreationInvolvement  class, 
which describes an involvement in the creation of a musical work. 
Only real persons can be linked to this class, because an author is 
always a person, not a band (even though all members of the band 
can  be  an  author  of  a  musical  work,  of  course).  But  back  to 
mbo:Artist.  It  is  linked  to  mbo:Release  and  mbo:ReleaseGroup. 
Both  classes  describe  a  product  the  artist  has  created.  In  most 
cases this will be an album with a couple of songs performed by 
that artist, but it can also be a release of that artist. The reason for 
the  differentiation  between  mbo:Release  and  mbo:ReleaseGroup 
is that these days artist usually  release  an album in different formats or versions, for example as a CD or a digital download. 

Lets  look  at  an  example.  The  Opera  Metal  band  molllust  (the 
mbo:Artist) released  their debut Schuld (read: they are  the  performing  artists  or  band)  as  CD  and  digital  download  as  well. 
When we want to attach meta data to the release itself, regardless 
of  the  media type, we use  mbo:ReleaseGroup. When we want to 
refer  to  a  certain  media,  for  example  the  release  date  of  the  CD, 
we  use  mbo:Release.  Of  course,  there  is  a  property  to  relate  a 
mbo:Release to its containing mbo:ReleaseGroup. 

As  a  release  is  usually  about  releasing  songs,  we  have  to  model 
the  songs  as  well.  At  first,  we  have  to  distinguish  between  the 
song  as  a  creative  work,  an  idea  and  the  actual  recording  of  it. 
This  is  a  very  important  point  in  the  music  business,  because  it 
distinguishes  the  author,  e.g.  composer,  arranger  and  or  lyri-
cist, of a song from the performer. This is an important differentiation when it comes to royalty payments. For example, the copyright societies take care of the rights and the compensation of the 
authors, while a collecting society for performance rights does the 
same  for  the  performer.  Music  labels  represent  the  performers, 

Figure 1: Class structure of the MBO 


responsibilities often mix, especially when the performer and the 
author are the same person.  However, when it comes to business 
issues, we have to distinguish between these two roles. 

To  represent  this  in  the  ontology,  we  have  the  class  mbo:Work 
that represents the intellectual artefact, the song as an idea, which 
connects  to  the  author  of  the  song.  Secondly,  we  have  the  class 
mbo:Recording,  which  represents  the  actual  recording  of  a  song. 
It connects to the performer  of the song. Of course,  there can  be 
more than one recording of a song. To connect a recording with a 
release,  we  introduce  the  class  mbo:Track.  It  describes  the  appearance  of  a  specific  recording  on  a  release.  Here  we  can  store 
information  about  the  recording  that  is  specific  to  the  release  it 
appears on, for example the position in the track list of the release.  

The creation of  a song  is  often a complex  thing that requires the 
involvement  of  persons  that  can  have  various  roles,  such  as  the 
composer, who creates the melodies and rhythms, the texter, who 
writes  the  lyrics  and  the  arranger  who  adapts  the  composition  to 
fit  for  a  special  instrumentation.  These  are  the  main  roles  in  the 
creation  of  a  song.  One  single  person  might  carry  them  out,  but 
there might be more than one person per role as well. Therefore, 
you also have to store how much an author contributed to a song 
to be able to correctly share the revenues for the song. This contribution  is  usually  stored  as  a  percentage  value.  To  model  this 
issue,  we  introduce  the  class  mbo:CreationInvolvement,  that 
stores the information about a single author and his or her role in 
the creation of the song. We do not simply connect an author to a 
musical  work,  since  we  want  to  store  more  details  about  the  au-
thorship. In that way, we are able to define the kind of authorship 
(e.g. composer, arranger or lyricist) the artist had and if more than 
one author was involved how big his or her share was. 

Now  we  have  the  basic  structure  of  musical  artefacts  that  are  in 
focus of the business transactions in music business. This will be 
expanded  to  more  artefacts  that  are  indirectly  connected  to  the 
music  or  the  artist  like  merchandising  (shirts,  cups  or  whatever 
can display the logo of the band) or live activities. 

To this structure we connect business objects, that dont represent 
the music but the business thats done with the music. One main 
field  in  the  music  business  is  still  the  selling  of  music.  While  it 
was  just  the  selling  of  albums  or  singles  on  different  physical 
formats  like  CD  or  vinyl  some  years  ago,  it  now  gets  a  little  bit 
more  complex  with  the  selling  of  music  on  digital  distribution 
channels like download or streaming. One common characteristic 
is that a consumer pays and gets a musical artefact, which might 
be a CD with a bunch of songs or just a single digital track. This 
transaction  is  modelled as  mbo:RoyaltyStatement. Unfortunately, 
there is still mostly no data about the individual customer, because 
distributors and  shops like  iTunes  or  Amazon do  not provide  this 
information.  There  are  some  alternatives  emerging,  like  band-
camp,  that  provide  the  seller  with  information  or  contact  to  the 
customer, but their market share is still low. As more information 
will  become  commonly  available,  they  will  be  modelled  in  the 
MBO as well. 

The main source of data about the sale of music comes from the 
shops, distributors and aggregators that deliver the musical prod-
ucts. There is no standard format or set of data, each reseller has 
his  own  way  of  presenting  the  numbers,  but  there  are  usually 
excel-files  involved.  Also,  you  usually  dont  get  a  statement  for 
each sale of a single product, but the number of sales of the product  in  a  given  period  of  time.  We  identified  the  relevant  information  provided  by  the  majority  of  resellers  and  created  corresponding properties in our ontology. We can store the time period 

of  the  statement  (mbo:begin,  mbo:end),  the  amount  of  sold  units 
(mbo:netSalesNumber), the supplier-id of the sold product, which 
is an identifier of the selling party (mbo:hasSupplierId), in which 
country the product was sold, the amount of money that is passed 
over  from  the  reseller,  just  to  name  a  few.  Of  course,  you  can 
connect 
as 
foaf:Organization) and the sold product. A mbo:RoyaltyStatement 
can  be  linked  with  a  mbo:Release,  a  mbo:Recording  or  a 
mbo:Work. 

(modelled 

reseller 

the 

statement 

to 

the 

There are a lot more properties and classes that attempt to model 
the business view on music in the MBO, but it would go beyond 
the  scope  of  this  paper  to  present  them  all.  We  rather  want  to 
present some use cases, where the MBO comes into operation. 

The  construction  of  the  MBO  is  one  important  point  that  is  focused but its mandatory to promote its use in the music business. 
Only  if  it  is  widely  used,  it  becomes  relevant!  Therefore,  we 
created a bunch of prototype tools that can display the usefulness 
of the MBO to the music business. When we created these tools, 
we focused on the reason we started creating the MBO firsthand: 
to  be  an  interchange  format  for  data  accumulated  in  music  business  activities.  But  the  real  strength  of  the  idea  comes  from  the 
ability  to actually accumulate  the data in  one data source. While 
the interviews und workshops showed that in business practice all 
the data is scattered in different  formats, tables, stores,  files  etc., 
the  MBO  gives  the  possibility  to  store  all  the  data  in  one  place. 
Thereby we can enrich the converted data with information that is 
already stored in our database, minimizing redundancy and error-
prone, multiple manual input of data. 

This way, we cannot only just convert the data from one format to 
the  MBO  schema  or  vice  versa,  we  can  also  add  further  needed 
information automatically, which saves a lot of time and prevents 
many errors. 

Another  advantage  of  this  approach  is  that  no  company  has  to 
completely restructure its IT-infrastructure (even if that would be 
recommendable  in  many  cases,  but  thats  another  story)  in  order 
to use the MBO. All what has to be done is the creation of a bunch 
of conversion  tools that translate from the appropriate formats  to 
the MBO (and  vica  versa).  As  mentioned  before, those tools can 
use additional data from the existing data in the MBO-datastore to 
raise their usefulness beyond the simple conversion of data. 

This way, we wont create a complex software system that tries to 
address  all  the  needed  functionality  for  the  music  business  (and 
probably would fail because of the complexity, the ever-changing 
and  individual demands and  no one being  able to pay for such a 
monster),  but  rather  create  a  set  of  individual  tools,  that  address 
one  specific  problem  each.  The  MBO  serves  as  a  common  data 
store,  where  the  tools  share  their  data,  thereby  integrating  the 
overall business logic on a data level. Of course, this will arouse 
other problems like data integrity, data validity and duplicate data. 
We suggest either a clearing tool, that watches over the triple store 
or  a  management  layer  that  can  be  placed  between  the  tools  and 
the data store,  so  the  tools do not directly communicate  with the 
triple store. But this topic needs further research. 

5.  TOOLS USING THE MBO 
For now, we want to show the possibilities of the use of the MBO 
with small but powerful tools and accept the problems that might 
arise in a real world environment. 

To  simplify  the  introduction  of  a  new  concept  or  system,  it  is 
useful to find a way to let the user use the existing data instead of 
having to enter the data again. As many data about music already 
exists around the web, it is a good idea to use this data to be able 


before  that  the  MBO  is  closely  connected  to  the  musicbrainz 
structure,  so  it  is  obvious  to  create  an  importing  tool  for 
musicbrainz data. 

Figure 2: Reflected data 

With this tool in its current state of functionality, you can search 
the  musicbrainz  database  for  an  artist  to  import  into  your  triple 
store.  If  you  find  this  artist,  you  can  fetch  the  related  data  from 
musicbrainz. You get information about the artist itself, about the 
releases  he  or  she  published  including  the  recorded  songs,  about 
the songs the artist contributed and so on. To be able to adapt the 
import  (which  data  you  want  to  import  and  which  data  need  to 
change), we use reflection to create a hierarchical structure of the 
musicbrainz  data.  Nodes  in  this  tree  consist  of  the  name  of  the 
variable, the value and a  switch for turning the import  on or off, 
see  Figure  2. This reflection  technique can be used for other importers  as  well.  Naturally,  you  have  to  adapt  the  conversion  to 
MBO-triple, as this is format specific. This conversion is actually 
the  final step. When  you  checked the data the tool converts  it  to 

triples  in  the  MBO-format  and  writes  it  to  a  triple  store  using  a 
sparql-endpoint. During this process, we might query other triple 
stores  for  URIs  used  for  certain  objects.  For  example,  we  ask 
dbpedia  for  URIs  for  places.  Our  artist  molllust  comes  from 
Germany,  so  we  store  the  URI  for  Germany  from  dbpedia 
<http://dbpedia.org/resources/Germany> 
instead  of  the  string 
Germany,  preparing  the  field  for  linked  data.  Additionally,  we 
check the existence of each created URI in the database, avoiding 
duplicating data and enable the enrichment of data about an artist 
that might already be part of the database. 

As  all  the  needed  information  is  free,  everybody  can  contribute 
writing  importers  (and  exporters  as  well  for  that  matter)  for  the 
MBO. 

A  second  example  for  a  tool  is  our  ImportDistributorStatement-
Tool. As the format of the Royalty Statement Reports of the distributors are manifold and usually dont fit to the  music business 
companies data structure, you have to import this data somehow. 
Nowadays  this  is  often  done  manually  by  fiddling  around  with 
excel  sheets.  Because  of  the  numerous  different  formats  in  use, 
you would need to create a bunch of converters to convert the data 
from  one  format  to  another.  This  is  where  the  MBO  comes  into 
play. 

With just one converter for each format you can basically convert 
every format to another with an existing converter. And even if a 
converter  for  your  specific  format  doesnt  exist,  you  can  create 
one by yourself or commission someone to create it, which is not 
a huge task and affordable even for small companies. 

For  our  showcase,  we  created  a  tool  that  can  import  real  world 
statements  from  a  specific  distributor  and  export  statements  to  a 
SAP  Business ByDesign format, which is a common ERP-system 
for  small  and  medium  enterprises.  The  first  step  is  to  read  the 
statement  from  the  distributor  and  to  convert  it  to  triples  in  the 
MBO-format. These triples can be stored in our database, enriching the data of the accounted artists and converted from the triples 
into the xml structure that can be imported into the SAP-System. 
Considered only those two formats, it might look easier to directly 
convert the data from the distributor-statement to the SAP XML-
file,  but  on  a  larger  scale,  considering  all  the  other  formats  that 
might need a transformation, it is much more effective to convert 
the data into a common intermediate format, reducing the theoret-

Figure 3: Data transfer before and after the introduction of the MBO 


of royalty statement formats and m the number of formats used by 
the music business industry. 

The final tool we want to mention checks the statements from the 
German copyright society GEMA for completeness. Artists, Publishers  or  Organizers  report  about  the  usage  of  their  works  in 
Live-performances,  radio  or  TV  for  which  they  get  royalties. 
Artists  and  publishers  might  want  to  check  if  all  the  expected 
royalties  are  handed  out.  To  achieve  this,  they  have  to  manually 
check the statement against their records of work usage. The tool 
reads the statement from the GEMA and a record of the live activities  of  the  artists  and  the  works  they  performed.  This  record  of 
live  activities  is  imported  from  an  excel  file,  but  when  the  publisher stores this information in the triple store beforehand, it can 
be extracted directly from there. From those lists, a compilation of 
missing  royalties  can  be  automatically  created  and  send  to  the 
GEMA. Without the tool it took the publisher that tested it about 
one week to check the statements, with the tool just a few hours. 
As with all other tools, the data can be pushed to the triple store, 
preserving it for further use, for  example  calculating the fees for 
their artists. 

These  exemplary tools illustrate different  use cases for the MBO 
and how they can  improve the  music  business.  They  give a concrete  value to the  music  business,  and thus are  likely to increase 
the acceptance of the MBO itself. 

6.  DISCUSSION 
There are some  other projects that deal with music  metadata like 
the already mentioned Music Ontology or the Musicbrainz initia-
tive. The differentiation from the MBO is their stronger focus on 
the user side  of  the  music opposing to  the  business aspects  of it, 
which addressed by the Music Business Ontology. There are other 
formats used in the music business, but none of them can count as 
a universal standard that covers  most of the needs  of  the  various 
players.  In  most  cases  only  specific  players  are  focused.  On  example is the DDEX (Digital Data Exchange), which is not an open 
standard and cant be used for free. Other data initiatives like the 
Global repertoire database (GRD), that try  to solve the problems 
with a centralistic approach fail because  of the complexity of the 
problem and the many different players involved1. 

The  development  of  the  MBO  is  an  ongoing  process.  Therefore, 
the aim of the prototypical tools is twofold: first, they are used for 
demonstration  purposes  to  illustrate  applicability  of  the  MBO  in 
different use cases. Second, by the use of the tools in various real 
world scenarios with business data the MBO as well as the tools 
are  evaluated. Therefore, the  continuously  given  feedback  of  our 
industry  partners  supports  the  appropriate  development  of  the 
MBO. To improve the quality and quantity of the evaluation it is 
planned to extend the range of involved companies by the presentation  of  the  MBO  in  various  networking  events  in  the  music 
industry  in  the  future.  Due  to  the  project-induced  focus  on  the 
German  music  industry,  a  stronger  international  orientation  is 
required to evaluate applicability in non-German markets as well. 

7.  CONCLUSION  
In  this paper we showed the development  of  the Music  Business 
Ontology  (MBO).  The  MBO  was  developed  in  reaction  to  problems  towards  data  and  communication  in  the  music  industry. 
Based on a qualitative pre-study we analyzed the music industry, 

1  http://www.musikmarkt.de/Aktuell/News/Aus-fuer-die-Global-

Repertoire-Database-PRS-will-Alternative 

its  players  and  data  and  software  in  use.  We  identified  typical 
services  and  data  formats  and  extracted  concepts  and  properties 
from the music business. The design of the ontology was followed 
by the development of software tools for the music business serving well-defined tasks. As a result, the MBO increases transparency  of  the  music  business  as  well  as  it  serves  for  a  better  understanding  of  the  music  business  itself  among  its  actors.  Further, 
depicted in Figure 3, the introduction of the Music Business Ontology changes the way actors and systems in the music business 
interact  with each other.  It decreases  the need for different interfaces and formats and thus considerably reduces complexity. 

The Music Business Ontology is a potent solution to tackle two of 
the main problems with data processing. At first, it can serve as an 
intermediate  format  that  helps  translating  the  manifold  data  formats into each other. Doing so, it reduces the loss of data, speeds 
up  the  administrational  processes  in  music  industry  and,  in  gen-
eral, helps towards a more fluent data transfer compared to nowa-
days.  Secondly,  it  serves  as  a  storage  format  that  enables  the 
enrichment  of  data  with  already  existing  information,  which  reduces the need for redundant input and spelling errors, also speeding up administrational processes. 

It is necessary to involve as many contributors and users as possible to  make the MBO  successful. Only  if  the use of  the  MBO is 
widespread,  it  can  unfold  its  full  potential.  Therefore,  a  good 
range  of  useful  tools  which  help  with  the  crucial  processes  in 
music business are essential. Of course, security issues have to be 
focused either. Finally, the use of the tools has to be intuitive and 
easy to be accepted by the actors in the music business. Usability 
plays an essential role in order to successfully diffuse ideas, soft-
ware, ontologies  or whatever  kind  of concepts  we  have from  the 
world. 

If these steps can be achieved, administrational effort in the music 
business will be reduced to a great amount, leaving space for the 
important, creative work of supporting the artists. Finally, and not 
to  forget,  it  is  the  first  step  for  more  transparency  in  the  music 
business. 

8.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Parts of the work were funded by grants of the German Ministry 
of  Education  and  Research  in  the  context  of  the  joint  research 
project ART-e-FAKT (01IS12035) under the supervision of the 
PT-DLR. 
