Expanded citations and projections of concepts

Marcin Skulimowski

Faculty of Physics and Applied Informatics

University of Lodz
Pomorska 149/153
90-236 Lodz, Poland

mskulim@uni.lodz.pl

ABSTRACT
In our recent paper, we proposed a new kind of citations,
called the expanded citations, which link scientific papers
and concepts from them. The expanded citations are represented in RDF and can be processed by machines. In this
paper, we use the expanded citations to introduce projections of concepts which can be useful in searching for publi-
cations. The analysis of the projections and their time evolution gives a knowledge about the role and the significance
of the concept in a given domain.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.4 [Articial Intelligence]: Knowledge Representation
Formalisms and Methods

Keywords
citation relation, semantic publishing, digital libraries

INTRODUCTION

1.
Bibliographic citations are very important in scientific ac-
tivity. They can be used to estimate the quality of the research ([1],[2],[12]). The problem with citations, however,
lies in the fact that they usually are treated equally, while,
in fact, there are many reasons why authors cite publications of others ([5],[9],[11]). A growing body of literature
has tried to describe precisely citations and, in consequence,
the relationship between publications ([4],[10]). To this end,
terms from special ontologies can be used (see e.g.
[6]).
Accordingly, citation networks can be represented in RDF
(Resource Description Framework) and become machine-
understandable. However, to make this possible, we have
to determine functions of citations in publications. This can
be done automatically to some extent [3]. Above all, the
function of a citation can be determined by the author of a
publication. In fact, the author can do more. Namely, he
can expand some of the citations. Note that a citation is

away.

Dedicated to the memory of my father, who recently passed

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers
or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. SEM 14, September 04
- 05 2014, Leipzig, AA, Germany Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2927-
9/14/09a  A e$15.00. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2660517.2660537

often related to the usage of some concept (idea, formula,
method) from a cited article in a citing article. And this
concept can be included in the citation. In this way we
come to the so-called expanded citations which we proposed
in our recent paper [8].
In this paper, we propose an application of expanded cita-
tions. Namely, we show that expanded citations allow for
more precise search of scientific publications. Today, when
we want to find articles related to some topic, we usually
use a search engine. As a search result we obtain a list of
articles in which some word, related to the issue, was found.
In order to decide whether an article is interesting for us or
not we have to read or at least browse it. Expanded citations will enable search for a well-defined concept (identified
by a URI - Uniform Resource Identifier). Moreover, as a
search result we will obtain a collection of articles where the
relationship between each article and the concept is defined
by a term from some ontology. It will be possible to narrow
down the results to a set of articles that are only in a certain
relation to the concept. We call this set a projection of the
concept. For example, we may be interested only in articles
in which some concept was generalized or criticized. This
short paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the notion
of expanded citations is presented. Projections of concepts
are introduced and briefly discussed in Section 3. The paper
ends with discussion and the future directions of the present
work.
2. EXPANDED CITATIONS
Throughout this paper, we use a term concept to refer to
any entity (part) of a scientific article named with a URI.
Such a URI can be obtained using a URL of the article (see
[8]). Thus, each concept is a resource according to RDF
terminology. Let us now consider two articles A and B and
a standard citation A  B (A cites B). In our recent paper,
we introduced the following definition [8]:

Definition 1. We say that a citation A  B is expandable
if there exist concepts CA (from A) and CB (from B), relations r, rA, rB represented by object properties from some
ontology O and the following RDF triples (links)1:

CA r CB:
A rA CA:
B rB CB:

(1)

(2)

(3)

1Throughout this paper, we use Notion 3 syntax for RDF
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Notation3). In this defi-
nition, for simplicity, we use letters for resources.


Fig. 1).

Standard citations are included in citation networks [1]. Expanded citations are included in the so-called concept networks [7].

where P is a publication, C is a concept from P and r is a
named relation (represented by an object property) between
P and C. The same concept C can appear in many articles.
It may be useful to consider all publications referring to this
concept. We introduce the following definition.

Figure 1: Expanded citation [8]

Example 1
Let us consider Kijowskis distribution for the time of arrival (shortly Kdistr). This concept was introduced in the
following paper:

Kijowski, J.,On the time operator in quantum mechanics and
the Heisenberg Uncertainty relation for energy and time, Reports on Mathematical Physics 6 (3), p. 361-386.

The paper has the following URL:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0034-4877(74)80004-2

The concept Kdistr is represented in this paper by the formula with number 9. So we can assign to it the following
URI:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0034-4877(74)80004-2#9

We take into account the following set of articles related to
the concept Kdistr:

1-http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/spmi.1997.0544
2-http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.58.4336
3-http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.61.012104
4-http://pra.aps.org/abstract/PRA/v61/i2/e022118
5-http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0370-1573(00)00047-8
6-http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0102005
7-http://m.iopscience.iop.org/1751-8121/43/50/505303

Each of these articles contains a standard citation referring
to the article (dentoted by 0) in which the concept Kdistr
was introduced. All these citations refer to the concept
Kdistr. They can be expanded using terms from SACO, the
Scientific Article Content Ontology.2 This draft ontology
contains a set of object properties enabling characterization
of what is done within a scientific publication. For example,
we can say that an article analyzes, generalizes or uses some
concept. The expanded citations obtained for Kdistr can be
found in Appendix A.

3. PROJECTIONS OF CONCEPTS
As it follows from the previous section, an expanded citation consists of three RDF triples (see Definition 1). In this
section we limit ourselves to the following triples:

P r C:

(4)

2http://purl.org/lyr/saco

Definition 2. Let C be a concept and O be an OWL on-
tology. The set P (C) of all publications referring to C is
defined as follows:

P (C) := {P | r  O : P r C}:

(5)

Notice that P (C) is not a set of publications in which some
word (e.g., a name related to the concept C) can be found
using full-text search. P (C) contains publications for which
relations to the concept C are precisely defined by r. Each
such a relation r corresponds to some subset of P (C).

Definition 3. A projection of a concept C on an object

property r  O is a set r-C defined as follows:

r-C := {P  P (C) | P r C}:

(6)

As we can see from the definition, r-C contains all publications which are linked with C by the relation r. Note that
r-C can be defined formally in OWL as a restriction containing an owl:hasValue constraint. It describes a class of
all individuals (in our case  publications) for which the
property r has at least one value semantically equal to the
concept C. From the last definition it follows that the family
of sets {r-C : r  O} is a cover of P (C), i.e:



P (C) =

(r-C)

(7)

Using properties from the SACO ontology we can obtain

Figure 2: Projections of C as a cover of P (C).

various projections of a concept C e.g.:

introduces-C - contains a publication (or publications) in
which C was introduced for the first time.
uses-C - contains publications in which C is used.
generalizes-C - contains publications in which C is general-
ized.
givesExampleOf-C - contains publications in which examples
of C are given.
Example 2
Using the expanded citations obtained for the Kijowskis
distribution (see Appendix 1) we can obtain the following
sets3:
3Note that, we do not consider projections of Kdistr (which
contain all publications) but their subsets.


{1; 2; 5}  analyzes-Kdistr
{4; 6; 7}  generalizes-Kdistr
{3; 7}  obtainsDifferently-Kdistr

We can see from the above examples that projection spaces
may intersect.
It is obvious taking into account that the
same concept can be treated in different ways in one pub-
lication. For example, our concept Kdistr is generalized and
obtained differently in publication 7.
In consequence, the
family of sets {r-C : r  O} is a cover of P (C) but not its
partition. In some cases, one projection may be a subset of
another one. For example, it seems to be obvious that if a
publication introduces some concept C then it also analyzes
this concept. Consequently: introduces-C  analyzes-C.
In general, we can formulate the following lemmas.

Lemma 1. Let r1 and r2 be two object properties defined

in some OWL ontology. Then:

r1 rdf s : subP ropertyOf r2  r1-C  r2-C

where C is a concept.

Proof. Let us consider P  r1-C. From the definition
of r1-C it follows that there exists an RDF triple P r1 C.
Because r1 is a subproperty of r2 there exists an RDF triple
P r2 C. This means that P  r2-C.

Obviously the reverse implication is not true. One can imagine that for some concept C and two properties r1 and r2 we
have r1-C  r2-C. However, it does not necessarily follow
from this inclusion that r1 is an rdfs:subproperty of r2.

Lemma 2. Let r1 and r2 be two object properties defined

in some OWL ontology. Then:

r1 owl : propertyDisjointW ith r2  r1-C  r2-C = 

where C is a concept.

Proof. Assume to the contrary that there is a publication P such that P  r1-C  r2-C. From the definition of a
projection it follows that the statements P r1 C and P r2 C
are true. But this contradicts our assumption that r1 is
disjoint with r2.

3.1 Evolution of projections
Projections of concepts will change over time as new publications will appear. The analysis of both the projections
pC and their time evolution can provide information about
the role and importance of C in a given domain. Important
concepts will have a number of non-empty projections. Be-
sides, these projections will contain more and more publications over time. In order to illustrate the time evolution
of projections we propose special diagrams called projection
diagrams (see Fig. 3). A projection diagram represents time
evolution of several projections. The horizontal lines correspond to projections. The points on these lines represent
publications. What is very important, the projection diagram includes a time axis. The publications are arranged
chronologically, from the oldest (on the left) to the youngest

Figure 3: Projection diagram for some concept C.

(on the right). In the case when some publication belongs to
two (or more) projections the points representing this publication are connected by a vertical line. Empty projections
are not taken into account.

Example 2
Let us consider the concept Kdistr and the papers from Example 1. Taking into account their publication dates we can
obtain the projection diagram for Kijowskis distribution. It
is presented below in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Projection diagram for Kijowskis distri-
bution.

Let us examine the diagram in more detail. The considered
concept Kdistr was introduced in paper 0. There are three
generalizations of the concept (papers 4, 6, 7). Moreover, in
papers 3 and 7 the concept was obtained in a different way.
In three papers (1, 2, 5) the concept was analyzed. There is
also one paper (7) in which the concept was generalized and
obtained differently. When we take into account the timeline of the concept we can observe that it was introduced in
1973 and the generalizations of it were obtained about 30
years later. It suggests that the concept is very important
in the domain.

3.2 Discussion and future work
Projections of concepts allow to decompose the set P (C) of
all publications related inaccurately to a concept C into various sets for which the relationship is precisely defined. This
decomposition will make it easy to find publications related
to the concept C in some clearly defined way. Using the
union and the intersection of projections we are able to define very accurately the set of publications we are interested
in. Finding publications contained in this set will be more
efficient because the projections of concepts can be generated automatically using machine-understandable expanded
citations.
To further our research at first we plan to develop and harmonize the vocabulary used in expanded citations. Obvi-
ously, not every standard citation can be expanded. We
intend to investigate how large is the class of citations for
which the expansions exist. The current study was limited
to publications from one domain (quantum mechanics). Future work will explore expanded citations and projections


ing a web tool supporting the creation of expanded citations
and search for publications with the help of projections of
concepts.
