Information Content based Ranking Metric

for Linked Open Vocabularies

Ghislain Auguste Atemezing

EURECOM

Campus SophiaTech, France
atemezin@eurecom.fr

Raphael Troncy

EURECOM

Campus SophiaTech, France

raphael.troncy@eurecom.fr

ABSTRACT
It is widely accepted that by controlling metadata, it is easier to publish high quality data on the web. Metadata,
in the context of Linked Data, refers to vocabularies and
ontologies used for describing data. With more and more
data published on the web, the need for reusing controlled
taxonomies and vocabularies is becoming more and more a
necessity. Catalogues of vocabularies are generally a starting point to search for vocabularies based on search terms.
Some recent studies recommend that it is better to reuse
terms from popular vocabularies [4]. However, there is
not yet an agreement on what makes a popular vocabulary
since it depends on diverse criteria such as the number of
properties, the number of datasets using part or the whole
vocabulary, etc.
In this paper, we propose a method for
ranking vocabularies based on an information content metric which combines three features: (i) the datasets using the
vocabulary, (ii) the outlinks from the vocabulary and (iii)
the inlinks to the vocabulary. We applied this method to
366 vocabularies described in the LOV catalogue. The results are then compared with other catalogues which provide
alternative rankings.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous;
H.3.5 [Online Information Services]: Data sharing
Web-based services

General Terms
Ranking, Linked Data, Vocabularies

Keywords
Information Content, Linked Open Vocabularies, reusing vo-
cabularies, ranking metric.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
SEM 14 September 04 - 05 2014, Leipzig, AA, Germany
ACM 978-1-4503-2927-9/14/09 http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
2660517.2660533.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The linked data principles have gained significant momentum over the last few years as a best practice for sharing and
publishing structured data on the Semantic Web [1]. Before
being published, data is modeled and ontologies or vocabularies are one of the key elements of a dataset. Vocabularies
are the artefact that bring semantics to raw data. One of
the major barriers to the deployment of linked data is the
difficulty for data publishers to determine which vocabularies should be used since developing new vocabularies has a
cost. Catalogues of ontologies are therefore a useful resource
for searching terms (classes and properties) defined in those
vocabularies. The Linked Open Vocabulary (LOV) initiative [3] is playing a significant role in providing such services to users who can search within curated vocabularies,
fostering ontologies reuse. LOV focuses only on vocabularies
submitted by users, which are then reviewed and validated
by curators. In addition, LOV computes dependencies between vocabularies, keeps track of different versions of them
in order to enable their temporal evolution.

To the best of our knowledge, recommending vocabularies
to reuse are limited to popular or well-known ones. This
paper proposes a metric combining different features such
as how vocabularies are interlinked, or how they are used
in real world datasets. This contribution originates also in
the desire to bring the traditional concept of Information
Content (IC) into the field of the semantic web applied to
vocabularies. Many catalogs of ontologies already provide
some ranking metrics based on some features. However, we
are interested in applying the principles of IC on vocabularies to investigate if such techniques can give more insights
in ontology ranking and ontology usage (e.g in visualization
applications).

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 defines the
theory of Information Content, and the features used for applying Partition Information Content to vocabularies. We
present our experiments on the LOV catalogue in the Section 3. We discuss how this ranking metric can be used
for vocabulary design and maintenance in Section 4. We
compare our results with other rankings for vocabularies in
Section 5 before concluding and outlining future work (Sec-
tion 6).

2.

INFORMATION CONTENT METRICS

Based on probability theory, Information Content (IC) is
computed as a measure of generated amount of surprise [6].
More common terms in a given corpus with higher chance
of occurrence cause less surprise and accordingly carry less


We reuse the notion of informativeness as the value of information associated with a given entity, where Information
Content has a negative relation with its probability. The
concept of Information Content can be used to rank each
entity, term, or alphabet in the corpus. We apply the Partitioned Information Content to measure the informativeness
of Linked Open Vocabularies as a semantic network of resources connected together using different range of relations,
as described in [5]. Partitioned Information Content (PIC)
is derived from the IC value using some weights. We empirically set those weights according to three features:
 (i) datasets using the vocabulary (weight = 2);
 (ii) outlinks from a vocabulary, i.e. whether a vocab-

ulary reused other vocabularies (weight = 1);

 (iii) inlinks to a vocabulary, i.e. whether other vocab-

ularies are reusing this vocabulary (weight = 3).

2.1 Information Content in Linked Open Vo-

cabularies

This experiment aims at bringing the concept of informativeness in the field of terms semantically related as it is the
case within semantic web ontologies. The ranking obtained
can give additional information based on the Information
Content theory to help reusing terms and detecting the ones
that are less popular. This can then be used by applications
consuming datasets described with these vocabularies. The
equation (1) gives the formula for computing the IC value
of a term (class or property):

IC(t) =  log2(

(t)

),

(1)

where N is set to be the maximum value corresponding to
the term occurrence in the LOV aggregator (as of June 2014,
this value is 3958, and it corresponds to the popularity of
the skos:prefLabel property); and (t) is the occurrence
of the term (but not its popularity).

For computing (t), we use two types of SPARQL queries
depending on whether the term is a class (Listing 1) or a
property (Listing 2 considers owl:ObjectProperty, owl:Data-
typeProperty and rdfs:Property). Note that we do not yet
take into account the owl:equivalentClass and owl:equi-
valentProperty axioms that may appear in some vocabu-
laries. We leave this as a future work.

Listing 1: SPARQL query for computing the occurrence of a class
SELECT ( count ( ? u r i 1 ) a s ? o c c )
WHERE {
? u r i 1

?p %%c l a s s U R I

. }

2.2 Ranking Vocabularies using Information

Content

For computing the PIC value, we use the following for-

IC(ti),

(2)

i=1

mula:

P IC(f ) = wf  n

Listing 2: SPARQL query for computing the occurrence of a property
SELECT ( count ( ? u r i 1 ) a s ? o c c )
WHERE {

? u r i 1 +objectURI+ ? u r i 2 .
FILTER ( ? u r i 1 != ? u r i 2 ) }

where wf is the weight related to vocabulary f .

We consider very important that a vocabulary is being
reused by other vocabularies and implemented within real
world datasets. For example, the foaf ontology is weighted 6
because it reuses vocabularies (1), it has been used in some
datasets (2) and it is being reused by other vocabularies
(3). The dul1 vocabulary is weighted 3 because it doesnt
reuse any vocabulary but it is instead used by several other
vocabularies.
3. EXPERIMENTS ON VOCABULARIES

We use the LOV catalogue, and particularly the LOV aggregator2 to look at the terms (classes and properties) to
compute their Information Content (IC). LOV defines the
LOV Distribution as the number of vocabularies in LOV
that refer to a particular element and the LOV popularity
as the number of other vocabulary elements that refers to
a particular one. Based on the concept of Partitioned Information Content, we implement our ranking measure according to the algorithm 1. We take the subset of classes
and/or properties with LOV popularity and LOV distribution greater than one. The initial set of vocabularies in LOV
is 366. After filtering the candidate terms, we came out with
a set of 161 vocabularies (44% or 161 vocabularies) for computing their ranking.

The Table 1 gives the Top 15-ranking of the vocabularies
according to the informativeness of the classes and properties used within the LOV ecosystem. As the function is
proportional to the number of terms, we use a threshold of
22 terms in the vocabularies. For example, the PIC value
of dcterms is higher than foafs because the former uses 53
terms (39 properties and 14 classes), while the latter only
35 terms (9 classes and 26 properties); although they both
have the same weight value.

The Table 2 shows the Top 20 namespaces of vocabularies according to the informativeness of the classes and
properties used within the LOV ecosystem, along with their
Information Content Value.

4. APPLICATION OF INFORMATION CON-

TENT ON VOCABULARIES

We foresee various applications using the ranking method
based on the Information Content metric while designing semantic web applications, vocabulary life-cycle management
or novel recommendation services. We make the following
recommendations when using the PIC ranking method on
vocabularies:

 Vocabularies on the Top PIC-ranking can be used in
visualization applications, i.e. to be displayed to the

1http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/ont/dul/
DUL.owl
2http://lov.okfn.org/endpoint/lov_aggregator


dcterms
schema
gr
foaf
bibo
time
skos
dul
ptop
rdafrbr
vaem
ma-ont
prov
swrc
dce


Table 1: Top 15 vocabularies according to their PIC.
All the prefixes used for the vocabularies are the
ones used by LOV

Rank vocab term
skos:example
dce:contributor
skos:scopeNote
dcterms:source
mads:code
mads:authoritativeLabel
vs:userdocs
dce:title
skos:hasTopConcept
dce:description
dcterms:issued
dce:creator
skos:inScheme
skos:notation
dcterms:description
coll:List
vs:term status
skos:definition
skos:prefLabel
foaf:Person


IC value


Table 2: Ranking of Top 20 terms (classes and prop-
erties) according to their IC value

Algorithm 1 Ranking vocabularies algorithm
Require: Dump of lovaggregator file
1: Upload in a triple store for querying
2: Select
3: for term  lovaggregator do
4:

LOV aggregatorendpoint

candidate

subset

of

if (LOV distribution  1 )and (LOV P opularity 
1) then

vocabs

COMPUTE weight for each vocabulary

candidateterms  append term

5:
6:
end if
7: end for
8: for each term  candidateterms do
9: GROUP BY vocabulary namespace
10:
11: end for
12: INITIALIZE P ICvector AS a vector
13: for each term  candidateterms do
14: while term  vocabularySpace do
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20: ORDER PICvector
21: end for
22: return PICvector

ICvocab  ICterm

end while
P ICvocab  weight(vocab)ICvocab
P ICvector  append (PICvocab)

ICterm  function IC(term, vocabPrefix)

user as much as possible.

 Terms with lower IC can be used in facetted brows-
ing, and they seem appropriate for generating sameAs
links during the interconnection and enrichment pro-
cess. They might also be used for promoting the reuse
of terms in vocabularies in general.

 The PIC-ranking could help the ontology designers to
monitor and to assess the usage of some terms and
lead to update the ontology accordingly. For example,
it can be useful in extending the use of the properties
such as vs:term_status or owl:deprecated.

 Such a ranking can be used to rank organizations or
publishers of vocabularies in a time period (e.g. an-
nual) as a way to encourage good qualities vocabularies
and/or datasets on the cloud.

The use of the information content on LOV vocabularies
can be applied in the datasets interlinking task and visualization applications workflow. For interlinking datasets,
this method can help detecting properties with a lower PIC
which will be a candidate for the interlinking tool. The PIC
score can further be used to track the vocabularies terms
status (i.e. vs:term_status ) or owl:deprecated properties
by dataset maintainers. From the list of namespaces having
deprecated terms (Table 3), we observe some correlations
with the PIC rank for the vocabularies dcat (8), vcard
(36), gr (6), wl (2), pav (1) and bibo (1)3. More pre-
cisely, the presence of gr and bibo provides evidence of such
a correlation, while the presence of dcat and card can be
explained by the fact that those two vocabularies are in a
review process at W3C and subject to re-modeling respec-
tively. Table 3 gives an overview of some namespaces with
their deprecated terms.

3As of June 2014, there are 60 terms deprecated in LOV
with the query http://bit.ly/1aqcDf3


In this section, we look at three other catalogues providing rankings for vocabularies: vocab.cc, LODStats and
prefix.cc. vocab.cc4 does not provide a ranking for vocabularies but rather proposes a rank for classes and properties.
The proposed ranking presented in Table 4 is taken from the
ranking of classes assuming the namespace is used only once
per class.

prefix #DeprecatedTerms
vcard
dcat
gr
wl
pav
bibo


dcterms:modified

2013-09-25
2013-09-20
2011-10-01
2013-05-30
2013-08-30
2009-11-04

Table 3: Sample of vocabularies with terms deprecated in LOV

Rank LOV-PIC prefix.cc vocab.cc

lodstats


dcterms
schema

gr
foaf
bibo
time
skos
dul
ptop

rdafrbr
vaem
ma-ont

prov
swrc
dce

yago
rdf
foaf
dbp
dce
owl
rdfs
dbo
rss
skos
gldp
geo
sc
fb
gn

intervals

foaf
time
qb

scovo

freebase

mo
owl

metalex

doap
prov
void
frbr
skos

dcterms

rdf
rdfs
owl

dcterms

skos
foaf
dce
void
geo

aktors

ro
obo
app
repo
time

Table 4: Comparing ranking position when using
PIC in LOV with respect to prefix.cc and vocab.cc

The LODStats ranking is focused on covering the number
of datasets reused in the linked open data cloud [2], which is
partially taken into account in our approach. The evidence
of that is the first three vocabularies used (RDF, RDFS, OWL)
which are considered as the meta model for designing vocab-
ularies. Those vocabularies are not included into the LOV
catalogue and they do not appear in our ranking. The relative stable position of foaf in the four columns of the table
suggests that there are equal popular terms.
In addition,
two other vocabularies have relative similar ranking using PIC and LODStats: skos and dcterms. Regardless the
metric used, a short list of the most popular vocabularies
based on their presence in the Top-15 of the four catalogues
is: foaf, skos followed by dcterms, time, dce, prov.

Closer to our work, Schaible et al. reported on an empirical study involving 75 linked data experts and practitioners assessing reuse strategies based on various ranking
decisions [7]. The goal is to find objective criteria for choosing which vocabularies to reuse and how many can be com-
bined. LODStats and LOV are used to obtain the number of
4http://vocab.cc/v/tco

datasets using a specific vocabulary while vocab.cc is used for
getting the number of occurrence of a vocabulary term. We
propose a different metric to rank existing vocabularies that
can be furthermore added as a new feature in such a study.
One drawback in the model is to use the same weight for two
vocabularies with different number of datasets reused. This
could be address in the future by using a function based
weighting for datasets reused (e.g.
inverse logarithm) for
computing the PIC score.
6. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVE

We have presented a different perspective of ranking vocabularies using the principles of Information Content. By
applying this concept to Linked Open Vocabularies, we tried
to use features that we consider relevant to be taken into
account when comparing vocabularies (e.g: datasets reused,
external vocabularies). We compare with other rankings
that are mostly based on the popularity of vocabularies.
This work can path the way for assessing vocabularies with
applications in a more systemic approach for recommending
classes/properties in ontology management, or in visualization applications to propose the most oh yeah? suitable
property to be visualized for RDF entities when there is
large a large number of properties. As future work, we aim
to take into account the equivalence axioms (between classes
and properties) when computing the Information Content,
and more generally, all sort of semantic relationships between terms. Also, we plan to compare our ranking model
with other ranking approaches such as graph-based ones
(e.g. pagerank). Another future direction work is to investigate the dependency ranking between vocabularies, by
focusing on a specific type of inlinks (i.e. extensions, gen-
eralization) and study how they affect the PIC values.
Acknowledgment
This work has been partially supported by the French National Research Agency (ANR) within the Datalift Project,
