Personal Learning Environments on the 
Social Semantic Web 

Editor(s): Carsten Keler, University of Munster, Germany; Mathieu dAquin, The Open University, UK; Stefan Dietze, L3S Research 
Center, Germany 
Solicited review(s): Eleni Kaldoudi, Democritus University of Thrace, Greece; Ivana Marenzi, L3S Research Center, Germany; Fridolin Wild, 
University, The Open University, UK; Matthew Rowe, The Open University, UK 

Zoran Jeremica, , Jelena Jovanovica,*
aFOS-School of Business Administration, University of Belgrade, Serbia 
bSchool of Computing and Information Systems, Athabasca University, Canada 

 and Dragan Gasevicb 

Abstract. Todays students, being used to constant activity and multitasking in their everyday life, need a high level of social 
and creative engagement in order to learn; for them, highly interactive learning environments which allow for communica-
tion, collaboration, and authoring, are a must. In addition, modern learning theories stress the importance of interactivity and 
engagement of students for successful learning processes, whereas recent empirical studies provide evidence and confirm 
this. In this paper, we present how the integration of Social and Semantic Web technologies, often referred to as the Social 
Semantic Web (SSW), along with the Linked Data paradigm offer potentials for improving the interactivity of todays learning environments, while putting students in control of their learning process spanning across different tools and services. We 
identify the main principles on which such SSW-supported personal learning environments are based, and illustrate them 
through  the  design,  implementation,  analysis,  and  evaluation  of  DEPTHS  (DEsign  Patterns  Teaching  Help  System)    a 
SSW-based interactive personal learning environment we have developed for the domain of software design patterns.   

Keywords: Semantic Web, Social tools, Ontologies, Linked Data, Collaborative learning, Project-based learning 

1.  Introduction 

Current e-learning practices are increasingly influenced by the fact that a huge number of students and 
teachers are members of at least one social network 
on the Web. In addition to being active on commonly 
popular social networks like Facebook, Twitter, and 
YouTube,  many  of  them  also  actively  participate  in 
online  networks  specifically  focused  on  education. 
For example, students typically use these educationoriented networks to share lecture notes and assignment  materials  with  their  classmates  (e.g.,  Note-
Mesh1).  Similarly,  teachers  can  exchange  their  lectures and slides on topics they present in class (e.g., 
SlideShare2  and  Connexions3).  Some  online  social 
networks are aimed at connecting students and teach-

*Corresponding author. E-mail: jeljov@gmail.com 

ers  (e.g.,  BuddySchool4).  Finally,  other  educationoriented  networks  support  continuous  development 
of  ones  portfolios  through  interactions  with  the 
members of the network (e.g., Elgg5, both as a social 
network and social software platform).  

The acceptance of social networking tools (and the 
broader  category  of  social  software  tools)  in  education  is  primarily  led  by  teachers  enthusiasts  who, 
trying  to  make  their  classes  more  engaging  for  stu-
dents,  turn  to  these  popular  online  tools  and  make 
them part of their, often innovative, teaching practic-
es.  However,  since  evidence  is  still  lacking  as  to 
whether and to what extent these tools are beneficial 
for education, different authors have different views 
on  their  usefulness  in  educational  settings.  Besides 
individual  practitioners,  the  growing  number  of  re-

searchers  (e.g.,  [1,2,3])  and  research  projects  (e.g., 
iCamp6  and  Horizon  Project7) 
technology-
enhanced learning have been exploring the potentials 
of these tools and reporting the benefits of and challenges for their broader application. Some even consider  that  further  development  of  social  networking 
tools  and  Web  in  general  can  provide  technical 
grounds  for  much  needed  disruptive  innovations  in 
education  [4].  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  authors 
who are skeptical about these tools and their educational  potentials  (e.g.,  [5,  6]).  Having  done  a  deep 
exploration  of  the  educational  potentials  of  social 
software  tools  (as  presented  in  the  following  sec-
tions), we believe that it is reasonable to expect that 
these tools will be increasingly present in educational 
practices. Accordingly, we follow such a perspective 
in our own exploration of this field.         

To  realize  their  full  potential  in  the  educational 
domain (as well as in many other domains), todays 
social networks have to evolve. Currently, these networks  are  like  isolated  islands    knowledge  and 
learning  resources  can  be  exchanged  within  the  island (i.e., the network) but not across multiple islands, 
at  least  not  without  a  lot  of  manual  copy-and-paste 
effort. For example, consider a student learning about 
a  certain  domain  topic  and  trying  to  consult  related 
resources gathered by an expert or his/her peers. The 
resources maintained by these people may be located 
on many different online social networks, and cannot 
be  automatically  imported  in  the  students  current 
learning environment and context (e.g., described by 
her  learning  activities  and  goals).  This  is  the  challenge that the Data Portability8 movement is aiming 
to address on the Social Web in general (i.e., not exclusively related to learning and education), by providing  users  with  means  to  easily  move  their  data 
across different Social Web applications. 

However, content and human discovery is not the 
only  important  issue  for  an  effective  learning  envi-
ronment. Modern learning theories stress the importance of interactivity [7] and engagement of students 
[8] for successful learning processes, whereas recent 
empirical  studies  provide  evidence  and  confirm  this 
(see  Section  2.4  for  some  background). Yet,  widely 
used (e-)learning environments (e.g., Learning Management Systems) do not support students' interactivity across diverse learning systems, tools, and online 
educational networks that students turn to during the 
learning process. Even though some of them do support  widely  accepted  online  interaction  paradigms 
and  practices  (such  as  bookmarking,  tagging,  com-
menting,  and  communicating  via  short  messages), 

those interactions are confined to the walls of the 
learning environment. 

Recognizing  the weaknesses  of  the  present  social 
software  and  interactive  learning  environments,  the 
e-learning community has come up with and already 
widely  embraced  the  concept  of  Personal  Learning 
Environments (PLEs) [9]. PLEs let the learners control  their  learning  environment  while  promoting  interactive  learning  in  distributed  web  contexts.  As 
Section 2 demonstrates, there has been a considerable 
amount of research and development related to PLEs. 
Still,  the  problem  of  personalized  and  meaningful 
integration of distributed learning data/systems facilitating pedagogically sound interactive learning is an 
open  research  challenge.  Moreover,  there  are  no 
widely adopted principles that can provide developers  with  a  set  of  systematic  guidelines  for  building 
PLEs.  

To address the above two open challenges of PLEs, 
this paper proposes a set of principles for designing 
PLEs based on both the Social Semantic Web (SSW) 
and  Linked  Data  paradigms.  SSW  has  emerged  recently as a new paradigm for creating, managing and 
sharing information on the Web [10]. It is based on 
the idea of merging the best features of Social Web 
and Semantic Web, through combining the common 
formats for defining and structuring information with 
the  social  mechanisms  for  creating  and  sharing  the 
knowledge.  We  argue  that  by  using  SSW  technologies  and  following  Linked  Data  paradigm  and  principles  [11],  walled  garden  learning  environments 
can be turned into open, interactive PLEs. To allow 
for  a  systematic  development  of  such  environment, 
we recommend a set of development principles (Sec-
tion 3). By following these principles, we developed 
a PLE that allows for project-based and collaborative 
learning of software design patterns (Section 4). The 
implemented  PLE  enabled  us  to  thoroughly  analyze 
the recommended principles (Section 5) and evaluate 
the  effectiveness  of  the  approach  in  a  real  learning 
setting (Section 6). 

2.  Social Semantic Web and Interactive PLEs  
State of the Art 

In this section, we give a brief literature overview 
of the research areas relevant for our work  Social 
Semantic Web, Personal Learning Environments and 
Interactivity  in  Learning    aiming  to  present  the 
state-of-the-art  in  these  areas  and  thus  set  the  stage 
for  the  principles  for  designing  interactive  PLEs 
which we propose in the next section (Section 3).    

The Social Semantic Web (SSW) stands for a new 
paradigm  for  creating,  managing  and  sharing  information  through  combining  the  technologies  and  approaches from the Semantic Web and the Social Web 
(Web 2.0). The former aims at giving information a 
well-defined  meaning,  better  enabling  computers 
and people to work in cooperation [12] through the 
definition of ontologies [13]. The latter is a platform 
for  social  and  collaborative  exchange  [14]  where 
users meet, collaborate, interact and most importantly 
create  content  and  share  knowledge  through,  e.g., 
wikis, blogs, photo- and video sharing services. SSW 
emerged  by  merging  the  best  of  these  two  worlds, 
through combining the common formats for defining 
and structuring information with the social  mechanisms  for  creating  and  sharing  knowledge  [10].  On 
SSW, socially created and shared knowledge leads to 
the  creation  of  explicit  and  semantically-rich  knowledge  representations [15].  This  novel  paradigm  has 
already  started  making  its  way  into  e-learning  and 
education,  as  shown,  e.g.,  in [16]  and  [17].  Specifi-
cally,  SSW  has  already  shown  as  beneficial  for:  i) 
on-demand assembly of course content from existing 
learning  objects  [18];  ii)  learning  and  knowledge 
sharing  in  collaborative  e-learning  environments 
[19,20,21,22];  and  iii)  provision  of  highly  informative  feedback  for  educators  [23].  Below  we  present 
how it has been leveraged for the realization of PLEs, 
and further on in the paper (see Section 4.3) how it 
enabled us to develop advanced, context-aware educational services that support and foster interactivity 
in a PLE. 

2.2. PLEs  a common denominator of modern e-
learning approaches 

Different authors provide somewhat different definitions of PLEs. However, common features of these 
learning  environments  did  emerge  and  include  (but 
are not restricted to) the following9:  

 Facilitate  online  interaction:  interaction  with 
content  and  interaction  with  other  individuals 
around the shared content; 

 Put the control over the learning process in the 

hands of learners; 

 Bring together all the disparate resources of the 
learners  interests  and  simplify  their  manage-
ment; 

 Allow  for  creating  new  meaning  through  interaction  with  (annotation,  linking  and  aggrega-
tion) disparate existing resources. 

Accordingly, a PLE can be considered as a facility 
for  an  individual  to  access,  combine,  configure  and 
manage  digital  resources  (content  and  services)  related to their present learning needs and interests. In 
addition, it provides means for seamless communication and collaboration among individuals involved in 
a  learning  process.  PLEs  are  often  associated  with 
informal  learning,  but  are  also  entering  the  formal 
learning  scene  mostly  through  the  efforts  of  PLE 
researchers  who  are  also  educational  practitioners 
(i.e., teachers)10.   

The  notion  of  PLE  recognizes  the  importance  of 
interaction for learning  interaction with content as 
well as social interaction with members of a learning 
community or/and the Web in general. In order not to 
alienate learning interactions from those that todays 
students are well accustomed to, most PLEs adopt the 
widely  accepted  online  interaction  paradigms  and 
practices,  such  as  bookmarking,  tagging,  comment-
ing, communicating via short messages, status updat-
ing, and the like. 

Related  to  the  notion  of  PLE  is  the  metaphor  of 
"Teacher as DJ"11, introduced by Wiley in 2005. This 
metaphor has recently been revitalized and even put 
into  practice  under  the  name  Open  Educator  as  a 
DJ12. It demonstrates how different kinds of Social 
Web  tools  can  be  applied  (by  teachers)  over  open, 
publicly accessible (learning) content to produce new, 
contextualized  teaching/learning  content.  However, 
this metaphor and practice can be further generalized 
so that not only teachers are the ones who do content 
sampling,  (re-)mixing  and  presentation,  but  also 
learners can and should perform these activities as a 
part of their learning process. 

Wild  et  al.s  view  on  PLEs,  presented  in  [24], 
somewhat  differs  from  the  mainstream  view  presented  above.  They  consider  learning  environments, 
their  construction  and  maintenance  as  the  crucial 
parts  of  both  the  learning  process  and  the  expected 
learning  outcome.  Accordingly,  the  learning  environment  is  not  a  stage  where  the  learning  activities 
are  taking  place,  but  it  is  something  that  is  created 
during  the  learning  process  and  is  considered  as  its 
most  crucial  result.  The  notion  of  learning  environment is also extended to include not only tools, but 
also  artifacts,  and  different  actors  involved  in  the 
learning  process  (learners,  teachers,  and  experts). 
This  novel  perspective  on  learning  environments  is 
accompanied  by  a  novel  approach  to  learning  envi-

domain-specific language allowing learners to easily 
construct and maintain their PLEs. This approach can 
be considered a part of the broader area of end-user 
development. 

2.3. Educational Mashups: the Materialization of 
PLEs  

From  a  technical  point  of  view,  a  PLE  can  be 

viewed as a selfdefined collection of services, tools, 

and  devices  that  help  learners  build  their  Personal 
Knowledge Networks,  encompassing different kinds 
of learning resources (content, services, people) [25]. 
Sire  et  al  [26]  proposed  a  model  for  estimating  the 
quality of different web platforms with respect to the 
technical support they provide for PLEs. The model 
consists  of  six  dimensions:  screen,  data,  temporal, 
social,  activity  and  runtime;  each  dimension  is  further  defined  through  a  set of  four  features (e.g.,  the 
data dimension includes the following features: interwidget  communication,  drag  and  drop,  PLE  data 
manager,  and  Linked  Data  support).  As  explicitly 
stated by the authors, a PLE does not need to support 
any of these dimensions and it is fine as long as that 
PLE  is  aimed  to  be  used  for  one  specific  learning 
design  and  learning  settings  for  which  it  has  been 
developed. However, if a PLE is to be generic, that is, 
capable  of  supporting  different  learning  scenarios 
and  learning  contexts,  it  should  support  as  many  of 
these dimensions as possible. The model proposed by 
Sire et al. is highly related to the Principles we suggested in this paper (Sect. 3). However, whereas this 
model  is  focused  on  technical  and  implementation 
aspects  of  PLEs,  the  proposed  Principles  are  more 
general in nature and besides technical aspects, also 
cater for pedagogical elements of PLEs (e.g., interactivity and self-regulation in learning).       

Since most often PLEs are realized through combination  of  various  Web  2.0  sources,  they  are  also 
called Mash-Up Personal Learning Environments or 
MUPPLEs [24]. There are two types of MUPPLEs:  
 Mashups by aggregation: most of the state- of-
the-art mashup PLE solutions fall into this cate-
gory; these mashups mainly support learners in 
putting  together  content  from  different  sources 
(mainly  feeds  and  widgets)  into  a  single  inter-
face.  Personal  dashboards,  like  iGoogle,  NetVibes and PageFlake are typical examples.  

 Mashups  by  integration:  allow  for  combining 
data from different sources and exchanging data 
among the tools and services integrated into the 

PLE; the integrated data can serve as an excellent  basis  for  adaptation  and  personalization  of 
PLEs  through  the  provision  of  advanced  con-
text-aware  services  [27];  however,  mashups  of 
this  type  (still)  require  programming  skills  and 
thus have not been that widely accepted among 
end users (learners and teachers).    

Since our research work, as well as the work of the 
MUPPLE research community in general, is primarily  focused  on  the  MUPPLEs  of  the  latter  type,  in 
what follows we present different approaches to their 
implementation,  categorized  based  on  the  major 
technology they rely upon. However, as some of the 
presented  solutions  combine  two  or  more  technolo-
gies, we classify these based on the technology that 
we perceived as dominant for the particular solution.   

2.3.1. PLEs based on Web 2.0 APIs 

Most of the proposed mashup PLE approaches fall 
into  this  category.  Common  features  of  these  approaches include [25]: (1) pulling data from external 
(RSS or Atom) feeds, (2) filtering, sorting, and combining many feeds into one, (3) exporting results as 
RSS, JSON, XML, and other formats, and (4) creating a widget for seamless integration of the results in 
other Web sites.  

PLEM [28] is a mashup driven aggregator and filter of diverse kinds of learning resources (e.g., learning  content,  activities,  experts,  communities).  Inspired by the aforementioned David Wileys concept 
of "the learner as DJ", PLEM allows one to create a 
personalized  space,  where  she/he  can  easily  aggre-
gate, manage, tag, rate, and share learning resources 
of  interest.  Learning  resources  are  made  accessible 
through social media APIs that allow for the access 
to  and  retrieval  of  open  educational  resources  (via 
MIT  OCW13  and  OUNL  OpenER14),  blogposts  (via 
Google  Blog  Search  and  Technorati),  videos  (via 
Google  Blog  Search  and  YouTube),  books  (via 
Google  Book  Search),  images  (via  Google  Image 
Search and Flickr), and presentations (via Slideshare). 
PLEM harness the collective intelligence of its users 
to  provide  them  with  a  mechanism  for  ranking  and 
recommending  learning  resources.  Specifically,  users actions, such as commenting, saving, liking, rat-
ing, viewing, and sharing, are considered as votes for 
respective  learning resources  and  are used for ranking and recommendation purposes. 

As  previously  mentioned,  Wild  et  al  [24]  suggested a novel approach to learning environment design  in  which  learners  empowered  by  a  domain-

guage    LISL)  construct  and  manage  their  PLEs. 
Their  prototypical  implementation,  called  MUPPLE 
(Mash-UP  Personal  Learning  Environment),  allows 
for the reuse of different existing tools and their presentation to the user (learner) in an integrated manner 
(like  personal  dashboards).  The  communication  is 
achieved through feeds and connect statements which 
establish the feed channels between the tools [29]. 
ReMashed  is  a  system  that  recommends  learning 
content by using the collective intelligence emerging 
in  a  PLE  [30].  The  PLE  is  realized  through  the  aggregation of popular Web2.0 services, such as Flickr 
and Delicious. ReMashed uses collaborative filtering 
to offer recommendations; it matches together learners  with  similar  opinions  about  learning  resources. 
Ratings  and  tags  of  like-minded  users  are  used  to 
create personalized recommendations for the current 
learner. 

Graasp  [31]  is  an  online  learning  environment 
that  allows  users  to  aggregate  data  and  content 
from different social media and social networking 
applications. It has in-built support for some popular  content  types  (e.g.,  videos,  books  and  slides) 
and  their  providers  on  the  Social  Web  (such  as 
YouTube,  SlideShare  and  Amazon);  in  addition, 
the  application  can  be  extended  to  include  other 
content  types and other  social  media  applications. 
Graasp also allows users to communicate and collaborate not only within the system boundaries, but 
also with peers who are using some external communication  or  collaboration  application;  this  is 
supported through the use of widgets. 

2.3.2. PLEs based on Social Semantic Web and 
Linked Data paradigm 

Talis Aspire15 is aimed at enhancing the process of 
authoring  resource  lists  by  allowing  users  to  easily 
discover appropriate content that can be re-used and 
remixed [32]. In addition, by harnessing the existing 
work  it  can  provide  recommendations  to  authors  of 
new  lists  within  comparable  subject  areas.  Recommendations are primarily based on the identified patterns  of  resource  usage  (e.g.,  which  resources  were 
often  used  together,  or  whose  contributions  were 
most  often  re-used).  In  addition,  students  votes  for 
resources, both explicit (e.g., ratings and stated intensions  regarding  resource  usage)  and  implicit  (e.g., 
number  of  accesses  and  downloads  of  a  particular 
resource), are also used as a valuable source of data 
for  generating  recommendations.  The  Talis  Aspire 
system  is  completely  based  on  Linked  Data  princi-

ples and makes use of several ontologies to fully semantically describe the resources so that they can be 
easily combined and remixed. Even though this system cannot be considered a typical PLE, its features 
related to pulling content from different sources, reusing  and  remixing  the  content,  and  allowing  for 
seamless collection of users (learners) feedback do 
fit into the Teacher as a DJ metaphor.    

The  GroupMe!16  system  combines  Web  2.0  and 
Semantic  Web  technologies  to  provide  personalized 
content  management  in  a  group  (social  networking) 
context [33]. Hence, it can be considered as a PLE of 
a  specific  group  of  learners,  often  gathered  around 
the same learning objective. From the Web 2.0 side, 
it leverages intuitive user interfaces that allow users 
to  create  groups  of  resources  (Web  pages,  videos, 
images). Creation of groups, addition of resources to 
the  groups,  and  any  other  operation  related  to  the 
groups are all saved as RDF triples compliant to a set 
of  ontologies  that  GroupMe!  uses.  By  leveraging 
Semantic  Web  technologies  for  storing  data  about 
group-related  (content  and  knowledge  management) 
activities, GroupMe! allows for the integration, sharing  and  better  (re-)use  of  resources  relevant  for  a 
group of users. In particular, this eliminates the problems  of  ambiguity  and  improves  the  ranking  of  the 
discovered resources. 

The GroupMe! system served as a technical foundation for the development of LearnWeb2.0, a learning  environment  for  Content  and  Language  Integrated Learning [34]. LearnWeb2.0 supports a collaborative  group  search  and  syndication  of  resources 
from  a  number  of  Web  2.0  services,  such  as  You-
Tube, SlideShare, and Blogger. It provides: 1) a personal space offering access to resources from various 
Web 2.0 repositories; 2) collaborative aggregation of 
collected  resources;  3)  sharing  of  the  so-called 
standing queries, where users are notified whenever 
a  new  learning  resource  matches  the  query;  and  4) 
integration of the user's social networks from different Web 2.0 services. 

The  Ensemble  project17  is  exploring  the  potential 
of  semantic  technologies  to  support  and  enhance 
teaching and learning in higher education, with special  focus  on  learning  settings  where  some  kind  of 
case  based  learning  is  the  pedagogy  of  choice.  The 
adopted  research  approach  assumes  the  combined 
usage of digital repositories, Semantic Web technol-
ogies,  and  features  of  social  software  in  order  to 
allow  for  reuse  through  reconfiguration,  adaptation, 
and collective action. This implies that the project is 
following  SSW  paradigm  in  building  learning  environments that bear a lot of resemblance to PLEs. 

Chatti et al. [25] proposed a mashup PLE frame-

work, called PLEFExt, which allows for mashing-up 

RESTful  services  and  makes  use  of  semantic  approaches to deal with service integration and mediation  within  mashup  PLEs.  Specifically,  PLEF-Ext 
leverages  semantic  description  of  learning  services, 
expressed  using  Service  Mapping  Description  lan-
guage, to enable finding, sharing, integrating, manag-
ing,  reusing,  and  remixing  the  services  with  minimum effort. 

2.4. Interactivity in e-Learning 

Interactivity in e-learning assumes learners active 
participation in the learning process, rather than passive consumption of the content server by instructors 
[35]. It implies 'doing' as opposed to 'being' (present) 
[36],  and  could  be  equated  with  social  and  creative 
engagement,  that  is,  communication,  collaboration 
and authoring.  

Todays  students  and  teachers  are  citizens  of  the 
Social  Web  where  the  notions  of  social  interaction, 
human  computing,  and  collective  intelligence  are 
major assets. They are well accustomed to interaction 
paradigms  and  practices  of  Social  Web,  such  as 
bookmarking,  tagging,  commenting,  communicating 
via short messages, status updating, and the like. Ac-
cordingly, in order to be broadly accepted by students 
and teachers, the solutions for enhancing the interactivity in e-learning should be based on these already 
widely accepted forms of interaction which are currently  (in  everyday  life)  well  supported  by  diverse 
kinds of social software tools. However, we believe 
and  have  already  shown  [16]  that  the  integration  of 
Social and Semantic Web technologies has potential 
to  offer  even  a  better  solution.  Specifically,  in  our 
previous work [16], we have explored the potential of 
the SSW paradigm for improving present and developing new forms of interaction along each dimension 
of the interactivity triangle [37]. Our research work 
has  been  grounded  on  the  interactivity  triangle 
since it is a widely accepted model of interactivity in 
learning  settings  which  has  students,  teachers  and 
content  at  its  vertices,  and  where  each  vertex  is  related with the other two and with itself (so that, for 
example,  students  are  in  interactions  with  teachers 
and content, but they also interact among themselves). 
We  have  indicated  the  potential  of  the  SSW  paradigm for: i) introducing new and improving existing 
forms  of  Interaction;  ii)  supporting  interactivity 
across different systems and tools; and iii) integrating 

interaction data to allow for advanced forms of adaptation and personalization in e-learning [38]. 

2.5. (Semantic) Social Software Tools in e-Learning: 
State of the Practice 

We have conducted a small-scale study in order to 
investigate  the  tools  and  services  that  leverage  the 
Social  Web  and/or  SSW  paradigm  for  educational 
purposes,  and  get  a  better  understanding  of  what 
kinds  of  tools/services  have  actually  been  used  in 
practice and to what extent. The ultimate aim of the 
study was to find out whether and to what extent the 
tools that are currently in use could actually be employed for the realization of interactive PLEs. 

The  applied  methodology  included  three  primary 
steps: 1) identification of potentially relevant tools18, 
2) analysis of candidate tools with respect to a predefined set of criteria, and 3) selection of representative 
tools. Since  social  software  tools  and  their semantically enhanced counterparts differ with respect to the 
underlying  technology  and  the  general  level  of  ma-
turity,  we  had  to  apply  somewhat  different  approaches  when  reviewing  and  analyzing  the  tools 
from  these  two  categories.  To  keep  the  narration 
clear and avoid any potential ambiguity, in the rest of 
the paper we refer to the former category of tools as 
social software tools and the later as SSW tools.  

To  select  potentially  relevant  tools,  we  made  use 
of  both  scholarly  publications  (i.e.,  journal,  confer-
ence, and workshop papers), and Web content (con-
tent  of,  e.g.,  blogs,  wikis,  and  discussion  forums) 
generated  by  learning  professionals  worldwide.  The 
latter source, even though less formal, is continually 
growing  in  both  quantity  and  relevancy  and  offered 
us  with  great  insights  into  educators  real-world  experiences  with  diverse  Web-based  tools.  We  also 
explored  published  surveys  (e.g.  SemTech  Survey19 
and [17]), tools listings (e.g., Sweet Tools20) and ratings  (e.g.,  The  100  Tools  for  Learning21)  of  Webbased tools used for learning purposes.    

The  common  criteria  we  used  for  the  analysis  of 
both  kinds  of  tools  are:  1)  the  ability  to  support,  or 
even foster, interaction within an online community; 
and  2)  the  tools  applicability  for  educational  pur-
poses.  Our  choice  to  focus  on  interactivity  of  the 
considered  tools  was  motivated  by  the  fact  that  (as 
explained above) interaction is one of the key characteristics  of  the  PLE  concept;  additionally,  its  pedagogical value is stressed by the major modern learning theories [16]. The criterion related to interactivity 
was  further  narrowed  down  to:  interactions  among 

actions  with  learning  content.  An  additional  third 
criterion, defined only for SSW tools, was the use of 
Semantic  Web  technologies  for  achieving  advanced 
functionalities.     

Even though social software tools have not yet become  part  of  educational  technology  mainstream, 
they have reached a high level of maturity and have 
been  increasingly  adopted  in  educational  practices 
worldwide.  On  the  other  hand,  SSW  tools  are  still 
quite immature and there is a scarce evidence of their 
application in real-world educational settings. There-
fore, we had to use different approaches when eliciting  representative  tools  of  these  two  categories  of 
tools. The social software tools were chosen based on 
the documented experience of their usage in learning 
settings, as well as their ratings in the previous stud-
ies. For example, the yearly report on the 100 Tools 
for  Learning  produced  by  Centre  for  Learning  and 
Performance  Technologies22  provides  practitioners 
(i.e.  teachers)  perceptions  of  and  opinions  about 
each  tool  included  in  the  list.  Likewise,  interviews 
and panel discussions with educational professionals 
and  practitioners23  provide  insight  into  their  experience with different social software technologies and 
tools. For the other category of tools  SSW tools  
we present all the tools we identified that passed the 
first  (support  for  interactivity)  and  the  third  (ad-
vanced  functionalities  achieved  through  the  use  of 
Semantic  Web  technologies)  criteria  of  the  analysis 
phase.  We  did  not  strictly  consider  their  successful 
application in educational settings (as the evidence of 
their usage is generally lacking), but considered their 
potential for use in education (mainly based on their 
features).       

Our  results  are  summarized  in  Table  1,  given  in 
Appendix, where we present the selected representative sets of both social software tools and SSW tools. 
Both kinds of tools are grouped into two broad categories based on the kind of interaction they (primar-
ily)  support:  1)  interaction  among  members  of  an 
online  learning  community;  and  2)  interaction  with 
(learning) content. Each of these categories is further 
narrowed down into subcategories reflecting the primary  functionality  offered  by  the  tools  within  that 
subcategory  (e.g.,  social  networking,  collaborative 
authoring, etc). It is important to stress that this is not 
a strict classification of tools since a significant number  of  them  could  be  placed  into  more  than  one  of 
these subcategories. 

3. Principles 

Having  analyzed  the  state-of-the-art  in  the  domains  of  PLEs  and  (support  for)  interactivity  in  e-
learning,  as  well  as  the  state-of-the-practice  in  the 
application  of  social  software  and  SSW  tools  in  e-
learning, we set ourselves on the task of identifying 
the  requirements  for  the  realization  of  interactive 
PLEs.  We  looked  into  the  requirements  originating 
from: i) the concept of PLE; ii) the concept of interactivity in e-learning; iii) the identified strengths and 
weaknesses  of  the  existing  PLE  implementations; 
and iv) the general trends in web-based (social) interactions and education, which includes, e.g., the use 
of  numerous  distributed  and  heterogeneous  webbased applications, huge quantities of available content that is increasingly difficult to deal with, interactions  with  peers  around  the  shared  content,  trust  in 
the  peers  recommendations,  etc.  Having  analyzed 
these  requirements  we  came  up  with  a  set  of  principles that could serve as a reference when developing  software  architecture  of  an  interactive PLE. We 
present these principles in Table 1 and give below the 
rationale  for  each  one  of  them.  The  principles  are 
highly  mutually  connected  and  reinforced;  some  of 
them, e.g., Principle 7, depend on other principles for 
their successful realization. Please note that the number  associated  with  each  principle  is  not  aimed  at 
indicating its relevancy. 

3.1. Principle 1: Integration 

The need for a PLE is based on the fact that learning  is  increasingly  occurring  in  different  places  and 
situations and is not necessarily tied to one institution 
(e.g., school, university) [9]. Accordingly, one of the 
basic  premises  of  the  PLE  concept  is  the  ability  to 
integrate resources from disparate software tools and 
services  that  individuals  use  in  their  daily  learning 
practices. However, data integration across different 
applications is still a challenge given that a great majority of applications makes use of a bespoke schema 
for the data representation and storage. As discussed 
in the previous section (see Section 2.3), the research 
community is trying to address this problem by suggesting  different  approaches  and  technical  solutions 
for realizing mashups of content and data originating 
from different tools/services an individual makes use 
of. The most advanced solutions - mashups by integration24  -  are  based  on  the  use  of  semantic  web 
technologies. Specifically, they could be most effectively  realized  through  the  combined  use  of  ontolo-

seamless integration of data and knowledge originating  from  different,  often  dispersed  sources  [13].  In 
addition, the structure and semantics that ontologies 
add  to  the  captured,  stored  and  interlinked  data/ 
knowledge provide  an  excellent basis for  the development  of  advanced  learning  services,  as  demonstrated in [39,27,40]. Furthermore, by facilitating the 
integration  of  data  about  all  learning  activities  and 
learning-related artifacts from different contexts and 
sources of learning, ontologies and Linked Data paradigm  enable  the  creation  of  very  comprehensive 
and  dynamic  e-portfolios.  These  portfolios  can  be 
further enhanced through semantic annotation of different kinds of content being used/created/shared by 
an  individual,  as  well  as  her/his  undertaken  or 
planned  learning  activities.  The  Linked  Open  Data 
cloud25 offers plenty of vocabularies (ontologies and 
datasets) that could be leveraged for semantic annotation of all kinds of learning-related resources; services  such  as  DBpedia  Spotlight26  already  enable  this 
kind  of  advanced  content  annotation.  This  further 
enables semantic interlinking (i.e., connecting based 
on  meaning)  of  diverse  kinds  of  components  of  a 
learning process  (e.g.,  activities,  knowledge  objects, 
people)  and  facilitates  the  provision  of  advanced 
search,  discovery  and  recommendation  services  for 
learners. 

3.2. Principle 2: Openness 

This principle refers to: open standards, open content  and  open  source  software.  Its  first  component, 
open standards, is quintessential for the realization of 
the above mentioned integration principle, since it is 
the key prerequisite for applications and data interoperability  and  integration.  All  Semantic  Web  technologies  have  been  developed  as  open,  community 
driven initiatives coordinated by the WWW Consortium (W3C)27. This trend is entering the Social Web 
as well, and there are emerging open standards, such 
as OpenID28 and Activity streams29. However, more 
rapid uptake of open standards on the Social Web is 
hampered  by  the  interests  of  big  enterprise  players 
aiming  to  establish  their  own  dominance  over  the 
Social Web space.     

According  to  the  latest,  2010,  Horizon  Report30 
[41], our second component of openness  open content  can be characterized as one of the key trends in 
education in the last few years, promoted and led by 
the  leading  world  universities  and  accepted  by  numerous  educational  institutions  and  practitioners 

worldwide. This yearly report suggests that the open 
content movement reflects the change in the perception  of  education  in  academia,  and  the  recognition 
that learning is more about activities around the content  than  the  content  itself.  Besides  professionally 
authored open content (available through, e.g., MITs 
Open  Courseware  Initiative31    or   Open  Knowledge 
Foundation32),  a  significant  source  of  educationally 
valuable  open  content  are  (social)  Web  users  who 
share their knowledge and experience through wikis, 
blogs,  Q&A  forums,  micro-blogging  platforms  and 
other  online  communication  channels. For  the  realization of advanced PLEs (i.e., mashups through inte-
gration), the open datasets that are part of the Linked 
Open Data (LOD) Cloud are of special importance as 
they offer data that can be easily combined (mashed-
up) and thus used to fuel diverse educational appli-
cations. Among many relevant LOD datasets, of particular  importance  are  those  comprising  (meta)data 
about  courses  and  learning  resources  published  by 
universities. Current leaders in linked data publishing 
are  UK universities:  Open University,  University  of 
Southampton33 and Oxford University34. In addition, 
(meta)data  stored  in  learning  content  repositories 
have started being exposed as linked open data [42]. 
Educational  semantic  social  networks,  such  as  Me-
tamorphosis+35 are exposing data about shared learning resources as linked open data [43]. The principles 
of linked data also have a significant potential to increase  integration  of  different  educational/learning 
systems of interest (e.g., as shown in our case study 
later in the paper).  

The continuously growing quantity of diverse and 
constantly  evolving  educational  content  opens  up 
unprecedented  possibilities  for  both  teachers  and 
learners, but also imposes a new challenge  how to 
make effective use of the available content. The previously  mentioned  Open  Educator  as  a  DJ  metaphor  has  a  potential  to  address  this  challenge  and 
enable  effective  use  of  the  available  open  content. 
Following  the interactivity  principles, we generalize 
this metaphor to include also learners. In other words, 
we  suggest  that  all  participants  in  the  learning 
process  could  effectively  use  open  content  through 
the cycle of content sampling, (re-)mixing and pres-
entation. Since this practice requires combined use of 
different kinds of software tool (integrated in a PLE) 
and  interaction  with  both  content  and  other  participants in the learning process, an interactive PLE provides an excellent environment for its realization.  

The third kind of openness  open source software 
 has made such significant contributions in so many 
domains,  education  being  just  one  of  them  that  we 

cessful realization of interactive PLEs. If made open 
sourced, a software solution for e.g., data integration 
across diverse tools, could be reused and further developed 
individual  developers  or 
groups/organizations),  thus  contributing  to  the  improved implementation of interactive PLEs. 

(by  either 

3.3. Principle 3: Distributed identity management 

This principle is essentially about the users ability 
to  control  and  manage  their  identities  and  online 
presence  across  different  tools/services  that  are  part 
of their PLEs. It includes the users ability to seamlessly  access  different  tools/services  that  are  part  of 
their  PLEs;  to  pull  together  their  profile  data  from 
those tools/services; and regulate the use of their data 
within tools/services that form their PLEs.     

The  first  component  of  this  principle,  seamless 
access to web applications, is in the center of interest 
of  open  web  initiatives,  such  as  OpenID  and  WebFinger36 for user identification, and OAuth37 for user 
authentication. An increasing number of social software and SSW tools (e.g., significant portion of those 
mentioned in Table 1) is using some of these protocols to provide their users with easy access points. In 
addition,  some  recent  research  work  has  been  directed towards devising methods for unique identification  of  users  on  the  Social  Web  by  using  the 
peoples public profile data on diverse online applications (mostly social networks). For example, Carmagnola et al have presented the preliminary results 
[44] of their research work aimed at uniquely identifying users on the Social Web and retrieving the data 
stored  in  their  profiles  across  Social  Web  applica-
tions.  The  suggested  approach  does  not  require  the 
provision of users authentication data and user identification is performed by using the public data available  on  the  Web.  Even  though  it  offers  promising 
results, this approach needs to be further worked on 
in order to become really usable.  

The second component of this principle  seamless 
integration  of  users  profile  data  -  is  related  to  and 
can benefit from the research work done in the area 
of distributed user modeling (e.g., [45,46]). From the 
inception of this research challenge, i.e., the recognition  of  the  need  for  integrating  users  profile  data 
from  different  online  applications,  ontologies  have 
played a significant role in the proposed solutions (as 
shown in e.g., [47,48]). As one of the key representatives of the SSW trend, and one of the most widely 
used ontologies on the Web today, the FOAF (Friend 

of  a  Friend)38  ontology  has  become  the  basis  for 
building  domain/application  specific  ontologies  for 
user  modeling.  In  addition,  it  has  served  as  a  common data format for mapping to and thus integrating 
users profile data from popular Social Web applications (as shown, e.g., in [49]). While FOAF is about 
static user profiles dealing mostly with users persistent characteristics, the notion of Online Presence is 
about  dynamic  and  changeable  characteristics  (e.g., 
status  messages,  availability  for  chat,  etc)  that  are 
related  to  user's  current  appearance  in  the  online 
world. The Online Presence Ontology (OPO) enables 
the integration, exchange and common interpretation 
of  Online  Presence  related  data  [50].  Thanks  to  the 
shared  understanding  of 
the  online  presence, 
tools/services  of  a  PLE  can  adapt  their  interaction 
with the learner by considering social factors such as 
who  is  online,  who  to  contact,  who  is  nearby,  and 
how to contact. This further leads to the provision of 
advanced  peer,  expert,  and  teacher  finding  services, 
and thus benefits student-student and student-teacher 
interactivity [51].  

Finally,  the  third  component  of  the  Distributed 
Identity Management principle  the users ability to 
seamlessly regulate the use of their data in different 
online applications  can be realized through the de-
finition/configuration  of  various  types  of  policies, 
primarily those related to privacy and access control. 
Ontologies  have  proved  as  beneficial  technology  in 
this  domain  as  well.  For  example,  Kruk  et  al  [52] 
have used the FOAFRealm ontology for letting users 
define fine grained access rights for their resources. 
FOAFRealm  ontology  [53]  is  an  extension  to  the 
FOAF  ontology  which  allows  users  to  express  how 
well  one  person  knows,  or  trusts,  another.  Access 
control  is  based  on  the  distance  and  the  friendship 
level  between users which  is  expressed using  FOA-
FRealm.  However,  in  this  domain,  ontologies  are 
even more advantageous if they are used in combination  with  policy  languages  such  as  Ponder,  KAoS, 
Rei, PeerTrust, and XACML [54]. Typically defined 
over  ontologies,  policy  languages  provide  a  reliable 
mechanism  for  (rule-based)  reasoning  in  open  envi-
ronments, such as PLEs, where the use of roles and 
institutions the users may belong to is not applicable 
[55].  Current  policy  languages  allow  for  contextbased  reasoning  where  one  can  only  leverage  the 
knowledge coming from the shared vocabulary (i.e., 
ontology) of a community and the individuals reputation  in  the  community.  However,  management  of 
policies today requires a lot of technical knowledge, 
which  prevents  wider  adoption  of  policy-based  approaches  in  educational  settings.  Accordingly,  there 

faces for policy management. Moreover, one cannot 
expect that end-users will define a policy for all the 
different ways they want to regulate the use of their 
data.  Accordingly,  there  is  a  need  to  develop  mechanism  for  automatic,  context-aware  detection  of 
situations  that  potentially  violate  users  require-
ments/preferences  regarding  the  usage  of  their  data, 
by leveraging the ontology-based definitions of con-
texts. To make the policy-based approach even more 
applicable in educational settings, there is a need to 
investigate policy languages that allow for reasoning 
over  socially  constructed  knowledge,  in  addition  to 
the formally defined ontologies.  

It should be noted that this principle is tightly related to the User Centricity principle and e-portfolio 
approach; actually it is a prerequisite for these two. It 
is also closely related to, and dependent on the Integration principle. Finally, the users ability to seamlessly regulate data ownership and privacy is not only 
the  key  component  of  this  principle,  but  is  also 
strongly  related  to  the  principles  of  Openness  and 
Ubiquitous Data Access. 

3.4. Principle 4: Context-awareness 

The abundance of resources (content and services) 
available  over  the  Internet,  makes  it  difficult  for 
learners  to  find  specifically  those  resources  that 
would  be  relevant  for  their  learning  task/objective; 
hence the need for an assistance by the learning envi-
ronment. Context-aware software environments offer 
a solution as they attempt to improve the efficiency 
of  the  users  interaction  with  the  environment 
through capturing and making use of data about relevant aspects of the user's current situation (i.e., con-
text). The improvement in the interactivity typically 
originates  from  improved  quality  of  search  results, 
proactive  recommendations,  and  mediation  of  com-
munication, among other things [56]. 

Despite  the  diversity  in  interpretations  of  the  notion  of  learning  context,  researchers  seem  to  agree 
that  it  is  about  the  environment,  tools,  resources, 
people (in terms of social networking), and learning 
activities [57]. Being more specific, context in learning is mostly characterized by the learners, learning 
resources  (content  and  tools)  and  a  set  of  learning 
activities that are performed in the light of a specific 
pedagogical  approach.  Due  to  their  flexibility,  expressiveness  and  extensibility,  ontologies  have  been 
accepted  by  many  researchers  as  the  most  suitable 
mean for context modeling (e.g., [58,59,39]). Ontol-

ogies  ensure  that  different  entities  that  use  the  context data have a common semantic understanding of 
that  data.  They  also  come  with  reasoning  mechanisms over the available context data, making it possible to extract inferred knowledge out of the implicitly 
stated  situations.  Through  the  context  awareness, 
learning  environments  can  also  provide  adequate 
pedagogical support (e.g., guidance or instruction). 

In our  previous  work,  we have  developed LOCO 
(Learning  Object  Context  Ontologies)  as  a  comprehensive  ontological  framework  aimed  at  formally 
representing diverse kinds of  learning  contexts  (i.e., 
learning situations), as well as diverse kinds of interactions  that  occur  during  a  learning  process  (i.e., 
students'  mutual  interactions  and  their  interactions 
with the learning content) [39]. LOCO allows one to 
formally represent all particularities of a given learning context: the learning activity, the learning content 
that  was  used  or  produced,  and  the  student(s)  in-
volved.  Accordingly,  the  framework  integrates  a 
number of learning-related ontologies, such as learning  context  ontology,  a  user  model  ontology,  and 
domain  ontologies.  The  ontologies  are  designed  to 
harness the value of Linked Data paradigm by reusing and being based on ontologies such as Friend of a 
Friend  (FOAF)  and  Socially-interlinked  Online 
Communities  (SIOC).  Moreover,  they  are  also  designed to be compatible with the relevant e-learning 
standards  such  as  IMS  Learning  Design.  These  ontologies  allow  for  preserving  the  semantics  of  any 
given  learning  context  in  a  machine  interpretable 
format and thus provide the foundation for the development  of  context-aware  learning  services  (as  we 
show in the subsequent sections). We have integrated 
LOCO  with  the  aforementioned  Online  Presence 
ontology in order to enrich the LOCO-based definition of learning context with the online presence data 
[51].  This  was  motivated  by  the  fact  that  the  inclusion of social software tools/services in online learning environments, PLEs not being an exception, has 
made  users  online  presence  an  integral  part  of  any 
learning situation (i.e., context). Finally, in the scope 
of the IntelLEO EU (FP7) project, we have evolved 
this  framework  to  secure  support  for  context-aware 
learning and knowledge building in workplace learning settings [60]. 

In the following sections we present how context-
awareness, achieved through the use of semantic web 
technologies,  lead  to  the  development  and  deployment  of  advanced  learning  services  within  the 
DEPTHS  PLE39  and  positively  influenced  different 
interactivity  dimensions  (student-student,  student-
teacher, student/teacher-content) of this PLE. 

3.6. Principle 6: Ubiquitous data access 

This  principle  refers  to  the  ability  to  seamlessly 
configure a PLE for any given purpose (i.e., learning  goal),  by  adding  new  and/or  replacing  existing 
content,  tools  and/or  services.  Currently,  this  principle  is  realized  in  aggregation-based  educational 
mashups  (e.g.,  personal  dashboards)  which  allow 
learners  to  put  together  content  from  different 
sources (mainly feeds and widgets) into a single in-
terface. Some online learning systems, Haiku40 being 
a  notable  example,  allow  learners  to  incorporate 
well-known social software tools/services by choosing 
them  from  a  wide  selection  of  available 
tools/services (e.g., Haiku offers over 80 social software tools ready to be embedded with just a simple 
drag-and-drop).  The  drawbacks  of  such  mashups 
include the users low level of control over what and 
how  is  present  (e.g.,  there  is  no  support  for  setting 
custom filters for the data supplied by a service), and 
their  static  nature  (the  data  sources  are  predefined 
and cannot be dynamically changed). 

From  the  modularity  perspective,  an  advanced 
PLE could be realized through dynamic service composition based on standardized description of services  deployed  within  a  service-oriented  architecture 
[61].  Furthermore, 
if  services  descriptions  are 
enriched with formal semantics (i.e., annotated with 
concepts coming from ontologies), service composition could be partially automated thus facilitating the 
creation  and  maintenance  of  a  PLE  and  improving 
users experience. An initial work in this direction is 
presented in [25]. 

An alternative solution for data modularity, that is, 
for the realization of dynamic data mashups is to use 
SPARQL [62] queries on top of linked data to integrate  data  originating  from  potentially  different 
sources, and filter the resulting data stream based on 
personal  preferences.  Even  though  advantageous  in 
terms  of  the  offered  functionality  (over  the  current 
static  and  non-adaptive  mashups),  this  approach  is 
presently not applicable in educational settings since 
it  is  still  overly  complex  for  non-technical  users. 
However, semantic web interfaces have been significantly evolving (as shown, e.g., in the series of workshops on Semantic Web User Interaction41 and summarized  in  a  recent  presentation  by  D.  Degler  [63]) 
and we can expect that it is not far away when these 
advanced  solutions  become  usable  in  educational 
settings. 

This  principle  emerges  from  the  proliferation  of 
mobile devices which made numerous aspects of our 
lives, education included, ever more mobile. Accor-
dingly,  individuals  increasingly  need  the  ability  to 
have access to their data from whatever device they 
are  using  in  the  given  moment.  In  addition,  webbased  applications  are  having  even  higher  growth 
rate,  resulting  in  a  huge  number  of  available  online 
applications, among which a significant number can 
be  used  for  educational  purposes  (see  section  (Se-
mantic) Social Software Tools in e-Learning: State of 
the Practice). The challenge with respect to this trend 
is  to  provide  users  (learners  and  educators)  with 
access to all relevant resources regardless of the application they are using at the given moment. Specif-
ically,  this  implies  the  need  for  letting  users  access 
and  integrate  their  profile  data  scattered  across  diverse applications they use. Additionally, it assumes 
the learners ability to access data about their learning  activities  and  achievements  (e-portfolio).  These 
requirements are tightly related to the previously discussed  Integration  and  Distributed  identity  management  principles,  and  as  indicated  in  the  discussion 
about  these  principles,  the  technology  is  available, 
and even though it is maybe not mature enough, the 
real challenge is not technical. Instead, the challenge 
is in making a shift in the ownership of data and content  switching it from companies, to users [64]. 

In  addition,  this  principle  is  related  to  the  users 
ability  to  ubiquitously  access  and  manage  artifacts 
they  have  (co-)authored  as  well  as  their  work  in 
progress.  This  is  currently  supported  by  online  Of-
fice-like environments (also known as office in the 
cloud),  such  as  Google  Docs  or  Zoho42.  These  authoring  environments,  equipped  with  constantly  increasing number of collaboration features and accessible  through  web  browser,  offer  users  any-time  and 
any-place access to their documents, and all the advantages of modern collaborative authoring tools. In 
addition, these application are beginning to adopt the 
principles of openness by letting their users take their 
data/content across the application walls (e.g., it is 
possible  to  directly  import  any  existing  documents 
from Google Docs to Zoho Docs in order to use some 
features  of  Zoho  Docs  not  available  from  Google 
Docs).  

The notion of PLE recognizes the role of an individual  in  organizing  his  or  her  own  learning  [9].  It 
assumes  an  active  learner  who  is  in  control  over 
his/her learning process, by taking initiative in learning  and  responsibility  for  managing  his/her  knowledge and competences. This makes PLE closely related  to  the  concept  of  Self  Regulated  Learning 
(SRL) [65] and the portfolio approach [66]. Through 
the different tools and services they integrate, PLEs 
allow  learners  to  plan  and  document  their  personal 
learning processes, to store personal reflections, self-

Table 1 

produced  artifacts  and  other  evidences  of  acquired 
competences.  This  could  be  effectively  enabled  by 
using the Linked Data principles that allow for seamless  integration  of  data  about  learning  activities  in 
various  systems  and  connecting  them  through  the 
different  learning  contexts.  In  addition,  a  PLE  can 
further support a self-directed learner by offering the 
content and learning tasks appropriate for the learners  present  learning  context.  It  is  obvious  that  this 
non-technical  principle  is  closely  related  to  and  depends  upon  all  the  above  described  technical  principles (1-6).    

Principles for the development of Interactive PLEs 

Principle 1: 
Integration 

Principle 2: Openness 

Principle 3: 
Distributed Identity 
Management 

Principle 4: 
Context-awareness 

Principle 5: Modularity 

Principle 6: Ubiquitous 
data access 

Principle 7: 
User Centricity 

seamlessly access different tools/services that are part of their PLEs; 

regulate the use of their data within tools/services that from their PLEs. 

Integration of distributed and heterogeneous data sources, tools and services 
Quintessential for the realization of all other principles, and thus development of advanced PLEs, i.e., PLEs 
offering context-aware and personalized learning, as well as ubiquitous data access 
Open standards => application and device independence, long-term access to content and services, interoperability 
Open source software => cost-effective customizations to the users needs,  
Open content => more diverse and constantly evolving and improving educational content 
The users ability to: 

-  pull together their profile data from those tools/services; 

Improved efficiency of users interactions with the environment through capturing and leveraging data about 
the user's learning context;  
Improvements: higher quality of search results, proactive recommendations, mediation of communica-
tion/collaboration 
The ability to seamlessly configure a PLE for any given purpose (i.e., learning goal), by adding new and/or 
replacing existing content, tools and/or services 
Support for standardized and light-weight approaches for the development of dynamic (e-learning) mashups. 
Seamless access to and integration of profile data, data about learning activities and learning resources 
Ability to access and use relevant resources regardless of the system/tool/service the user is currently using 
The user at the centre paradigm  student is responsible for managing his/her individual knowledge and competences 
The learning system is the facilitator: it identifies the appropriate resources, adapts them to the users learning 
context, and suggests the most appropriate learning strategies 

We have further explored the principles shown in 
Table 1 during the development of DEPTHS (DEsign 
Patterns Teaching Help System)  an interactive collaborative  learning  environment  in  the  domain  of 
software design patterns [67].  

4. Case study: Development of the DEPTHS 
Personal Learning Environment 

DEPTHS is our proof-of-the-concept PLE that follows  the  identified  principles  (Sect.  3).  Its  architecture  and  implementation  are based on  the SSW  and 
Linked Data paradigm and the use of ontologies as a 
common base for the integration of different learning 
systems  and  tools  in  a  common  environment.  It 

enabled us to get a hands-on experience with the application of the proposed principles and to test their 
feasibility  with  the  current  technology  (i.e.,  to  what 
extent these principles can be applied with the state-
of-the-art technology). The identified challenges and 
lessons learned are discussed in Section 5.2. 

4.1. Pedagogical Approach 

Having in mind that effective learning of software 
DPs requires a constructivist approach to be applied 
in  the  teaching  process,  we  have  identified  two  important  theories  in  this  field:  Project-based  learning 
(PBL) and Engagement theory. PBL is a teaching and 
learning  model 
learning  around 
projects. Projects comprise complex tasks and activi-

that  organizes 

tion that results in knowledge building. PBL is sometimes mistakenly interpreted as Problem-based learn-
ing. However, despite many similarities, project- and 
problem-based learning approaches are not identical. 
The main difference between them is in the extent to 
which the end product (project in project-based learn-
ing, and problem solution in problem-based learning) 
is organized: in the project-based learning, end products  are  elaborated  and  may  require  extensive  planning and labor, while in the problem-based learning, 
end  products  are  simpler  and  more  summative.  The 
engagement theory is based upon the idea of creating 
successful collaborative teams that work on tasks that 
are  meaningful  to  someone  outside  the  classroom 
[68].  Based on  the  guidelines  for  teaching Software 
Engineering  to  students  (e.g.,  [69]),  and  our  own 
teaching  experience,  we  believe  that  the  presented 
theories provide a solid base for effective learning of 
software  DPs.  Accordingly,  we  based  the  DEPTHS 
framework on them. 

A  typical  scenario  for  learning  software  patterns 
with DEPTHS assumes a project-based learning approach with collaborative learning support. In partic-
ular,  a  teacher  defines  a  specific  software  design 

problem  that  has  to  be  solved  in  a  workshop-like 
manner,  i.e.  student  has  to  propose  software  project 
as the solution of the given problem. A workshop is a 
peer-assessment activity with a huge array of options, 
such as allowing students to review and assess each 
others  solutions.  Students  engagement  in  solving 
the  problem  and  the  support  provided  by  DEPTHS 
are  presented  in  Figure  1.  Specifically,  based  on  a 
students current learning context, DEPTHS suggests 
other  students,  experts  and/or  teachers  who  can  be 
contacted  for  additional  support  (via  the  Experts, 
teachers and peers discovery service) (A). Using the 
Web  resource  finding  service  and  the  Service  for 
discovery  of  relevant  internally  produced  resources, 
DEPTHS  will  also  suggest  the  learning  content 
which might be useful for the students task at hand 
(B). The system currently does this on the students 
request but we plan to also include proactive recom-
mendations. Finally, it lets students to collaboratively 
annotate and comment on the learning resources during  the  problem  solving  process  (C).  As  DEPTHS 
provides seamless integration of all of its tools, students  are  able  to  communicate  and  collaborate  regardless of what specific tools of the DEPTHS environment they are using at that moment. 

It is possible to develop many other learning scenarios where DEPTHS would prove as beneficial for 
the learning process. For example, let us suppose that 
a student, who uses DEPTHS, is experiencing problems  with  his  assignment  related  to  the  Composite 
design  pattern.  He  would  like  to  ask  some  of  his 
classmates for help, but he does not know who have 
already done that assignment and how to reach them 
in that moment, so he decided to rely on the systems 
recommendation. Having analyzed his current learning  context,  the  system  recognizes  that  some  of  his 
classmates have already mastered Composite design 
pattern and would be able to help. However, the two 
of  them  whom  the  system  recommends  as  the  most 
appropriate helpers are currently not using the same 
learning  tool  (e.g.  LMS)  as  the  student  requesting 
help. Luckily, they are using another tool integrated 
in  DEPTHS  (e.g.,  modeling  tool)  and  thus,  can  be 
contacted. The contact could be initiated through chat 
(yet another tool that is a part of the DEPTHS envi-

ronment)  and  further  developed  through  any  of  the 
tools integrated into DEPTHS. 

4.2. Architecture 

Figure 2 illustrates the architecture of DEPTHS. It 
integrates existing, proven learning systems, such as 
a  Learning  Management  System  (A),  a  Software 
Modeling Tool (B), a Feedback Provisioning Tool for 
teachers  (C),  a  Collaborative  Annotation  Tool  (D) 
and  Online  Repositories  of  software  patterns  (E). 
This integration is achieved through the use of ontologies that comprise the LOCO framework (F). Spe-
cifically, the LOCO ontologies serve as the basis for 
storage and exchange of data among DEPTHS com-
ponents. 

LOCO (Learning Object Context Ontologies) (Jo-
vanovic et al, 2007b) is a generic ontological framework capable of formally representing particularities 
of  the  given  learning  context.  We  define  learning 

by:  the  learning  activity  that  was  performed  (e.g., 
reading, posting, or discussing), the learning content 
that was used or produced (e.g., lesson, Web page, or 
forum  posting),  and  the  user(s)  involved  (student(s) 
and/or teacher(s)). When defining the notion of learning context we wanted to have a common model for 
representing  interaction  data,  that  is,  the  data  that 
different  learning  systems/tools  keep  track  of  and 
store. Accordingly, the notion of learning context as 
defined here can be considered as the basic description of a specific learning situation which can be extended  to  support  the  requirements  and  features  of 
any  specific  learning  environment.  The  ontologies 
integrated  within  this  framework  (e.g.,  user  model 
ontology,  content  structure  ontology,  and  domain 
ontology) allow one to formally represent all the details of any given learning context, thus preserving its 
semantics  in  a  machine  interpretable  format  and  allowing  for  the  development  of  context-aware  learning services. The ontologies of the LOCO framework 
were  developed by following  the  Linked Data  Principles and Best Practices [70]. Accordingly, linkages 
were  established  (primarily  through  subclass  rela-
tionship)  with  well-known  Web  ontologies  such  as 
the  Dublin  Core  vocabulary43,  FOAF  (Friend-Of-A-
Friend44, and SIOC (Semantically Interlinked Online 
Communities45). These ontologies provide a suitable 
infrastructure  for  implementing  most  of  these  prin-

ciples  of  SSW-based  learning  (as  explained  in  the 
Compliance to the Principles section). 

thus 

integrated 

DEPTHS currently makes use of two ontologies of 
the LOCO framework: the Learning Context ontology and domain ontology. The Learning Context ontology allows for semantic representation of the data 
about  students  overall  interactions  with  learning 
content  and  other  students  during  different  learning 
activities.  This  ontology  was  extended  to  allow  for 
the representation of learning contexts specific to the 
systems,  tools  and  services  often  used  in  software 
engineering  education  and 
into 
DEPTHS. In particular, the kinds of learning activities  recognized  by  the  Learning  Context  ontology 
(e.g., reading a lesson, posting a chat or forum message  and  doing  an  assignment)  were  not  enough  to 
meet the specific needs of the DEPTHS environment. 
Therefore,  we  extended  this  ontology  with  a  set  of 
classes  and  properties  for  modeling  project-based 
collaborative learning. Moreover, the Learning Context ontology has been extended with additional types 
of learning content (i.e., subclasses of the ContentUnit class), namely DesignProblem, Task and Diagram 
(Figure  3).  Based  on  the  data  captured  by  the  (ex-
tended)  Learning  Context  ontology,  DEPTHS  can 
perform  context-aware  retrieval  of  resources  on 
software design patterns (DPs) from online repositories  and  its  own  repository  of  software  design  artifacts  (which  contains  artifacts  produced  by  students 
and those shared by the community, Figure 2). 

Fig. 2. The architecture of DEPTHS learning environment 

teaching/learning software DPs, we needed a domain 
ontology  that  formally  represents  the  domain  of 
software DPs. Rather than developing a new ontology  from  scratch,  we  (re)used  an  existing  ontology. 
Specifically,  we  have  chosen  the  set  of  ontologies 
suggested in [71] as it provides a very intuitive and 
concise way to describe DPs and pattern collections, 
and to offer more information on usability of DPs in 
software architectures. These ontologies are used by 
the  Semantic  annotation  service  to  semantically  annotate  learning  content  (see  section  Implemented 
Architecture). 

The above presented LOCO ontologies are used as 
the  basis  for  storage  and  exchange  of  data  among 
DEPTHS components. In particular, these ontologies 
underlie two DEPTHS repositories:  

Repository  of  Interaction  Data  stores  data  about 
students interaction with learning content, as well as 
their mutual interactions in the learning environment. 
It actually stores learning context data in the form of 
RDF triples compliant with the (extended) Learning 
Context ontology. 

Repository of LO Metadata stores semantic metadata about all kinds of learning objects (LOs) used in 
the courses under study: lessons and resources available from online repositories, as well as user generated content, such as software design diagrams, discussion forum and chat messages. We refer to these metadata  as  semantic  metadata,  as  they  formally  describe the semantics of the learning content they are 
attached  to.  This  is  done  by  relating  LOs  with  the 
appropriate concepts in the ontology of software Design  Patterns  (DP),  in  the  following  manner:  {lo-
co:LearningObject} 
loco:hasDomainTopic 
{depths:DesignPattern}. 

The data in these two repositories are interlinked. 
The  linking  of  data  across  these  two  repositories 
enables us to seamlessly relate students interactions 
with  the  content  used  and/or  produced  during  those 
interactions and to identify interactions related to the 
same domain topics (i.e., DPs). By leveraging these 
and  similar  possibilities  enabled  through  the  use  of 

linked  data,  we  were  able  to  develop  recommendation  services  described  below.  Currently,  we  do  not 
publish these data on the Web as linked data. How-
ever,  we  intend  to  expose  as  linked  open  data,  the 
metadata that we generate for the learning resources 
from the public repositories of software DPs since we 
believe that these (meta)data could be useful to others who are e.g., developing similar educational applications  with  adaptation  and/or  recommendation 
features.    

DEPTHS also includes a Repository of Design Artifacts  that  stores  software  artifacts  created  by  stu-
dents,  such  as  UML  class  diagrams.  These  artifacts 
are  maintained  in  two  open  standard  formats:  XMI 
(XML metadata interchange) format that is appropriate for later reuse, and SVG (Scalable Vector Graph-
ics) that is suitable for presenting the artifacts in the 
Learning Management System. In addition, they are 
suitable for semantic annotation with domain ontolo-
gies.  This  repository  is  maintained  by  the  Design 
Artifacts Handler (G in Figure 2). 

Since different learning systems, tools and services 
use  different  formats  for  representing  and  storing 
interaction data, DEPTHS integrates a Data Mapping 
Module (H in Figure 2) that performs the mapping of 
the data generated as the result of learners activities 
and stored in the native data format, into RDF triples 
compliant with the LOCOs learning context ontology (i.e., interaction data are transformed into LOCO 
context data). In addition, this module is responsible 
for  intercepting  different  types  of  events  that  occur 
during the users interaction with the tools integrated 
into  the  environment,  and  storing  the  (meta-)data 
about  those  events  as  RDF  triples  compliant  with 
LOCOs ontologies. The RDF data generated by this 
module  are  stored  in  the  Repository  of  Interaction 
Data.  Data  mapping  is  performed  throughout  each 
learning session in order to keep the semantic repository updated (with data about the interactions occurring  during  that  session).  More  details  about  this 
module as well as other components of the DEPTHS 
architecture can be found in [72]. 

Identity  Management  Component  (I  in  Figure  2) 
enables  learners  to  seamlessly  access  all  learning 
systems/tools integrated in the DEPTHS environment 
in spite of the fact that they all may require different 
access  accounts.  More  importantly,  this  allows  for 
ubiquitous  access  to  the  data  available  within  the 
DEPTHS  environment  regardless  of  the  system  the 
data  was  originally  created  and  stored  in.  In  our 
present implementation, we opted for the use of OpenID  due  to  its  simplicity.  Each  time  a  learner  accesses a tool within the DEPTHS environment, s/he 
is  presented  with  the  OpenID  login  form.  Once  the 
learner is verified by the OpenID server, s/he is automatically logged in any other tool integrated within 
DEPTHS. This eliminates the need for multiple usernames across different tools. 

Semantic  Annotation  and  Indexing  Service  (J  in 
Figure 2) is used for semantic annotation and indexing  of  documents  from  publicly-accessible  repositories of DPs, as well as the learning content created by 
students and teachers (e.g., exchanged chat messages, 
discussion  forum  threads,  or  assignments).  This 
module uses semantic annotation services of the KIM 
(Knowledge  and  Information  Management)46  platform to automatically annotate documents in the publicly accessible online repositories of software DP as 
well as students projects stored in the Repository of 
Design  Artifacts.  As  a  result  of  this  annotation 
process,  documents  and  students  projects  are  associated  with  topics  (concepts)  from  the  ontology  of 
software patterns. Semantic Annotation and Indexing 
Service  uses  the  term  frequency-inverse  document 

frequency (TF-IDF) [74] to measure what each document is about (based on the domain topic most frequently found in the document) and how relevant the 
document is for the whole document collection. Thus, 
the more frequently a domain topic appears in a doc-
ument,  it  is  considered  as  more  significant  in  the 
document.  However,  if  a  domain  topic  is  very  frequent in the whole document collection, it is not considered to be particularly representative for any doc-
ument. Additionally, for each indexed document, we 
also capture the relevance value which indicates how 
relevant that document is for a specific domain topic. 
This relevance value is computed as a cosine similarity between the TF-IDF value of a document and the 
domain topics it contains (more details on this can be 
found in [27] and [72]).   

Context-aware Learning Services  (K  in  Figure  2) 
are  accessible  to  all  systems  and  tools  integrated  in 
the  DEPTHS  environment  and  are  exposed  to  end 
users (students) as context-aware learning features.  

4.3. Context-aware Learning Services 

These services use the data from DEPTHS repositories  to  provide  students  with  additional,  contextaware  learning  support.  They  include  (but  are  not 
limited to) the following: 

Web resource finding. Based on the students current  learning  context,  this  service  finds  potentially 
useful Web resources (Figure 4). DEPTHS uses rele-
vant, publicly accessible repositories of software DPs 

In  particular,  it  currently  makes  use  of  Yahoo!  Design Pattern Library47, Portland Pattern Repository48, 
and  Hillside.net  Pattern  Catalog49.  The  service  uses 
the  semantic  annotations  of  the  resources  available 
from these repositories (generated by the DEPTHSs 
Semantic Annotation and Indexing Service) to identify  those  resources  that  are  relevant  for  the  given 
learning context. The relevance of a resource is cal-

culated  according  to  its  relatedness  to  the  domain 
ontology concepts (i.e. software patterns) relevant for 
the  current  learning  context,  and  the  students  previous  ratings  of  the  resource  [27].  All  resources 
found to be relevant are sorted based on their relevance for the current context. More details about this 
service as well as other context-aware services, briefly outlined below, can be found in [72]. 

Fig.4. A screenshot presenting the use of the Web resource finding service and the service for the Discovery of internally produced content, 

with the brainstorming task. 

tivity  has  a  different  impact  factor  on  the  systems  estimation  of  the  students  competences. 
This factor is defined in the system but could be 
changed by the teacher. 

 knowledge  level  estimated  by  the  teacher  and 
obtained through the peers evaluations, including projects evaluations and idea ratings. How-
ever, not all ratings have the same influence on 
the knowledge level estimation. For example, a 
high mark given by a student with high competences on the given topic has more impact on the 
final knowledge level appraisal than a high mark 
given by a student with average or low compe-
tences.  

 social connections with the peer asking for help 
- the stronger the social connection with a specific person, the more suitable that person is for 
providing help. It has been shown (e.g., in [73]) 
that  an  already  appointed  social  connection 
could  be  much  more  successful  and  effective 
than new connections with people one does not 
know. 

Discovery  of  relevant  internally  produced  re-
sources.  This  service  suggests  internally  created  resources (e.g., discussion threads, brainstorming notes, 
and  project  descriptions)  that  could  be  useful  to  a 
student when solving a problem at hand in the given 
learning  context.  The  computation  of  relevancy  for 
the  internally  produced  resources  is  done  in  a  way 
similar  to  the  one  used  for  external  Web  resources 
[27]. 

Discovery of experts, teachers and peers. Based on 
the  current  learning  context,  this  service  suggests 
other  students  or  experts  as  possible  collaborators 
(Figure 5). Collaborators are selected and sorted using an algorithm which considers their competences 
on three different levels: same content (i.e., the current  software  problem),  similar  or  related  learning 
content (i.e., a similar software problem) and broader 
content (i.e., a software problem in the same course). 
Estimation  of  a  peers  competence  on  each  level  is 
performed  through  assessing  three  types  of  competence indicators [27]: 

 participation in learning activities (e.g., brains-
torming,  submitting  a  solution  to  the  software 
problem or assessing peers solutions). Each ac-

Additionally,  the  service  for  the  discovery  of  ex-
perts, teachers and peers makes use of the DEPTHSs 
integration  with  online  social  networks,  which  currently includes Facebook and Twitter. Thus, if a peer 
to be recommended by this service is not available in 
the LMS in the given moment, the service will check 
his/her availability on online social networks, namely 
Facebook and Twitter, and if s/he is available on any 
of these network, the student in need for help will be 
informed about that. The student, still working within 
his/her LMS, will be able to send a help request message  (Figure  5)  to  the  peers  account  on  one  of  the 
social  networks  s/he  is  currently  active;  the  service 
will insert in the message a direct link to the learning 
context  where  the  help  is  needed.  Having  received 
the  notification,  the  peer  can  read  the  message  and 
access  the  software  design problem  to  check  if  s/he 
can offer help. 

Context-based  semantic  relatedness.  This  service 
is used by all other services, as it allows for: i) computing  context-based  semantic  relatedness  between 
tags  that  students  define  and/or  use  in  the  given 
learning  contexts  with  appropriate  concepts  of  the 
domain ontology (i.e. disambiguation of the tags with 
the domain concepts [75]); and ii) resolution of students queries containing both tags and domain concepts relevant for the given learning context. 

4.4. Implemented Architecture 

The  DEPTHS  learning  environment  is  implemented  through  the  extension  and  integration  of 
open-source  learning  system  and  tools.  The  open 
access to the source code of those system and tools 
enabled us to extend them with Semantic Web technologies  and  to  integrate  them  according  to  the  requirement of the DEPTHS architecture.  

We use Moodle50, a popular open-source Learning 
Management System, with a variety of learning tools 
and  features.  However,  to  effectively  support  collaborative learning in the domain of software DPs, we 
have extended it with additional modules. In particu-
lar, we have developed a module (Figure 4) that supports activities typical for collaborative project-based 
learning,  such  as  brainstorming,  software  artifact 
exchange,  evaluation  of  peers  projects  based  on 
teacher-defined  criteria,  and  rating  and  commenting 
ideas.  To  better  support  collaborative  tagging  in 
DEPTHS,  we have  extended  the  tagging feature offered by Moodle and integrated it in project module, 
as well as within discussion forums. Of course, given 
the openness and flexibility of DEPTHS architecture, 
other  general-purpose  collaborative  tagging,  hig-
hlighting,  and  note-taking  systems  can  be  used.  In 
our experiments, we have used OATS (Open Annotation  and  Tagging  System)  [76].  We  have  also  extended Moodle with support for capturing interaction 
data  in  the  form  of  RDF  triples  compliant  with  the 

All these data are stored in the Repository of interaction  data  and  could  be  accessed  from  all  tools  integrated in DEPTHS. Finally, our context-aware learning services are available from within Moodle.  

For  semantic  annotation  of  learning  content  we 
deploy  semantic  annotation  services  of  the  above 
mentioned KIM platform. These services allow us to 
annotate  learning  content  (e.g.,  lessons,  resources 
from online repositories of software patterns and artifacts  produced  by  students)  with  the  concepts  from 
our  domain  ontology  (i.e.,  the  ontology  of  software 
patterns).  The  resulting  metadata  is  represented  and 
stored in the standard format for educational metadata  storage  (i.e.,  as  IEEE  LOM  profile  encoded  in 
RDF).   

As  a  software  modeling  tool,  we  have  integrated 
ArgoUML51,  an  open-source  tool  that  supports  the 
design,  development  and  documentation  of  objectoriented  software  applications.  ArgoUML  has  also 
been  extended  with  support  for  working  with  the 
LOCO  ontologies,  so  that  it  can  exchange  learning 
context  data  with  all  other  integrated  systems/tools. 
We  have  also  provided  support  for  describing  software solutions and collaborative work (e.g., chat and 
messaging) that was lacking in this tool. Most importantly we enabled it to make use of the DEPTHS con-
text-aware learning services. 

Finally,  we  integrated  LOCO-Analyst,  a  tool  that 
uses learning context data (based on the ontologies of 
the  LOCO  framework)  to  provide  teachers  with 
learning  analytics  about  all  kinds  of  activities  their 
students performed during the learning process (e.g., 
feedback about students online interactions, or feedback about students comprehension of domain topics based on their collaborative tags) [23]. 

5. Analysis 

Having developed DEPTHS as a novel SSW learning environment, we analyzed how compliant it is to 
the  principles  that  we  have  identified  (Table  2)  and 
how  such  architecture  improves  interactivity  in  the 
learning process. 

5.1. Compliance to the Principles 

The  integrative  approach  (Principle  1)  applied  in 
DEPTHS is completely opposite to the currently pre-
valent, fragmented approach that assumes individual  use  of  systems  and  tools  for  teaching/learning 
software DPs. The major advantage of this approach 
is the seamless exchange of interaction data (i.e., data 
about the students interaction with learning content 
and other members of the online learning communi-
ty)  among  different  systems,  tools  and  services  that 
students  typically  use  when  learning  about  software 
DPs.  The  integration  of  students  interaction  data 
(Principle  1)  allows  for  the  deployment  of  contextaware learning services (Principle 4) that offer a personalized  learning  experience  to  students  (Principle 
7). In addition, it allows for ubiquitous access to relevant data and resources (Principle 6). Through the 
use of OpenID, we support identity management between  systems  and  services  integrated  in  DEPTHS 
(Principle 3). 

DEPTHS integrates open-source learning systems 
and  tools  and  assumes  the  (re)use  of  open  learning 
content, that is learning content available in publicly 
open  content  repositories  (Principle  1).  It  also  uses 
open software standards for storage and exchange of 
software  artifacts  that  students  produce  during  the 
learning process. 

DEPTHS  modularity  (Principle  4)  stems  from  its 
reliance  on  the  ontologies  of  the  LOCO  framework 
for data capturing and integration, as well as on the 
encapsulation  of  context-aware  learning  services  relying on loose coupling and interoperability. In par-
ticular, DEPTHS context-aware learning services are 
fully based on the LOCO-based data, so the functionalities they provide are not coupled to any particular 
learning system or tool (i.e., to their native format for 
interaction data). This further means that these functionalities  would  be  available  to  any  new  system 
and/or  tool  added  to  DEPTHS.  The  only  thing  that 
needs to be done is the mapping between the interaction data format of the new system/tool and the LOCOs learning context ontology (i.e., an extension of 
the  DEPTHSs  Data  Mapping  Module).  Similarly, 
resources  from  new  online  repositories  can  be  included  (i.e.,  considered  for  recommendation),  after 
they  are  semantically  annotated  (by  the  Semantic 
Annotation  and  Indexing Service)  with  the  concepts 
of the domain ontology. 

Compliance of the DEPTHSs architecture with the proposed Principles
Short Description 

DEPTHS Component(s) 

Integration of heterogeneous tools and users 
interaction data 
Openness: (re-)use of open learning content 
Distributed identity management 
Context-awareness 
Modularity 
Ubiquitous access to relevant data and resources 

LOCO ontologies and Data Mapping Module 

Semantic Annotation and Indexing Service 
Identity Management 
Context-aware Learning Services 
LOCO ontologies 

LOCO ontologies and Data Mapping Module 

Principle 

Personalized learning experience 

Context-aware Learning Services and Semantic Annotation and Indexing Service 

5.2. Challenges (Experiences) and Lessons learned 

Based on our experience, including the above case 
study, we can state that DEPTHS' foundation on the 
SSW  Linked  Data  paradigm  has  introduced  a  new 
quality to the learning experience. However, providing support for all the identified principles (Section 
3), was not an easy task. We have found several difficulties caused by the technology limitations. In this 
section we share our experiences and lessons learned, 
aiming  to  increase  the  awareness  of  the  difficulties 
that might arise when developing a PLE. Please notice  that  the  reported  challenges  are  related  exclusively  to  the  PLE  development,  not  its  use  by  the 
end users (i.e., teachers and learners).  

Integration.  One  of  the  basic  aspects  of  learning 
in  DEPTHS  is  the  integration  of  different  learning 
resources  both  from  internal  sources  (tools  inte-
grated)  and  external  sources  (web  repositories).  In 
order  to  provide  appropriate  recommendation  of 
content  originating  either  from  internal  or  external 
sources, DEPTHS needs to have some basic understanding of that content; accordingly, it has to annotate  those  pieces  of  content,  i.e.,  generate  metadata 
for 
the  content.  To  collect  external  content, 
DEPTHS  integrates  a  Web  crawler,  a  tool  for  collecting  links  of  all  processable  web  pages  inside  a 
specific online repository. However, some  websites 
do not allow Web crawlers to process the pages inside the site, which makes such a site unavailable for 
DEPTHS.  An  implication  of  this  limitation  is  that 
the  content  from  some  websites  with  high  educational potential could not be effectively used within 
DEPTHS  and  similar  educational  environments. 
Without  ability  to  directly  access  the  content  and 
annotate it, neither DEPTHS, nor other learning systems will be able to provide learners with advances 
educational  services  (e.g.,  recommendation  of  con-

tent relevant for the given learning context). In addi-
tion, there is a problem of semantic annotation of the 
crawled pages and learning content in general. Even 
though,  DEPTHS  makes  use  of  the  state-of-the-art 
services  for  semantic  annotation,  the  results  (i.e., 
annotations)  are  not  always  on  the  level  of  quality 
(due  to  missing,  imprecise  or  even  wrong  annota-
tions)  that  would  be  required  for  linking  content 
based on its semantics. This could result in recommendations that are not always best fit for a specific 
learning  situation.  We  are  addressing  this  problem 
by  collecting  students  feedback  about  the  used 
learning resources and using it in the recommendation  process.  However,  until  a  substantial  feedback 
is received, students will be served with potentially 
inappropriate  resources.  Even  if  we  disregard  this 
problem, there is still an important impediment associated with this kind of semantic annotation; it is the 
need to extend the knowledge base of the annotation 
services  with  the  concepts  relevant  for  the  subject 
domain of the resources to be annotated. In the case 
of  DEPTHS  (Section  4.2),  this  has  been  done  by 
extending the KIMs knowledge base with the concepts  from  the  domain  ontology  used  by  DEPTHS 
(ontology of software design patters). On the bright 
side,  the  need  for  hand-crafting  domain  ontologies 
for different subject domains (i.e., different courses, 
in the considered context of education) and importing them into knowledge bases of annotation services  could  be  bypassed  and  thus  the  whole  process 
could  be  significantly  facilitated  by  making  use  of 
DBPedia  and/or  subject-specific  datasets  of  the 
Linked Open Data cloud.         

Openness. To facilitate an effective access to the 
content and addition of new tools in a PLE, we considered the tools support for representation and annotation  of  the  used  content.  For  example,  ArgoUML is compliant to the UML XMI standard, so 
that  the  produced  software  models  can  be  easily 

format  to  share  UML  models  between  ArgoUML 
and  Web  applications  (e.g.  Moodle).  Furthermore, 
the  DEPTHS  environment  is  also  open  in  its  compliance to the broadly adopted Linked Data ontologies (e.g., SIOC and FOAF), which sets the ground 
for  sharing  the  data  produced  and  used  in  the 
DEPTHS services and tools with other external sys-
tems.  

Distributed  identity  management.  None  of  the 
LMSs we have considered to integrate in DEPTHS 
supports  any  of  the  open  web  initiatives,  even 
though they can have identity management regulated 
via  more  heavy-weight  identity  management  approaches (e.g., LDAP). Even more, domain specific 
tools  (e.g.,  ArgoUML)  most  often  do  not  support 
any kind of user authentication. As DEPTHS builds 
user  profiles  based  on  their  activities  in  different 
tools, it is very important to provide a common user 
identification  for  all  the  tools  integrated  within  the 
environment. In order to deal with this problem, we 
implemented mapping of the user authentication data 
from the integrated LMS (i.e., Moodle) to the common  ontology.  All  other  tools,  integrated  within 
DEPTHS  use  this  information  to  authenticate  user. 
However, these tools had to be extended to support 
this. Tools that already contain authentication module  are  extended  to  check  user  identity  against  the 
user profile stored in the ontology, while tools that 
do not contain authentication module had to be extended with the module that supports authentication.  
Modularity.  From  the  modularity  perspective, 
none  of  the  tools  we  integrated  within  DEPTHS 
could  be  described  as  highly  modular  application. 
We had to extend all these tools in order to support 
their  integration  within  the  DEPTHS  environment. 
Developing  additional  module  that  maps  data  between  integrated  application  (i.e.,  its  database)  and 
common ontology was not a challenging task. How-
ever, extending applications to intercept user activities and store them in the ontology-compliant format 
was not so easy in case of ArgoUML due to its quite 
complex  design  and  lack  of  modularity;  the  same 
task in Moodle demanded much less work. Moreo-
ver,  switching  from  the  version  of  ArgoUML  we 
started with, to the most recent version required significant effort due to the fact that backward compatibility is not preserved. While writing this paper, we 
are  facing  the  same  problem  with  Moodle,  as  our 
module  for  supporting  collaborative  project-based 
learning  became  incompatible  with  Moodle  2.x  ar-
chitecture.  

6. Evaluation 

6.1. Research Questions 

A  formative  evaluation  [77]  of  DEPTHS  was 
conducted  in  February  2009,  in  the  context  of  a 
course that the first author of this paper taught at the 
Department  of  Computer  Science  of  the  Military 
Academy in Belgrade, Serbia. The evaluation study 
was  aimed  at  enabling  us  to  answer  the  following 
three research questions: 

RQ1:  Whether  and  to  what  extent  the  students 
perceived  learning  services  and  functionalities  offered by the DEPTHS environment as valuable?. 

RQ2: Whether and to what extent the course design  is  perceived  as  consistent  with  technologies 
used in DEPTHS? To answer this research question 
we investigated how the students perceived the use 
of  the  course  design  within  the  DEPTHS  environ-
ment, as well as how they perceived the contribution 
of  the  assigned  learning  tasks  to  the  outcomes  of 
their learning process.   

RQ3:  Whether  and  to  what  extent  the  students 
recognize  the  importance  of  and  accept  to  take  the 
responsibility  for  their  own  learning?  Specifically, 
we  explored  if  the  course  design  encouraged  the 
students to take responsibility for their own learning 
and if they perceived that DEPTHS is enabling them 
to take control over their learning process. 

6.2. Method 

6.2.1. Study Design 

Giving  that  this  was  a  formative  evaluation  performed at an early stage of DEPTHS development, 
our goal was not to have results that can be generalized  for  a  target  learner  population,  derive  new 
learning  theories,  or  prove  causalities  among  some 
variables. Accordingly, the sample was recruited not 
to draw statistically significant conclusions that can 
be  generalized  to  the  entire  target  population,  but 
rather to evaluate the present progress and perceived 
value of DEPTHS. As per the purpose of formative 
evaluation [77], we aimed to verify the adequacy of 
the proposed technology through identifying how the 
students  perceived  learning  with  DEPTHS  and  the 
consistency  of  the  course  design  and  technologies 
used in DEPTHS. This also drive the design of our 
data collection instrument (i.e., questionnaire) suitable for answering our research questions. Moreover, 
we  expected  to  get  directions  for  further  research 

results. 

6.2.2. Participants 

DEPTHS  was  evaluated  with  a  group  of  13  undergraduate  (fifth  year)  Computer  Science  students 
who  took  part  in  our  course  on  software  develop-
ment.  Giving  that  this  was  a  formative  evaluation 
and  the  fact  that  study  groups  in  senior  years  of 
Computer Science programs are typically small, we 
consider that the size of this study group (13) is sufficiently representative for the target audience of our 
research. This is in line with the purpose of a formative evaluation, which is not designed to make generalizations to the entire population, but to assess the 
progress  of  the  present research  and  inform  the  future  research.  The  students  already  had  some  elementary knowledge in the domain of software DPs, 
but  they  were  not  familiar  with  the  particular  software DPs used in this experiment (Facade, Adapter, 
Strategy, Composite, Visitor and Decorator). 

The students were divided into 4 groups (3 groups 
with 3 students and 1 group with 4 students), based 
on  the  instructors  subjective  opinion  about  their 
knowledge  in  the  domain  of  software  development 
and  their  previous  results  in  the  courses  related  to 
software  engineering.  The  size  of  the  groups  was 
based on our teaching experience that work in small 
size groups (3 or 4 students) is a necessity for effective education of software engineers. 

6.2.3. Materials 

The  materials  used  in  this  evaluation  study  in-
cluded:  the  DEPTHS  environment  (including  the 
tools and services it integrates), the DEPTHS's logs 
related to the use of the tools/services it integrates, 
the  learning  course  with  specified  software  design 
assignments and the questionnaire. In order to complete  the  tasks  defined  in  the  assignments,  the  students had to use the software tools integrated within 
DEPTHS,  namely,  Moodle,  ArgoUML  and  educational services (peers discovery service and resource 
recommendation).  The  course  contained  two  assignments  (i.e.,  design  problems).  The  first  assignment was supposed to be done by students working 
in  small  study  groups  (3-4  students,  as  explained 
above),  whereas  the  second  one  was  to  be  accomplished by all the students working together.  

We used a questionnaire to collect the data about 
the students' perception of the services and functionalities  provided  by  DEPTHS.  The  questionnaire 

was  also  supposed  to  enable  us  to  obtain  the  data 
about the perceived consistency of the course design 
and the technologies and tools used in DEPTHS, as 
well as the students perceptions regarding the effectiveness  of  learning  with  DEPTHS.  Except  for  the 
six  questions  that  were  open-ended  questions,  all 
other questions (33) were multiple-choice questions 
based on a five-point Likert-like scale. 

6.2.4. Study Procedure 

Before the experiment started, a demonstration of 
DEPTHSs  functionality  along  with  a  training  session  in  which  an  assignment  similar  to  those  used 
later  in  the  experiment,  were  performed  with  the 
students. For the experiment, each student was given 
two  assignments  (i.e.,  software  design  problems), 
one common for all students in each group and the 
other common for all students involved in the study. 
The  students were  asked  to  solve  the given  assignments  within  sven  days  by  following  a  predefined 
set of tasks: brainstorming, suggesting a solution and 
evaluating  each  others'  solutions.  However,  inside 
each  individual  task,  students  had  a  freedom  to 
choose  how  they  would  perform  the  task  and  how 
they would use the provided tools and services. Ac-
tually, the work on the assignments was supposed to 
follow  the  learning  workflow  described  in  Section 
4.1. As a part of the brainstorming task, the students 
were asked to present their ideas for solving the given software design problem using a specific design 
pattern, and to comment on and rate ideas suggested 
by other students from their group. When they were 
all  working  together  on  the  second  assignment,  the 
students were asked to make use of the Service for 
the discovery of peers, as a mean for improving the 
collaboration. Afterward, each student was asked to 
use  the  domain  modeling  tool  (i.e.,  ArgoUML)  to 
create  his/her own proposal for  the design  problem 
solution  and  to  submit  it.  At  the  end,  each  student 
was supposed to evaluate all solutions proposed by 
other students.  

6.3. Study Results 

In what follows, we discuss the study results from 
the  perspective  of  the  research  questions  stated 
above.  

RQ1: Perceived value of services and functionalities  offered  by  DEPTHS.  The  DEPTHS  environment  received  high  marks  from  the  students.  The 
students reported that the environment was intuitive 

learning with DEPTHS (84.61%).  

The  students  felt  that  educational  services  provided  within  DEPTHS  were  very  helpful:  Web  resource finding service - 92.30% of the students; Service  for  the  discovery  of  relevant  internally  produced resources  84.61%; and Experts, teachers and 
peers discovery service  76.92% (Principles Openness and Context-awareness).  

Having  analyzed  DEPTHSs  logs,  we  found  that 
students  frequently  used  the  educational  services 
during  the  experiment.  Moreover,  resources  suggested by DEPTHS as the most relevant in the current context, were also voted as relevant by students 
(94.15%  of  them)  in  DEPTHS  itself.  These  results 
indicate  that  DEPTHS  might  have  a  very  positive 
impact on the student-content interactions.  

shared 

Having analyzed correlation between variables we 
have identified 27 variables pairs that have significant  association  through  the  use  of  Pearsons  chisquare  (we  used  standard  level  of  significance 
p<0.05). For example, we found that students satisfaction  with  the  educational  services  for  recommending  relevant  Web  pages  and  course  content 
affected  their  later  satisfaction  with  their  learning 
results using this program. We believe that this association is related with the students level of adoption 
of  these  services  as  important  and  useful  part  of  a 
learning system. However, a deeper analysis of these 
results and a follow-up summative evaluation out of 
scope of this paper and will be reported in our future 
work. 

RQ2: Perceived consistency of the course design 
with the technologies used in DEPTHS. The majority of students (92.30%) perceived that learning ob-
jectives,  outcomes,  and/or  expectations  for  the 
course  were  clearly  stated.  Most  of  the  students 
(84.61%)  found  that  helpful  examples  have  been 
used in the course. They also thought that the activities provided within the learning tasks considerably 
contributed to the outcomes of the learning process 
(brainstorming    76.92%,  and  evaluating  each  others works  100%). In addition, the majority of the 
students (92.30%) perceived that they learned from 
other 
the 
DEPTHS's project module. Additionally, 84.61% of 
the  students  found  ideas  of  other  students  as  very 
beneficial  and  all  students  (100%)  indicated  that 
evaluation  of  other  students  works  was  useful  for 
learning  process.  This  indicates  that  DEPTHS  has 
well  set  the  scene  for  productive  student-student 
interactions.   

students  projects 

through 

RQ3:  The  perceived  recognition  of  the  importance  of  and  acceptance  to  take  responsibility  for 
learning.  Our  analysis  has  shown  that the  majority 
of  the  students  (76.92%)  were  encouraged  to  take 
responsibility for their learning in DEPTHS. Most of 
them (76.92%) reported that they had a great deal of 
choice over how they are going to learn in the given 
project task (Principle User centricity).In addition, a 
significant  number  of  the  students  (84.61%)  had  a 
clear  idea  where  they  are  going  and  what  was  expected from them.  

We  can  conclude  that  DEPTHS  provides  prerequisites for user centricity (Principle User centricity), 
and makes students responsible for the development 
of  their  individual  knowledge  and  competences. 
Moreover,  even  though  the  students  were  accustomed to using the Web for information access and 
online tools for collaboration, they did not use them 
in an integrated way. However, they found that when 
integrated (like in the DEPTHS environment), these 
tools  are  even  more  useful  (Principle  Distributed 
identity  management).  Based  on  the  students  answers  to  the  questions  about  educational  services 
and  tools  provided  within  DEPTHS,  we  can  infer 
that  the  principles  of  context-awareness  (Principle 
Context-awareness)  and  ubiquitous  data  access 
(Principle Ubiquitous data  access)  are  promising  to 
create more productive and effective learning expe-
rience. 

7. Conclusion 

The  seven  key  principles  for  interactive  PLEs 
have been identified and empirically explored in the 
architecture of the DEPTHS PLE. The principles can 
be considered a first step towards the materialization 
of  the  concept  of  interactive  PLE  built  on  Social 
Semantic Web paradigm and Linked Data principles. 
The  presented  architecture  and  implementation  of 
the  DEPTHS  environment  demonstrates  how  this 
synergetic  mix  of  social  and  semantic  technologies 
and  Linked  Data  paradigm  advances  the  learning 
process in a very concrete domain of software engineering  education.  DEPTHS  goes  beyond  narrow 
goals of individual courses and serves as a basis for 
managing  life-long  learning.  While  the  benefits  of 
the use of the Social Semantic Web and Linked Data 
are obviously present, two major questions still need 
to  be  solved:  privacy  preservation  and  data  ownership in education and learning. This requires further 
research of the perception of privacy and data own-

an  engagement  of  the  overall  Web  community,  not 
only  educators.  Until  these  important  issues  are  re-
solved, Linked Data inspired local data clouds [78] 
will most probably dominate in the educational do-
main.  

With regard to future work we plan to perform a 
more  elaborate  summative  evaluation  study  with  a 
higher  number  of  participants.  In  particular,  our 
study will be aimed to investigate the impact of the 
interventions  implemented  in  the  DEPTHS  environment on the level of cognitive presence [79] and 
metacognition  [80]  in  project-based  collaborative 
learning.  In  addition,  we  are  preparing  a  detailed 
review  of 
the  state-of-the-art  and  state-of-the-
practice  in  the  area  that  intersects  social  semantic 
web, linked data and online learning, in order to further explore the potential and implications that these 
novel data-driven  technologies  have  on  the  interactivity and collaboration aspects of personal learning 
environments. 

8. Endnotes 

1.  http://www.notemesh.com/ 
2.  http://www.slideshare.net/ 
3.  http://cnx.org 
4.  http://www.buddyschool.com/) 
5.  http://elgg.net/ 
6.  http://www.icamp.eu/ 
7.  http://www.nmc.org/horizon 
8.  http://dataportability.org/ 
9. 

 http://www.deliberations.com.au/2006/12/present-and-
future-of-personal-learning.html  

10.   One of the most prominent example is Prof. Michael Wesch 

from Kansas State University  
(http://mediatedcultures.net/ksudigg/)  

11.   http://opencontent.org/blog/archives/227  
12.  http://edtechpost.wikispaces.com/Open+Educator+as+DJ+%2

8Final%29  

13.  http://ocw.mit.edu/OcwWeb/web/home/home/index.htm  
14.  http://www.opener.ou.nl/  
15.  http://www.talis.com/aspire  
16.  http://groupme.org/GroupMe/ 
17.  Ensemble: Semantic Technologies for the Enhancement of 

Case Based Learning, http://ensemble.ljmu.ac.uk/wp/ 

18.  In order to reduce the clutter and make the text easier to read, 

we use the term tool as generic term when referring to different kinds of tools, systems and services. 

19.  http://semtech-survey.ecs.soton.ac.uk/ 
20.  http://www.mkbergman.com/new-version-sweet-tools-sem-

web/ 

21.  http://www.c4lpt.co.uk/recommended/top100.html 
22.  http://www.c4lpt.co.uk/ 
23.  Available as podcasts on, for example, 
http://www.educause.edu/podcasts, and  
http://cider.athabascau.ca/CIDERSessions/  

24.  In Section 2.3, we described both types of mashups and emphasized the advantages of mashups by integration over mashups by aggregation. 
25.  http://linkeddata.org/ 
26.  http://dbpedia.org/spotlight  
27.  http://www.w3.org/ 
28.  http://openid.net/ 
29.  http://activitystrea.ms/ 
30.  Annual report that identifies and describes emerging technologies that are expected to have significant impact on higher 
education practices 
31.  http://ocw.mit.edu/  
32.  http://www.okfn.org/  
33.  (http://data.southampton.ac.uk) 
34.  http://data.open.ac.uk 
35.  http://metamorphosis.med.duth.gr/  
36.  http://code.google.com/p/webfinger/ 
37.  http://oauth.net/ 
38.  http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/ 
39.  http://learningdesignpatterns.org 
40.  http://www.haikulearning.com/ 
41.  http://swui.webscience.org/ 
42.  http://www.zoho.com 
43.  http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/ 
44.  http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1 
45.   http://sioc-project.org 
46.  http://www.ontotext.com/kim/index.html 
47.  http://developer.yahoo.com/ypatterns/index.php  
48.  http://c2.com/ppr/  
49.  http://www.hillside.net/patterns/onlinepatterncatalog.htm  
50.  http://moodle.org 
51.  http://argouml.tigris.org/ 
52.  SparqlPress plugin (http://wiki.foaf-

project.org/w/SparqlPress) is required for providing Semantic 
Web functionalities 

53.  FOAF export plugin is necessary to provide Semantic Web 

functionality 
