Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Preface

Diego Calvanese a, Thomas Lukasiewicz b
a KRDB Research Centre for Knowledge and Data, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
b Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK

This special issue of the Semantic Web journal contains thoroughly revised and significantly extended
versions of selected papers presented at the Fourth International Conference on Web Reasoning and Rule
Systems (RR 2010), which was held in Bressanone/Bri-
xen, Italy, September 22-24, 2010.

The Semantic Web aims at allowing knowledge to
be freely accessed and exchanged by software. It is
now widely recognized that if the Semantic Web is to
contain deep knowledge, the need for new representation and reasoning techniques is going to be criti-
cal. These techniques need to find the right trade-off
between expressiveness, scalability, and robustness to
deal with the inherently incomplete, contradictory, and
uncertain nature of knowledge on the Web.

The annual International Conference on Web Reasoning and Rule Systems (RR) is addressing these
needs and has grown into a major international forum for the discussion and dissemination of new
results concerning Web Reasoning and Rule Sys-
tems. The first
three International Conferences on
Web Reasoning and Rule Systems (see http://www.rr-
conference.org), held in Innsbruck, Austria (2007),
Karlsruhe, Germany (2008), and Chantilly, Virginia,
USA (2009), received enthusiastic support from the
Web Reasoning community.

Queries, Reinhard Pichler, Axel Polleres, Sebastian Skritek, and Stefan Woltran study the problem of redundancy detection on RDF graphs in
the presence of rules and constraints, and with respect to queries. They investigate the influence of
several problem parameters on the complexity of
detecting redundancy. The main result of the paper is a fine-grained complexity analysis of both
graph and rule minimization in various settings.
 In Paraconsistent OWL and Related Logics, Frederick Maier, Yue Ma, and Pascal Hitzler propose four-valued paraconsistent description log-
ics, which can reason over inconsistencies. They
focus on logics corresponding to OWL DL and
its profiles. They present the logic SROIQ4,
which is sound relative to classical SROIQ and
has a consequence-preserving embedding into
SROIQ. They also examine paraconsistent variants of EL++, DL-Lite, and Horn-DLs.

 In Model Outlines: a Visual Language for DL
Concept Descriptions, Fernando Naufel do Amaral proposes a new visualization framework called
model outlines, where more emphasis is placed
on the semantics of concept descriptions than on
their syntax. He presents detailed algorithms for
translating between model outlines and the description logic ALCN . He also reports on the results of a recent usability study comparing model
outlines and Manchester OWL.

We would like to thank all authors for their contributions to this special issue and all referees (Natalya Ke-
berle, Adila A. Krisnadhi, Domenico Lembo, Gergely
Lukacsy, Michael Meier, and Gerardo I. Simari) for
their timely expertise in carefully reviewing the contributions of this special issue.

There were 15 (full or short) technical papers at RR
2010, which had been selected out of 31 submitted papers in a rigorous reviewing process, where each paper
had been reviewed by at least three program committee
members. After the conference, the authors of five papers judged best were invited to prepare thoroughly revised and significantly extended versions of their conference contributions to be considered for publication
in the Semantic Web journal. Based on a rigorous reviewing process, the three papers listed below have
been selected for this special issue.

 In Complexity of Redundancy Detection on RDF
Graphs in the Presence of Rules, Constraints, and

Diego Calvanese in Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
Thomas Lukasiewicz in Oxford, UK

