Undefined 1 (2009) 15
IOS Press

Linked Data for Science and Education

Editor(s): Name Surname, University, Country
Solicited review(s): Name Surname, University, Country
Open review(s): Name Surname, University, Country

Carsten Keler a, Mathieu dAquin b and Stefan Dietze c
a Institute for Geoinformatics, University of Munster, Germany
E-mail: carsten.kessler@uni-muenster.de
b The Open University, UK
E-mail: m.daquin@open.ac.uk
c L3S Research Center, Germany
E-mail: dietze@l3s.de

Sharing of resources, resource metadata, and data
across the Web is a central principle in scientific and
educational contexts. Scientific collaboration has long
been striving for wider reuse and sharing of knowledge and data. Likewise, the Open Educational Resources community has promoted the widespread exploitation of public and reusable educational resources
throughout the last decade. Hence, technologies to enable interoperability of shared resources and data have
long been at the centre of scientific and educational
information systems. However, due to the lack of a
shared technology stack and joint principles, the landscape of developed and utilised standards is very fragmented and covers an increasing variety of heterogeneous technologies, such as repositories with proprietary interfaces and query mechanisms. Moreover, a
broad range of largely incompatible metadata schemas
and taxonomies have been developed to describe and
expose educational resources, and scientific workflows
and data. Due to the prevailing heterogeneity of deployed approaches and technologies, interoperability
remains an open challenge.

At the same time, the Linked Data (LD) approach
has emerged as the most recent evolution of the Semantic Web, aiming at Web-scale data interoperability,
it has produced an ever growing amount of data sets
and schemas available on the Web. Given the proven
capabilities of LD technologies towards realising Web
scale data sharing and reuse, scientific and educational
practitioners have started to adopt those principles. Results of such activities cover joint schemas used for describing scientific or educational resources, vast col-

0000-0000/09/$00.00 c 2009  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

While the first two papers focus on the dissemination of scientific assets, the remaining two papers ad-

lections of structured data about, for instance, cultural
or historic artifacts, bibliographic collections, domainspecific vocabularies capturing extensive amounts of
scientific domain knowledge  where the life sciences
are particularly well represented  as well as baseline technologies used to expose and integrate linked
datasets.

This special issue contains four papers documenting
the most recent developments in Linked Data for Science and Education. Focusing on the collection and annotation of scientific data, the paper Ontology of Units
of Measure and Related Concepts by Hajo Rijgersberg,
Mark van Assem and Jan Top shows how to annotate
quantitative research data for sharing and reuse. The
design choices made during the development of this
OWL ontology are explained, and the application of
the ontology is demonstrated with different use cases
and the tools and web services built to handle them.

The paper Publishing Bibliographic Data on the Semantic Web using BibBase by Reynold S. Xin, Oktie Hassanzadeh, Christian Fritz, Shirin Sohrabi and
Renee J. Miller addresses the next step in the research
process, namely publishing the results and handling
the publication metadata. BibBase is a system that automatically creates a number of services from standard
BibTex files, providing the contents as rich Linked
Data queryable through a SPARQL endpoint, as RSS
feeds, and as HTML snippets, thus addressing a number of use cases for sharing and dissemination of publication metadata.

C. Keler et al. / Linked Data for Science and Education

dress the application of the Linked Data paradigm in
education. The paper Personal Learning Environments
on the Social Semantic Web by Zoran Jeremic, Jelena
Jovanovic and Dragan Gasevic addresses the requirement for highly collaborative and interactive learning.
It provides an overview of the state of the art in personal learning environments and the underlying princi-
ples. Based on their DEPTHS system, the authors discuss the design, implementation, analysis, and evaluation of such a learning environment based on Semantic
Web technologies.

The special issue is rounded off by a paper that
addresses the annotation of study programs. The
Bowlogna Ontology: Fostering Open Curricula and
Agile Knowledge Bases for Europes Higher Education Landscape by Gianluca Demartini, Iliya Enchev,

Joel Gapany and Philippe Cudre-Mauroux introduces
a multi-lingual OWL ontology that allows universities
to publish their curricula according to the Bologna pro-
cess, i.e., with a focus on students planning external
semesters at other universities, and students switching
programs after their undergraduate degree.

This special issue shows, through these four widely
different but exemplar works, that the use of Semantic
Web principles and technologies is gaining momentum
in the area of science and education, where the need
for efficient ways to share information and knowledge
openly and globally is most obvious. New initiatives
are emerging frequently, with promising prospects for
new applications, as the practices of science and edu