Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

A Review of Argumentation for the Social
Semantic Web

Editor(s): Harith Alani, The Open University, UK
Solicited review(s): Fouad Zablith, American University of Beirut, Lebanon; Simon Buckingham Shum, The Open University, UK; Iyad
Rahwan, Masdar Institute, Abu Dhabi
Open review(s):

Jodi Schneider a, Tudor Groza a,b, and
Alexandre Passant a
a Digital Enterprise Research Institute, National
University of Ireland, Galway,
firstname.lastname@deri.org
b School of ITEE, The University of Queensland,
Australia, tudor.groza@uq.edu.au

Abstract. Argumentation represents the study of views and
opinions that humans express with the goal of reaching a
conclusion through logical reasoning. Since the 1950s, several models have been proposed to capture the essence of informal argumentation in different settings. With the emergence of the Web, and then the Semantic Web, this modeling shifted towards ontologies, while from the development
perspective, we witnessed an important increase in Web 2.0
human-centered collaborative deliberation tools. Through a
review of more than 150 scholarly papers, this article provides a comprehensive and comparative overview of approaches to modeling argumentation for the Social Semantic Web. We start from theoretical foundational models and
investigate how they have influenced Social Web tools. We
also look into Semantic Web argumentation models. Finally
we end with Social Web tools for argumentation, including
online applications combining Web 2.0 and Semantic Web
technologies, following the path to a global World Wide Argument Web.

Keywords: Argumentation, Semantic Web, Social Web, Semantic Web, Ontologies

1. Introduction

In recent years, the problem of representing largescale argumentation on the Web has attracted the at-

tention of scholars from fields such as artificial intelligence [137], communication theory [5], business
management [88] and e-government [107]. At the
same time, argumentation researchers began establishing the foundations for a World Wide Argument Web
(WWAW) as a large-scale Web of interconnected arguments posted by individuals to express their opinions in a structured manner [138].

Arguments on the Web can be used in decisionmaking contexts. Decision-making often requires discussion not just of agreement and disagreement, but
also the principles, reasons, and explanations driving
the choices between particular options. Furthermore,
arguments expressed online for one audience may be
of interest to other (sometimes far-flung) audiences.
It can be difficult to re-find the crucial turning points
of an argumentative discussion, even one in which we
have participated. Yet on the Web, we cannot subscribe
to arguments or issues, nor are there tools that support
searching for arguments. Nor can we summarize the
rationale behind a groups decision, even when the discussion took place entirely in public venues such as
mailing lists, blogs, IRC channels, and Web forums.

By providing common languages and principles to
model and query information on the Web (such as
RDF [90], RDFS [1], OWL [3], SPARQL [2], Linked
Data principles [18], etc.), the Semantic Web [20] is
an appropriate means to represent arguments and argumentation uniformly on the Web, and to enable, for
instance, browsing distributed argumentation patterns
that appear in various places on the Web. Indeed, researchers have shown that the Semantic Web can be
used for visualization and comparison in decision rationale [102].

In this context, this paper discusses research in modeling argumentation as it relates to the Social Seman-

1570-0844/0-1900/$27.50 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

tic Web [10,70,27], focusing on foundational models
of argumentation, their applications in the Social Web,
and on ontologies (as in computer science [69]).

In particular, our purpose is to investigate ontologies
and tools which may be useful for argumentation on
the Social Semantic Web, a field where the aforementioned Semantic Web technologies support Social Web
[123] applications, while at the same time Social Web
paradigms are used to generate Semantic Web data collaboratively and at large scale. This convergence aims
at providing new and improved ways to integrate and
discover data, following the vision of Social Machines
provided by Berners-Lee [19], both on the Web and
in the enterprise [127]. In the context of argumenta-
tion, this could help to aggregate arguments from various websites  for instance a discussion starting on
Twitter and followed up on a mailing list, later frozen
on a wiki once consensus is reached  thus providing
new means to follow argumentative discussions on the
Web. This would enable an argument-centric view of
the Web.

Moreover, the Social Web does not yet have widelyused argumentative ontologies, though this problem
has been noted [67], along with the need for federation
infrastructures [125]. Thus, in order to identify how
different argumentation models and tools can be used
for the Social Semantic Web, this paper offers a review
of more than 150 research papers on the topic, from
1945 to 2011, from which we compare:

 14 theoretical models of argumentation
 14 Semantic Web models for argumentation (i.e.

 37 tools for representing argumentation on the

ontologies)

Web.

As the focus is on human-centered argumentation
[87], with the goal of improving access and providing
overviews and visualizations, this article will briefly
mention, but not analyze, the agent-based argumentation domain1

Following the introduction, we provide brief overviews

of argumentation (Section 2.1) and of the Social Web
(Section 2.2), then discuss requirements for supporting argumentation on the Social Semantic Web (Sec-
tion 3). We next present theoretical models of argu-

1See for instance the Argumentation in Multi-Agent Systems
(ArgMAS) Workshop series, in its ninth year in 2012. In particular,
in the social context, Heras has presented argumentation work from
a social perspective using case-based reasoning and ontologies e.g.
the ArgCBROntology 2. [76,73].

mentation (Section 4) from a variety of fields, compare
them (Section 5), and present applications of these theoretical models (Section 6). Subsequently we present
(Section 7) and compare (Section 8) Semantic Web
models of argumentation. Then we move on to reviewing tools: in Section 9 we highlight thirteen noteworthy features of Social Web argumentation tools, based
on a comprehensive analysis of thirty-seven relevant
tools (see the Appendix for full details). Finally we
conclude the paper in Section 10.

2. Background

2.1. Argumentation

Argumentation theory is the study of agreement,
disagreement, and of the dialogues and writing through
which we convince ourselves and others of our points
of view [65]. Informal argumentation occurs throughout conversations, online and offline, often in conjunction with persuasion or with joint decision-making.
Even logically sound decisions may involve choices
based on values and preference judgements: people
may agree on the facts of a situation yet disagree on
the preferred outcome or decision to be taken. That is
vitally different from disagreeing on the facts of a situation (in which case more information is called for).
We are concerned with argumentative discussions,
which we take to be online, mainly textual messages
and discussions, in which subjective perspectives or
differences of opinion are important and relevant.
Groups may use online conversations and social media
to coordinate and support decision-making; such argumentative discussions can be found in many online discussion fora such as standardization bodies listservs,
Wikipedia editors wiki pages, and open source communities IRC channels, bug reports, and listservs. Individuals may also draw on online conversations and
social media in order to form personal opinions and
clarify their own preferences, based on sensemaking
and analysis of others experiences; such argumentative discussions can be found, for instance, on product
reviews websites, political blogs, in patient advocacy
and support group discussions, and in brief anecdotes
shared via microblogs.

There are a variety of common argument structures
[134]. A single premise may directly support a conclusion (as in (i) of Figure 1 on the facing page), but more
commonly, they are combined to come to a conclusion.

Yet the internal structure of these discussions  such
as whether the participants agree or disagree, are contributing diverse ideas, or debating in circles  is still
not represented in SIOC. Capturing such underlying
arguments would be valuable, and research is beginning to address this for instance by identifying argument schemes used in Amazon reviews [75,208] and
by modeling the speech acts in Twitter conversations
[148]. Yet infrastructure for argumentation on the Social Semantic Web is still needed.

3. Requirements

What are the requirements for supporting argumentation on the Social Semantic Web? Arguments
must be identified, resolved, represented and stored,
queried, and presented to users. Identification involves
mining arguments, in the form of claims, from text
(Section 6.12.2, page 17), eliciting them from users,
or some combination of these approaches. Resolving
involves indicating the relationships between the individual claims that make up arguments: are they on
the same topic? Do they agree or disagree? Representing and Storing arguments requires a suitable ontology to represent claims and the relationships between
them. This supports Querying and enables Presenting
the Social Semantic Argument Web, i.e. using these
ontologies to facilitate access to conversations, summarizing the contentious and agreed-upon points of a
discussion.

The representations chosen are key to this process,
since they determine what stored information can be
retrieved, and what information needs to be mined and
resolved. Existing representations will need to be aug-
mented, since the information we can retrieve depends
on what information we store. The desired ontologies
should encompass not only the structural features of
posts (such as the date and author of a post) and of
conversations (such as the reply structure of multiple posts), but also additional argumentative features,
for instance to mark claims and to indicate the relationships between them. The simplest relationships for
representing argumentation indicate whether pairs of
claims support or challenge each other. Yet in gen-
eral, these relationships do not just pertain to pairs; in
general, entire groups of argumentative messages may
need to be considered together. The meaning of a dialogue may be lost by chunking messages and treating
them individually, out of the original context.

Fig. 1. Common argument patterns, from [134].

Premises and conclusions may also be chained (as in
(iv) of Figure 1 on the next page).

Further, as we will see in this review, there are different ways of thinking about and modeling arguments.
Argumentation theorists have variously modeled individual argument structure (e.g. Toulmin, discussed in
Section 4.1, page 4), argument chaining (e.g. Araucaria3 [150,142,144]), and groups of arguments (e.g.
Dung, discussed in Section 4.5, page 6). There is a significant difference between what is possible to analyze
when looking at these different levels of argumenta-
tion: they show micro- and macro- structures which
are not commensurate, so it is important to have clarity
about what kind of analysis suits a situation.

We believe that for social media, the basic units
of argumentation are claims and justifications. By
a claim, we mean an assertion of fact or opinion4.
Justificationsreasons for believing the claimare often elicited when a claim is questioned. Some justifications take the form of explanations; opinions may be
elaborated upon and explained even when no disagreement is expected.

2.2. Social Semantic Web

The interaction of users around the Web has been
shifting from individual siloed Web systems, towards
more open and interlinked social applications5. In discussion environments, such interlinkage is particularly important: the same community may discuss topics across multiple sites, and use multiple types of
sites, such as blogs and microblogs, discussion forums,
and wikis. Crosslinking the discussions of these systems is a first step, which has been taken by SIOC
 Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities [26].

3http://araucaria.computing.dundee.ac.uk/
4A propositional commitment, in Walton and Krabbes terminol-

ogy [198]

5http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/

what-is-web-20.html

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

Even simple scenarios may give rise to complex
argumentation involving chains of statements (e.g.
[178]), and context-dependent relationships in which
the conclusion of one argument is premise of another
[209]: this makes the graph structures of the Semantic Web a natural fit. Wyner et al. suggest that besides agreement and disagreement, the semantic types
of arguments should at least include introduction of
a premise or exception, refinement, and pronomial
anaphora and call for a modular architecture where
different relationships or debate components may be
added systematically [209].

3.1. Example Applications & Requirements

We envision two main approaches to studying argu-

mentation on the Social Semantic Web:

1. Focusing on the real-time, dialogical nature of
the Social Web, i.e. by soliciting arguments from
humans through conversation and real-time ex-
change.

2. Focusing on the Social Web as a source of ar-
tifacts, i.e. by using existing natural language
conversations and reconfiguring the traces and
archives of these conversations.

Examples of the first case would be a chatbot or
an interactive webform; these could help populate a
knowledge base or enable argumentative interaction
between humans and intelligent agents. Examples of
the second case would be discussion summaries or interactive conversation browsers; a discussion summary
could highlight the agreement and disagreement about
a topic expressed in a number of Social Web sources,
or a review browser could enable faceted navigation
through reviews based on the factors they mention, and
the polarity and strength of the reviewers perspective
on each such factor.

Formal semantics will be needed in both cases,
but for different functions. In the first case, formal
semantics translate from natural language to agentappropriate vocabularies, potentially enabling reasoning over human input. Argumentation has long been
used for planning between agents: agent-based approaches to the Semantic Web are common [179], and
there has been some work in mediating between humans and agents [169,202]. In the second case, the semantics will mainly be useful for presenting humans
with visualizations and overviews, therefore the ease
of mining and presenting representations, and the suitability for human understanding, should be preferred.

Another factor is howby what process and agent
arguments are translated into the formal semantics.
This may be the responsibility of a human or machine.
If argumentation is annotated by humanseither the
person posting a comment or other individualsthey
will need sufficient understanding of the model as well
as a suitable incentive or motivation for annotating.
Meanwhile, machine-based (algorithmic) annotation is
limited by our current understanding of informal ar-
gumentation, and by the multilayered meaning of con-
versations. Further, argumentation can be treated as
static (for completed discussions) or dynamic (for ongoing conversations). If participants annotate the dis-
cussion, the requirement to annotate can distract from
the discussion; yet non-participants and machines may
be limited by lack of awareness of the context and of
subtle language cues.

Models supporting human navigation (e.g. to support our second example above) should make psychological sense; this is not a factor for internal representations for machines. In either case, to ensure feasibility (for either human or algorithmic entry), argumentation classifications need to be clearcut. Thus, the granularity of the model must be limited.

4. Theoretical Models of Argumentation

This section discusses fourteen theoretical models.
Seven are designed for capturing argument structure:
Toulmin [180], Issue-Based Information Systems [96],
Waltons argumentation schemes and critical questions [197], Walton and Krabbes dialogue types [198],
Dungs Argumentation Frameworks [51], Value-based
Argumentation Frameworks [15], and Factor Analysis
and Dimension Analysis [16]. An additional seven linguistic approaches deal with issues relevant to argument structure or detection: Speech Act Theory [158],
Language/Action Perspective [205], Pragma-dialectic
[186], Metadiscourse and Structural Elements of Text
[79], Rhetorical Structure Theory [110], Coherence
[91], and Cognitive Coherence Relations [152].

4.1. Toulmin

The study of informal argumentation originated
in philosophy in 1958 with Toulmin [180]. Toulmin
sought to find a common underlying basis for arguments in every field of human activity. His model
applies, for instance, to legal, scientific, and informal conversational arguments. In Toulmins theory,

evidence and rules called Warrants support Claims.
Claims may also be qualified (i.e. with constraints or
to indicate uncertainty); Rebuttals may be used to argue against an argument. Toulmins argument pattern
is shown in Figure 2: Data is supported by Warrants
which have Backings, showing that a Claim holds with
Qualifiers regarding the situation, unless there is a Re-
buttal. Figure 3 shows Toulmins now-famous argu-
ment, presented according to this structure.

Fig. 2. An interpretation of Toulmins argument pattern, from [29].

Fig. 3. Toulmins example argument from page 105 of [180].

4.2. Issue-Based Information System (IBIS)

IBIS, Issue-Based Information System, is a problemsolving structure first published in 1970 [96]. As the
name suggests, IBIS centers around controversial issues which take the form of questions. Specialists from
different fields may use the same words with different assumptions and intentions6, hampering commu-
nication. IBIS is especially intended to support community and political decision-making. In this scenario,
there may be three separate groupsthe participants in
the discussion, the relevant experts, and the decision

6Many central terms used are proper names for long stories specific of the particular situation, with their meaning depending very
sensitively on the context in which they are used." [96]

makerseach of whom need to communicate with each
other and who must also get information from existing
records and documentation.

IBIS, as originally designed, is a documentation sys-
tem, meant to organize discussion and allow subsequent understanding of the decision taken; this explains the use of Information System in its acronym.
The context of the discussion is a discourse about a
topic. Issues may bring up questions of fact and be
discussed in arguments. Here, Arguments are constructed in defense of or against the different positions
until the issue is settled by convincing the opponents
or decided by a formal decision procedure, [96]. IBIS
also recognizes model problems, such as cost-benefit
models, that deal with whole classes of problems.

Several kinds of relationships exist between is-
sues: direct successor, generalization, relevant anal-
ogy, compatible, consistent, or inconsistent. The method
also distinguishes issue content, as factual, deonic
(Shall X become the case?), explanatory, or instrumental (Shall we take approach X to accomplish
Y?").

Originally implemented as a paper-based system,
IBIS influenced several ontologies and numerous tools
(see Section 6.2, page 12) as well as procedures such
as dialogue mapping [47].

4.3. Waltons Argumentation Schemes and Critical

Questions

The Canadian philosopher Walton has written extensively on argumentation for more than thirty years
(e.g. [190,193,194]); a 2010 festschrift honoring his
contributions [143] shows how his work has influenced
and been applied to computer argumentation. Informal
argumentation is one of Waltons specialties [195], and
in this section, we discuss two of his key theories, starting with argumentation schemes.

According to Rahwan [134], while many taxonomies
of argumentation have been proposed [129,63,185,85],
Waltons taxonomy [191] provides the point of departure for computational models of argumentation. In
his detailed classification from 1995 [191], Walton describes each scheme with a name, a conclusion, a set of
premises, and a set of critical questions. Critical questions address the points where this argument scheme
may break down, and suggest attacks against the argu-
ment. For example, the following six critical questions

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

are associated with the Argument from Expert Opinion
[62]7:

1. How credible is E as an expert source?
2. Is E an expert in the field that A is in?
3. Does Es testimony imply A?
4. Is E reliable?
5. Is A consistent with the testimony of other ex-

perts?

6. Is A supported by evidence?

Waltons 2008 book [197], coauthored with computational argumentation researchers, presents 65 general
argumentation schemes, presumably updating [191].

4.4. Walton and Krabbes Dialogue Types

Discussion types, first developed by Walton and

Krabbe [198], have also been influential. 8

Seven types of dialogue are shown in Figure 4 on
the next page. These types are Persuasion, Inquiry,
Discovery, Negotiation, Information-Seeking, Deliber-
ation, and Eristic. They are distinguished by the initial situation, the individual goals of the participants,
and the overall goal of the dialogue. For instance, an
information-seeking dialogue and an inquiry have similar goals, but differ in the initial situation: one person is believed to have the answer in an informationseeking dialogue, while in an inquiry, no one has the
answer. Persuasion and deliberation are distinguished
by whose preferences are used: in a persuasion dia-
logue, the outcome depends on the preferences of the
individual to be persuaded, while in a deliberation, the
group preferences are used.

Understanding the goal of a conversation is important for determining the outcome, and for determining
what conversational moves are relevant. We may be
able to access to pragmatics [92] of a conversation by
understanding its goals. This is also how we evaluate
a conversation: What was A trying to achieve? What
was B trying to achieve? Did they achieve it?

In our own view,

these types of dialogue can
be classified based on whether knowledge plays a

7[62] attributes this to page 49, D. Walton, Appeal to Expert Opin-

ion, Penn State Press, University Park, 1997.

8Walton has revised this taxonomy several times. Discovery was
not in several earlier formulations, such as [193](p. 183); it is motivated by choosing the best hypothesis for testing. Debate and Pedagogical appeared in an earlier formulation [192] which provides descriptions of the goals of each dialogue. Other scholars have also
suggested extensions and modifications, for instance Dunne et al.
have proposed adding examination dialogues [52].

large, middling, or minor role. Inquiry, Discovery,
and Information-seeking dialogues are almost entirely
knowledge-based, while knowledge plays only a minor role in Negotiation (aiming at a harmonious set-
tlement) and Eristic (quarrels, beneficial mainly for
venting emotions). Knowledge plays some role in the
remaining two types: in Persuasion and Deliberation,
opinion and belief also have a large role. Further complexity arises because dialogue types may shift in an
actual discussion, and argument schemes may be embedded in one another [196].

4.5. Dungs Argumentation Frameworks

Dung provides a powerful graphical model of argumentation frameworks in [51], which has been
widely used in computational argumentation. Argumentation frameworks are defined as sets of arguments
and attacks between them. Formally, an argumentation
framework is a pair AF = (cid:104)AR, attacks(cid:105) where AR
is a set of arguments, and attacks is a binary relation
on AR, i.e. attacks  AR  AR.

Fig. 5. Example of an argumentation framework

Then the questions of interest are to find maximal
sets of arguments that do not attack each other (these
are called conflict-free), and to find arguments that are
not defeated by a given set of arguments (these are
called acceptable). A conflict-free set of arguments is
then considered to be admissible if each argument is
acceptable with respect to the set.

Dung then finds maximal admissible sets, known as
preferred extensions. Also important are the grounded
extensions, which represent the least fixed point of the
function mapping an argumentation framework to the

Fig. 4. Waltons seven types of dialogue, from [196].

set of acceptable arguments of that framework. A stable extension is a conflict-free set of arguments that attacks each argument that does not belong to the set.

A simple argumentation framework is shown in Figure 5. In this example, A and B attack each other; A
also attacks C; and D is not attacked. Thus A,D and
B,C,D are preferred extensions.

In Dungs theory, there is a notion of defend  to
defeat the attackers  but there is no direct notion of
support. Arguments support another one by not being defeated, and by not attacking, a given argument.

4.6. Value-based Argumentation Frameworks

Value-based Argumentation Frameworks [15], based
on Dungs argumentation frameworks, address persuasion and preferences. It is not just differences about
the facts, or failures in logic that can cause reasonable people to disagree: differences in values can also
be to blame. For instance: Despite the fact that the
weather is beautiful, I choose to stay inside, because
I have something important to do". In practical rea-
soning, two people can come to different, consistently
logical opinions, based on a difference of values: A
key element in persuasion is identifying the value conflict at the root of the disagreement so that preference
between values can explicitly inform the acceptance
or rejection of the competing arguments." The theory of Value-based Argumentation Frameworks thus

draws from Perelmans notion of audience [129]: arguments are often addressed to particular audiences,
and persuasive arguments are those aligned with the
audiences values and preferences. Value-based Argumentation Frameworks provide a method for logically
calculating consistent approaches, distinguishing between the facts of a situation and community members values.

4.7. Factor and Dimension Analysis

There is a large business market in legal information
retrieval, and one method for classifying and indexing
legal cases has been the key factors of a case, for instance for the early legal argumentation system CATO
[7]. Factor analysis can be helpful in supporting community decision-making or in summarizing reviews.
Factors are simplifications that are either present or ab-
sent; when present, a factor always strengthens the
case for the same disputant" [16].

Further development along the lines of CATO
yielded Ashleys later system, HYPO [11], which uses
dimensions rather than factors. Dimensions capture
the legal relevance of a cluster of facts to the merits
of a claim". Dimensions such as Obligation to aid the
victim" or Failure to heed traffic signs" contribute to
determinations of culpability, and have been recorded
in manually constructed databases [12]. Dimensions

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

can be present to a greater or lesser degree and it may
unclear which side they favor.

4.8. Speech Act Theory

Several approaches to conversation and argumentation have been derived from speech act theory. Searles
Speech Act Theory [158] describes five categories of
speech acts: assertives, directives, commissives, ex-
pressives, and declaratives. Speech acts are about the
force of a statement: what effect they seek to have on
the hearer or the world. Assertives (The sky is blue)
assert that something is true. Directives (Clean your
room) order, permit, or request something. Commissives are vows or pledges (I swear to tell the truth).
Expressives offer thanks or congratulations, or express
feelings (Great work!). Declarations (I now pronounce you man and wife) enact what they say, effectively changing reality.9 Speech act theory is not a
complete model of argumentation, yet it is a relevant
theory that has been widely influential. For example,
earlier (Section 4.4, page 6) we discussed that understanding the goals of a conversation could be important
for interpreting it; the same speech acts can be used in
different ways, depending on the goals of a dialogue
10.

4.9. Language/Action Perspective

The Language/Action Perspective (LAP) [205] embeds Speech Act Theory in a task-based framework.
Argumentation is found in each of the three types
of conversations which accomplish goals in the Lan-
guage/Action Perspective, according to de Moor and
Aakhus: Conversations for action involve making
commitments; conversations for possibility create a
context for action; and conversations for disclosure allow participants to share their views and concerns [49].

4.10. Pragma-dialectic

The pragma-dialectic approach is a complete argumentative theory, which has been developed over a
number of years in numerous scholarly works (espe-
cially [184,185,186]) and popularized in the authors
textbooks (e.g. [187]). Like the Language/Action

9As with all speech acts, sincerity is a criterion, and social criteria,

e.g. ceremony, may also hold.

10For a pertinent example see the persuasion and deliberation sce-

narios discussed in Atkinson et al. [13].

Perspective, it uses speech acts, further developing
Searles theory in order to model argumentation.
Rather than focusing on the logical forms and patterns
of reasoning, as Walton does, van Eemeren and Grootendorsts pragma-dialectic theory views argumentation as a social process, used to settle a difference of
opinion by verbal means [187](pp. ix-xii).

Fig. 6. Distribution of speech acts in a critical distribution from
[186].

Depending on the context, the same speech acts can
function as an explanation, a piece of information, or
as an argumentation: for argumentation, the context
must include a difference of opinion. Depending on
their order and position in the discussion, speech acts
take on different meanings, as we will see in Figure 6.
Further, Searles illocutionary speech acts, which function at the sentence-level, combine in argumentation
into a higher-order textual element: the argumentation
is itself seen as a complex speech act.

The main speech acts within an argumentation are
assertives, commissives, and directives. Expressives
which express emotionsdo not help resolve the difference of opinion, but may affect how or whether the discussion proceeds. Declarativeswhich bring a state of
affairs into beingare relevant for definitions, specifi-
cations, amplifications, and explanations; van Eemeren
and Grootendorst call these usage declaratives.

The pragma-dialectic approach also stresses the
principles of clarity, honesty, efficiency, and relevance,

updating Grices Cooperation Principle [64]which focuses on the intention of languagewith the Searlean
focus on the communicative aspects of language use.
Relevance, for example, can be global, local, subject
matter-specific, or probative. An argument may be relevant at one phase, but irrelevant at another; for example an argument related to selecting the topic of discussion is not relevant once the topic has been agreed
upon.

To understand the force of a speech actwhether
an assertive, commissive, or directive, we must identify where we are in the argumentation. van Eemeren
and Grootendorst identify four dialectical stages of ar-
gumentation: Confrontation, Opening, Argumentation,
and Closing [186]. In the confrontation stage, the issue
at hand is announced, agreed upon, or clarified. In the
opening stages, the rules are agreed to (perhaps implic-
itly). In the main stage (Argumentation), each party is
expected to make a serious effort to support his point
of view, while also allowing the other party to make
his case. Finally, the argument closes when the goal is
fulfilled or the parties agree to end the debate.

The pragma-dialectic approach is far more extensive in attending not only to linguistic patterns, but also
to the social context in which they are embedded (i.e.
the linguistic pragmatics, see e.g. [92]). Argumentative discourse starts with the assumption that the listener does not (necessarily) agree with the speakers
position, and aims at coming to a reasonable agreement [187], p 4. Speakers may anticipate objections,
explaining their reasoning to account for expected (im-
plicit) differences of opinion. Or, they may wait to hear
their conversational partners standpoints or doubts,
and then respond.

The issue, according to the pragma-dialectic the-
ory, may be single or multiple, and mixed or non-
mixed. Single disagreement is about just one proposition while multiple disagreement is about more than
one proposition. If both a positive and a negative standpoint are taken on the issue, the disagreement is mixed,
otherwise it is simple. This is a particularly useful distinction for conversations in social media.

Pragma-dialectic is also particularly useful for determining which parts of social media discourse can
be considered argumentative, since it presents phrases
that tend to mark argumentation, and since it treats
speech acts from an argumentative perspective. For ex-
ample, doubt is often implicit, but certain phrases mark
it more explicitly, such as I dont know whether",
Im not yet convinced that, Couldnt it be that, and
Ill have to think about whether.

Similarly, set phrases often indicate the topics of
a debatehelping us detect a participants standpoint,
which expresses a certain positive or negative position with respect to a proposition" [186](p. 3). Standpoints may often be obliquely stated, yet they can
sometimes be recognized by the appearance of particular phrases, which can be baldly stated (my standpoint is that, we are of the opinion that) or explicit
(I think that, if you ask me, therefore). Some
phrases that may be used to indicate a standpoint also
permit alternate interpretations (the way I see it, in
other words, all things considered). Other patterns,
like shouldnt, you must never, that...is, ought
to be, commonly co-occur when a standpoint is expressed [187](pp. 10-12).

Such phrases, like the metadiscourse markers we
discuss next, can potentially be applied in detecting
and mining argumentation (which we later discuss in
Section 6.12.2, page 17). However, phrase-detection
alone does not suffice, and significant challenges re-
main. Language is multivalent and context is needed
for properly reconstructing argumentation. In language use there is often the case that there is more than
one purpose at the same time, and if language is used
argumentatively, the argumentative function need not
always be the most important," [186](p. 23), meaning
that reconstructing argumentation must extract a single
thread of meaning out of many.

4.11. Linguistic Markers of Argumentation:

Metadiscourse and Structural Elements of Text

We next discuss linguistic markers of argumenta-
tion; strictly speaking these are not theoretical models
of argumentation, yet they identify possible argumen-
tation, essentially enabling the argumentation structures to be annotated in and abstracted from the text.

Metadiscourse refers to the aspects of a text which
explicitly organize a discourse or the writers stance towards either its content or the reader. [79](p. 14). Argumentative words and phrases such as but and according to X are prominent examples. Metadiscourse
is used not only to structure text but also to influence
the readers view.

Hyland classifies metadiscourse into interactive and
interactional types. Interactive metadiscourse, which
organizes text, includes transitions (in addition, but,
thus, and); frame markers (finally, to conclude, my
purpose is); endorphoric markers (noted above, see
Fig,
in section 2); evidentials (according to X, Z
states); and code glosses (namely, e.g., such as, in

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

other words) [79](p. 49). Interactional metadiscourse,
which makes the authors views explicit and invites
readers response, includes hedges (might, perhaps,
possible, about); boosters (in fact, definitely, it is clear
that); attitude markers (unfortunately, I agree, surpris-
ingly); self mentions (I, we, my, me, our); and engagement markers (consider, note, you can see that).

As markers of the persuasive and rhetorical elements of texts, metadiscourse elements are likely to be
useful signals for identifying claims and arguments in
social media.

4.12. Rhetorical Structure Theory

Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) [110], a method
for analyzing texts according to their structure and
rhetorical role, was developed at the University of
Southern Californias Information Sciences Institute to
assist with computer-based text generation. In RST,
structures such as Concession, Evidence, and Jus-
tify, called relations, describe the relationship of two
or more spans of text. Generally one span (the most
important) is called the nucleus, while the less important spans are known as satellites. In some situations
(such as sequences and contrasts), both spans are nuclei of equal weight. Justifications and hedges are more
likely to appear in satellites while the nucleus is more
likely to contain claims; this has potential application
in detecting arguments and in summarizing social web
applications.

4.13. Coherence

Coherence is another important concept in text and
dialogue. Coherence is not an argumentation theory
per se, but it is both an essential part of text, and an
essential part of argumentation, since before an argument can be understood (much less formally evalu-
ated), how its parts hold together or interrelate must be
understood. Knott compares the following two examples [91].

1. Tim must love that Belgian beer. The crate

in the hall is already half empty."

2. Tim must love that Belgian beer. Hes six

foot tall."

While the first example is coherent the second example is more challenging to make sense of: the reader
expects (but does not get) a sensible explanation or evidence for why Tim must love that Belgian beer.

Argumentation relies on coherence: Adding because works in the first example but not in the second example. The word because stresses the expected causal relationship, making the informal argument more evident.
3. Tim must love that Belgian beer, because the crate

in the hall is already half empty."

In Sentence 3, the reader must still infer some informa-
tion, such as that the crate in the hall contains Belgian
beer, and that Tim is the main person drinking the contents of the crate. Such missing premises are typical in
informal argumentation.

4.14. Cognitive Coherence Relations

One actionable way of expressing coherence is by
using specific signaling terms. The causal relationship
(expressed in because) is one of the Cognitive Coherence Relations which Sanders uses to explain how
readers understand text [152]. The four Cognitive Coherence Relations are: Basic Operation (causal or ad-
ditive), Source of Coherence (semantic or pragmatic),
Polarity (positive or negative), Order of Segments (for
causal relations only: basic or non-basic, depending on
whether or not the antecedent appears before the con-
sequent). Based on this, the relationship signaled in because in Sentence 3 (above) is causal, pragmatic, pos-
itive, and basic.

5. Comparison of Theoretical Models

Any of these models could be expressed in semantic formats (e.g. RDF) since they are compatible
with a graph-based representation of argumentation.
Yet for modeling argumentation on the Social Semantic Web, it is most meaningful to examine the challenges and opportunities that might advantage any one
model or framework over the others. As previously
noted, various units have been modelledindividual
argument structures (e.g. Toulmin, discussed in Section 4.1, page 4), argument chaining (e.g. Araucaria11
[150,142,144]), and groups of arguments (e.g. Dung,
discussed in Section 4.5, page 6).

We can make several further distinctions between
models, for instance based on the community in which
they originated, their purpose or use, the extent to
which they focus on disagreement, the unit of analysis

11http://araucaria.computing.dundee.ac.uk/

on which they focus, their granularity, and their suitability for automation or for aiding human reasoning.

5.1. Community of Origin

Various communities have contributed models, particularly the argumentation and linguistics communi-
ties. The IBIS model comes from management and
was later taken up by design rationale and humancomputer interaction (HCI) communities. The Lan-
guage/Action Perspective originated in artificial intelligence and HCI and was later adopted by communication theorists. In some cases, models bridge commu-
nities: the pragma-dialectic approach is an argumentation model which has been heavily influenced by lin-
guistics, and by the theory of pragmatics [92] in par-
ticular. Models have been shaped by their originators
and proponents, and the purposes for which they were
intended.

5.2. Purpose or Use

The intended purpose for each model depends
largely on its origin. Models put forth by the argumentation community are generally designed to support either analysis (e.g. to determine the reasoning
patterns used and to identify fallacies) or formal rea-
soning, in order to address questions such as computational decisions of which argument won, what the
deciding factors were, or what values and preferences
were expressed in the discussion. Models of linguistic
features may be used in discourse analysis, for summa-
rization, and to support natural language generation by
both machines and non-native speakers. Models from
other communities are generally intended to support
flow-based process analysis, for instance to organize
information in order to avoid information overload, to
speed human decision-making, and to provide a record
of collaborative thought processes.

5.3. Agreement/Disagreement Focus

Disagreement and the process of coming to consensus are the core of argumentation. While disagreement and agreement are central in models coming from
the argumentation community, other models focus on
this core to a greater or lesser extent. Most linguistic
models are considerably broader and less focused on
the argumentation aspects, yet in addressing conversa-
tion, they provide valuable insights as well as analysis tools. HCI models focus on supporting collabora-

tion and shared visions; disagreement is analyzed or
understood only to the extent necessary for coming to
consensus or providing an overview of viewpoints.

5.4. Unit of Analysis

Different units of analysis have been used. At the
language layer, models may focus on the relationship between different clauses (Metadiscourse, Coher-
ence, Cognitive Coherence, RST) or the communicative function of different words, phrases, and sentences
(Speech Act Theory and the Language/Action Per-
spective). The pragma-dialectic approach focuses on
the propositional level, while factors analysis looks
at important attributes or dimensions. Other models
focus on classifying individual arguments and their
relation to a whole (IBIS), or studying the internal
structure of arguments (Toulmin, Walton, Argumentation Frameworks, Value-based Argumentation Frame-
works).

5.5. Granularity

Models of linguistic features are more granular,
but sometimes less focused on the overall structure.
Coarse-grained and simple models, such as IBIS, more
common in application. Yet even IBIS is not generally applied in its full complexity, but is rather reduced
to focusing identifying issues, and then on identifying
pros and cons for a particular issue. Fuller versions become more complex by looking at the relationships between arguments: what responds to what.

5.6. Ease of Automated Application

Mechanistic application is possible for some models but not for others. In particular, classification for
Waltons model would be quite difficult due to the
large number (65) of argument categories and the need
for detailed reasoning. On the hand, in many cases
language technologies can be mechanically analyzed.
Identification and classification of argumentation via
language technologies is still in its infancy, yet offers
great potential to expand algorithmic understanding of
language.

5.7. Support for Human Reasoning

To aid human reasoning, however, linguistic models
that mainly use cue words are probably too granular
since they occur at the sentence level, probably more

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

granular than needed. For this purpose, Waltons critical questions are very useful, because they can point
humans to the questions that need to be addressed,
opening the door to checklists for reasoning, which
could be applied consistently by groups. Value-based
frameworks also address the basic reasoning underlying social decisions: each person has their own rea-
sons, which may be revealed in the course of a discus-
sion. Focusing on what the values are, and being able
to articulate them, can help both in developing empathy for dissenting viewpoints, and in making clear
the rationale for group decisions when consensus is
needed.

6. Applications of the Models to the Social and

Semantic Web

The theoretical models discussed have been quite in-
fluential, and in many cases we can directly trace Social and Semantic Web applications of these models. In
this section we describing some applications, reviewing each of the models in turn.

6.1. Applications of Toulmin

Toulmin is cited frequently and in numerous fields,
from rhetoric (e.g. [199]) to education (e.g. [37]) to
computer argumentation (e.g. [103]). While his model
is a useful abstraction, scholars have argued about
whether people actually think in terms of Toulmins
warrants [121].

One early hypertext system, SEPIA, drew from the
Toulmin system [171]. A modified version of Toulmins argumentation schemes have been used to describe a cooperative dialogue game, implemented in
Prolog, in which the participants goal is to reach a
claim on which they agree, while also producing a
supporting argumentation structure for the claim [14].
Such dialogue games could be modified for use in
mixed-initiative systems.

In the Semantic Web, the Toulmin Argument Model
has been implemented by an OWL 2 DL ontology
that imports CiTO12 [130]. It follows Toulmins model
closely, as shown in Figure 7.

12http://www.essepuntato.it/2011/02/

argumentmodel

Fig. 7. The core Toulmin argument model ontology [130].

6.2. Applications of Issue-Based Information System

(IBIS)

Although many tools are described as using the
IBIS model or IBIS-like, there is significant variation in the underlying structure of these models [82].
In our view, these models use IBIS-like to mean that
they concern decision-making or design rationale, provide graphical representations, and use some form of
polarity.

The IBIS model has a long history of use, particularly with early hypertext systems. Early critiques
of IBIS came from the design rationale community.
One difficulty was that only deliberated issues were
included; Procedural Hierarchy of Issues (PHI) modifies IBIS to allow inclusion of subissues which are
not deliberated [56]. PHI was adopted by another early
system, the Authors Argumentation Assistant [157],
which also drew from the authors earlier Toulminbased system, SEPIA [171].

Another difficulty, representing the relationships
and interdependencies of issues [56], remains challenging to resolve, though ideas such as nonfunctional
requirements and dependencies (Section 7.6, page 20),
might be relevant.

IBIS has also been used outside of design ratio-
nale. For instance, Gerosa et al. [59] discuss an e-
learning message board system adopting a modification of IBIS, where message types are specified. In
addition to the IBIS-analogues, Question, Argumen-
tation, and Counter-Argumentation, the system adds
two types: Seminar (a general topic for the week)
and Clarification. IBIS has also influenced the design
of modern ontologies, including the SALT Rhetorical
Ontology, SIOC-Argumentation, DILIGENT, and the

Change Ontology which we discuss after reviewing
IBIS RDF representation.

6.2.1. IBIS RDF

IBIS RDF13 is an RDF representation of the IBIS
model. refersTo is modelled as a subProperty of
dcterms:reference with two subproperties, pro
and con. The larger IBIS vocabulary provides Published Subject Indicators14 for important terms, including pro, con, Idea, Question, Argument,
Decision, and Reference.

6.2.2. SALT Rhetorical Ontology

SALT [68] is a rhetorical ontology for scholarly
communication. In SALT, opposing arguments can be
connected together with the relation
hasCounterArgument, while a RhetoricalElement
can also be connected with what it argues for (Argument
and hasArgument, for instance). SALTs argumentation also includes Reason, which contains
Argument (further specified to PositiveArgument
or NegativeArgument) and CounterArgument.

6.2.3. DILIGENT ontology

DILIGENT provides an argumentative structure
for collaborative ontology construction; the acronym
comes from the phrase DIstributed, Loosely-controlled
and evolvInG Engineering processes of oNTologies.
DILIGENT draws from both RST (Section 4.12, page
10) and IBIS (Section 4.2, page 5), as shown in Figure 8 on the next page.

6.2.4. Change Ontology (ChAO) in Collaborative

Protege

DILIGENT [36] itself influenced the Change Ontology in Collaborative Protege. Castro et al. distinguish between an argument (which is well-focused and
specific) and an elaboration (which provides support
for the argument, possibly with file attachments) [36].
Positions become clear through the dispute-resolution
process. With Protege, various argumentation-related
Annotations can be added, including Explanation,
Proposal, and AgreeDisagreeVote [156].

6.2.5. SIOC-Argumentation

The SIOC-Argumentation15 model [98] expands on
the IBIS model with terms such as Decision and
Argument. It is provided as an extension of SIOC 

13http://purl.org/ibis
14http://www.topicmaps.org/xtm/index.html#

def-published-subject-indicator

15http://rdfs.org/sioc/argument

Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities [26] 
a model that focuses on representing online communities and the content shared within them.

While SIOC simply focuses on the notion of replies
to represent connections be-
(sioc:reply_to)
tween discussion items, the SIOC-Argumentation module goes further and provides finer-grained representation of discussions and argumentations in online com-
munities.

So far a modification of SIOC that draws from DILIGENT and OMDoc has been used in the math wiki
system SWiM16 [99], a Semantic Wiki for Mathematical Knowledge Management. The SIOC/OMDoc argumentation ontology (Figure 9 on the following page)
is further described in Langes dissertation [97]. It incorporates IBIS-style classes from SIOC (Position,
Decision, Idea, and Issue), as well as domainspecific argumentation classes for math (e.g. Wrong,
Keep_as_Bad_Example, Incomprehensible).
As opposed to IBIS-RDF, SIOC-Argumentation
(Figure 10 on page 15) provide the means to easily
integrate argumentation modelling patterns with Social Web applications since it relies on SIOC, already
used in various applications (Drupal7, etc.). However,
SIOC-Argumentation has limitations: it does not represent taxonomic, causal, or similarity relations, which
prevents its use in contexts that require deeper analysis
of arguments.
6.2.6. SWAN-SIOC

SWAN-SIOC [128] harmonizes the argumentation
aspects of two pre-existing ontologies: along with
SIOC, it is based on SWAN  Semantic Web Applications in Neuromedicine [44]  an ontology which
focuses on scientific communication in neurology.

SWAN/SIOC uses twelve terms, as shown in Fig-

ure 11 on page 15. The most general term is relatedTo,
which has five direct descendents or subterms. These,
in turn, may have subterms, until we reach the base
terms in the ontology: disagreesWith, agreesWith,
and discusses. SWAN/SIOC provides a simple
model for the relationships between items. Tools using
SWAN-SIOC include PDOnline, which is discussed in
Section A.31, page xiv.

6.3. Applications of Walton

Waltons model has been widely applied in computational argumentation [143], and recent research has

16http://kwarc.info/projects/swim/demo.html

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

Fig. 8. An overview of the core DILIGENT ontology from [174].

Fig. 9. The argumentation ontology from SWiM extends SIOC-Argumentation and DILIGENT Argumentation [99].

demonstrated how argument schemes could be used
to aid sensemaking in Amazon reviews [75,74,208].
Avicenna and ArgDF incorporate Waltons schemes.
The only Social Web application we are aware of is
Parmenides17 [32,33,34], which uses the following argumentation scheme and value-based argumentation
frameworks [15]:

Argumentation Scheme AS1:
 In the current circumstances R,
 we should perform action A,

17http://cgi.csc.liv.ac.uk/~parmenides/

 to achieve new circumstances S,
 which will realize some goal G,
 which will promote some value V.
The following sixteen critical questions are associ-

ated with Argumentation Scheme AS1:
CQ1 Are the believed circumstances true?
CQ2 Assuming the circumstances, does the action

have the stated consequences?

CQ3 Assuming the circumstances and that the action
has the stated consequences, will the action bring
about the desired goal?

CQ4 Does the goal realize the value stated?

Fig. 10. An overview of the SIOC-Argumentation module from [98].

Fig. 11. SWAN-SIOC ontology from [42].

CQ5 Are there alternative ways of realizing the same

CQ6 Are there alternative ways of realizing the same

CQ7 Are there alternative ways of promoting the

consequences?

goal?

same value?

CQ8 Does doing the action have a side effect which

demotes the value?

CQ9 Does doing the action have a side effect which

demotes some other value?

CQ10 Does doing the action promote some other

value?

CQ11 Does doing the action preclude some other ac-

tion which would promote some other value?

CQ12 Are the circumstances as described possible?
CQ13 Is the action possible?
CQ14 Are the consequences as described possible?
CQ15 Can the desired goal be realized?
CQ16 Is the value indeed a legitimate value?

6.4. Applications of Walton & Krabbes Dialogue

Types

sively studied [132], and the wider area of dialogue
games has been an active area of agent argumentation
[113]. In applications to human argumentation, some
work on deliberation (e.g. [189] and the Parmenides
system Section A.30, page xiii as a whole) has used
dialogue type to focus the discussion.

6.5. Applications of Dungs Argumentation

Frameworks

Dungs argumentation frameworks have been incredibly influential: as of 2011, the original 1995 paper
has over 450 citations in the ACM Digital Library, and
over 1500 in Google Scholar. A Java reasoner called
Dungine implements Dungs acceptability semantics
[170]. Dungine is part of ArgKit18, a Java 5 development toolkit for applications that use argumentation; it
is open source, licened under LGPL.

Dungs approach has driven computational research
in argumentation and provided the basis for a large
body of theoretical work. Among theoretical exten-

Walton & Krabbes Dialogue Typess have been
influential. Persuasion, in particular, has been exten-

18http://argkit.org/

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

sions of Dungs work, we have focused on Value-based
Argumentation Frameworks, and the relevant Social
Web application of Dung is in fact an application of
that extension, as we next explain.

6.6. Applications of Value-based Argumentation

Frameworks

Parmenides uses value-based argumentation frameworks in addition to the argument scheme and critical questions discussed above. It pinpoints the source
of the disagreement, by having participants respond to
a series of questions in a survey format. The groups
preferences are revealed in the results, which are displayed to administrators as graphical argumentation
frameworks.

6.7. Applications of Factor Analysis

Factor analysis has been applied in Ashleys legal
argumentation systems, but we know of no specific Social Web applications.

The factors analysis approach is still used by commercial providers of legal information [207]. More re-
cently, automatic text mining has been used to identify these factors [207]. Generalizing factors, perhaps
using argument schemes and critical questions, could
provide another approach to argument mining; see
for instance Heras manual application of argument
schemes to Amazon reviews [75] and Schneiders factors analysis of Wikipedia deletion discussions [155].

6.8. Applications of Speech Act Theory

Speech acts are used to model the flow of online conversation in several recent works. Jeong et al.
[83] use semi-supervised machine learning to identify speech acts in email and forum posts. Ritter et
al. [148] model Twitter conversations with Speech Act
Theory in combination with topic modelling and show
a Speech Act transition map with probabilities for each
state.

One central use is in provenance in the Semantic
Web. For assertions modelled in RDF, Carroll et al.
[30] use the idea of performative warrants, to describe
assertions made legitimately by the authority signing a
Named Graph.

6.9. Applications of the Language/Action Perspective

Using the Language/Action Perspective and drawing from Speech Act Theory, Twitchell et al. [181]

model online conversations to classify them and create
visual maps, used for information retrieval:

Using current search engines, the searcher could
search for the words Vietnam, war, and critique.
However, many critiques of the war might not contain the word critique, and would thus be lost (or
receive a low ranking) in such a search. If the
searcher was able to issue a query such as Vietnam war (critique) where critique is the purpose
of at least one participant in the conversation,
she would likely get better results. The search for
the semantic meaning of the words Vietnam war
using conventional searching techniques would
then be combined with the search for the pragmatic
force of the word critique, yielding a search result
with higher precision than searching on semantic
meaning alone. [181](bold, underline added).

Attending to Speech Acts can also help predict decep-
tion, which uses fewer assertions and more expressives [181].

6.10. Applications of Pragma-dialectics

We are not aware of any argumentation tools specific to pragma-dialectics. de Moor, however, has taken
a reconstructive approach to argumentation based on
pragma-dialectics (e.g. [49]).

Pragma-dialectics has also been very influential
in the argumentation community, integrated into e.g.
Waltons textbook descriptions of argumentation [195]
and discussed in at least one journal special issue [25]
and edited collection [183].

6.11. Applications of Metadiscourse and Structural

Elements of Text

Annotating argumentation in natural language often
takes advantage of detecting metadiscourse and document structure. Two particularly promising approaches
come from Teufel and Sandor. Teufels rhetorical component extraction uses machine learning to extract and
classify text according to its rhetorical status [175].
Sandors concept-matching framework detects contrasting ideas linguistically, using metadiscourse and
rhetorical markers [6]. Rather than determining the relations between text spans, Sandor uses her conceptmatching framework to infer contrasts, novel informa-
tion, etc. from the authors metadiscourse [6].

Teufel and Moens focus on the document-level con-
text, rather than the relationship between text spans. In

their argument zoning, machine learning is used to extract and classify text from academic articles according to its rhetorical status [175]. Sandor and Teufel and
Moens provide contributions in risk assessment, an-
notation, and audience- and task-specific summariza-
tion. Reuse of their work has included an application
to find rhetorical features of related work sections, first
using classification algorithms, and then applying ontologies [9]. However, these techniques are of particular interest because of further work in argument mining
drawing on these ideas, which we soon discuss (Sec-
tion 6.12.2, page 17).

6.12. Applications of Rhetorical Structure Theory

RST has been widely used for a variety of purposes and in 2006 a paper summarizing its applications [173] was published. Recently, Mentis et al. [114]
used RST to analyze group decision rationale, comparing new and established groups using relations such
as Interpretation & Evaluation, Evidence, Elabo-
ration, Concession, and Antithesis. Summarization
research has frequently drawn upon RST [111,112].
Some further applications of RST and related approaches are discussed in a recent survey of work
on discourse structure [200]; argumentation might be
found in several genres they discuss, such as in the essay analysis and scoring and opinion mining applica-
tions.

6.12.1. DILIGENT

DILIGENT, briefly discussed above as an application of IBIS (Section 4.2, page 5), also draws from
RST (Section 4.12, page 10) as shown in Figure 8 on
page 14. To improve the agreement, clarity, and satisfaction [174] of discussions for ontology creation
and refinement, DILIGENT restricts the argumenta-
tion. Five argumentative relations  alternative,
evaluation and justification, counterExample,
elaboration, and example  were drawn from
RST [99], based on the arguments that advanced the
ontology creation process in an experiment [131].

6.12.2. Argumentation Mining

Drawing on rhetorical parsing, argument mining is
a new area of study which seeks to detect and extract arguments from texts algorithmically. MochalesPaulaus dissertation work [116] focused on mining arguments [117,207,115] from the European Court of
Human Rights and from the Araucaria annotated cor-

pus19, based on Context Free Grammars [207] as well
as techniques from Teufel and Moens. Earlier Grover
et al. [66] adapted Teufel and Moens approach to
determine the argumentative role of sentences drawn
from a corpus of legal judgements.

In Automatic Argumentation Detection and its
Role in Law and the Semantic Web" [117], MochalesPaulau and Moens suggest that argument mining could
contribute to the World Wide Argument Web [138],
by extracting argument structures without human an-
notation. As they point out, automatic argument detection is needed at multiple levels: the inner structure of
each argument as well as the overall structure of how
multiple arguments are combined to contribute to the
argumentative discourse.

6.13. Applications of Coherence

Related notions of coherence are used in Thagards
explanatory coherence theory, a computational theory
an explanatory hypothesis is accepted if it coheres
better overall than its competitors [176]. This theory
has been applied to analyze scientific reasoning and legal trials.

Another theory it influencedthat of cognitive coherence relations, which we discuss nexthas been in-
fluential.

6.14. Applications of Cognitive Coherence Relations

Cognitive Coherence Relations contributed to the
development of ScholOnto [109]. In separate work,
Mancinis cinematic hypertext [108] used Cognitive
Coherence Relations to develop a visual language for
structuring hypertext links, increasing the coherence
of argumentation conveyed in non-linear hypertext by
clearly expressing the rhetorical relationships between
chunks of text. Meanwhile, agent-based argumentation
has used Cognitive Coherence Relations as a theory of
pragmatics [126].

The ScholOnto [166,17] project, which ran at Open
Universitys Knowledge Media Institute from 2001-
2004, focused on modeling claims and arguments
in scholarly communication. ClaiMapper, ClaiMaker,
and ClaimSpotter were among the tools21 developed

19AraucariaDB20, the Arucaria corpus of arguments, draws in part
from discussion fora (BBC Talking Point, Christian Apologetics &
Research Ministry Discussion Boards, MSNBC discussion forum,
NPR discussion boards, and Global Greens) [86].

21http://projects.kmi.open.ac.uk/scholonto/

software.html

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

in the project, which was seen as part of sensemaking research. An open source web publishing
tool called the Digital Document Discourse Environ-
ment22, or D3E [164] was also developed in related
research. ScholOnto made an RDF Schema avail-
able, but database queries with SQL were preferred to
querying based on this RDF Schema (SPARQL was
first released as a working draft in 2004). The underlying ScholOnto ontology for these projects is shown
in Figure 6.14 on the facing page. This ontology now
underlies one of the applications we later discuss: Cohere is argument mapping software for sensemaking
that integrates annotation and argumentation for the
general public [162].

7. Ontologies incorporating argumentation

In addition to the seven ontologies discussed above,
which implement or follow from particular theories
ChAO, DILIGENT, IBIS RDF, SALT, ScholOnto,
SIOC-Argumentation, and SWAN/SIOCwe now review seven ontologies relevant to argumentation. These
include both dedicated argumentation ontologies (the
Argument Interchange Format) and ontologies designed with substantial input from the argumentation
community (the Legal Knowledge Interchange For-
mat) as well as ontologies that incorporate small numbers of argumentative elements (the Annotation On-
tology, bio-zen-plus, the Citation Typing Ontology,
the Non-functional requirements and Design Rationale
Ontology, and the Semantic Annotation Vocabulary).

7.1. Argument Interchange Format (AIF)

The Argument Interchange Format [120] is a pow-
erful, dedicated ontology for argumentation, originally
designed to ensure interoperability of argumentation
software such as ArgDF, ArgKit, Carneades, and Online Visualisation of Argument. AIF would be challenging to apply to the Social Web because it requires
argumentation schemes to be specified. In fact, even
arguments themselves are not necessarily clearly specified in the informal argumentation found in the Social Web! Thus, for example, enthymemes make formal specification of arguments challenging [22].

The original core ontology, shown in Figure 7.1 on
page 20 consists of two disjoint sets of nodes: information nodes (I-nodes) holding the content of the argu-

22http://d3e.sourceforge.net/

ment and scheme nodes (S-nodes) holding the relationships between arguments. Scheme nodes are further divided into three main types, for representing logical inference (RA nodes), preferences or values (PA nodes),
and conflicts between I-nodes (CA nodes). More recent work on AIF envisions classification of argumentation schemes, enabling automated reasoning over the
schemes [136]. In Spring 2012, new specifications for
AIF were released in OWL and RDF; an SQL database
definition is also in progress23.

AIF forms the foundation for the World Wide Argument Web (WWAW). The WWAW is a large-scale
Web of interconnected arguments posted by individuals to express their opinions in a structured manner
[138], where RDFS and OWL were suggested to be
used for AIF. The foundations of the World Wide Argument Web have been further discussed by Rahwan
and others (e.g. [139,134,135]).

AIF has continued to develop, and several published
extensions of AIF exist. Rahwan adds form nodes (F-
nodes) [138] in order to more fully represent generic
argument schemes (as opposed to the instantiations
of those schemes). Then Waltons argument schemes
can be represented, using ConflictSchemes to capture
exceptions/Critical Questions. With AIF-RDF24, Rahwan et al. [138] add RDFS extensions to an AIF im-
plementation. In this implementation, edges are explicitly typed. Letia and Groza add a Context Node, used
to evaluate the same argument in different contexts
[100]. Rahwan et al. [136] present a new formalization
of AIF in OWL-DL, implemented in Avicenna (Sec-
tion A.9, page iii). Work on this area continues, largely
published in the Computational Models of Argument
(COMMA) conference series25, with a large body of
promising research in the 2012 edition of this biannual
conference.

While AIF was intended to model monological ar-
guments, dialogue has been another area of interest in AIF extensions, with work from Modgil and
McGinnis [118] and Reed et al. (e.g. [146]). Earlier work began the process of extending monological
AIF for use in representing dialogical argumentation
[141,145,147,140].

23http://www.arg.dundee.ac.uk/?page_id=197
24http://argdf.org/source/ArgDF_Ontology.

rdfs

25http://www.comma-conf.org/

Fig. 12. Class structure of the Scholarly Discourse Ontology from [166] .

7.2. Annotation Ontology

Argumentation enters into the Annotation Ontologys26 [43] curation use case. In that use case, a human curator reviews an annotation created by a text
mining service, and first rejects it. This curator subsequently changes her mind after a discussion with a
second curator, and finally accepts the annotation after all. The statuses Rejected , Discusses, and
Accepted express an argumentative workflow in this
situation.

The Annotation Ontology has been used by existing
tools such as the SWAN Annotation Framework and
Utopia PDF reader [177]. It is currently being incorporated into a new W3C standard for Open Annotation
27.

7.3. bio-zen-plus ontology framework

The bio-zen-plus ontology28 [151] is an ontology
for biology; as the name suggests, it is an extension of
the bio-zen ontology29. It includes two argumentative

26http://code.google.com/p/

annotation-ontology/

27http://www.openannotation.org/spec/core/
28http://neuroscientific.net/bio-zen-plus.

owl

29http://neuroscientific.net/index.php?id=43

properties, supported-by and in-conflict-with,
augmenting the argumentation-related
correlation-concepts,
such as Positive correlation (unsigned),
Positive correlation (signed),
Negative correlation (unsigned), and
Negative correlation (signed), which are
found within the bio-zen ontology30.

7.4. Citation Typing Ontology (CiTO)

CiTO31 [160,161] is an ontology for citation networks in scholarly publications. Its argumentative
terms include corrects, confirms,
gives support to, is agreed with by,
is ridiculed by, qualifies, and refutes.
Papers can thus be semantically enhanced.32 For ex-
ample, an author could indicate in a paper that it
updates a previous publication, and critiques a
piece of related work, while using evidence from another paper (citesAsEvidence). Readers can assemble bibliographies using CiTO properties, for instance with the bibliographic management software

30http://neuroscientific.net/bio-zen.owl
31http://purl.org/spar/cito
32http://imageweb.zoo.ox.ac.uk/pub/2008/

plospaper/latest/

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

Fig. 13. Concepts and relations of the Argument Interchange Format

CiteULike33, showing the possibilities of semantic an-
notation.

7.6. The NDR Ontology

7.5. Legal Knowledge Interchange Format

Legal Knowledge Interchange Format (LKIF)34,
developed as part of the ESTRELLA project, is an
OWL ontology [3] for the legal domain. Its Rules
& Argumentation Module deals with Exceptions,
Rules, Arguments, and Assumptions [133]. It
also imports the LKIF Expression Module, which provides a vocabulary for describing, propositions and
propositional attitudes (belief,
intention), qualifica-
tions, statements and media" [133]. It includes terms
for various PropositionalAttitudes, as well
as Intention and Lie, for instance.

33http://www.citeulike.org/
34http://www.estrellaproject.org/lkif-core/

lkif-rules.owl#

The Non-functional requirements and Design Rationale (NDR) Ontology [102] addresses the visualization of non-functional requirements as Softgoal Interdependency Graphs. While some classes (such as
Softgoal) are specific to this domain, the NDR
Ontology introduces useful argumentative labels and
the label propcausal relationships. For example,
erty can be used to indicate the extent
to which
goals are met (i.e. whether they are adequately satis-
ficed): Denied, Weakly denied, Undecided,
Weakly satisficed, Satisficed, or Conflict.
NDR also has classes for Argumentation, Claim,
Contribution, and Interdependency (includ-
ing a subclass,
Correlation). The Contribution of child goals
to the parent goal can be labelled as Break, Hurt,
Unknown, Help, Make, etc.

7.7. Semantic Annotation Vocabulary

9. Features of Social Web Tools

The Semantic Annotation Vocabulary [60] was developed for the Trellis system (Section A.35, page
xvi). They used various dimensions: pertinence, reli-
ability, credibility, causality (e.g. contribute to, indi-
cate), and temporal ordering, as well as structural relationships (such as part/whole, example-of, describes).

8. Comparison of Semantic Web Models

In Figure 14 on the following page we present a
comparison of the Semantic Web models discussed.
Topics addressed include whether each ontology is
centered on relations or concepts as well as whether
it is IBIS-like (i.e. does it contain concepts functionally equivalent to IBIS Statement, Issue, Posi-
tion, and Argument?). We also cover what types
of relations it contains, drawing from ScholOntos
types: causal, similarity, generic, supporting, challeng-
ing, taxonomic (e.g. hierarchical categorization), and
problem related. Further, we describe whether polarity
(e.g. positive vs. negative) and weights are explicit or
implicit and whether the ontology specifies other ontologies to use for content provenance and authorship
provenance (such as from FOAF, SIOC, or PAVthe
Provenance & Authoring and Versioning ontology35)
and domain knowledge (such as from DOLCE, SKOS,
or the PRotein Ontology). We have used a ? to indicate that we were not able to find this information in
publications, or when information was ambiguous, to
reconcile it.

Some models provide a shallow view of arguments
yet are situated within a larger (perhaps social) con-
text. Yet other models, originating in the argumentation community, focus on representing the arguments
themselves, often including the internal structure of
the arguments. The argumentation communitys interest in the Semantic Web has been motivated in part by
the idea of The World Wide Argument Web (WWAW)
[138], while the semantic web communitys interest
has centered on communication structures, rather than
the details of argumentation or rhetoric.

We conducted a thorough review of argumentation
tools for the Social Web, attending especially to existing Social Web sites, tools using the Semantic Web,
and prototypes from the research community in Social
Web and Semantic Web. In this section we describe related reviews of argumentation tools, the scope of our
review, and some highlights concerning thirteen particular features of these systemsvisualization, ease of
use, collaboration, user engagement, balancing contri-
butions, deliberative polling, distributive and federated
systems, annotation, incremental formalization, populating knowledge bases from user input, mixed ini-
tiative, search, reasoning and querying. These provide
ideas of the aspects that may be need to be considered for argumentation systems on the Social Semantic Web. For further detail about each system we re-
viewed, consult the Appendix, Section A, page i.

9.1. Related Reviews

Argumentation tools have been reviewed and overviewed

in various publications, including two contemporary
books. Visualizing Argumentation [87] presents eight
chapters which cover the history and cognitive foundations of argumentation tools; describe tools for collaborative learning and deliberation; provide insight
into map-based facilitation of in-person meetings; and
describe mapping scholarly debates. Of particular interest in this exceptional volume is the chapter on
The Roots of Computer Supported Argument Visu-
alization" [165]. Knowledge Cartography: Software
Tools and Mapping Techniques [122] provides seventeen case studies of using mapping and argumentation
tools, primarily in education, but also in science, poli-
tics, and organizational knowledge transfer.

Argumentation tools have also gained attention in
e-government (e.g. [107], or for a tools review see
Opinion gathering in e-democracy, Chapter 3 of
Cartwrights dissertation, [35]) and education ([153]).
Crossover interest in politics from the IEEE community is evidenced by a Trends & Controversies section AI, E-government, and Politics 2.0" [39].

Scheuer et al. [153] review 45 argumentation systems36 used in Computer Supported Collaborative
Learning and discuss 13 empirical studies involving

35http://swan.mindinformatics.org/spec/1.2/

pav.html

36Six of these systems are also discussed in our review below:
Argunet, ConvinceMe, CoPe_it!, Debategraph, Debatepedia, and
SEAS.

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

(a)

(b)

Fig. 14. A comparison of Semantic Web models for argumentation in terms of (a) structure; and (b) features.

the use of argumentation systems in education. Interesting results from their work are that arguments are
constructed in learning applications in five main ways:
free-form arguments, argumentation based on background materials, arguments rephrased (e.g. reworded
and rekeyed) from a transcript, arguments extracted
(e.g. copied/pasted) from a transcript, and systemprovided units, with combined approaches also used in
some applications. Further, they compare the advantages and disadvantages of user-controlled and systemcontrolled layouts for education. Their discussion of
ontologies is limited.

This tools coverage in this section differs from previous coverage in its scope of collaborative, Webbased tools with argumentation components, and in
its attempt at comprehensiveness. A further bias has
been software aimed at use by the public, rather than
exclusively for government consultation, enterprise
decision-making, or learning argumentation and critical thinking skills. However, we have deliberately included several research prototypes which focus on Semantic Web approaches to argumentation on the Web
and on supporting the nascent World Wide Argumentation Web.

9.2. Scope: Collaborative, Web-based tools with

argumentation components

Tools were considered in-scope if they were collaborative (i.e. involved sharing information among multiple parties who could build upon each others work
in some way), Web-based (i.e. allowed display of information on the Web), and had argumentative discussion components. By argumentative discussion, we
mean discussion around disagreements, explanations,
and reasons, coming from or including a rational (i.e.
reason-based) standpoint.

Some prospective tools were excluded due to failing

one or more of these conditions.

Tools failing the collaborative criterion included
the EUProfiler37, and the HealthCentral/Washington
Post Poligraph 200838. Users of these tools viewed personalized visualizations, based on their answers to a
questionnaire, however they are not asked (or able) to
share their comments on others views, to interact with
other users (adding to a larger debate), or to contribute
to sensemaking or analysis of existing argumentation.

37http://euprofiler.eu/
38https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/

health/interactives/poligraph/

Tools failing the Web-based criterion included
email tools such as WIT and Zest, SAICs SIAM and
Causeway, and the argumentation tools Carneades,
Araucaria, and Convince Me39. WIT40 [19] and Zest
[210] focused on argumentation in email. SIAM41 and
Causeway42 are Windows-based software for influence
net modeling, designed for analyst use and primarily
for collaboration inside the firewall; although HTML
can be exported, Web-based collaboration is not sup-
ported. Similarly, Carneades43 maps can be shared in
LKIF, but not directly visualized online. Araucaria44
[150,142,144] offers a searchable online argument cor-
pus, but not online display of its arguments. While
Convince Me45 offers a Java applet for display, arguments cannot be saved or published via the applet.

Tools failing the argumentative discussion criterion included general Web2.0 tools as well as Anek-
dotz, and Vox Populi. General Web2.0 tools (e.g. Twit-
ter46, Facebook47) and social software (generic mailing lists, forums) were excluded since their argumentation support is peripheral. Anekdotz48 failed because
the sites currently using it focus on the emotional,
rather than the rational, aspects of argumentation. For
example, the breakups section of When You Knew
asks commenters to click on either Put their stuff on
the curb or Give em another shot to solicit feed-
back, which is marked as positive, negative, or neutral.
Vox Populi49 [24] supports documentary filmmakers
in generating argumentative film sequences based on
annotated interviews.

Further, tools were treated differently depending on
their origin and availability; for instance, it was considered helpful to include many contemporary research
systems even though we were not able to interactively
explore Web-based demo versions for some of those
systems. We have inevitably missed some relevant sys-
tems, and would appreciate the readers assistance in
fixing this flaw.

39Note that we do include the similarly named ConvinceMe site

in Section A.17, page viii.

40http://www.w3.org/WIT/
41http://www.inet.saic.com/inet-public/siam.

htm

42http://www.inet.saic.com/inet-public/

causeway.htm

43http://carneades.berlios.de/
44http://araucaria.computing.dundee.ac.uk/
45http://codeguild.com/convinceme/
46http://twitter.com
47http://www.facebook.com/
48http://www.anekdotz.com/
49http://homepages.cwi.nl/~media/demo/IWA/

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

9.3. Classifications of social tools

Aakhus and collaborators [49,4] classify argumentation software by use: issue networking, funnelling,
or reputation (Figure 15 on the next page). Shum says
that each tool is tuned to a different task: foraging
for material, classifying and linking it, discussing it in
meetings and online, and evaluating specific points in
more depth" [163]. We later use this categorization, as
Functional type in our comparison of tools.

Scheuer et al. [153] compare the visualization and
representation styles of argumentation tools used in
computer-supported collaborative learning. They summarize the pros and cons of 5 representation styles,
as shown in Figure 16 on the facing page. We later
use this categorization, as Representation style in our
comparison of tools. Scheuers representation styles
are typically used for discussions (linear represen-
tation), modeling (container50), or both (threaded,
graph). For instance, graph representations are highly
expressive, with explicit labelling of relationships, but
make it hard to see temporal sequences.

9.4. List of social and Semantic Web tools considered

In this section we draw from our review of thirtyseven online argumentation tools: AGORA: Participate - Deliberate, ArgDF, Arguehow, Argument Blog-
ging, Argumentum, Argumentations.com, Argunet,
Avicenna, bCisiveOnline, Belvedere, Cabanacs annotation system, Climate CoLab, Cohere, Competing Hypotheses, ConsiderIt, ConvinceMe, CoPe_it!,
CreateDebate, Debate.org, Debategraph, Debatepe-
dia, Debatewise, DiscourseDB, Dispute Finder, Hy-
pernews, LivingVote, Opinion Space, Online Visualisation of Arguments, Parmenides, PDOnline, REA-
SON, Riled Up!, SEAS, Trellis, TruthMapping, and
Videolyzer. These systems are described and discussed
individually, in alphabetical order, in the Appendix,
Section A, page i.

9.5. Visualization

Overviews and visual representations aid under-
standing. Here we point out visualization features of
some Social Web argumentation tools, along with
screenshots; further details are available in the ap-

pendix. Argument maps are one classic representation,
which continues to be popular with a variety of tools,
including Argunet, Cohere, and Climate CoLab.

On Argunet, users have significant control over the
presentation of arguments, such as colors and descriptions of different argument families. Related maps can
be published in series, as shown in Figure 17(a) on
page 27. In the argument map representation, each
node can be opened up to reveal a matrix listing
which other arguments support, attack, are supported
by, and are attacked by the given node (Figure 17(b)
on page 27).

(a)

(b)

Fig. 17. Argunet can show an (a) overview of several related argument maps; and (b) in each individual map, nodes can be opened up
to show arguments they support, attack, are supported by, and are
attacked by.

In Argumentum51 arguments are colored to indicate the supporting (green) and opposing (red) arguments (Figure 18 on page 27). Comments, but not
their replies, are similarly colored to indicate agreement or disagreement. Pro and con arguments are distinguished by green and red lines to the left of a com-
ment, posted linearly, rather than in two columns.

Competing Hypotheses52 supports breaking down
information into hypotheses, evidence, and analysis,

50The container approach uses discrete visual areas to group related items. For example in Debatepedia each question is contained
in a frame with pro and con arguments on that question.

51http://arg.umentum.com/
52http://competinghypotheses.org/

Fig. 15. Issue-networking, funnelling, and reputation, from [49].

Fig. 16. Comparison of the visualization and representation styles of CSCL argumentation tools, from [153].

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

Fig. 18. In Argumentum, the left-hand color bars indicate the supporting (green) and opposing (red) arguments.

Fig. 21. At CreateDebate, users add and comment on pro and con
arguments.

which are entered into a matrix as shown in Figure 36(a) on page vii. The matrix can help visually indicate the most likely and least likely scenarios.53 Multiple analyses can be combined to provide a group view
(Figure 36(b) on page vii), or compared pairwise.

ConsiderIt54 [94,93] powers the Living Voters
Guide55. What is unique is the possibility to drill down
to understand other voters perspectives. In addition to
seeing pros and cons on an issue from all voters, regardless of their stance, (Figure 20(a) on the following page), the Living Voters Guide can show the key
points for a particular group of voters (Figure 20(b) on
the next page), such as those undecided on the issue or
strongly supporting it. This can help users understand
what makes an issue controversial. Users indicate how
they feel about an issue before and after reading an
argument (deliberative polling), which could also be
used to find the most convincing arguments.

CreateDebate (Figure 21 on page 27) offers numerous statistics for each debate, such as the language grade level, average word lengths, and vocabulary overlap, as well as a wordcloud. Some debates
have more than two sides. Replies can support, dis-
pute, or clarify a given point.

In Opinion Space [55], opinions are mapped in a
constellation, using principal component analysis, to
show a user where they stand compared to other re-
spondents, as shown in Figure 22 on page 27. Each
point in the visualization represents a perspective;
larger points represent more popular perspectives.

53More sophisticated ACH-based software uses matrices as input

to Bayesian probabilistic reasoning.

54http://engage.cs.washington.edu/

considerit/

55http://www.livingvotersguide.org/

Fig. 22. Opinion Space maps comments in a constellation view.

SEAS [105,104] structures arguments as templates,
showing a colored tree view (Figure 23 on the facing
page). SEAS visualization features are also consider-
able: to visualize multiple dimensions, SEAS uses star-
burst, constellation, and table views.

9.6. Ease of use

By ease of use, we mean how easy an interface is
to use, based on our own perception. ConvinceMe56
lets users add arguments to pro or con columns, or add
a rebuttal by clicking a button. Arguments can be voted
up or down. Various other systems (discussed in the
appendix) have similar functionality.

Debatepedia57, a wiki-based system, provides an
intuitive editing environment, where users can edit the
entire page or just the relevant section, such as the pro
or con for a topic.

56http://www.convinceme.net/
57http://debatepedia.idebate.org/

(a)

(b)

Fig. 19. In Competing Hypotheses, (a) each individuals analysis is represented in a consistency matrix; (b) multiple analyses can be combined
to create a group matrix. In the group view, darker shades of purple indicate more disagreement.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 20. The Living Voters Guide compiles pro and con lists on each issue. They give (a) an overview of what all voters think about the issue; as
well as (b) the key points for undecided voters.

Living Vote58 asks participants to vote on arguments in a tree. To vote on an argument, you must first
prove youve read it by answering a simple question.
Users can also add arguments to the tree.

9.7. Collaboration

Systems approach collaboration in various ways.
bCisive Online is intended for real-time collaboration in conjunction with with audio conferencing. One
person edits the map at a time, adding nodes and connections between nodes while others can point with
their cursor or request editing control.

Climate CoLab uses moderation to help review
comments and deal with the learning curve for argument mapping. While any user can add Pros, Cons, and
Issues directly to an argument map, moderators are ex-

Fig. 23. SEAS visualizes arguments as a tree; colors indicate the
credibility level [105].

58http://www.LivingVote.org/

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

pected to keep track of the conversation, adding new
ideas to the argument map as needed.

Competing Hypotheses59 has persistent chat (es-
sentially a comment thread) for the entire project as
well as message boards for each hypothesis, evidence
item, and evidence-hypothesis pair.

On Debatewise60, everyone can collaborate in creating the strongest case both for and against a given
issue, using teams.

9.8. User Engagement

Debatewise also makes it easy to get involved by
providing suggestions of 5-minute, 20-minute and 1-
hour tasks and showing 7 things you should have an
opinion on" in rotating images on the homepage.

Social networking is one part of the engagement at
Debate.org, which allows users to search for people
with particular profile attributes, such as income, lo-
cation, ideology, gender, president, religion, and who
they are interested in and looking for.

Along with adding comments, on many sites, users
can vote for arguments that convinced them (e.g. Create Debate). A users reputation is generally based on
the success of their arguments. Votes may be weighted,
for instance after 10 up or down votes, further votes
have less influence on ArgueHow.

Competition helps engage users at other sites, which
can be quite explicit about this aspect; for instance,
Riled Up!s tagline is Like Raising Cain? So Do We."
Other sites, like ConvinceMe treats debates as games;
in one such game, the debater whose idea is most popular is crowned King of the Hill. Competitive debating environments may use point schemes and user
rankings to motivate contributions.

9.9. Balancing Contributions

There are several approaches to balancing contribu-
tions. For example, by removing authorship markers,
argument maps may increase the neutrality of a con-
versation.

Another approach to balancing is taken by TruthMap-
ping61, which focuses on having a persistent conversation which can not be drowned out by a single
opponent. Users can leave feedback in critiques attached to each premise and conclusion (Figure 53(b)

59http://competinghypotheses.org/
60http://debatewise.org/
61http://www.truthmapping.com/

on page xvii), users can continually modify each con-
tribution, but can only post one critique on each node.
Anyone can leave a rebuttal, but only one user, the
original arguer, can modify the map. The system indicates when comments are out of sync with the map,
and a wiki-style history is available to better trace the
conversation.

9.10. Deliberative Polling

One measure of arguments is how persuasive they
are. Measuring how users feel about an issue before
and after reading an argumentknown as deliberative
polling [57]is used in some systems, such as Con-
siderIt, Living Vote, and OpinionSpace.

Debate.org uses deliberative polling but places
more importance on other factors besides agreement
when scoring debates, giving the most importance to
using reliable sources and making convincing argu-
ments.

9.11. Distributed and Federated Systems

Systems can be distributed, like Argument Blog-
ging, in which JavaScript code is placed on blogs to
link back to a server which provides access to a larger
conversation.

Federation is an exciting direction: Argunet [154]
uses an open source federation system for sharing argument maps from a desktop tool62. Uses can run their
own server or use a public server, Argunet.org63, which
allows authors to make maps public or restrict viewing
and/or editing to a specified group.

These mechanisms also impact the privacy of a
systemwhether work can be saved privately, used collaboratively with a small group, or shared publicly
with the world.

9.12. Annotation

Annotating materials or commenting on existing
discussions can be an important way to interact on
the Social Web. Annotation can also be used to classify messages. For instance, Hypernews64 [21] asks
users to indicate what kind of message they are post-

62http://www.argunet.org/editor/
63http://www.argunet.org/debates/
64http://www.hypernews.org/HyperNews/get/

hypernews/reading.html

ing (None, Question, Note, Warning, Feedback, Idea,
More, News, Ok, Sad, Angry, Agree, Disagree).

Videolyzer65 [50] provides an integrated discussion
forum for annotating and challenging the claims a
video makes. Segments likely to be of interest are identified ahead of time by processing both the transcript
and the video.

Annotation has also been treated in from an argumentation perspective in the research of Cabanac et
al., who study social validation of argumentative debates through collective annotations [28].

9.13. Incremental Formalization

With incremental formalization, representations are
useful before they are fully interpretable by the com-
puter. Incremental formalization can be helpful since
people find it difficult to make structure, content, or
procedures explicit [159]. As the users understanding
(or goals) change, some systems facilitate systematic
additions or changes.

With Argunet, arguments can be quickly sketched
or reconstructed as premises and conclusions, supporting incremental formalization.

CoPe_it! transforms the user-created informal spatial hypertext view (Figure 39(a) on page ix) into an
issue chart (Figure 39(b) on page ix) according to rules
shown in Figure 39(c) on page ix). Users can also customize the transformation rules.

9.14. Populating Argumentative Knowledge Bases

From User Input

Other approaches are also iterative, similar to incremental formalization but focusing specifically on the
input phase. For instance, user input may be processed,
and the output presented to the user, who can then correct it.

Trellis introduced a language processing technique
called Annotation Canonicalization through Expression synthesis" [23], which applied an ontology to a
user-supplied sentence, checked the computers ontology application by presenting a paraphrase to the user,
and solicited additions to the ontology from unknown
or misunderstood words.

Controlled natural languages, which adopt a more
restrictive grammar and vocabulary in order to facilitate parsing, have also been used to take in informa-
tion, formalizing it for reasoning. For instance, Wyner

65http://videolyzer.com/

et al. [206] propose using a controlled natural language called Attempto Controlled English [46] for
high-stakes argumentative discussions, in order to generate a first-order-logic representation of the discus-
sion.

Dispute Finder66 [53,54] provides just-in-time in-
formation, alerting users when information they read
is disputed, based on its database of disputed claims.
This relies on a disputes database which was first populated by hand-annotation by activists (interested in informing or convincing others) and then extended al-
gorithmically. The algorithm, which can be applied on
the Web at large, uses a set of 54 patterns to identify
possible disputed claims.

9.15. Mixed Initiative

Another possibility is to use Mixed Initiative sys-
tems, wherein the actions of both humans and machines are important. Online Visualisation of Argument (OVA)67 is part of a pipeline of argumentation
tools [168] which starts to bridge the gap between
human-oriented argumentation tools and calculationbased agent argumentation. Mixed initiative discussions are enabled by the argument maps created by
OVA or any other AIF-based tool. Thus, instead of representing ones point of view countless times in a forum or FAQ, it would be possible to delegate these
conversations to a machine agent using an underlying argument map, as prototypes like MAgtALO68
[145,202] and the Google Wave discussion bot Arvina
show.

9.16. Search

Semantic search focuses not on mere keyword
matches but on retrieving structured data, such as
whether an opinion is argued for or against. Semantic search is possible with several tools. ArgDF69 uses
the AIF-RDF ontology described above [139,138,212]
and Sesame RDF70. In ArgDF, it is possible to display
all the arguments in which a claim is involved (e.g.
where it is used as a conclusion or as a premise) or all
the arguments using, say, the Argument from Expert
Opinion reasoning scheme.

66http://ennals.org/rob/disputefinder.html
67http://ova.computing.dundee.ac.uk
68http://www.arg.dundee.ac.uk/?page_id=61
69http://argdf.org/
70Various other tools tools export AIF without directly imple-

menting semantic search.

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

DiscourseDB71 uses Semantic MediaWiki [95] with
the SemanticForms72 extension. This makes it possible to list all commentary written by particular person,
published in a particular venue, and so forth. Further,
since items indicate the position they take on a topic,
DiscourseDB can list all commentary for or against
a given position. When a topic has multiple positions
(e.g. Darfur73), DiscourseDB is especially helpful in
summarizing the discussion. Semantic search uses a
simple syntax: for instance, on the Darfur conflict is-
sue, to search for commentary opposing the position
that the U.N. should send peacekeepers, this code is
used: [[is against::Darfur conflict / United Nations
should send peacekeepers]]. Since the results are already displayed on summary pages, most end users
would not need to create or modify queries, but DiscourseDBs semantic search is a powerful tool for creating summaries.

9.17. Reasoning and Querying

As previously mentioned, Attempto Controlled
English can generate first-order-logic representations,
which allow inference and consistency-checking, and
can be translated into OWL and RuleML [58]. Mean-
while, Open Vocabulary Executable English can be
used for simple reasoning in the Internet Business
Logic System74.

Parmenides75 [32,33,34] is a structured survey tool
for gathering public opinion on a proposal. Based on
argument schemes and critical questions from argumentation theory, Parmenides can pinpoint the source
of the disagreement, by having participants respond to
a series of questions. At the end of the survey, users
are offered the choice of submitting an alternative pro-
posal, and are shown the answers they chose. Administrators can then analyze the groups responses, which
are displayed in graphical argumentation frameworks
[51].

More advanced reasoning and querying is enabled
by Avicenna, an OWL-based argumentation system
on the Web which uses Jena [31], ARQ76, and Pellet [167]. Since OWL supports inference over transi-

71http://discoursedb.org/
72http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:

Semantic_Forms

73http://discoursedb.org/wiki/Darfur_

conflict

74http://www.reengineeringllc.com/
75http://cgi.csc.liv.ac.uk/~parmenides/
76http://jena.sourceforge.net/ARQ/

tive properties, Avicenna can support argument chain-
ing, such as retrieving all arguments that directly or indirectly support a given conclusion. Avicenna is also
used to infer the classification hierarchy of argument
schemes: for example, an appeal to expert opinion is a
specialization of an argument from position to know.

10. Discussion & Conclusion

We have reviewed argumentation theory, existing
ontologies with argumentative aspects, and Web tools
for argumentation. We now discuss three main gaps
based on our observations. First, the ontologies given
need further adaptation to meet the existing variety
of social tools and purpose. In particular, arguing is
a social activity. The varieties of argument tools on
the Social Web need distinct types of interface support
and social engineering. The remaining question is what
appropriate Social Web ontologies for argumentation
would be. Rather than a single ontology, we envision
modular, interoperable components.

10.1. Arguing is a Social Activity

As argumentation scholars have long realized, humans argue for a variety of reasons, not always to solve
wicked problems". Rather, arguing is a social activity people may use to position and establish them-
selves. This kind of arguing is important in the Social
Web, where people play by arguing such as with ConvinceMes the King of the Hill game, or create networks of friends and enemies, such as on Riled Up!
and Create Debate. Arguing can also be used to connect people such as on Debate.org. Ontologies for the
Social Semantic Web will need to respect these social
aspects, and may need to incorporate emotive indicators such as the heat of the debate as well as the manner
in which the outcome will affect the participants.

The notion of debate, where two parties face off, is
also well-represented in existing social tools. Debate
may allow individuals to show their expertise, to find
the best arguments, or simply to practice their rhetorical skills. Debate topics may be reused, for ongoing
issues with two or more defendable positions, especially when a topic is controversial. This suggests two
opportunities. First of all, future Social Semantic Web
prototype tools for sensemaking and argument mapping could be tested with for argumentation for some
common debate topic in order to find a large audience
of potential evaluators. Second, providing meaningful

ways to discover new debate topics, and potentially
record and share the outcome of these debates, could
be helpful. Frequent debaters may also provide an interesting class of users since we might expect them to
be more familiar with fallacies and argument diagram-
ming, making them potentially more savvy about argumentation schemes and similar abstractions.

can be more complex and involved than those for casual use by the general public. E-government and deliberation tools have the strictest usability needs for
this reason.

10.3. Bridging the Social Web and the Semantic Web

to Manifest the World Wide Argument Web

10.2. Current Use

While argumentation support has become more
mainstream, it is still a niche. While there is a desire
for public discussion systems, especially in areas such
as e-government, social discussion systems and social
networks are driven by network effects (e.g. you are
persuaded to use them by the ability to communicate
with your friends and colleagues) and by ease of use.
Argumentative elements in generic social media tools
are very basic: Facebook and Google Plus use Like
and +1 buttons, which imply a semantics of agree-
ment; YouTube adds a dislike button, and flagging
posts for moderation (e.g. on Craigslist) or downvoting
posts (e.g. on StackOverflow or Reddit) also implies
dislike.

With existing systems, discussed in the Appendix,
there is a continuum from those with little use to those
with wide use. Some (non-research) sites have few
users and seem to have been abandoned. Some research prototypes are not accessible at all (and have
been discussed based on papers and screenshots).
Other research prototypes are available, and some
seem to have users. Some are widely (or at least some-
what) used  showing (perhaps) whats needed to build
a Social Web infrastructure for argumentation.

Argumentation support has not yet moved firmly
from the academic lab, into the mainstream. While discussion is widespread, argumentation needs are often
specific to the reasoning schemes used  which vary
by discipline and area. Such constraints simplify the
reasoning process for humans as well as for argumentation support. Further, in dialogue, most argumentation happens informally: we can count on our conversational partners to indicate what is missing and to demand that we explain what is unclear to them. It is
difficult to systematically indicate assumptions and to
make reasoning explicit; while this is needed for ideal
reasoning support, it is not feasible or reasonable to expect in everyday discourse. This leads into a discussion
of usability.

Usability needs depend on the task at hand and the
target audience. Tools for in-depth analysis by experts

To conclude, we discuss the obstacles to manifesting
the Social Semantic Argumentation Web, along with a
research agenda.

10.3.1. Problems

Despite candidate technical architectures for a World
Wide Argument Web, the WWAW is not yet viable on
the Social Web at large. We notice several interrelated
obstacles: first, the existing ontologies are not meant
for integrating wide-scale informal discussion; second,
current approaches to supporting argumentation generally require substantial human effort; and third, determining the appropriate uses and re-uses for social
media posts depends on their context (e.g. the type of
discourse).

First, the very informality of social media can make
discussions more difficult to integrate. Argumentation
is used in many contexts and while formal argumentation can be represented with ontologies such as AIF,
argumentation on the Social Web can be quite infor-
mal, with missing premises and unexpressed argument
schemes. While human analysis can sometimes bridge
the gap between AIF and the Social Web, (facilitated
for instance by tools such as OVA, Section A.29, page
xiii), more scalable solutions are needed. Several approaches will be needed to more routinely express the
existing argumentation on the Social Semantic Web.

Second, most current approaches to supporting argumentation still require substantial human effort;
little automatic processing is available. Issues and
stances can be categorized by hand, mapped and ana-
lyzed, or voted up and down. Tools for certain tasks
situational analysis, argumentation reconstruction, and
argument mappingare highly developed. These tools
have become, while not mainstream, widely accepted
for certain communities. The value of spatial hypertext
visualization systems cannot be discounted, and some
automation does exist: leveraging human-devised matrices using Bayesian networks (in more advanced versions of ACH tools like Competing Hypotheses), or
summarizing human-answered surveys with argumentation frameworks (Parmenides). Yet since these valueadded tools still require substantial human effort to en-

Schneider et al. / A Review of Argumentation for the Social Semantic Web

Language (CNL); whereas on the general Social Web,
CNL would restrict input, in analysis tools, CNL might
open the vocabulary.

ter information in particular formats, their very use is
an encouraging sign that some forms of argumentation
support would be beneficial.

Third, context is important for integrating conversations and claims. One strength of the Semantic Web is
in bringing conversations together; this has been very
powerful for the Social Semantic Web in general. Yet
the rhetorical effect of an argument depends on certain
contextual information, such as the surrounding con-
versation, its participants, and the medium. Extracting and summarizing conversations without this context has risks (i.e. potentially presenting misleading or
overstated arguments).

10.3.2. Research Agenda

To overcome these obstacles and manifest the Social Semantic Argumentation Web, we see a need for
various approaches. First, we need ontologies suitable
for representing informal Social Web arguments, and
to map to these ontologies. Second, to address and reduce the human effort required we also need to motivate participation, and find ways to infer argumentative relationships. Third, we need to further investigate
context.

First, we need ontologies that map between the
social world and the argumentative world. A modular approach will be needed, reusing existing work,
both in domain knowledge and in Social Web mod-
eling, for instance by importing existing ontologies
(particularly SIOC). Maximal benefit from a Social
Web ontology for argumentation will come from aligning and crosswalking to popular ontologies (especially
AIF). Many tools can already output AIF, and analystoriented tools can be brought onto the Argument Web
with comparatively little effort. Motivated users and
defined argumentation schemes ease this process.

Mapping to these ontologies will also leveraging the
existing human effort already used in argumentation
tools. SEAS, for example, already uses argument tem-
plating. Such templates appear to be specialized argument schemes, which could be expressed in shared
repositories and even classified (for instance using
OWL as Avicenna does). Once the argument schemes
can be referenced, SEAS might provide another source
of AIF data, as well as point to further enrichment
needed. The ACH process underlying Competing Hypotheses seems to use a narrower set of reasoning; its
data, similarly, might be encompassed by understanding and expressing the ACH argument scheme. The analyst community is also a good place to start with interface interventions such as using Controlled Natural

Second, to further address the human effort re-
quired, we need to motivate wide-scale participation
and improve automatic argument detection. To encourage ongoing human effort, it would be helpful to create
a virtuous cycleby which people benefit from the Argument Web, thereby motivating increased participa-
tion. Understanding the niches filled by existing tools,
and whether these needs could be fulfilled better by
a larger Argument Web, would help in this regard.
For instance, while abstract argument schemes may
not be well understood by users, Parmenides shows
that stepwise processes based on these schemes can
be powerful. Opening up the analysis tools, so that a
group could view aggregate responses, would take Parmenides to a new level of collaboration. While Parmenides focuses on gathering multiple responses on
the same set of issues, a different approach would be
to crowdsource work based on an argument scheme.
Many groups already do this informally with checklists and procedures, for instance in Wikipedias article
promotion process. Providing templates where users
could indicate which critical questions they have asked
and answered, and at what point in time, might help
to distribute and share this work, while making the underlying process more transparent.

Automatic detection of arguments might help further bootstrapping the existing Social Web into the Argument Web. In the scholarly communication and legal fields, argument detection relies on rhetorical fea-
tures. Argumentative markers would also help in modifying these argument detection approaches for use on
the Social Web. Analyzing existing Social Web cor-
puses, such as DisputeFinders claims database and the
Discussion Fora from the Aracaria corpus may help in
determining such markers. Various corpus-processing
techniques and approaches may be useful for detecting
argumentation, which shares rhetorical features with
other sorts of speech. Linguistic pragmatics dominate
in much argumentation, so one form of progress would
be to find unassailable features which mark argumentative contexts on the Social Web. Relevant approaches
may come from opinion mining [124], question answering and explanation [119], contradiction detection
[149], controversy detection [72], persuasion detection
[211,8], stance detection [188] and automatically typing links [45].

Third, we need to investigate how to preserve the
rhetorical effect of an argument even when it is di-

vorced from its original context. Some aspects of context are straightforward: for instance, items can be confusing or non-sensical when stripped of context. The
canonical example from metadata scholars is the on
a horse [204] problem: in the context of a Theodore
Roosevelt collection, the description on a horse" adequately describes a photo; yet outside of that context
it is unclear and diffuse. Other contextual factors include the type of argumentative discourse. The various types of argumentative discourse, shown in Figure 4 on page 7, vary in the amount of interest and
value they generate, outside the immediate context of
the discussion. Eristic dialogue, of personal conflicts,
for instance, is generally not worth reusing (though it
could be used to establish, for instance, who started an
argument, or that a dyad should avoid further discus-
sions). Discovery dialogue, on the other hand, which
seeks to find and defend a hypothesis, can be useful
both for understanding the process undertaken and the
outcome.

Support may also depend in part by who reuses
discussionsthe participants, outside parties, or both
and how much support they need at various points in
time. Reviews, for instance, are mainly written for an
external audience. Blog and microblog posts may be
read by others but also searched by the author as a
form of externalized memory. There may also be a
temporal component: standards bodies use their own
discussions in order to make decisions, but after the
fact, these discussions may be of considerable interest
to non-participants trying to understand why a particular decision was taken. The decision-making associated with discussions may be a particular point where
support is needed. Decisions can be taken by groups
(e.g. standards bodies) or by individuals (e.g. from re-
views) and may depend on a centralized discussion or
widely distributed pieces of information.

Overall, there is significant potential for supporting argumentation on the Social Semantic Web, but a
large amount of work remains to be done, in creating ontologies, easing human annotation of arguments,
improving techniques for detecting and mining argu-
mentation, and in marking the context, pragmatics,
and provenance of dialogues. Given the vast amount
of commentary on the social web  much of it argu-
mentative, persuasive, or opinionated  there is a great
need for further research and technical developments
to search and organize these discussions with semantic
web technologies.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Science Foundation
Ireland under Grant No. SFI/09/CE/I1380 (Lion2).
We are grateful for the extensive comments of the
reviewers, Iyad Rahwan, Simon Buckingham Shum,
and Fouad Zablith. Thanks also to Agnes Sandor for
her comments which have prompted further clarifications and furthered our thinking. The re-revision of
this paper also benefited significantly from conversations with and feedback from Katie Atkinson, Trevor
Bench-Capon, and Adam Wyner, thanks to a visit to
the University of Liverpool sponsored by the COST
Action IC0801 on Agreement Technologies, STSM
1868.
