Undefined 1 (2009) 15
IOS Press

Linked data for Potential Algal Biomass
Production

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
Solicited review(s): Anne Thessen, Arizona State University, USA; Boris Villazon-Terrazas, iSOCO, Madrid, Spain; Femke Reitsma,
University of Canterbury, New Zealand

Monika Solanki a,, Johannes Skarka b, Craig Chapman c
a Knowledge Based Engineering Lab, Birmingham City University, Birmingham, United Kingdom
E-mail: monika.solanki@bcu.ac.uk
b Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, ITAS, Karlsruhe, Germany
E-mail: johannes.skarka@kit.edu
c Knowledge Based Engineering Lab, Birmingham City University, Birmingham, United Kingdom
E-mail: craig.chapman@bcu.ac.uk

Abstract. In this paper we present an account of the publication of a suite of datasets, LEAPS, that collectively enable the
evaluation of potential algal biomass production sites in North West Europe (NWE). LEAPS forms the basis of a prototype
Web application that enables stakeholders in the algal biomass domain to interactively explore via various facets, potential algal
production sites and sources of their consumables across NWE.

Keywords: Algae, Biomass, Energy, triplification, linked data, Ontologies

1. Introduction

Recently algal biomass has been identified as a potential source of large scale production of biofuels.
In order to derive fuels from biomass, algal operation
plant sites are setup that facilitate biomass cultivation
and conversion of the biomass into end use products,
some of which are biofuels. In this paper we present
LEAPS - Linked Entities for Algal Plant Sites, a suite
of linked datasets that collectively enable the evaluation of the potential of algal biomass production sites
in North West Europe (NWE). The framework underlying LEAPS has been developed within the context of
the EnAlgae1 project. In Section 2 we present the motivation behind curating the LEAPS dataset suite. Section 3 provides an account of the raw datasets which

served as the basis for LEAPS. Section 4 illustrates the
vocabularies used in the datasets. Section 5 discusses
characteristics of the dataset. Section 6 describes the
prototype Web application built over LEAPS2. Section
7 outlines limitations and finally Section 8 presents
conclusions and discusses future work.

2. Motivation

The idea that algae biomass based biofuels could
serve as an alternative to fossil fuels has been embraced by councils across the globe. Major companies
[5,6], government bodies [8] and dedicated non-profit
organisations such as ABO (Algal Biomass Organisa-
tion) 3 and EABA (European Algal Biomass Associ-

*Principal

and

Corresponding

author.

Email:

2http://www.semanticwebservices.org/

monika.solanki@bcu.ac.uk

1http://www.enalgae.eu/

enalgae/

3http://www.algalbiomass.org/

0000-0000/09/$00.00 c 2009  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

Monika Solanki / Linked data for Potential Algal Biomass Production

ation)4 have been pushing the case for research into
clean energy sources including algae biomass based
biofuels.

Within the context of algae production, a major objective of the EnAlgae project is to create a network of
pilot scale algal facilities across NWE in order to address the current lack of verifiable information on algal
productivity. The integrated network incorporates an
up to date inventory in which pilots collect and share
data in a standardised manner and provide demonstrations to diverse project partners, observers and stake-
holders.

One of the key gaps identified within the algal
biomass domain is the lack of a semantically enriched infrastructure for sharing and reusing knowl-
edge. An introspection of the algae-to-biofuels lifecycle reveals several layers where Semantic Web standards and linked data technologies could be very successfully applied and immensely benefit the commu-
nity. Algal biomass data manifests itself across several
facets. At a very high level, the value chain for algal
biomass ranges from cultivation of algae to production of biofuels and other products from the cultivated
biomass [4]. Figure 15 depicts a schematic represen-

Fig. 1. The Algal biomass supply chain

tation of the algal biofuel value chain stages and the
contributions that Semantic Web and linked data could
bring to each of the stages.

Stage 1 encompasses the cultivation of algae. It involves setting up an algal cultivation site and incorporates datasets about location related geographical information about the sites, locations of sources of light,
CO2, nutrients, water and labour. The linked data for

datasets is described using domain specific and spatial ontologies. Stage 2 is concerned with the harvesting of algal biomass. Datasets and vocabularies related
to harvesting strategies and extraction techniques are
the key semantic outputs of this stage. Stage 3 involves
the conversion of biomass to end use products such as
biofuels and other constituents. Application ontologies
and product ontologies such as GoodRelations6 will be
crucial in describing the datasets for this stage.

In this paper we showcase the publication of linked
data for some of the datasets from stage 1. The objective of LEAPS is to enable the stakeholders of
the algal biomass domain to interactively explore,
via linked data, potential algal production sites and
sources of their consumables across NUTS (Nomen-
clature of Units for Territorial Statistics)7 regions in
NWE.

3. Transformation of Raw datasets to linked data

Table 1 highlights the sources of the datasets along
with their purpose. All the datasets were openly available in non-RDF formats with various origins. By performing potential analysis on different NUTS levels,
regions with high potential can be identified. The calculations are based on high resolution (300 m) data
on possible algae production sites and data on CO2
sources.

The transformation of the raw datasets to linked data
takes place in two steps. The first part of the data processing and the potential calculation are performed in
a GIS-based model which was developed for this purpose using ArcGIS 8 9.3.1. Raw datasets with various
origins and formats are first transformed using bespoke
computational algorithms to an ArcGIS specific XML
format. This step is very crucial for two main reasons:
 It brings uniformity in the format of representa-

tion of the datasets.

 In the process of transformation, important computations that are part of the final datasets are per-
formed.

The second step of lifting the data from XML to RDF
is carried out using a bespoke parser that exploits

4http://www.eaba-association.eu/
5All figures in the paper are available at http://purl.org/

6http://purl.org/goodrelations/v1
7http://bit.ly/I7y5st
8http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis/

biomass/LEAPSFigures

index.html

XPath 9 to selectively query the XML datasets10 and
generate linked data using the ontologies illustrated in
Figure 3 and a linking engine. While in most cases,
transforming XML datasets to their linked data counterparts is done assuming a simplistic one-to-one mapping between the XML elements and RDF entities, in
our scenario, the original data sources had several limitations and a one-to-one transformation was not possi-
ble. A bespoke engine [7] was developed that enabled
the transformation for each of the datasets.

An architecture underlying the transformation process is depicted in 2. The main components of the ap-

Fig. 2. Architecture of LEAPS

plication are

 Parsing modules: As shown in Figure 2, the parsing modules are responsible for lifting the data
from their original formats to RDF. The lifting
process takes place in two stages to ensure uniformity in transformation.

 Linking engine: The linking engine along with
the bespoke XML parser is responsible for producing the linked data representation of the
datasets. The linking engine uses ontologies,
dataset specific rules and heuristics to generate
interlinking between the five datasets. From the

9http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath/
10A snippet of one of the XML dataset is available at
http://www.purl.org/biomass/XMLSnippet

LOD cloud, we currently provide outgoing links
to DBpedia11 and Geonames12.

 Triple store: The linked datasets are stored in a

triple store. We use OWLIM SE 5.0 13.

 Web services: Several REST Web services have
been implemented to provide access to the linked
datasets.

 SPARQL endpoints: SPARQL endpoints that
provide access to individual dataset repositories
are available. Snorql has been customised as the
front end for the endpoint. An endpoint for federated queries is planned to be implemented as part
of future work.

 Ontologies: A suite of OWL ontologies for the
algal biomass domain have been designed and
made available.

 Interfaces: The Web interface provides an interactive way to explore various facets of sites,
sources, pipelines, regions, ontolgoies and SPARQL
endpoints. The map visualisation has been rendered using Google maps. Besides the SPARQL
endpoint and the interactive Web interface, a
REST client has been implemented for access to
the datasets. Query results are available in RD-
F/XML, JSON, Turtle and XML formats.

 Biological taxonomy visualisation: A subset of
the Algaebase database which is the largest information source of algae on the Web, has been retrieved and curated in our triple store. This dataset
when integrated with the dataset for algal cultivation site, can inform stakeholders about the strains
of algae that can be harvested on that site. Further,
the Semantic Import plugin14 of Gephi15 has been
exploited to visualise the biological taxonomy of
algae. This visualisation is also made available
via the LEAPS interface.

For each of the algae production site, information on
biomass yield and site area are determined. Addition-
ally, data on CO2-providing industrial or power plants
can be queried for each site and costs for CO2-supply
can be calculated. Thus, the data enables a screening for promising individual sites, provides base data
for more detailed planning purposes and would be im-

11http://dbpedia.org/
12http://sws.geonames.org/
13http://www.ontotext.com/owlim/editions
14http://wiki.gephi.org/index.php/

SemanticWebImport

15https://gephi.org/

Monika Solanki / Linked data for Potential Algal Biomass Production

Raw dataset (format)

1 Global radiation (GRIB a)

Temperature (NetCDF c)

3 Data on land use (GeoTIFF)

Protected areas (GIS vector data)

Elevation (GIS raster data)

CO2 sources (MS Access)

Source

Identify suitable land area

Calculate the algal biomass yield

Purpose
Calculate the algal biomass yield NCEP-NCAR 50-year reanalysis
provided by the CISL Research
Data Archive b.
DSWRF (downward shortwave
radiation flux at the surface) in
dataset number ds090.2 [3]).
E-OBS dataset provided by the
ECA&D project d [10], [1].
European Environment Agency
(EEA), CORINE land cover
raster dataset 2006 version 13 e.
CORINE land cover raster dataset
2000 version 15 f.
World Database on Protected Areas (WDPA) provided on g by
UNEP-WCMC [2].
Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) data [9] by Global
Land Cover Facility (GLCF) h.
European Pollution Release and
Transfer Register (E-PRTR) provided by the EEA i in the version
of 09 Nov 2009.

Identify suitable land area

Identify suitable land area

Identify sources of CO2

ahttp://badc.nerc.ac.uk/help/formats/grib/
bhttp://dss.ucar.edu
chttp://www.leokrut.com/leonetcdf/netcdfformat.html
dhttp://eca.knmi.nl
ehttp://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/corine-land-cover-2006-raster
fhttp://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/data/corine-land-cover-2000-raster
ghttp://www.protectedplanet.net
hhttp://www.landcover.org
ihttp://bit.ly/v3dS2I

Table 1

Sources of raw datasets

mensely useful to stakeholders in research, national
councils and industry.

It is worth noting that the process of aggregating
data for nutrients and water sources for each of the
algae production site is in progress. Once these become available they would be integrated with the other
datasets as outlined further in Section 5.

Spatial data has been modelled using a combination
of several ontologies namely, WGS84 ontology 16, spatial relations ontology, 17 the Geonames ontology 18
and the NeoGeo ontology 19.

Geometries for algal plant sites and pipelines have
been modelled using an extension of the NeoGeo ge-

4. Vocabularies

LEAPS utilises a set of several well established and
domain specific vocabularies as illustrated in Figure 3.

16http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84\_pos
17http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/

oswebsite/ontology/spatialrelations.owl

18http://www.geonames.org/ontology/

ontology\_v2.2.1.rdf

19http://geovocab.org/geometry

Fig. 3. Ontologies for algal biomass. Arrows indicate reuse

ometry ontology 20. For the CO2 sources, the geometry
is modelled as a Point from the WGS84 ontology 21.
Modelling units and measurements for various attributes of the algal biomass datasets was non trivial.
The QUDT ontology 22 for dimensions and units was
extended to include bespoke units of measurements.

We developed conceptual OWL ontology schemas
23 for algal plant site, CO2 sources, regions and
pipelines. Figure 4 illustrates some of the core con-
cepts, their relationships and attributes. The figure also
shows the relationship with the NUTS24 vocabulary.

5. The LEAPS datasets

The transformation process yielded four datasets
which were stored in distributed triple store reposito-
ries: Biomass production sites, CO2 sources, pipelines
for the CO2 sources and region potential. We stored
the datasets in separate repositories to simulate the realistic scenario of these datasets being made available
by distinct and dedicated dataset providers in the fu-
ture. While a linked data representation of the NUTS
regions data 25, was already available there was no
SPARQL endpoint or service to query the dataset for
region names. We retrieved the dataset dump. In order

20http://geovocab.org/geometry
21http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84\_pos
22http://qudt.org/1.1/vocab/dimensionalunit
23Ontologies are available at

http:/purl.org/biomass/ontologies

25http://nuts.geovocab.org/

Fig. 4. A partial account of core concepts, their attributes and rela-
tionships

to inform the query retrieval performance, we pruned
the dataset to include only the regions in NWE. We
then curated the pruned dataset in our local triple store
as a separate repository. The NUTS dataset was required to link the biomass production sites and the CO2
sources to regions where they would be located and
to the dataset about the region potential of biomass
yields. We further enhanced and augmented the NUTS
dataset, with data on global radiation26. The transformed datasets, interlinked resources defining sites,
CO2 sources, pipelines, regions and NUTS data using link predicates defined in the ontology network depicted in Figure 3. Figure 5 illustrates the linkages between the datasets.

Fig. 5. Linked datasets for algal biomass

26global radiation is another term for solar radiation. It is the sum
of short wavelength incoming radiation to the earths surface and
consists of the direct and the diffuse sunlight.

URIs

Monika Solanki / Linked data for Potential Algal Biomass Production

We propose URI patterns for the datasets used in this
paper to be reused across the sector. Note that while we
would like the URIs to be persistent, they may evolve
as the uptake of linked data within the algal biomass
community gains momentum.

In particular we propose URI sets for
 Algal plant sites
 CO2 sources
 Pipelines.

Figure 6 exemplifies some of the URIs minted for real
world algal biomass entities which have unique identifiers and which are uniquely located in a certain NUTS
region. It also illustrates the definition of a conceptual
entity and a relationship within the algal plant site on-
tology.

Fig. 6. Representative URIs for Algal Biomass Plant Site

Statement level statistics

Statement level statistics for the various datasets in

LEAPS are indicated in Table 2.

Dataset
Algae sites dataset
CO2 sources
Pipelines

Global radiation
Biomass potential

Number of Statements

261680

Table 2

Dataset statement statistics

Dataset availability

The LEAPS27 application is available on the Web.
The interface currently provides visualisation and nav-

27http://www.semanticwebservices.org/

enalgae

igation of the algae cultivation datasets in a way most
intuitive for the phycologists. The application has been
demonstrated to several stakeholders of the community
at various algae-related workshops and congresses.
They have found the navigation very useful and made
suggestions for future dataset aggregation. At the time
of this writing, data retrieval is relatively slow for
some queries because of their federated nature, however optimisation work on the retrieval mechanism is
in progress to enable faster retrieval of information.

Besides the application Web interface, datasets are
available for querying via the dedicated triple store
Web interface28.

VOID description of the datasets

The VoID29 descriptions of some of the datasets in
the LEAPS suite have been made available 30. Once the
datasets are made public the VoID descriptions will be
updated.

Linking to other datasets

Datasets within the LEAPS suite have been linked to
each other via the link predicates in the domain specific vocabularies created for the datasets. The sites
datasets have been linked to the CO2 sources, pipeline
datasets and the nuts region dataset. Back links to the
datasets have been provided from the CO2 and the
pipelines dataset.

Though we have achieved good interlinking between the datasets in the LEAPS suite, we have only
been able to link externally to DBpedia and Geonames.
Reasons for the low external linkages have been discussed in Section 7.

6. A Prototype Application

The LEAPS integrated datasets enables a screening
for promising individual sites, provides base data for
more detailed planning purposes and would be immensely useful to stakeholders in research, national
councils and industry. We have developed a prototype
application 31 with a Web interface built over REST-

28http://www.semanticwebservices.org/

openrdf-workbench/repositories/NONE/
repositories

29http://www.w3.org/TR/void/
30http://purl.org/biomass/void
31http://purl.org/biomass/LEAPSDemo

ful Web services that exposes the LEAPS datasets via
various facets. The Web interface provides an interactive way to explore various facets of sites, sources,
pipelines, regions, ontolgoies and SPARQL endpoints.
Figure 7 illustrates a typical site. The map visualisation has been rendered using Google maps. Besides
the SPARQL endpoint and the interactive Web inter-
face, a REST client has been implemented for access to
the datasets. Query results are available in RDF/XML,
JSON, Turtle and XML formats. For the stakeholders

Fig. 7. A typical site as visualised with the LEAPS Web interface

in the biomass domain, the application provides an integrated view over multiple heterogeneous datasets of
potential algal sites and sources of their consumables
across NUTS regions in NWE.

7. Discussion

While LEAPS currently provides integrated information about algal plant sites, CO2 sources and the
pipelines connecting them,
there are several other
datasets such as nutrients, water supply and their associated sources which need to be integrated once
they become available. One of the core datasets which
should be made available as linked data is that of algal
strains that can be cultivated on the plant sites. We have
recently curated the Algaebase 32 dataset as linked
data. In the near future, experiments would be carried
out on the potential sites to establish the algal strains
that can be cultivated there. The algal strains from
the Algaebase dataset will then be integrated within
LEAPS to link the potential biomass production sites
with the algal strains they could produce. We believe
this will go a long way in providing the stakeholders,

32http://www.algaebase.org

information about the kind of algae that can be cultivated on potential sites, thereby helping in a more accurate analysis of the economic potential of producing
biofuels from Algae.

A limitation of LEAPS is the low number of outgoing links it provides with other datasets. Currently
LEAPS links to DBpedia, Geonames and the NUTS
datasets. Three main reasons can be identified for the
shortcoming in linkages:

 The lack of motivation within the algal biomass

community to open up and share data.

 The lack of shared vocabularies and uptake of Semantic Web and linked data technologies within
the community. LEAPS is the first dataset suite to
be exposed as linked data using RDF.

 LEAPS is a newly curated dataset. Its availability
as a data source to which other datasets can provide outgoing links needs to be widely advertised
both within and across the domain.

the LEAPS dataset suite
We strongly believe that
will prove a major milestone in generating the much
needed awareness about linked data and its benefits
within the algal biomass community. We are working
with biologists in the domain to address the above lim-
itations.

8. Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we presented a framework LEAPS that
exploits Semantic Web and linked data for making the
analysis of biomass potential in NWE available to the
stakeholders. Specifically, the framework contributes
by

 enabling the screening of data for promising individual plant sites and provides base data for more
detailed planning purposes.

 proposing a set of domain specific ontologies for
algal plant sites, CO2 and pipelines to be shared
and extended by the community.

 defining a linked data publishing architecture that
transforms raw data in disparate formats to a uniform XML representation.

 using a set of well established and domain specific ontologies as metadata to transform it further
into linked data.

 providing various data access options such as a
SPARQL endpoint, an interactive Google map interface and a REST API for making the data accessible to stakeholders.

Monika Solanki / Linked data for Potential Algal Biomass Production

As discussed in Section 7, several limitations need to
be overcome at various levels in order to fully realise
the vision of have an open platform for publishing
and consuming algal biomass datasets, both within and
across community.

In order to increase the uptake and showcase the potential of LEAPS we have been presenting the application at various algae congresses and workshops. This
also informs us about any related datasets that can be
integrated within LEAPS. We are working with biologists in the domain to facilitate the process of making the taxonomy from the AquaFuels33 project available as SKOS models. Multifaceted visualisation of
the integrated datasets is another area that we are currently focusing on to motivate the idea of interlinking
datasets. A few examples of these visualisations34 can
be seen via the Web application. The reasoning infrastructure in LEAPS is currently based on implicit OWL
235 DL inferences. Work is also in progress on exploiting rule based reasoning to model domain specific con-
straints.

33http://www.aquafuels.eu/
34Visualisations are powered by Sgvizler,

http://code.google.com/p/sgvizler/

35http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-direct-semantics/
