Semantic Web 0 (2012) 10
IOS Press

The Bowlogna Ontology: Fostering Open
Curricula and Agile Knowledge Bases for
Europes Higher Education Landscape

Editor(s): Carsten Keler, University of Munster, Germany; Mathieu dAquin, The Open University, UK; Stefan Dietze, L3S Research Center,
Germany
Solicited review(s): Mathieu dAquin, The Open University, UK; Carsten Keler, University of Munster, Germany; anonymous reviewer

Gianluca Demartini a,, Iliya Enchev a, Joel Gapany b, and Philippe Cudre-Mauroux a
a eXascale Infolab, University of Fribourg, Switzerland
b Faculty of Humanities, University of Fribourg, Switzerland
E-mail: {firstname.lastname}@unifr.ch

Abstract. The Bologna Process initiated a radical change within higher education institutions. This change triggered the creation
of new administrative procedures in the every day life of European universities. It also gave rise to the emergence of new concepts
for the description of curricula. It is critical for the successful continuation of this process to support the publication and exchange
of information among universities. With this aim in mind, we created the Bowlogna Ontology to model an academic setting as
proposed by the Bologna reform. In this paper, we present our efforts to design this ontology and the entire process that lead to
its creation starting from the definition of a linguistic lexicon derived from the Bologna reform and its conversion to a formal
ontology. We also describe practical applications of our ontology for end-users at universities (such as a faceted search and
browsing system for course information).

Keywords: Bologna Process, Ontology Engineering, Faceted Search

1. Introduction

In 1999, a process of renovation and standardization
of Europes higher education landscape started with
the signing of the Bologna declaration. This process
lead to the definition of standard ways to create university curricula, assign degrees, and evaluate students.
This is of course a long process which, in order to be
successful, requires time and several revisions of the
proposed framework and its implementation by each
participating country.

After more than ten years, the reform process is
well under way and a number of higher education
policies and processes have already been consolidated.

*Corresponding author. E-mail: gianluca.demartini@unifr.ch

For instance, the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS) has now been adopted by
most European countries and allows students to attend courses in foreign universities and to automatically transfer the credits they earned abroad to their
home university.

While the Bologna process surely has helped to consolidate the heterogeneous higher education systems
across Europe, there is still a long way to go before creating a coherent, interconnected and integrated higher
education system in Europe. For example, today an
exchange student who wants her ECTS credits recognized at her home university has to provide a written
certificate from the foreign university about her perfor-
mance. Once earned, the credits are typically entered
once at the foreign university, transferred by post to the
home institution, and entered a second time manually

1570-0844/12/$27.50 c 2012  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

G. Demartini et al. / The Bowlogna Ontology

at the home university. This scenario clearly points out
the lack of cohesion and automation across university
systems inside Europe.

To support the ongoing Bologna process, we describe in this paper our efforts towards automatizing
both higher education processes and workflows by creating a standard and reusable ontology which formally
defines the concepts and relations involved in an academic setting as described by Bologna. The motivation to create such an ontology is to push the standardization process that will enable the connection among
academic systems and improve educational workflows,
communication, and collaboration between universi-
ties. We can imagine different usage scenarios where
a standard ontology describing the Bologna university
environment would have a beneficial impact. One example is the sharing of information among different
universities. The adoption of a standard schema would
facilitate the mapping between heterogeneous university schemas and enable information flows among universities (e.g., Erasmus students who have taken exams in foreign universities). Such an adoption would
also allow the creation of general tools for internally
searching and browsing data. As the same schema gets
adopted by different institutions, a given query could
be run over different knowledge bases (see an example of such a process in Section 6). Processes in European universities currently follow the Bologna reform
directives. For this reason, a common schema based on
such directives would be the easiest to integrate in current workflows. In summary, there are several benefits
in the definition and progressive adoption of a standard
ontology targeting the Bologna university reform. In
this paper, we first describe our effort in modeling the
Bologna reform through the creation of a lexicon. We
then describe how we converted the lexicon to a standard ontology. We also present different applications
of the proposed ontology for end-users in university
administrations (e.g., a faceted search system).

The rest of this article is structured as follows: Section 2 and Section 3 give a few details about the
Bologna reform and our efforts to identify and define
the key concepts related to the Bologna reform using
a linguistic approach. This effort lead to the creation
of a lexicon of about 60 key terms used for the implementation of the Bologna Process in our institution [7].
Then, we describe (Section 4) the process which, in
collaboration with the linguists who defined the lexi-
con, lead to the definition of the Bowlogna ontology.
In this part we also mention the challenges that we
encountered in, for example, modeling part-of rela-

tions in this context. We present the Bowlogna ontology with its classes and properties in Section 5. More
specifically, we discriminate between public and private parts of the ontology and also focus on the multilingual aspect of our work. We describe (Section 6) the
envisioned usage of the proposed ontology and various applications fostering the integration of information from different knowledge repositories. Finally, we
conclude the paper in Section 7 by summarizing the
lessons learned during the process of creating a lexicon
and an ontology about the Bologna Reform, and propose future directions with the use of Bowlogna to improve knowledge flows between higher education institutions in Europe.

2. The Bologna Process: Convergence within

Diversity

In June 1999, the ministries of education of 29 European countries signed the so-called Bologna Dec-
laration. Ten years later, in March 2010, the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) was officially
launched at the Budapest and Vienna Ministerial Anniversary Conference. This newly created areawhich
was on the same occasion enlarged to Kazakhstan
encompasses at present 47 countries, whose broad variety of cultures and languages unquestionably influence the way the reforms are locally understood and
implemented. This diversity may be regarded as a cultural asset and there is of course a legitimacy to take
into account the specificities related to the individual
national contexts in which the Bologna Process takes
place. On the other hand, the need for a common and
mutual understanding of the ongoing reforms has progressively been more apparent with the enlargement of
the EHEA.

The train of reforms in which higher education institutions have been involved during the last decade has
been investigated by disciplines as different as peda-
gogy, management or sociology, to mention only a few.
With many respects, this interest led to significant evolutions in teaching and curricula, in the organization
and in the governance of universities, and in the perception that members of the academic community have
of their role in the civic society. But, to some extent,
the lack of communication between specialists from
various disciplines has prevented higher education institutions from really developing a coherent view of the
transformations they are currently experiencing.

Improving the mobility of students within the EHEA
is often mentioned as one of the main goals of the
Bologna process. But, as such, it evokes a more abstract type of mobility that has to do with the capacity to share information. Although this dimension is
rarely mentioned as a specific goal, we think that, on
the contrary, it is at the heart of the Bologna process.
To some extent, it is even the necessary counterpart of
the diversity of approaches and implementations we
have just mentioned. Technically, it will require the
development of integrated, next-generation information systems, such as the one we describe in the rest of
this article. We are confident that this movement will
not only be useful for new information systems, but
will also contribute to a form of convergence that is at
the same time constitutive of the Bologna process and
necessary to the achievement of its main objectives.

3. The Bologna Linguistic Lexicon

The Bologna process takes place in a multilingual
environment, which is certainly not a barrier to good
communication, but implies the capacity to explicitly
link local discourses to a common understandingor
at least to parallel and comparable understandings
of the various higher education systems. The issue can
practically be addressed by constructing local ontologies that should relate or map to a set of common enti-
ties.

We recently published [7] in the official Bologna
Handbook a basic set of entities that correspond to
the new system of studies and that seem to be rather
stable across time and institutions. In that article, we
described how the compilation of a lexicon of about
60 definitions contributed to the implementation of
the Bologna Process in our institution. We adopted a
purely text-based approach to identify the various concepts defined in the lexicon: We hired a terminologist,
whose work was to carefully review the texts underpinning the Bologna reform, and to extract all essential
concepts (rather than single words) from the text while
transcribing their implied meaning through succinct
definitions and explicit relations to other concepts. The
resulting lexicon has been spread among academic and
administrative staff, in order to create a common understanding of Bologna.

4. Converting a Lexicon into an Ontology

In this section we describe the process that lead us to
the creation of the Bowlogna ontology, a formal model
of the academic setting as described in the Bologna re-
form. Once our domain of discourse was well understood and a standard lexicon was produced by domain
experts together with terminologists, we were able to
start the modeling process that later produced a digital
formalization of the concepts described in the lexicon,
along with their relationships.

As we did not designed the ontology by directly analyzing the existing domain bur rather transforming a
model (i.e., the lexicon) into an ontological format, we
did not use standard ontology engineering methods [8].
However, we relied on the high-quality modeling that
was performed while creating the Bologna lexicon. For
instance, properties and suggestions (e.g, the Unity criteria from [8]) had already been considered at the lexicon definition level and have been preserved in the
Bowlogna ontology1.

4.1. Previous Approaches to Thesaurus conversion

Several approaches have been proposed for (semi-
)automatically translating lexicons or thesauri to Semantic Web formats with the goal of enabling interoperability between the converted models. Efforts in
converting standard thesauri such as, for instance, the
medical thesaurus MeSH used to index scientific arti-
cles, have been proposed [13]. In that case, an individual thesaurus was converted to RDF without the goal
of having a general framework for such conversions.

Other researchers have proposed methods for converting a general thesaurus to an ontological format.
With such approaches, the challenge is usually to
model any type of relationship that can be found in
a thesaurus into a model that focuses on taxonomic
(e.g., is-a) relationships. An example of such an approach is [12] where, starting from a thesaurus from
the Food and Agriculture Organization, an ontology
meta-model is first defined, and a set of transformation
rules is then applied to produce a formal conceptual-
ization, which is edited manually in the end.

A last category of approaches consists of those using SKOS as a general framework for converting a
thesaurus into an ontology. SKOS2 provides a basic

1We also took particular attention in modeling part-of relations.

See the discussion in Section 4.3.

2http://www.w3.org/TR/skos-primer/

G. Demartini et al. / The Bowlogna Ontology

framework to model the core structure of controlled
vocabularies (e.g., thesauri and taxonomies). The use
of such a common framework allows the produced
models to be interconnected, that is, it allows to link
concepts which are present in different thesauri. As
examples of such approaches, [15] proposes generic
methods to convert thesauri, producing a mapping to
SKOS via an intermediate RDF meta-model. In [14],
van Assem et al. propose a general method to convert
thesauri to SKOS with the goal of interoperability between the converted models. Despite that goal, they do
not provide evidence of any interaction between different models. The main limitation of this class of approaches is that information is typically lost in the conversion process, since not all information present in
thesauri can be represented using SKOS (as, for exam-
ple, for the MeSH lexicon [14]).

Compared to previous work, our setting does not require the produced model to be compatible with other
ontologies but, rather, to well represent the modeled
domain, and, thus, to encompass all important information present in the original lexicon. For this rea-
son, we did not adopt SKOS classes and properties in
the Bowlogna ontology. Another important aspect to
be mentioned is the fact that we did not adopt an automated approach to create our ontology in order to
have a high-quality outcome. Instead, we manually designed the ontology together with the help of the domain experts and terminologists who defined the lexicon containing the original concepts and relations.

4.2. Our Conversion Approach and Steps

Our approach to lexicon conversion has a lexical
perspective. After domain experts have defined the
main concepts and some of their relations in natural
language, we performed a conversion of the lexicon to
a formal ontology. The main goal of our approach was
to reach high coverage in terms of the concepts mentioned and defined in the lexicon. As seen in previous
work, coverage is not always the main goal of conversion approaches since, for the sake of compatibility between the generated ontology and legacy ontolo-
gies, previous approaches typically focus on a subset
of all concepts defined in the thesaurus (see, for exam-
ple, [14] where not all MeSH terms and relations are
included in the final ontology).

In more detail, the steps we took in our approach
are as follows. In the initial step, a lexicon is created
by domain experts through a linguistic analysis of the
sources defining the domain of discourse. The second

step consists of creating, together with the help of domain experts, a mapping of lexicon terms to classes,
instances, and relationships. Then, relationships are
further refined to distinguish between different types
(e.g., subclass, part-of). In a subsequent step, additional concepts are added to the ones imported from
the lexicon in order to guarantee the full coverage of
the domain. This step is also essential to integrate elements which are present in legacy systems and are not
always directly defined in the lexicon or in the Bologna
setting (such as local or legal information). Finally, a
further revision is done to exclude concepts which are
not useful in the deployment of the ontology for its final use (e.g., the class about the Bologna reform itself).
Technically speaking, in our setting, the conversion
process started from a PDF document describing the
linguistic lexicon. We then transformed the PDF document into an XML file, which was parsed by a conversion program that, exploiting the Jena framework3,
produced a minimal RDF file containing all the concepts defined in the lexicon. Those first RDF definitions were then revised manually with the help of domain experts and the use of Jena and the Protege ed-
itor4. Our approach is similar to previous work in the
sense that it adopts a semi-automatic approach to translate the lexicon into an ontology. Of course, a substantial effort was made to understand the lexicon before designing the first RDF schema and the translation rules which were then applied in our conversion
program.

Another key property of our conversion method is
the fact that we maintained all the definitions from the
lexicon in four different languages (i.e., French, Ger-
man, Italian, and English) in the final ontology. This
is a critical multi-lingual first step, as we aim to establish an ontology for many countries and their respective universities. As a possible application scenario,
we can imagine two different universities from Germany and France sharing data about the same concepts
(e.g., courses and ECTS credits). Thanks to the multilinguality of our ontology, different actors can understand the meaning of concepts used to label the shared
data.

Although we were taking a comprehensive ap-
proach, not all lexicon terms became concepts in the
ontology at the time of our conversion process. This
was the case for terms that are relevant to the Bologna

3http://jena.sourceforge.net/
4http://protege.stanford.edu/

setting which are, however, neither classes to be instantiated nor entities that can be part of a relation. An
example of such a lexicon term is Bologna Reform.
Further lexicon elements that were not included in the
final ontology are terms that are either local or that
are not generic enough to be of interest for each European university (e.g., general study qualification for
psychology students). On the other hand, we added
to the ontology classes which were not explicit terms
defined in the lexicon but rather concepts mentioned
in the definition of other terms and used by current information systems in our university. Examples of such
classes include Department and various classes related to students and professors. The examples we have
reported so far motivate our choice of a manual step in
the conversion process even further, in addition to initial automated conversion step to syntactically convert
the entire original lexicon to an ontology.

4.3. Mereology Relations

An interesting challenge we have faced during the
conversion process is the handling of mereology relations (i.e., part of). Mereology defines the part-of relation using three axioms. It must be:

 Transitive: If A is part of B and B is part of C,

then A is part of C

 Reflexive: A is part of A
 Antisymmetric: If A is part of B and A != B then

B is not part of A.

In our setting, an example of a transitive relation is
Learning Activity being part of Teaching Unit
which is part of an Educational Module. During
the conversion process we have encountered different
types of part-of relations that we modeled using different OWL relationships. For example, we can see that
a professor is part of a department. In order to distinguish between different part-of relations, we have
used a set of OWL relationships to model them in our
ontology (e.g., Professor - bb:isFromDepartment -
Department). An example of a different type of a
part-of relation is the Evaluation class where a stu-
dent, a professor, a teaching unit, and a grade are
components of the evaluation concept in the sense
that, together, they create an instance of an evalua-
tion. For this case, we have created appropriate relationships to model such scenario: Evaluation -
bb:performedByStudent - Student, Evaluation -
bb:evaluatedByProfessor - Professor, and Evaluation - bb:evaluatesTeachingUnit - Teaching_Unit.

Moreover, given the lack of support of OWL for different types of part-of relationships, we took particular
care while modeling them to avoid problems such as
creating cycles in the part-of graph.

5. The Bowlogna Ontology

The outcome of the process described in the previous two sections is the Bowlogna ontology. This ontology describes the university setting as defined by
the Bologna reform started in 1999. Figure 1 shows
some of the classes in the Bowlogna ontology together with their relations. Different arrow colors indicate different relation types. For example, purple arrows (e.g., between Person and Professor) indicate a
rdfs:subClassOf relation, green arrows (e.g., between
Student and Major Area) indicate a bb:follows relation.
The ontology currently contains 25 top level classes
(66 in total) describing concepts like students, profes-
sors, student evaluations (i.e., exams where students
get a grade from a lecturer in the context of a teaching unit), teaching units (i.e., courses given by lecturers and attended by students), ECTS credits, as well
as formal documents such as, for instance, study pro-
grams, certificates, or grade transcripts. Additionally,
succinct definitions for all the concepts included in the
original lexicon are available in German, French, Italian and English in the ontology.

One of the key classes in this ontology is Evaluation in which a Student, a Professor and a Teaching
Unit are involved. This class models the event when a
student, after attending a course given by a professor
(i.e., a teaching unit) is evaluated and given a grade.
Properties of teaching units include the semester and
the language in which the units are given, as well as
the number of corresponding ECTS credits earned by
students who successfully follow the course. The class
Student also has a number of properties including the
name of the student, his enrollment or graduation dates
for Bachelor and Maser degrees. The same student instance can be, over time, registered for different academic degrees (e.g., first a Bachelor and then a Mas-
ter). The class ECTS credit is linked to all classes directly or indirectly related to the measurement of students advancement: for example, teaching units and
study programs. The class Semester, with start and
end dates, enables queries on the temporal dimensions
(e.g., the number of students enrolled at the university
during a certain semester).

The full ontology can be accessed at the following
URL: http://diuf.unifr.ch/xi/bowlogna/

G. Demartini et al. / The Bowlogna Ontology

5.1. Public and Private Ontology Parts

5.2. Multi-Linguality

Fig. 1. The Bowlogna ontology: key classes and relations.

The Bowlogna ontology can be divided in two important parts according to the type of information
stored. Some information are public and can be shared
with other universities as well as with the general pub-
lic. Examples of such public information include the
departments, the teaching units together with information about their ECTS credits and teaching language.
The second part of the ontology consists of information which should not be publicly available, such as
grades given to students. In real instantiations of the
ontology, the private part will contain many more instances as compared to the public part. It is also clear
that aggregations over private information might often be of general interest (e.g., the number of students
currently enrolled at the university), and can be safely
shared.

While such a separation is made clear at the ontology level by defining which classes, sub-classes,
properties, and sub-properties are public or private,
Bowlogna does not incorporate any security mechanisms at this point. Security, privacy, and access policies are obviously of utmost importance when deploying information systems based on Bowlogna, but they
are infrastructure and application-dependent and as
such cannot be fully specified in the ontology from our
perspective.

One of the key properties of Bowlogna is the definition of all its concepts in four different languages:
English, French, Italian, and German. This has been
done as the University of Fribourg, which is a trilingual
institute (where all Bachelor-level courses are given
in both German and French, while Master courses are
given in English) in a trilingual country (French, German and Italian are all official languages in Switzer-
land5).

We kept all the original definitions available in
the lexicon (which defined all terms in both German
and French) for our ontology. Classes are linked to
their multi-lingual concept definitions. Additionally,
we have included in the ontology English and Italian
definitions to ease its use at the European level. In order to cover the most important languages involved in
the European higher-education landscape, we aim at
extending the set of languages used for the definitions
in the near future.

5.3. Related Ontologies

Other ontologies describing similar domains exist.
For example, the Metadata for Learning Opportunities (MLO) is a model (also available as RDFS)
which can be used to create and share course descrip-

5Romansh is the forth official Swiss language but only account

for 0.5% of the population.

tions. Compared to it, Bowlogna adopts a course (i.e.,
teaching unit) modeling approach which is based on
the Bologna process definition of teaching units. Mappings between the two ontologies are naturally possible (as for example http://purl.org/net/mlo/assessment,
which is similar to bb:Evaluation). Another related
project is eXchanging Course Related Information6
(XCRI) where a language to share course descriptions
is defined. Possible mappings with Bowlogna exist as
well: for example, http://xcri.org/profiles/catalog/1.2/course
is related to bb:Teaching_Unit. The Academic Institution Internal Structure Ontology7 (AIISO) has a different focus, which targets the structure of an academic
organization. An example mapping to Bowlogna is
http://purl.org/vocab/aiiso/schema#Module, which relates to bb:Teaching_Unit. Finally, LinkedUniversties8
is an initiative aiming at listing all available vocabularies and resources on linked data for higher-education.

6. A Standard Ontology for European

Universities: Usage Scenarios

Once created, the Bowlogna ontology can be deployed to automate information workflows and facilitate data exchange in both open and closed higher education settings. We detail below how we took advantage of the ontology at the university of Fribourg to
power next generation services for various members of
the academic community, and how open higher education interoperability can be fostered by adopting or
mapping to the ontology.

6.1. A Faceted Search and Browsing System over

Bowlogna

We now describe a first system that we built on top
of the Bowlogna ontology. The application scenario is
the following. In an university administration, there is
a constant need to access the large amounts of data
stored about students. In the case where the institution
is using the Bowlogna ontology for storing such data, it
is possible to adopt external search and browsing tools
supporting RDF or OWL. As a proof-of-concept, we
have developed a search and browsing interface over
the Bowlogna schema using the SIMILE libraries9.

6http://www.xcri.co.uk/
7http://vocab.org/aiiso/schema
8http://linkeduniversities.org/
9http://simile.mit.edu/

With such an interface, it is easy to find, for example,
all exams performed by a specific student, all the professors affiliated with one department, or the courses
taught in one specific language10. A screenshot of the
system is shown in Figure 2.

6.2. Agile Knowledge Bases for University

Administration

Beyond the simple search system described above,
the management of data across research groups and departments inside a university is increasingly becoming
difficult, both because of the rapid augmentation of information to manage, and the increasing complexity of
the processes and queries to support. Our current information infrastructure at the university of Fribourg
is based on standard commercial relational database
technologies; over the years, two main data management problems have surfaced and are today severely
hampering information workflows inside the univer-
sity:

Super-linear increase in data: the relational system
currently in place is used to store data for both
current course offerings, registered students, etc.
and also to keep historical data about the univer-
sity. Year after year, the constant augmentation of
students and academic programs leads to a steady
increase in the sheer amount of data to manage
in the database. Semi-automatic processes used
so far to extract and analyze data, such as CSV
export of historical course offerings and manual
inspection of the data through a spreadsheet, are
no longer possible today (the database contains
for example several thousands of entries in the
various course tables). Tackling this problem
requires a complete overhaul of the current data
infrastructure inside the university, which is technically difficult since relational data were never
meant to be shared across systems (i.e., transferring relational data from one system to the other
is a challenging process typically implying some
loss of data either because of unsupported data
types, constraints, or event handlers).

Multiplication of Relations: As another consequence
of the constant augmentation of course offerings
and the complexification of teaching organiza-

10A demo of our faceted search system over Bowlogna is available

online at: http://diuf.unifr.ch/xi/bowlogna/

G. Demartini et al. / The Bowlogna Ontology

Fig. 2. A faceted search and browsing system over the Bowlogna ontology. In the figure we can see the selection of all the evaluations done by a
specific professor.

tions, the number of tables used by the relational
engine to store data is also soaring. There are for
example more than fifty relations used to represent students, accounting for various study pro-
grams, part-time students, external students, students registered to special programs, external au-
ditors, etc. The relationship between those tables are never formally described, though the
tables are often implicitly linked through automated triggers (e.g., adding a student to the PartTime Students tables automatically triggers the
addition of the student in other student tables
as well). This implicit increase in schema complexity is today becoming unbearable and creates
awkward situations where relatively straightforward queries such as what is the total number of
students registered at the university? cannot be
answered precisely today since the query touches
a web of relations, whose semantic relationships
are only vaguely and implicitly defined.

The two problems described above are both tackled by the proof-of-concept system that we are building around Bowlogna. As our infrastructure is centered around semi-structured OWL data, sharing or exporting both schema and instance data is straightfor-
ward, as all data can be exchanged using standardized serialization mechanisms (for example through an
XML serialization). Thus, offloading data to specialized tools, for instance for large-scale reasoning [1]
or business intelligence tasks [17] is straightforward.
As for the multiplication of relations, Bowlogna provides two key advantages: i) it allows for more dynamic schemas, where new concepts or relationships
can be easily added without having to modify or update former conceptualization (e.g., by adding new object properties to an existing ontology, or adding new
properties linking pairs of classes) and ii) it defines
the relationships between classes through formal constructs (e.g., using class hierarchies or formal properties such as owl:TransitiveProperty). Taking advantage of inference mechanisms, queries such as the one

mentioned above (what is the total number of students registered at the university?) are then straightforward to answer, and generally boil down to simple
selections/projections on one class in the class hierarchy (i.e., a selection on the student superclass).

Another salient problem in current

information
management systems inside universities is the difficulty to trace information lineage. For example, it
is not easy to trace all exams (successful and not)
a student has been taking since she started her academic studies, including also the ones given by foreign
universities during Erasmus exchanges. The gradual
adoption of a standard ontology within European universities would enable an easier traceability of the data.
In our Bowlogna ontology it is, for instance, possible
to run temporal queries (e.g., what is the percentage
of students who continue their university studies beyond the Bachelor?) as instances contain time-related
properties which allow to trace, for example, student
activities from their first registration to the end of their
studies.

Once data mappings are in place, automated query
reformulation or gossiping mechanisms [2] can be
used to create transparent data integration and a unique
query interface for the end-user, for example to create
faceted search functionalities such as those described
above to let students browse all potential courses offered in European universities. Beyond the extension
of the simple search system described above to include
several institutions, one can easily envision the potential benefits of using or mapping to a unique ontology across all higher education institutes in Europe.
This would for instance open the door to the adoption of standard software built on top of the common
conceptualization as well as enable the publication and
sharing of information among institutions. Semantic
data integration also opens the door to fully automated
data exchange [6], where universities following the
Bologna precepts could for instance exchange grade
or ECTS information automatically and securely [9]
across heterogeneous and distributed information sys-
tems.

6.3. Large-Scale Curricula Integration for European

Students

7. Conclusions

Transparent integration of course offerings is another breakthrough which can be made possible by
the adoption of Semantic technologies by universities.
Today, while basically each university in Europe provides some HTML pages to describe its courses and
programs, no common infrastructure exists to automatically integrate all curricula across Europe, in order for example to provide a single query interface
to prospective students. Integrating heterogeneous data
displayed on HTML pages is an extremely intricate
problem [10]. The adoption of Semantic technologies to manage higher-education data offers a number
of advantages in this context. The systematic use of
URIs to identify both conceptualizations and data in-
stances, as well as the availability of standard publication mechanisms such as SPARQL end-points enable
the publication of vast quantities of structured data on
the Web. Once the course offerings are available as raw
data, the a posteriori integration of information can be
made possible by schema [3,5] and instance matching [4] techniques. The publication of a reference ontology for course offerings (like the Bowlogna ontol-
ogy) is a key-element to minimize the amount of manual work required to integrate data, as it can be used
as a central hub or mediator [16] to facilitate the mappings between various university systems.

The Bologna process, which started in 1999, established a new era for higher education across Eu-
rope. Many institutions adapted their course offerings
to comply to the standards suggested by this reform.
This harmonization process has taken several years to
unfold. As a consequence, we can today observe striking similarities among very disparate universities in
Europe.

To support this renovation process from the point of
view of information systems, there is an urgent need
for standard data representation in order to enable automated information flows and data sharing among in-
stitutions.

In this paper, we described Bowlogna, an ontology modeling an academic setting as defined by the
Bologna reform of higher education in Europe. We
presented the efforts made by terminologists to create a
lexicon regrouping the terms used to describe the academic setting as prescribed by the Bologna reform. We
then described the semi-automated process of converting such a lexicon to an ontology, which could then
be used as a standard conceptualization for modeling
data about students, courses, evaluations, etc. We also
showed how such an ontology could underpin various applications tackling crucial problems of todays
IT systems in European universities. Finally, we pre-

G. Demartini et al. / The Bowlogna Ontology

sented our current faceted-search prototype, and discussed how Bowlogna could be used to implement
more agile and integrated information platforms for
managing, integrating and serving higher education
data across Europe.

7.1. Lessons Learned

We described above the creation process of a lexicon
of concepts capturing the Bologna reform, its conversion to a standard ontology, and the application of such
an ontology in various contexts (e.g., a faceted search
application). During those various steps, we made important observations which can be shared as practical guidelines for transitioning from a legacy relational
system to a next-generation Semantic Web infrastructure in a university. In detail, we can share the following recommendations:

1. Asking linguistic experts to model the domain of
discourse through a direct and careful analysis of
the sources describing the domain is essential in
order to extract a comprehensive set of key con-
cepts:
 In the domain we analyzed, one critical aspect
was the variety of culture and languages in-
volved. This lead us to the decision that all
terms present in the lexicon should be defined
in different languages to ease communication
among the different actors involved. Currently,
the Bowlogna ontology include definitions in
English, German, Italian, and French.

 Another important aspect

is the interdisciplinarity that the Bologna process implies.
Different disciplines such as pedagogy, man-
agement, and sociology are involved. It is
therefore necessary to consider this aspect
while modeling the domain and to invest efforts in maintaining natural language description of all important conceptualization in order to foster communication among different
disciplines.

2. Transforming a lexicon of concepts into an ontology is a non-trivial task and must again involve
domain-experts for optimal results:
 Majors efforts had to be invested in understanding which concepts and relations from
the lexicon should be kept in the ontology, and
which should be discarded.

 Not all the terms defined in the lexicon had to
be translated to ontology classes, even though
our goal was to obtain a high coverage of the
domain of discourse.

 Particular care had to be taken to model different types of part-of relations used rather informally in the lexicon.

3. If properly defined, the common conceptualization foster information exchange and data integration through various higher-level applica-
tions:
 In the case of end-user applications, most of
the user requirements were already defined
during the lexicon definition and the ontology
conversion. This allowed quick prototyping of
further applications thanks to the careful modeling of the domain of discourse.

 Once available, a formal conceptualization can
considerably lower the efforts required to integrate heterogeneous information sources, by
acting as a common representation or as a central mediator upon which local schemas or ontologies can be mapped.

7.2. Future Directions

As mentioned in the previous sections, we envision several important future directions involving the
Bowlogna ontology. Most importantly, we plan to push
for the gradual adoption of the Bowlogna ontology
as an integral part of the overall description of the
Bologna reform, in order to lower the efforts required
to integrate information systems across European uni-
versities. As a first step forward, we are currently assessing the various benefits of adopting such an ontology in our local institution. We have developed a
demonstrator based on the Bowlogna ontology that allows university administration employees as well as
students to navigate and query real data from our insti-
tution. In this way, (prospective) students can be better informed about the current educational offers (e.g.,
Which degrees can I obtain in Fribourg about His-
tory?) at our University. We hope to gather experience
on the potential pitfalls and risks related to the wide
deployment of Semantic technologies in a university
setting, and on the safeguards to put in place in order
to allow for a smooth transition from legacy systems.
We are also currently approaching various higher education institutions in Europe in order to push for the
wider adoption of Semantic technologies in university

settings, and hope to deploy a first distributed prototype supporting the sharing and exchange of information between a small set of institutions in the near fu-
ture.

8. Acknowledgment

This work is supported (in part) by the Swiss
National Science Foundation under grant number
PP00P2_128459.
