Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Linked Data, Big Data, and the 4th Paradigm

Editorial

Pascal Hitzler, a Krzysztof Janowicz, b
a Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, USA
b University of California, Santa Barbara, USA

Around 2006, the inception of Linked Data [2] has
led to a realignment of the Semantic Web vision and
the realization that data is not merely a way to evaluate
our theoretical considerations, but a key research enabler in its own right that inspires novel theoretical and
foundational research questions. Since then, Linked
Data is growing rapidly and is altering research, gov-
ernments, and industry. Simply put, Linked Data takes
the World Wide Webs ideas of global identifiers and
links and applies them to (raw) data, not just docu-
ments. Moreover, and regularly highlighted by Tim
Berners-Lee, Anybody can say Anything about Any
topic (AAA)1 [1], which leads to a multi-thematic,
multi-perspective, and multi-medial global data graph.
More recently, Big Data has made its appearance
in the shared mindset of researchers, practitioners, and
funding agencies, driven by the awareness that concerted efforts are needed to address 21st century data
collection, analysis, management, ownership, and privacy issues. While there is no generally agreed understanding of what exactly is (or more importantly, what
is not) Big Data, an increasing number of Vs has been
used to characterize different dimensions and challenges of Big Data: volume, velocity, variety, value,
and veracity. Interestingly, different (scientific) disciplines highlight certain dimensions and neglect oth-
ers. For instance, super computing seems to be mostly
interested in the volume dimension while researchers
working on sensor webs and the internet of things seem
to push on the velocity front. The social sciences and
humanities, in contrast, are more interested in value
and veracity. As argued before [13,17], the variety dimensions seems to be the most intriguing one for the
Semantic Web and the one where we can contribute
most as a research community. Of course, these dis-

1Or AAAAA if you add space and time [12].

/0-1900/$ c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

tinctions are not crisp and science is at its best when
it aims at a holistic understanding. At the end, all Vs
have to be addressed in an interdisciplinary effort to
substantially advance on the Big Data front [4].

The notion of variety as it applies to Big Data, of
course, has a significant number of dimensions itself,
including variety of data and representation formats as
well as variety in terms of correctness, underlying conceptualizations or data models, temporal and spatial
dependencies, etc. [13]. Untangling and understanding
the important aspects of this variety notion is going to
be part of the process of addressing them. Of course,
variety also occurs in Small Data. However, in the case
of small data volume or throughput (a.k.a., velocity),
variety can usually be handled by established methods,
e.g., by manual curation or explicit conversions. Thus,
variety as a Big Data issue is distinct in that established small scale methods are insufficient. From this
perspective, the Big Data notion of variety is a generalization of semantic heterogeneity as studied in the field
of databases, artificial intelligence, Semantic Web, and
cognitive science in general since many years.

The 4th Paradigm of Science is yet another notion that has emerged within the last years and can
be understood as the scientific view on how Big
Data changes the very fabric of science [5]. With the
omnipresence and availability of data from different
times, locations, perspectives, topics, cultures, reso-
lutions, qualities, and so forth, exploration becomes
an additional (4th) paradigm of science. This raises
synthesis to a new level. The study of relative (pixel)
greenness in pictures extracted from public webcams
to do research on phenology is just one example [10].
In other words, we can gain new insights by creatively
combining what is already there  an idea that seems
to align very well with Linked Data and Semantic Web
technologies as drivers of integration. Interestingly, we

Hitzler and Janowicz / Linked Data, Big Data, and the 4th Paradigm

would argue that Big Data makes small science possible again as vasts amounts of data and processing
power become available to individual scientists.

Summing up, it appears to be uncontroversial that
Linked Data is part of the Big Data landscape. We
would even go a bit further and claim that Linked Data
is an ideal testbed for researching some key Big Data
challenges and to experience the 4th paradigm in ac-
tion.

Indeed, Linked Data reduces Big Data variability by
some of the scientifically less interesting dimensions.
For example, due to a general agreement on RDF [16]
as basic data representation language for Linked Data,
many syntactic issues vanish. Likewise, Linked Data
relies on a relative small set of conventions, e.g., the
use of vocabularies, and those vocabularies are created
using a few formally well-defined languages (includ-
ing, but not limited to OWL [7]). Even more, Linked
Data can be accessed, stored, linked, queried, and so
forth by a set of (largely) compatible free and open
source tools and systems on regular hardware. Finally,
most Linked Data are object centric (which reduces the
mutli-mediality aspect). In this sense, Linked Data is a
bit like Big Data in a laboratory setting, where certain
variables are under control and thus can be ignored in
the development of solutions or at least a deeper understanding of the issues. And once we have learned
how to deal with the remaining variety dimensions in
Linked Data, we are in a much better position to take
further steps towards tackling Big Data at large.

In fact, it turns out that the variety challenges2 which
remain in Linked Data are still very substantial. As a
particular example, just consider the case of integrated
querying over multiple Linked Datasets. Of course,
such integrated querying would be an obvious capability required for synthesis and exploration, and in particular such a capability would seem to be rather well
aligned with the general promises of Semantic Web
technologies. However, despite a good number of efforts and some advances (see, e.g., [14,15] and the references cited therein), the community still seems to be
rather far away from a powerful, general, and practically feasible solution.

Such difficulties in making practical use of Linked
Data are often attributed to poor quality of Linked Data
[3,8,9,11,18]. In the context of the larger Big Data dis-
cussion, however, what may appear to be quality issues

2and, of course, also issues of volume, velocity, veracity, and

value.

can be subsumed under the notion of variety: given
the minimalistic agreed-upon requirements for Linked
Data on the Web, and the fact that most datasets are
community-created in a grassroots manner, it is only
natural that there is not only a large variance in perspectives and underlying data models, but also a significant amount of genuine low-level quality issues
such as erroneous and missing data, triplification er-
rors, misleading owl:sameAs links, faulty syntax, and
unavailable SPARQL endpoints.

Semantic Web and Linked Data researchers need to
embrace these issues. They will not go away. Rather,
we will need to find technical and methodological solutions which perform well even under such circum-
stances. And at the same time, we need to start creating a culture of best practices in data publishing which
will alleviate some of the issues, and will thus make
technical solutions easier to develop. Even more, following the previously outlined argumentation, it becomes clear that we need a way to communicate, illus-
trate, and document linked datasets in a way that is understandable to researchers and practitioners outside of
the Semantic Web and computer/information science
in general.

In this issue, we present the very first Linked Dataset
Description papers which were accepted for publication in the Semantic Web journal. Initially, our callfor this new type of papers was intended as a onetime special issue. However the response was overwhelming and we received 27 submissions. We thus
adopted dataset descriptions as a new standing paper type for the journal. Similarly to our argumentation for Tools & Systems papers [6], dataset descriptions are key research enablers. For instance, recent
progress on foundational and theoretical aspects such
as ontology alignment, semantic search, the combination of inductive and deductive approaches, and so
forth would not have been possible without central
Linked Data repositories such as DBpedia and Geo-
names, and their interlinkage.

By introducing a paper type for linked dataset descriptions we provide a publication outlet for these
contributions, make them visible to a broader research
community, archive them as notable contributions to
development of the Semantic Web as research field,
and finally allow for peer-review based quality control with a transparent set of review criteria. At the
same time we give authors the chance to receive academic credit for their work. The peer-review aspect

[10] N. Jacobs, W. Burgin, N. Fridrich, A. Abrams, K. Miskell,
B. H. Braswell, A. D. Richardson, and R. Pless. The global network of outdoor webcams: properties and applications. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, pages
111120. ACM, 2009.

[11] P. Jain, P. Hitzler, P. Z. Yeh, K. Verma, and A. P. Sheth. Linked
Data is Merely More Data.
In D. Brickley, V. K. Chaudhri,
H. Halpin, and D. McGuinness, editors, Linked Data Meets
Artificial Intelligence, pages 8286. AAAI Press, Menlo Park,
CA, 2010.

[12] K. Janowicz. The role of space and time for knowledge organization on the semantic web. Semantic Web, 1(1-2):2532,
2010.

[13] K. Janowicz and P. Hitzler. The digital earth as knowledge

engine. Semantic Web, 3(3):213221, 2012.

[14] A. Joshi, P. Jain, P. Hitzler, P. Yeh, K. Verma, A. Sheth,
and M. Damova. Alignment-based querying of Linked Open
Data. In R. Meersman, H. Panetto, T. Dillon, S. Rinderle-Ma,
P. Dadam, X. Zhou, S. Pearson, A. Ferscha, S. Bergamaschi,
and I. F. Cruz, editors, On the Move to Meaningful Internet
Systems: OTM 2012, Confederated International Conferences:
CoopIS, DOA-SVI, and ODBASE 2012, Rome, Italy, September 10-14, 2012, Proceedings, Part II, volume 7566 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 807824. Springer, Heidel-
berg, 2012.

[15] V. Lopez, M. Fernandez, E. Motta, and N. Stieler. PowerAqua:
Supporting users in querying and exploring the Semantic Web.
Semantic Web, 3(3):249265, 2012.

[16] F. Manola and E. Miller, editors. Resource Description Framework (RDF). Primer. W3C Recommendation, 10 February
2004. Available from http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-primer/.

[17] A. P. Sheth, C. Ramakrishnan, and C. Thomas. Semantics for
the semantic web: The implicit, the formal and the powerful.
Int. J. Semantic Web Inf. Syst., 1(1):118, 2005.

[18] STKO.

Place and location on the web of linked data.

http://stko.geog.ucsb.edu/location_linked_data, 2013.

turned out to be an important fact as many of the initial
submissions suffered from poor quality.3 Over the last
months we received feedback from editors, authors,
and linked data enthusiasts that the existence of this
paper type starts to affect the the quality of available
linked datasets. As of May 2013 we received 59 linked
dataset description papers,15 of these are presented in
this issue.

Acknowledgements The first named author acknowledge support by the National Science Foundation under award 1017225 "III: Small: TROn  Tractable Reasoning with Ontologies." Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
