Semantic Web 1 (2009) 15
IOS Press

TourMISLOD: a Tourism Linked Data Set

Editor(s): Pascal Hitzler, Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA; Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California, Santa
Barbara, USA
Solicited review(s): Amit Joshi, Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA; Michael Lutz, European Commission  Joint
Research Centre, Italy; Jesse Weaver, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA

Marta Sabou a,, Irem Arsal b and Adrian M.P. Bra soveanu a
a New Media Technology Department, MODUL University Vienna, Austria
E-mail: marta.sabou, adrian.brasoveanu@modul.ac.at
b Tourism and Hospitality Department, MODUL University Vienna, Austria
E-mail: irem.arsal@modul.ac.at

Abstract. The TourMISLOD dataset exposes as linked data a significant portion of the content of TourMIS, a key source of European tourism statistics data. TourMISLOD contains information about the Arrivals, Bednights and Capacity tourism indicators,
recorded from 1985 onwards, about over 150 European cities and in connection to 19 major markets. Due to licensing issues, the
usage of this dataset is currently limited to the TourMIS consortium. Nevertheless, a prototype application has already revealed
the datasets usefulness for decision support.

Keywords: Tourism indicators, tourism ontology, triplification, decision support

1. Introduction

We present the TourMISLOD1 dataset which contains the linked data encoding of European tourism
statistics extracted from the TourMIS2 system. We start
by describing the content, the purpose of creation and
availability of our dataset in Section 2. In Section 3 we
provide more details about the dataset creation process
and describe current usage in Section 4. We discuss
limitations and future work in Section 5.

2. The TourMISLOD Dataset

2.1. Data Source and Coverage

The data source of TourMISLOD is the TourMIS
system, an online database that consists of tourism
market research data such as bednights, arrivals and

*Corresponding author. E-mail: marta.sabou@modul.ac.at.
1Available at http://tourmislod.modul.ac.at/
2www.tourmis.info/index_e.html

capacities in European countries and cities [12]. Such
data collections are referred to as tourism indicators or
tourism statistics. The major aim of TourMIS is to have
comparable data necessary to support tourism managers in their decision-making [12]. As such, a supporting consortium, including National Tourism Statistics Austria, European Travel Commission (ETC), European Cities Marketing (ECM) and Austrian National
Tourist Office, ensures the continued development and
population of the system. TourMIS contains data about
three major tourism indicators:

Arrivals - the number of tourists that arrive to various types of accommodations (i.e., hotels, bed
and breakfasts, camp sites, etc.) at a destination;
Bednights - the number of nights spent by tourists at
various types of accommodations at a destination;
Capacity - the total bed capacity of accommodations

at a destination.

This data is provided by several organizations. The
National Tourism Statistics Austria collects data from
the Austrian accommodation suppliers regarding key
tourism indicators. ECM and ETC support the collec-

1570-0844/09/$27.50 c 2009  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

M. Sabou et al. / TourMISLOD

tion of measurements for the three tourism indicators
by encouraging their members, city tourism organizations (CTOs) of over 100 European cities and national
tourism organizations (NTOs) of 33 nations respec-
tively, to enter their data into TourMIS. The supporting consortium updates the TourMIS data frequently,
with new data being added almost daily3. Data about
the three indicators is available from 1985 onwards, in
relation with 154 European destinations4 (i.e., cities)
and for 19 different markets, where markets denote
the origin of the tourists. The indicators are measured
both monthly and annually. Besides storing raw data,
TourMIS also includes a method-base that computes
a range of statistics such as market shares and market
volumes of selected cities.

TourMIS provides a REST API which returns an
XML file containing a set of measurements where each
measurement is about one of the three tourism indi-
cators, it refers to one destination (e.g., LJU, which
is a code for Ljubljana), it is about one market, it has
an associated year, as well as month if it is a monthly
reading, and a value. The example in Listing 1 shows
the XML encoding of a bednights measurement for
Ljubljana, where 837 bednights were spent by Spanish
tourists in March 2005.

Listing 1: XML output from the TourMIS API

< d a t a >

< / d a t a >

< d e s t i n a t i o n >LJU< / d e s t i n a t i o n >
< market >ES< / market >
< y e a r >2005< / y e a r >
<month>3< / month>
< v a l u e >837< / v a l u e >

2.2. Purpose of Creation

The motivation behind creating the TourMISLOD
data is threefold. Firstly, data about tourism indicators
such as those stored in the TourMIS system are important for tourism decision makers. Secondly, although
there are several tourism datasets, none provide the
level of details that TourMIS does, nor are they available as linked data. Thirdly, the current technology solutions used by tourism statistic sources are limited to
offering data via diverse APIs or simply as data dumps.

3The latest additions are displayed at www.tourmis.info.
4http://tourmislod.modul.ac.at/coveragemap

This severely hampers the development of applications
that wish to combine data from different sources. We
now detail and exemplify these issues.

The importance of tourism indicators. Tourism indicators play a key role in supporting decision making
processes in tourism. The tourism domain is a highly
complex and dynamic domain where decision-makers
often rely on forecasting models to predict future demand or on decision support systems to analyze and
compare the relevant stakeholders (e.g., benchmarking competing regions). Tourism statistics such as the
number of tourists that arrive to the destination and the
number of bed nights spent at the destination are important for the industry for various decision making related tasks such as (i) understanding the contribution
of tourism to the destinations economy [10] or (ii)
promoting and marketing a destination by forecasting
tourism demand, setting marketing goals and exploring potential source markets [4]. In addition, tourism
planners and public agencies can use tourism statistics
to decide on planning tourism related facilities (e.g.,
hotels and resorts) and infrastructure such as airports,
highways, bridges and water treatment facilities [4].

Characteristics of tourism statistics data sources.
As a consequence of their importance, many organi-
zations, such as the World Bank5, the UN6 or Euro-
stat7, provide tourism statistics (see details in [8]).
However, none of these datasets provide the level of
detail that TourMIS does. While the previously mentioned sources provide annual measurements (except
Eurostat), at country level, TourMIS contains both annual and monthly measurements and it focuses on individual cities. Additionally, TourMIS also identifies key
markets based on tourists origin, a feature not offered
by any of the data sources we surveyed, despite the fact
that market information is essential for tourism promotion organizations in developing their international
advertising campaigns.

Tourism data integration issues. The important activities of decision support often require combining
data from various data sources. Indeed, if the decisionmaker only relies on one, isolated, data source his analysis ignores other, external indicators that would allow
discovering complex phenomena and designing more
accurate forecasting models. However, tourism data
sets primarily exist in isolation and they are often dif-

5http://data.worldbank.org/
6http://data.un.org/
7http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/

page/portal/statistics/search_database

ficult to combine and compare automatically because
of the following two issues. Firstly, at the data encoding level, while most data sets are published as open
data, they use syntactic encoding formats that lead to
substantial manual effort when integrating them (e.g.,
data dumps and in some cases custom APIs). Secondly,
at the data semantics level, they contain data of different geographic granularity, time frequency or they
employ different ways of measuring the same indi-
cator, but all these differences are not made explicit
in a machine readable format and it remains the task
of an analyst to understand them. For example, difficulties caused by this technological status affected
BASTIS8, a system that aims to support tourism decision makers in making better marketing and strategy
decisions. BASTIS targets tourism stakeholders involved in heritage tourism in the Baltic Sea region and
provides them with information on trends and statistics (both tourism and economic) about this area, thus
overcoming the general shortcoming of such informa-
tion. BASTIS integrates data from TourMIS and Eurostat among others but this integration is purely manual
and therefore costly and error-prone (based on email
communication with the creators of BASTIS).

spection by interested readers. The sample contains
(i) all (1586) Arrivals measurements from 1985 to
2012, measured annually, for all destinations and for
the total market (ZZ); (ii) all (9989) Bednights mea-
surements, for all destinations and all markets, measured monthly during 2005; and (iii) all (107) Capacity measurements, for all destinations, for year 2007.
While only a portion of the entire dataset, this sample will allow for checking technical correctness as
well as it will give an insight into the key characteristics of the dataset (the three measurements, the
availability of data over 28 years, for 158 destinations and 19 markets). The dataset is stored in an
OpenRDF Sesame repository9 and can be accessed at
http://tourmislod.modul.ac.at.

3. Linked Data Creation Process

The process of creating the linked data set included
three major stages: creating an ontology to represent
the concepts covered by TourMIS (Section 3.1), creating RDF data triples from the TourMIS database (Sec-
tion 3.2), dataset publication (Section 3.3) and, finally,
establishing links to other datasources (Section 3.4).

2.3. Licensing and Availability

3.1. Ontology Creation

Licensing is a major issue for our dataset. TourMIS
is a system which, although developed at a univer-
sity, is financed by multiple tourism organizations and
is updated by a range of different contributors (Sec-
tion 2.1). While form-based data extraction from the
database is granted for free to anyone upon registration with TourMIS, opening up the entire data set for
querying by third parties is a major step that raises intricate licensing issues given the heterogeneous origin
of the data. Therefore, for now the linked data we produced remains closed and for use only within the TourMIS consortium, but discussions with the other stakeholders are ongoing about the possibility of opening (at
least parts of) this data for public querying. For now, it
has been agreed that partial access (e. g., to data collected before 2010) or full access to the data might be
granted upon request. In anticipation of this data being
openly accessible, its name already contains "LOD".

Due to these licensing issues, we are unable to provide this dataset publicly at the moment. We have,
however, published a sample of the dataset for in-

We started with the identification of ontologies that
could be used to represent the TourMIS data. Although
several tourism ontologies exist their focus is on supporting tourist-centric applications (e.g., recommendation and question answering systems to be used by
tourists) and their vocabulary is restricted by those
applications scope [1]. For example, QALL-ME provides a model to describe tourism destinations, sites,
events as well as transportation [7]. The Harmonise
ontology focuses on tourism events and accommodation types [3], while the Hi-Touch ontology models
tourism destinations and their associated documentations [5]. We were unable to identify any ontology
defining the tourism indicators of interest to us and
therefore created our ontology as described next.

Figure 1 depicts the ontology that models the various measurements and their characteristics. Central
to the ontology is the Measurement concept and
its three subconcepts that correspond to the tourism
indicators covered by TourMIS. This concept also
serves as the domain for a set of object and data

8http://www.bastis-tourism.info

9http://www.openrdf.org

M. Sabou et al. / TourMISLOD

Fig. 1. Ontology schema for describing key TourMIS concepts (xsd:Int stands for xsd:integer).

to the definition of that measurement

properties used to define the key elements of each
measurement. The three data properties (depicted
with dashed arrows in Figure 1) allow specifying
the value of a measurement (hasValue), as well
as the year and the month when it was measured
(hasYear and hasMonth respectively). The object properties (depicted with doted arrows in Figure 1) allow specifying the Destination and the
Market for which the measurement has been made
as well as any difference in measurement with re-
spect
type
(hasExceptionToDefinition ). The ExceptionToDefinition concept records, using a textual comment, cases when the measurement differs
from the main definition, for example, when arrivals
are measured "in city area only" or "in greater city
area". Currently, we model these exceptions as TourMIS does, i.e., as textual comments, however, we envision a more formal, axiom-based modeling as future
work. When specifying a market for a measurement,
one can either refer to three generic markets (total, domestic and foreign markets codified as ZI, ZA and ZZ
respectively) or to markets specific to a given coun-
try. A market for a specific country is an instance of
MarketForCountry and specifies the country of
interest through the forCountry property.

During ontology design we relied on the "N-ary relation with no distinguished participant" design pattern
recommended by [6] for modeling relations between
many individuals, where none of the individuals can be
considered a primary one. By using this design pattern
we closely follow the structure of the TourMIS XML
output, thus making the triplification process, as well
as debugging activities more straightforward.

3.2. Triplification

We triplified a subset of TourMIS containing raw
statistical data about the Arrivals, Bednights and Capacity tourism indicators. The data spans 28 years, 154
destinations and 19 markets (and three generic mar-
kets). For transforming the TourMIS content into RDF
data based on the ontology, we extracted this data using the servers REST API. This data was then transformed into an ontology model using the Jena library
and saved into RDF files. We have triplified a total of
201 762 measurements with the final data set accounting to just over 1 million triples. In Listing 2 we provide the RDF representation of the data from Listing 1.
To assess internal connectivity, we have computed the
average ratio of incoming vs. outgoing links for each
node in the RDF data. We obtained a value of 2.9.

3.3. URI Design and Data Set Publication

We use different namespaces for ontology concepts
and for instances, namely http://tourmislod.
modul.ac.at/tourmis/ontology/ and
http://tourmislod.modul.ac.at/tourmis/
resource/ respectively. In Listing 2 and in the
Sesame repository, we refer to these namespaces as to
and tr respectively. Each measurement is assigned a
generated local name which contains its type, the TourMIS code for the destination, the year and month of
its measurement as well as the TourMIS code for the
respective market, if any, as exemplified in Listing 2.
We make use of slash URIs which have the expected
303 redirect behavior [9].

We have used the Pubby10 tool to add a Linked Data
interface of dereferenceble URIs on top of Sesames

10http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/pubby/


Listing 2: The RDF representation of the data from Listing 1.

< r d f : D e s c r i p t i o n r d f : a b o u t ="&t r ; aBednightsMeasurement_LJU_2005_3_ES ">

r d f : r e s o u r c e ="&t r ; m a r k e t F o r S p a i n " / >

< t o : i s A b o u t M a r k e t
< t o : m e a s u r e d F o r M o n t h >3< / t o : m e a s u r e d F o r M o n t h >
< t o : m e a s u r e d F o r Y e a r >2005< / t o : m e a s u r e d F o r Y e a r >
< t o : h a s V a l u e >837< / t o : h a s V a l u e >
< t o : i s A b o u t D e s t i n a t i o n r d f : r e s o u r c e ="&t r ; L j u b l j a n a " / >
< r d f : t y p e

r d f : r e s o u r c e ="&t o ; BednightsMeasurement " / >

< / r d f : D e s c r i p t i o n >

SPARQL endpoint. A good starting point for exploring
the dataset is http://tourmislod.modul.ac.
at/tourmis/ontology/Measurement. Since
this page corresponds to the core concept of our ontol-
ogy, it provides access to all schema elements as well
as to all measurement instances.

3.4. Creating Links to Other Datasets

To lift the triplified dataset to a 5-star linked data
level, we have established links between DBpedia resources and the corresponding destinations in TourMIS (154 European cities) as well as the 19 countries that constitute the key markets covered by the
system. Links for both cities and countries were identified by querying DBpedia for entities that (i) were
of type dbo:PopulatedPlace and (ii) had the
same English label as the label of the city/country
in TourMIS (for each code used, such as LJU or
ES, TourMIS provides a corresponding label). With
this query we successfully linked all countries to
the corresponding DBpedia entity, and all except 20
cities. The major reason for failing to find a link,
was, in most of the case, that a city was not of a
dbo:PopulatedPlace type. Given the small number of outliers, we manually added the correct links for
these cities. We established a schema level mapping by
specifying that the Country concept is the same as
http://dbpedia.org/ontology/Country.
We also extended the dataset with links to the GeoNames11 geographic dataset for the cities. Most of these
links were identified from DBpedia for those cities
whose DBpedia entry contained a GeoNames link.
For 22 cities that did not contain any GeoNames
links, we looked up the corresponding URIs manu-

ally. To sum up, external connectivity amounts to 328
owl:sameAs links to two external datasets: DBpedia
(174) and GeoNames (154).

4. Current Usage

The TourMISLOD dataset has been created in
March 201212 and has not been made publicly available due to the licensing issues described in Section 2.3. As a result, current usage is limited to efforts
internal to the MODUL University, where we explore
the potential of this dataset in supporting decision
making processes. Decision support is a task of major
interest to members of the TourMIS consortium as well
as to the typical users of the system. Indeed, TourMIS
caters for four main user groups: firstly, representatives
of national, provincial, regional and city tourism or-
ganizations, which are involved in long-term, strategic
planning of the tourism development of a region; sec-
ondly, tourism suppliers such as suppliers of accom-
modation, food, travel, culture, sport as well as travel
agencies and tour operators, which are mostly interested in domestic tourism demand; thirdly, educational
institutions active in tourism research and fourthly,
consultants and public authorities involved in regional
planning and decision making. Typical tourism decision making processes as well as the benefit of using
linked data to support them are detailed in [8].

We are currently extending the prototype system
built on TourMISLOD and described in [8] with functionalities that allow drill down analysis of the dataset,
a common feature of decision support systems [2].
Our initial prototype allowed a graphical comparison between TourMIS and World Bank arrivals data

11http://www.geonames.org/

12About two months before the time of writing.

M. Sabou et al. / TourMISLOD

for a given European country. The new application
also displays additional graphs showing the destinations from which data was collected for a given time-
point. This allows a comparison between the tourist
numbers visiting each destination in a country. The
prototype is available at http://tourmislod.
modul.ac.at.

5. Conclusions

A shortcoming of TourMISLOD is its currently restrictive license due to the heterogeneous origin of the
source data (see Section 2.3). While the TourMIS consortium decides on the appropriate license, requests
from interested developers will be treated on a case by
case basis, where providing part of the (or the entire)
dataset might be possible. Beyond our project, providing licensing agreements for datasets where the data
belongs to multiple stakeholders, is an interesting future research issue relevant for the entire field.

Another issue is that the current dataset creation process requires the linked data set to be regenerated in order to include updates. This solution does not suit the
dynamic nature of the TourMIS data as new updates
are only accessible as Linked Data when the data set
is regenerated. As a possible solution, we have investigated the use of existing database to RDF translators
such as D2R or other tools providing RDF/SPARQL
access to relational databases13: however, we did not
use them at this stage because the TourMIS database
itself was undergoing a re-design to ensure its scalabil-
ity. Adopting such an automated solution once TourMIS has been redesigned is future work.

Future work will focus, firstly, on exposing not just
raw data, but also data points derived by the model
base such as market-size, market-share or forecasted
values. Here careful considerations must be given to
correctly conveying the meaning of the statistical formula used to derive these data points, as described
in [11]. Secondly, we will also expose data about
tourism sights available in TourMIS. This will provide an additional dimension to the data, and will raise
more complex linking problems. It will also require an
extension of the current ontology to cover new types
of tourism concepts, potentially by reusing existing
tourism domain models (see Section 3.1).

13Such as those listed at http://d2rq.org/resources

In terms of applications, we will extend the current
tool in line with requirements from the TourMIS consortium and to include additional data sources, more
indicators and diverse visual metaphors (e.g., maps).

Acknowledgements

We thank Prof. Karl Wober for his support with Tour-
MIS. The work presented in this paper was developed
within DIVINE (www.weblyzard.com/divine),
a project funded by FIT-IT Semantic Systems of the
Austrian Research Promotion Agency and the Federal
Ministry for Transport, Innovation and Technology.
