Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

The New Manuscript Review System for the
Semantic Web Journal

Editorial

Pascal Hitzler, a Krzysztof Janowicz, b Kunal Sengupta a
a Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, USA
b University of California, Santa Barbara, USA

The Semantic Web journal relies on a non-standard
review process which in particular features open and
transparent reviews and encourages reviewers to disclose their identities [1,2]. While the continued success of the Semantic Web journal shows that this setup works in practice and is suitable for a high-quality
journal, the overhead caused by the non-standard process has been significant, in particular for the editors
and the editors-in-chief.

The main reason for this overhead was the unavailability of suitable manuscript review systems, as existing systems support only standard processes and
are merely customizable within rigid and conventional
bounds. For more than two years we thus had a rather
cumbersome setup using, on the one hand, a commercial journal review management system, and on the
other hand a public Website [2]. As a result, we had
to constantly copy information from the review management system to the Website, and in fact we have
done so manually. It was clear from the beginning that
this was not going to be a solution which is sustainable over the long run, and so it was necessary to set
up our own manuscript review system, tailored to the
specific needs of the journal. In particular, we needed
a tight integration of the review system with the journals website, so that it would no longer be necessary
to handle two independent systems.

The new review system went online in October
2012, and it has since served us very well. It is realized
in Drupal, the popular Web Content Management System which underlies the Semantic Web journal web-
site. Visitors of the website may in fact hardly notice a
difference. However, authors who want to submit papers do so directly via the journals website, rather than

/0-1900/$ c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

through a separate submission site. Likewise, reviewers and editors interact directly with the website.

While we are very pleased with the improvements
resulting from the custom system, we will continue to
develop it, and are happy about any feedback or comments we may receive. For 2013 we plan to embed Semantic Web technologies and thus support new types
of queries over the journals dataset.

In this issue of the journal, we present three papers.
The first two are very substantial surveys of current research topics, and they continue our series of highly
selective and well-received high-quality surveys published in the journal. The third article is a vision paper
which argues for a systematic investigation of order (in
the mathematical sense) for reasoning in the Big Data
age. While we usually do not publish vision papers, we
are happy to include this article of exceptional quality.
It was fully reviewed to the standards of the journal.

Acknowledgements Work on the new review system
was supported by the State of Ohio Research Incentive
grant Kno.e.CoM  Knowledge-enabled Content Management and by IOS Press. Kunal Sengupta acknowledges the hospitality of the University of California,
Santa Barbara, during a visit while working on the sys-
tem.
