Undefined 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Europeana Linked Open Data 
data.europeana.eu

Editor(s): Pascal Hitzler, Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA; Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California, Santa
Barbara, USA
Solicited review(s): Francois Scharffe, LIRMM, France; Dave Kolas, BBN Technologies, USA; Amit Joshi, Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State
University, Dayton, OH, USA

Antoine Isaac a, Bernhard Haslhofer b
a Europeana, The Hague, and Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
b Cornell Information Science, USA

Abstract.

Europeana is a single access point to millions of books, paintings, films, museum objects and archival records that have been
digitized throughout Europe. The data.europeana.eu Linked Open Data pilot dataset contains open metadata on approximately
2.4 million texts, images, videos and sounds gathered by Europeana. All metadata are released under Creative Commons CC0 and
therefore dedicated to the public domain. The metadata follow the Europeana Data Model and clients can access data either by
dereferencing URIs, downloading data dumps, or executing SPARQL queries against the dataset. They can also follow the links
to external linked data sources, such as the Swedish cultural heritage aggregator (SOCH), GeoNames, the GEMET thesaurus, or
DBPedia.

Keywords:, Europeana, Linked Data, Libraries, Cultural Heritage

1. Introduction

Europeana is a single access point to millions of
books, paintings, films, museum objects and archival
records that have been digitized throughout Europe,
gathered from hundreds of individual cultural insti-
tutions,1 with the help of dozens of data aggregators
and providers. The Europeana Linked Open Data pilot
dataset contains open metadata on approximately 2.4
million texts, images, videos and sounds. These collections encompass more than 200 cultural institutions
from 15 countries. They cover a great variety of heritage objects, such as a Slovenian version of O Sole

Mio from the National Library of Slovenia2 or memories on the herring business from the Tyne and Wear
Archives & Museums in Newcastle.3

Version 1.1 of the dataset, which is now available
at http://data.europeana.eu, has been released in February 2012. The data is represented in
the Europeana Data Model (EDM), as we explain in
more detail in Section 4. It is served according to the
Linked Data principles [3]: the described resources
are addressable and dereferenceable by their URIs;
especially, depending on its Accept parameter, an
HTTP GET request against a data.europeana.
eu URI leads either to an HTML page on the Europeana portal for the object it identifies or to raw,
machine-processable data on this object. See http:

1Around 1500 institutions have contributed to Europeana including renowned names such as the British Library in London, the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam and the Louvre in Paris but also many
smaller cultural heritage organizations and libraries across Europe.

2http://data.europeana.eu/item/92056/

BD9D5C6C6B02248F187238E9D7CC09EAF17BEA59
3http://data.europeana.eu/item/09405f/
533F9A826CB038D02C05A9814CF97E5D1B49BBEE

0000-0000/0-1900/$00.00 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

Isaac and Haslhofer / Europeana Linked Open Data

//pro.europeana.eu/tech-details for ex-
amples. The data is also available for bulk download
at http://data.europeana.eu/download/,
where the metadata are organized by dataset ver-
sion, data provider, and RDF serialization format
(RDF/XML, N-Triple). Clients can also execute structured queries against the publicly available SPARQL
endpoint: http://europeana-triplestore.
isti.cnr.it/sparql.

2. Opening Cultural Data

data.europeana.eu is one of the results of
more than one year of campaigning from Europeana
to convince its community of opening up their meta-
data.4 Currently it serves metadata coming from 8 data
aggregators who have reacted early and positively to
these efforts and agreed to publish their metadata under the Creative Commons CC0 Public Domain Ded-
ication,5 which means that [Anyone] can copy, mod-
ify, distribute and perform the [data], even for commercial purposes, all without asking permission.

Including only a subset of the total Europeana col-
lection, which encompasses more than 20M objects at
the time of writing, is deliberate. In fact the first version of our dataset contained metadata for approximately 3.5M objects but the licensing was not explicit.
With 2.4M objects in version 1.1 we clearly favored
openness of metadata over quantity.

At

the moment, data.europeana.eu serves
as a prototype for unlocking metadata and rights on
metadata, on a massive scale. In so-called hackathons
(Hack4Europe6) developers can learn about this prototype and other access mechanisms to cultural data:
Europeana also has an API and semantic mark-up on
pagescurrently using RDFa7. We hope they will be
used by third parties to develop innovative applications
and services. This would in turn help to convince our
partners to release more open data, next to other actions such as the release of an animation that bridges
Linked Data technology with Open data policies8.

4See Europeanas new Data Exchange Agreement and actions
in support for open data at http://pro.europeana.eu/
support-for-open-data

5http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/

zero/1.0/

6http://pro.europeana.eu/hackathons
7http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml-rdfa-primer/
8http://vimeo.com/36752317

Table 1

Open data contribution by country.
Number of objects
Country
1,468,460
Spain

Norway

Austria

Sweden

Belgium

Denmark

Germany
Slovenia

United Kingdom 39,243

Ireland
Luxembourg

Serbia

Czech Republic

Italy
Portugal

3. Data Anatomy

3.1. Coverage

As said, Europeana aggregates metadata about more
than 20M millions books, paintings, films, museum
objects, archival records and other types of cultural
objects. data.europeana.eu represents the public domain subset of the collections that can be accessed through Europeana. It currently holds metadata
about 2,381,745 digitized objects, which were aggregated from 8 aggregators representing 221 individual
institutions from 15 countries across Europe. Please
note that the following statistics apply to this open
subset of the total Europeana collection. We also excluded data about 4 objects, which were added to the
dataset for test purposes.

In Table 1, which shows the public domain metadata contribution by country, we can clearly see that
institutions from Spain, with 1.47M objects, are currently the major data contributors.

While the 10 largest data providers (see Table 2)
contribute 80% of all data (1,902,380 objects), the remaining 20% (479,365 objects) are contributed by the
211 smaller institutions or come from collections for
which we do not have explicit information on individual data providers, as is currently the case for the
majority of Swedish objects. Two data providers even
contribute only one single object to the current dataset.
These statistics show the importance of Europeana
and intermediate data aggregators that contribute to
it, such as Hispana or The European Film

Aggregator
Hispana
Norsk Kulturrad
The European Library
Hispana
Hispana
Hispana
The European Film Gateway
Hispana
The European Film Gateway
The European Library

Table 2

The 10 largest data providers and their aggregators.
Data Provider
Biblioteca Virtual de Prensa Historica
Fylkesarkivet i Sogn og Fjordane
Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek - Austrian National Library
Galiciana: Biblioteca Digital de Galicia
Repositorio Biblioteca virtual de Andalucia
Gredos (Universidad de Salamanca, Spain)
Det Danske Filminstitut
Biblioteca Digital de Madrid
Deutsches Filminstitut - DIF
National and University Library of Slovenia

Number of objects

Gateway. The distribution of data aggregation efforts allows unifying the access to objects from a huge
diversity of institutions, with limited effort. The resources it takes to consume data available at an aggregator is much lower than the effort of setting up a
solution at each data providers side.

3.2. Data gathering, linkage, and processing

The preparation of the data for data.europeana.
eu has been described in a separate technical paper [2]. The prototype is deployed directly on top of
metadata that has already been gathered by Europeana,
either via OAI-PMH servers or from batch files. These
metadata are formatted according to the Europeana
Semantic Elements (ESE) XML Schema,9 which is essentially a flat record structure that uses the Dublin
Core Element Set10 with some Europeana extensions.
For the Europeana Linked Open Data set we converted this ESE metadata into the new Europeana Data
Model (EDM),11 which has been developed with a
much stronger Linked Data focus. We thus defined a
mapping12 between ESE and EDM and implemented
it as an executable ESE-EDM transformation library,13
which can be applied on the legacy ESE data.

Parallel to this, we currently follow two strategies
for linking data.europeana.eu resources with
other Web resources: first, we fetch semantic enrichment data that is being created by Europeana, after

9http://pro.europeana.eu/technical-

requirements

10http://dublincore.org
11http://pro.europeana.eu/edm-documentation
12http://europeanalabs.eu/wiki/

EDMPrototypingTask15

13https://github.com/behas/ese2edm

it has ingested metadata from its data providers. This
data consists of links to four types of reference re-
sources:14 Geonames for places (1.7M links, enriching 58% of all objects), GEMET for general topics
(862K links, 27%), the Semium ontology for time
periods (1.9M links, 75%) and DBpedia for persons
(1304 links, 0.05%). Since the enrichments are links
they perfectly fit EDM and the Linked Data approach,
as seen in the following section. Second, as a simple adhoc linking strategy, we rely on existing resource identifiers that are part of the metadata and create links to other Linked Open Data services, which
hold information about objects that are also served by
data.europeana.eu: presently this only concerns
the Swedish cultural heritage aggregator (SOCH).

At the moment we manually execute the ESE-EDM
transformation and fetch the enrichment data whenever we release a new dataset version and ingest the
resulting RDF data into a separate triple store. This
is clearly a temporary solution, only suitable for a pi-
lot. In the long term, all human- and machine-readable
Europeana interfaces, including the Linked Data one,
should be directly fed from one single data repository.

4. EDM data modeling patterns

For publishing metadata at data.europeana.
eu, we upgrade ESE data to the Europeana Data
Model (EDM), which has been developed by the Europeana community and is a more flexible and precise
model. It offers the opportunity to attach every statement to the specific resource it applies to and also re-

14Accessible respectively at http://www.geonames.org,
http:

http://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet/,
//semium.org and http://dbpedia.org

Isaac and Haslhofer / Europeana Linked Open Data

flects some basic form of data provenance. The main
EDM requirements include:

 distinguish between a provided object (paint-

ing, book, etc.) and digital representations

 distinguish between an item and the metadata

record describing it

 allow ingesting multiple records for a same item,
containing potentially contradictory statements
about it

EDM allows one to represent different perspectives
on a given cultural object. It also enables to represent
complex, especially hierarchically structured objects
as in the archive or library domains. Finally, it allows
us to represent contextual information, in the form of
entities (places, agents, time periods) explicitly represented in the data and connected to a cultural object.

In the following we explain in more detail the basic structure of EDM networked resources, which is
shown in Figure 1, together with the properties we expect to be applied to their instances. Further informa-
tion, including dereferenceable example resources are
available at http://pro.europeana.eu/web/
guest/tech-details. An example ESE record
and its EDM conversion are provided in [2].

4.1. Item (Provided Cultural Heritage Object)

Item resources (typed as Provided Cultural Heritage
Object (CHO)) represent items for which institutions
provide representations to be accessed through Euro-
peana. Provided CHO URIs are the main entry points
in data.europeana.eu. A Provided CHO is the
hub of the network of relevant resources. When applicable (see Section 3.2), the URIs for these objects link,
via owl:sameAs statements, to other linked data resources about the same object. In our pilot, no descriptive metadata (creator, subject, etc.) is directly attached
to object URIs. It is instead attached to the proxies that
represent a view of the object, from a specific institutions perspective (either a Europeana provider or Europeana itself, see below). Depending on the feedback
received during this pilot, we may change this and duplicate all the descriptive metadata at the level of the
item URI. Such an option is costly in terms of data ver-
bosity, but it would enable easier access to metadata,
for data consumers less concerned about provenance.

4.2. Providers proxy

Proxies originate from the OAI-ORE model [4] and
are used as subjects of descriptive statements (cre-

ator, subject, date of creation, etc.) for the item, which
are contributed by a Europeana provider. They enable the separation of different views for a same re-
source, in the context of different aggregations. This
allows us to distinguish the original metadata for the
object from the metadata that is created by Europeana.
Descriptive properties that apply to these proxies, as
we can generate them from ESE metadata (see Section 3.2) mostly come from Dublin Core. Proxies are
connected to the item they represent a facet of, using the ore:proxyFor property. They are attached
to the aggregation that contextualizes them, using the
ore:proxyIn property. This design was chosen because of the lack of support for named graphs (aka
quadruples) in the RDF standard. OAI-ORE introduced proxies in order to support referencing resources
in the context of a specific graph. Eventually, named
graphs may be natively supported by RDF, which
could supersede the Proxy construct.

4.3. Providers aggregation

These resources provide data related to a Europeana providers gathering of digitized representations and descriptive metadata for an item. They
are related to digital resources about the item, be
they files directly representing it (edm:object and
edm:isShownBy) or web pages showing the object
in context (edm:isShownAt). They may also provide controlled rights information applying to these resources (edm:rights). Finally, provenance data is
given in statements using edm:provider (the direct
provider to Europeana in the data aggregation chain)
or edm:dataProvider (the cultural institution that
curates the object). The aggregation is connected to the
item using the edm:aggregatedCHO property.

4.4. Europeanas proxy

Europeana proxies are the second type of proxies served at data.europeana.eu. They provide access to the metadata created by Europeana
for a given item, distinct from the original metadata
from the provider. Here one can find edm:year
statements, indicating a normalized date associated
with the object. A Europeana proxy also has statements that link it to places, concepts, persons and
periods from external datasets, as mentioned in section 3.2. Finally, it is connected to the item it is a view
of, using the ore:proxyFor property, as well as
to its corresponding (Europeana) aggregation, using
ore:proxyIn.

Fig. 1. Basic structure of EDM networked resources.

4.5. Europeanas aggregation

to the providers proxy. Next

A Europeana aggregation bundles together the result of all data creation and aggregation efforts for
a given item. It aggregates the providers aggregation (using ore:aggregates), which in turn
will connect
to the
provider aggregation, one can find the digitized resources europeana.eu serves for the item, i.e.,
an object page (edm:landingPage) and a thumbnail (using a combination of edm:hasView and
foaf:thumbnail). The Europeana proxy is also
connected to this aggregation, as mentioned above.

4.6. Resource map

OAI-ORE Resource maps are constructs for indicating meta-level statements about the creation and
publication of ORE data (ORE aggregations and
their aggregated resources). We are exploring their
use as a contextualization mechanism for the Europeana aggregation. Maps are connected to an item
they are about using foaf:primaryTopic, and
to its corresponding Europeana aggregation using
ore:describes. They sum up the provenance of
metadata using dc:creator and dc:contributor
statements. Crucially, they also indicate, in a machinereadable way, that the data.europeana.eu RDF
dataset is provided under the CC0 open license.

4.7. Vocabulary usage and interoperability

EDM is well connected to other established ontolo-
gies, most notably the Dublin Core metadata elements,
SKOS and OAI-ORE. We have tried to directly re-use
elements from these vocabularies whenever this was
possible. When not, the newly introduced elements
are semantically aligned to these ontologies, either us-

ing simple RDFS class and property specialization or
OWL axioms. Such alignments allow for example to
connect EDM to CIDOC-CRM, an important vocabulary for the museum domain.15

5. Known Shortcomings and discussion

Europeana is often confronted with the critique that
its data quality could be enhanced. Especially, the
internal connectivity of the dataset is currently very
low. We have Provided CHO - aggregation - proxy relationships that come with the EDM model, but no semantic links between the items, or the proxies that
represent them.

This is partly because the ESE metadata format,
which is based on simple text fields, conceals the richness of the original metadata: many providers use contextual resources, which could be fed into Europeana
and provide internal links. This includes, amongst oth-
ers, concepts from shared domain thesauri, or place
resources, which are already used in the description
for different objects in a collection or even across col-
lections. This contextual information is lost when the
metadata is transferred to Europeana in ESE. We hope
to obtain such valuable information from providers,
when they can submit metadata in EDM. Europeana
is currently working on it and case studies16 demonstrate how this can be done and what are the benefits.
In the Amsterdam Museum prototype [1], for instance,
richer original metadata has been converted to EDM
and published as Linked Open Data, together with its
companion thesaurus and authority file.

For achieving external connectivity, we currently
rely on Europeanas enrichment process (see Sec-

15http://www.cidoc-crm.org
16http://pro.europeana.eu/edm-case-studies

Europeana MetadataData Provider Metadataens:aggregatedCHOore:proxyInore:proxyForens:aggregatedCHOore:aggregatesore:proxyForore:proxyInore:Aggregationeulod:aggregation/provider/00000/2AAA3C6DF09F9FAA6F951FC4C4A9CC80B5D4154eulod:item/00000/2AAA3C6DF09F9FAA6F951FC4C4A9CC80B5D4154ore:Proxyeulod:proxy/provider/00000/2AAA3C6DF09F9FAA6F951FC4C4A9CC80B5D4154edm:EuropeanaAggregationeulod:aggregation/europeana/00000/2AAA3C6DF09F9FAA6F951FC4C4A9CC80B5D4154ore:Proxyeulod:proxy/europeana/00000/2AAA3C6DF09F9FAA6F951FC4C4A9CC80B5D41546

Isaac and Haslhofer / Europeana Linked Open Data

tion 3.2), which generates semantic links from specific fields in the ESE data (e.g., Dublin Cores
dc:subject). But provenance information is not yet
recorded and we do not know whether, say, a given city
is the subject of an item or its place of production. We
had to use an EDM property that merely expresses that
the item is generally linked to that place. Because it
has to deal with very heterogeneous collections, Europeana is bound, for the moment, to using simple enrichment techniques, which we know will bring errors.
Still, we can do better at handling the provenance of
enrichments to obtain a better data grain.

Another issue is the transition to the network model
of EDM, which lead to quite verbose data. Especially,
the proxy mechanism is quite cumbersome [2]. We
may want to hide this complexity when it is not
needed or reveal the full complexity and power of
EDM in successive steps, which should make the full
picture easier to understand for data providers and
consumers alike. This important lesson learnt has directly influenced how EDM should be used for data ingestion into Europeana, i.e., with only a limited part
of the pattern presently used for our pilot. But it is
still open, whether and how data.europeana.eu
should handle the complexity differently, as a data
publication service. We could for example make consumption of proxy data optional by duplicating and
merging these data onto the main item resources.

Finally, we needed to start addressing design issues
that the existing EDM specification had not touched at
all. The first one is the minting of HTTP Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) for all EDM resources in a
Linked Data environment. We realized that many patterns were possible, each corresponding to slightly different priorities in terms of representing the underlying
model or enabling certain HTTP-based services. The
second issue is the representation of provenance for the
metadata served on data.europeana.eu, including such things as attribution or licenses. All the provenance information available at Europeana could be
represented. The way it has been represented, though,
may be revisited in the light of ongoing discussions in
the community.

6. Summary and Future Work

With data.europeana.eu we created a Linked
Open Data prototype for Europeana, which is a single access point to millions of cultural digital objects
that have been digitized throughout Europe. At the mo-

ment, it serves metadata of 2.4M objects under the
Creative Commons CCO public domain dedication.
The data originate from aggregators and providers who
have reacted early and positively to Europeanas new
Data Exchange Agreements. One future work goal is
to convince more data providers to accept these agreements and to increase the number of objects included
in Europeanas Linked Open Data service.

The exposed metadata are represented in the Europeana Data Model (EDM), which has been developed by the Europeana community and allows to represent different perspectives and basic provenance information on a given cultural object. We expect that future data.europeana.eu dataset releases reflect
the lessons we have learned with respect to the models
complexity and identification of digital objects. We
will also investigate how to align the EDM with other
efforts dealing with provenance on the Web, such as
the provenance model developed by W3C17.

Increasing Europeanas internal and external connectivity by means of links between Web resources is
another major goal. This can be achieved by convincing data providers to deliver their original rich metadata instead of flat ESE records and by applying better
entity linkage techniques in the data ingestion phase.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Cesare Concordia (ISTI-CNR) for his support. The work has partly
been supported by a EU Marie Curie International Outgoing Fellowship (no. 252206) and the eContentplus
program (EuropeanaConnect). Earlier stages of this
work [2] notably benefitted from input by Stefan Grad-
mann, Victor de Boer and Carlo Meghini.
