The AGROVOC Linked Dataset 

Editors: Pascal Hitzler, Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio, USA; Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California, Santa 
Barbara, California, USA 
Solicited reviews: Marta Sabou, MODUL University Vienna, Austria; Willem Robert van Hage, VU Amsterdam, The Netherlands; one anonymous reviewer  

Caterina Caraccioloa, Armando Stellatob, Ahsan Morsheda, Gudrun Johannsena, Sachit Rajbhandaria, 
Yves Jaquesa and Johannes Keizera * 
a Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO of the UN) v.le Terme di Caracalla 1, 00154 
Roma, Italy 

 University of Rome, Tor Vergata, Via del Politecnico 1, 00133 Rome, Italy 

Abstract. Born in the early 1980s as a multilingual agricultural thesaurus, AGROVOC has steadily evolved over the last fifteen years, moving to an electronic version around the year 2000, and embracing the Semantic Web shortly thereafter. Today 
AGROVOC is a SKOS-XL concept scheme published as Linked Open Data, containing links (as well as backlinks) and references to many other Linked Datasets in the LOD cloud. In this paper we provide a brief historical summary of AGROVOC and 
detail its specification as a Linked Dataset. 

Keywords: Linked Datasets, Agriculture, Data Management 

*Corresponding author.  

The  AGROVOC  thesaurus  --  its  name  is  a  portmanteau word of Agriculture with Vocabulary -- was 
first  published  at  the  beginning  of  the  1980s  by  the 
Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United 
Nations  (FAO).  At  its  birth  AGROVOC  was  available in three languages (English, Spanish and French), 
its purpose to serve as a controlled vocabulary for the 
indexing  of  publications  in  agricultural  science  and 
technology,  including  forestry,  animal  husbandry, 
aquatic  sciences,  fisheries,  aquaculture  and  human 
nutrition. Primary users were the FAO library and the 
International  System  for  Agricultural  Science  and 
Technology  (AGRIS)  (http://agris.fao.org),  a  global 
public  domain  database  coordinated  by  FAO  and 
containing  approximately  3.5  million  bibliographic 
records. 

In  the  year  2000,  AGROVOC  abandoned  paper 
printing  and  went  digital,  with  data  storage  handled 
by  a  relational  database.  This  greatly  eased  mainte-
nance.  However,  limitations  were  also  experienced, 
especially  owing  to  the  distributed  community  of 
editors which had enlarged over the years. Also, data 
were available to third parties only by means of database  dumps,  or  through  web  services.  The  models 
and technologies developed within the Semantic Web, 
and the publication methodologies and best practices 
promoted by Linked Open Data [1] offered the possibility to overcome these limitations. AGROVOC was 
remodelled  using OWL  [2]  and  then SKOS  (see  [3] 
for  a  detailed  description  of  the  evolution  of  the 
model). With the adoption of SKOS-XL, AGROVOC 

Today, the AGROVOC SKOS-XL concept scheme 
is  a  LOD  (Linked  Open  Data)  Dataset  composed  of 
more  than  32000  concepts  available  in  over  20  languages (five additional languages are under develop-
ment),  containing    up  to  40,000  terms  in  each  lan-
guage.  

AGROVOC is still managed by FAO, and owned 
and  maintained  by  an  international  community  of 
experts and institutions active in the area of agricul-
ture. AGROVOC is widely used in specialized libraries as  well as digital libraries and repositories to index  content.  It  is  also  used  as  a  specialized  tagging 
resource  for  knowledge  and  content  organization  by 
FAO and other third-party stakeholders.  

finally met the modelling requirements of a multilingual and linguistically detailed thesaurus. 

This  paper  provides  an  overall  description  of  the 
AGROVOC  Linked  Dataset  and  details  its  maintenance  and  publication  process.  As  many  thesaurus 
managers are embracing Semantic Web technologies,  
we  believe  our  work  is  of  general  interest  and  may 
serve as a use case to the community. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: section  two  provides  more  details  about  publication  of 
the linked dataset; section three presents the process 
followed for the generation of links between AGROVOC  and  relevant  resources  such  as  vocabularies, 
glossaries and thesauri; section four summarizes and 
discusses  the  entire  data  flow  of  AGROVOC,  from 
maintenance  to  LOD  publication;  section  five  provides  additional  information  on  reported  use  of  the 
AGROVOC linked Dataset and section six concludes. 

2. The Dataset  

Information  about  AGROVOC  thesaurus  is  availthe  address: 

the  FAO  website,  at 

able  from 
http://www.fao.org/agrovoc. 

The  RDF  version  of  AGROVOC  has  been  made 

available as a Linked Open Dataset at the address: 
http://aims.fao.org/aos/agrovoc/ 
and  it  is  also  available  through  a  data  dump  on  the 
project site1 of its  main editing platform, VocBench 
(see [4] for a detailed description of this collaborative 
editing  tool  developed  by  FAO  and  other  partners). 
AGROVOC data is freely usable under the terms of 
the Creative Commons 3.0 license2

1 http://code.google.com/p/agrovoc-cs-workbench/downloads/list 

2 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/ 

). 

Content  negotiation  for the  LOD Dataset is properly  managed  by  the  server,  and  clients  requesting 
HTML  content  (e.g.  ordinary  web  browsers)  are  returned  with  an  HTML  representation  of  RDF  data 
describing  the  requested  concept,  provided  by  the 
Pubby3

 application (see 

Figure 1

A description file following the VoID (Vocabulary 
of Interlinked Datasets) specifications [5] is available 
alongside  the  AGROVOC  Linked  Open  Dataset:  
http://aims.fao.org/aos/agrovoc/void.ttl. Such a VoID 
file  contains  statistical  information  about  the  linked 
dataset,  as well as coordinates for automatically accessing and properly querying it. 

After  the  evolutions  which  its  modelling  exigencies dictated along the past years, AGROVOC finally 
found  in  the  SKOS-XL  model  its  perfectly-fitting 
dress. The SKOS-XL model, features reified labels 
which  can  thus  be  enriched  with  properties  of  their 

3 http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/pubby/ 

substances 
entities 
phenomena 
activities 
products 
methods 
properties 
features 
objects 
resources 
subjects 
systems 
locations 
groups 
measures 
state 
stages 
technology 
processes 
factors 
time 
events 
site 
strategies 

Figure 2. Distribution of the 32000+ AGROVOC concepts under the 25 top concepts of its main scheme 

own. As an example, consider the concept shown in 
Figure  1,  maize  in  English.  Its  Chinese  preferred 
label4,  ,  is  expressed  in  skos-xl  by  means  of 
two triples5
agv:c_12332 skos-xl:prefLabel agv:xl_zh_1299486844646 
and 
agv:xl_zh_1299486844646 skos-xl:literalForm \u7389\u7C73 
However, note that when providing a human readable  representation  of  the  data  (Figure  1),  we  preferred  to  present  our  visitor  the  actual  label,  instead 
of the reified version of it. This is why the classical 
skos representation of terms is also available: 
agv:c_12332 skos:prefLabel \u7389\u7C73@zh 

Beyond enabling a finer linguistic modelling of the 
resource  (by  allowing,  for  instance,  lexical  relationships  across  labels  without  involvement  of  the  attached concepts), SKOS-XL also makes it possible to 
refine the grain of editorial notes at language level by 
adding  separate  information  on  the  revision  of  concepts as well as of each label in each language. Thus 
we are able to state that  has a code, originating 

4 In the classical thesaurus terminology, a preferred label corre-

sponds to a descriptor. 

5 asgv  is  used  here  as  a  prefix  for  the  agrovoc  namespace:  

        http://aims.fao.org/aos/agrovoc/ 

from the past pre-RDF versions of AGROVOC, equal 
to 12332. This is expressed by the triple6

agv:xl_zh_1299486844646

 agront:hasCodeAgrovoc 12332 
As a further example, we are also able to state that 

that term was created on December 12, 2002: 
agv:xl_zh_1299486844646 
12T00:00:00Z  

dct:created 

2002-12-

The Agrontology7 seen in the above example is a 
compendium 
to  AGROVOC,  providing  domainspecific  properties  for  enriching  the  description  of 
concepts. Agrontology is enriched with VOAF8 (Vo-
cabulary of a Friend) descriptors, mostly for linking it 
to  AGROVOC  (and  to  other  Datasets  adopting  it, 
such  as  the  FAO  Biotech  Glossary9
),  and  to  have  it 
mentioned  in  the  LOV  Dataset.  Currently,  AGROVOC is undergoing a deep analysis in order to make 
very explicit the modelling style adopted in its various topic areas (see 
). A parallel analysis of 
the  agrontology  is  ongoing,  with  the  purpose  of 

Figure 2

6 Agront  is  the  prefix  for  the  Agrontologys  namespace,  described in the next paragraph. However this predicate will be soon 
deprecated  and  replaced  by  the  standard  skos:notation  one,  followed by the definition of a dedicated datatype for Agrovoc codes. 

7 aims.fao.org/aos/agrontology 
8 http://purl.org/vocommons/voaf 
9 http://www.fao.org/biotech 

and the vocabulary currently used for it.  

All 32,000+ concepts of the AGROVOC thesaurus 
are hierarchically organized under its 25 top concepts. 
AGROVOC  top  concepts  are  very  general  and  high 
level  concepts,  including  concepts  such  as  activi-
ties,  organisms,  locations,  products,  organ-
ism,  etc.  The  fact  that  20,000+  concepts fall  under 
the  top  concept  organism,  confirms  how  AGROVOC is largely oriented towards the agriculture sector (see Figure 2 for a complete statistic distribution 
of  the  dataset  concepts  under  its  25  top  concepts). 
Other  important  areas  of  AGROVOC  include  sub-
stances,  entities,  products  and  locations.  Beyond being listed in the AGROVOC website, the list 
of  top  concepts  can  be  found  in  the  VoID  file  for 
AGROVOC Linked Open Dataset. Moreover, a deep 
study on the current coverage of AGROVOC is under 
study,  with  the  purpose  of  supporting  human  and 
machine  users  alike  in  their  quest  for  information 
within the thesaurus and its links.   

3. Linking AGROVOC to other resources 

AGROVOC is today published as an Open Linked 
Dataset  with  links  to  thirteen  vocabularies,  thesauri 
and ontologies. Five of the linked resources are general in scope: the Library of Congress Subject Headings  (LCSH) 10 ,  ,  RAMEAU  Repertoire  d'autorite-
matiere encyclopedique et alphabetique unifie, Euro-
voc11,  DBpedia12,  and  an  experimental  Linked  Data 
version  of  the  Dewey  Decimal  Classification13.  The 
remaining eight resources are specific to various do-
mains:  NAL  Thesaurus 14for  agriculture,  GEMET 15 
for environment, STW for Economics, TheSoz16 for 
social  science  and  both  GeoNames  and  the  FAO 
Geopolitical  Ontology  cover  countries  and  political 
regions. ASFA17
 covers aquatic science and the aptly 
named Biotechnology glossary covers biotechnology. 
These  linked  resources  are  mostly  available  as 
RDF/SKOS resources. 

Table 1. Resources linked to AGROVOC. 

10 http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects.html 
11 http://eurovoc.europa.eu/ 
12 http://dbpedia.org/ 
13 http://dewey.info/ 
14 http://agclass.nal.usda.gov/ 
15 http://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet 
16 http://www.gesis.org/en/services/tools-standards/social-science- 

         thesaurus/ 

17 http://www4.fao.org/asfa 

Vocabulary 

Coverage 

General  
General  
General  (cut on Agri.) 
Agriculture  
General (cut on Agri.)  
General  
Social science  
Economy  

EUROVOC  

RAMEAU  
DBpedia  
TheSoz  

FAO Geopol. Ontology  Geopolitical  
Environment  

Aquatic sciences  
Biotechnology 
Biotech 
GeoNames 
Gazeteer 

#matches 

Lang used 
for link 
discovery 

the 

The linked resources  were considered in their entirety  barring  RAMEAU,  for  which  only  agriculture 
related concepts were considered (amounting to some 
10%  of  its  150  000  concepts).  Candidate  mappings 
were  found  by  applying  string  similarity  matching 
algorithms to pairs of preferred labels [6] and by using  the  Ontology  Alignment  API  [7]  for  managing 
the  produced  matches.  The  common  analysis  language  used  was  English  in  all  cases  except  the 
AGROVOC - RAMEAU alignment for which French 
was used. Table 1 shows, for each resource linked to 
AGROVOC (column 1), its area of coverage (column 
2), 
language  considered  for  mapping  with 
AGROVOC (column 3), and the number of matches 
resulting from the evaluation (column 4, see below).  
Candidate links were presented to a domain expert 
for  evaluation  in  the  form  of  a  spreadsheet.  Once 
validated, the mappings were loaded in the same triple  store  where  the  linked  data  version  of  AGROVOC  is  stored.  All  resulting  validated  candidate 
matches  were  considered  to  be  skos:exactMatch,  as 
in 
agv:c_12332 
http://eurovoc.europa.eu/1744 
skos:exactMatch 
("maize" in English). Exact match has the advantage 
of a looser notion of equivalence than the more formal  equivalence  found  in  owl  equivalence/identity 
properties such as owl:sameAs. 

The  objective  when  linking  AGROVOC  to  other 
resources was to provide only main anchors, privileging  accuracy  over  recall.  This  is  why  we  (mostly) 
rejected  skos:closeMatch  and  relied  exclusively  on 
skos:exactMatch, found by means of string-similarity 
techniques as opposed to more sophisticated contextbased  approaches.  Also,  the  One  Sense  per  Domain 
assumption  which,  in  analogy  to  the  one  sense  per 

Figure 3. Overview of the process for publishing AGROVOC as linked data 

discourse  [8]  assumption,  specifies  that  the  more 
specialized  a  domain  is,  the  less  is  the  influence  of 
word  sense  ambiguity,  supports  our  claim  that  (in 
our  case)  similar  strings  correspond  to  equivalent 
meanings. The use of more sophisticated approaches 
might  have  contributed  to  filtering  out  potential  results  more  than  widening  their  number  (thus  incrementing precision over recall), however this potential 
loss of precision was well compensated by the manual validation of candidate links by a domain expert. 

4. AGROVOC LOD data flow 

Figure 3 (next page) provides a high-level view of 
the entire AGROVOCs maintenance process and its 
publication as linked data. The figure emphasises the 
three levels of data maintenance (bottom layer), data 
storage  (middle  layer),  and  data  publication  (top 
layer).  

The  relational  database  is  still  necessary  as  many 
existing applications interface with this legacy model 
via  SQL.  Such  conversions  are  thus  needed  to  synchronize  the  data  accessed  by  editors  using  legacy 
tools.  This  duplication  of  data  repositories  and  the 
consequent  data  conversions  is  obviously  not  ideal 
and in principle should be limited. On the other hand, 
AGROVOC  has  supported  a  worldwide  community 
of  users  (people  and  institutions)  for  decades  who 
have developed a number of  applications relying on 
the  legacy  relational  model:  these  conversion  steps 
are thus currently unavoidable and give an idea of the 
complexity inherent to historic, distributed collaboration  scenarios.  Elaborate  procedures  are  rendered 
necessary, and the conversion effort, modelling issues 
and information needs are just the tip of the iceberg 
compared to the real effort spent in content and services maintenance. 

Several  conversion  steps  are  then  present  in  the 
AGROVOC lifecycle. Note that this data flow is not 
always monotonic. Although the main authoring tool 

occasionally  come  from  legacy  formats  such  as 
spreadsheets  and  SQL  files.  This  updated  content  is 
thus contributed separately (through different modali-
ties) and then merged to produce a new copy.  

When a VocBench version is finalized with contributions coming from different sources and formats, it 
is then converted back to the relational DB for legacy 
applications.  At the  same time, a SKOS-XL  version 
is  produced  and  enriched  with  information,  such  as 
metadata  descriptors  from  the  VoID  vocabulary  to 
feed the LOD endpoint with updated data. Currently, 
no  versioning  info  for  the  dataset  as  a  whole  (i.e. 
which  AGROVOC  release  a  client  is  accessing),  is 
explicitly  reported  inside  its  triples,  while  editorial 
notes  provide  fine-grained  details  about  its  content, 
with creation and modification dates for all concepts 
and labels present in the dataset. 

The  linked  data  version  of  AGROVOC  is  now 
available  online  thanks  to  a  collaboration  between 
FAO and MIMOS Berhad. Data is stored in an RDF 
triple  store  (Allegrograph 18
)  hosted  on  a  server  in 
Kuala  Lumpur,  Malaysia.  A  SPARQL  endpoint, 
combined with http resolution of AGROVOC entities, 
allows for publication as linked data. The Pubby service mentioned in section 
 is also hosted by MIMOS. 
Both  RDF  and  HTML  access  are  resolved  through 
content negotiation on FAO servers and redirected to 
the proper MIMOS service.  

5. Usage 

During  the  more  than  30  years  of  its  existence, 
AGROVOC has seen a growing community of users 
exploiting its content for a progressively wider set of 
uses.  In  this  section  we  report  the  more  important 
uses of which we are aware. In some cases they exploit AGROVOC to give further explicit contribution 
to the LOD cloud itself, while in others, the availability of AGROVOC data as LOD will foster wider access possibilities and probably see an increase in use 
as the number of potential users augment due to their 
interaction with the entirety of the LOD cloud and to 
AGROVOCs position within it. 

5.1. Data.fao.org 

In  2011,  following  a  wave  of  enthusiasm  caused 
by Linked Open Data initiatives and benefiting from 

the successful experiences of the AIMS group working  on  AGROVOC  and  other  concept  schemes  and 
vocabularies  ported  to  the  Semantic  Web,  FAOs 
Information Technology Division (CIO) chose to add 
a taste of Semantic Web to their ambitious data integration  project  data.fao.org.  The  project  which 
launches publicly in December 2012, brings much of 
FAOs statistical, textual and geographical data under 
one  roof,  fostering  data  integration  and  harmonization  first  within  FAO  itself,  and  later  publicly  via 
LOD.  The  models  which  are  being  exploited  are 
many, mainly covering domain representation (OWL 
and  SKOS  as  core  modelling  vocabularies),  flanked 
by  standard  vocabularies  such  as  FOAF  [9])  and 
statistical data reporting (Data Cube Vocabulary [10]). 
AGROVOC, the first FAO resource to embrace the 
Semantic Web and to be published on the LOD cloud, 
was chosen as a common, controlled vocabulary  for 
tagging the information resources (documents, media 
etc..) in data.fao.org. AGROVOC will also act as an 
interlingua to easily  match RDF resources from different  datasets,  which  still  maintain  a  certain  independence  and  which  thus  expose  potential  overlaps 
with other datasets.  A  new, potentially  wider, set of 
linksets  on  a  star  configuration  with  AGROVOC  in 
the centre will be elaborated for establishing a global 
interconnected network of resources within FAO. 

5.2. Agrovoc Web Services 

AGROVOC  and  other  vocabularies  hosted  on 
VocBench (e.g. Journal Authority Descriptions) have 
for some years been supported by an extensive set of 
SOAP web services19
 that allow others to seamlessly 
integrate  vocabularies  into  their  applications.  The 
services  support  a  variety  of  keyword  searches  and 
most methods return either SKOS or TXT. 

The web services are in use by FAOs library, ter-
minology,  translation,  knowledge  management  and 
capacity development groups for indexing and to aid 
in  the  translation  of  FAO  documents.  A  number  of 
CMSs  as  well  as  several  FAO-supported  digital  repository solutions also access these services, such as 
AgriDrupal  and  AgriOcean  Dspace.  The  publication 
of AGROVOC as a LOD dataset will probably make 
many web services users move to standard SPARQL 
queries, up to a point in which many of these services 
will be abandoned. Other services instead, due to the 
complex  nature  of  the  results  they  offer,  or  of  the 
queries they implement (and to the local optimization 

18 http://www.franz.com/agraph/allegrograph 

19 http://aims.fao.org/tools/vocbench-2/web-services 

to flank the standard SPARQL offer. 

5.3. Other users/stakeholders  

Research  and  academia  also  commonly  make  use 
of AGROVOC in their work. AGROVOC is used for 
indexing  the  library  collections  of  most  CGIAR 20 
centres  and  numerous  agricultural  research  institutions worldwide. Of recent note are the AGROVOC 
Topic Map developed in Kyoto21, and the integration 
of AGROVOC into two recent indexers, HIVE22
 and 
MAUI. Having AGROVOC on the LOD means having  a  ubiquitous  centralized  index  that  is  easily 
browsable  to  support  the  meaning  of  adopted  index 
tags  and  to  add  coherence  to  their  adoption  across 
different  uses  within  the  same  and  possibly  across 
different resources, as in the above cited examples. 

6. Conclusions 

The  lifecycle  of  AGROVOC,  from  evolution  and 
maintenance,  to  alignment  with  other  thesauri  and 
finally  to  publication  as  linked  data  is  supported  by 
an entire development chain, consisting of  users engaged in a  workflow supported by specialized tools. 
In  particular,  the  re-modelling  of  AGROVOC  using 
OWL  and  SKOS  and  its  publication  as  linked  data 
imply a series of discrete steps requiring a mixture of 
domain experts, terminologists, ontologists and software developers. These roles must in turn be supported by a series of tools: editors and workflow managers  such  as  VocBench,  triple  stores  and  SPARQL 
endpoints  such  as  Allegrograph,  RDF  visualizers 
such as Pubby, and RDF APIs such as the Ontology 
Alignment API. In addition, careful attention must be 
paid to managing the support and migration of legacy 
applications tied to non-RDF models. 

In the current process, both historical information 
systems and new  semantically-aware systems play a 
role:  a  streamlined  sequence  of  conversion  steps  is 
thus impossible to realize. Support for previous versions and their user base is in fact a business process 
requirement that cannot be ignored. Work is ongoing 
to provide training to AGROVOC editors, organizing 
workshops  for  data  managers,  and  in  improving  the 
functionalities of the VocBench environment so that 
it  can  be  used  by  all.  Also,  the  quality  control  of 

20 Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
21 http://infos.net.cias.kyoto-u.ac.jp:8083/agrovoc/index.jsp 
22 http://hive.nescent.org 

AGROVOC content (for both its terminological and 
structural aspects) is continuous.  

In  this  light,  the  immediate  issues  to  address  include the improvement of off-line VocBench editing 
(to  address  the  needs  of  low-bandwidth  users),  continual  VocBench  usability  improvements  (which  includes adapting its user interface to various language 
communities), and the completion of the revision and 
standardization of the AGROVOC model. This final 
point  is  expected  to  improve  the  efficiency  of 
VocBench, and to streamline editors work. 

In consideration of the rising importance of linked 
data, development continues on VocBench so that it 
may  natively  support  RDF/SKOS.  This  will  have 
several  beneficial  effects:  a  single  triple  store  can 
then be used to both edit and disseminate linked data, 
removing the need for tedious conversions. Secondly, 
the tool will be of use to any community organizing 
their data in SKOS. Another planned development is 
the 
the  crossvocabulary alignment functionalities that are currently hosted in Eclipse. This will integrate the alignment 
workflow with the overall AGROVOC editing work-
flow. 

integration  within  VocBench  of 

The  process  followed  to  maintain,  align  and  publish  AGROVOC  as  linked  data  is  repeatable.  It  is 
hoped that this overview can be useful to others with 
similar goals or problems. 

Acknowledgments 

The  work  described  in  this  paper  could  have  not 
been possible  without the collaboration of a number 
of people. We wish to thank our colleagues Lim Ying 
Sean,  Prashanta  Shrestha,  Lavanya  Neelam,  Jerome 
Euzenat,  Stefan  Jensen,  Antoine  Isaac,  Sren  Roug 
and Thomas Baker. 
