Undefined X (2012) 1X
IOS Press

A Curated and Evolving Linguistic Linked
Dataset

Editor(s): Pascal Hitzler, Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, U.S.A.; Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California, Santa
Barbara, U.S.A.
Solicited review(s): Ivan Herman, W3C; Marta Sabou, MODUL University Vienna, Austria; Jesse Weaver, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
U.S.A.

Emanuele Di Buccio, Giorgio Maria Di Nunzio and Gianmaria Silvello
University of Padua, Department of Information Engineering, Italy
E-mail: {dibuccio, dinunzio, silvello}@dei.unipd.it

Abstract. This paper describes the Atlante Sintattico dItalia, Syntactic Atlas of Italy (ASIt) linguistic linked dataset. ASIt is
a scientific project aiming to account for minimally different variants within a sample of closely related languages; it is part of
the Edisyn network, the goal of which is to establish a European network of researchers in the area of language syntax that use
similar standards with respect to methodology of data collection, data storage and annotation, data retrieval and cartography.
In this context, ASIt is defined as a curated database which builds on dialectal data gathered during a twenty-year-long survey
investigating the distribution of several grammatical phenomena across the dialects of Italy.

Both the ASIt linguistic linked dataset and the Resource Description Framework Schema (RDF/S) on which it is based are
publicly available and released with a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0). We report the characteristics of the data
exposed by ASIt, the statistics about the evolution of the data in the last two years, and the possible usages of the dataset, such
as the generation of linguistic maps.

Keywords: Linguistic Data, Curated Database, Part-Of-Speech and Sentence Tagging, Interoperability

1. Introduction

Studying languages increases our understanding of
how humans communicate and store knowledge. For
over a century, linguists have produced atlases showing the geographical distribution of linguistic features
in the dialects of a language [13]. In the last two
decades, several large-scale databases of linguistic material of various types have been developed worldwide
and have been offered on-line to be shared by any
research community. The World Atlas of Languages
Structures (WALS) [8] is the first linguistic feature
atlas on a world-wide scale and one of the largest
projects with 160 maps showing the geographical distribution of structural linguistic features.1 In Europe,
the Common Language Resources and Technology In-

1http://www.wals.info/

frastructure project (CLARIN) [14] aims at creating an
infrastructure which makes language resources (anno-
tated recordings, texts, lexica, ontologies) and technology (speech recognisers, lemmatisers, parsers, sum-
marisers, information extractors) available and readily usable to scholars of all disciplines, in particular
the humanities and social sciences. One of the most
important applications of linguistic databases is linguistic cartography, the goal of which is to create geographical maps which visualize particular linguistic
features. These maps are usually produced either to
study and safeguard the worlds linguistic diversity
or to display the geographic distribution of syntactic
variables and their potential correlations. An example
of the former is The National Geographics Enduring

0000-0000/12/$00.00 c 2012  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

E. Di Buccio, G. M. Di Nunzio, and G. Silvello. / A Curated and Evolving Linguistic Linked Dataset

Voices Project, 2 the aim of which is to preserve endangered languages by identifying language hot spots and
documenting the languages and cultures within them.
Unesco3 as well has made available an online tool to
assess the status of linguistic diversity in the world.
The tool provides pieces of information for each language like: the name, the degree of endangerment, the
countries where it is spoken, and the geographic co-
ordinates. Other important online projects which refer
to the problem of displaying correlations of linguistic
features are: VIVALDI,4 DynaSAND,5 and the above
mentioned WALS. The scientific value of these linguistic projects is undoubted; nevertheless, the use and
the distribution of their data is very limited: users can
only generate maps and save them as figures, and in
a few cases export geographical XML files (as in the
case of the Unesco project). The data of these systems
are neither browsable nor exportable. Two recent international initiatives have started to tackle these issues:
the Edisyn network [12], the goal of which is to establish a European network of researchers in the area
of language syntax that use similar standards with respect to methodology of data collection, data storage
and annotation, data retrieval and cartography; and the
ISOcat6 linguistic concept database, developed by ISO
Technical Committee 37, provides a reference to create
a universally available resource for language-related
metadata that can be used in a variety of applications
and environments [10]. Furthermore, in recent years
the interoperability of linguistic resources has become
a major topic in several scientific fields, for instance
computational linguistics and Natural Language Processing [7]. The different representation and management choices made by each linguistic project act as
barriers toward the integration of all their linguistic re-
sources. Furthermore, the lack of interoperability prevents the possibility of developing and exploiting common analysis tools based on the linguistic data.

Exposing linguistic data as Linked Open Data enhances the interoperability between existing linguistic datasets and allows for their integration with other
RDF resources such as lexical-semantic resources already available as Linked Data, e.g. a general knowl-

2http://travel.nationalgeographic.com/

travel/enduring-voices/

3http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/

themes/endangered-languages/

4http://www2.hu-berlin.de/vivaldi/
5http://www.meertens.knaw.nl/sand/
6http://www.isocat.org/

edge base like DBpedia, or linguistic resources like
WordNet or Wiktionary [7]. In this paper, we address
the problem of the design and distribution of language resources by adopting an approach based on
the Linked Open Data (LOD) paradigm [9] and exploiting its ability to enable interoperability at a datalevel by overcoming the single collections characteristics and the particular system and its technological
choices. We focus on the Atlante Sintattico dItalia,
Syntactic Atlas of Italy (ASIt) enterprise [1], a scientific project carried on as a part of the Edisyn network.
We define a mapping from a conceptual model of the
ASIt linguistic curated database to a Resource Description Framework (RDF) schema, thus providing an
instrument to expose linguistic data as LOD. This RDF
schema defines a common layer allowing different linguistic projects to read, manipulate and re-use diversified linguistic data. Furthermore, the RDF schema allows us to present the ASIt linguistic database as a curated and evolving linked dataset.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reports
on the issues that should be addressed to guarantee the
quality of the data in the linguistic domain. Section
2.1 presents the ASIt enterprise highlighting its main
features and the method of creation and maintenance
of the data. Section 3 reports the main characteristics
and statistics about the ASIt Linguistic Linked Dataset.
Lastly, Section 4 draws some final remarks.

2. Linguistic Curated Data

Language resources that have been made publicly
available can vary in the richness of the information
they contain: on the one hand, a corpus typically contains at least a sequence of words, sounds or tags; on
the other hand, a corpus may contain a large amount of
information about the syntactic structure, morphology,
prosody, and semantic content of every sentence, plus
annotation of discourse relations or dialogue acts [5].
However, the quality of such corpora may have been
reduced by the intense, and often not well controlled,
usage of automatic learning algorithms [15]. Depending on the type of analysis a researcher performs,
linguistic datasets created by an automatic Part-Of-
Speech (POS) tagger can be either helpful or useless.
For example, POS annotations are very important for
performing particular linguistic analyses such as capturing fine-grained grammatical differences by comparing various dialectal translations of the same sen-
tence. In these cases, even an accuracy of 98% of the

best automatic POS taggers is not sufficient to pin
down these subtle asymmetries. This specificity can
only be reached manually [3].

The preparation of a linguistics resource of high
quality requires several steps: crawling, download-
ing, cleaning, normalizing, and annotating the data are
some of the actions that need to be performed to produce valuable content [11]. Some of these steps do require human intervention to achieve the highest quality possible for a resource of usable scientific data. Curated databases7 [6] are a possible solution for design-
ing, controlling and maintaining collections that are
consistent, integral and high quality. To this purpose,
Bird et al. [5] discuss three important points about the
design and distribution of language resources:

 How do we design a new language resource and
ensure that its coverage, balance, and documentation support a wide range of uses?

 When existing data is in the wrong format for
some analysis tool, how can we convert it into a
suitable format?

 What is a good way to document the existence
of a resource we have created so that others can
easily find it?

In the context of the ASIt enterprise, these issues are
addressed by adopting an approach based on the LOD
paradigm with the aim of enabling interoperability at
a data-level by overcoming the single collections characteristics depending on different methodological and
technological choices.

2.1. The ASIt Curated Database

The ASIt enterprise builds on a long standing tradition of collecting and analyzing linguistic corpora,
which has given rise to different efforts and projects
over the years [3,1,2]. Dialectal data stored in the ASIt
were gathered during a twenty-year-long survey investigating the distribution of several grammatical phenomena across the dialects of Italy [4]. Research on
the syntax of Italian is of great interest to several important lines of research in linguistics: it allows comparison between closely related varieties (the dialects),
hence the formation of hypotheses about the nature of
cross-linguistic parametrization; it allows contact phenomena between Romance and Germanic varieties to
be singled out, in those areas where Germanic dialects

7A curated database is a database the content of which has been

collected by a great deal of human effort.

are spoken; it allows syntactic phenomena of Romance
and Germanic dialects to be found, described and analyzed to a great level of detail [2].

At present, there are eight different questionnaires
written in Italian and almost 500 questionnaires, corresponding to the eight Italian questionnaires, written in more than 240 different dialects, for a total of
more than 50,000 sentences and more than 40,000 tags
stored in the data resource managed by the ASIt digital
library system.

In order to efficiently store and manage the amount
of data recorded in the questionnaires, the interviews
and the tagged sentences, ASIt has been realized as a
linguistic curated database. The ASIt curated database
is organized in three main conceptual areas:

 the geographical area, which is the place where
a given dialect is spoken and where a speaker is
born;

 the derivation area, which focuses on the background of the speaker: the level of knowledge of
the dialect, the particular variety of the dialect,
the birthplace, the ancestors, the document that
she/he translated;

 the tagging area, which is how the document is
structured and how it has been tagged (at a sentence level and at a word level).

A relevant aspect of the ASIt curated database is
that it explicitly models sentence level tagging, which
is not modeled by any other of the presented linguistic projects. Furthermore, we have developed a
language-specific set of POS tags which is suitable
for ASIt dialectal data but, at the same time, allows
these data to be linked to other databases of dialect
syntax. We can therefore imagine the creation of a
language-specific tagset as starting from a universal
core, shared by all languages, and subsequently developing a language-specific periphery, which is compatible with other databases and able to classify languagespecific structures.

3. The Linguistic Linked Dataset

The ASIt curated database was the starting point
for defining the RDF/S underlying the ASIt Linguistic Linked Dataset we present in this work. In Figure
1 we report the main classes and properties defining
the RDF/S, whereas in Table 2 we report the Ontology Web Language (OWL) data type properties of the
presented classes.

E. Di Buccio, G. M. Di Nunzio, and G. Silvello. / A Curated and Evolving Linguistic Linked Dataset

Fig. 1. Diagram representing the RDF/S defined for the ASIt enterprise.

Namespaces and Prefixes adopted by the ASIt RDF Specification.

Table 1

Prefix

asit
dcterms
foaf
geo
gn
owl
rdf
rdfs

Namespace

http://purl.org/asit/terms/
http://purl.org/dc/terms/
http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/
http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#
http://www.geonames.org/ontology#
http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#
http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#
http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#

Description

ASIt vocabulary terms
Dublin Core terms
Friend of a friend
WGS84 Geo Positioning
GeoNames Ontology
OWL vocabulary terms
RDF vocabulary terms
RDF Schema

As far as the vocabulary adopted in this specification
is concerned, we use the namespaces and prefixes reported in Table 1; asit is the only vocabulary which
is not inherited from other domains. RDF assumes that
any instance of a class may have an arbitrary number
(zero or more) of values for a particular property.

As an extension of RDF/S, OWL allows us to specify the maximum number of occurrences of a class
within a property. Since in ASIt this number is either 1
or n, we use the owl:onProperty from the OWL
vocabulary to specify an owl:cardinality equal
to 1. For instance an Actor can be born in one and

Main data type properties of the classes of the schema of Fig. 1.

Table 2

Area

geographical

derivation

tagging

Class
Region
Province
Town

Dialect

Actor

document
sentence
word
collocation
tag

Table 3

geo:long,

gn:population,

asit:townNotes,
asit:mountainTown,

geo:alt,

geo:lat,

asit:altimetricArea,

asit:provinceLittoral,

OWL Datatype Properties
gn:officialName, asit:geographicPartition, asit:regionNotes
gn:officialName, gn:shortName, asit:provinceNotes
gn:officialName,
asit:provinceCapital,
asit:surface, asit:latitudine, asit:longitudine
asit:dialectName
foaf:firstName, foaf:lastName, foaf:name, foaf:birthday, foaf:gender, foaf:mailbox,
asit:placeOfBirth, asit:education, asit:job, asit:country, asit:lang, asit:actorNotes,
asit:affiliation
dcterms:title, dcterms:date
asit:sentence, asit:transcription, asit:sentenceNotes
asit:wordText, asit:transcription
asit:position
asit:tagDescription, asit:mandatory

Details of the ASIt Linguistic Linked Dataset.

Name

Ver. No
Ver. Date
Licensing

Availability
#Triples
Size

ASIt Linguistic Linked Dataset
http://purl.org/asit/alld

2012-08-03
Creative Commons License
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0)
Public

38.3 MB

only one Town, or a Province can be in one and
only one Region.

The complete RDF/XML serialization of the RDF/S
specification is publicly available at the following
URL:

http://purl.org/asit/rdf/asit-schema.rdf

We exploited this RDF/S to expose the linguistic
data in the ASIt curated database as a Linked Dataset
whose details are reported in Table 3.

The ASIt curated database is synchronized with the
ASIt Linguistic Linked Dataset, where every entity
in the database corresponds to a class in the linked
dataset; therefore, the dataset is maintained following
the same policies adopted for the database, ensuring
the quality and the freshness of the exposed data. To
this purpose the ASIt enterprise is provided with an

RDF layer which is responsible for persistence and access to RDF triples. A synchronization service allows
for the interaction with the RDF datastore which is
responsible for the persistence of the RDF/S instantiation in the RDF Store. Therefore, the operations required by resource creation, deletion or modification
are performed in parallel for each request to guarantee
the synchronization between the database and the RDF
store. As a consequence, the ASIt Linguistic Linked
Dataset size grows proportionally to the size of the
data in the curated database: the number of entries associated with a database entity is related to the number of instances of the RDF class we mapped from
it. Since the research activities on the linguistic ASIt
database are still ongoing, the number of documents
and sentences is increasing over time as well as the
tags the linguistic researchers associate with them. Table 4 reports the statistics about the evolution of the
data in ASIt in the last two years. These statistics do
not present data about the actors involved in the linguistic activities, which include dialectal speakers and
data curators; these data are not exposed because of
privacy issues.

This dataset has been presented following the guidelines in [9]. As an example we report how it is possible to access and browse a resource referring to the
resource named Veneto which is an instance of the
class Region. It is possible to access the Veneto
resource by means of three URIs, which are:

1. http://purl.org/asit/resource/Region/Veneto
2. http://purl.org/asit/data/Region/Veneto
3. http://purl.org/asit/page/Region/Veneto

E. Di Buccio, G. M. Di Nunzio, and G. Silvello. / A Curated and Evolving Linguistic Linked Dataset

Table 4

Statistics about the growth of main entities/relationships of the ASIt
curated database

allows for the investigation of correlation among geo-
graphical, linguistic and user data.

tags
documents
sentences
tags/sentences
tags/words

Jan 11

Jul 11

Jan 12

Jul 12

The first of the three URIs identifies the non-information
resource Veneto; dereferencing the first URI asking for application/rdf+xml gives the user, after a
redirect, an RDF description of http://purl.org/
asit/resource/Region/Veneto within the information resource http://purl.org/asit/data/Region/
Veneto. In the event of a Web browser, the user is
redirected to http://purl.org/asit/page/Region/
Veneto information resource which is an HTML representation of Veneto; the HTML representations
are made available through a browser embedded in
the ASIt enterprise;
the browser allows other resources within the ASIt dataset and resource of external datasets to be accessed through hyperlinks. Cur-
rently, the ASIt dataset is linked to DBpedia: the
instances of the classes Region, Province and
Town are linked to the corresponding instances of
the dbpedia.org class Place through the property
owl:sameAs.

A SPARQL endpoint is provided at the URL: http:
//purl.org/asit/rdf/sparql and a GUI to submit
queries to the ASIt Linguistic Dataset is available at
the URL: http://purl.org/asit/rdf/sparqlGui.

4. Final Remarks

The Linguistic Linked Dataset we presented in this
work aims to enable interoperability at a data-level by
overcoming the single linguistic project boundaries depending on different methodological and technological choices. We imagine the use of the ASIt Linguistic
Linked Dataset by third-party linguistic projects in order to enrich the data and build up new services over
them. An example of a possible use of a new service is
linguistic cartography.

ASIt aims to generate linguistic maps and also to expose the linguistic data by leaving users free to generate whatever type of map or analysis tool they like. In
addition, the Linguistic Linked Dataset we presented

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thanks Maristella Agosti for
her support and contribution in the design and development of the ASIt Digital Library. This work
has been partially supported by the Project FIRB
Uninchiesta grammaticale sui dialetti italiani: ricerca
sul campo, gestione dei dati, analisi linguistica (cod.
RBFR08KRA_003), and the PROMISE network of
excellence (contract n. 258191).
