Undefined 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Amsterdam Museum Linked Open Data

Editor(s): Pascal Hitzler, Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA; Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California, Santa
Barbara, CA, USA
Solicited review(s): Fabien Gandon, INRIA, Sophia Antipolis, France; Aba-Sah Dadzie, University of Sheffield, UK; Philippe
Cudre-Mauroux, University of Fribourg, Switzerland

Victor de Boer a, Jan Wielemaker a Judith van Gent b Marijke Oosterbroek b Michiel Hildebrand a
Antoine Isaac a,c Jacco van Ossenbruggen a Guus Schreiber a
a Department of Computer Science, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The
Netherlands
Email: {v.de.boer, j.wielemaker, m.hildebrand, j.r.van.ossenbruggen, guus.schreiber}@vu.nl
b Amsterdam Museum, Postbus 3302, 1001 AC Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Email: {j.vangent, m.oosterbroek}@amsterdammuseum.nl
c Europeana, Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Prins Willem-Alexanderhof 5, 2509 LK, Den Haag, The Netherlands
Email: antoine.isaac@kb.nl

Abstract. In this document we describe the Amsterdam Museum Linked Open Data set. The dataset is a five-star Linked Data
representation and comprises the entire collection of the Amsterdam Museum consisting of more than 70,000 object descriptions.
Furthermore, the institutions thesaurus and person authority files used in the object metadata are included in the Linked Data
set. The data is mapped to the Europeana Data Model, utilizing Dublin Core, SKOS, RDA-group2 elements and the OAI-ORE
model to represent the museum data. Vocabulary concepts are mapped to GeoNames and DBpedia. The two main contributions
of this dataset are the inclusion of internal vocabularies and the fact that the complexity of the original dataset is retained.

Keywords: Cultural Heritage, Museum, Thesaurus, Europeana Data Model

1. Introduction

In this document, we describe the Amsterdam Museum Linked Data set. The Amsterdam Museum1 is
a Dutch museum hosting objects related to the history and culture of Amsterdam and its citizens. Among
these objects are paintings, drawings, prints, glass and
silver objects, furniture, books, costumes, etc. At any
given moment, around 20% of the objects are on display in the museums exhibition rooms, while the rest
is stored in storage depots.

As do many museums, the Amsterdam Museum
uses a digital data management system to manage their
collection metadata and authority files, in this case

*Corresponding Author
1http://amsterdammuseum.nl

the proprietary Adlib Museum software2. As part of
the museums policy of sharing knowledge, in 2010,
the Amsterdam Museum made their entire collection
available online using a creative commons license. The
collection can be browsed through a web-interface3.
Second, for machine consumption, an XML REST
API was provided that can be used to harvest the entire
collections metadata or retrieve specific results based
on search-terms such as on creator or year4. The lat-

2http://www.adlibsoft.com/
3http://collectie.amsterdammuseum.nl/
4An

example

is

http://amdata.adlibsoft.com/

wwwopac.ashx?database=AMcollect&search=
creator=Helst*

0000-0000/0-1900/$00.00 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

V. de Boer et al. / Amsterdam Museum Linked Open Data

ter API has been used extensively in multiple Cultural
Heritage-related application-building challenges5.

While larger cultural heritage institutions such as
the German National Library6 or British National Library7 have the resources to produce their own Linked
Data, smaller institutions often depend on large-scale
aggregators such as Europeana. Europeana aggregates
metadata from more than 2,200 European cultural
heritage institutions and provides access through its
Web portal8. The Europeana Linked Data pilot 9 uses
metadata from 200 of these institutions and provides
Linked Open Data access, which is described in the
data.europeana.eu paper in this special issue [7]. In
current workflow of this pilot, metadata records are
ingested and restructured to fit the Europeana Data
Model (EDM) [5] and published it on Europeana
servers as five-star Linked Data [1]. Although this
approach ensures a level of consistency and interoperability between the datasets from different institutions
the restructuring creates a disconnect between the cultural heritage institute original metadata model and the
Linked Data version.

A large part of the research that has resulted in
the dataset described in this document was carried
out within the context of EuropeanaConnect10. Within
EuropeanaConnect, different technologies and components for Europeana were developed, including the
methodology and tools of which the Amsterdam Museum Linked Data set is the result. The dataset has
been included in the Europeana Thoughtlab, a set of
innovative technologies and tools that lead the way for
Europeana-related developments11.

The Amsterdam Museum Linked Data set was created with a number of design principles in mind.
Specifically, we have created a five-star Linked Data
set for a small museum that 1) retains the complexity
of the original data while 2) achieves interoperability
through a mapping to an interoperability layer - in this
case the EDM. The Amsterdam Museum Linked Data
set implements best practices that, together with its
methodology and tools, Europeana is keen on adopting
for its future workflow. This is exemplified by the in-

5http://blog.amsterdammuseum.nl/?p=5245

(Dutch)

6https://wiki.dnb.de/display/LDS/
7http://bnb.data.bl.uk
8http://www.europeana.eu
9http://data.europeana.eu
10http://www.europeanaconnect.eu/
11http://pro.europeana.eu/web/guest/

thoughtlab/linked-open-data

clusion of the dataset in the Europeana Thoughtlab and
by the adoption of specific modeling choices in future
versions of the Europeana Data Model (for example,
the method of achieving interoperability as described
in Section 2.3 is adopted in [5, Sect. 5.4]).

2. Metadata Conversion and Modeling

2.1. Conversion

We here describe briefly the process used to convert the original data to Linked Data. The methodology and tools that focus on a high level of interactivity
and transparency of the process are described in more
detail in [2].

The Amsterdam Museum data consists of three
parts: 1) an object metadata set consisting of metadata records for the 73,447 objects; 2) a thesaurus
consisting of 28,000 concepts used in the metadata
records and 3) a person authority file consisting of
66,966 persons related to the objects or the meta-
data. The metadata, thesaurus and person authority
file were all harvested through an OAI-PMH interface 12. The resulting XML was first converted to
crude RDF and subsequently restructured using interactive rewriting rules. This was done with the
XMLRDF tool [2]. Resources (Objects, concepts,
persons,
...) were assigned URIs. URIs are made
up of three parts. For the URI basename, we used
http://purl.org/collections/nl/am/, here shortened to am:. Second, a term denoting the type of re-
source, followed by a dash: proxy-, aggregation-,
t- or p- for proxies, aggregations, concepts and persons respectively. Finally, the URI ends with a unique
Amsterdam Museum identifier (the priref). An example URI is http://purl.org/collections/nl
/am/proxy-22476 which has am:proxy-22476 as a
shorthand notation. For predicate URIs, we use the
basename plus the original XML element names (eg.
am:maker). At the time of conversion, we did not have
access to the Amsterdam Museum web servers. This
meant we could not have URIs in the Amsterdam Museum namespace redirect to our semantic server so that
they can be resolved. We therefore used purl.org URIs.
Also in this step, implicit links (for example between between objects and thesaurus concepts) are
made explicit as RDF relations. Literal values that rep-

12Open Archives Initiative - Protocol for Metadata Harvesting:

http://www.openarchives.org/pmh/

resent references to resources are replaced by those re-
sources. Language information of the literals is also
added to the data in the form of language-typed liter-
als. The internal links are described in Section 3.4. Figure 1 shows examples of both the internal links and the
language-typed literals.

2.2. The Europeana Data Model

Within the cultural heritage domain, a number of
metadata schemas exist. Popular schemas for museums are models such as Dublin Core (DC) [6], Visual
Resources association (VRA)13, the Lightweight Information Describing Objects schema (LIDO) [9] or
the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (CRM) [3].
EDM is not built on any particular community standard but rather adopts an open, cross-domain Semantic Web-based framework that can accommodate the
range and richness of these schemas. It has been tested
for compatibility with other community standards such
as the Encoded Archival Description (EAD)14 for
archives and the Metadata Encoding and Transmission
Standard (METS)15 for digital libraries [4].

In fact, EDM mainly re-uses or draws inspiration from elements belonging to other standards. DC,
CIDOC-CRM, SKOS are used for descriptive meta-
data.16 For person metadata, EDM also uses the Resource Description and Access (RDA) Group 2 metadata standard17. These properties include given and
family names, birth and death dates etc.18 For more
technical and organization-related metadata as-
pects, requirements specific to large-scale aggregation and access to digitized resources have been taken
into account, making EDM a fairly unique proposal as
these scenarios emerged only recently. EDM for example supports multiple providers describing the same
object and allows for enrichment of the museum data,
while clearly showing the provenance of all the data
that links to digital objects. This is achieved by incorporating the proxy-aggregation pattern from the Object
Re-use and Exchange (ORE) model [8]. For more details and discussion on EDM we refer the reader to the

13http://www.vraweb.org/projects/vracore4/
14http://www.loc.gov/ead/
15http://www.loc.gov/mets/
16To a great extent, our interoperability approach is therefore easily transferable to application contexts that exploit other descriptive
metadata element sets.

17http://rdvocab.info/ElementsGr2
18Europeanas choice for RDA was partly informed by the re-

search presented in this paper.

Fig. 2. RDF fragment showing how metadata mapping ensures in-
teroperability.

paper on the data.europeana.eu dataset in this special
issue [7].

2.3. Mapping to the Europeana Data Model

To make the Amsterdam Museum Linked Data interoperable with the EDM, two steps are taken. First
of all, the museum objects are represented as proxyaggregation pairs. For our purpose, this means that
an Amsterdam Museum metadata record gives rise to
both a proxy resource as well as an aggregation re-
source. The RDF triples that make up the object metadata (creator, dimensions etc.) have the proxy as their
source while the triples that are used for provenance
(data provider, rights etc.) as well as digital representation (e.g. thumbnails) have the aggregation resource
as their source. An example of this is shown in Figure 1. The bottom part of the figure shows an example triple relating an object to the name of a depicted
person. DC only has a single notion of the subject of a
work. By mapping the specific properties to the more
general property using the rdfs:subProperty in the
metadata schema, an application capable of RDFS reasoning can infer that the object has Job Cohen as its
subject. We therefore achieve interoperability without
discarding the complexity of the original data.

The second step is to map the Amsterdam Museum
specific classes and properties to those of the EDM
using rdfs:subPropertyOf or rdfs:subClassOf relations through a schema file. Specifically, we map
the Amsterdam Museum properties and classes to
those from DC, SKOS, RDA and to EDM-specific ele-
ments. Through these mappings, interoperability of the
museum-specific metadata with the EDM is achieved.
An example is shown in Figure 2.

3. Description of the Linked Data set

We now describe in more detail the resulting Linked
Data set, for each of its three parts. Table 1 lists some
statistics. For illustration, Figure 1 shows a small part

am:proxy_22093 Job Cohen am:contentPersonName rdfs:subPropertyOf dcterms:subject 4

V. de Boer et al. / Amsterdam Museum Linked Open Data

Fig. 1. A small part of the RDF graph surrounding the resource am:proxy-27659. Predicates and classes are listed with their super-properties
and super-classes in italics. On the left side, the relation to the Aggregation (with the attached thumbnail) can be seen. In the top right, the
relation to the thesaurus concept is shown. In the bottom right, a complex creator relation (the relation has a type as well as a value) requires a
blank node. The rdf:value of the blank node is a resource in the Person list. The proxy has two title triples, for the English and Dutch titles
respectively, with language-typed literals as objects.

Data part
Object metadata
Thesaurus
Person auth. list
Total

Resources
73,447 (proxies)
28,000 (concepts)
66.966 (persons)

Predicates used

RDF triples
5,700,371

6,603,333

Table 1

Some statistics for the three parts of the Linked Data set

of the RDF graph for a museum object, including internal links (relations to Amsterdam Museum resources).

3.1. Object Metadata

The object metadata consist of 73,447 proxy-aggre-
gation pairs. The 100 different predicates include cre-
ator, dimensions, locations, related exhibitions etc. For
complex relations, 566,239 blank nodes were retained.
In total the object metadata consists of 5,700,371 RDF
triples. 975,859 triples have a thesaurus concept as object and 210,407 triples have a person resource as ob-
ject.

The RDFS mapping file relates the 100 Amsterdam Museum properties to the EDM properties
through the rdfs:subPropertyOf construct. 90 properties are defined as subproperties of DC properties,

seven properties are mapped to EDM-specific properties ( edm:hasMet , edm:happenedAt, etc.) and three
properties are defined as subproperties of rdfs:label.
Two Amsterdam Museum classes am:Exhibition and
am:Locat were defined as rdfs:subClassOf of the
EDM class edm:Event. Instances of these two classes
are used to describe Amsterdam Museum-specific
events related to the cultural heritage object.

3.2. Thesaurus

The thesaurus consists of 28,000 concepts represented in SKOS. These include geographical terms,
motifs, events etc. Most term-based thesauri, including the AM thesaurus, have a more or less uniform
structure, based on the ISO 2788 standard19. This standard defines two types of terms (preferred and non-
preferred) and five relations between terms: broader,
narrower, related, use and use for. Use and use for are
allowed between preferred and non-preferred terms,

19http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/

catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=

edm:Agent am:Person am:p-13978 ore:Proxy am:proxy-27659 "Koperen etsplaat met portret van Clement de Jonghe"@nl dcterms:title am:title dcterms:medium am:material dcterms:creator am:maker Rembrandt rda:prefname am:name 1606 rda:dateOfBirth am:birthDateStart ore:Aggregation am:aggr-27659 ore:ProxyIn skos:Concept am:t-5447 skos:altLabel roodkoper@nl skos:broader koper@nl skos:prefLabel skos:Concept am:t-12469 _blank node_ dcterms:description am:creatorRole etser rdf:value Copper etching plate with portrait of Clement de Jonghe@en dcterms:title am:title edm:object http://am.adlibhosting.com/.../KA_19319.jpg V. de Boer et al. / Amsterdam Museum Linked Open Data

the others only between preferred terms. Translating
thesauri from this format to SKOS is fairly straightforward and well documented (cf. [10]). There are
13 predicates including skos:broader (7,487 triples)
and skos:narrower (8,486 triples) that establish hier-
archies. In total the thesaurus consists of 601,819 RDF
triples (no blank nodes).

3.3. Person authority file

The person authority file consists of 66.966 instances of am:Person (a subclass of edm:Agent). The
persons in this data set are creators, past or present
owners of art objects, annotators, depicted persons
etc. In this case, the original 21 distinct Amsterdam
Museum predicates were used. These predicates include birth and death dates, nationality, alternative
name spellings etc. These properties are mapped to
RDA Group 2 elements using 20 rdfs:subProperty
relations. The am:Person class was also mapped
as a rdfs:subClassOf edm:Agent. In total there are
301,143 RDF triples in Person data set.

3.4. Internal Links

There are many links between resources in the
dataset. There are 558,161 links between the 73,447
proxies to thesaurus concepts, producing an average
of 7.6 links to thesaurus concepts per cultural heritage object. Examples of such links are am:material
and am:contentMotifGeneral. There are also 80,432
links between proxies and persons, mostly through the
am:contentPersonName and am:associationPersonName
properties. In addition to this, there are 243,532 links
between proxies and other proxies, using for example
the am:relatedObjectReference property.

3.5. External Links

Links to external data sources were established manually using the Amalgame alignment platform [11].
Amalgame supports an interactive alignment process
where the user iteratively applies can apply different
(string) matching techniques, mapping partitioners and
filters. After each step the user typically analyzes the
results and can adjust settings or prepare next steps.
Matchers, filters etc. are combined into an alignment
workflow that can be run on the vocabularies that are
to be linked. The Amsterdam Museum alignment process is described in more detail in [2], we here give a
high-level description.

For the Amsterdam Museum thesaurus, the final
workflow includes a type-based filter that splits the
concepts into geographical and non-geographical con-
cepts. The non-geographical concepts were mapped to
the Dutch Art and Architecture thesaurus (AATNed)20
using a simple exact string matching algorithm. Of the
resulting mappings, the non-ambiguous mappings are
separated from the ambiguous mappings (where one
Amsterdam Museum concepts is mapped to multiple
target concepts). A manual evaluation of a small subset indicated that the precision is around 80%. These
non-ambigous matches (2,498 links) were added to the
data.

For the geographical concepts, a similar workflow
was employed to map the concepts to GeoNames21. An
evaluation of a subset of the produced links showed
that the precision is above 90%. The 143 covering
about 75% of the geographic part of the Amsterdam
Museum thesaurus.

The person authority file was mapped to Getty
Union List of Artist Names (ULAN)22. Here,
the
Amalgame workflow included first matching based on
canonical person names and secondly matching on
alternate spellings of the name. Resulting mappings
were also split based on ambiguity. Through evaluation of subsets, we identified three categories of map-
pings: high precision (100% correct), mid-precision
(80-90% correct) and low precision (<80%). The highand mid-level mappings to ULAN were added to the
data resulting in 1,426 links. Finally 34 persons were
linked to persons in DBpedia. This is a relatively low
number as 1) most of the Amsterdam Museum people
are not well-known enough to appear in DBPedia and
2) we used fairly simplistic matching algorithms here.
In total 3,753 links to external data sources are in-
cluded. Although this is only a fraction of the total
number of concepts, the usefulness of these mappings
is much greater as they represent the part of the concepts with which the most metadata is annotated. In to-
tal, 70,742 out of the 73,447 (96%) objects are annotated with one or more concepts or persons that have
been linked, with an average of 4.3 linked concepts per
object. Nevertheless, we are still aiming to enrich the
data with more links.

20http://www.aat-ned.nl
21http://www.Geonames.org
22http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/

vocabularies/ulan

4. Availability

V. de Boer et al. / Amsterdam Museum Linked Open Data

The Amsterdam museum data, consisting of the
converted datasets, the schema mapping files and the
high-quality mapping files are served as Linked Open
Data on the Europeana Semantic Layer (ESL). The
ESL is a running instance of the ClioPatria semantic server [12] that houses other datasets that have
been mapped to EDM. It can be accessed at http://
semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/europeana. Amsterdam Museum PURL URIs (for example http://purl.org/
collections/nl/am/proxy-63432) are redirected to
this server. Based on the response header in the HTTP
request, either HTML, RDF/XML or RDF/Turtle
is served. The SPARQL endpoint for the ESL is
found at http://semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/europeana/
sparql/23. In addition to this, the Amsterdam Museum dataset can be separately accessed through a
GIT repository at http://eculture.cs.vu.nl/git/
public/?p=econnect/metadata/AHM.git. More in-
formation,
including example URIs and SPARQL
queries can be found at http://semanticweb.cs.vu.
nl/lod/am.

5. Discussion

The Amsterdam Museum Linked Data set is a significant data source for Amsterdam history and cul-
ture. In previous application development competitions such as Apps for Amsterdam24, the Amsterdam
Museum dataset has been used extensively for a number of mashup applications and we expect that the
Linked Data version will be an equally central data set
for the web of cultural heritage Linked Data.

Future work on the data set includes efforts to produce more links, both to Amsterdam and Dutch cultural heritage datasets and vocabularies as well as to
more general vocabularies such as VIAF or DBPe-
dia. At the same time, we plan to validate our design choices by developing a number of Web and mobile applications that combine the Amsterdam Museum data with other datasets. One example is a mobile
cultural tour guide for the city of Amsterdam in which
the Amsterdam Museum Linked Data set will be a central data source, which we are currently developing. In
another project, we combine the Amsterdam Museum

23An interactive SPARQL query page is available at http://

semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/europeana/user/query

24http://www.appsforamsterdam.nl/

data with World War II archival and library data. We
expect that these efforts will also provide us with feedback on the specific design choices made, which can
inform next version.

The Amsterdam Museum Data Set was developed in
the context of the EuropeanaConnect research project.
It serves as a prototype Linked Data set in which the
original richness of the data is maintained, while still
being interoperable through its mapping to the EDM.
A limitation for direct re-use in Europeana is that this
interoperability does require some RDFS reasoning by
applications wishing to access the data at the interoperability level.

Another difference with the current Linked Data pilot of Europeana is that the latter focuses on producing
a Linked Data set based on the already-ingested meta-
data, This metadata consists of a minimal set of Dublin
Core properties. Current research within Europeana is
gearing towards harvesting and producing more complex data sets, in the manner of the Amsterdam Museum one. When more of these data sets will appear,
more links to Amsterdam Museum data are likely.

In the current workflow, the Linked Data is not updated automatically once a change has been made in
the original collection management system. The OAIPMH harvesting, conversion and data uploading steps
would have to be run again. The XMLRDF conversion rules as well as the Amalgame alignment workflows are are retained and can be re-run on new data at
any moment. The performance is linear in the amount
of input records. On a dual CPU P8700 @ 2.53 GHz
with 4 GB of RAM, the initial conversion to crude
RDF of 73,447 records takes 117.02 seconds. Executing the 58 XMLRDF rewriting rules on this crude RDF
takes 89.78 seconds. The total conversion time for this
dataset is 206.8 seconds.

For Amsterdam Museum, this conversion can be
executed in an automated fashion when the original
data is updated. The conversion tool ensures that the
same resources receive the same URIs. The workflow
has partial support for incremental updates. When new
records are added, they can be processed incrementally by the conversion and linking tools to produce
new RDF triples. However, currently the XMLRDF
tool does not implement functionalities to adopt modified or deleted records incrementally. In this case, it
is necessary to run the conversion script on the entire
dataset.

Currently, the Amsterdam Linked Data set is hosted
on the ESL. We are looking at the feasibility of having the data hosted by the Amsterdam Museum itself,

which could contribute to persistency and maintainability of the data. The use of PURL URIs allows us
to redirect HTTP requests to another server, when this
happens.
