Semantic Web 1 (2012) 15
IOS Press

Publishing and Interlinking the Global Health
Observatory Dataset

Towards increasing transparency in Global Health

Editor(s): Pascal Hitzler, Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA; Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California, Santa
Barbara, USA
Solicited review(s): Natasha Noy, Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, USA; Willem van Hage, VU Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; Giovanni Tummarello, DERI Galway, Ireland; one anonymous reviewer

Amrapali Zaveri a,, Jens Lehmann a, Soren Auer a, Mofeed M. Hassan a, Mohamed A. Sherif a and
Michael Martin a
a Universitat Leipzig, Institut fur Informatik, AKSW, Postfach 100920, D-04009 Leipzig, Germany
E-mail: {lastname}@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

Abstract. The improvement of public health is one of the main indicators for societal progress. Statistical data for monitoring
public health is highly relevant for a number of sectors, such as research (e.g. in the life sciences or economy), policy making,
health care, pharmaceutical industry, insurances etc. Such data is meanwhile available even on a global scale, e.g. in the Global
Health Observatory (GHO) of the United Nationss World Health Organization (WHO). GHO comprises more than 50 different
datasets, it covers all 198 WHO member countries and is updated as more recent or revised data becomes available or when
there are changes to the methodology being used. However, this data is only accessible via complex spreadsheets and, therefore,
queries over the 50 different datasets as well as combinations with other datasets are very tedious and require a significant amount
of manual work. By making the data available as RDF, we lower the barrier for data re-use and integration. In this article, we
describe the conversion and publication process as well as use cases, which can be implemented using the GHO data.

Keywords: RDF, Health, WHO, GHO, statistics, datacube, CSV, spreadsheets

1. Introduction

The improvement of public health is one of the main
indicators for societal progress. The World Health
Organization (WHO)1, a specialized agency of the
United Nations, is mainly concerned with international
public health with the main aim of the attainment of the
highest possible level of health by all people. Besides
publishing reports on global health problems, WHO
also provides access to enormous amounts of statistical
data and analyses for monitoring the global health situ-
ation. The WHOs Global Health Observatory (GHO)

*Corresponding

author.

E-mail:

zaveri@informatik.uni-

leipzig.de.

1http://www.who.int/en/

publishes such statistical data and analyses for important health problems, which is categorised by either
country, indicator or topic. The aim of GHO is to provide access to (1) country data and statistics with a focus on comparable estimates, and (2) WHOs analyses
to monitor global, regional and country situation and
trends2.

GHO provides access to a wide variety of over 50
different datasets, such as the world health statistics,
mortality and burden of disease, health expenditure
per capita, deaths due to particular diseases such as
HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, neglected tropical diseases,
violence and injuries, health equity, just to name a few.

2http://www.who.int/gho/about/en/

1570-0844/12/$27.50 c 2012  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

A. Zaveri et al. / Global Health Data

Each dataset contains an extensive list of indicators
which capture statistical data according to a region,
country or based on gender. The data covers all the
198 WHO member countries3 and while some indicators are from the late 1970s onwards, some are prior
to the mid-1990s. The data is updated as more recent
or revised data becomes available or when there are
changes to the methodology being used. A list of all
the datasets with a description of its contents is provided in Table 1.

In this paper, we first describe the process of the
conversion of the GHO data to RDF in Section 2. Details of the publishing and the interlinking GHO with
other datasets are presented in Section 3. Section 4
portrays a few potential application scenarios and use
cases for the GHO data. A number of related initiatives
and how GHO is different than what already exists is
discussed in Section 5. Finally, we conclude with the
lessons learned in Section 6.

2. Dataset Conversion

The GHO data is published as spreadsheets describing a single data item (e.g. death, DALY) in several
dimensions (e.g. country, population, disease). In order to convert the data to RDF, we used the RDF Data
Cube Vocabulary [3] which is based on the popular
SDMX standard4 and designed particularly to represent multidimensional statistical data using RDF. The
vocabulary also uses the SDMX feature of content oriented guidelines (COG). COG defines a set of common statistical concepts and associated code lists that
can be re-used across datasets.

However, transforming these spreadsheets to RDF
in a fully automated way may cause information loss as
there may be dimensions encoded in the heading or label of a sheet. Thus, we implemented a semi-automatic
approach by integrating the algorithm as a plug-in extension in OntoWiki [1]. OntoWiki is a tool which supports agile, distributed knowledge engineering scenar-
ios. Moreover, it provides ontology evolution function-
ality, which can be used to further transform the newly
converted statistical data.

Using this plug-in5, when a spreadsheet containing
multi-dimensional statistical data is imported into On-
toWiki, it is presented as a table as shown in Figure 1.

Subsequently, the user has to manually configure the
(1) dimensions, (2) attributes by creating them individually and selecting all elements belonging to a certain
dimension and (3) the range of statistical items that are
measured. Using RDFa, the corresponding COG concepts are automatically suggested, when a user enters
a word in the text box provided. The specified configurations can also be saved as a template and reused for
similar spreadsheets, such as for data published in consecutive years. Then the plug-in automatically transforms the data into RDF. A presentation detailing the
conversion process is available6.

After converting the GHO data, an RDF dataset containing almost 8 million triples (number of triples for
each individual dataset is reported in Table 1 ) was
obtained and published at: http://gho.aksw.
org/. The mortality and burden of disease dataset in
GHO alone accounts for 3 million triples. An example
of the death value 127 represented as RDF using the
Data Cube vocabulary is illustrated in the following
listing:

gho:Country

rdfs:subClassOf qb:DimensionProperty;
rdf:type rdfs:Class;
rdfs:label "Country" .

gho:Disease

rdfs:subClassOf qb:DimensionProperty;
rdf:type rdfs:Class;
rdfs:label "Disease" .

gho: Afghanistan

rdf:type ex:Country;
rdfs:label "Afghanistan" .

gho:Tuberculosis

rdf:type ex:Disease;
rdfs:label "Tuberculosis" .

gho:c1-r6

rdf:type
rdf:value
qb:dimension
qb:dimension

qb:Observation;
"127"^^xsd:integer;
gho:Afghanistan;
gho:Tuberculosis .

Listing 1: RDF representation of the death value 127
using the RDF Data Cube Vocabulary

3. Dataset Publishing and Linking

Dataset Publishing. After converting the GHO data
as RDF, we published it as Linked Data using the OntoWiki platform [1]. OntoWiki not only allows the publishing and maintenance of the data but also provides a
SPARQL endpoint for the dataset in combination with
Virtuoso7 as the storage solution for the RDF model.

3http://www.who.int/countries/en/
4http://sdmx.org
5Available at aksw.org/Projects/Stats2RDF

6http://goo.gl/OHDM9
7http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/

Table 1

Different
Observatory.

statistical datasets available in the Global Health

Dataset

Description

Environmental health

Number of deaths due to children health, climate change, household air pollution, UV radiation,
water, sanitation and hygiene

Epidemic prone diseases

Number of reported cases of cholera, meningococcal meningitis and statistics from the Global
Influenza Surveillance and Response System

Equity

Equity figures for women health, urban health and social determinants of health

Health-related Millennium
Development Goals

Health indicators associated with poverty and hunger, child mortality, maternal health, environment
sustainability, and global partnership for development.

Health systems

HIV/AIDS

Immunization

Data on healthcare infrastructure, essential health technologies, aid effectiveness, health financing,
essential medicines, service delivery and health workforce

Data on the size of the epidemic and on the HIV/AIDS response

Country and regional data of immunisation efforts for several diseases

Injuries and violence

Number of deaths due to road traffic accidents, data on demographic and socio-economic statistics,
emergency care provision and existence of a national policy for human safety

Triples #

242845

Mortality and burden of
disease

Number of deaths, DALYs, life expectancy, mortality and morbidity, disease and injury country
estimates for each country

3,000,000

Neglected Tropical Dis-
eases

Statistics on newly reported cases of each of the neglected tropical disease that is monitored

Noncommunicable Dis-
eases

Mortality measures, risk factors and health system response and capacity for each of the noncommunicable disease that is monitored

1,409,629

Tobacco Control

Tuberculosis

Data on the prevalence of adult and youth consuming tobacco and various measures to help prevent
tobacco consumption, such as policies, help, warnings, enforcing bans

Cases of incidence and mortality, diagnosis, drug regimens, treatment success for tuberculosis in
each country

Table 2

Technical details of the GHO RDF dataset.

http://gho.aksw.org/

Version date and number

01-11-2010, 1.0

Licensing

VoiD File

The DataHub entry

WHO allows reproduction of
its data for non-commercial
purposes.

http://db0.aksw.org/
downloads/void.ttl

http://thedatahub.
org/dataset/gho

Fig. 1. Screenshot of the OntoWiki statistical data import wizard
displaying a GHO table configured for conversion into RDF.

Additionally, it is also possible to browse the data with
the HTML output of OntoWiki. Details and links of the
SPARQL endpoint, the version, licensing, availability
and link to the VoiD file are listed in Table 2.

Dataset Interlinking. The URIs for diseases and
countries are uniform for all the datasets in GHO since
all the datasets utilize the same disease and country name in the original data. Thus, there was no explicit interlinking required within the datasets. A sin-

A. Zaveri et al. / Global Health Data

fication of the diseases. Moreover, in order to increase
the interlinking between GHO and other datasets, we
interlinked the countries from GHO with those in the
DBpedia12 and World Bank13 datasets. It is to be noted
that for these three interlinks (ICD-10, DBpedia and
World Bank), although LIMES was able to correctly
find interlinks for the diseases and countries, there
were some instances for which no links were found.
For these the interlinks were manually created.

In addition to the ability to explore the data by
using SPARQL and the resulting lists of resources,
users are able to visualize the data by using Cube-
Viz. CubeViz is an OntoWiki extension, which uses
DataCube resources as input. After the selection of
desired dimension properties such as gho:disease
and gho:country as well as the measure property
gho:incidence CubeViz is able to generate different type of charts (e.g. bar chart, pie chart, spline
chart)). As an example, the incidence of the disease
"Migraine" in selected countries can be visualized with
CubeViz as depicted in Figure 2.

gle country or disease URI was therefore automatically
linked to all the instances from the different tables associated with that country or disease and vice-a-versa.
Thus, when a single country or diseases is looked up,
all the corresponding instances from all the tables can
be retrieved. There are a total of 192 unique country
URIs and 116 disease URIs in the entire dataset.

We used the mortality and burden of disease dataset
from GHO as a test-environment for link generation
and linked it with the LinkedCT8 (the Linked Data version of ClinicalTrials.gov) and PubMed9 (converted to
Linked Data by the Bio2RDF project) datasets for diseases and countries.

We used the Silk 2.0 [4] tool, which is developed for discovering relationships between data items
within different knowledge bases, that are available via
SPARQL endpoints. Silk includes a declarative language for specifying (1) the types of RDF links that
should be discovered and (2) the conditions which the
data items must fulfil in order to be interlinked. We
used the Jaro distance as string metric where applicable and two confidence value thresholds: (1) Links
above 0.95 confidence were accepted and (2) links between 0.90 and 0.95 were saved to a separate file for
manual inspection. The number of interlinks obtained
for countries and diseases is displayed in Table 3 along
with the precision for each set of links. The precision
value was calculated manually by a researcher with a
biomedical background by going through each links
and evaluating the correctness. Then, using the for-
mula: (correct links * total no. of links / total no. of
links), the precision values were noted. Since a gold
standard dataset was not available, the recall values
were not calculated.

Additionally, we interlinked the diseases from GHO
with the diseases in BioPortal10, in particular the ICD10 codes11. We used the LIMES [2] framework to create these links since the SILK tool did not provide the
flexibility and efficiency that was required to generate
these interlinks. There was a total of 107 interlinks that
were created, of the total 116 diseases. Interlinks for
diseases such as Communicable, maternal, perinatal
and nutritional conditions", Maternal conditions" or
Nephritis and nephrosis" could not be found either
because there was no match found or they were too
generalized whereas ICD contained a thorough classi-

Fig. 2. Screenshot of CubeViz displaying the pie chart of incidence
of Migraine in a subset of countries.

4. Application Scenarios and Use-Cases

In this section, we outline selected application sce-

narios and use-cases for the Linked GHO data.

8http://linkedct.org/
9http://bio2rdf.org/
10http://www.bioontology.org/
11http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/

12http://wiki.dbpedia.org/Downloads38#

links-to-gho

13http://worldbank.270a.info/

Table 3

Number of inter-links and precision values obtained between GHO
and PubMed, LinkedCT, ICD-10, DBpedia and WorldBank for diseases and countries.

Links
between

Link type

Source
dataset

Source
Instances

Target
Dataset

Target
Instances

Accepted
Links

Verified
Links

Precision
Accepted

Precision
Verified

owl:sameAs
rdfs:subClassOf
owl:sameAs
owl:sameAs

Diseases
Diseases
Diseases
Diseases
Locations redd:locatedIn
Countries
Countries
Countries

owl:sameAs
owl:sameAs
owl:sameAs

LinkedCT 5000
LinkedCT 5000

LinkedCT 757341

PubMed

ICD-10

PubMed
DBpedia

WorldBank 214

300000

Monitoring health care scenarios. Since GHO provides information on mortality, morbidity, health sta-
tus, service coverage and risk factors for several diseases in each country, it can be used by each country to
monitor the disease prevalence for any given year and
to compare prevalence as well as the effect of countermeasures with similar or neighbouring countries.

For example, Listing 2 shows the SPARQL query
for retrieving the number of deaths due to Measles in
all countries. Listing 3 shows the SPARQl query for
retrieving the measles immunization coverage among
1-year-olds (%)14. The values retrieved from these
SPARQL queries can be used to compare the number
of deaths and the immunization services carried out in
a country for a particular year to gauge its effective-
ness.

gho:Country

SELECT ?deaths ?diseasename ?countryname
FROM <http://ghocountry.org>
FROM <http://interlinks.org>
WHERE {?item
?item
?country rdfs:label
?item
?disease rdfs:label
?item
?item
FILTER regex(?diseasename, "Measles")}

qb:Observation.
?country .
?countryname.
?disease.
?diseasename.
gho:Measure2 .
?deaths .

att:unitMeasure
eg:incidence

gho:Disease

Listing 2: SPARQL query for retrieving the number of
deaths due to Measles in all countries.

This can help to implement either precautionary measures if the mortality is high or curb health expendi-

14All prefixes can be found on http://gho.aksw.or or on prefix.cc

tures for diseases which seem to have adequate treatment options.

SELECT DISTINCT ?countryname ?incidence ?whichyear
WHERE {?item
ex:incidence ?incidence.
?item
gho:Country
?item
gho:Year
?item
?year
rdfs:label
?country rdfs:label
FILTER regex(?whichYear, "2004")}

?country.
?year.
?whichYear.
?countryname

qb:Observation.

Listing 3: SPARQL query for retrieving the measles
immunization coverage among 1-year-olds (%).

Disparity Analysis. Another application of the GHO
dataset is evaluating the disparity between the availability of treatment options and the global burden
of disease, as illustrated in the ReDD-Observatory
project [5]. This project
interlinks GHO with the
PubMed and LinkedCT datasets so as to enable the
evaluation of the disparity. This disparity is partially
caused due to the limited access to information that
would allow health care and research policy makers make more informed decisions regarding health
care services. The hindrance lies in reliably obtaining
and integrating data regarding the disease burden and
the respective research investments. Therefore, as the
Linked Data paradigm provides a simple mechanism
for publishing and interlinking structured information
on the Web, an opportunity is created to reduce this
information gap that would allow for better policies in
response to these disparities.

Listing 4 provides an example of a SPARQL query
which retrieves the number of deaths (from GHO) and

A. Zaveri et al. / Global Health Data

the number of clinical trials (from LinkedCT) for the
disease Tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS in all countries.

SELECT ?countryname ?diseasename ?value
count(?trial)
FROM <http://gho.aksw.org/>
FROM <http://linkedct.org/>
WHERE {?item

qb:Observation ;
?country ;
?disease ;

gho:country
gho:disease
att:unitMeasure gho:Measure ;
gho:incidence
rdfs:label
rdfs:label

?value .
?countryname .
?diseasename .
ct:trials ;
?condition ;
?location .
?disease .
?country .

?country
?disease
?trial

?condition
?location

ct:condition
ct:location
owl:sameAs
shv:locatedIn

FILTER (?diseasename("Tuberculosis", "HIV/AIDS")).}

Listing 4: SPARQL query for retrieving the number
of deaths and number of trials for Tuberculosis and
HIV/AIDS in all countries.

Primary source providing ground truth. GHO enables direct linking to the ground truth data for secondary (e.g. scientific publications) or tertiary (e.g. en-
cyclopedias) sources. This enables improved provenance tracking in those sources. It also allows automatic syndication of the data using SPARQL or simple
REST queries, which enables a simpler verification of
statements compared to the manual work, which would
be necessary without Linked Data. For example, the
Wikipedia entry for Disease15 (a tertiary source) uses
the statistical values from GHO, in particular from the
mortality and burden of disease data. The years of potential life lost (YPLL) and disability-adjusted life year
(DALY) metrics are derived from GHO to provide information about them for several diseases categories
in different regions of the world. Similarly, the corresponding DBpedia entry16 (also a tertiary source) also
links to the GHO page about the burden of diseases17.
Human development data warehouse.
Just as data
warehouses and business intelligence are now integral parts of every larger enterprise, the linked GHO
data can be the nucleus for a human development data
warehouse. In such a human development data ware-
house, a large number of statistical data and indicators
are published by different organizations that could be

15http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disease
16http://dbpedia.org/page/Disease
17http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_

burden_disease/2004_report_update/en/index.
html

integrated automatically or semi-automatically in order to obtain a more interactive picture of the human
development.

Currently, the indicators (e.g. the Human Development Index) are very coarse-grained, mainly referring
to countries. Using linked data, such indicators could
be computed on a much more fine-grained level, such
as for cities and regions as well as with regard to different groups of people (e.g. per gender, ethnicity, education level). Policy making would be based on more
rational, transparent and observable decisions as it is
advocated by evidence-based policy.

For example, Listing 5 shows the SPARQL query
for retrieving the public health expenditure (from
the World Bank dataset) and the number of DALYs
(Disability-Adjusted Life Years)18 caused by all diseases (from GHO) in the year 2004. The results from
these queries can thus be compared per country per
year to obtain an overview of the human development
problems affecting each country.

SELECT ?countryNameGHO ?daly
(?obsValue AS ?publicHealthExpenditure)
WHERE {

GRAPH g-indicators: {

?obs property:indicator

indicator:SH.XPD.PUBL;

sdmx-dimension:refArea
sdmx-dimension:refPeriod

?countryWB;

<http://

reference.data.gov.uk/id/year/2004>;

sdmx-measure:obsValue

?obsValue.

GRAPH g-meta: { ?countryWB
SERVICE <http://gho.aksw.org/sparql> {

SELECT DISTINCT ?countryNameGHO ?daly {

dbo:Country .}

gho:Country

?item
?item
?countryGHO owl:sameAs
?countryGHO rdfs:label
?item
?disease
?item
?item

gho:Disease
rdfs:label
att:unitMeasure
eg:incidence

qb:Observation.
?countryGHO .
?countryWB.
?countryNameGHO.
?disease.
"All Causes".
gho:Measure2 .
?daly .

Listing 5: SPARQL query for retrieving the public
health expenditure (from World Bank dataset) and
number of DALYs caused by all disease (from GHO)
in the year 2004.

5. Related Initiatives

There are already a number of efforts to convert
health care and life science related data sets to Linked

18http://dbpedia.org/page/

Disability-adjusted_life_year

Data such as LODD, LinkedCT, OBO ontologies and
the W3Cs Health Care and Life Sciences Working
Group, each of which is discussed in this section along
with the importance of converting and publishing the
GHO datasets.

LODD, i.e. the Linking Open Drug Data project19,
mainly converts, publishes and interlinks drug data
that is available on the web, ranging from impacts of
drugs on gene expression to results of the clinical tri-
als. A number of datasets have been converted in this
project20 including DrugBank, DailyMed, SIDER to
name a few. However, these datasets are restricted to
drug data and even though they do contain disease data
(from the Diseasome dataset), they do not connect the
number of deaths or the health expenditure or the status of the health system in each country for each of the
diseases that are included (as provided by GHO).

LinkedCT is the Linked Data version of Clinical-
Trails.gov which publishes data about clinical trials in
RDF and links it to other datasets such as PubMed.
Even though, in LinkedCT each trial is associated with
a disease and a drug, it does not provide information about the prevalence of the disease in a particular
country, which is provided in GHO.

OBO is the Open Biological and Biomedical Ontologies project21 which aims to create a suite of interoperable reference ontologies in the biomedical do-
main. It brings together biology researchers and ontology developers who work together to develop a set
of ontologies as well as design principles that can
help develop interoperable ontologies. However, most
of the ontologies developed are at the experimental
level or organismal level and are not yet sufficiently
interlinked with other datasets available as Linked
Data. Additionally, the NCBOs BioPortal22 contains
a large collection of controlled medical terminologies,
all available as Linked Data.

The Semantic Web Health Care and Life Sciences
(HCLS Interest Group)23 is established by the World
Wide Web Consortium (W3C) to support the use of
Semantic Web technologies in health care, life sci-
ences, clinical research and translational medicines.
The group focuses on aiding decision-making in clinical research, applying the strengths of Semantic Web
technologies to unify the collection of data for the

19http://www.w3.org/wiki/HCLSIG/LODD/
20http://www.w3.org/wiki/HCLSIG/LODD/Data
21http://obofoundry.org/
22http://bioportal.bioontology.org/
23http://www.w3.org/blog/hcls/

purpose of both primary care (electronic medical
records) and clinical research (patient recruitment,
study management, outcomes-based longitudinal anal-
ysis, etc.). Subgroups, on the other hand, focus on
making the biomedical data available in RDF, dealing
with biomedical ontologies, focus on drug safety and
efficacy communication and support researchers in the
navigation and annotation of the large amount of potentially relevant literature.

6. Conclusion and Lessons Learned

Although we were able to successfully convert the
GHO dataset and utilize one of the datasets in a use
case, we encountered some problems such as cumbersome conversion, low interlinking quality and lack of
time series capability in the datasets. We discuss these
problems in the sequel.

Conversion. The conversion process was cumbersome and time consuming because, first of all, each individual Excel files needed to be downloaded from the
GHO web portal. Then, each file had to be converted
into CSV so that it could be appropriately displayed
as an HTML table in OntoWiki. Since the conversion
method was semi-automated, one had to individually
selected the dimensions, attributes and data range for
each of the files. While some of the required steps such
as the annotation of the CSV files for conversion are
not automatable, other steps, such as the Excel to CSV
conversion can be performed more efficiently (e.g. in a
batch or through bulk processing).

Coherence. The number of interlinks obtained between the datasets for diseases was relatively low, as
presented in Table 3. The main reason was the different use of identifiers for the naming of the disease. For
example, heart attack in GHO could not be matched
with cardiac arrest in LinkedCT using the basic string
similar functionality of SILK. In order to address this
problem, we plan to extend current linking tools in
such a way, that background knowledge in the form
of gazetteers can be also taken into account. Also, we
plan to link the disease names with their corresponding
ICD codes so as eliminate the need for entity recognition and also to improve precision and recall.

Temporal Comparability. The data in GHO is not
published regularly every year. Also, since the health
data recording and handling systems differ between
countries, comparability of the data is limited. This is

A. Zaveri et al. / Global Health Data

mainly due to the differences in definitions and/or time
periods and incomplete data provision from different
countries. Therefore, computing time trends is not possible using GHO, which would be a good indicator of
the health scenario in each country over a number of
years. We expect, however, that the increased visibility
and transparency of a Linked Data version of GHO together with the enhanced possibility of annotation and
linking (when compared to simple Excel sheets) will
contribute to standardization and increased temporal
comparability in the future.

Exploring GHO. Using OntoWiki or similar tools
(such as Disco or Tabulator etc.) to browse the RDF
data helps users to gain new insights. CubeViz as
an OntoWiki extension provides visualization of statistical data (such as GHO) in an user friendly way
by means of displaying the data in various types of
diagrams and charts. However, a limitation of such
generic visualization tools is their limited scalability.

Conclusion.
In conclusion, by providing the GHO
data as Linked Data and interlinking it with other
datasets, it is possible to not only obtain information
on important health related topics in each country but
also ease the work of health care professionals for data
analysis in providing easy access to data. Moreover, it
provide opportunities to link to related data and thus
perform analyses for current priority health issues. The
Linked Data publishing and linking of the GHO data is
a first milestone in a larger research and development
agenda: The creation of a global human development
data warehouse, which allows to interactively monitor social, societal and economic progress on a global
scale.

7. Acknowledgment

This work was supported by grants from the European Unions 7th Framework Programme provided for
the projects LOD2 (GA no. 257943) and LATC (GA
no. 256975). We thank the LATC and LOD2 consortium members as well as the European Commission
for their feedback on the GHO dataset.
