The GeoLink Modular Oceanography Ontology

Adila Krisnadhi1,8(B), Yingjie Hu2, Krzysztof Janowicz2, Pascal Hitzler1,
Robert Arko3, Suzanne Carbotte3, Cynthia Chandler4, Michelle Cheatham1,
Douglas Fils5, Timothy Finin6, Peng Ji3, Matthew Jones2, Nazifa Karima1,
Kerstin Lehnert3, Audrey Mickle4, Thomas Narock7, Margaret OBrien2,
Lisa Raymond4, Adam Shepherd4, Mark Schildhauer2, and Peter Wiebe4

1 Wright State University, Dayton, USA

krisnadhi.2@wright.edu

2 University of California, Santa Barbara, USA

3 Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, New York, USA

4 Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, USA

5 Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Washington, USA

6 University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, USA

7 Marymount University, Arlington, USA

8 Faculty of Computer Science, Universitas Indonesia, Depok, Indonesia

Abstract. GeoLink is one of the building block projects within Earth-
Cube, a major effort of the National Science Foundation to establish a
next-generation knowledge infrastructure for geosciences. As part of this
effort, GeoLink aims to improve data retrieval, reuse, and integration of
seven geoscience data repositories through the use of ontologies. In this
paper, we report on the GeoLink modular ontology, which consists of
an interlinked collection of ontology design patterns engineered as the
result of a collaborative modeling effort. We explain our design choices,
present selected modeling details, and discuss how data integration can
be achieved using the patterns while respecting the existing heterogeneity within the participating repositories.

Keywords: Ontology design pattern  Data integration  Geoscience 

Collaborative modeling

1 Introduction

Like in other branches of science, data holds a very prominent role in conducting
research inquiries in ocean science. A number of synthesis centers sponsored by
the National Science Foundation (NSF), such as NCEAS and NESCent, have
provided evidences that coupling existing data with interdisciplinary collaboration and analyses can lead to exciting and novel scientific insights, which would
be almost impossible to achieve traditionally [3,5,11]. This leads to the establishing of ocean (and generally, geo-)science data repositories, such as BCO-DMO,
DataONE, and IODP, which contributes to a significant improvement particularly in data preservation. Such data repositories are typically designed to serve
c Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
M. Arenas et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2015, Part II, LNCS 9367, pp. 301309, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-25010-6 19

A. Krisnadhi et al.

specific parts of the geoscience research community, making data management
and quality control more tractable. On the flip side, however, data become highly
heterogeneus because of the differences in data formats, methods of access, and
nuances in the conceptualization. This can cause frustration for researchers when
attempting to find and integrate relevant data from these multiple repositories to
perform an integrative analysis [12]. This problem and other related knowledge
management problems led to the launching of the EarthCube program by NSF.
EarthCube is a major, community-led effort to upgrade cyberinfrastructure for
the geosciences consisting of various building block projects and research coordination networks, all aiming to enable extensive cross-discipline data sharing and
integration, to allow global data discovery, and to transform the way researchers
understand the Earth system via data-enabled geosciences research.

GeoLink1 is one of the EarthCube building block projects aiming to leverage
advances in semantic technologies for developing a data integration and discovery framework involving seven major data repositories, mainly in the area
of ocean science. Those repositories are BCO-DMO, DataONE, IEDA, IODP,
LTER, MBLWHOI Library, and R2R.2 The data integration problem faced by
this project is both technically and socially challenging, not just because of the
lack of direct alignment between data from different repositories, but also due to
fundamental differences in the way data and knowledge are modeled. GeoLink
tackles this problem by the use of Linked Data [1] and Ontology Design Patterns (ODPs) [2]. Linked Data enables repositories to describe and publish their
data using standard syntax featuring links to other data, possibly in different
repositories. Meanwhile, ODPs allows a horizontal integration featuring semantic
alignment between repositories with possibly independent semantic models.

In this paper, we present the GeoLink modular ontology, which is actually a
collection of ODPs developed for the purpose of data integration in the GeoLink
project. Before describing the ontology, we start by explaining key points in our
modeling approach using ODPs in section 2. Sections 3 and 4 present the ontology and selected modeling details. Due to space restriction, we cannot present
the whole ontology in detail, and refer the reader to the more detailed technical
report at http://schema.geolink.org/. Section 5 describes the availability and
external links of this ontology. Finally, Section 6 summarizes this work.

2 Modeling Approach

The GeoLink project aims to provide a framework for horizontal integration
amongst data providers. The project, however, does not advocate the creation
of an overarching upper ontology for the ocean science because fundamental differences in data modeling and vocabularies between repositories due to differing
subdomains, purposes and requirements prevent the realization of such an ontol-
ogy. Instead, we set out with developing ontology design patterns (ODPs), or
more specifically the so-called content patterns, each of which is a self-contained,

1 http://www.geolink.org/
2 See http://www.geolink.org/team.html.
?

?

?
highly modular ontology encapsulating a particular notion within some domain
of discourse and can act as a building block of a more complex ontology [2].

The modeling task was conducted through collaborative modeling sessions,
which ensure a good community engagement by a very active involvement of
oceanographers as domain experts and potential end users. The modeling sessions are intended to bridge language and perspective gaps between ontology
engineers, domain experts, and end users, which are bound to occur during an
ontology development [7]. In a modeling session, we proceeded by focusing on
one notion a time, starting from (i) gathering use cases through a set of competency questions [10]; (ii) identifying and visualizing relevant classes and relationships while keeping within the boundary of the focus notion; and (iii) specifying
constraints and axioms, initially in semi-formal natural language expressions.
Ontology engineers then continued the work by translating the modeling result
from the steps above into a formal ontology, while ensuring no axiom makes an
overly strong ontological commitment. Since modeling was focused on one notion
at a time, we obtained self-contained, highly modular ontology patterns.

3 Ontology Overview

The GeoLink modular ontology comprises of several content patterns (Figure 1).
The majority of the content patterns model some concrete notion deemed important by the participating data providers as it reflects an important discovery
facet. These include cruise, person, organization, dataset, funding award, pro-
gram, etc. A few other content patterns represent some form of abstraction introduced typically as a good modeling practice or as a flexible connector between
two other patterns. The remaining patterns are auxiliary content patterns that
provide more details to some other content patterns. We briefly present an
overview of each of these patterns in the following and the reader is referred
to the technical report and our OWL implementation for more details.

We start with the abstract patterns Agent and Agent Role. The Agent
pattern defines a central class Agent and allows one to express that an agent
(e.g., a person or an organization) may perform a role, which is an instance of
the AgentRole class. The latter is aligned to the AgentRole class in the Agent
Role pattern. The Agent Role pattern itself is essentially a reification of relations
between an agent and the thing the agent is involved in. For example, a person
may participate in a cruise as a chief scientist. Then, using the Agent Role
pattern, we express this by stating that a cruise provides a role of type chief
scientist that is performed by that person. This reification allows to flexibly
cover various ways in which an agent may be related to the thing the agent is
involved in. The pattern also allows us to express the starting and ending time
of a role.

The abstract pattern Event describes generic events, which may include
cruises, sampling processes, etc. This pattern is inspired by the Simple Event
Model (SEM) [4], but augmented with a stronger axiomatization in OWL. In
this model, an event is something that occurs at some place and some time, and
may provide agent roles performed by agents.

A. Krisnadhi et al.

Fig. 1. Schema diagram containing (almost) all patterns in the GeoLink ontology
and their main links. All patterns have links to Time Entity/Instant and Information
Object, but they are not displayed to make the figure less clutterred. sCO=subClassOf;
pAR=providesAgentRole; each box is a pattern, represented by its main class.

The abstract pattern Information Object, reused from DOLCE [8], encapsulates information commonly attributed to an object, including name, aliases,
description, webpage, and other non-URI identifiers. This pattern allows us to
collect many pieces of information about an object that become relevant when
it is understood as an information artifact.

The Place pattern captures spatial information in the Event pattern above
and the rest of the ontology. It expresses that a place has a geometry as its spatial
footprint, similar to the relationship between geographic feature and geometry
in GeoSPARQL [9]. The Information Object pattern is used to represent other
information about a place such as its name and description.

The Person pattern is a specialization of the Agent pattern, describing
human persons. As an Agent, a person may perform a role in a particular context.
Additionally, the Person pattern allows one to say that a person has personal
information items. A personal information item is an attribute of a person, such
as name, address, etc., that may change during his/her lifetime, and is modeled through the auxiliary Personal Info Item pattern. The Person Name
pattern is also defined as a specialization of the Personal Info Item pattern.

The Organization pattern is a specialization of the Agent pattern, describing organizations, including academic institutions, funding agencies, vessel own-
ers, etc. This pattern also models affiliation relationships of an agent to organizations using the Agent Role pattern. Every organization is described by exactly
one information object that encapsulates additional information about the organization such as name and location. This last part is modeled by reusing and
aligning with the Information Object pattern.

The Cruise pattern describes oceanographic cruises. A cruise is modeled as
a type of event whose spatiotemporal component is determined by its trajectory.
The Agent Role pattern is used to model various roles a person or organization
?

?

?
may hold in relation to a cruise. In addition, the Vessel pattern models vessels,
which is the physical object with which the cruise is undertaken.

The Funding Award pattern describes funding awards given to researchers
to carry out their ocean science research activities. It has a starting and ending
date and provides roles to agents such as principal investigator, sponsor, etc.

The Program pattern captures the notion of ocean science programs. A
program is a loose group of activities, funding awards, and other things related
to ocean science research that follow certain scientific themes or objectives. It
can be in the form of a strategic initiative spanning different projects, or a
collaborative network involving many scientists working on different projects
which share some common strategic goals.

The Dataset pattern models the notion of dataset and common metadata
such as description, creator, creation time, etc. A dataset can be associated
with features of interests and may contain digital objects. The Digital Object
pattern represents digital objects, which are understood as file-like objects within
a data repository.

The Physical Sample pattern minimally represents discrete specimens
(rocks, sediments, fluids, etc) collected from the natural environment for scientific study.

4 Selected Modeling Details

In this section, we present selected modeling details from the Cruise pattern,
which is arguably one of the most interesting parts of the GeoLink ontology.
Oceanographic cruises indeed play a very central role in the professional lives
of many ocean scientists, and so it is very natural to utilize them as an aspect
of data organization and sharing. In our ontology, an oceanographic cruise is
modeled as a type of event whose spatiotemporal component is represented by
its trajectory. Like in the Event pattern (Fig. 2), the Cruise pattern employs
the Agent Role pattern to model involvement of agents in it (Fig. 3). Alignment
of Cruise pattern to the Event pattern is specified through axioms written in
description logic (DL) notation in (1)-(5) with glev: denoting the namespace
prefix of the Event pattern. Specific roles for cruise are defined by subclassing
AgentRole.

hasTrajectory  hasFix  hasLocation  hasSpatialFootprint

Cruise  glev:Event, Port  glev:Place, TimeEntity  glev:TimeEntity (1)
AgentRole  glev:AgentRole, Agent  glev:Agent (2)
  glev:occursAtPlace (3)
hasTrajectory  hasFix  atTime  glev:occursAtTime (4)
providesAgentRole  glev:providesAgentRole, isPerformedBy  glev:isPerformedBy (5)
We then assert that a cruise has exactly one trajectory, is undertaken by
exactly one vessel, and is described by exactly one InformationObject. Addition-
ally, this instance of InformationObject describes exactly only the cruise. This
InformationObject, which is aligned to the class of the same name from the

A. Krisnadhi et al.

Fig. 2. Event pattern

Fig. 3. Cruise with Trajectory and Agent Roles. SCO=subClassOf

Information Object pattern, acts as a proxy through which we describe various information about the cruise not covered by having the cruise as an event.
In addition to the data properties (not displayed in the figure) inherited from
the Information Object pattern such as identifier, description, webpage, etc., an
InformationObject of a cruise may carry information regarding funding award,
program, as well as other cruises related to the cruise described by this instance
of InformationObject. We also assert that if a cruise is undertaken by a vessel,
then this vessel has to travel along the cruises trajectory.

Cruise  (=1 hasTrajectory.Trajectory)  (=1 isUndertakenBy.Vessel)
 (=1 isDescribedBy.InformationObject)
.Cruise)
  isUndertakenBy  isTraveledBy

InformationObject  (=1 isDescribedBy
hasTrajectory

(6)
(7)
(8)

A cruise trajectory in turn represents a route that the cruise takes. To model
the notion of cruise trajectory, we reused and extended the Semantic Trajectory
pattern, which already provides basic vocabulary and OWL axiomatization [6].
Generally, a trajectory is given by an ordered collection of fixes, representing
time-stamped locations. Non-spatiotemporal information specific to a fix can be
included via its attributes, for example, to indicate that the fix is the arrival to
some port stop. Between two consecutive fixes, we define a segment, traversed by
some moving object, e.g., a vessel. Details of the axiomatization for trajectory
is given in the technical report and in the OWL implementation.
?

?

?
One other piece of detail we would like to convey is the use of guarded
domain and range restrictions. Most of the arrows in Figures 2 and 3 represent object properties and the direction of the arrows goes from the domain
part of the property towards its range. A straightforward way to axiomatize
these would have been as unguarded domain and range restrctions, i.e., as
axioms of the form P rdfs:domain C and P rdfs:range C, which are equivalent to P.  C and   P.C using DL notation. For patterns, however,
this would introduce rather strong ontological commitments which would make
future reuse of the patterns more difficult. Hence, we use guarded versions of
the restrictions, e.g., for the hasTrajectory property, we state the two axioms
hasTrajectory.Trajectory  Cruise and Cruise  hasTrajectory.Trajectory.

5 Availability

All ODPs for GeoLink are available online from http://schema.geolink.org/,
including the technical report containing detailed descriptions of all patterns.
This will be made available even beyond the duration of the GeoLink project
because the participating repositories have committed to continue the integration effort, which is also strongly motivated by ocean science researchers who
have been using these repositories for their research activities.

Each pattern resides in its own OWL file with ontology URI of the form
http://schema.geolink.org/version/pattern/[patternname]. For instance, http://
schema.geolink.org/dev/pattern/agentrole is the URI where the Agent Role pattern currently resides. The dev part in the URI indicates that the pattern is
currently under development. A stable release will replace dev with a version
number. A pattern is typically aligned to another pattern or an external ontol-
ogy, and this is incorporated by creating a separate OWL file containing axioms
for one direction of alignment. For example, the alignment from the Cruise pattern to the Event pattern is provided by the module at http://schema.geolink.
org/dev/pattern/cruise-to-event, which really contains axioms (1)-(5). Mean-
while, an alignment to the W3C Time ontology3 is provided by the module at
http://schema.geolink.org/dev/pattern/cruise-to-owltime.

Note that such alignment modules specify one-direction alignment as they do
not specify an alignment from the opposite direction. For example, the module
at http://schema.geolink.org/dev/pattern/cruise-to-event really only specifies
an alignment from Cruise to Event, and not from Event to Cruise. In terms of
file organization, such alignment modules are imported by the pattern that is
the origin of the alignment. So, the module at http://schema.geolink.org/dev/
pattern/cruise-to-event is imported by the Cruise pattern at http://schema.
geolink.org/dev/pattern/cruise.

Besides the W3C Time ontology, external linkages also exist to other ontologies and vocabularies. The Place pattern is aligned to the GeoSPARQL ontol-
ogy,4 in particular the Geometry class. Standard geographic features from the

3 http://www.w3.org/2006/time
4 http://www.opengis.net/ont/geosparql

A. Krisnadhi et al.

GEBCO gazetteers5 are used to populate the Place pattern. In addition, we
adopt parts of the SeaVoX standard platform types6 to obtain types of vessels.

6 Conclusions

We have presented the GeoLink ontology, consisting of a number of ODPs
designed for the oceanography domain. The resulting patterns are sufficiently
modular, and thus arguably easier to extend than foundational, top-level ontolo-
gies. Currently, the GeoLink project is in the middle of populating the patterns
with real data and a very preliminary evaluation demonstrated that the patterns
together can serve as an integrating layer of heterogeneous ocenographic data
repositories.

Acknowledgments. The presented work has been primarily funded by the National
Science Foundation under the award 1440202 EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: GeoLink  Leveraging Semantics and Linked Data for Data Sharing
and Discovery in the Geosciences.
