Semantic Bridges for Biodiversity Sciences* 

Natalia Villanueva-Rosales1,2(), Nicholas del Rio3, Deana Pennington1,4,  

and Luis Garnica Chavira1,2 

1 Cyber-ShARE Center of Excellence, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, USA 

{nvillanuevarosales,ddpenninngton,lagarnicachavira}@utep.edu 

2 Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, USA 

3 Air Force Research Lab, Information Directorate, Rome, USA 

nicholas.del_rio@us.af.mil 

4 Department of Geology, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, USA 

Abstract. Understanding the impact of climate  change and humans on biodiversity requires the retrieval and integration of heterogeneous data sets for the 
generation  of  models  that  provide  insights  not  possible  with  a  single  model. 
Scientists  invest  a  significant  amount  of  time  collecting  and  manually  preprocessing data for the generation of such models. The Earth Life and Semantic 
Web (ELSEWeb) project aims to create a semantic-based, open-source cyberinfrastructure to automate the ingestion of data by models. This paper describes 
the ontologies at the backbone of ELSEWeb that provide semantic bridges between environmental data sources and species distribution models. 

Keywords: Ontology  Data-to-model integration  Model web  Biodiversity  
Climate change 

Introduction 

What  will  happen  to  native  species  in  national  parks  under  scenarios  of  climate 
change?  When  and  where  might  we  expect  zoonotic  infectious  disease  to  spread?  
These  questions  and  others  can  be  addressed  using  species  distribution  models 
(SDMs) [1]. SDMs predict where animal or plant species might find suitable habitat 
given present conditions or under change scenarios.  Species might be socially relevant  because  they  are  endangered  or  carry  diseases.  Conducting  what-if  analyses 
provides insights of changes in the environment as they occur  or before they occur. 
Scenario analysis is becoming a key tool for the biodiversity (and other) sciences [2] 
to understand human impacts on the environment coupled with climate change. SDMs 
require species occurrence data and environmental data. Species occurrence data contains the location of known occurrences of a species in a given time period. Species 
occurrence data is mostly available in museums, which have invested in digitization 
and  the  development  of  metadata  standards  and  repositories  through  the  Global  
Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF)1. Environmental data is heterogeneous and 
                                                           
  N. del RioAffiliated with the University of Texas at El Paso when producing this work. 
1 http://www.gbif.org  
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
M. Arenas et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2015, Part II, LNCS 9367, pp. 310317, 2015. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-25010-6_20 
?

?

?
available from multiple sources, e.g., satellite imagery. Scientists spend considerable 
time deciding what data might be most relevant, where to find it, how to obtain it, and 
what to do with it since data manipulation may require the use of proprietary tools. In 
addition, each modelling algorithm has its own constraints, operational requirements, 
assumptions, parameter and data requirements, usage history, and advocates (or dissi-
dents). Data are required to  be further  manipulated and assembled into the  formats 
and scales consistent with the selected algorithm. The GEO Model Web initiative [3] 
aims to increase access to models and interoperability across models, databases, and 
websites. The Model Web advocates the creation of infrastructure with four underlying principles: open access, minimal barriers to entry, service-driven, and scalability. 
The Earth, Life and Semantic Web (ELSEWeb) project aims to enable interoperability between data and model providers in a way that data can be automatically retrieved 
and ingested by a model seamlessly to the user. ELSEWeb follows the four principles 
of the Model Web. The current implementation of ELSEWeb integrates data sets from 
the University of New Mexico Earth Data Analysis Center (EDAC)2 with the species 
distribution modelling service provider Lifemapper (Lifemapper)3.  

Semantic Descriptions of Data and Model Providers 

Ontologies in ELSEWeb describe concepts needed to automate the retrieval and manipulation of data for the generation of SDMs, to advance our understanding of how 
to  automatically  chain  models  together    a  requirement  of  the  Model  Web.    These 
ontologies  were  created  using  an  iterative,  bottom-up  approach  driven  by  standards 
and best practices followed by EDAC and Lifemapper, such as those provided by the 
Open  Geospatial  Consortium  (OGC)4  and  the  Federal  Geographic  Data  Committee 
(FGDC)5.  Non-semantic  resources  were  inspected,  interpreted,  and  expressed  as 
classes and properties using the Web Ontology  Language (OWL)6. These resources 
included Web Services metadata, arbitrary REST-full service descriptions in XML, 
shell  scripts  and  Java  code.  ELSEWebs  initial  semantic  descriptions  focused  on 
technical  requirements  (e.g.,  format)  to  enable  the  seamless  integration  of  data  and 
models from EDAC and Lifemapper respectively [4]. These ontologies were iteratively refined with expertise knowledge from EDAC and Lifemapper partners and aligned 
to  upper-level,  and  community  accepted  ontologies  and  vocabularies  such  as  the 
Provenance Ontology (PROV-O)7. In this paper, ELSEWebs ontology names, classes 
and properties are denoted in italics.  

                                                           
2 http://edac.unm.edu 
3 http://lifemapper.org/  
4 http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards 
5 https://www.fgdc.gov/ 
6 http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl# 
7 http://www.w3.org/ns/prov-o 

N. Villanueva-Rosales et al. 

2.1  ELSEWebs Environmental Data Ontology 
The elseweb-data ontology currently provides concepts to describe datasets with characteristics relevant to SDMs such as spatial/temporal dimensions. The elseweb-data 
ontology covers remote sensing environmental data, spatial in nature, geo-referenced, 
and measured from some instrument such as a MODIS sensor8. Environmental data 
represent any phenomenon that might be important for providing required habitat for 
a given species or for constraining the ability of a species to survive such as vegetation type. These biophysical  data are usually combined  with climate data that often 
establish thresholds of survival. Fig. 1 illustrates the core classes of the elseweb-data 
ontology  with  gray  nodes and the ontologies it extends. The elseweb-data ontology 
extends  the  Data  Catalog  Vocabulary  DCAT9  to  describe  the  temporal  and  spatial 
coverage of data (e.g., Geographic Region), the corresponding Theme (e.g., Vegeta-
tion), and how the data can be accessed (e.g. a File Manifestation, subclass of Dataset 
Manifestation, describes the format of a file and where it can be downloaded).   
 

 
 
Fig. 1. The elseweb-data ontology (gray nodes) provides concepts for describing characteristics 
 
of a dataset in a biodiversity scenario: spatial/temporal dimensions, how it can be accessed and
 
the  focal  entity  described.  The elseweb-edac  ontology  (white  nodes)  extends  and  instantiates 
 
the  elseweb-data  ontology  to  describe  data  sets  published  by  EDAC.  Dashed  boxes  outline
 
concepts of the ontology that extend existing ontologies and vocabularies.  
 

With respect to spatial coverage, ELSEWeb describes a Boxed Geographic Region 
specified  by  left  longitude,  lower  latitude,  right  longitude  and  upper  latitude.  This 
notion follows OGC standards and best practices for Web Services. More generally, 
OGC Web Coverage Services (WCS) metadata describes how to invoke services for 
data retrieval, their corresponding spatial/temporal coverage, and the different kinds 
of formats available for the retrieved file (e.g., PNG or TIFF). Additionally, the OGC 
metadata schema defines extension points which can be used to reference additional 
                                                           
8 http://modis.gsfc.nasa.gov/ 
9 http://www.w3.org/ns/dcat 
?

?

?
metadata. ELSEWebs data provider, EDAC, relies on these extension points to include FGDC metadata in their services. The design of the elseweb-data ontology was 
largely inspired by this conglomerate-service metadata employed by EDAC. The most 
specific concepts of elseweb-data ontology describe different kinds of Geospatial data 
sets. For example, a Raster Dataset consists of a set of DataBands. A DataBand captures a Characteristic (e.g., Temperature) of an Entity (e.g., Air), with a specific Unit 
(e.g., Fahrenheit) and Resolution (e.g. 250 m). By extending the Extensible Observation  Ontology  (OBOE)10,  elseweb-data  can  answer  questions  about  measurements 
contained  in  specific  DataBands  or  the  observed  focal  entity.  By  extending  the 
PROV-O, elseweb-data can answer questions about data providers and how the data 
was generated.  

The  elseweb-data  ontology  is  extended  and  populated  with  data  provided  by 
EDAC in the elseweb-edac ontology, illustrated by white nodes in Fig. 1. For exam-
ple, information about data sets published by EDAC instantiates the class RGIS Data 
Band, a subclass of the generic Data Band. Fig. 1 illustrates that EDAC also offers 
data processing services, such as Reproject, used by EDAC when publishing a Raster 
dataset. Provenance information indicates, for example, that EDACs data is retrieved 
from  the  US  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  (NASA)  and  transformed following EDACs quality assurance guidelines. Once the dataset is published 
as a service, it becomes an RGIS WCS Service that has a corresponding RGIS WCS 
Manifestation with information on how to retrieve the data. Appropriate classes and 
properties  of  elseweb-edac  extend  PROV-O  classes  such  as  PROV-O  Activity. 
EDACs geospatial data is exposed through OGC Web Map, Web Feature and Web 
Coverage Services. EDACs Web Coverage Services metadata is leveraged by EL-
SEWebs harvester to automatically populate elseweb-edac. 

2.2  ELSEWebs Modelling Service Ontology 
The elseweb-modelling ontology, also in OWL, describes biodiversity modelling services  as  implemented  algorithms,  parameters,  and  data  inputs/outputs.  Fig.  2  illustrates  the  core  classes  of  this  ontology  with  gray  nodes.  Concepts  in  elsewebmodelling  that  are  used  to  describe  a  modelling  algorithm  (e.g.  Species  Modelling 
Algorithm) and corresponding parameters (e.g., Species Modelling Parameter) extend 
the  Semantic  Science  Integrated  Ontology  (SIO)11.  Concepts  describing  services, 
inputs, and outputs are inherited from the Semantic Automated Discovery and Integration  (SADI)  framework12  and  PROV-O.  For  example,  in  the  elseweb-modelling 
ontology,  a  SADI  Service  Agent  is  also  a  PROV-O  Agent.  This  model  allows  ELSEWeb to describe a computational process with an Activity associated with a SADI 
Service,  which  is  also  a  PROV-O  Agent.  The  combination  of  PROV-O  and  SADI 
provides a unified view to describe discovery, run time, and provenance metadata.  

                                                           
10 http://ecoinformatics.org/oboe/oboe.1.0/oboe-core.owl 
11 http://semanticscience.org/ontology/sio.owl 
12 http://sadiframework.org/ 

N. Villanueva-Rosales et al. 

 

 
Fig. 2. The elseweb-modelling ontology (gray nodes) provides concepts for describing biodiver-
 
sity modelling algorithms, their inputs, outputs, parameters, and services providing these algo-
 
rithms.  The  elseweb-lifemapper ontology  (white  nodes)  extends  and  instantiates  the  elseweb-
 
model ontology to describe SDM services provided by Lifemapper. Dashed boxes outline con-
 
cepts of the ontology that extend existing ontologies.  

 
The elseweb-lifemapper ontology, illustrated by white nodes in Fig. 2, extends and 
instantiates the elseweb-modelling ontology with information about the modelling services  provided  by  Lifemapper.  Elseweb-lifemapper  describes  the  specific  inputs  and 
outputs  generated  by  a  modelling  service.  For  example,  a  Lifemapper  Service  Agent 
requires an Executable Experiment Specification as an input. An Executable Experiment 
Specification is composed of Species Occurrence Set, Modelling Scenario (e.g., a stack 
of environmental data used to generate an SDM), Projection Scenario (e.g. a stack of 
environmental data used to generate a projection of the species distribution by applying 
the SDM to changed conditions), and an Algorithm Specification (e.g., Maximum En-
tropy).  

The elseweb-lifemapper ontology contains concepts that describe how a projection 
was  generated.  ELSEWeb  provides  users  with  provenance  to  understand  how  their 
specific modelling and projection scenarios were used to create a specific SDM. Life-
mappers Web Services expose XML files with metadata about available algorithms and 
their parameters. The elseweb-lifemapper ontology is automatically populated using a 
Java-based harvester that leverages this metadata. 

Semantic Bridges from Data to Model Providers  

2.3 
Scientists often write custom scripts in order to move, augment, and transform source 
data into alternative forms that suit the needs of target analytical tools [5]. These custom scripts can often lack explicit documentation about data ingestion, transformation 
processes, and generated outputs, making these scripts difficult to reuse. To facilitate 
reuse  of  data  transformation  services,  ELSEWeb  creates  semantic  bridges  (i.e., 
alignments) between the elseweb-edac ontology and the elseweb-lifemapper ontology. 
These  bridges,  specified  in  the  elseweb-mappings  ontology,  provide  a  declarative, 
formal specification that can automate the data transformations required to generate 
an SDM.  The elseweb-mappings ontology was specified by ELSEWeb team using an 
?

?

?
iterative  and  bottom-up,  two-stage  process.  First,  an  ad-hoc  workflow  composed  of 
shell  script  and  Java  widgets  that  performed  the  necessary  transformations  was 
created [4]. Then, this workflow was promoted from the procedural program level to the 
declarative level using OWL formalisms. For example, an RGIS WCS Dataset published by EDAC can be automatically classified as part of an Executable Experiment 
Specification, which in turn is described as the input of a Lifemapper Service Agent.  

Results 

ELSEWebs ontologies are stored in an instance of Virtuoso triple store13 with over 
350,000  triples  and  available  through  an  SPARQL  endpoint14. Additional  resources 
can be found at the projects website15. The linked data section of the website includes 
SPARQL  sample  queries  to  navigate  ELSEWebs  knowledge  base  and  answer 
competency  questions.  The  ontology  section  provides  links  to  ontology  files  and 
additional  diagrams.  Ontologies  can  also  be  retrieved  under  their  designated 
namespace16. ELSEWeb currently enables the integration of over 6,650 environmental 
data sets, 1000 species occurrence data sets and 11 algorithms for the generation of 
SDMs. 

Users can generate SDMs by creating experiments through the Graphical User Interface (GUI)17. Interested readers can test ELSEWeb by accessing the demo section. 
After submitting an experiment, SDMs can be retrieved at Lifemapper with the credentials user:elseweb2, password:elsewebtwo. ELSEWebs GUI also allows the manual  submission of experiments through a JSON specification. The service-oriented 
architecture used in ELSEWebs infrastructure, GUI design, and a discussion of the 
technical challenges addressed by the ELSEWeb framework can be found in [6].  

Existing  semantic  web  service  frameworks  such  as  SADI  can  leverage  semantic 
bridges  and  orchestrate  the  execution  of  Web  Services  to  dynamically  generate  the 
output required. In ELSEWeb, SADI services are used to retrieve and transform data 
and generate SDMs along  with a provenance trace. SADI services  semantically describe  EDACs  Web  Services  to  retrieve  data  requested  by  the  user  as  a  measured 
characteristic with time and spatial constraints. SADI services semantically describe 
the inputs and outputs of services at Lifemapper that generate SDMs. ELSEWeb uses 
the  SHARE  client18  provided by  the  SADI  framework,  to  automatically  orchestrate 
the  execution  of  SADI  services.  Interested  readers  may  refer  to  [4]  for  an  in-depth 
description of ELSEWebs SADI services and the service orchestration process. 

                                                           
13 http://www.openlinksw.com/ 
14 http://visko.cybershare.utep.edu/sparql 
15 http://elseweb.cybershare.utep.edu/  
16 http://ontology.cybershare.utep.edu/ELSEWeb/ 
17 http://elseweb.cybershare.utep.edu/experiments 
18 http://biordf.net/cardioSHARE/ 

N. Villanueva-Rosales et al. 

Related Work 

Efforts towards the integration of heterogeneous data for the creation of biodiversity 
models  include  eHabitat  [7]  and  iPlant  Collaborative19.  eHabitat  implements  the 
Model Web principles using OGC Web Processing Services for multi-purpose mode-
ling, including ecological forecasting under climatic or development scenarios. To the 
best of our knowledge, eHabitat does not make use of ontologies or generic reasoners 
for service orchestration. Instead, eHabitat provides web clients where users can manually orchestrate service execution. The iPlant Semantic Web Platform enables the 
semantic discovery of services and service orchestration using the Simple Semantic 
Web Architecture Protocol (SSWAP) and Resource Description Graphs [8]. In contrast  to  ELSEWeb,  service  orchestration  in  iPlant  is  a  manual  task,  facilitated  by  a 
GUI where a reasoner leverages service descriptions, encoded in ontologies, to suggest the next service in the pipeline. iPlant Collaborative efforts also include the development of ontologies to support biodiversity knowledge discovery [9]. These ontologies provide complementary concepts that can be used to further inform the models generated at ELSEWeb. In particular, the Biological Collections Ontology (BCO) 
describes specimen collections and sampling processes, the Environmental Ontology 
(ENVO) describes habitats, environmental features and materials, and the Population 
and  Community  Ontology  (PCO)  describes  communities  of  biological  entities  and 
their qualities and interactions, among other concepts.  

Conclusions and Future Work 

Easier and more efficient approaches for harnessing the vast array of scientific data 
are essential for the generation of biodiversity models. The ontologies developed in 
ELSEWeb  aim  to  facilitate  the  use  of  data  and  data  transformation  and  modelling 
services  following  the  principles  of  the  Model  Web.  ELSEWebs  ontologies  were 
created by an interdisciplinary group of researchers and developers following an itera-
tive, bottom-up approach driven by community standards and best practices. Semantically  described  data  and  models  exposed  on  the  Semantic  Web  enable  frameworks 
like  SADI  to  automatically  find,  retrieve,  and  manipulate  data  to  generate  SDMs. 
These capabilities, however, do not address the issues involved in determining whether data and model integration is sensible scientifically even if it can be accomplished 
technically. In part, this is due to the sheer enormity of the task, given the wide range 
and diversity of concepts employed in any given biodiversity problem. Related efforts 
towards creating ontologies for biodiversity knowledge discovery include the development of BCO, ENVO and PCO. Aligning ELSEWebs ontologies with such ontologies may lead to a more robust integration of domain and technical concepts, enable 
the automated verification of models, and provide a more comprehensive provenance 
trace.  Future  work  of  ELSEWeb  includes  the  integration  of  additional  data  sets  
and  services  for  the  generation  of  water  models.  Water  models  will  provide  the  
opportunity to test ELSEWeb with members of academia, industry, society and government to facilitate interdisciplinary collaborations. 
                                                           
19 http://www.iplantcollaborative.org/ 
?

?

?
Acknowledgements.  ELSEWeb  was  funded  by  NASA  ACCESS  grants  NNX12AF49A 
(UTEP),  NNX12AF52A  (UNM),  and  NNX12AF45A  (KU).  This  work  used  resources  from 
Cyber-ShARE  Center  of  Excellence  supported  by  NSF  grant  HRD-0734825  and  HRD-
1242122. The authors thank Soren Scott and Karl Benedict (EDAC), and CJ Grady and Aimee 
Stewart (Lifemapper) for their contributions to the design of ELSEWebs ontologies and the 
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on this manuscript.  
