Creating and Using Geospatial Ontology Time Series in

a Semantic Cultural Heritage Portal

Tomi Kauppinen1, Jari Vaatainen2, and Eero Hyvonen1

1 Semantic Computing Research Group (SeCo)

Helsinki University of Technology
and University of Helsinki, Finland

firstname.lastname@tkk.fi
http://www.seco.tkk.fi/
2 Geological Survey of Finland
firstname.lastname@gtk.fi

http://www.gtk.fi

Abstract. Content annotations in semantic cultural heritage portals commonly
make spatiotemporal references to historical regions and places using names
whose meanings are different in different times. For example, historical administrational regions such as countries, municipalities, and cities have been renamed,
merged together, split into parts, and annexed or moved to and from other regions.
Even if the names of the regions remain the same (e.g., Germany), the underlying regions and their relationships to other regions may change (e.g., the regional
borders of Germany at different times). As a result, representing and finding
the right ontological meanings for historical geographical names on the semantic
web creates severe problems both when annotating contents and during information retrieval. This paper presents a model for representing the meaning of changing geospatial resources. Our aim is to enable precise annotation with temporal
geospatial resources and to enable semantic search and browsing using related
names from other historical time periods. A simple model and metadata schema
is presented for representing and maintaining geospatial changes from which an
explicit time series of temporal part-of ontologies can be created automatically.
The model has been applied successfully to represent the complete change history of municipalities in Finland during 18652007. The resulting ontology time
series is used in the semantic cultural heritage portal CULTURESAMPO to support faceted semantic search of contents and to visualize historical regions on
overlaying maps originating from different historical eras.

1 Introduction

Geospatial ontologies define classes and individuals for representing e.g. geographic
regions, their properties, and mutual relationships. By sharing ontological resources in
different collections and application domains, interoperability in terms of geographical
locations can be obtained, and intelligent end-user services such as semantic search,
browsing, and visualization be facilitated [9,24,23]. For example, in the semantic portal

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 110123, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
?

?

?
MUSEUMFINLAND1 [10] a location partonomy2 was used for annotating museum artifacts with metadata about the place of manufacture and the place of usage.

A lesson learned during this work was that geography changes rapidly, which makes
it hard 1) to the content annotator to make correct references to spatiotemporal regions
and 2) to the end-user to understand the changes in historical geography and, as a result,
to formulate the queries. For example, many artifacts in MUSEUMFINLAND originate
from regions that no longer exist and/or have not been a part of Finland but of Russia
after the Second World War. Finding the right names for querying, understanding to
which regions on the map the names refer to at different times, and understanding how
old historical names relate to modern Finnish and Russian geography creates, at the
same time, both a semantic challenge for the technology and an important part of useful
content to learn when using the portal.

This paper addresses two essential needs from the end-user point of view when using

historical geographic regions in a cultural heritage portal:

Ontology-based spatiotemporal search. It is necessary to be able to use both historical and modern regions as search concepts e.g. in a view-based, or multi-facet
search [7,20,18,6]. The idea is that regions offer one view to a content and they can
be used to select a subset of the content by specifying constraints. For example, selecting Finland (1945-) from a facet view would refer to a part of Europe relating
to the modern post-war Finland.

Visualization of concepts. It is necessary for the end-user to be able to see where the
historical regions are on the map in a proper temporal context. Moreover, there
should be a way of visualizing the spatial relationship between the old regions and
the modern ones on the maps in order to relate history with the world of today. Creation of several layers of information on maps is a common way to visualize maps
[3] and related content at the same time. In our case, we decided to apply this idea
to overlaying historical and modern maps to visualize spatiotemporal relationships
of regions, and to display related cultural content on the maps. Such map visualizations also help in finding the right concepts for a search and for presenting the
search results.

To successfully meet the above needs the following requirements can be set for the
ontology creation and management:

1. Concepts representing the regions from different time intervals need to be identified
by URIs, put into a valid spatial part-of hierarchy, and mapped with each other in
the temporal dimension.

2. Essential geographical properties, such as coordinates of points or polygonal bound-
aries, time span, size, and names of the historical regions, need to be assigned to
the URIs of the regions.

To meet these requirements, it is essential that a geospatial ontology used in a semantic
cultural system can represent change in time [15]. In current historical geo-vocabularies

1 http://www.museosuomi.fi
2 This partonomy is a part-of hierarchy of individuals of the classes Continent, Country, County,

City, Village, Farm, etc.

T. Kauppinen, J. Vaatainen, and E. Hyvonen

and ontologies, such as the Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names (TGN)3, historical
regions may be found, but the aspect of change is usually missing. For example, in the
TGN the historical city of Rome in Italy has an entry as an inhabited place, but its
development from an Etruscan city of the 8th century BC to its declination in 330 AD
is described only as a piece of literal text.

In this paper, we present a simple metadata schema and a model for representing
geospatial changes and for maintaining them as an RDF repository. A method for constructing a time series of geospatial, temporal ontologies (an ontology time series) from
the filled metadata schema is discussed, and a reasoning mechanism to infer properties
(size), relationships, and mappings between spatiotemporal regions is then presented.
To test and evaluate the approach, the system was used in a case study of creating a
complete model of the changes of the Finnish municipalities in 18652007. Finally,
we present how the resulting ontology time series has been applied to creating intelligent services and map-based visualizations in the semantic cultural heritage portal
CULTURESAMPOFinnish Culture on the Semantic Web4 [12].

2 Modeling Geospatial Changes

2.1 Analysis of Change Types

We analyzed the kinds of regional changes of municipalities in Finland5 between years
1865 and 2007. Table 1 lists the change types found and their quantities.

Table 1. Different types of regional changes between 1865 and 2007 in Finland

Change type
Establishment (A region is established)
Merge (Several regions are merged into one)
Split (A region is split to several regions)
Namechange (A region changes its name)
Changepartof (Annexed (to a different country))
Changepartof (Annexed (from a different country))
Changepartof (Region moved to another city or mu-
nicipality)
Total sum

Quantity
?

?

?
An example of a merge is depicted in Figure 1. In the year 1922 Nummi-Pusula
was formed via the unification of two former municipalities, Nummi and Pusula. This
means that the old notions of Nummi and Pusula became obsolete after 1922, and the
new concept of Nummi-Pusula was introduced.

In Figure 2, there is an example of a split. Pirkkala was split into two municipalities,
Pohjois-Pirkkala and Etela-Pirkkala in 1922. In Figure 3 there are two examples of

3 http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabulary/tgn/
4 http://www.kulttuurisampo.fi
5 As collected by the Geological Survey of Finland.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. An example of a merge

Fig. 2. An example of a split

Fig. 3. Two examples of name changes

Fig. 4. An example of a change where a part
of a region is moved

Fig. 5. Another example of a change in a
partition hierarchy

Fig. 6. A third example of a change in a
partition hierarchy

name changes. In year 1938 Pohjois-Pirkkala was renamed Nokia. At the same time, its
neighbor Etela-Pirkkala was renamed to Pirkkala. Finally, in Figures 4, 5 and 6 there are
three different examples of changes in a partition hierarchy. Figure 4 depicts a change
where Petsamo was annexed from Russia to Finland in 1920. Figure 5 depicts a change
where Petsamo was annexed from Finland to USSR in year 1944. Finally, Figure 6
depicts a different change: Vuosaari was moved from Helsingin maalaiskunta to the
city of Helsinki in year 1966.

These changes always change not only the sizes of the regions in question but also the
partition hierarchy. This means that from year 18656 until 2007 there are 142 different
kind of partition hierarchies of historical "Finlands".

Modeling all these different 142 temporal partition hierarchies of Finland, the resources and their mutual relationships, as separate ontologies by hand would be hard.
Instead, we propose utilization of a simple schema for representing changes, and using
an automated process for generating the different partition hierarchies.

2.2 A Schema for Representing and Maintaining Changes

The change types of Table 2 can be represented in terms of a few metadata fields (el-
ements) listed in the Metadata Schema of Changes (see Table 2). An other metadata

6 In year 1865 first municipalities were established in Finland.

T. Kauppinen, J. Vaatainen, and E. Hyvonen

Table 2. The Metadata Schema of Changes. Cardinalities are presented in the column C

Field
identifier

date
place

Definition
Identifier for a change
(automatically generated)
The date of the change
Place field

place type The type of the place
change type The type of the change

from

to

From where there are areas
moving to in the change
To where there are areas moving
to in the change

C Value range
1 Change ontology

1 W3CDTF (ISO8601)7

Location ontology

Location ontology

1 Change type ontology

(either establishment, merge,
split, namechange, or
changepart, (see Fig. 16)

1..* Location ontology

1..* Location ontology

movedpart Which part(s) are moving in the change 0..* Location ontology

(if they can be named)
Note: Only used for changepartof

description Description of a change

String

Table 3. The Metadata Schema of Current Places

Field
identifier
place name
size
partof

Definition
Identifier for a place
Current place 8.
Size of the place in square kilometers 0..1 Double
Which other administrational region 1
this region is a part of
Representative point of the place
point
polygonal boundaries Polygonal boundaries of the place
maps

Maps of the place

0..* ISO 19107, WGS84
0..* ISO 19107, WGS84
0..* Map ontology

C Value range
?

?

?
Location ontology
Location ontology

Location ontology

schema, the Metadata Schema of Current Places is meant for maintaining the contemporary places, like cities, municipalities and countries (see Table 3) and the Metadata
Schema of Historical Places for properties such as boundaries of historical regions (see
Table 4). Note that the last two schemas are very similar and could also be integrated.
Different fields of the Metadata Schema of Changes, such as place, date, change type
and from and to-fields are filled up with the changes and resources they concern. For
example, a change concerning the annexing of Petsamo from Finland to USSR on 1944-
09-19 has an own instance conforming to the metadata schema, with the corresponding
fields filled up (from=Finland, to=USSR, movedpart=Petsamo, date=1944-09-19, and
so on). Notice that for each region modified by a change, a separate instance conforming
to the metadata schema is created.

8 For an implementation as an XML Schema Date, see http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/
?

?

?
Table 4. The Metadata Schema of Historical Places

C Value range

Location ontology
1..* Location ontology

Field
identifier
place name
size
partof

Definition
Identifier for a place
Place name
Size of the place in square kilometers 0..1 Double
Which other administrational
region this region is part of
Representative point of the place
point
polygonal boundaries Polygonal boundaries of the place
measurement date

0..* ISO 19107, WGS84
0..* ISO 19107, WGS84
Date when the properties were valid 1 W3CDTF (ISO8601)
(e.g. boundaries)
Maps of the place

0..* Map ontology

0..1 Location ontology

maps

3 Creating an Ontology Time Series and Overlap Mapping

The previous section described three schemas used for creating an ontology time series.
An ontology time series [15] defines a set of geospatial ontologies, including partonomy
hierarchies for different time spans. This knowledge is represented in terms of RDF
triples [1], where a resource (subject) is characterized by an identity (URI) and related
property (predicate) values (object) in the form < sub ject, predicate,ob ject >.

The following example motivates the creation of different temporal ontologies. Let
us assume two RDF triples represented in a table, utilizing the name space dcterms of
Dublic Core Metadata Terms 9 and another namespace location:

Subject
location:Monrepos dcterms:isPartOf location:Vyborg
location:Vyborg
dcterms:isPartOf location:Russia

Predicate

Object

These triples could come from an RDF repository containing a traditional partonomy
hierarchy that define the fact that the famous park Monrepos is a part of the city called
Vyborg which in turn is a part of Russia. This is true for the ontology of the year 2007.
However, the two RDF triples

Subject
location:Monrepos dcterms:isPartOf location:Viipuri
location:Viipuri
dcterms:isPartOf location:Finland

Predicate

Object

define the historical fact that Monrepos is a part of Finlandthis was true in 1921
1944. As we can see, these two sets of RDF triples would confuse a reasoner and the
end-user, because location : Monrepos would be a part of two non-intersecting regions
location : Russia and location : Finland (assuming that dcterms:isPartOf is transitive).
To overcome this problem, our ontology time series is populated with different temporal parts of places which are described by a metadata schema. Examples of temporal

8 Present in year 2007 as of writing this paper.
9 http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/

T. Kauppinen, J. Vaatainen, and E. Hyvonen

parts of location:Viipurin mlk are location:Viipurin mlk (1869-1905), location:Viipurin
mlk (1906-1920), location:Viipurin mlk (1921-1944) and location:Vyborg(1944-). All
these temporal parts have different polygonal boundaries, different sizes, and some of
them are also in a different partonomy hierarchy. The ontology population process proceeds in the following way.

First, a place is created in the RDF repository (like location:Viipurin mlk). Based on
the two sequential changes in the Metadata Schema of Changes for Viipurin mlk, that
happened e.g. in 1906 and in 1921, a temporal part location:Viipurin mlk (1906-1920)
is created and added to the union of 10 location:Viipurin mlk. Similarly, by examining
the next two sequential changes concerning the place, additional temporal parts (like
location:Viipurin mlk (1921-1944)) are created. If there are no more changes for that
place, then the place has ceased to exist (like location:USSR (1944-1991)) or it is a
contemporary one (like location:Helsinki (1966-)). Whether the place is a contemporary
one is checked from the Metadata Schema of Current Places.

Second, the properties for the temporal parts of places are retrieved from the Metadata Schema of Current Places and from the Metadata Schema of Historical Places,
depending whether the place in question is an existing one or has ceased to exist. This
phase creates RDF triples representing, for example, the polygonal boundaries, the center point, the size, and partonomical relationships of the temporal part of the place. For
example, two different partonomy hierarchies of our previous example of Monrepos is
defined by four triplets

Predicate

Subject
location:Monrepos(1921-1944) dcterms:isPartOf location:Viipuri(1921-1944)
location:Viipuri(1921-1944)
dcterms:isPartOf location:Finland(1921-1944)
dcterms:isPartOf location:Vyborg(1991-)
location:Monrepos(1991-)
location:Vyborg(1991-)
dcterms:isPartOf location:Russia(1991-)

Object

In addition, there are triples defining that different temporal parts of Monrepos belong
to the same union of location:Monrepos, and triples defining different properties for
temporal parts.

A temporal ontology [15] includes all temporal parts (of places) of some time span.
For example, a temporal ontology of the year 1926 would include location:Viipurin
mlk (1921-1944) because the year 1926 is within the range 19211944. Furthermore,
the ontology contains all the partonomical relationships of those temporal parts that are
valid during its time span.

Next, when all the places, their temporal parts and properties are created in the ontology time series, a model of changes is created based on the fields of the Metadata
Schema of Changes. In each change there is something before the change (like loca-
tion:Viipurin mlk (1869-1905)) and something after the change (like location:Viipurin
mlk (1906-1920)). This is expressed with properties before and after. In practice, the
following types of RDF triples are added to the repository:

10 owl:unionOf is used, http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-guide/
?

?

?
Predicate

Subject
change:change15 change:before
change:change15 change:after
change:change15 change:after
change:change15 change:date
change:change15 change:changetype change:split

Object
location:Viipurin mlk(1869-1905)
location:Viipurin mlk(1906-1920)
location:Nuijamaa(1906-1944)
1906-01-01

These triples are used as an input for a previously published method [14,15] to create a
global overlap table between different temporal parts in the ontology time series. This
table tells how much each place overlaps with the others. The repository is filled by
following kind of triples based on the global overlap table calculation:

Predicate

Subject
overlapping:overlap31 overlapping:overlaps
overlapping:overlap31 overlapping:overlappedBy 0.3131
overlapping:overlap31 overlapping:argument1
overlapping:overlap31 overlapping:argument2

Object
1.0

location:Viipurin mlk(1869-1905)
location:Nuijamaa(1906-1944)

For example, since the size of Nuijamaa (1906-1944) is 407 square kilometers and
the size of Viipurin mlk (1869-1905) is 1300 square kilometers, Nuijamaa overlaps
Viipurin mlk by value 407/1300 = 0.3131 and is overlappedBy by Viipurin mlk by
value 407/407 = 1.0 after the split (cf. the example above).

The Figure 7 illustrates the global overlap table by depicting overlaps with colors
between a selected set of regions. The black color indicates a full 100% overlap between
the temporal parts and the white color a 0% overlapping, accordingly. Different shades
of grey indicate the level of overlapping: the darker the box, the greater is the overlap.
From this illustration it is easy to see the mutual asymmetric overlaps between the
temporal parts, and that the overlap-relation in this case is fairly complicated.

4 Creation of a Finnish Spatio-Temporal Ontology

The metadata schemas and methods described in the previous sections were implemented to create a Finnish Spatio-temporal Ontology, an ontology time series of Finnish
municipalities over the time interval 18652007.

The metadata schemas were implemented as a spreadsheet tables11 for easy editing.
Figure 8 shows a screenshot of the Metadata Schema of Changes. Different schema
fields, such as place, date, change type, from, and to, are filled up with resources and
values. For example, the split of Viipurin mlk (1869-1905) into Nuijamaa (1906-1944)
and Viipurin mlk (1906-1920) is seen on the row 1197, and the annexing of Viipuri
from Finland to USSR on 1944-09-19 is on the row 1195. Most changes have a natural
language explanation of the event.

The methods for creating an ontology time series from the metadata schemas were
implemented using Java and Jena Semantic Web Framework12 [2]. The resulting RDF

11 We used the freely available OpenOffice Calc (http://www.openoffice.org/)
12 http://jena.sourceforge.net/

T. Kauppinen, J. Vaatainen, and E. Hyvonen

Fig. 7. Overlaps between temporal parts of places visualized using colored boxes. The black color
indicates a full 100% overlap between the temporal regions and the white color a 0% overlap,
accordingly. Different shades of grey indicate the level of overlap between regions: the darker the
box, the greater is the overlap between the regions.

Fig. 8. A set of changes collected as a spreadsheet table
?

?

?
repository contains 1105 different changes and 976 different temporal parts of 616 different historical and modern places, meaning each place has on average 1.58 temporal parts. For example, the place resource location:Viipurin mlk got the temporal parts
location:Viipurin mlk (1869-1905), location:Viipurin mlk (1906-1920), Viipurin mlk
(1921-1943), and location:Viipurin mlk (1944-). The temporal parts and their partonomy hierarchies in the RDF repository constitute 142 different temporal ontologies between the years 1865 and 2007, each of which is a valid model of the country during its
own time span.

5 Applications for Spatiotemporal Search and Visualization

Two case applications were created to utilize the resulting ontology time series in real
application scenarios. The first one uses partition hierarchies of different time spans in
faceted search facilitating ontology-based spatio-temporal search. Both historical and
modern regions can be used as search categories. To illustrate this, in Figure 9 two categories corresponding to temporal parts of location:Helsinki, namely location:Helsinki
(1966-) and location:Helsinki (1640-1946) are selected in a search facet, and related
items from cultural collections are retrieved.

This functionality is included in the semantic CULTURESAMPO portal [12] that currently contains over 32 000 distinct cultural objects. The annotations of the objects were
enriched automatically by comparing the time span and place of each annotation with
those of the temporal parts of places. If they overlapped and place names matched, then
the annotation was enriched accordingly. CULTURESAMPO also allows for searching
with places on a map as illustrated in Figure 11. By clicking a place on a map, the items
annotated with that place are retrieved and shown on the right side of the map. Further-
more, the user can formulate a search query as a polygon by pointing out n points on a
map. All the places that have a point inside that polygon are retrieved and the content
related to those places are listed on the right side of the page.

Our second application [13] utilizes the ontology time series in visualizing historical
and modern regions on top of maps and satellite images. This answers to the need for
visualizing spatiotemporal places: it is necessary for the end-user to be able see where
the historical regions are on the map in a proper temporal context. Figure 12 illustrates
the application. Historical regions, i.e. temporal parts of places, can be selected from
a drop-down menu on the left. Here a temporal part location:Viipuri(1920-1944) of
location:Viipuri is selected. As a result, the polygonal boundaries of Viipuri (1920
1944) are visualized on a contemporary Google Maps satellite image, map, or on a
historical map. In addition, modern places from ONKI-Geo [11] that are inside the
polygonal boundaries of the historical region are retrieved in a mash-up fashion, and
can be used to browse the map. The content related to location:Viipuri(1920-1944)
is listed in this view on the right. Furthermore, content from historical regions that
overlap location:Viipuri(1920-1944) are listed as recommendations. The overlappings
are looked up from the global overlap table.

Historical maps can be shown on top of the contemporary maps, as depicted in
Figure 10. In the middle, a contemporary satellite Google Maps image of the city
of Viipuri in the Karelia region is shown. In the middle, a smaller rectangular area

T. Kauppinen, J. Vaatainen, and E. Hyvonen

is

Fig. 10. Using multiple maps
simulta-
neously. A historical Karelian map depicting the city of Viipuri
shown
semi-transparently on top of a modern
satellite image provided by the Google
Maps service. Temporal parts of places on
the left can be used to select different maps.
The search for cultural artefacts can be
constrained in this view by pointing our n
points on a map.

Fig. 9. Temporal parts of places used as a
search constraint in CultureSampo

Fig. 11. A search with regions without temporal extensions

Fig. 12. Temporal parts are used to visualize
polygonal boundaries of historical regions
in CULTURESAMPO and for searching historical artifacts

is shown with a semi-transparent13 old Karelian map that is positioned correctly and
is of the same scale as the Google Maps image. This smaller view shows the old
Viipuri, an old Finnish city that nowadays is a part of Russia. The place cannot be
found in current maps as it was, which makes it difficult for modern users to locate the
place geographically. In order to move around the user is able to use the zooming and

13 We use transparency libraries provided by http://www.kokogiak.com/ which allow the alter-

ation of the level of transparency.
?

?

?
navigation functions of Google Maps and the historical view is automatically scaled
and positioned accordingly.

To provide the historical maps, we used a set of old Finnish maps from the early
20th century covering the area of the annexed Karelia region before the World War II.
The maps were digitized and provided by the National Land Survey of Finland14. In
addition, a geological map of the Espoo City region in 1909, provided by the Geological Survey of Finland15, was used. This application is also included in the CULTURESAMPO portal [12].

6 Conclusions

6.1 Contributions

This paper presented an analysis of change types in historic regions, a model of changes
based on the analysis and an ontology time series from the model, and a practical tool
for maintaining the RDF repository of changes. We have also succesfully applied an
existing method [15] to create a global overlap table from the repository of changes.
We have evaluated the usability of the resulting ontological structurethe ontology
time seriesin two real life applications for information retrieval and for visualization
in a semantic cultural heritage portal.

These applications can be used for teaching where historic regions have been and
how they are related with each other in a partonomy hierarchy. The visualization is
made using a rich set of historic maps, modern maps, satellite images, and polygonal
boundaries. In addition, the applications can be used for retrieving historical cultural
content related to the regions. The relationship is explicated for the user indicating
whether the content has been found, used, manufactured, or located in a specific region.
Old maps and names on them could be of substantial benefit when using visualization
in annotating or searching content in cultural heritage systems. The idea of using overlaid transparent maps is useful when comparing geo-information from different eras
(e.g., how construction of cities has evolved) or from different thematic perspectives
(e.g., viewing a geological map on top of a satellite image). We believe that map-based
views of historic locations together with rich, precisely, and spatio-temporally annotated cultural content offer a good use case of semantic web technologies for solving
real life interoperability and information retrieval problems.

6.2 Related Work

Traditions in ontology versioning [17] and ontology evolution [19] are interested in
finding mappings between different ontology versions, doing ontology refinements and
other changes in the conceptualization [16,22], and in reasoning with multi-version
ontologies[8]. In ontology mapping research, there have been efforts to do mappings
based on probabilistic frameworks [21]. Means for handling inconsistencies between
ontology versions [5] have been developed. Methods for modeling temporal RDF have
been proposed recently [4].

14 http://www.maanmittauslaitos.fi/default.asp?site=3
15 http://en.gtk.fi

T. Kauppinen, J. Vaatainen, and E. Hyvonen

In contrast to these works, our approach is merely about the evolution of ontology
time series that is due to changes in the underlying domain. Hence it should not be
confused with ontology versioning, database evolution, or ontology evolution even if
changes are considered in all of these approaches as well. Each temporal member ontology in a time series is a valid, consistent model of the world within the time span it
concerns, and may hence be used correctly in e.g. annotation.

6.3 Future Work

In the future, we would like to investigate whether the methods and tools presented in this
paper could be generalized to other domains, where concepts overcome changes affecting their extensions, properties, or positions in ontological hierarchies and structures.

Acknowledgements

Our research is a part of the National Semantic Web Ontology Project in Finland16
(FinnONTO, 20032007 and 20082010) funded by the Finnish Funding Agency for
Technology and Innovation (Tekes) and a consortium of 38 companies and public
organizations.
