LabelTranslator - A Tool to Automatically

Localize an Ontology

Mauricio Espinoza1, Asunci on G omez-P erez1, and Eduardo Mena2

1 UPM, Laboratorio de Inteligencia Artificial, 28660 Boadilla del Monte, Spain

asun@fi.upm.es, mespinoza@delicias.dia.fi.upm.es

2 IIS Department, Univ. of Zaragoza, Mar a de Luna 1, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain

emena@unizar.es

Abstract. This demo proposal briefly presents LabelTranslator, a system that suggests translations of ontology labels, with the purpose of
localizing ontologies. LabelTranslator takes as input an ontology whose
labels are described in a source natural language and obtains the most
probable translation of each ontology label into a target natural language.
Our main contribution is the automatization of this process, which reduces human efforts to localize manually the ontology.

Keywords: Ontology localization, Multilingual ontologies.

1 Introduction

Typically, the names assigned to ontology terms appear in a specific natural
language. Thus, in order to achieve a more generally applicable ontology, it is
necessary to guarantee that the same knowledge be recognizable in different
natural languages. Moreover, some organizations working in a multilingual environment demand multilingual ontologies.

To cope with these problems we present LabelTranslator, a system that automatically localizes ontologies in English, Spanish, and German. The Ontology
Localization Activity (OLA) consists in adapting an ontology to a concrete language and culture community, as defined in [3]. The technological background
of the system comprises: 1) the extraction of possible single-lemma translations
from semantic and translation resources, 2) the disambiguation of the translation
senses, and 3) the ranking of the translations.

Some details on the aspects above enumerated are given in the following

section. For a more comprehensive description of our system, we refer to [2].

2 System Description

The current version of LabelTranslator has been implemented as a Neon1 plug-
in, but it can easily become an independent module, for example a web service.
Figure 1 illustrates the main steps given by our system and their executing

1 http://www.neon-toolkit.org/

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 792796, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
?

?

?
Fig. 1. Main steps of LabelTranslator

sequence to localize an ontology among different natural languages. Notice that,
the steps two and three are executed sequentially, then, the system enforces that
the steps four and five be finished to continue its execution.

1. Choosing ontology terms(s) to localize. The system starts with an ontology
(described) in OWL-DL, F-Logic, or RDF provided by the ontology user.
The system uses some views of the Neon ToolKit to load the ontology and
store the multilingual results, respectively. In Figure 2, we show a screenshot of both the Ontology Navigator and the Entity Properties view with
information related to our sample ontology2.

When the system imports a new ontology, it offers a perspective over ontological data using the NeOn ToolKit-style. Then, the user chooses the label
of the ontology term(s) to be translated. In our example, the concept planta
(plant). By right clicking on a frame (concept, attribute, or relation), the
Translate action performs the translation of an ontology label (see Figure 2).
2. Obtaining the translations of each ontology label(s). To obtain the translations of the selected ontology label(s), the system relies on different linguistic

2 The sample ontology used here belongs to biosphere domain and it needs to be

localized from Spanish into English.

M. Espinoza, A. G omez-P erez, and E. Mena

Fig. 2. A screenshot of the NeOn Toolkit views used by the LabelTranslator plug-in

resources: 1) multilingual translation web services such as Babelfish3,
GoogleTranslate4, etc., and 2) other lexical resources as IATE5. The current
prototype supports translations from/into English, Spanish, and German. A
cache stores previously translations to avoid accessing the same remote data
twice. In our example the system retrieves 12 translations for the selected
label planta. Thus, T = { sole, flora, plant, mill, story, level, plant life, ...,
factory, manufactory }.
In the case of compound labels where no entry is present in the translation
resources used, the label is split into its components; the individual components are translated and then combined into a compound label the target
language. The original order of each component is considered to combine
components respecting the word order of the target language using lexical
templates6. The learning of the lexical templates was semi-automatically
derived from the patterns found in the labels used in ontologies of different
domain and described in English, Spanish, and German. A more detailed
description of this process can be found in [2].

3. Obtaining the senses for each translated label(s). For each translated label
the system retrieves a list of semantic senses using the approach proposed in
a previous work [6]. Our system takes as input a list of words (each translated label), discovers their semantics in run-time and obtains a list of senses

3 http://babelfish.altavista.com/
4 http://www.google.com/translate t
5 http://iate.europa.eu/iatediff/SearchByQueryLoad.do?method=load
6 The notion of lexical template proposed in this paper refers to text correlations found

between a pair of languages.
?

?

?
extracted from different ontology pools; it deals with the possible semantic overlapping among senses. These senses are used by the disambiguation
method (see step 6) to sort the different translations of an ontology label
according to similarity with its lexical and semantic context.

4. Determining the context of the ontology label(s). In order to determine the
context of an ontology label, the system retrieves the set of labels associated
with the label under consideration. The list of context labels comprises a set
of names which can be direct label names and/or attributes label names, depending on the type of term that is being translated. The number of context
labels is limited to those labels with the higher values of similarity according
to the Normalized Google Distance [1] (NGD). NGD measures the semantic relatedness between any two terms, considering the relative frequency in
which two terms appear in the Web within the same documents. Those labels
that have the higher values of similarity with the label under consideration
are chosen. In our example the system selects only three context labels, out
of eight previously found. Thus, C = { organismo(organism), liquen(lichen),
con fera(conifer) }.

5. Obtaining the senses for each context label(s). The senses of each context
label are discovered with the same process used to discover the senses of
each translated label (see step 3).

6. Disambiguating the senses of the translations. A disambiguation process is
needed to sort the list of translations according to similarity with the context
of the label to translate. This method takes as input the set of senses of each
translated label (step 3) and the senses of their context labels (step 5). From
this set of senses, the method relies on a relatedness measure [4] based on
glosses to disambiguate the translations. Candidate translations are then
ranked according to the similarity with their context in the ontology, and
the ranked list is used to either present the user the best candidates first, or
to use the highest-scoring candidate to translate the label automatically.

Figure 3 shows a screenshot of the translation dialog with the translations
of the sample ontology label planta. In our example, the system correctly
suggests plant in the sense of a living organism lacking of power of loco-
motion as first translation of the selected ontology label.

7. Updating the ontology with linguistic information. Once the right sense has
been selected, the system updates the linguistic information of the ontological term. Our system supports the linguistic model [5] designed for the
representation and structuration of multilingual information in ontologies.
In the current version, the system fills in runtime the fields representations
and description of the Entity Properties view (shown in Figure 2), according
to the most probable translations proposed by the disambiguation method.
These fields represent the link between the conceptual knowledge and the
linguistic information discovered. In a future release (current under develop-
ment), we will add support to the new linguistic model which captures all
the relevant linguistic/terminological information associated with concepts.

M. Espinoza, A. G omez-P erez, and E. Mena

Fig. 3. Translations into English of the spanish ontology label planta

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the European Commissions Sixth Framework Program under the project name: Lyfecycle support for networked ontologies (NeOn)
(FP6-027595), the National Project GeoBuddies (TSI2007-65677C02), and the
spanish CICYT project TIN2007-68091-C02-02.
