Conceptual Spaces in ViCoS

Claus Zinn

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics

Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Claus.Zinn@mpi.nl

Abstract. We describe ViCoS, a tool for constructing and visualising
conceptual spaces in the area of language documentation. ViCoS allows
users to enrich existing lexical information about the words of a language
with conceptual knowledge. Their work towards language-based, informal ontology building must be supported by easy-to-use workflows and
supporting software, which we will demonstrate.

1 Research Background and Application Context

Language documentation aims at the creation of a representative and long last-
ing, multipurpose record of natural languages. Such documentation contributes
to maintain, consolidate or revitalize endangered languages, and inherently, also
contributes to the description of cultural elements of a language community [1].
Our aim is to increase this cultural aspect by allowing users to complement linguistic information  defined mainly by lexica and annotated media recordings
 with ontological information. Our approach in centered around the notion of
knowledge spaces, where users model and manipulate a world of concepts and
their interrelations rather than just lexical entries.

In language documentation, both linguistic and ontological resources are targeted for human consumption. By and large, there are two main user groups:
scientists such as linguists and anthropologists, and members of the language
community. Scientists may contribute to and exploit resources to study the language and culture of a community, or to compare them to the ones of other com-
munities. This user group requires technology for intelligent search, potentially
across lexica with their diverse structure and metadata, and thus, a machinery
that can cope with data heterogeneity. The focus for the second user group is a
different one; the empowerment of community members to actively participate in
describing their language and culture and to learn from such resources. For community members, words are keys to access and describe relevant parts of their
life and cultural traditions such as food preparation, house building, medicine,
ceremonies, legends etc. For them, words are of foremost practical rather than
theoretical nature; and their understanding of words is best described by the
various associations they evoke rather than in terms of any formal and abstract
theory of meaning. This user group requires effective technology for the construction of knowledge spaces, a sort of informal ontology of fuzzily-defined concepts
and relationships, that enables community members to anchor the words of a
linguistic resource, or the objects of a multimedia archive, to such associations.

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 890894, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
?

?

?
2 Related Work

Given existing lexical and multimedia resources, users shall be empowered to
represent, communicate, and thus preserve complex facts about their language
and culture. Resources may help eliciting their tacit knowledge, but tools are
required that help transform it into tangible representations that can be viewed
and manipulated by others. Resulting conceptual structures may then facilitate
the revival of a shared understanding within the community. Mind mapping and
concept mapping software are a good starting point to support this task.

Mind maps form a tree structure as there is only a single central concept to
which other concepts can be related to. Usually, the nature of these relations is
left underspecified. Concept maps are more expressive. First, there is no single
central concept so that the hierarchy of concepts form a graph structure. More-
over, it is possible to name the relations that hold between concepts, and links
between concepts can be directed. There is, however, no formal definition of node
types (classes, instances), or arc types (defining the relation types). Ontologies
can be seen as a formalisation of concept maps as they are based on using formal
languages, and thus, concept and relation types have a well-defined semantics.
Existing tools for ontology engineering (e.g., Prot eg e) have only limited relevance for a community-driven knowledge engineering effort as their proper and
effective use requires a considerable amount of expertise in knowledge representation formalisms. Moreover, the use of existing ontologies, in addition to the
need to know their content and structure, is problematic as they induce a significant (and usually Westernized) bias of how the world should be modelled.
Existing tools for constructing mind/concept maps are much easier to use but,
for our purpose, lack integration with lexical resources and multimedia archives.
Our ViCoS tool is based on the notion of conceptual spaces (CS), where a concept must be anchored to its lexical resource(s), and where it can be illustrated
with archived material (images, sounds, videos). In contrast to concept maps,
we require users to define relation types before their first use. Their definition is
semi-formal but help addressing some interoperability issues when doing studies across lexica and conceptual spaces. In contrast to ontology builders, there
is, thus, no formal semantics of concepts or relations. In this sense, conceptual
spaces are closer to topic maps [6] rather than RDF/OWL-based approaches.
Conceptual Spaces also bear much resemblance to the representational aspect of
ConceptNet [7], a semantic network where concept nodes (semi-structured English fragments) are interrelated by twenty rather pragmatic semantic relations.

3 ViCoS

ViCoS is a simple but effective tool that aims at empowering a broad base of
users to describe and link together those words (and the concepts they denote),
which they feel are important in their language and culture. ViCoS is coupled
with Lexus [2], our tool for building and maintaining lexical resources, and has
access to an archive that hosts multimedia objects and their annotations [3].
ViCoS is a web-based application requiring a Javascript-enabled web browser.

C. Zinn

Fig. 1. ViCoS Main Window, showing the Y el Dnye example lexicon)

Fig. 1 depicts ViCoS main window consisting of: the Lexicon Selection and
Start Letter Selection frame; the Word List frame where lexical entries are represented by their lexeme; the Lexical Entry frame where selected lexical entries are
displayed; and the Conceptual Workspace frame where relations can be created.
In the screenshot, we have selected the Y el Dnye demo lexicon, and clicked on
the letter t to obtain (from Lexus) all lexemes that start with this letter. We
then selected te (Engl. fish) from the Word List frame to display its lexical
entry. We then copied the complete lexical entry [[te]] (via drag&drop) to
become the target of a is-a relation. In a similar way, be obtained the two fish
species ch:oo and ghee as sources. Likewise, any relation between any pair
of lexical entries can be created. With a tab mechanism that maintains access
to prior selections of lexical entries, links can also be created across lexica.

ViCoS offers a few standard pre-defined relation types such as hypnomy,
meronymy, holonymy, synonymy, and antonymy. Users may also define new relation types. To view the conceptual space for a lexical entry, the user drags
this lexical entry from the Lexical Entry frame into the Show in Knowledge
Space option of the Conceptual Space frame. The lexical entrys corresponding
concept will take center stage in the conceptual space browser, surrounded by
all concepts that are directly related to it (see Fig. 2).
?

?

?
Fig. 2. ViCoS Browser Window, showing a few classes and their interrelations

The graphical editor and browser offers various modes: in Browse mode, when
clicking on a concept node, additional information that stems from the lexical
entry is displayed; and in Connect mode, new relations between concepts can be
drawn. A double-click on a node will show a CS with the chosen node as centre,
together with all concepts it is directly related to. There is also functionality
for moving around nodes, or deleting concepts and relations. In Lexus mode,
clicking on the node with open Lexus to show the corresponding lexical entry in
linguistic context, thus strongly linking together lexical and ontological spaces.
On the back-end, ViCoS uses the OWL knowledge representation language
[4]. Conceptual spaces are stored within the JENA framework, which provides a
programmatic environment for OWL constructs as well as a rule-based inference
engine for retrieving implicit information [5]. Once a query user interface is in
place, users can then ask ViCoS, for instance, whether a given speech community categorises a dolphin as a type of fish, or whether dolphin meat is used
as ingredient for food recipes. The reasoning engine will exploit class-subclass
hierarchies and the characteristics of relation types, for instance, their domain
and range, and whether they are symmetric, transitive, or functional.

ViCoS has entered a test phase with end-users. First feedback from two documentation teams has been positive. We are currently implementing new functionality that aims at supporting users in the creation of conceptual spaces: an
interface to Lexus search engine where search results can be easily entered into

C. Zinn

the CS space; and a mechanism that suggests, for each noun, a CS that contains
its corresponding concept as well as candidate concepts to which it may be related to. These candidates will stem from the lexicon, exploiting, i.e., semantic
data categories, or from word co-occurrences within example sentences.

4 Discussion

Language documentation projects aim at preserving endangered cultural heritage for future generations, ideally within the communities themselves. Thus an
active involvement of community members is crucial for such projects to suc-
ceed. To overcome the limitations of a purely linguistic approach to language
documentation, we use knowledge engineering methods that allow members of
indigenous communities to play an active role in the documentation process. This
emphasises that a language is so much more than a list of lexical entries and their
scientific description in linguistic parlour. Our approach turns words into culturally relevant concepts and places them in relation to other concepts. It attempts
to engage and inspire community members to explore and to extend the resulting
knowledge space. Because our design preserves the relationship between lexical
and ontological space, users can browse them more or less simultaneously and
can thus gain a richer experience of the language and culture being documented.
In a way, our approach bridges scientific resources (lexica constructed by lin-
guists; and multimedia assets annotated by experts) with indigenous knowledge
resources (knowledge spaces constructed by community members).

Ensuring that emerging CSs stay manageable instead of becoming chaotic
and hard to interpret will be a main challenge. One could hope that the users
themselves organise the spaces they build. In particular, relation types will be
an issue as it is unclear whether the built-in relation types will be accepted
and properly used by community members. It is also to be seen how their set
grows, and how well they will be documented and reused; regular interventions
of moderators may prove necessary to clarify their semantics.

Acknowledgements. I would like to thank Jacquelijn Ringersma (MPI) and Gaby
Cablitz (University of Kiel) for testing ViCoS, and for reporting their feedback.
