KonneXSALT: First Steps Towards a Semantic

Claim Federation Infrastructure

Tudor Groza, Siegfried Handschuh, Knud M oller, and Stefan Decker

DERI, National University of Ireland, Galway,

{tudor.groza,siegfried.handschuh,knud.moeller,stefan.decker}@deri.org

IDA Business Park, Lower Dangan, Galway, Ireland

http://www.deri.ie/

Abstract. Dissemination, an important phase of scientific research, can
be seen as a communication process between scientists. They expose and
support their findings, while discussing claims stated in related scientific
publications. However, due to the increasing number of publications, finding a starting point for such a discussion represents a real challenge. At
same time, browsing can also be difficult since the communication spans
accross multiple publications on the open Web. In this paper we propose a
semantic claim federation infrastructure, named KonneXSALT, as a solution for both issues mentioned above: (i) finding claims in scientific pub-
lications, and (ii) providing support for browsing by starting with a claim
and then following the links in an argumentation discourse network (ADN)
(in our case, by making use of transclusion). In addition, we join the web of
linked open data, by linking the metadata contained in KonneXSALTwith
some of the known repositories of scientific publications.

1 Introduction

Dissemination, an important phase of scientific research, can be seen as a communication process between scientists. They expose and support their findings,
while discussing claims stated in related scientific publications. This communication takes place over the course of several publications, where each paper
itself contains a rhetorical discourse structure which lays out supportive evidence
for the raised claims. Often this discourse structure is hidden in the semantics
expressed by the publications content and thus hard to discover by the reader.
Externalization, as defined by Nonaka and Takeuchi [1], represents the process of articulating tacit knowledge into explicit concepts. As such, it holds the
key to knowledge creation. Consequently, the knowledge becomes crystallized,
thus allowing it to be shared with and by others. Although made explicit, the
externalized knowledge is dependent on the degree of formalization. In the case
of the argumentation discourse based on claims, it can be a couple of keywords,
or a weakly structured text, both possibly including direct references to the
publications stating the actual claims.

In a previous paper [2], we have described SALT (Semantically Annotated
LATEX), an authoring framework for creating semantic documents and defined a

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 8094, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
?

?

?
Web identification scheme (named claim identification tree) for claims in scientific publications. The goal of the framework was to define a clear formalization
for externalizing the knowledge captured in the argumentation discourses. We
defined a special LATEX markup syntax for annotating claims and arguments,
and modeled the relationship between them by means of the SALT Rhetorical
Ontology. The Web identification scheme allowed us to introduce a novel way
for authoring and referencing publications, by giving authors the possibility of
working at a fine-grained level, i.e., by citing claims within publications. The
main goal was to support the creation of networks of claims, which span across
multiple publications.

Having set the foundation, we have now reached the point where we can provide ways to use the externalized knowledge modelled as semantic metadata.
In this paper, we introduce KonneXSALT, a semantic claim federation infras-
tructure, designed with the goal of finding claims in scientific publications and
providing support for browsing argumentative discussions, starting from a particular claim. KonneXSALTwas not conceived to be yet another search engine,
but rather to represent a look-up service for externalized knowledge and realize
efficiency through the minimization of the data to be indexed. By using latent
semantic indexing, it also provides a means for discovering similarities among the
managed claims. From a browsing point of view, KonneXSALTdefines Argumentative Discourse Networks (ADN) as realizations of associative trails [3]. As a
consequence, it provides a method for federating claims with the help of semantic
technologies. In addition, for improving the readability of the ADNs, it makes
use of transclusion (the inclusion of part of a document into another document by
reference [4]). Finally, KonneXSALTcontributes to the web of linked open data
by linking the claims, and implicitly the publications hosting them, to publications referred to by social websites (e.g. Bibsonomy1) or managed by known
repositories (e.g. DBLP2). Our ultimate goal is to transform KonneXSALTin an
open hub for linking scientific publications based on externalized knowledge.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in Sect. 2 we present the
relevant research performed in this field. Following, we introduce our use-cases
(Sect. 3) and then, in Sect. 4, we provide background information to motivate
the decisions taken for achieving our goals. In Sect. 5 we present the design and
implementation of KonneXSALT, and before concluding in Sect. 7, we discuss
some ethical and technical challenges discovered during our research (Sect. 6).

2 Related Work

The relevant literature for our work can be split in two main categories: search
engines focused on scientific publications and hypertext systems close to our
browsing goals.

Table 1 shows a brief comparative overview of some of the known search
engines for scientific publications and shows how KonneXSALTcompares to them
1 http://www.bibsonomy.org/
2 http://dblp.uni-trier.de/

T. Groza et al.

Table 1. Scientific publication search engines overview

Google Scholar CiteSeer Science-Direct DBLP

KonneXSALT

Focus

Population
Full search
SW oriented
Linking
Openness

Full

publications

Crawling

+


+
