IVEA: An Information Visualization Tool for
Personalized Exploratory Document Collection

Analysis

VinhTuan Thai, Siegfried Handschuh, and Stefan Decker

Digital Enterprise Research Institute (DERI),

National University of Ireland, Galway

firstname.lastname@deri.org

Abstract. Knowledge work in many fields requires examining several
aspects of a collection of documents to attain meaningful understanding
that is not explicitly available. Despite recent advances in document
corpus visualization research, there is still a lack of principled approaches
which enable the users to personalize the exploratory analysis process. In
this paper, we present IVEA (Information Visualization for Exploratory
Document Collection Analysis), an innovative visualization tool which
employs the PIMO (Personal Information Model) ontology to provide the
knowledge workers with an interactive interface allowing them to browse
for information in a personalized manner. Not only does the tool allow
the users to integrate their interests into the exploration and analysis
of a document collection, it also enables them to incrementally enrich
their PIMO ontologies with new entities matching their evolving interests
in the process, and thus benefiting the users not only in their future
experiences with IVEA but also with other PIMO-based applications.
The usability of the tool was preliminarily evaluated and the results were
sufficiently encouraging to make it worthwhile to conduct a larger-scale
usability study.

Keywords:Personal Information Management, Semantic Desktop, PIMO
ontology, Exploratory Document Collection Analysis, Information Visual-
ization, Coordinated Multiple Views, Human-Computer Interaction.

1 Introduction

Apart from the need to retrieve information from documents that are relevant
to certain topics of interest, oftentimes knowledge workers also need to explore
and analyze a collection of documents as a whole to gain further understand-
ing. This particular kind of information-seeking activity can be referred to as
exploratory data analysis or information analysis and is commonly carried out
in science, intelligence and defense, or business fields [1]. Unlike the information
retrieval activity, the information analysis activity aims to provide the users
with an overall picture of a text collection as a whole on various dimensions
instead of presenting them with the most relevant documents satisfying some

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 139153, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

V. Thai, S. Handschuh, and S. Decker

search criteria. The insights obtained from the exploration and analysis of a text
collection can enable the knowledge workers to understand the distribution of
topics, to find clusters of similar documents, or to identify trends or linkages between different entities [1]. Information visualization is an effective mechanism
to support the information analysis task and has also been widely employed in
many data mining and knowledge discovery tools to identify previously unknown
useful information.

While there are many existing tools reported in the Information Visualization
literature that support document corpus visualization (such as [1,2,3,4]), most
are based only on the text of the documents in the corpus and hence present
findings that are independent of the users interests. Their approaches focus on
the entity extraction process in order to identify the main entities (e.g. topics,
people, locations) within a document collection and then visualize different linkages between the identified entities onto a 2D or 3D user interface. While the
automatic extraction of entities is helpful, the visual exploration process cannot
be aligned with the knowledge workers interests, especially when a number of
entities contained within their spheres of interests are of particular importance
to their knowledge work. As a result, the knowledge workers cannot have a personal viewpoint over the entities and relationships that they wish to focus on
to gain insights by using the existing tools. There is a clear need to link various important concepts and structures within parts of the knowledge workers
mental models with the document collection visual exploration and analysis ac-
tivity. To achieve this, it is necessary that these concepts and structures can be
externalized to some formal representation.

The above requirement motivates us to investigate existing work within the
Semantic Desktop area where several integrated Personal Information Management environments have been introduced [5]. In the Semantic Desktop paradigm,
desktop items are treated as Semantic Web resources and formal ontologies al-
low the user to express personal mental models and form the semantic glue
interconnecting information and systems [5]. One such ontology has been designed and developed within the Gnowsis project and is based upon the Personal
Information Model (PIMO) [6]. Since the PIMO ontology acts as a formal representation of the structures and concepts within a knowledge workers mental
model [6], it can be employed as a means to integrate her personal interests into
an exploratory visualization tool. This would give the PIMO-based visualization
tool clear advantages over the keyword-based visualization tools in that: (1) it
can align the exploration process with the users interests and hence can offer
the users the control over which aspects of a text collection they wish to focus
on, (2) it can utilize the hierarchical structure (class-subclasses, class-instances)
within the PIMO ontology to provide the users with the flexibility to explore a
text collection at different levels of detail.

In this context, we propose an innovative visualization tool called IVEA, which
leverages upon the PIMO ontology and the Coordinated Multiple Views technique to support the personalized exploration and analysis of document collec-
tions. IVEA allows for an interactive and user-controlled exploration process in
?

?

?
which the knowledge workers can gain meaningful, rapid understanding about
a text collection via intuitive visual displays. Not only does the tool allow the
users to integrate their interests into the visual exploration and analysis activity,
it also enables them to incrementally enrich their PIMO ontologies with entities
matching their evolving interests in the process. With the newly added entities,
the PIMO ontology becomes a richer and better representation the users interests and hence can lead to better and more personalized exploration and analysis
experiences in the future. Furthermore, not only can IVEA be beneficial to its
targeted task, it provides an easy and incremental way that requires minimal
effort from the users to keep their PIMO ontologies in line with their continuously changing interests. This, indirectly, can also benefit other PIMO-based
applications.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 details different
visual aspects of IVEA. Its system architecture is described in Section 3. In
Section 4, we present a usability study and a discussion on the results. Related
work is highlighted in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper and outlines
future work.

2 Proposed Solution

2.1 Design Desiderata

In order to design a suitable visualization solution, various factors need to be
taken into consideration, including: (1) the nature of the task (personalized exploratory analysis, integration of newly discovered entities to evolving spheres of
interests), (2) the type of data (contents of documents in a collection rather than
those of a single metadata file describing it), (3) the target users (knowledge
workers rather than computer users in general), and (4) their typically available
work environment (2D display interface rather than advanced 3D environment).
Furthermore, the design of advanced visual interfaces can also benefit from the
well-known visual information-seeking mantra: Overview first, zoom and filter,
then details-on-demand proposed by Shneiderman in his seminal paper [7]. Taking into account all those aspects, desirable capabilities for such a visualization
solution would be:

 Provide an overall view showing the degrees of relevance of all documents in
a collection with respect to the personal interests represented by the PIMO
ontology.

 Enable the users to interactively explore and analyze a text collection at
different levels of detail by filtering the set of documents based on the PIMO
concepts and instances and their hierarchical relationships.

 Provide a detailed view on demand which focuses on the distribution of

entities of interest within each document.

 Suggest the users with entities potentially matching their evolving interests

and enable them to enrich the PIMO ontology with the selected entities.

V. Thai, S. Handschuh, and S. Decker

2.2 Visual Interface

To cater for the above-mentioned needs, we employ the Coordinated Multiple
Views (CMV) technique [8] to design IVEA, as shown in Fig. 1. The use of
the CMV technique enables the users to understand a text collection better via
different visual displays highlighting different aspects of it, as well as via the
interactions with and coordinations between those displays. Interested readers
are encouraged to view the demo screencast available online1.

Fig. 1. IVEA interface

IVEAs visual interface consists of four views as follows:

 Personal Knowledge View: The tree structure, as shown on the upper-left
corner of Fig. 1, is used to display the concepts, instances and their hierarchical relationships within the PIMO ontology. Although this tree structure
does not display many other relationships that exist between PIMO concepts and instances, it is sufficient to serve as an anchor keeping the users
informed of their entities of interest. This view acts as the basis for some of
the interactions in IVEA.

1 http://smile.deri.ie/projects/ivea/demo/demo1.html
?

?

?
 Collection Overview: The scatter plot, as shown on the upper-right corner of Fig. 1, is used as the overall view to display documents matching the
users interests. On the scatter plot, each document is represented by a dot
and its file name is shown in the dots tooltip text. The coordinate of a dot
on the scatter plot is determined by the relevance values of the dots corresponding document with respect to the classes or instances set on the x and
y axes. The initial display of the scatter plot, as shown in Fig. 1, uses the
overall relevance values of documents in the collection with respect to the set
of all PIMO instances on both axes. Based on this initial display, the users
can, for example, see that in the collection being explored, 59 documents
overlap with their interests and that the document C:\data\Papers\iswc
2007\197.pdf , represented by the rightmost dot on the scatter plot, is most
relevant, based on its coordinate. More details about that particular document can be obtained immediately from the coordinated document overview
and entities distribution view as described shortly. Moreover, the dimension of either of the two axes can be changed to reflect how relevant the
documents are with respect to the concepts or instances placed on it. The
dots colors and shapes are used to differentiate the associated documents.
The dots size can be customized to accommodate for text collections of
different sizes.

 Document Overview: Bar charts are used to display detailed views on
various characteristics of each document in the collection. Three different bar
charts are used on the lower-right corner of Fig. 1. The first bar chart shows
the PIMO instances appearing in a document together with the relevance
values of that document with respect to them. The second one displays the
matching PIMO instances based on their frequencies. The third bar chart
shows the top frequent phrases or terms in a document. For instance, in Fig.
1, the top frequent phrases bar chart of the document 197.pdf  mentioned
above shows that the word claim appears most frequently.

 Entities Distribution View: This view, as shown in the lower-left corner
of Fig. 1, is based on the TileBars, originally reported in [9], and some
of its variants in [10]. It is used to display the matching PIMO instances
within each fragment of a document. The rows are associated with PIMO
instances whose labels are placed next to them on the right. The number
of column in this view is the number of fragments to divide a document
up to, whose value can be set by the users. Each document is split into
sentences and they are put into fragments such that each fragment contains
an approximately equal number of sentences. The height of the colored area
in a cell is determined by the frequency of the corresponding PIMO instance
in that particular fragment. By using this view, the users can quickly be
informed of the relative locations, in which certain entities of interest appear,
together with their respective frequencies. For instance, Fig. 1 shows that
the instance SALT  of the concept pimo:Project appears more often in
the first three fragments than in any other parts of the document 197.pdf .

V. Thai, S. Handschuh, and S. Decker

2.3 Interactions, Manipulations and Coordinations

In line with the visual information-seeking mantra [7], IVEA provides the users
with the freedom to interact and control the visual displays in the following
manners:
 Filtering: It is essential that the users are able to filter out uninteresting
documents to focus only on a restricted subset of a text collection. In IVEA,
the users can directly manipulate the overall view displayed in the scatter
plot by dragging concepts or instances from the personal knowledge view
and dropping them onto the labels of the x and y axes to indicate the dimensions upon which the relevance values of documents are to be measured.
IVEA instantly updates the scatter plot by executing dynamic queries for
the relevance values of all documents with respect to the instance or the
aggregated relevance values with respect to the concept placed on the axes.
In Fig. 2, the x-axis highlights documents relevant to Semantic Desktop
while the y-axis highlights documents relevant to pimo:Person. The relevance value of a document with respect to pimo:Person is dynamically
measured as the aggregated relevance value of that document with respect to
all instances of the concept pimo:Person in the PIMO ontology. Hence, the
scatter plot can show, among others, documents referring to both the topic
Semantic Desktop and one or more persons who are of specific interest to
the users (documents plotted above both axes). The example also illustrates
that IVEA can take advantage of the hierarchical relationships between entities within the PIMO ontology to allow for the rapid exploration of a text
collection at different levels of detail.

 Details-on-demand: Once the overall view has been restricted to a specific set of documents, the users can investigate the details of each document within that set. Clicking on a dot in the scatter plot will open up the
corresponding document in its associated application. Furthermore, to interactively link the collection overview with the detailed views, coordinations
between the scatter plot and the bar charts as well as the Entities Distribution View are provided in such a way that hovering the mouse over a dot in
the scatter plot will display the corresponding bar charts and highlight the
TileBars of the document represented by that dot. This interaction is also
illustrated in Fig. 2.

 PIMO ontology enrichment: An innovative feature of IVEA is its capability to enable the users, with minimal efforts, to enrich their PIMO ontologies
while exploring a text collection. While investigating a particular document
to see how it overlaps with their spheres of interests, the users are presented
with the most frequent phrases2 in that document. The top frequent phrases
and their corresponding frequencies are displayed in a histogram as shown
in Fig. 3. If any of the presented phrases is of specific interest to the users,
they are just two-click away from adding it to the PIMO ontology simply by
dragging its respective column in the histogram and dropping on a concept

2 Candidate phrases are nouns or noun chunks consisting of at most 3 words.
?

?

?
Filtering

Details-on-demand

Fig. 2. Interactive Filtering and Details-on-demand

in the PIMO ontology. The users have the option to add the selected phrase
as a subclass or instance of the targeted concept. Fig. 3 and 4 illustrate how
the users can enrich the PIMO ontology by adding conference as a subclass of pimo:Event. We believe that this is of benefit to the users as it
allows them to update their PIMO ontologies with new entities on-the-fly.
Consequently, they can better explore a text collection when their spheres
of interests are better represented. Besides, an extended PIMO ontology is
useful not only for IVEA but also for other PIMO-based applications.

3 System Architecture

The system architecture is shown in Fig. 5. Documents in a collection are first
analyzed by the text processing component, which is based on various natural
language processing resources (Tokenizer, Sentence Splitter, POS Tagger, JAPE
Transducer) provided by the GATE [11] API. Each document is split into sentences to identify the fragments boundaries for use in the Entities Distribution
View. Furthermore, to suggest the users with entities potentially matching their
interest, most frequent noun chunks in each document together with their frequencies are extracted.

V. Thai, S. Handschuh, and S. Decker

Options to add conference as a 
subclass or an instance of pimo:Event

Drag-n-drop conference
to pimo:Event

Fig. 3. Adding new concepts or instances to the PIMO ontology

The PIMO ontology 
enriched with a new 
concept

Fig. 4. The PIMO ontology added with a new concept

The analyzed text is then stored into a Lucene3 index. A Boolean query (with
the default OR operator) consisting of all PIMO instances is used to retrieve
documents that are of interest to the users. The term weight in a document of
an instance is used as the relative relevance value of that document with respect

3 http://lucene.apache.org/
?

?

?
Fig. 5. System architecture

to that instance. In Lucene, a variant of the well-known TF.IDF term weight
function is used, which takes into account the frequency of a term locally (in
a document) and globally (in the whole collection), as well as the length of a
document itself [12]. The relative relevance value of a document with respect to
a class is the aggregated relevance value of that document with respect to all of
its direct instances and recursively, all of its subclasses.

The above relevance values and the frequencies of PIMO instances in fragments of each document are used as raw data for the visualization components.
The implementation of the visual displays is based on the prefuse library [13]
and Java Swing components.

4 Usability study

Given a text collection on the desktop, most users are used to keyword-based
search interface to look for documents satisfying some criteria using a desktop
search engine. To explore a text collection this way, the users may have to perform many searches, each with a query containing multiple Boolean clauses. As
such, we implemented a baseline interface as shown in Fig. 6 and performed a
small-scale usability study to (1) get initial indications about the users performances by using IVEA versus by using the baseline interface, and (2) identify
IVEAs potential usability problems.

4.1 Description

Six researchers participated in the study. They all had prior knowledge about ontology and Boolean query operators. They were assumed to have the same sphere
of interest, whose concepts and structures were encoded into a predefined PIMO
ontology. This PIMO ontology acted as the basis for exploring and analyzing a test
collection consisting of 62 research papers in the Semantic Web domain. Although
the collections size was not large, it was suitable for this initial study since it could

V. Thai, S. Handschuh, and S. Decker

Fig. 6. Baseline interface

be representative of some real-world situation, e.g. when a researcher wishes to understand different characteristics of a document collection consisting of scientific
papers published at a conference in a particular year.

The subjects were asked to perform the same set of 4 simple tasks and 4
complex tasks by using first the baseline interface and then the visual interface,
followed by filling out the follow-up questionnaire. The following measures were
recorded based on the subjects responses:
 Effectiveness: calculated as the accuracy and completeness with which the

users accomplished a tasks goal [14].

 Temporal efficiency: calculated as the ratio between the effectiveness

achieved in a task and the time taken to complete that task [14].

 Users satisfaction: determined by the ratings responded to the followup questionnaire consisting of 12 Likert-scale questions (the ratings are on a
range from -2 (strongly disagree/very bad) to 2 (strongly agree / very good))
and 1 open-ended question seeking suggestions on improving IVEAs design.

Further details about the tasks, the questionnaire and their respective results
can be found online4. In the next section, we elaborate our findings and discuss
what can be deduced from them.

4.2 Findings

We are aware that the study described above is not a summative usability evalu-
ation, which would (1) involve a larger number of participants who are representative of the target users population (knowledge workers) and hence may have
limited knowledge about ontology and Boolean query operators, (2) require a
larger test collection, (3) use a more extensive set of tasks, and (4) require that
each interface be used first by half of the subjects. Nevertheless, at this stage

4 http://smile.deri.ie/projects/ivea/usability/preliminary.html
?

?

?
Fig. 7. Average Effectiveness and Temporal Efficiency by Task Type and Interface
Used

of IVEAs design and development, the outcomes of the conducted study provide us with initial suggestive indications of its performances as well as potential
usability problems.

With respect to the participants performances, the average effectiveness and

temporal efficiency are shown in Fig. 7.

In terms of effectiveness, it is interesting to note that, on average, the participants achieved a better score on the set of simple tasks by using the baseline
interface than by using IVEA. We believe that this could be due to the effect of
experience, whereby all the participants were very familiar with using keywordbased search interface to find out simple facts but had no prior experience with
IVEA before. Meanwhile, they achieved the same score on the set of complex
tasks by using the two interfaces, and the score was higher than those achieved
on the set of simple tasks. This could be attributed to the order in which the task
types were introduced (from simple to complex) whereby the subjects learned
from the mistakes they made when using both interfaces for the first time while
performing the simple tasks, and they became more experienced with both in-
terfaces features as they moved along to carry out the complex tasks.

When the task completion time was taken into consideration, Fig. 7 shows
that the temporal efficiencies of the participants are comparable on the set of
simple tasks by using the two interfaces. Meanwhile, on the set of complex tasks,
the participant were considerably more efficient by using IVEA than by using the
baseline interface. Moreover, the overall temporal efficiency of the participants
on the set of complex tasks is lower than that of the participants on the set
of simple tasks on both of the interfaces. The results suggest that our work is
toward the right direction, however we are aware that a further usability study
on a large scale is necessary.

With respect to the participants satisfaction, their responses on the questionnaire are shown on Fig. 8. Among the 6 participants, a particularly well-liked
aspect of IVEA was that its design and layout were appealing, whereas the ratings were a bit low for its self-descriptiveness and being complex for the task. We
believe that with proper documentation, these setbacks can be mitigated. Some
of the participants suggested to display 10 frequent phrases instead of the default

V. Thai, S. Handschuh, and S. Decker

Fig. 8. Questionnaire responses

setting of 5. In fact, this number could be customized, but the lack of detailed
manual rendered the participants uninformed of this feature. The participants
also provided us with valuable design feedback such as:
 Highlight the most relevant document on the scatter plot.
 Group the visual items in the document view and the Entities Distribution

 Display the text surrounding the PIMO instances in the tooltip text of the

View by class.

TileBars cells.

 Enable the Collection Overview to display at more than 2 dimensions.

To sum up, the study provided us with useful suggestive indications and valuable
feedback to improve the design of IVEA in the future. In the next section, we
review related work.

5 Related Work

Many research efforts in the area of Semantic Desktop [15,16,17,18] have introduced semantically-enabled Personal Information Management environments on
the desktop. Although many useful functionalities are provided in these envi-
ronments, we are not aware of any visualization tool that enables the users to
explore and analyze a text collection according to their interests.

In the Information Visualization literature, a number of exploratory visualization tools are described in [19]. These tools, however, visualize different aspects
of a domain based on the contents of a single file, which contains manually
?

?

?
cleaned metadata describing a set of documents within that domain [19]. They
do not enable exploring a text collection based on the documents contents, and
the considerable efforts required to produce the metadata file make it impractical for wide-spread use. In addition, several document corpus visualization tools
have been developed (e.g. [1,2,3,4,20]). However, they are based only on the
textual contents of the documents and provide no mechanism to integrate and
utilize an ontology representing the users knowledge or interests. Hence, they
lack some of the capabilities that ontology-based visualization tools offer, e.g.
they do not allow the users to personalize the dimensions in which insights are to
be gained. Nor do they enable the addition of newly discovered entities into the
users knowledge. It is also worth noting Adunas AutoFocus, an ontology-based
visualization tool which displays search results for documents on the desktop
as clusters of populated concepts [21]. While allowing for the exploration of a
document collection based on the extracted metadata and search keywords, in
AutoFocus no deep insights or comparisons can be attained when the degrees
of relevance of documents with respect to each entity within the users spheres
of interests are not available. Many other ontology-based visualization tools are
designed specifically for certain domains and hence have different objectives
than ours.

Also related to our work are faceted search and browsing tools, e.g. Flamenco
[22] or Exhibit [23], which allow the users to navigate along different conceptual
dimensions of a given document collection or a structured dataset. Although
these tools are very effective in supporting browsing and exploratory tasks, they
were designed either to work on document collection whose rich metadata categories are available or only to be used for browsing structured data.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper, we introduced IVEA, an innovative information visualization tool
which supports the task of personalized exploratory document collection analy-
sis. IVEA leverages upon the PIMO ontology as a formal representation of the
users interests and combined various visual forms in an innovative way into an
interactive visualization tool. The integration of the PIMO ontology into IVEA
allows the users to rapidly explore text collections at different levels of detail.
To cater for the knowledge workers evolving spheres of interests, IVEA enables
them to enrich their PIMO ontologies with new concepts and instances on-the-
fly. A small-scale usability study was carried out and the results were sufficiently
encouraging to make it worthwhile to conduct a larger-scale usability study.

In future work, we plan to improve IVEAs functionalities based on the useful
feedback gathered. In addition, we intend to employ anaphora resolution techniques so that co-references of PIMO instances (e.g. European Central Bank,
ECB, the bank, it) can be correctly identified. Furthermore, the users
should be able to tag documents with PIMO concepts and instances. IVEA will
also need to be capable of handling more types of textual documents than just
PDF files. Once the final version of IVEA is developed, a full-scale summative
evaluation is to be carried out to gauge its usability.

V. Thai, S. Handschuh, and S. Decker

As a final remark, it is our hope that the benefits that IVEA can bring about
are not confined within its targeted task. If its final version has a high usability, it
will demonstrate, to a certain extent, that the PIMO ontology is very useful and
hence will motivate more users to start populating their own PIMO ontologies
and use them to describe desktop items. This activity is certainly of particular
importance to the realization of Semantic Desktop environments.

Acknowledgments. We thank Anthony Jameson for his constructive comments on a draft of this paper, and the anonymous reviewers for the insightful
remarks. We are also grateful to the researchers who participated in the usability
study. This work is supported by the Science Foundation Ireland(SFI) under the
DERI-Lion project (SFI/02/CE1/1131) and partially by the European Commission 6th Framework Programme in context of the EU IST NEPOMUK IP - The
Social Semantic Desktop Project, FP6-027705.
