User Profiling for Semantic Browsing in Medical  

Digital Libraries 

Patty Kostkova, Gayo Diallo, and Gawesh Jawaheer 

City ehalth Research Centre, City University, Northampton Square, London,  

EC1V 0HB, UK 

patty@soi.city.ac.uk, 

{Gayo.Diallo.1,Gawesh.Jawaheer.1}@city.ac.uk  

Abstract.  Semantic  Browsing  provides  contextualized  dynamically  generated 
Web content customizing the knowledge to better meet user expectations. The 
real-world medical digital library, the National electronic Library of Infection 
(NeLI,  www.neli.org.uk), enriched with an infection domain ontology enables 
new semantic services to be developed qualitatively. In this paper, we will address the use of group profiling to customize semantic browsing by integrating 
distributed  knowledge  sources.  The  service  is  evaluated  by  web  server  logs 
analysis, dynamically enhancing the profiles and by qualitative feedback from 
real users of the NeLI portal.  

1   Introduction and Background 

The  Semantic  Web  leverages  the  knowledge  integration  on  the  Web  to  new  levels.  
Despite the efforts put into the technical and research issues, there are few applications actually deploying and evaluating semantic web with real users. Semantic web 
can only deliver if it is driven by user needs, context or profiles to seamlessly  integrate the knowledge on the web to really provide desirable content.    

This is in particular relevant in the medical domain. The Internet enabled patients 
and healthcare professionals to access vast amount of available information but this 
often results in the inability to find what is needed and when it is needed [1]. Medical 
sites need to support a profile-based semantic search and a contextualized browsing to 
integrate knowledge from other medical portals needed by particular medical users or 
patients.  

Context and customisation are some of the key factors for accurate, effective relevant information access in Internet digital libraries and in general  in the Semantic 
Web. Allan et al.  [2] define contextual retrieval as a general framework combining 
search technologies and knowledge about a query and so called user context into a 
single framework in order to provide the most appropriate results for  users information needs. The context of the user may include his/her level of expertise and domains 
of interest. An user profile is a record of user specific data that define users interests, 
his/her level of expertise, and his/her context. 

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 827  831, 2008. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008 

P. Kostkova, G. Diallo, and G. Jawaheer 

2   Semantics Profiling in NeLI  

2.1   Overview 

The work presented in this paper demonstrates using profiles to customise user access  
in the UK based National electronic Library in Infection (NeLI) and to semantically 
integrate  NeLI  with  other  medical  portals.  Since  2000,  NeLI  has  provided  a  single 
access point to the best available evidence around all aspects of infection and is currently  being  used  by  more  than  15  000  real-world  medical  professionals  a  month.  
Portal users range from  members of the public, General Practitioners (GPs), nurses, 
consultants  communicable  disease  control  (CCDCs)  to  senior  Primary  Care  Trust 
executives.  NeLI  has  been  gathering  user  and  group  profiles  providing  contextual 
information essential for support of customised services. The development of the new 
version  of  NeLI  portal  takes  into  consideration  the  emerging  Semantic  Web  where 
ontologies are one of the essential components [3].This is particularly the case in the 
(bio)medical domain where substantial efforts have been made to develop standards, 
medical  terminologies  and  coding  systems  (SNOMED,  MeSH  and  UMLS,  which 
integrates  more  than  100  most  relevant  vocabulary  sources  in  medicine1),  thereby, 
providing  knowledge bases for encoding medical evidence. As there is no standard 
ontology meeting our specific need, the NeLI ontology has been developed representing the infection medical domain with several hundred concepts.  

Resources in the library are indexed using a NeLI ontology that has been created 
form a pruned sub-tree of the MeSH2 (Medical Subject Headings) vocabulary and a 
customised classification for infection control and public health. The development of 
the NeLI ontology has been carried out by 3 NeLI content managers, in a close collaboration with the project Advisory Board members and infection experts in the UK.  
Profiling for recommending research papers based on ontologies was investigated 
by Middleton [4]. Dynamic profiling applied to information retrieval on the web has 
been widely applied [5]. However, a very common application of profiles is the vision 
of customised content relevant to the particular profile [6]. 

In this section, we will look into the spectrum of NeLI users and discuss how they 
could be categorised in terms of profiles. NeLI users come from different professional 
backgrounds  and  specialties  which  determine  their  medical  interests,  information 
needs and type of questions they are asking on the portal. In addition to their profes-
sions,  they  have  particular  specialities  and  are  likely  to  have  particular  interests  in 
treatment  or  investigation  of  a  particular  disease  or  a  group  of  diseases.  Due  to  the 
size limitation of this demo paper, personal user profiles are outside the remit of this 
publication  and  can  be  found  in  [7].  Based  on  personal  profiles,  which  have  been 
inserted  manually  by  NeLI  users,  we  have  an  understanding  of  their  professional 
backgrounds and personal interested. Users have provided this information to us when 
subscribing to project updates at conferences or online. We use the personal profiles 
as a base for semi-automated development of professional group profiles.  

                                                           
1 http:// umlsks.nlm.nih.gov/ 
2 www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/2002/index.html 
?

?

?
2.2   Professional Group Profiles 

The professional group profile is defined as a tuple: N={p,s,e,o,t} where p  P, s  P,  
e  O, o  O and t  T, where O is the set of NeLI ontology concepts, P is the list of 
NeLI  recognised  professions  and  T  is  a  list  of  NeLI-recommended  external  knowledge web portals in a form of a URL (called Targets). The list P of NeLI recognised 
professions include: clinical scientists, nurse, consultant, environmental health officer, 
general  practitioner,  lecturer,  microbiologist.  An    example  of  a  user  is  illustrated  in 
Table 1.  

Table 1. Example of a speciality group user profile 

Profession 
Speciality 
Expertise Area 
Other Area of Interest 

Targets  

Nurse 
Infection Control 

Hand washing 
Antibiotic Resistance 
National Policy 
Department of Health  

Currently, we are looking into a dynamic web server log-based generation of the 
profiles  (the  Other  Area  of  Interest  and  the  Targets  fields  being  dynamically  populated  by  frequently  searched  keywords  from  the  NeLI  ontology).  The  aim  is  to  dynamically enhance the profiles by evaluation of the search keywords and navigation 
terms from the web server logs. Users in a group may have different interests, but also 
sufficiently  similar  interests  for  the  development  of  group  default  preferences.  The 
need  for  a  combination  of  professional,  speciality  and  topic  comes  from  different 
questions asked by different users.  For example, all users search for TB (tuberculo-
sis) but the information they actually need varies: a clinician will ask about latest TB 
guidelines provided by the Department of Health (target), an infection control nurse 
about isolating patients with TB, a public health office is more concerned about highrisk TB populations and outreach to them, while a GP might need to check the latest 
diagnosis  and  treatment  recommendations  for  TB.      A  case  scenario  around  TB  is 
shown in Table 2. Based on the user group (profession), different information is to be 
provided  (targets  portals with further knowledge). 

Table 2. User profiles information needs example based on a TB scenario 

Professional group 
GPs 

clinicians 

nurse 
public 

Targets 
BNF (British National Formulary) 
NeLI treatment pages  
PubMed 
Clinical Evidence 
Department of Health 
Wikipedia 
HPA Public leaflets 
Nathnac 

P. Kostkova, G. Diallo, and G. Jawaheer 

3   Semantic Browsing and Semantic Knowledge Integration 

Semantic browsing provides users  with dynamically selected concepts or links from 
an ontology  enriched by the profile-based customization this selects and integrates 
web portals by working as a semantic recommender system.  NeLI semantic browsing is being developed in the context of the SeaLife project [8] enabling users to semantically browse the Web by highlighting ontology concepts and providing dynamic 
access to Web servers or knowledge portals semantically related to the Web content 
retrieved (targets).  

To  facilitate  this,  NeLI  has  integrated  the  Conceptual  Open  Hypermedia  Service 
(COHSE)  system  [9]  developed  at  University  of  Manchester.  COHSE  automatically 
inserts hyperlinks on web pages by recognizing terms contained in background knowl-
edge,  based  on  an  uploaded  ontology,  and  presents  the  user  with  search  web  services 
linking to relevant targets, see Table 2. For any term from the ontology, resources are 
provided for broader, narrower and related terms based on ontological taxonomical and 
non-taxonomical relationships.  Selecting the relevant set of targets for a particular profile improves the contextualization of the search and recommender function. 

Demonstrator 
Unlike  many  other  demos  serving  just  as  a  proof  of  concept,  NeLI  is  a  real-world 
Internet medical library with over 15 000 unique users a month.  In the demonstration, 
we will show the ontology-based selection of targets based on the user group profiles. 
A medical scenario semantically integrating the following targets based on ontologybased relationships will be shown for two profiles: public and nurses.  

A public user visits NeLI to search for tropical diseases. A list of search results 
based  on  taxonomical  relationships  in  the  NeLI  ontology  is  displayed  containing 
(among others)  malaria resources. NeLI ontology terms on the page are  highlighted 
by the NeLI-COHSE system and ontological relationships to malaria are shown in a 
pop-up  box.  Among  non-taxonomical  relationship  is  caused  is  shown  giving 
Plasmodium. When selected, the targets for public profile show the Nathnac web site 
http://www.nathnac.org giving travelers information on malaria for public. 

A nurse searches for healthcare associated infection. Results contain documents 
on  MRSA,  TB  etc.,  provided  by  the  NeLI  ontology.    When  a  TB  concept  is 
highlighted  a  pop-up  box  providing  the  ontology  relationships  shows  a  nontaxonomical transmission mode giving airborne. The HPA (www.hpa.org.uk) and 
Department  of  Health  (www.dh.gov.uk)  targets,  provided  for  a  nurse  profile,  are 
searched  to  give  policy  resources  on  management  of  healthcare  acquired  TB    in 
particular, respiratory isolation and respiratory protection.  

These  two  case  scenarios  demonstrate  the  semantic  search,  use  of  taxonomical  and 
non-taxonomical relationships in the NeLI ontology and the new concept of selection of 
targets  for  different  professional  profiles  and  the  construction  of  searches  on  those 
external sites to provide contextualized information. These are new features enhancing 
the COHSE system developed by the NELI team to support profile-based customization. 
A screen shot cand be found in Figure 1.  

The visitors will see a unique working example of domain ontology-driven medical 
portal  in  use  by  practising  clinicians  and  a  semantically  integrated  knowledge  from 
other portals based on professional group profiles.  
?

?

?
Fig. 1. NeLI-COHSE Semantic Browsing and Recommender Case Scenario 

 

Acknowledgments.  We  acknowledge  the  EC  for  providing  funding  for  the  SeaLife 
project (IST-2006-027269). We thank the University of Manchester for providing the 
COHSE System used in this research. 
