Pronto: A Non-monotonic Probabilistic

Description Logic Reasoner

Pavel Klinov

The University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

pklinov@cs.man.ac.uk

Abstract. The demonstration presents Pronto - a prototype of a nonmonotonic probabilistic reasoner for very expressive Description Logics.
Pronto is built on top of the OWL DL reasoner Pellet, and is capable of performing default probabilistic reasoning in the Semantic Web.
It can handle uncertainty in terminological and assertional DL axioms.
The demonstration covers Prontos features and capabilities as well as
current challenges and limitations. It describes how an involved realistic
problem of breast cancer risk assessment can be formalized in terms of
probabilistic reasoning in Pronto. As an important outcome, it is anticipated that attendees should learn and better understand the potential
of ontology based approaches to modeling problems involving reasoning
under uncertainty.

1 Introduction

One of the limitations of current Description Logic (DL) reasoners is the inability to handle uncertain knowledge. It is a serious obstacle to the expansion of
the Semantic Web because many domains of human interest contain knowledge
that cannot be represented with absolute certainty. One example of an uncertain
domain is medicine, in particular, disease diagnosing. Symptoms, causes and consequences of many diseases are uncertain which complicates conceptualization
of such domains in formal ontologies and thus restricts machine understanding.
This demonstration presents Pronto - a probabilistic DL reasoner prototype [1].
Pronto is an attempt to provide reasoning services for P-SHIN (D) - a very expressive formalism that is a probabilistic generalization of OWL with the exception of
nominals [2]. In addition to presenting the Prontos features and capabilities, the
demo displays how Pronto can aid in the probabilistic modeling of a realistic medical problem by providing representation and reasoning services for constructing
and using a probabilistic ontology for breast cancer risk assessment.

2 Research Background

Pronto provides means for the representation of uncertain ontological statements
and offers a collection of reasoning services. It uses the syntax of Lukasiewiczs
conditional constraints to express uncertain OWL axioms [2] and Lehmanns
lexicographic entailment to perform default probabilistic reasoning [3] [2].

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 822826, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
?

?

?
2.1 Representation of Uncertain Knowledge
Pronto represents uncertain ontological knowledge using P-SHIN (D) formalism
[2] that is a probabilistic generalization of the very expressive DLs SHIN (D).
It is heavily based on the earlier developed approach to default probabilistic
reasoning with conditional constraints [4]. In the context of P-SHIN (D), conditional constraints are expressions of the form (D|C)[l, u] where C and D are
arbitrary SHIN (D) concepts and [l, u] is a closed interval within [0, 1].
Using conditional constraints Pronto is capable of representing both, generic
and individual uncertainty. For example, a generic constraint (F ly|Bird)[0.9, 0.95]
where F ly and Bird are DL concepts, can express the uncertainty that randomly
picked bird can fly. Similarly, a constraint (P enguin|)[0.7, 0.8] for individual
T weety captures the uncertainty in T weety being an instance of P enguin.
The important feature of P-SHIN (D) supported by Pronto is the ability to
capture default terminological knowledge. That is, TBox constraints are default
in the sense that they represent statements that are generally true but might
fail for some specific individuals. They can also be overridden by more specific
statements. The demo will exemplify this possibility.

2.2 Default Probabilistic Reasoning
The main reasoning task in P-SHIN (D) is entailing new conditional constraints,
both, terminological and assertional, from probabilistic knowledge bases. Given
that standard notion of logical entailment is too weak [4], it has been proposed
to use Lehmanns lexicographic entailment that obeys desirable non-monotonic
properties [3]. In particular, it allows to resolve conflicts between conditional
constraints by preferring some constraints to others [4].

Computing probabilistic entailments involves other reasoning procedures, such
as probabilistic satisfiability and probabilistic consistency. Satisfiability is defined in a traditional way, i.e., as a problem of determining whether given probabilistic knowledge base has a model. Consistency has no analogue in monotonic
DL reasoning. Knowledge base is consistent iff given a probabilistic entailment
relation, it is possible to resolve all conflicts during reasoning.

All aforementioned reasoning procedures are implemented in Pronto.

3 Technological Basis

One of the principal requirements for Pronto was that the uncertainty could be
gradually introduced into existing OWL ontologies and that the existing OWL
reasoning services should be retained. To meet that requirement, Pronto was
designed on top of the OWL reasoner Pellet [5] that performs reasoning with
the classical part of ontologies and provides routines for higher level probabilistic
reasoning procedures, e.g., lexicographic entailment.

Pronto also employs methods for solving linear optimization and related sub-
problems. Following Lukasiewiczs approaches to probabilistic default reasoning

P. Klinov

and probabilistic logic programming, Pronto reduces the probabilistic satisfiability (PSAT) to the problem of solvability of a corresponding linear system. In
addition, lexicographic entailment is reduced to a number of logical entailments
each of which is computed by performing linear optimization. Pronto makes use
of an LP solver to perform these tasks 1.

Finally, Pronto uses OWL 1.1 axiom annotations to associate probability in-

tervals with uncertain OWL axioms.

4 Demonstration

It has been chosen to use Life Sciences domain, in particular, medical informatics
to demonstrate Prontos capabilities. Medical informatics has a successful history
of using ontologies for modeling domain knowledge [6]. At the same time, medical
domain knowledge is often uncertain especially when it is required to diagnose
diseases or estimate risks of developing them in the future.

One relevant medical problem is assessing women risk of developing breast
cancer. Given that neither all the relevant risk factors are known nor their impact is sufficiently investigated, the assessment cannot be done with absolute
certainty. There have been proposed few statistical approaches to probabilistically estimate the breast cancer risk, for example, Gail model used by the
National Cancer Institute (NCI) risk calculator2 [7].

The demo aims to show how Pronto might aid in approaching the same problem by incorporating the statistical knowledge into a cancer ontology. It will
first present how the problem can be modeled using a probabilistic ontology,
and second, how risk assessment can be performed on the basis of probabilistic
default reasoning. Extended version of web based ontology browser OWLSight
3 will serve as the interface to Pronto.

4.1 Probabilistic Model Demonstration

The model of breast cancer risk assessment consists of two major parts - classical
OWL ontology and the probabilistic part that represents domain uncertainty.
The classical part of the ontology models two types of risk of developing breast
cancer. First is absolute risk, i.e., the risk that can be measured without the
reference to other categories of women. Statements like an average woman has
up to 13.2% of developing breast cancer in her lifetime are the examples of the
absolute risk. Second, the ontology models relative breast cancer risk, i.e., the
risk comparably to an average woman. Statements like having BRCA1 gene
mutation increases the risk of developing breast cancer by a factor of four are
the examples of the relative risk.

The ontology defines risk factors that are relevant to breast cancer. It makes
the distinction between the factors that should be known to a woman, e.g., age,

1 Operations Research library, available at: http://opsresearch.com/OR-Objects/
2 http://www.cancer.gov/bcrisktool
3 Standard version is available at: http://pellet.owldl.com/ontology-browser/
?

?

?
family cancer history, breastfeeding, and those that can only be inferred on the
basis of other factors or by the examination, e.g., BRCA gene mutation, breast
and bone densities, etc.

Following the assumption that the subjective probabilities representing risk
factors for a certain individual can be combined with objective probabilities
representing the statistical knowledge, the probabilistic part combines a set of
uncertain ABox and TBox axioms 4. ABox axioms define risk factors that are
relevant to a particular individual. TBox axioms model generic probabilistic
relationships between the risk factors and classes of women.

It will be shown how to express various dependencies between risk factors.
One possibility is to represent how the presence of one risk factor allows to guess
on the presence of others. This is the principal way to use inferred risk factors,
i.e., those unknown to a woman. For example, it is known that Ashkenazi Jews
are more likely to develop BRCA gene mutation.

It will be demonstrated how to capture the impact of combining risk factors,
i.e., if they are known to strengthen or weaken each other. Classical part of
the ontology provides classes that are combinations of multiple risk factors. The
model can define the risk for women having multiple risk factors to be higher
(or lower) than if they had just one of the factors. This is possible using the
overriding feature of the default probabilistic reasoning.

Finally, the ontology contains a number of ABox axioms that represent risk
factors for specific individuals. The motivation is that while the generic probabilistic model that provides all the necessary statistics can be developed and
maintained by a central cancer research institute, individual women can supply
the knowledge about the risk factors that are known to them, e.g., age. It will
also be shown how to express uncertainty in having some particular risk factor.

4.2 Probabilistic Reasoning Demonstration

The modeling described above is necessary to reduce the problem of assessing
breast cancer risks to the standard lexicographic entailment implemented in
Pronto. Risk assessment for a particular woman corresponds to the entailment of
an ABox constraint. For example, (W omanW ithBRCInLongT erm|)[0.6, 0.8]
implies that some womans risk of developing cancer in life time is 60%-80%. The
reasoning will be demonstrated on a number of test probabilistic individuals.

It will also be presented how Pronto justifies the results of the risk assessment
by generating the explanations for the entailments. In particular, it can retrieve
exactly those risk factors and generic statistical axioms that caused the inference
for a particular woman and filter our all the irrelevant risk factors. In addition
to being useful for end users, this capability can aid the model developers in
testing the accuracy and adequacy of their model.

Finally, the demo will reveal some pitfalls of default probabilistic reasoning
by presenting seemingly unobvious, yet sound entailments. This will provide a
better insight into the nature of probabilistic reasoning and also demonstrate
the need of explanations.
4 Available at: http://www2.cs.man.ac.uk/ klinovp/pronto/brc/cancer cc.owl

P. Klinov

5 Discussion

Although the demo does not pretend to cover all the aspects of default probabilistic reasoning in the Semantic Web, it is expected to help the attendees learn
the following important things:
 Features and capabilities of Pronto. The demo will present Prontos funda-

mental features, e.g., reasoning services and representational capabilities.

 How Pronto can help in modeling real life problems that involve uncertain
knowledge. It is important to learn that the limits of applicability of ontologies will be pushed forward once they become capable of representing
uncertain knowledge. The breast cancer risk assessment is one of the problems that can be given a probabilistic ontological model and then approached
using a Semantic Web reasoner.

 How current OWL ontologies can be reused in probabilistic models.
 Current challenges and limitations of probabilistic reasoning as well as future

research directions.

Acknowledgment. Pronto was developed when the first author was an intern
at Clark & Parsia, LLC (www.clarkparsia.com) during the summer 2007. Pronto
is a property of Clark & Parsia and is available under the AGPL license at:
http://pellet.owldl.com/pronto. The authors are thankful to Bijan Parsia, Evren
Sirin, Michael Smith and Kendall Clark for numerous useful suggestions and
other support regarding the nature of this work.
