ODEWiki: A Semantic Wiki That Interoperates with the 

ODESeW Semantic Portal 

Adrian Siles, Angel Lopez-Cima, Oscar Corcho, and Asuncion Gomez-Perez 

Facultad de Informatica, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid,  

Campus de Montegancedo, sn. 28660 Boadilla del Monte (Madrid, Spain) 

asiles@delicias.dia.fi.upm.es, {alopez,ocorcho,asun}@fi.upm.es 

Abstract. We present ODEWiki, a technology for the development of Semantic 
Wikis,  which  has  a  combined  set  of  added-value  features  over  other  existing 
semantic wikis in the state of the art. Namely, ODEWiki interoperates with an 
existing  semantic  portal  technology  (ODESeW),  it  manages  inconsistencies 
raised  because  of  the  distributed  nature  of  knowledge  base  development  and 
maintenance, it uses RDFa for the annotation of the resulting wiki pages, it follows a WYSIWYG approach, and it allows decoupling wiki pages and ontology 
instances,  that  is,  a  wiki  page  may  contain  one  or  several  ontology  instances. 
Although some of these features appear in some of the state-of-the-art semantic 
wikis, but they are not combined together in a single solution.  

Keywords: Semantic Wiki, ODEWiki. 

1   Introduction and Background 

A wiki is software that allows users to create, edit, and link web pages easily1. Wikis 
are often used to create collaborative websites and to power community websites. As 
it happens with other Web sites, wikis are mainly focused on the provision of content 
for human users, and lack from a clear semantic description of their content. Semantic 
wikis  have  appeared  in  the  last  years  as  a  technology  that  builds  on  top  of  existing 
wikis,  providing  the  same  functionalities  as  these  plus  the  possibility  of  adding  semantic annotations (normally in the  form of RDF triples) to the  wiki pages that are 
generated.  

In the last years, there has been a huge growth in the number of semantic wikis that 
have been developed and made available to the community. For instance, the OntoWorld  site  provides  a  non-exhaustive  list  of  approximately  30  semantic  wikis2.In 
addition, there have been several workshops whose only topic has been about semantic wikis. In our analysis, we have focused on some of the most popular ones: Makna 
[1], Rhizome [2], Semantic Mediawiki [3], SweetWiki [4] and IkeWiki [5]. 

Some  of  the  common  characteristics  of  all  these  technologies  are  related  to  the  

following aspects: 

                                                           
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki 
2 http://ontoworld.org/wiki/Semantic_Wiki_State_Of_The_Art 

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 859  863, 2008. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008 

A. Siles et al. 

-  Annotation. This is the mechanism by which semantic annotations are related to 
the information provided in a wiki page (normally in a textual form). These semantic annotations may be related to existing ontologies or only be plain RDF, 
which is used mainly as a syntax for providing additional information.  

-  Edition. This is the mechanism by which users can add semantic information not 
only to the wiki pages that they are editing (this is the annotation process afore-
mentioned), but also the knowledge base that acts as a knowledge repository for 
those wiki pages.  
Semantic search. This is the mechanism by which users may look for wiki pages 
taking into account their semantic annotations.  

- 

-  Visualization. This is the mechanism by which semantic wikis visualize the semantic  information  about  ontologies  and  their  corresponding  instances  in  the 
knowledge base. 

-  Navigation.  This  is  the  mechanism  by  which  users  can  navigate  between  wiki 
pages  taking  into  account  the  semantic  relationships  that  are  established  by  the 
annotations associated to them.   

Although these are common features for semantic wikis, not all the existing semantic  wiki technologies offer all these services, and there are many differences among 
different  technologies  with  respect  to  the  degree  of  complexity  and  functionality  in 
each of these categories.  

After an analysis of the state of the art in semantic wiki technologies, we have dis-

covered several limitations of all of them: 
-  None  of  the  existing  semantic  wikis  is  used  together  with  a  knowledge  portal. 
This  means  that,  although  these  applications  are  similar  (semantic  wikis  and 
knowledge  portals  allow  creating  and  maintaining  knowledge  bases),  their 
strengths are not combined in any single solution. This could facilitate processes 
of  collaborative  knowledge  update  and  different  publishing  options  for  knowledge portals, and knowledge edition and curation workflows for semantic wikis.  
-  Only one of the analyzed semantic wiki technologies (SweetWiki) makes use of the 
latest  developments  in  the  use  of  XHTML  tags  to  include  RDF  triples  (RDFa3). 
This fact is very important for automatic data discovery using same wiki page, that 
is, persons and computers can be extract same information  from this page. 

-  Only  one  of  the  analyzed  semantic  wiki  technologies  (SweetWiki)  follows  a 
WYSIWYG  (What  You  See  Is  What  You  Get)  approach,  which  facilitates  the 
annotation of wiki pages for non-experts. The rest of technologies require users 
to learn a new set of tags or syntax to include these annotations, and also require 
users to know the ontologies to be used in advance, or to have them opened in a 
different part of the web site. 
In most cases, each wiki page is associated to only one instance of an ontology. 
This means that each page may only describe an individual, which makes it diffi-
cult, for instance, to create and annotate more complex pages which contain and 
declare  several  instances  (e.g.,  a  page  that  contains  information  about  a  set  of 
persons  that  belong  to  an  institution,  where  we  want  to  have  more  information 
about them than simply their name). 

- 

                                                           
3 http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml-rdfa-primer/ 
?

?

?
Taking  into  account  the  aforementioned  limitations,  we  have  designed  and  implemented ODEWiki, which is a semantic wiki that is integrated with the ODESeW 
semantic portal [6] [7] [8]. This semantic wiki provides the most common functionalities that are provided by most of the existing semantic wikis: annotation, edition, 
search, navigation and visualization. And besides being integrated with a semantic 
portal,  which  acts  as  a  knowledge  repository  for  the  wiki  plus  as  an  alternative 
knowledge publishing system. ODEWiki combines features that are only found in 
some of the state-of-the-art semantic wikis, such as the use of RDFa for the annotation of the resulting wiki pages, a WYSIWYG approach, and the decoupling of wiki 
pages and ontology instances, that is, a wiki page may contain one or several ontology instances.  

In  this  demo,  we  will  demonstrate  how  to  edit  semantically  enabled  wiki  pages 
with this technology, together with the advantages of the integration with a semantic 
portal, so that the visitor will know how to operate with this technology. 

2   Annotation and Edition in ODEWiki 

Most of the limitations identified in the state of art are related to characteristics of the 
annotation  and  edition  functionalities  offered  by  wikis.  In  annotation  and  edition, 
users can use a WYSIWYG user interface to annotate wiki pages with semantic data, 
which is included in the  wiki page using the  RDFa format. This  wiki page, and the 
semantic data included into it, is not modified until the user decides to modify it. This 
fact  sometimes  causes  the  semantic  data  to  have  external  inconsistencies  with  the 
underlying knowledge base, and therefore with the ODESeW semantic portal or other 
wiki  pages.  ODEWiki  provides  a  mechanism  to  automatically  detect  and  manually 
correct  these  external  inconsistencies.  We  understand  by  external  inconsistencies 
those that are related to the following situations: 
-  The  wiki  page  contains  an  instance  that  is  not  present  in  the  knowledge  base 
(e.g., onto:AdrianSiles rdf:type onto:Person). This may have happened because 
another wiki page or an external system has deleted that instance from the knowledge base. 

-  The  wiki  page  contains  annotations  of  an  instance  that  exists  in  the  knowledge 
base. However, the annotation itself (in other words, the RDF triple) does not exist  in  the  knowledge  base4  (e.g.  onto:AdrianSiles  onto:belongsTo  onto:UPM, 
where onto:belongsTo has been removed from the ontology, onto:UPM has dis-
appeared, this person has stopped belonging to onto:UPM, etc.). To some extent, 
this may be seen as a generalization of the previous case.  

These  external  inconsistencies  are  checked  whenever  a  wiki  page  is  going  to  be 
visualized  or  when  the  user  is  going  to  start  editing  it.  The  user  is  notified  of  the  
 
                                                           
4 Taking into account the Open World Assumption (OWA), this situation should not be considered as a problem, since we can always have annotations about an ontology instance that has 
not been defined elsewhere, but since this system is connected to a knowledge portal where 
we consider the Closed World Assumption (CWA), we must assume here this behavior. This 
behavior, however, could be changed accordingly in case that the OWA. 

A. Siles et al. 

Fig. 1. Notification of inconsistencies in a wiki page 

 

inconsistencies that have been found (as shown in figure 1) and can take any of the 
following decisions: delete the corresponding RDF triple from the wiki page or from 
the knowledge base, or include the RDF triple into the knowledge base. 

Users can annotate wiki pages in two ways, using semantic data from the knowledge base or adding new semantic data. Semantic data added to a wiki page is automatically added into the knowledge base. Not only can users add semantic data into 
the underlying knowledge base, but also can they delete, using a special action attribute in RDFa triple, semantic data form the knowledge base and from the wiki page. 
Users are responsible to take specific actions to avoid deleting relevant semantic data. 
In  fact,  ODEWiki  is  not  recommended  to  be  used  in  open  environments,  that  is, 
ODEWiki is specifically designed to be used inside companies or organizations. 

ODEWiki also provides a mechanism to automatically detect and manually correct 
internal  inconsistencies.  We  understand  by  internal  inconsistencies  those  that  are 
related to the following situation: 

-  A  wiki  page  contains  annotations  of  an  instance  that  is,  at  the  same  time,  removed from that page (onto:AdrianSiles onto:belongsTo onto:UPM is added to 
the knowledge base from the wiki page, but at the same time the wiki page contains an action to remove the triple onto:AdrianSiles rdf:type onto:Person and 
there is no other onto:AdrianSiles rdf:type X or onto:AdrianSiles rdf:label X 
triple in the knowledge base, which causes the removal of that instance).  

3   Conclusions and Future Work 

In this paper,  we have shown some of the limitations of the most relevant semantic 
wiki technologies, which are mainly, related to their annotation and edition function-
alities, especially in what respects to collaborative and distributed edition of semantic 
information. To overcome these limitations, we have built ODEWiki, a semantic wiki 
that  is  interconnected  with  a  knowledge  portal,  which  acts  both  as  a  knowledge  repository and as an alternative publication and knowledge edition platform. 

As part of our future work in this technology, we will focus on the provision of an 
improved search functionality that goes beyond the current state of the art in semantic 
search in existing semantic wikis (which is based on the SPARQL protocol). And in 
an improved navigation model that inherits some of the characteristics of the navigation model of ODESeW [8]. 
?

?

?
Acknowledgement 

This  work  has  been  funded  by  the  UPM-funded  project  Extensiones  a  portales 
semanticos con wikis semantico5 (CCG06-UPM/INF-284). 
