Semantic Browsing with PowerMagpie

Laurian Gridinoc, Marta Sabou, Mathieu dAquin,

Martin Dzbor, and Enrico Motta

Knowledge Media Institute (KMi), The Open University, Milton Keynes, UK

{l.gridinoc,r.m.sabou,m.daquin,m.dzbor,e.motta}@open.ac.uk

Abstract. PowerMagpie is a tool that brings semantic interpretation
to classical web pages by dynamicallyi.e. during browsingselecting
and making use of a wide range of online available ontologies. We introduce the idea of extending browsing through semantic, ontology-based
interpretation. Then, we provide a brief description of the architecture.
In the end we underline which aspects of the available online semantic
data are demonstrated, what the user may learn and which are the future
directions.

1 Introduction

The web supports a large array of interactions and tasks by providing a scalable
infrastructure which makes it possible to locate, explore and exchange knowl-
edge. However, not much support is available for the interpretation of web pages
[2], beyond what is provided by the author of each particular resource. Generally
speaking the web offers two mechanisms to help users make sense of a resource.
The first is hypertext linking, that is normally used to indicate additional explicative material, which can help the user in understanding web content. The
second is the Related Pages feature provided by several search engines and direc-
tories. While these mechanisms can be useful in many cases, they nevertheless
suffer from limitations.

Hypertext linking is provided by the author of a web page, who may have
a particular audience in mind or may not be aware of other relevant material.
This mechanism cannot be very robust with respect to the generation of new
information, which may in principle be useful to interpret earlier resources as
few resource providers will keep resources up to date. The Related Pages facility
improves on the static hypertext linking, as it dynamically identifies interesting
relevant pages and therefore supports a user in exploring a domain and even in
moving across domains. However, from the point of view of supporting sense-
making, this feature is not very precise and effective, given that the linking is
based on lexical similarity and that typically the search space the user needs to
explore explodes very quickly, in sharp contrast to the targeted manner in which
page designers insert hyperlinks in web resources.

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 802806, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
?

?

?
1.1 Motivation

Semantic layering (the realisation of semantic links, in addition to the existing
syntactic ones) is a notion that was introduced in connection with browsing
and navigation in early papers about Magpie [3]. Magpie finds and highlights
the entities from a particular ontology in the current web page. A pre-condition
of a successful parsing within the Magpie-enabled browser is the specification
of an ontology-derived lexicon which is used to automatically associating a semantic layer to a web resource. This Magpie-mediated association between an
ontology and a web resource provides an interpretative viewpoint or context over
the resource in question. While Magpie has been successfully used in a number
of applications in the domains of Climate Science, Agriculture, and Academic
Research, it requires the user to select a priori which ontology has to be used.
Hence, it suffers from the brittleness that typically affects knowledge-based sys-
tems: while it works well within a well-defined domain, as soon as the browsing
session moves away from the original domain, the support declines dramatically.
A number of other approaches can be found in the literature. However, most
of them, when not extracting data from the pages and offering it out of context
in a different interface (PiggyBank [4]), tend to deal with structured content, e.g.
Sifter [5], and pay no attention to the unstructured web documents. Other tools,
which bring in the same interface semantic data within the web page, rely mostly
on collaborative annotation, like Trailblazer [7]. While this approach can work
for well defined communities in well defined domains, it is nevertheless brittle
the quality of the interpretation support relies on the availability and quality of
annotation. Hence, there is the need for a tool which is able to dynamically bring
relevant semantic information into a browsing session, without being limited
to one particular ontology. The goal of PowerMagpie is to bring to the user,
opportunistically, the appropriate semantic information relevant to his current
information needs, in principle from any ontology available on the web.

2 Architecture

From a user perspective, PowerMagpie is an extension of a classical web browser,
but the main functionalities it provides are actually realized by server-side software that can be seen as a back-end for the whole architecture. In this way,
PowerMagpie is particularly easy to install, as it does not require particular
software except a JavaScript enabled web browser.

The PowerMagpie server is the central element of the architecture: it is in
charge of realising term extraction, ranking and ontology selection and to transmit the results to the browser extension. The term extraction and ranking are
done via a hybrid tf*idf algorithm [6] which weights each term against its popularity in a search engine (Google or Yahoo). The top ranked terms represents
a lexical document signature [8] and those will be used to bootstrap ontology
selection. Watson [1]an ontology search enginewhich makes it possible to
access large scale semantic content with the degree of efficiency that is required

L. Gridinoc et al.

Fig. 1. PowerMagpie architecture

for open semantic browsing. Finally, the interface for the user is in charge of
realising the navigation of the semantic and textual information. It is the only
part of the architecture that is required to be installed on the client-side, i.e. on
the users computer. The advantage of relying on a common server is that the
information computed by the PowerMagpie server can be cached, improving the
performance for all the users, based on each individual use of PowerMagpie.

3 Demonstration

In our demonstration we will show various functionalities of the tool (i.e., extracting semantic data, navigating the semantic data through the two panels
providedontology and entity view), applied on web pages of various content
while underlying the role of each component within the architecture.

From a user perspective, PowerMagpie is an extension of a classical web
browser and takes the form of a narrow, vertical widget displayed on top of
the currently browsed web page. This widget provides several functionalities
that allow exploring relevant semantic information. A first view, displayed under the Entities panel, lists the key terms from the web page, ordered according
to their importance to the document. Each term can be extended to display
the semantic information (i.e., ontological entities) it is attached to and allows
navigating to the text snippet from where it was extracted. A second, ontology
centric view is shown in the Ontologies panel and displays all the ontologies
that were identified as relevant for the page. Each ontology can be extended to
explore its semantic entities that are relevant for the web page. While the navigation from the ontological entities to the text is a powerful tool for apprehending
the document from a semantic perspective, navigating from text to ontologies
is important in a situation in which the user needs a semantic definition of a
term, either because he is unfamiliar with it or because additional information
is needed. This functionality is provided as follows: whenever a word in the text
?

?

?
Fig. 2. PowerMagpie screenshot with entity panel in view, ontology panel detailed

of the web page is double-clicked, the PowerMagpie interface moves to the entity
panel, to display the semantic description of this term. If the given word has not
been already recognised as a key term, then it is automatically added, and the
relevant ontologies and ontological entities dynamically selected and explored.
The user will learnby watching the demo and using the tool himselfhow
to acquire relevant semantic information and how to make use of it in order to
support the sense making process. Because the semantic information is brought
in from online available ontologies (via Watson), the user will get a glimpse of
the quality of online available data. Further, he will have the chance to use one
of the first applications that exploit the semantic web at runtime and experience
the added value of such a direct interaction.

A demo of PowerMagpie and a demonstrative video are available at

http://powermagpie.open.ac.uk/.

L. Gridinoc et al.

4 Future Work

As the semantic information we can align with the document may be too abstract
and of little value to a user which is not a knowledge engineer, we plan to use
this information to expand the computed lexical signature of the document to
a semantic oneusing it as a query expansion approach with a classical lexical
search engine (Google or Yahoo) in order to discover semantically related pages.
Since query expansion yields high recall and low precision, we will have to filter
those results by using the already discovered ontologies in order to validate which
of the discovered documents are relevant with the current domain.

We also have to address the presentation of the related semantic information
which is cryptic to the regular user by emphasising relations between entities
and group them by provenance rather than just displaying URIs as they were
intended to be opaque. Regarding the semantically related pages upcoming fea-
ture, we intend to address from the previewing of such information to the extent
that this information existence may decide which semantic information will be
shown to the user, as ontologies that will just define and not lead anywhere
would be of little value in semantic browsing.
