CSR: Discovering Subsumption Relations for the 

Alignment of Ontologies 

Vassilis Spiliopoulos1, 2, Alexandros G. Valarakos1, and George A. Vouros1 

1 AI Lab, Information and Communication Systems Engineering Department, University  

of the Aegean, Samos, 83 200, Greece 

{vspiliop,alexv,georgev}@aegean.gr 

2 Institution of Informatics and Telecommunications, NCSR Demokritos, Greece 

Abstract.  For  the  effective  alignment  of  ontologies,  the  computation  of  equivalence relations between elements of ontologies is not enough: Subsumption relations play a crucial role as well. In this paper we propose the "Classification-Based 
Learning  of  Subsumption  Relations  for  the  Alignment  of  Ontologies"  (CSR) 
method. Given a pair of concepts from two ontologies, the objective of CSR is to 
identify patterns of concepts' features that provide evidence for the subsumption relation among them. This is achieved by means of a classification task, using state of 
the art supervised machine learning methods. The paper describes thoroughly the 
method, provides experimental results over an extended version of benchmarking 
series and discusses the potential of the method. 

Keywords: ontology alignment, subsumption, supervised machine learning. 

1   Introduction 

In spite of the fact that ontologies provide a formal and unambiguous representation 
of domain conceptualizations, it is rather expectable to deal with different ontologies 
describing the same domain of knowledge, introducing heterogeneity to the conceptualization of the domain and difficulties in integrating information. 

Although many efforts [1] aim to the automatic discovery of equivalence relations 
between  the  elements  of  ontologies,  in  this  paper  we  conjecture  that  this  is  not 
enough: To deal effectively with the ontologies alignment problem, we have to deal 
with  the  discovery  of  subsumption  relations  among  ontology  elements.  This  is  particularly true, when we deal with ontologies whose conceptualizations are at different 
granularity  levels:  In  these  cases,  the  elements  (concepts  and/or  properties)  of  an 
ontology are more generic than the corresponding elements of another ontology. Although  subsumption  relations  between  the  elements  of  two  ontologies  may  be  deduced by exploiting equivalence relations between other elements (e.g., a concept C1 
is  subsumed  by  all  subsumers  of  C2,  if  C1  is  equivalent  with  a  concept  C2),  in  the  
extreme cases where no equivalence relations exist, this can not be done. In any case, 
we conjecture that the discovery of subsumption relations between elements of different ontologies can enhance the discovery/filtering of equivalence relations, and vise-
versa, augmenting the effectiveness of our ontology alignment and merging methods. 
This is of great importance when dealing with real-world ontologies, where, as it is 

S. Bechhofer et al.(Eds.): ESWC 2008, LNCS 5021, pp. 418431, 2008. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008 
?

?

?
also stated in the conclusions of the Consensus Track of OAEI 06 [2], current state of 
the art systems confuse subsumption relations with equivalence ones. 

To make the above claims more concrete, let us consider the ontologies depicted in 
Fig. 1. These specify the concept Citation in O1 (which is equivalent to the concept 
Reference in O2), and Publication in O2 (which is equivalent to the concept Work 
in O1). Each of these ontologies elaborates on the specification of distinct concepts: O2 
elaborates on the concept  Publication and O1 on the concept Citation. Further-
more, as shown in Fig.1, concepts are related among themselves via object properties 
whose lexicalizations differ: For instance, in O2, the concept Reference is related via 
the object property of with the concept Publication, while in O1, the corresponding 
concept Citation is related via the object property to with the concept Work. Given 
these  ontologies,  and  given  that  equivalent  properties  in  the  two  ontologies  do  not 
have the same lexicalization, and that non-equivalent concepts do have the same lexi-
calization, we may distinguish two cases: 

 

1st Ontology (O1) 

from 
Authors 

Citation 

to 

in 

noOf 
pages 

publishing 
house 

title 

Book 

Article 

title 

contributors 

Monograph 

Selection 

Conference 

Journal 

chapters 

noOf 
Papers 

conference 
Name 

journal 
Name 

date 

Work 
