Integrating Uncertainty into Ontology Mapping

Ying Wang

School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,

Queens University Belfast, Belfast, BT7 1NN, UK

ywang14@qub.ac.uk

Abstract. This paper gives an outline of my PhD thesis which describes
the integration of managing uncertainty into ontology mapping. Ontology mapping is one of the most important tasks for ontology interoperability and its main aim is to find semantic relationships between entities
(i.e. concept, attribute, and relation) of two ontologies, However, in the
process of mapping, uncertainty and incompleteness of semantics in the
syntactic representation and description of relations between entities in
ontologies will lead to imprecise results. If we want to obtain better re-
sults, it becomes more significant for the ontology mapping to be able to
deal with uncertainty.

1 Introduction to the Problem

Ontologies are cores in the Semantic Web because they are the carriers of the
meaning contained in the Semantic Web. However in many cases, different domains define different ontologies containing the same concepts. Even in the same
domain, different organizations construct different ontologies. Therefore, it is
necessary to find mappings between ontologies.

In recent years, researchers have developed a number of tools for finding these
mappings. In most cases, the mappings produced are imprecise. For instance,
most automatic ontology mapping tools use heuristics or machine learning tech-
niques, which are imprecise by their very nature. Even experts sometimes could
not be sure about the exact match between concepts and just assign some certainty ratings to matches [1]. The reason why we get imprecise mapping results
is to some extent because of uncertainty. Uncertainty means that an agent, i.e. a
computer or a human, has only partial knowledge about the truth value of a given
piece of information. Peter Haase thought that uncertainty can be distinguished
to objective uncertainty and subjective uncertainty [2]. I think that subjective
uncertainty plays the most prominent role that prevent ontology mapping from
getting better results. For instance, in the process of mapping, one may use diverse range of rules to judge the mapping, but different rules imply different
uncertainty and one does not know the accuracy and reliability of rules. There
has been little focus on dealing with uncertainty in ontology mapping. However
this problem began to attract attention of researchers in this area.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the current
state of existing solutions. Section 3 discusses the current approaches we have
achieved so far and also problems we have encountered. Section 4 concludes the
paper.

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 961965, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

Y. Wang

2 Uncertainty, Ontology Mapping and Ontology Mapping

with Uncertainty

Uncertainty. There are many models to deal with uncertain information in
artificial intelligence and the most popular methods are:
1.Probability Theory. It attempts to quantify the notion of probable. An increasing important approach to using probability theory in computing is probability networks, also called Bayesian networks or Causal networks. Bayesian networks
can be used to represent and reason more efficiently with probabilistic information.
2.Evidence Theory. The Dempster-Shafer theory (Evidence Theory) is a
mechanism for representing and reasoning with uncertainty, imprecise and incomplete information [3]. Evidence theory has an ability to model information
flexibly and it provides a convenient and simple mechanism for combining two
or more pieces of evidence when they come from distinct sources.
3.Possibility Theory. It was introduced in 1978 by L.A. Zadeh [4], in connection with the fuzzy set theory, to allow a reasoning to be carried out on imprecise
or vague knowledge, making it possible to deal with uncertainties on knowledge.
Two typical merging operations in possibility theory are max and min which
combine two possibility distribution into one.
Ontology Mapping. Ontology mapping is a critical problem in many application domains and many different mapping solutions have been proposed with
diverse range of mapping techniques so far. For example, an integrated ontology
mapping approach [5] is proposed based on rules and the method in quick ontology mapping [6] puts attention to the runtime of program. Anchor-PROMPT
is a tool for ontology merging and mapping [7,8]. It contains a sophisticated
prompt mechanism for possible mapping entities. In [9], researchers from several
universities are working together to create an ontology mapping approach based
on information flow. The approach of semantic enrichment for ontology mapping
exploits text categorization to automatically assign documents to the concept
in the ontology and use the documents to calculate the similarities between
concepts in ontologies [10].
Ontology Mapping with Uncertainty. In the mapping process, if only syntactic or element-level matching is performed, as in the case for name matching
without the use of a thesaurus, inaccuracies can occur [11]. It affects the results
of mapping, but so far only a few ontology mapping methods considered dealing
with uncertainty issue.

Nagy et al [12] and Besana [13] both recognized the importance of uncertainty
in ontology mapping, and both of them used Dempster-Shafer theory to assist
mapping. They believed that different matchers have uncertainties associated
with them, so they combine the results obtained from different matchers using
DS theory and it is possible to give a uniform interpretation, consistent with the
uncertainty inherented in the problem.

In [14] a Bayesian Networks based approach was designed and a system called
BayesOWL was proposed. In this approach, the source and target ontologies are
?

?

?
first translated into Bayesian networks (BN); the concept mapping between the
two ontologies are treated as evidential reasoning between the two translated
BNs. Probabilities, that are required for constructing conditional probability
tables (CPT) during translation and for measuring semantic similarity during
mapping, are learned using text classification techniques where each concept in
an ontology is associated with a set of semantically relevant text documents,
which are obtained by ontology guided web mining.

Holi and Hyv onen [15] thought that in the real world, concepts are not always
subsumed by each other, and cannot always be organized in a crisp subsumption
hierarchies. Many concepts only partly overlap with each other, so they present
a new probabilistic method to model conceptual overlap in taxonomies, and an
algorithm to compute the overlap between a selected concept and other concepts
of a taxonomy by using Bayesian networks.

Zhao et al [16] proposed a novel similarity measure method based on rough
set theory and formal concept analysis (RFCA) to realize ontology mapping
tasks. The authors combined rough set theory into the similarity computation
formula of formal concept analysis (FCA). Although the authors did not consider
uncertainty in the process of mapping explicitly, they applied the rough set
theory to measure the similarity of concepts of ontologies. So, in some case, they
considered the uncertainty problem.

3 My Approaches

We have proposed a new ontology mapping approach called ACAOM [17]. It first
uses WordNet to calculate similarities between words for the node names comparison in ontologies. WordNet is organized as a classified structure in which synset
is the basic unit. Every set containing many words expresses a single meaning and we can utilize jwnl to access WordNet, thereby to compute similarities
between names of nodes. This is a name-based mapping strategy. Then in the
instance-based strategy we follow the following assumption: the more semantics
is explicitly specified about the ontologies, the more feasible their comparison
becomes. Here, the instances are documents assigned to the concept nodes. According to the definition of ontology mapping given above, given a node in one
ontology, a mapping function searches the node in another ontology which has
the most similar semantics to it. We employ approaches in information retrieval
to assist ontology mapping. In this way, we can denote the documents that have
been bound with nodes by using vector space models, and then the numerical
degrees of similarity give a way to rank the matches.

Following that we are developing a new mapping method which uses three different and independent matchers: Edit distance-based matcher, Linguistic-based
matcher and Structure-based matcher. In these three matchers, a new matcher
is the structure-based matcher which utilizes the similarity measures between
two words (w1 and w2), a father node of w1 with w2 and all the child nodes
of w1 with w2. This matcher takes both the semantics and the structure of an
ontology into account. We then discuss how the mapping results from different
matchers can be combined. We consider both the Dempster Shafer theory of

Y. Wang

Table 1. Comparison of Experiment Results

Datasets

p

f

f

p

falcon

r

r

ctxMatch2-1
p r
101-103 100 98.97 99.48 100 98.97 99.48 100 100 100 100 100 100 87 34
101-104 100 98.97 99.48 100 98.97 99.48 100 100 100 100 100 100 87 34 48.89
101-205 46.88 46.39 46.63 30.29 29.90 30.09 88 87 87.5 43 42 42.5 36 4
7.2
101-223 100 98.97 99.48 100 98.97 99.48 100 100 100 100 100 100 83 31 45.14
101-302 45.83 45.83 45.83 43.75 43.75 43.75 97 67 79.26 37 33 34.89 0 0

ola
r

f

p

r

f

p

f

evidence (DS theory) and Possibility Theory and apply them to combine the
outcomes obtained by three different and independent matchers.

In our evaluation, we choose Test 101, Test 103, Test 104, Test 205, Test
223 and Test 302 of OAEI 2006 benchmark tests and take Test 101 as the
reference ontology. All of other ontologies are compared with Test 101. We
use the combination mechanisms in both DS theory and Possibility Theory to
combine the matching results from our three matchers. We now compare the
outputs from the two combination rules to the results obtained from falcon,
ola and ctxMatch2-1 algorithms which were used in the EON 2005 Ontology
Alignment Contest1, and the details are given in Table 1. In Table 1, p for
precision, r for recall, f for f-measure, DS for Dempsters combination rule, and
PT for the minimum merging operator in Possibility Theory.

4 Conclusion

During my PhD study, my research will mainly focus on dealing ontology mapping with uncertainty, so I think I can begin from two aspects: ontology mapping
and uncertainty theory. For ontology mapping, I need to develop more scientific matchers to find out mapping relations between ontologies. These matchers
should put attention on how to find different kinds of mappings and how to
improve the accuracy of mappings. For uncertainty theory, firstly, I will study
the different methods of representing uncertainty. Secondly, I will try to utilize
these different representing methods to represent ontology mappings. Thirdly, I
will study how to use different combination rules of uncertainty in different sit-
uations. I hope that I can use different methods to handle different uncertainty
problems in the process of ontology mapping successfully in the future.
