Finnish Health Information on the Semantic Web

HealthFinland

Eero Hyv onen, Kim Viljanen, and Osma Suominen

Semantic Computing Research Group (SeCo),

Helsinki University of Technology (TKK), Laboratory of Media Technology

University of Helsinki, Department of Computer Science

firstname.lastname@tkk.fi

http://www.seco.tkk.fi/

Abstract. This paper shows how semantic web techniques can be applied to solving problems of distributed content creation, discovery, linking, aggregation, and
reuse in health information portals, both from end-users and content publishers
viewpoints. As a case study, the national semantic health portal HEALTHFINLAND
is presented. It provides citizens with intelligent searching and browsing services
to reliable and up-to-date health information created by various health organizations in Finland. The system is based on a shared semantic metadata schema, on-
tologies, and ontology services. The content includes metadata about thousands of
web documents such as web pages, articles, reports, campaign information, news,
services, and other information related to health.

1 Introduction

Health information on the web is provided by different independent organizations of
varying levels of trustworthiness, is targeted to both laymen and experts, is available in
various forms, and is written in different languages. The difficulty of finding relevant
and trustworthy information in this kind of heterogeneous environment creates an obstacle for citizens concerned about their health. Portals try to ease these problems by
collecting content into a single site [1]. Portal types include service portals collecting a
large set of services together into a localized miniature version of the web (e.g., Yahoo!
and other start pages), community portals [2] acting as a virtual meeting place of a
community, and information portals [3] acting as hubs of data. This paper discusses
problems concerning information portals when publishing health information on the
web for the citizens. We consider both the publishers and the end-users viewpoints.
A distributed semantic web1 content publishing model has been developed for health
organizations, based on a shared metadata schema, ontologies, and ontology services,
by which the content is created cost-effectively by independent content producers at
different locations. Our system aggregates the content and makes it semantically interoperable to be reused in different applications without modifying it.

To test and demonstrate the approach, we have created an operational prototype of
the national semantic health information portal HEALTHFINLANDFinnish Health

1 http://www.w3.org/2001/SW/

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 778791, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007
?

?

?
Information of the Semantic Web2. The content for the prototype (ca. 6000 web docu-
ments) was created by the National Public Health Institute (KTL)3, the UKK Institute4,
the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health5, the national Suomi.fi citizens portal6,
and the Ministry of Justice7, and new organizations are joining in.

In the following, problems of finding and producing health information on the web
are first outlined. After this the content creation model of HEALTHFINLAND and the
portal itself are presented.

2 Problems of Mediating Health Information

A citizen searching for health information on the web faces many challenges:

1. Content discovery. The discovery of relevant content is difficult because it often
requires prior knowledge of the administrative organization providing the contents.
2. Outdated and missing linkage. After finding a piece of interesting information, it is
often tedious and difficult to find related relevant web resources. Furthermore, when
useful links are given on a web page, they outdate quickly. When new information
is entered in a site or old information changed or removed, the links in existing
pages cannot be updated automatically but refer to older information, or even nonexisting information.

3. Content aggregation. Satisfying an end-users information need often requires aggregation of content from several information providers, which is difficult if heterogeneous content is provided by several independent web sites. For example, if
a baby is born in your family, relevant information related to the situation may be
provided by health care organizations, social organizations, the church, legal ad-
ministration, and others.

4. Quality of content. The trustworthiness of the information on the web pages varies.
In many cases it is difficult know whether a content is based on scientific results or
laymans opinions and rumors, or whether it is motivated by commercial interests.
5. Matching end-users expertise level. There are lots of medical information available
that is targeted to experts rather than ordinary citizens. Providing and finding the
information on the right level of user expertise is a challenge that is very evident
in the medical domain where, e.g., the terminology used by doctors and content
providers is very different from the terminology used by citizens in expressing their
needs and interests.

From the viewpoint of the health organizations, creating health information to citizens
is problematic in many ways:

2 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/applications/tervesuomi/
3 http://www.ktl.fi/
4 http://www.ukkinstituutti.fi/
5 http://www.ttl.fi/
6 http://www.suomi.fi/
7 http://www.finlex.fi/

E. Hyv onen, K. Viljanen, and O. Suominen

1. Duplicated work. Several organizations create overlapping content, which is in
many cases a waste of time and money and confusing to the end-user. For example,
in Finland the governmental citizen portal Suomi.fi has a section for governmental health information containing material partly overlapping with those available
through the sites of the Finnish Centre of Health Promotion, and the health pages
of the national broadcasting company YLE. These organizations share the goal of
providing free health information to citizens and are not competing with other. In
our vision, similar content should in such situations be created only once and reused
rather than recreated by others.

2. Difficulty of reusing content. Content in portals is usually annotated for the purpose of presenting it in a particular portal and for the particular purpose of the
organization managing the portal. This makes it difficult and expensive for other
organizations to reuse content across portals even if the portal owners were willing
to do this. For example, in our case, a newspaper would be willing to publish links
to the governmental HEALTHFINLAND portal to enrich their health related news
articles, and the portal would definitely like to promote its health information to
the readers of the online newspaper. However, a cost-effective way to do this with
minimal changes in current content management systems (CMS) is needed.

3. Internal and external link maintenance. The problems of maintaining links up-to-
date is costly and tedious from the site maintenance viewpoint, especially when
dealing with links to external sites to which the maintainer has no control.

4. Indexing (annotation) problems. Finding the right keywords and other metadata
descriptions for web pages and documents is difficult and time consuming for information producers. The vocabularies used, such as MeSH8, UMLS9 or SNOMED
CT10, are very large and require expertise to use.

5. Quality control. There are several quality issues involved when publishing health
information: 1) Quality of the content creation process (e.g. regular reviews and
updates of published material). 2) Quality of the content itself (e.g., errors in the
medical subject matter, is the content readable and written for the correct audience).
3) Quality of additional information on pages (e.g., it is advisable to show the date
of publication on each page). 4) Quality of the metadata. For example, one indexer
may use only few general keywords while another prefers a longer detailed list,
which leads to problems of unbalanced metadata.

Much of the semantic web11 content will be published using semantic portals [4] based
on web standards such as RDF12 and OWL13. In MUSEUMFINLAND14 [5], a semantic web model and portal was created in the cultural domain for distributed semantic
content creation [6], aggregation, and provision to end-users using semantic search and
browsing services. This approach has been shown to be applicable in different domains

8 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/
9 http://umlsinfo.nlm.nih.gov
10 http://www.snomed.org/snomedct/
11 http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/
12 http://www.w3.org/RDF/
13 http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/
14 http://www.museosuomi.fi/
?

?

?
[1,7], and it was also applied to HEALTHFINLAND. In the following, we show how
HEALTHFINLAND develops the idea of semantic portals further and applies it in practice to create a national publication channel for health information targeted to citizens.

3 Overview of the HEALTHFINLAND Approach

In traditional web publishing, content creators publish web pages and link them together
independently from each other. Content management systems (CMS) and portals are
used to aggregate related material collections within one site, and to provide local search
and linking services. Linking between sites is usually done manually. Search engines
are used to provide content aggregation services on the global cross-site level.

In HEALTHFINLAND we wanted to create a new kind of collaborative distributed
content creation model for publishing health information on the web in order to solve
the problems listed in section 2.

The first idea of the model is to minimize duplicate redundant work and costs in creating health content on the national level by producing it only once by one organization,
and by making it possible to reuse the content in different web applications by the other
organizations, not only in the organizations own portal. This possibility is facilitated by
annotating the content locally with semantic metadata based on shared ontologies, and
by making the global repository available by a semantic portal and by open APIs for
creating mash-up web services. This is a generalization of the idea of multi-channel
publication of XML, where a single syntactic structure can be rendered in different
ways, but on the semantic metadata level and using RDF: semantic content is reused
through multi-application publication.

The second key idea behind HEALTHFINLAND is to try to minimize the maintenance costs of portals by letting the computer take care of semantic link maintenance
and aggregation of content from the different publishers. This possibility is also based
on shared semantic metadata and ontologies. New content relevant to a topic may be
published at any moment by any of the content providers, and the system should be able
to put the new piece of information in the right context in the portal, and automatically
link it with related information.

The third major idea of HEALTHFINLAND is to provide the end-user with intelligent
services for finding the right information based on her own conceptual view of health,
and for browsing the contents based on their semantic relations. The views and vocabularies used in the end-user interface may be independent of the content providers
organizational perspective, and are based on laymans vocabulary that is different from
the medical expert vocabularies used by the content providers in indexing the content.
Figure 1 depicts an overview of the HEALTHFINLAND system. The content providers
on the left produce web pages, documents, and other resources of interest along their organizational interests as before for their own purposes (primary applications in the
figure). However, the content is annotated by using a shared metadata schema and ontologies for the others to use, too. Selected content is then harvested into a global knowledge base (center of the figure) to be reused in secondary applications. In this paper, we
focus on one application in particular, the semantic portal HEALTHFINLAND that provides citizens with information services to the global health information repository. We

E. Hyv onen, K. Viljanen, and O. Suominen

Fig. 1. An overview of the HEALTHFINLAND content creation and reuse process

will also briefly show how external organizations can reuse the semantic content costeffectively with semantic mash-up service components called floatlets in the sprit of
Google Maps15 and AdSense16, but generalized on the semantic level. The figure depicts
an enhanced portal Portal 2 in which the content of the primary application is enriched
by, e.g., semantic recommendation links to content pages in HEALTHFINLAND. In the
following, the metadata schema and ontologies used in the system are first outlined.

4 Ontological Infrastructure

The ontological infrastructure of HEALTHFINLAND consists of two major components:

1) A metadata schema, i.e. an annotation ontology that specifies what elements are
used for describing the web documents to be included in the system, and what kind
of values the elements (properties) can take. The metadata schema is shared by
all organizations creating the content and ensures syntactic interoperability of the
content.

2) A set of ontological vocabularies whose concepts are used to fill in values of the
metadata schema. The ontologies are also shared by the organizations, and their
usage ensures semantic interoperability of the content.

4.1 Metadata Schema

The HEALTHFINLAND portal requires the web documents used in the system to be described in a uniform and machine-understandable manner. A metadata schema specifies

15 http://maps.google.com
16 http://www.google.com/adsense/
?

?

?
a set of fields (properties) which are used for presenting information about each docu-
ment. The values of the metadata fields are either human-readable text (e.g., title), structured strings (e.g., publication date) or shared, explicitly identified ontological concepts
(e.g., the subject classification). Some fields are obligatory and some fields may exist
more than once. In addition to being a formal specification of what is required from
the content producers, the schema can be used for, e.g., automatically generating a user
interface for creating metadata conforming to the schema, and for automatic content
validation and feedback generation before publishing the content in the portal [8].

Table 1. HEALTHFINLAND Metadata Schema. Mandatory fields are marked in bold. Cardinalities are presented in the column C.

QName
dc:identifier
ts:url
dc:title
dcterms:abstract
dc:language

Name
Identifier
Locator
Title
Abstract
Language
Publication time dcterms:issued
Acceptance time
Modification time dcterms:modified
Publisher
dc:publisher
Creator
dc:creator
Subject
dc:subject
Audience
dcterms:audience
Genre
ts:genre
Presentation type dc:type
Format
Medium
Spatial coverage

C Value type Value range
?

?

?
0..1 URL
1a Free text
1a Free text
1..* String

String
dcterms:dateAccepted 0..* String
0..* String
1..* Instance
0..* Instance
1..* Concept
1..* Concept
1..* Concept
1..* Concept
String
?

?

?
Concept
0..* String or
concept
0..* String or
concept

dc:format
dcterms:medium
dcterms:spatial

Temporal coverage dcterms:temporal

Non-empty string.
Non-empty string.
RFC 3066
W3CDTF (ISO 8601)
W3CDTF (ISO 8601)
W3CDTF (ISO 8601)
foaf:Organization
foaf:Organization, foaf:Person or foaf:Group
YSO, MeSH and HPMulti Ontologies
Audience Ontology
Genre Ontology
DCMI Type vocabulary
IANA MIME types
Medium Ontology
DCMI Point, DCMI Box or Location Ontology

W3CDTF, DCMI Period or Time Ontology

dcterms:isPartOf
dc:rights

0..* Document URI
0..* Free text or

URI or textual description

URI (e.g., ISBN) or bibliographical reference

URI (e.g., ISBN) or bibliographical reference

Part of
Rights

Source

dc:source
