Unlocking the Potential of Public Sector Information

with Semantic Web Technology

Harith Alani1, David Dupplaw1, John Sheridan2, Kieron OHara1, John Darlington1,

Nigel Shadbolt1, and Carol Tullo2

1 Intelligence, Agents, Multimedia

School of Electronics and Computer Science
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK

{h.alani,dpd,jd,kmo,nrs}@ecs.soton.ac.uk

2 Office Of Public Sector Information

Admiralty Arch, The Mall

{john.sheridan,carol.tullo}@opsi.x.gsi.gov.uk

London, UK

Abstract. Governments often hold very rich data and whilst much of this information is published and available for re-use by others, it is often trapped by poor
data structures, locked up in legacy data formats or in fragmented databases. One
of the great benefits that Semantic Web (SW) technology offers is facilitating the
large scale integration and sharing of distributed data sources. At the heart of information policy in the UK, the Office of Public Sector Information (OPSI) is
the part of the UK government charged with enabling the greater re-use of public
sector information. This paper describes the actions, findings, and lessons learnt
from a pilot study, involving several parts of government and the public sector.
The aim was to show to government how they can adopt SW technology for the
dissemination, sharing and use of its data.

1 Introduction

Public Sector Information (PSI) can make an important contribution to bootstrapping
the SW, which in turn will yield many gains. UK government tends to see the web primarily as a medium for the delivery of documents and the dissemination of content to
the citizen. With the emergence of a re-use policy agenda for PSI, the UK government
is beginning to develop a far richer and deeper understanding of the SW and the contribution it can make in terms of achieving greater efficiency through information sharing
and integration to realise broader economic and social gains.

The Office of Public Sector Information (OPSI)1 is responsible for the management
of all of the UK governments intellectual property, including setting standards, delivering access and encouraging the re-use of PSI. In the UK, any work produced by an
employee of the government is deemed to be owned by the Crown and thus subject to
Crown copyright. Under this constitutional position, Carol Tullo, the Director of OPSI
and co-author to this paper, is granted authority by Her Majesty The Queen to manage

1 Developed from Her Majestys Stationery Office (HMSO).

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 708721, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007
?

?

?
all copyrights and databases owned by the Crown. OPSI also has an important role as a
regulator of holders of public sector information (e.g. the Met Office, Ordnance Survey)
for their information trading activities.

In the UK, large quantities of public sector information have been made available,
ranging from geospatial, statistical, financial and legal information. However, making
data available and making data reusable are two very different things. Most government
data is published online in text formats with little structure, thus inhibiting its re-use. By
using unstructured, non-semantic representations of the data, it becomes almost impossible for machines to find or understand and integrate this rich source of information.
For these reasons, OPSI decided to initiate a research project, AKTivePSI. The aim of
AKTivePSI is to show how the use of SW technology can facilitate the large scale integration and re-use of public sector information, ultimately to the benefit of government,
business and citizen alike. AKTivePSI was about building prototypes and demonstrators to mainly win the hearts and minds of some government agencies and show them
how, and what will it take, to become semantically enabled. Several of the organisations
that actively participated are now investing in SW technologies, as will be highlighted
in section 6.

In the following sections we will report on the decisions, actions, and results of
AKTivePSI, which involved several government and information trading organisations
that collect, store, and publish public sector information.

2 Related Work

The UK has developed a strong e-Government agenda over the last ten years, initially
focussed on providing access to information and more latterly on delivering public services online. The publication of the governments IT strategy document, Transforma-
tional Government - Enabled by Technology [1] in 2005 marked an important shift in
the UK governments thinking to a much broader technology agenda.

Crucially the government has identified overcoming problems with information sharing as being integral to transforming services and reducing administrative burdens on
citizens and business. The UK government is committed to leveraging and producing
open standards, and the GovTalk programme2 has key documents that describe interoperability frameworks and metadata standards. With this in place, the scene is ideally
set for SW technologies now to take centre stage. To use the new parlance, transformational government will require the use of transformational technology for information
sharing.

The Access-eGov [8] project has been investigating how current governmental websites may be annotated using a shared reference ontology and intend to roll out methodologies on a test-bed of Eastern European governmental websites. They suggest that
guided markup of current web-pages and content is perhaps the way to go. However,
they correctly write that developers do not have the necessary domain knowledge to
create the reference ontology, creating an extra layer of bureaucracy in the development of the system [9]. Similarly the Quebec government in Canada have embarked

2 http://www.govtalk.gov.uk/

H. Alani et al.

on producing a SW-service-based portal, also using a reference ontology to markup the
governments web-pages.

The BRITE [18] project is building a SW infrastructure for specific areas of governmental record keeping, in this case European-wide business registrations. Vitvar
and colleagues [19] explain how SW services can be used as part of the proposed
Pan-European E-Government Services (PEGS) proposal, which will go some way to
addressing the follow-on problem of how to integrate semantic data from different
countries.

Information integration is of great importance in B2B scenarios. There are several
advantages in using ontology-based architectures for information integration, such as
ease of mapping, handling of different terminologies, explicit data models, etc. [3].

Using Semantic Web Services (SWS) for the integration and sharing of distributed
data sources has also been suggested and demonstrated in B2B scenarios [13,4]. Existing B2B standards for data exchange usually require considerable effort from organisations to agree how exactly they are to be used and implement that [13]. SWS is offered
as an alternative to describe and discover information. This approach could allow for
dynamic integration of resources, assuming that they have been appropriately described
in a SWS language (eg WSML, WSDL).

3 AKTivePSI

Information policy has developed quite quickly in the UK over the last five years, with
Freedom of Information legislation as well as the EU Directive, but no large scale
work had been done to research the potential for reuse using SW technologies and
approaches. OPSI initiated AKTivePSI as an exemplar to show what could be achieved
if public sector information was made available for reuse in an enabling way.

3.1 Aims of AKTivePSI

Integrating and sharing information from distributed sources contains several obstacles
and problems [5], such as scalability, different terminologies and formats, cost, etc.
After meeting with the AKTivePSI government participants, we noticed that many of
them shared the following misguided opinions or beliefs:

 Ontologies are very large, complex, and expensive data models
 Everyone has to agree and adopt the same terminology to enable data sharing
 To participate in the SW, their existing data infrastructures will need to be replaced

with new technology

 Opening access to data only benefits the consumer, and not the provider

Our first task in this project was to correct the above misunderstandings to gain
the support of the participants and encourage to provide data and some resources. The
initial aims of the project were to draw together a sufficiently large set of heterogeneous
information from a selection of public sector organisations in order to explore: (a) How
SW technology can help turn government information into re-useable knowledge to fuel
e-government, (b) Investigate the best practical approach to achieve this goal, in terms
?

?

?
of collecting data and constructing ontologies (c) Show how can data be integrated, and
identify existing government taxonomies that are useful for this task, and (d) provide
evidence that there is added value from undergoing this process.

Throughout the project, we had regular consultations with many government organ-
isations, including the London Boroughs of Camden3 and Lewisham4, Ordnance Survey5 (OS), The Stationary Office6 (TSO), The Met Office7, The Environment Agency8,
The Office of National Statistics9 (ONS), and several others.

To help focus the requests for data, information was collected from the geographical area covered by two of the participating London local authorities; Camden and
Lewisham.

3.2 Design Decisions

The AKTivePSI project set out to deal with real data, plenty of it, and several, very
busy, data providers, keen to find solutions to their knowledge problems. In such real
world scenarios, it becomes vital to follow a realistic approach that is practical and
inexpensive. To this end, the following decisions were made at the start of the project
which turned out to have a very positive impact on the project as a whole:

 No disruption to the participants existing data flows and models. A complete and
sudden transition to semantic knowledge bases (KB) is unnecessary and impractical
in the short term.

 Minimum cost to the participants. They provide the data, and we provide everything
else (ontologies, KB infrastructure, tools for integration, etc.). Data to be delivered
in any shape, format, and delivery method. No data preparation is required from the
provider. Aim here is to encourage participation, and once the benefits of the SW
become more apparent, they will be more willing to invest in this new technology.
The outcomes of this project show that this approach has paid off very well.

 Simulate a real-life scenario. In other words, what we build and do can be done the
same way outside our lab environment. For example, we treat the KBs as if hosted
by the participants.

 Small, well focussed ontologies. It is not realistic to assume that an organisation
will build one monolithic ontology for all their data, or that different organisations
will agree on one semantic model. Therefore, a new ontology will be constructed
for each dataset, and will be designed to represent only the data stored in this data-
base, rather that the extended domains that the data might be related to (exam-
ples later). These numerous, small ontologies will be mapped together to form a
small SW.

3 http://www.camden.gov.uk/
4 http://www.lewisham.gov.uk/
5 http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/
6 http://www.tso.co.uk/
7 http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/
8 http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/
9 http://www.statistics.gov.uk/

H. Alani et al.

 Data provenance must be preserved. Each dataset provided to us was transferred
into a separate KB with its own ontology to eliminate any risks of data contamination from one database to another. Furthermore, each ontology contains a few
classes and properties to represent the source of data, including name of supplier,
name of data set, date supplied, etc. Source information is also attached to all triples
when stored in the triple store.

4 Public Sector Datasets

Several organisations who participated in AKTivePSI made some of their databases
available for the project. The data was provided in various formats, including Microsoft
SQL databases, Microsoft Excel Spreadsheets, text-dumps from databases, XML files,
and Microsoft Access spreadsheets. We developed a number of scripts to automatically
convert this data to RDF, in correspondence with their designated ontologies. Table 1
lists the data sets that we used in this work, the number of RDF statements generated
for each, and a brief description of the data.

Table 1. Datasets provided to AKTivePSI, the number of RDF triples we generated for each
dataset, and a description of what the data is about

Camden Borough Council
Land and Property Gazetteer 2.3M Excel

Food Premises

84K Excel

Local Businesses

170K Excel

Properties in Camden, full address, coordinates,
type (residential/non-residential/mixed).
Food related premises in Camden, their business names,
hygiene inspection results, addresses, (eg restaurant, school, bar).
Businesses in Camden, names, addresses, contact info,
and type of business.

Licences

100K MSSQL Licences for businesses in Camden,

Councillors and Committees 29K Excel

Meeting Minutes
Lewisham Borough Council
Land and Property Gazetteer 4M Excel
Property Tax Bands
10K Excel

106K Text

their addresses, licence types, and expiry dates.
Councillors and committees, sub committees,
who sits on which committee, councillors personal information.
Web pages of committees meeting minutes.

Properties in Lewisham, their full addresses, and coordinates.
Tax property references, description, rate payers, rate value,
and a one string addresses.

Ordnance Survey (data for Camden and Lewisham only)
Address Layer 1
Address Layer 2

768K XML
11.7M XML

PointX POI

467K XML

Data about buildings, addresses, and coordinates.
Data about buildings, addresses, and coordinates
and building classifications (e.g. hospital, university).
Various landmarks and businesses, with names, addresses,
and coordinates.

The Stationery Office London Gazette (entire database was provided, but only the below was used)
Notices for the appointment of administrator for corporate
Administration Notices
insolvencies.
Decease notices of individuals, names, addresses,
description and date of death, address of representatives.

Deceased Estates

120K Text

3.2M Text

Once we receive a new database, we (1) design and build an ontology for this data,
(2) convert the data to RDF triples and store in a triple store, and (3) map the data and
ontology to our existing ontologies and KBs. These stages are described in the following
sections.
?

?

?
4.1 Ontology Construction

Ontologies vary according to their formality levels, the purpose for which they are built,
and the subject matter they represent [15]. One of the recommended first steps towards
building an ontology is to scope its domain to make sure the ontology does not grow
too large for what is needed [14][16].

The appropriate size for an ontology depends on its purpose and the domain it rep-
resents. Some ontologies are designed to represent entire domains, and thus tend to
be of very large sizes, such as the Gene Ontology (GO) 10, and Foundational Model of
Anatomy (FMA) ontology 11. Ontologies may also be built to serve the needs of specific
applications and thus their sizes, though dependent on the needs of these applications,
tend to be much smaller than the domain encapsulating ontologies. Other ontologies,
as in our case, are data-dependent, where they are mainly built to represent a collection
of data, to improve accessibility and understandability of the data. The scale of such
dataset-specific ontologies is limited to the scope of the data.

As stated earlier, one of our principals for this project was to ensure the ontologies
we build for the provided datasets are of low complexity and limited in scope and size.
Small ontologies are cheaper and easier to build, maintain, understand, and use. In
AKTivePSI, we found that most of the databases held by the participating organisation
only required a small number of concepts and relationships to represent the stored data.
In AKTivePSI, we wanted to show that ontologies are not hard to build if limited to
representing databases of defined scopes. We also wanted to show that it is not necessary to come to a common, agreed concensus on vocabulary, but that through ontology
mapping techniques, locally-built ontologies can also prove very useful. Figure 1 shows
an example of a ontology we have built, that describes, in very simple terms, the domain
of Camdens Land and Property Gazetteer. In total, we constructed 13 ontologies, one
for each dataset listed in table 1. All the ontologies were in OWL DL, and were mainly
used to control vocabulary and to cross-link knowledge bases.

4.2 Generating RDF

From the ontology we are able to create instances by running simple scripts over the
data to produce RDF. The scripts were hand-rolled specifically for the database and
ontology which they were linking (reused across similar databases and ontologies).
Although they were manually built, a framework for semi-automatic script generation
would not be inconceivable. The scripts were highly reusable and hence were very easy
to tune for new datasets and ontologies. We demonstrated to the participants the relative
ease of converting legacy data to RDF using cheap and ordinary technology.

As shown in table 1, the total number of RDF triples that we generated for the government data exceeded 23 million. So although we needed small ontologies, we also
needed scalable KB to hold all these RDF triples. We used the 3Store [6], an RDF
triple-store developed in the AKT project, to store the generated RDF files. This triplestore provides a SPARQL endpoint, which is a servlet that accepts SPARQL queries
and returns results in XML.
10 http://www.geneontology.org/
11 http://sig.biostr.washington.edu/projects/fm/

H. Alani et al.

Fig. 1. Ontology for the Camden Land and Property Gazetteer

4.3 Webbing the Knowledge

One of main reasons for utilising ontologies is that the need for tight physical integrations between systems is removed [17]. Ontologies allow integration to happen using
soft mappings between concepts and instances that queries or data browsers can follow to find similar or duplicated entities. In our work, we used the special owl:sameAs
property to link any mapped entities. By connecting our KBs in this way we are able
to provide much greater flexibility and querying power than the original data structures
could provide.

One main aim of this work is to show the added value of using SW technology for
publishing and using government data. Forming a bigger semantic network by integrating the KBs containing all the participants data will add even more value to the data,
and ease communication and data exchange between the partners.

We performed three levels of mappings:

 Mapping of local ontologies. It is safe to assume that individual organisations will
know most about any of the ontologies they develop for their data, and hence
it is possible for these local ontologies to be mapped to each other. For exam-
ple, we developed two ontologies for datasets from Lewisham. Each ontology has
?

?

?
classes representing Property, Address, Post Code. These concepts were links with
owl:sameAs to indicate that they represent the same concepts. Another example is
mapping the concept Premises from the Food Premises ontology of Camden to the
Property class in the Land and Property ontology of Camden. To semi-automate
these mapping, we used CROSI [7], a freely available tool that offers a wide choice
of mapping algorithms.

 Mapping of instances. Because we are using a data-centric approach, it was very
useful to map the instance data to each other as well. For example the instance postcode N6 6DS in one KB maps to the instance pc N66DS in another. Since these instances really do refer to the same object we are able to infer much more data about
certain objects that refer to this instance. In fact, we found that simply linking on
one data object (the postcode) was enough to gleen useful information from various datasets to such an extent that mashups are made easier (section 4.5). Instance
mappings were done automatically using simple scripts that search for duplicates
of specific type of instance (e.g. postcodes, streets, councillors). An owl:sameAs
link will be automatically added between the corresponding instances once such a
mapping is found.

 Mapping of local ontologies to the government reference taxonomy; IPSV. IPSV
(the Integrated Public Sector Vocabulary) is a structured list of terms for the Subject metadata of public sector resources [2]. UK e-Government Metadata Standard
requires public sector organisations to comply with IPSV. AKTivePSI partners expressed some difficulties mapping their databases to IPSV, and hence part of this
project was explore this taxonomy and assess its suitability for this task. To better
understand the problem, we manually mapped our ontologies to the best matched
terms in the IPSV.

4.4 Exploring the Knowledge Network

Now that all the data is ontologically represented and stored in KBs, we need to demonstrate to the participating government organisations what and where the added value is.
RDF provides a well-understood grounding on which data may be shared, and this
in itself provides added value, such that re-use of the data is made much easier (see
section 4.5 on Mash-ups).

4.5 Mashing-Up Distributed KBs

Once data is available in easily parsable and understandable formats, such as RDF,
mash-ups become much easier to generate by searching RDF KBs and mashing-up
data on the fly, which is one of the advantages the SW promises. Two examples of
such mash-ups were created in AKTivPSI. The aim of building these mash-ups was
to demonstrate the relative ease with which they can be constructed from semantically
represented knowledge.

The Camden Food Premises database gives information about the hygiene check results and health risk of various premises around the Camden area that handle food. The
risk categories are given a level between A, which is high risk, to E which is low risk,
and is based on the cleanliness of the premises, compliance with regulations, type of

H. Alani et al.

preparation that is performed, etc. The Food Premises database contains lots of information on these properties, but displaying this information on a map is difficult because
the geographical co-ordinates are missing from this particular data set.

However, the Ordnance Surveys Address Layer and Points of Interest (PointX)
datasets contain easting and northing coordinates for businesses and properties. The instance mapping of postcodes we performed earlier helped to cut down our search space
for finding matching addresses in the datasets. Indeed, once we had found matches we
were able to assert them as being the same, thereby avoiding the need for searching
again.

Fig. 2. Google Maps mashup of the Camden Food Premises dataset made possible by mapping
the data to the OS Address Layer II and PointX dataset

To create the mash-up, a number of SPARQL queries were written that searched for
each premises address from the Food Premises dataset in each of the OS two datasets
and once a match is found the co-ordinates are retrieved and the premises is displayed
on a Google map. The information from Food Premises along with the mapping performed between one dataset and another, provides extra context to instances from both
datasets. The PointX dataset gains access to the risk level of the food premises (as well
as the implicit knowledge that the premises are used for preparing food), and the food
premises dataset garnered exact coordinates for the premises. Figure 2 shows a simple
Google Maps mash-up that uses the mapping to provide a visual display of the food
premises dataset.

This type of mash-up could be very good for public awareness (and therefore commercial competition). For example, one particular business that scored within the high risk
category, has glowing customer reviews on restaurant review sites across the internet.

As for Lewisham, we were able to use the PointX dataset for a similar use for the
Lewisham Land and Property Gazetteer. This dataset contains information about all
kinds of properties across the Lewisham ward, and includes address and coordinate
?

?

?
information; however, it does not contain information about the business inhabiting a
property  information that the PointX data does provide. We provided a mash-up that
shows the location of business properties

5 Findings

Introducing a new technology, such as the SW to any organisation must be managed
very carefully to avoid any disruption to their current work procedures and data flow,
and to gain their trust and interest in the new technology. Below are some of the findings
and lessons learnt from the AKTivePSI study that relates more specifically to government agencies.

Minimise disruption to existing infrastructure: It was critical to show that adopting
SW technology does not mean throwing away existing database technologies; the reengineering of governmental information processing is a complex and difficult task
that is facilitated by special conditions and structures that do not obtain in the United
Kingdom [11]. An important part of our task was to show that the costs of SW adoption
were relatively low. We demonstrated how simple scripts can be used to convert all
their data into RDF triples. The approach we adopted in AKTivePSI was to cache the
given databases into triple stores. However, this might not be the best solution as it
duplicates existing databases. A slightly different approach is suggested in [10], where
they imported the data into ontologies, then exported it back into relational databases
with new structures that are closer to those of the used ontologies. In other words, they
changed the database schema to match the ontology. We are now experimenting with an
alternative approach, which is to use a technology like D2RQ12 which enables layering
an ontology on top of a non-RDF database, thus removing the need to duplicate or
change the structure of the original database. Such technology maintains the benefits
of scalability and maturity of RDBMS, as well as providing RDF and SPARQL access
points.

Minimal ontological commitment: Constructing ontologies requires certain skills and
modelling knowledge and expertise. Government organisations worry about the possible high cost of building such complex knowledge structures.

We were encouraged by the results of applying SW technologies to governmental
data. Not only were the benefits very high, even on a small quantity of data, but the
costs were relatively low. The building of small, data-centric ontologies was an easily
achievable goal for developers in governmental institutions, possibly working on limited budgets. This is a lesson that is of interest in the wider Semantic Web field, as
arguments continue over the overhead that developing and maintaining ontologies will
require. As a result of this work, Camden Council and the London Gazette are now
developing their own ontologies to represent some of their datasets.

Some of these organisations thought that Cyc, Gene Ontology, or even IPSV, are the
sort of ontologies they need to build to become semantically enabled. We demonstrated
a cheap and practical approach, where ontologies are scaled to individual datasets rather

12 http://sourceforge.net/projects/d2rq-map/

H. Alani et al.

than to entire domains, then gradually linked together to enable data sharing. It is possible that more elaborated ontologies might be required later on if more automation is
needed for ontology mapping or for data inconsistency checking.

Extending IPSV: One of the initial concerns that some AKTivePSI participants had was
the difficulty they were facing in mapping their data collections to IPSV (section 4.3).
During our investigation, we found that IPSV is mainly designed to represent subject
topics, not data. For example, IPSV contains more than 30 terms related to road issues
(e.g. Road safety, Road signs, Road cleaning), but there is not a Road term to map a
specific road to. Our conclusion was that IPSV is simply not designed to be a reference
ontology for representing data and hence a different reference ontology, or an extension
to IPSV, for mapping and sharing data. In AKTivePSI, we mapped each ontology to
IPSV to demonstrate how IPSV can be extended to cover the required semantics.

The ability to map ontologies together provided a much more practical and less expensive alternative to agreeing or using the same terminology, which some government
organisations thought was required to share data. They realised that it is possible to continue using their local terminologies whilst being able to open data exchange channels
between different, distributed, databases.

Showing added value: The goal of providing better access to data is naturally not
enough to win the interest, support, and active participation of data providers. It was
vital to show examples of where and what is the added value of integration and shared
access. Most of the organisations we met with had some needs, and sometimes laborious
procedures, for acquiring data from other government sources. We illustrated the direct
benefits of participating in a semantically enabled data exchange channel, especially
with respect to data consistency checking, relative ease of integration and distributed
querying, data exchange and merging, and lowering the cost of meeting the requests of
the public for data as well as the requests of the government for providing better access
to public sector information.

Data integration from multiple sources adds the value of knowledge augmentation
and verification. Integrating datasets can provide useful insights into the quality of the
dataset for the data provider involved. For example, the Ordnance Surveys Address
Layer 2 dataset provides a list of businesses, including their address and their geo-
location, and similarly so does the PointX dataset. However, we found that the two
lists of businesses do not match, where some are present in one dataset but not in the
other. In some examples, the PointX dataset contained several businesses listed at the
same address, while only one was listed in the OS Address Layer 2. Was this an error?
Perhaps, due to the lack of temporal information, one business took over the building
from another, or perhaps one business is sited in the same building on a different floor
to another business. It is difficult to infer an answer, but the integration has provided
some information about the quality of the datasets and made such comparisons and
cross-matchings possible.

This, of course, applies equally to errors and inconsistencies in the datasets, as well
as knowledge gaps. Table 2 gives an overview of one of the examples of inconsistencies
in the datasets. The Sunrise Food Mart appears in the PointX database at number 354,
?

?

?
whereas it occupies a number of building plots and is called Sunrise Food Market in
the Camden Food Premises. The Ordnance Survey has an error in its naming of the
business, and says the business is at number 352, with some courier service at 354.Such
inconsistencies cannot easily be automatically resolved, unless a number of other linked
datasets are able to provide evidence that supports one or other of the possible addresses.
All three sources are official and trusted, and hence not one can be taken as necessarily
the correct one.

Table 2. Inconsistencies on one entity highlighted by the integration

Name
Sunrise Food Mart
Sunrise Food Market
Sunrise Food Mart,352 352
London No.1 Courier 354

Number Postcode Dataset

NW62QJ PointX
352354 NW62QJ Camden Food Premises

NW62QJ Ordnance Survey Address Layer 2
NW62QJ Ordnance Survey Address Layer 2

As well as spotting many knowledge overlaps, we also identified several knowledge
gaps between various participants. For example, the OS desires to get automatic feeds
about accepted applications for property extensions from local councils, local councils
need to receive automatic notifications from Land Registry when a property changes
hands, and local councils in London would like to know when a business publishes its
insolvency notice in the London Gazette. Although AKTivePSI did not implement any
of these capabilities, but it showed how the SW can support such processes. Some of
these services will be implemented in the second phase of AKTivePSI due to start in
the coming few weeks.

Provenance and Privacy: Many agencies and institutions are instinctively secretive
about their data. The SW vision is to remove human processing from the knowledge
acquisition process as far as is feasible, and the idea of publishing data without even
controlling the context of its presentation is of course very new in governmental circles.
At present, the ideal limits to data publication are unknown. A number of agencies
lack understanding of what data they actually possess. These agencies needed to be
assured that with SW technology, they will be able to pick and choose which data to
share and which data to keep locked-up.

Some of AKTivePSI government participants expressed their great unease and worry
about possible misuse of the data, once access and reuse are enabled with the SW. Privacy is a complex issue, with post-Enlightenment concepts under technological threat
from a number of directions, not only government. Many of us are prepared to surrender
our privacy for gains in efficiency or monetary benefit; others defend personal privacy
as a vital pillar of a liberal democratic society. Unless and until such political dilemmas are resolved, governments will of necessity have to tread carefully when considering how far to exploit information-processing technologies such as the Semantic Web
[12]. Technologies and protocols currently under development in the W3C to create a
policy-aware Web, allowing information users, owners and subjects to express policies
for information use and negotiate about them, will help make the situation clearer [20].

H. Alani et al.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

The adoption of Semantic Web technology to allow for more efficient use of data in
order to add value is becoming more common where efficiency and value-added are
important parameters, for example in business and science. However, in the field of
government there are other parameters to be taken into account (e.g. confidentiality),
and the cost/benefit analysis is more complex. The work reported here was intended to
show that SW technology could be valuable in the governmental context.

An important outcome of the project is the level of awareness that has been built
up in government about the potential of SW technology. Having seen what the SW
technology is capable of, and the success of the pilot study of AKTivePSI, OPSI is
now funding a second project which will focus on implementing and running some of
the services and capabilities studied in the first stage at the premises of some of the
participating government agencies.

Some of the direct outcomes of this work are: (a) the London Gazette is currently
building OWL ontologies to represent parts of their data, and is working towards publishing this data in RDF; (b) OPSI oversaw the development of a URI schema, which
is now being used to generate URIs for government official legislations and copyright
statements; and (c) Camden Borough Council added a SW engineer to their staff force
to help the council in their effort to join the SW.

AKTivePSI has given a glimpse of what is possible by applying SW technology to
public sector information. We showed that by using small, purpose-built ontologies and
mapping these together, greater value can be sought in the data, and re-use of the data
in mash-ups becomes much easier, which should increase public awareness and access
to the data.

The issue of providing better access to to public sector information has also been
identified in the policy review, The Power of Information, conducted by Prime Min-
isters Strategy Unit13. The review aims to position the UK Government in response to
developments in the use and communication of citizen and state generated information
on the web. The work described in this paper predates that review and helped inform
the review teams analysis. Of particular note is the proposal to link the social power
of the web to help address the re-usable format issue, by providing citizens with an online facility for people to come together, to discuss and formally request public sector
information assets in a particular format.

The commercial re-use of public sector information that the SW enables, opens up
countless opportunities for the development of new information products and services,
driving forwards and accelerating the development of the knowledge economy.
