Lightweight Community-Driven Ontology Evolution 

Katharina Siorpaes 

Digital Enterprise Research Institute (DERI), University of Innsbruck, Austria 

katharina.siorpaes@deri.at   

Abstract.  Only  few  well-maintained  domain  ontologies  can  be  found  on  the 
Web. The likely reasons for the lack of useful domain ontologies include that 
(1)  informal  means  to  convey  intended  meaning  more  efficiently  are  used  for 
ontology specification only to a very limited extent, (2) many relevant domains 
of  discourse  show  a  substantial  degree  of  conceptual  dynamics,  (3)  ontology 
representation languages are hard to understand for the majority of (potential) 
ontology  users  and  domain  experts,  and  (4)  the  community  does  not  have 
control over the ontology evolution. In this thesis, we propose to (1) ground a 
methodology  for  community-grounded  ontology  building  on  the  culture  and 
philosophy of wikis by giving users who have no or little expertise in ontology 
engineering the opportunity to contribute in all stages of the ontology lifecycle 
and  (2)  exploit  the  combination  of  human  and  computational  intelligence  to 
discover  and  resolve  inconsistencies  and  align  lightweight  domain  ontologies. 
The contribution of this thesis is a methodology and prototype for communitygrounded building and evolution of lightweight domain ontologies. 

1   Problem Statement 

Even though one can observe highly active research in the areas of ontologies and the 
Semantic Web, there is a lack of up-to-date domain ontologies for many fields. The 
complexity  of  reality  makes  building  ontologies  difficult  in  several  ways:  (1) 
Ontology  engineering  methodologies  tend  to  focus  on  formal  means  for  specifying 
ontologies. However, in order to describe the intended meaning of ontology elements, 
informal means are also needed. (2) Many relevant domains of discourse, such as e-
commerce, show a high degree of conceptual dynamics, i.e. it is hard to keep up with 
the  pace  of  change  in  reality  [1].  (3)  A  prerequisite  for  using  an  ontology  and  thus 
committing  to  its  view  of  the  world  is  to  be  able  to  understand  the  meaning  of 
concepts  and  relations  [1].  This  is  problematic  for  many  users,  since  they  cannot 
easily figure out what they would be committing to when using a particular ontology 
file from the Web, as the discourse that lead to a certain specification is not available. 
(4) Most ontologies are built by a group of engineers and the user community does 
not have direct control over the evolution of the ontology.  

2   Motivation 

A  community-oriented  approach  has  several  advantages  as  compared  to  an  isolated 
engineering-oriented approach, where a small group of engineers carefully constructs 

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 951955, 2007. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

K. Siorpaes 

the  ontology  and  releases  it  to  the  user  community  at  a  later  point  of  time:  (1)  We 
believe that ontology building is inherently a collaborative task, for two reasons: first, 
ontologies are supposed to be community contracts [2, 3]; second, the combination of 
required domain expertise and modeling skills is more likely to be found in a group 
than  in  a  single  individual.    (2)  Timeliness  of  a  domain  ontology  is  important  in 
rapidly  changing  domains.  A  community  can  keep  up  with  the  pace  reality  is 
changing more easily. (3) The user community is more likely to agree on a view of 
the  world  that  is  represented  by  the  ontology.  Therefore,  it  is  likely  that  this 
community  will  also  actually  use  and  further  develop  the  ontology  as  it  is  not  a 
subjective conceptualization based on an outdated state of the world. (4) The burden 
of  creating,  maintaining  the  ontology  can  be  shared  by  those  benefiting  from  the 
ontology. Similarly, inconsistencies can be discovered and resolved faster. In [4], we 
provide evidence for the assumption that a community can be trusted with the task of 
building  lightweight  ontologies  by  showing  that  the  conceptual  reliability  of 
Wikipedia articles is  very  high (93% of  URIs convey a stable ontological  meaning, 
even though Wikipedia is maintained by a highly diverse group of actors). 

3   Approach and Design Principles 

In  the  following  we  outline  the  design  principles  of  this  approach:  Tapping  the 
wisdom  of  crowds:  We  believe  that  a  diverse  community  consisting  of  domain 
experts as well as knowledge engineers is smarter and more agile than only a small 
ontology development team.  Instead of forcing one view of the world onto the user 
communities, we envision co-existence and interoperability of conflicting views and 
to  support  the  community  in  achieving  consensus.  Openness  and  multimedia 
richness:  Traditional  ontology  building  environments  usually  impose  quite  high 
entrance  barriers  on  a  user  while  wikis  allow  many  users  to  contribute  easily  with 
only basic Web-editing skills. The culture of Wikis is the underlying paradigm of this 
work. Additionally, we propose the use of multimedia elements to better convey the 
informal  part  of  the  intended  meaning  of  a  concept.  Integration  of  external  data: 
with the increasing popularity of Web 2.0, a wealth of data is available, which can 
be  exploited  for  improving  the  process  of  ontology  construction.  Combination  of 
human and computational intelligence: Building ontologies is a task that depends 
on  human  intelligence,  both  as  a  source  of  domain  expertise  and  for  producing  a 
consensual  conceptualization  as  well  as  aligning  ontologies  and  resolving 
inconsistencies.  We  aim  at  developing  functionality  that  combines  human  and 
computational power and thus supports users in achieving several ontology building 
tasks.  

4   Methodology and Contribution 

The  envisioned  research  methodology  is  as  follows:  (1)  Analysis  of  a  trade-off 
between  expressivity  and  agility  of  an  ontology  meta-model  suitable  for  a  broad 
audience. (2) Deployment of a suitable model for ontology evolution. (3) Integration 
of  external  resources  to  support  lexical  and  multimedia-based  enrichment:  tagging, 
?

?

?
i.e.  describing  objects  with  keywords  to  enhance  content  retrieval,  avoids  the 
limitations known in ontology building as they allow the instant maintenance of tags. 
Statistical analysis of the large amount of data produced in tagging application can be 
used for ontology construction [5, 6]. Additionally, Web resources, such as Google, 
Wikipedia,  or  Freebase,  and  terminological  resources,  such  as  Wordnet,  will  be 
exploited for ontology construction and background enrichment. (4) Specification of 
user  roles  and  processes  supporting  the  community  in  achieving  consensus.  (5) 
Combination  of  human  and  computational  intelligence:  this  includes  discovering  
and  resolving  inconsistencies  and  aligning  ontologies  by  combining  matching 
algorithms with human intelligence, mapping Wikipedia special pages to an ontology 
building environment, and achieving stable releases of ontologies. (6) Application of 
various  techniques  for  visualization  of  ontologies  and  user  interfaces  to  foster 
comprehensibility.  (7)  Investigating  user  incentives  for  contributing  to  ontology 
building  in  a  community-driven  environment.  (8)  Implementation  of  a  community 
portal  based  on  the  methodology  and  evaluation:  the  portal  will  be  released  to  a 
community who will create and maintain several domain ontologies. The data will be 
logged  and  analyzed,  in  order  to  find  out  about  the  domain  coverage,  stability  of 
concept definitions, cost, user participation, and precision of usage. 

5   Related Work 

in 

The work related to this thesis can be divided into the following areas: Traditional 
ontology  engineering  methodologies  are  described  and  compared 
[3]. 
Collaborative  and  community-driven  ontology  engineering:  OntoSaurus  [7]  is  a 
web-based  tool  for  editing  and  browsing  ontologies;  however,  it  has  no  explicit 
support  for  collaborative  or  community-based  work.  Domginue  [8]  describes 
Tadzebao  and  WebOnto:  Tadzebao  supports  asynchronous  and  synchronous 
discussions  on  ontologies.  WebOnto  complements  Tadzebao  by  supporting 
collaborative browsing, creation and editing of ontologies. Vrandecic and colleagues 
[9]  describe  the  DILIGENT  knowledge  process  where  ontology  evolution  and 
collaborative  concept  mapping  are  applied  to  deal  with  conceptual  dynamics  of 
domains.  OntoEdit  [10]  is  a  collaborative  ontology  editing  environment.  Kotis  and 
Vouros  describe  the  HCOME  methodology  in  [11],  which  is  a  human-centered 
approach:  ontology  development  is  defined  as  a  dynamic  process  with  a  focus  on 
ontology  evolution.  HCOME  is  a  decentralized  engineering  model  where  everyone 
first formalizes her own ontology and shares it in a further step within the community. 
This is different to our approach as the ontology is not open to the community at all 
times. Braun and colleagues [12] present an ontology maturing process consisting of 
four  steps:  emergence  of  ideas,  consolidation  in  communities,  formalization, 
axiomatization.  They  regard  the  evolution  of  an  ontology  as  maturing  from  tags  to 
formal ontologies via the community. Gibson and colleagues [13] distinguish between 
ontological  and  meta-ontological  data  and  propose  that  more  attention  should  be 
dedicated  to  the  meta-ontological  data  and  to  allow  the  community  to  discuss 
ontologies at an early stage of development with a Web 2.0 user interface, where no 
formal  model  is  required.  They  emphasize  the  integration  of  natural  language. 
Semantic Wikis: [14] describe Makna, a Wiki engine that was extended with generic 

K. Siorpaes 

ontology-driven  components  that  allow  collaborative  authoring,  querying,  and 
browsing Semantic Web information. IkeWiki [15] allows annotating links, typing of 
pages, and context dependent content adaptation. [16] have the objective to make the 
knowledge within Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia, machine-accessible by adding 
semantic  information.  Platypus  Wiki  [17]  focus  on  the  creation  of  RDF  (instance) 
data, Platypus Wiki aims at augmenting a wiki with semantics. WikiFactory [18] is a 
framework that allows the automatic generation of domain specific wikis. The main 
difference  to  our  work  is  that  existing  approaches  aim  at  augmenting  existing  wiki 
content with semantics instead of using a Wiki-like infrastructure as an environment 
for collaboratively building ontologies. 

6   Expected Impact 

The  final  goal  of  the  thesis  is  to  develop  a  deployable  prototype  for  wiki-based 
ontology construction by large, unsupervised audiences. The process of communitydriven  ontology  construction  and  maintenance  will  be  supported  by  background 
intelligence in the tool that helps the community by suggestions based on statistically 
significant patterns or external lexical or structural resources. Eventually, thus should 
hand back the control over the evolution of ontologies to the community in order to 
overcome the current shortage of domain ontologies. 

 

Acknowledgments.  I would like to thank Martin Hepp for supervising my thesis and 
his  continuous  support.  The  work  presented  in  this  paper  has  been  funded  by  the 
Austrian  BMVIT/FFG  under 
(grant  no. 
812515/9284). 

the  FIT-IT  project  myOntology 
