Evaluating the Semantic Web:

A Task-Based Approach

Marta Sabou1, Jorge Gracia2, Sofia Angeletou1,

Mathieu dAquin1, and Enrico Motta1

1 Knowledge Media Institute (KMi), The Open University, United Kingdom

{r.m.sabou,s.angeletou,m.daquin,e.motta}@open.ac.uk

2 IIS Department,University of Zaragoza, Spain

jogracia@unizar.es

Abstract. The increased availability of online knowledge has led to the
design of several algorithms that solve a variety of tasks by harvesting
the Semantic Web, i.e., by dynamically selecting and exploring a multitude of online ontologies. Our hypothesis is that the performance of
such novel algorithms implicitly provides an insight into the quality of
the used ontologies and thus opens the way to a task-based evaluation
of the Semantic Web. We have investigated this hypothesis by studying
the lessons learnt about online ontologies when used to solve three tasks:
ontology matching, folksonomy enrichment, and word sense disambigua-
tion. Our analysis leads to a suit of conclusions about the status of the
Semantic Web, which highlight a number of strengths and weaknesses of
the semantic information available online and complement the findings
of other analysis of the Semantic Web landscape.

1 Introduction

The recent growth of the Semantic Web [19] and the appearance of semantic
search engines such as Swoogle [11] and WATSON [9] that allow quick access
to online knowledge has had a considerable impact on the design of Semantic
Web applications. Indeed, there is a trend to move away from applications relying on a small amount of manually selected semantic sources towards a new
generation of Semantic Web tools which dynamically select, reuse and combine
a multitude of heterogeneous, online available ontologies [20,21]. This paradigm
of harvesting the Semantic Web has also inspired novel ways of performing a
variety of tasks. For example, Alani [1] proposes a method for ontology learning
that relies on cutting and pasting modules from online ontologies relevant to a
set of keywords. In [14] the authors rely on online ontologies to disambiguate the
senses of keywords used in a search engine query. Dynamically selected online
ontologies play the role of background knowledge in ontology matching [26,27]
or can be used to semantically enrich folksonomy tag spaces [4,31]. The experimental evaluations of these algorithms [4,14,27] are still at an early stage, but,
nevertheless, they provide strong evidence that the Semantic Web has reached a

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 423437, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

M. Sabou et al.

critical point where it can be used as a valuable source of knowledge to perform
a variety of tasks.

Our hypothesis is that an important benefit of such novel algorithms lies in
their potential use for evaluating the Semantic Web. Indeed, because they reuse
a multitude of online ontologies, they can provide valuable insights into the
qualitative aspects of these ontologies such as their suitability for a task, the
properties of their vocabularies or the quality of their conceptual structure.

Such a task-based evaluation of the Semantic Web complements current efforts
for evaluating (online) ontologies. Ontology evaluation has been a core research
topic from the early stages of the Semantic Web leading to a set of approaches [6,16]
distributed in two major categories. On the one side, a few approaches exist, which
are based on the manual assessment of a set of ontology design criteria (e.g., OntoClean [15]). On the other side, there are many automatic approaches, which evaluate different aspects of an ontology (e.g., vocabulary, conceptual structure) by
relying on different views of what constitutes a good quality ontology [28]. For
example, the quality of an automatically learnt ontology can be judged in terms
of its similarity to a manually constructed ontology or to the corpus from which it
was extracted. Or, adopting a task-based view, the quality of an ontology can also
be judged with respect to the performance of a task that uses it [25].

With the growth of the Semantic Web, the focus of ontology evaluation efforts
has shifted towards online ontologies. Ontology selection methods [28] rely on
evaluating ontology aspects such as popularity [7,11,23], similarity to a domain
or set of keywords [2,7,11,23] and the richness of the internal structure [2,7].
Furthermore, several overviews of the Semantic Web as a whole focus on the
totality of online ontologies. Existing studies assess the size and growth rate of
online knowledge [10,19], as well as emerging trends in the adoption and use of
representation languages and their primitives [5,8,34]. While these findings are
important, they do not give an insight into the suitability of online ontologies to
be used for certain tasks. Hence, inspired by the paradigm introduced in [25], we
propose to perform a task-based evaluation of the Semantic Web by analyzing
the performance of novel algorithms that harvest it.

We test the feasibility and usefulness of such a task based evaluation approach
by detailing the lessons we have learnt about the quality of online ontologies
when they were employed to solve three different tasks: ontology matching (Sec-
tion 2), folksonomy tagspace enrichment (Section 3) and query disambiguation
(Section 4). We conclude in Section 5 with a number of observations about the
status of the Semantic Web that support our hypothesis and are complementary
to findings provided by similar studies of online ontologies [5,8,10,19,34].

2 Case Study 1 - Ontology Matching

Ontology matching is the task of determining the relations that hold between
the entities of two ontologies [30]. In [26] we proposed a new paradigm to ontology matching which relies on harvesting the Semantic Web: it derives semantic mappings by dynamically selecting, exploiting, and combining multiple and
?

?

?
heterogeneous online ontologies. For example, when matching two concepts labeled Researcher and AcademicStaff, the matcher would 1) identify (at run-time,
during matching) online ontologies that can provide information about how these
two concepts inter-relate and then 2) combine this information to infer the map-
ping. We distinguish two different strategies for deriving mappings [26]. In strategy S1 the mapping can be provided by a single ontology (e.g., stating that
Researcher  AcademicStaff ). In strategy S2 a mapping can be derived by reasoning with information spread over several ontologies (e.g., that Researcher 
ResearchStaff in one ontology and that ResearchStaff  AcademicStaff in an-
other). We performed a large scale investigation and evaluation of this matching
paradigm in [27] which provided a variety of insights into the quality of online
ontologies as described next.

2.1 Experimental Data and Results

For experimental purposes we used two large, real life thesauri1. The United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)s AGROVOC thesaurus,
version May 2006, consists of 28.174 descriptor terms (i.e., preferred terms) and
10.028 non-descriptor terms (i.e., alternative terms). The United States National
Agricultural Library (NAL) Agricultural thesaurus NALT, version 2006, consists of 41.577 descriptor terms and 24.525 non-descriptor terms. We used both
alternative and preferred terms in our experiments.

The matching process performed by using strategy S1 (see
implementation details in [26])
resulted in a total of 6687
mappings (2330 subclass, 3710
superclass and 647 disjoint rela-
tions) obtained by dynamically
selecting, exploring and combining 226 online ontologies. Fig. 1
shows the contribution of each
of these ontologies to the alignment in terms of the number of
mappings to which each ontology
contributed and the percentage
that this number represents.
Conclusion C1: Online ontologies are useful for the matching task.
Based on these results, we can already conclude that online ontologies are useful
to solve real life matching tasks. Indeed, if combined appropriately, they can
provide a large amount of mappings between the matched ontologies. Moreover,
in the next section we will show that the quality of the knowledge provided by
the Semantic Web allows us to produce a performance comparable with the best
performers among alternative approaches to ontology matching.
1 This data set was used in the OAEI06 food Thesaurus Mapping Task,
http://www.few.vu.nl/wrvhage/oaei2006/

Fig. 1. Contribution of the online ontologies used
by S1 to the alignment

M. Sabou et al.

Table 1. Evaluation results

Group 1 Group 2 Agreed by All

Correct
False
Dont know
Precision
?

?

?
63%
?

?

?
69%
?

?

?
70%

2.2 Quality of Online Ontologies

According to [25], the essence of a task based evaluation is that the quality of
an ontology correlates with the performance of the task in which it is employed.
In the case of matching this means that the precision of the alignment is an
indication of the quality of online ontologies explored to derive it.

To assess the quality of the knowledge provided by online ontologies we performed a manual assessment of 1000 mappings (i.e., 15% of the alignment). We
relied on six members of our lab working in the area of the Semantic Web, and
thus familiar with ontologies and ontology modeling. We performed two parallel evaluations of the sample mappings (i.e., each mapping has been evaluated
by two different evaluators). The participants evaluated each mapping as Cor-
rect, False or Dont know when they could not judge the correctness of the
statement. We computed the precision of the obtained alignment as the ratio of
Correct mappings over all the evaluated mappings (i.e., those evaluated either
as Correct or False) and obtained precision values of 63% and 69% for the two
groups (see Table 1). To level out any differences, we also computed the precision
of the fraction of the alignment on which both groups agreed (i.e., 742 mappings,
74%). We consider the so obtained precision value of 70% as a typical baseline
performance that can be achieved by harvesting online knowledge.

A manual inspection of the 217 false mappings on which both groups agreed
revealed that 114 (i.e., 53%) are due to our simplistic anchoring mechanism
(i.e., finding concepts in online ontologies that correspond to the matched con-
cepts). For example, in Table 2, c 6443 labeled with Rams and referring to an
uncastrated adult male sheep2 is put in correspondence with a similarly labeled
concept (ram), but which means Random Access Memory in the context of the
online ontology. An anchoring mechanism that could prevent us from deriving
these false mappings (thus reducing their number to 103) will imply an increase
in precision from 70% to 87%.

To fully understand the significance of these values, it is important to compare them to the performance of other background knowledge based techniques.
However, the precision values we found in the literature were reported on different data sets, therefore we can consider them only as indicative, and in addition
only S-Match reports on recall values [13]. The technique of Aleksovski et al.
was evaluated on a Gold Standard of mappings for 200 concepts and produced
a precision of 76% [3]. The matching techniques proposed by van Hage et al.
reach precision values of 53% - 75% when exploring a domain specific textual

2 Definition from WordNet2.1.
?

?

?
Table 2. Examples of several types of false mappings. For each mapping we show the
names and labels of the matched concepts, the reasoning which lead to deriving the
mapping and the online ontology from which the mapping was derived.

Error
Type

Anchor

Nr./

Examples
% AGROVOC Labels Rel. NALT
Concept
Rams, Tups  memory

Concept
c 6443
O1 = http://www.arches.uga.edu/gonen/qos bilal.owl
c 3954

Irrigation  agriculture

O1:ram  O1:memory

agriculture
O1:Irrigation  O1:SoilCultivation  O1:Agriculture

Labels

memory

114,
53%

Subsumption 40,
18%

as generic
relation

Subsumption 16,
7%

as

part-whole

Subsumption 11,

as role

Inaccurate

labeling

Different

View

12,
5%

12,
5%

O1 = http://sweet.jpl.nasa.gov/ontology/human activities.owl

c 23995

Branches

trees
?

?

?
trees

O1:Branch  O1:Tree

c 11091

O1 = http://site.uottawa.ca/mkhedr/FuzzyOnto
ingredients

 ingredients

O1:garlic  O1:vegetable  O1:ingredient

Garlic

5% O1 = http://cvs.sourceforge.net/viewcvs.py/instancestore/

instancestore/ontologies/Attic/pizza9.daml?rev=1.2

c 1693

Coal

industry

 industry

O1:coal  O1:industry

O1 = http://www.aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de/WBS/meh/

mapping/data/russia1a.rdf
?

?

?
c 2943
O1:Fish  O1:MarineInvertebrate  O1:Crustacean  O1:Lobster
O1 = http://139.91.183.30:9090/RDF/VRP/Examples/tap.rdf

lobsters

lobsters

Fishes

resource [32]. Therefore, the 70% precision value (which could be potentially
increased to 87%) obtained by dynamically selecting and combining multiple,
heterogeneous and generic ontologies correlates with the precision of the other
two techniques (75% - 76%) when exploring a single, high-quality, domain specific resource (i.e., DICE [3], CooksRecipes.coms Cooking Dictionary [32]).
Conclusion C2: Online ontologies have a good quality and lead to
high precision alignments. We conclude that online ontologies have a good
enough quality to lead to alignments with a high precision value which can
rival alignments obtained with manually selected, domain specific resources (e.g.,
ontologies, texts). Even more, our findings show that online ontologies dont only
have a high quality when taken stand alone, but most importantly their combined
use also results in high quality alignments.

2.3 Frequent Errors in Online Ontologies

While the use of online ontologies generally leads to correct mappings there
are also cases when false mappings are derived. Understanding the causes of
false mappings can provide another interesting insight into the quality of online
ontologies, namely, the typical errors that lead to false mappings. Our inspection
of the false mappings revealed that 91 (i.e., 42%) are a direct consequence of the
following types of errors in online ontologies (see Table 2).

M. Sabou et al.

Subsumption used to model generic relations. One of the most common
errors was the use of subsumption as a way to model the fact that there exists
some type of relation between two concepts, e.g., Survey  M arketing,
Irrigation  Agriculture, Biographies  P eople. This case leads to 40
false mappings (i.e., 18%).

Subsumption used to model part-whole relations. Subsumption is also
used in several ontologies to model part-whole relations. These ontologies
resulted in 16 (7%) incorrect mappings, e.g., Branch  T ree, Leaf  P lant.
Subsumption used to model roles. We found 11 false mappings (5%) derived because roles were incorrectly modeled as subclass relations, for ex-
ample, that Garlic, Leek  Ingredient (in fact, Leek is a V egetable but in
some contexts it plays the the role of an ingredient).

Inaccurate labeling. We also found 12 cases (5%) when a correct subclass
relation introduced errors due to the inaccurate labeling of its concepts. For
3 states that coal  industry, where coal refers to coal industry
example, O1
rather than the concept of Coal itself. Similarly, for Database  Enzime in
4, Enzyme refers to an enzyme database rather than describing the class
O1
of all enzymes.

Different Views. Finally, some of the explored ontologies adopted a certain
view on the relation of two concepts that was not in concordance with the
context of the mapping and/or the perspective of the evaluators. For exam-
ple, TAP considers lobsters kinds of Fishes, a perspective with which none
of the evaluators agreed.

Conclusion C3: Online ontologies contain modeling errors which hamper the quality of the alignment. Most errors are due to the incorrect use
of subsumption to model generic relations, roles and meronymy.

2.4 Contradictory Statements in Online Ontologies

The novelty of techniques that harvest the Semantic Web lies in their ability
to combine information from multiple, different ontologies. As such, they need
to deal with potentially contradictory information supplied by different sources.
For example, in the case of ontology matching, contradictory mapping relations
could be derived between two concepts by relying on different ontologies. The
question is how frequent this phenomenon is, i.e., do different online ontologies
lead to contradictory mappings between two given terms?

To answer this question, we ran a modified variant of S1: for every pair of concept labels we derive mappings from all the online ontologies that mention them.
While we have discovered mappings between a high number of label pairs (6425),
the number of cases when contradictory mappings are derived is surprisingly low
and accounts to only six pairs (see Table 3).

3 http://www.aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de/WBS/meh/mapping/data/russia1a.rdf
4 http://mensa.sl.iupui.edu/ontology/Database.owl
?

?

?
Table 3. Contradictory statements in online ontologies

AGROVOC NALT Nr. Subclass Nr. Superclass Nr. Disjunct
)

) relations (

) relations(

label
fruit
sea

energy
meat

label relations (
tomato

river
light

seafood
mushroom pizza
ocean

sea
?

?

?
Conclusion C4: Only few online ontologies contain contradictory relations between two given concepts. Our preliminary observations indicate
that the correct mapping can normally be filtered out with simple statistical
means: the most frequently derived relation is likely to be correct.

2.5 Inconsistencies in Multiple Mappings Drawn from Different

Ontologies


?

?

?
V egetablei

F ruit (F ood)j

In the previous section we have only looked
at a rather basic form of contradiction,
where contradictory relations have been explicitly stated between two items. As pointed
out, these cases appear to be very infrequent.
However, if we go beyond relations between
two items and look at a number of mappings as a whole, then inconsistencies arise
more frequently. Fig. 2 provides such an ex-
ample, where V egetablei is discovered to be
disjoint with F ruit (F ood)j, T omatoesj is a
subclass of both concepts and thus unsatis-
fiable: there cannot be any instance of T omatoesj, since it would have to belong
to two disjoint classes at the same time.

`BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB

Fig. 2. Example of incoherence in
mappings

6nnnnnnnnnnnn
hPPPPPPPPPPPP

T omatoesj
?

?

?
F ruiti

As already said, this phenomenon of generating sets of inconsistent mappings was more pronounced than expected. Indeed, our automatic incoherence
detection mechanism has identified 306 base incoherences that corrupted the
entire alignment. A few mappings between very generic concepts with many
subclasses (e.g., F oods  P roducts, P eople  Agents) caused the majority of
the incoherences. Fortunately, these can be isolated and disposed of automatically using reasoning mechanisms, thus leading to the improvement of the entire
alignment.

Conclusion C5: Because different ontologies rely on different views or
different contexts, they may contain contradictory information, leading to inconsistent sets of mappings.

h
`

M. Sabou et al.

3 Case Study 2 - Folksonomy Tagspace Enrichment

Social tagging systems5 are highly successful due to the ease of the tagging pro-
cess: users need neither to have prior knowledge or specific skills to use them
[18,35], nor to rely on a priori agreed structure or shared vocabulary. While folksonomies (i.e., lightweight structures that emerge from the tag space) are easy
to create, they only weakly support content retrieval since they are agnostic to
the relations between their tags: a search for mammal ignores all resources that
are not tagged with this specific word, even if they are tagged with semantically
related terms such as lion, cow, cat. Most approaches which address this
problem [12,29,35] identify clusters of implicitly related tags (e.g., that mammal
and lion are related). Specia and Motta [31] go one step further by proposing to make the semantic relations between tags explicit (e.g., that mammal is
more generic than lion). They envision a semantic enrichment algorithm which
complies with the paradigm of harvesting the Semantic Web by dynamically
exploring and combining multiple online ontologies to derive explicit relations
among implicitly interrelated tags.

A simplified version of
the enrichment algorithm
has been experimentally investigated in [4] by relying
on the same implementation of relation discovery as
used for ontology matching
in [26] (i.e., strategy S1).
Given a set of
implicitly
related tags, the prototype
identifies subsumption and
disjointness
relations between them and constructs
a semantic structure based
on these relations. The first experiments on tag sets identified in [31] led to
suboptimal results due to (1) the small size of the clusters (3-5 tags), (2) the
low coverage of certain tag types in online ontologies and (3) the limitation
of the software (it only identifies subsumption relations while most tags were
related through generic relations). Therefore, we ran a second set of experiments on larger tag clusters identified with the Flickr API6 around a handful
of terms from domains that are well-covered by online ontologies. In these cases
the process resulted in rich knowledge structures, such as for the tag cluster
of Fruit in Fig. 3 (dotted lines denote disjointness). The general conclusion of
the study is that while online ontologies can indeed be used to semantically enrich folksonomies, some of their characteristics hamper the process, as described
next.

Fig. 3. Semantically enriched tag cluster for Fruit

5 E.g., Flickr (http://flickr.com/), del.icio.us (http://del.icio.us/)
6 http://www.flickr.com/services/api/flickr.tags.getRelated.html
?

?

?
Conclusion C6: Online ontologies only weakly cover certain tag cate-
gories, as follows:
Novel terminology. Folksonomies are social artifacts built by large masses of
people. They dynamically change to reflect the latest terminology in several domains and therefore greatly differ from ontologies which are usually
developed by small groups of people and evolve much slower. As such, it
is not surprising that many of the tags used in folksonomies, e.g., {ajax,
css}, have not yet been integrated into ontologies7. Identifying such novel
terminology has a great potential for the Semantic Web as it could represent
a first step towards updating existing ontologies.

Scientific terminology (e.g., plant taxonomy) can only rarely be found in
online ontologies. This could change however if large ontologies containing
such information (e.g., AGROVOC) would be made available online.

Multilingual tags. Both Flickr and Del.icio.us (but especially Flickr) contain
tags from a variety of languages and not only English. These tags are usually hard to find on the Semantic Web because the language coverage of
the existing ontologies is rather low. Indeed, statistics8 performed on a large
collection of online ontologies (1177) in the context of the OntoSelect library [7] indicate that 63% of these ontolgies contain English labels, while a
much smaller percentage contains labels in other languages (German 13.25%,
French 6.02%, Portuguese 3.61%, Spanish 3.01%).
Photographic jargon. Because Flickr is a photo annotation and sharing site,
many tags reflect terms used in photography, such as {nikon, canon,
closeup}. Unfortunately, this domain is weakly covered in the Semantic Web.
Our study also found that, like in the case of ontology matching (C5), online
ontologies can reflect different views and when used in combination can lead to
inconsistencies in the derived structures. For example, the structure in Fig. 3
states that Fruit is disjoint with Dessert. The validity of this statement depends
on the point of view we adopt since some would argue that fruits are desserts.
Such different views can have more serious consequences. For example, Tomato
is considered to be both a Fruit and a Vegetable. The first statement is valid
in a biological context, since a tomato is the fruit of a tomato plant, however,
normally one would classify tomatoes as types of vegetables. While such different
views can co-exist, the fact that Fruit and Vegetable are disjoint makes the
derived semantic structure inconsistent.

4 Case Study 3 - Word Sense Disambiguation

The goal of the Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) task is to identify the appropriate sense of a word in a given context. Usually this task involves identifying
a set of possible senses and then filtering out the right one based on some similarity algorithms. Existing approaches [17,22,24] exploit a given lexical resource

7 At the time of our experiments, March 2007.
8 http://olp.dfki.de/OntoSelect/w/index.php?mode=stats

M. Sabou et al.

(mainly WordNet) or ontology (small set of ontologies) as sources of word senses
and then rely on one or more particular ontologies or corpora to compute semantic measures. Because they require the selection of appropriate knowledge
sources a priori, these approaches are not suitable in cases when the domain
of the words to be disambiguated is determined at run time. This limitation is
addressed by a novel, unsupervised, multi-ontology WSD method [14] which 1)
relies on dynamically identified online ontologies as sources for candidate word
senses and 2) employs algorithms that combine information available both on
the Semantic Web and the Web in order to compute semantic measures.

For example, suppose that we want to disambiguate Java in the context of
Indonesia Java. In a first step, the algorithm identifies a set of possible senses9
for each keyword by exploring online ontologies 10 and combines highly similar
senses to avoid redundancies. Table 4 shows the candidate senses for Java and
their characterization by their synonyms (i.e., Level 0) and superterms (Level 1,
in this case direct hypernyms). A second, disambiguation step consists in computing a Google based semantic relatedness between Indonesia and each involved
term (e.g., Indonesia  Java, Indonesia  Island) and combining the obtained values into a final [0,1] range score. The highest score indicates the most
appropriate sense, i.e., Java  Island in our case. While the large scale evaluation of this method is still in progress, we can already summarize some qualitative
conclusions about the characteristics of online ontologies.

Table 4. Disambiguation of Java in the context of Indonesia Java

#Sense Type Level 0
?

?

?
Java

concept
concept java, coffee
concept

java

Level 1
island
drink

Score
0.387
0.251
programming language 0.116

Conclusion C7: Online ontologies provide a good source for word sense
definitions. A major benefit of relying on multiple, online ontologies is that a
much larger set of keyword senses can be discovered than in cases when few,
predefined resources are used. For example, many traditional methods fail to
disambiguate developer in UML handbook for developers because WordNet2.1
does not contain the word UML (acronym of Unified Modeling Language), neither the intended meaning of developer as someone who develops software. This
information is however available in online ontologies: UML is a concept in the
Book11 ontology (subsumed by SoftwareDesigns), and developer is a property
described as Developer of software in the DOAP12 ontology. As evident from
Table 513 this extra information discovered at runtime in DOAP is crucial for
identifying the appropriate sense for developer.
9 Defined by the ontological context of the term: synonyms, hypernyms etc.
10 In addition to WordNet or any other local resource.
11 http://islab.hanyang.ac.kr/damls/Book.daml
12 http://usefulinc.com/ns/doap
13 Level 1 here contains direct hypernyms for concepts and domains for properties.
?

?

?
Table 5. Disambiguation of developer in the context UML handbook developer

#Sense Type Source

Level 0
property DOAP Developer of software developer

Description

Level 1
project

Score
0.293

concept WordNet

for the project
photographic
equipment ...

developer photographic 0.239

equipment

concept WordNet someone who develops developer

creator

0.230

real estate

Conclusion C8: Disambiguation results are influenced by modeling errors in online ontologies. However, due to its nature, the algorithm, is only
partially affected by the typical ontology errors described in Section 2.3 (see
Table 6). Indeed, the disambiguation algorithm uses part of the ontological context that characterizes a sense (e.g., subsumption, generic relations) in order to
restrict the semantic field of the sense and to distinguish it from other senses
of the same word. Such ontological information is used as a basis for relatedness computation and not exploited through formal reasoning as in the case
of ontology matching. Therefore, the algorithm is not affected by the quality
of formal modeling. For example, to characterize branch in its biological sense,
an incorrectly modeled part-whole relation (Branch  T ree) could lead to the
same disambiguation result as using a correct subsumption (Branch  Stalk).
Also, agriculture could be an acceptable context to distinguish irrigation as
supplying dry land with water from its medical sense. We conclude that error
types 1 and 2 do not affect intrinsically the algorithm. On the other hand, the
last three types of errors which associate a given term with other terms that do
not reflect its sense have a major influence on the algorithm. For example, in
Enzyme  Database, the inaccurate labeling could give unpredictable results
in the computed semantic measures. Also, the user could have different views
from some online ontologies (error 5) and thus obtain an undesired result.

Table 6. Sensitivity of disambiguation algorithm to frequent ontology errors

Error Type

Example

Subsumption as part-whole

1 Subsumption as generic relation Irrigation  Agriculture
?

?

?
Branch  T ree
garlic  ingredient
enzyme  database

Subsumption as role
Inaccurate labeling

lobster  f ish

Different view

Effect on algorithm?

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Conclusion C9: Many online ontologies have a weak internal structure
and thus hamper the performance of the method. For example, few online ontologies contain synonyms or non-taxonomic relations. We even found ontologies
containing no relations at all. As a result, our algorithm can identify richly (e.g.,
extracted from WordNet) as well as poorly defined senses for the same word.
Such uneven semantic characterization has a negative effect on the algorithm

M. Sabou et al.

(which was built to compare similarly rich descriptions of senses) and can lead
to suboptimal results. This insight in the general quality of online ontologies
lead us to envision two important future changes. First, our tool should only
rely on senses extracted from semantically rich ontologies which could be identified using a ranking mechanism such as AKTiveRank [2]. Second, the semantic
measures we use should adapt to ontological contexts of variable richness (e.g.,
glosses should be given a high importance in ontologies with a poor taxonomy
but rich in descriptions).
Conclusion C10: Parsing errors and broken links further hamper the
functioning of the method. For example, from the 602 online ontologies
identified for describing 25 terms randomly extracted from a list of frequently
used keywords14, 252 (42%) could not be correctly parsed into Jena15 models
due to parsing errors or broken links. Without being conclusive, this limited
example illustrates the proportion of the problem.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

The hypothesis put forward in this paper is that novel algorithms which harvest
online knowledge can facilitate a task based evaluation of the Semantic Web.
Accordingly, we report on quality characteristics of online ontologies determined
by analyzing the experimental results of three algorithms which solve divers
tasks: ontology matching, folksonomy enrichment and WSD.

The major conclusion that we derive based on the content of our observations
is that online ontologies have a great potential for being used in combination
to solve a variety of real life tasks. Indeed, combining knowledge from multiple
ontologies lead to a broad range of high quality mappings (C1) and to more
word sense definitions during WSD (C7). In the case of ontology matching, we
could also experimentally prove that the obtained alignment had a high preci-
sion, despite relying on more than 200 ontologies (C2). There are, however, some
undesired effects caused by combining knowledge from multiple sources. Even
if only in very few cases, contradicting statements can be obtained about two
given concepts (C4). Then, the first two case studies were affected by the fact
that online ontologies often reflect different views which can lead to incoherent knowledge structures when combined (C5). Overall, however, these findings
deliver an important message: even at this early stage of development, the Semantic Web is a powerful source of background knowledge that can be exploited
to successfully tackle real world tasks.

Besides providing task-centric conclusions, our approach also lead to observations about other aspects of online ontologies. At a syntactic level, several
ontologies cannot be accessed due to parsing errors and broken links (C10). Sec-
ond, regarding their vocabularies, online ontologies provide a weak coverage of
certain types of folksonomy tags, such as novel terms, multilingual tags or scientific terms (C6). Third, we gained insight into major issues with the quality
14 http://www.google.com/press/zeitgeist monthly.html
15 http://jena.sourceforge.net/
?

?

?
of the knowledge structures of online ontologies. We found that many have a
weak (or no) structure and thus hampered the WSD method (C9). Even more
worryingly, we identified a set of modeling errors, mostly related to the misuse
of subsumption relations, which affected (to different degrees) both the formal
reasoning based matching algorithm (C3) and the WSD process (C8).

While our conclusions provide a better understanding of the current state of
the Semantic Web (complementary with the conclusions of other similar studies [5,8,10,19,34]), they could further benefit the research community as follows.
First, we consider them as a proof that a task based evaluation is feasible and
useful, thus supporting the hypothesis of the paper. Therefore, we wish to provide a more formal model for performing evaluations in this manner. Second,
our findings have highlighted the need for novel evaluation methods that are
capable to automatically identify more subtle characteristics such as the quality
of the modeling [33]. Finally, these findings are valuable knowledge for those who
wish to (re-)design algorithms that harvest the Semantic Web in a way that they
maximally benefit from this rich and growing online knowledge repository.

Acknowledgements. This work was funded by the OpenKnowledge IST-FF6-
027253 and NeOn IST-FF6-027595 projects, the CICYT TIN2004-07999-C02-02
project and by the Government of Aragon-CAI grant IT11/06.
