Mutual Contextualization in Tripartite Graphs

of Folksonomies

Ching-man Au Yeung, Nicholas Gibbins, and Nigel Shadbolt

Intelligence, Agents and Multimedia Group (IAM),

School of Electronics and Computer Science,

University of Southampton,
Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK

{cmay06r,nmg,nrs}@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract. The use of tags to describe Web resources in a collaborative
manner has experienced rising popularity among Web users in recent
years. The product of such activity is given the name folksonomy, which
can be considered as a scheme of organizing information in the users own
way. This research work attempts to analyze tripartite graphs  graphs
involving users, tags and resources  of folksonomies and discuss how
these elements acquire their semantics through their associations with
other elements, a process we call mutual contextualization. By studying such process, we try to identify solutions to problems such as tag
disambiguation, retrieving documents of similar topics and discovering
communities of users. This paper describes the basis of the research work,
mentions work done so far and outlines future plans.

1 Introduction

The use of freely-chosen words or phrases called tags to classify Web resources
has experienced rising popularity among Web users in recent years. Through the
use of tags, Web users come to share and organize their favourite Web resources
in different collaborative tagging systems, such as del.icio.us1 and Flickr2. The
result of such social and collaborative tagging is given the name folksonomy [1].
Collaborative tagging and folksonomy possess a number of advantages which
account for its popularity [4]. These include its simplicity as well as the freedom
enjoyed by the users to choose their own tags. Folksonomies have also been
considered to be a possible solution to construct ontologies which can be used
in the Semantic Web [7]. However, some limitations and shortcomings, such as
the problem of ambiguous meanings of tags and the existence of synonyms, also
affect its effectiveness to organize resources on the Web [4].

In this research, we focus on analysis of tripartite graphs of folksonomies,
graphs which involves the three basic elements of collaborative tagging, namely
users, tags and resources. We investigate how these elements come to acquire

1 http://del.icio.us/
2 http://www.flickr.com/

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 966970, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007
?

?

?
their own semantics through their associations with other elements in the graphs,
a process which we call mutual contextualization. The study aims to acquire
a more thorough understanding of the characteristics of folksonomies, and to
devise mechanisms that allow applications to better utilize the power of folk-
sonomies. Methods of network analysis and community discovery will be employed to reveal the semantics hidden in the seemingly chaotic folksonomy data.

2 Mutual Contextualization in Folksonomies

The power of folksonomies lies in the interrelations between the three elements.
A tag is only a symbol if it is not assigned to some Web resources. A tag is
also ambiguous without a users own interpretation of its meaning. Similarly, a
user, though identified by its username, is characterized by the tags it uses and
the resources it tags. Finally, a document is given semantics because tags act
as a form of annotation. Hence, it is obvious that each of these elements in a
folksonomy would be meaningless, or at least ambiguous in meaning, if they are
considered independently. In other words, the semantics of one element depends
on the context given by the other two, or all, elements that are related to it.

To further understand this kind of mutual contextualization, we examine each
of the three elements in a folksonomy in details. For more specific discussions,
we assume that the Web resources involved are all Web documents. In addition,
we define the data in a social tagging system, a folksonomy, as follows.
Definition 1. A folksonomy F is a tuple F = (U, T, D, A), where U is a set of
users, T is a set of tags, D is a set of Web documents, and A  U  T  D is
a set of annotations.
As we have mentioned earlier, the three elements forming the tripartite graph of a
social tagging system are users, tags and documents (resources). The tripartite
graph can be reduced into a bipartite graph if, for example, we focus on a
particular tag and extract only the users and documents that are affiliated to
it. Since there are three types of elements, there can be three different types
of bipartite graphs. This is similar to those introduced by Mika [7], but we
distinguish our method by only concentrating on one instance of an element
instead of all the instances of the same element.

2.1 Users

By focusing on a single user u, we obtain a bipartite graph T Du defined as
follows:

T Du = T  D, Etd, Etd = {(t, d)|(u, t, d)  A}

In other words, an edge exists between a tag and a document if the user has
assigned the tag to the document. The graph can be represented in matrix form,
which we denote as X = {xij}, xij = 1 if there is an edge connecting ti and dj.
The bipartite graph represented by the matrix can be folded into two one-mode
networks [7]. We denote one of them as P = XX, and another as R = XX.

C.-m.A. Yeung, N. Gibbins, and N. Shadbolt

P represents a kind of semantic network which shows the associations between
different tags. It should be note that this is unlike the light-weight ontology
mentioned in [7], as it only involves tags used by a single user. In other words,
this is the personal vocabulary used by the particular user, which can be called
a personomy [5].

The matrix R represents the personal repository of the user. Links between
documents are weighted by the number of tags that have been assigned to both
documents. Thus, documents having higher weights on the links between them
are those that are considered by the particular user as more related.

By studying and comparing the documents and tags associated with different
users, we can have a better understanding of the vocabularies as well as the
interests or expertise [6] of different users. This will lead to more efficient and
effective ways for matching user interests and discovering community of users.

2.2 Tags
By using a similar method as described above, we can obtain a bipartite graph
U Dt regarding to a particular tag t:

U Dt = U  D, Eud, Eud = {(u, d)|(u, t, d)  A}

In words, an edge exists between a user and a document if the user has assigned
the tag t to the document. The graph can once again be represented in matrix
form, which we denote as Y = {yij}, yij = 1 if there is an edge connecting ui
and dj. This bipartite graph can be folded into two one-mode networks, which
we denote as S = YY, and C = YY.

The matrix S shows the affiliation between the users who have used the tag
t, weighted by the number of documents to which they have both assigned the
tag. Since a tag can be used to represent different concepts (such as sf for San
Francisco or Science Fiction), and a document provides the necessary content
to identify the contextual meaning of the tag, this network is likely to connect
users who use the tag for the same meaning.

C can be considered as another angle of viewing the issue of polysemous
or homonymous tags. Thus, with the edges weighted by the number of users
who have assigned tag t to both documents, this network is likely to connect
documents which are related to the same sense of the given tag.

The existence of ambiguous tags and synonymous tags is a major problem in
folksonomies. These tags affect the precision of describing resources as well as
that of retrieval of relevant documents. By examining the documents and users
associated with a tag, we are actually trying to interpret the meaning of a tag
by placing it in the right context. Thus, this will probably provides a possible
way to understanding the semantics of tags in a folksonomy.

2.3 Documents
Finally, a bipartite graph U Td can also be obtained by considering a particular
document d. The graph is defined as follows:

U Td = U  T, Eut, Eut = {(u, t)|(u, t, d)  A}
?

?

?
In words, an edge exists between a user and a tag if the user has assigned the
tag to the document d. The graph can be represented in matrix form, which we
denote as Z = {zij}, zij = 1 if there is an edge connecting ui and tj. Like in the
cases of a single user and a single tag, this bipartite graph can be folded into
two one-mode networks, which we denote as M = ZZ, and V = YY.

The matrix M represent a network in which users are connected based on
the documents commonly tagged by them. Since a document may provide more
than one kind of information, and users do not interpret the content from a single
perspective, the tags assigned by different users will be different, although tags
related to the main theme of the document are likely to be used by most users.
Hence, users linked to each other by edges of higher weights in this network
are more likely to share a common perspective, or are more likely to concern a
particular piece of information provided by the document.

On the other hand, the matrix V represents a network in which tags are
connected and weighted by the number of users who have assigned them to the
document. Hence, the network is likely to reveal the different perspective of the
users from which they interpret the content of the document.

The bipartite graph obtained by focusing on a single document gives us information on how different users interpret the content of the document, and which
aspects in the document do they focus on. A better understanding of these issues
will surely benefit applications such as Web page recommender systems.

From the above discussions, we can see that different relations between the
users, the tags and the documents in a folksonomy will affect how a single user,
tag or document is interpreted in the system. Each of these elements provide an
appropriate context such that the semantics of the elements can be understood
without ambiguity.

3 Research Progress and Future Plan

The current stage of this research work focuses on bipartite graphs obtained by
examining a single tag. As noted by several other authors [1,4,8], there are actually quite a lot of ambiguous tags in existing folksonomies. One of the objectives
of studying the bipartite graphs is to discover effective methods for tag meaning
disambiguation. To illustrate the approach consider the following example. The
tag sf is observed to be used to represent two distinctive concepts, namely sci-
ence fiction and San Francisco. The result shows that users and documents
which are associated with the same meanings of the tag tend to be clustered
with each other. This shows that it is possible to disambiguate tags by studying
the bipartite graphs. We are currently carrying out research on how different
community discovering techniques (e.g. [2,3]) can be employed to develop an
algorithm for tag disambiguation.

The future plan of this research involves the following steps. Firstly, after the
study of tag disambiguation, we will move on to study bipartite graphs obtained
by examining a single document or a single user. We will investigate how similar
techniques of network analysis can be applied to these graphs to discover useful

C.-m.A. Yeung, N. Gibbins, and N. Shadbolt

information regarding interests and expertise of users, communities of users with
shared interests, and clusters of documents with similar topics. In the end we
hope to develop a unified theory of the process of mutual contextualization in
folksonomies, which gives a thorough picture of the semantics of the elements
involved. Finally, we will investigate how these results can be applied to applications such as social network analysis, Web page recommender systems and
construction of ontologies.

4 Conclusion

This paper describes a research work on the analysis of tripartite graphs of
folksonomies. In particular, we study the process of mutual contextualization
between the three basic elements in a folksonomy, in the hope of understanding the semantics of these elements. Promising results have been obtained in
preliminary studies of disambiguation of tags, and plans for future works have
been drawn. We believe this work will contribute to a better understanding of
folksonomies and benefit different applications on the Web.
