From Texts to Structured Documents:  
The Case of Health Practice Guidelines 

Amanda Bouffier  

Laboratoire dInformatique de Paris-Nord 
Universite Paris 13 and CNRS UMR 7030 
99, av. J.-B. Clement  F-93430 Villetaneuse 

firstname.lastname@lipn.univ-paris13.fr 

Abstract.  This paper describes a system capable of semi-automatically filling 
an XML template  from  free texts in the clinical domain (practice guidelines). 
The XML template includes semantic information not explicitly encoded in the 
text  (pairs  of  conditions  and  actions/recommendations).  Therefore,  there  is  a 
need to compute the exact scope of conditions over text sequences expressing 
the required actions. We present in this paper the rules developed for this task. 
We show that the system yields good performance when applied to the analysis 
of French practice guidelines.   

Keywords:  Health  practice  guidelines,  Natural  Language,  GEM  (Guideline 
Elements Model). 

1   Introduction 

During the past years, clinical practices have considerably evolved towards standardization and effectiveness. A major improvement is the development of practice guidelines [1]. However, even if widely distributed to hospitals, doctors and other medical 
staff, clinical practice guidelines are not routinely fully exploited. There is now a general  tendency  to  transfer  these  guidelines  to  electronic  devices  (via  an  appropriate 
XML format). This transfer is justified by the assumption that electronic documents 
are easier to browse than paper documents.  

The  Guideline  Elements  Model  (GEM)  is  an  XML-based  guideline  document 
model that can store and organize the heterogeneous information contained in practice 
guidelines  [2].  It  is  intended  to  facilitate  translation  of  natural  language  guideline 
documents  into  a  format  that  can  be  processed  by  computers.  The  main  element  of 
GEM,  knowledge  component,  contains  the  most  useful  information,  especially 
sequences of conditions and recommendations. Our aim is to format these documents, 
which have been written manually without any precise model, according to the GEM 
DTD.  

One of the main problem for the task is that the scope of the conditional segments 
(i.e  all  the  recommendation  segments  that  have  to  be  linked  with  a  condition)  may 
exceed the sentence boundaries and, thus, include several sentences. In other words, 
sequences of conditions and recommandations correspond to discourse structures.  

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 916920, 2007. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 
?

?

?
Discourse  processing  requires  the  recognition  of  heterogeneous  linguistic  features 
(especially, the granularity of relevant features may vary according to text genre [9]).  
Following these observations, we made a study based on a representative corpus and 
automatic  text  mining  techniques,  in  order  to  semi-automatically  discover  relevant 
linguistic features for the task and infer the rules necessary to accurately structure the 
practice guidelines.  

The  paper  is  organized  as  follow:  first,  we  present  the  task  and  some  previous  
approaches (section 2). We then describe the rules for text structuring (section 3) and 
the  method  used  to  infer  them.  We  finish  with  the  presentation  of  some  results  
(section 4), before the conclusion. 

2   Document Restructuring: The Case of Practice Guidelines 

As we have previously seen, practice guidelines are not routinely fully exploited. To 
overcome this problem, national health agencies try to promote the electronic distribution of these guidelines. 

2.1   Previous Work 

Several attempts  have already been  made to improve the  use of practice guidelines. 
For example, knowledge-based diagnostic aids can be derived from them [3]. GEM is 
an  intermediate  document  model,  between  pure  text  (paper  practice  guidelines)  and 
knowledge-based models like GLIF [4]. GEM is thus an elegant solution, independent 
from  any  theory  or  formalisms,  but  compliant  with  other  frameworks.  Previous  attempts to automate the translation process between the text and GEM are based on the 
analysis  of  isolated  sentences  and  do  not  compute  the  exact  scope  of  conditional  
segments [5].  

      
?

?

?
         
   
      
   
 
?

?

?
 
?

?

?
           
        
?

?

?
 
?

?

?
Fig. 1. From text to a tree representing the scope of conditional segments 

A. Bouffier 

2.2   Our Approach 

Our  aim  is  to  semi-automatically  fill  a  GEM  template  from  existing  guidelines:  the 
algorithm  is  fully  automatic  but  the  result  needs  to  be  validated  by  experts  to  yield 
adequate  accuracy.  We  first  focus  on  the  most  important  part  of  the  GEM  DTD  
knowledge Component which is sequences of conditions and recommandations.  

We propose a two-step strategy: 1) basic segments (conditions and recommenda-
tions) are recognized and 2) the scope of the conditional segments is computed. In this 
paper, we focus on the second step, which is the most difficult one and has not been 
solved by previous systems. What is obtained in the end is a tree where the leaves are 
recommendations  and  the  branching  nodes  are  conditional  segments,  as  shown  on 
Figure 1.  All the children of a node are under the scope of the parent node.  

3   Structuring Rules 

We set up a representative corpus in order to infer a set of rules able to decide if a 
segment s is (or is not) under the scope of a conditional segment c.  

3.1   Material and Method 

The training corpus consists of 25 French Practice Guidelines (about 150 000 words, 
see  http://anaes.fr).  This  corpus  has  been  annotated  by  a  domain  expert,  who  had  to 
manually recognize conditions and recommendations, and link them according to the 
tree  structure  described  in  2.2.  We  have  built  on  this  basis  a  set  of  examples,  each 
example  being  a  couple  (c,  s)    where  c  is  a  conditional  segment  and  s  is  a  segment 
under the scope of c (positive examples) or not (negative examples). All the examples 
are represented by a set of 17 potential interesting linguistic features. The list of these 
features has been  identified from the relevant literature (e.g. [6] [7] [8]) and a manual 
study of the practice guidelines. More precisely, the features belong to the 4 following 
categories:  

1) Material text structure. Lets take the feature: has_the_same_visual_position(c,s). 
Its value for the couple (a,d) in Figure 1 is true because (a) and (d) are both at the beginning  of  a  paragraph.  Another  attribute  concerns  the  location  of  the  condition:  is  
detached(c). The value of this feature for  (c) in the figure 1 is detached because  (c) is 
located at the sentence-initial position.  
2) Lexical relations. Lets take the feature have_terms_with_an antonymic_relation(c,s). 
Its  value  is  true  for  the  couple  (a,d)  because  the  terms  immunodeprime  and  non  
immunodeprime are antonyms.  
3) Discourse connectors. Lets take the feature begins_with_a_coordination_ marker 
(s). Its value  is true for (a,3) because the proposition begins with De meme (also...).  
4)  Co-reference  relations.  This  feature  is  useful  to  recognize  co-references.  In  the 
medical domain, demonstrative noun phrases (dans ce cas, in this case....) is the 
most common way of marking co-reference.  
We then used data mining algorithms (in particularly attributes selectors and rules learning algorithms) in order to statistically validate the potential interest of the different fea-
tures, understand their relative contribution and derive the set of structuring rules.  
?

?

?
3.2   The Rules Organized in Knowledge Levels 

One of the main result of our study is that features related to the material structure of 
the  text  are  the  most  discriminating  ones  for  the  task,  using  an  Information  Gain 
measure. First, the location of the condition in the sentence (detached or not) is especially important. If it is detached, it exerts in 70% of the cases an influence downward 
from the sentence in which it is located. Conversely, if the condition is integrated inside the sentence, its scope is limited to the sentence boundaries in 80 % of the cases. 
More generally, the scope of a conditional segment often complies with the material 
text structure. Thus, the rules which involve these features correspond to  norms. This 
can be explained by the style of writing used for the guidelines text genre, that often 
makes use of visual information. The other kinds of attributes (discourse connectors, 
lexical relations co-coreference informations) are less discriminating simply because 
they  are  less  frequent.    Nevertheless,  they  are  sometimes  important  since  they  may 
violate  a  norm  and  suggest  a  more  accurate  way  of  structuring  the  document.  The 
rules which involve these features are called  exceptions. Therefore, we have organized the structuring rules according the ability of a feature to contribute to the solution 
(norms vs. exceptions). 

The  norms  represent  the  most  discriminating  rules  and  involve  the  most  salient 

features which belong to the category of the material text structure. 

(cid:122)  By default, IF c is syntactically integrated AND s is in another sentence of c 
THEN s is excluded from the scope of c. Conversely,  IFc is syntactically integrated  AND s  is in the sentence of c THEN s  is under the scope of c. 

(cid:122)  By default, IF c is detached from the sentence AND s is in the same position 
in  the  material  structure  than  c  THEN  s  is  excluded  from  the  scope  of  c. 
Conversely, IF s is NOT in the same position in the material structure than c 
AND s and c are in the same paragraph THEN s is included in the scope of c. 

These  two  rules  can  be  violated  if  another  set  of  rules  called  exceptions  suggest  a 
more accurate way of structuring the text. A first set of rules suggest an inclusion of s 
under the scope of c. For example, the following rule belongs to this category: 

 

(cid:122) 

IF s is in a co-reference relation with c THEN s is under the scope of c. 

Conversely, some other rules suggest an exclusion of s. For example: 

(cid:122) 

IF s is preceded by a discourse coordination connector THEN s is excluded 
from the scope of c. 

4   Evaluation 

We  evaluated  the  approach  on  a  corpus  that  has  not  been  used  for  training.  
The evaluation of basic segmentation gives the following results: .92 P&R1 for conditional  segments  and    .97  for  recommendation  segments.  The  scope  of  conditions  is 
                                                           
1 P&R is the harmonic mean of precision and recall  (P&R = (2*P*R) / (P+R), corresponding to 
a F-measure with a  factor equal to 1. 

A. Bouffier 

recognized with accuracy above .7. This result is encouraging, especially considering 
the large number of parameters involved in discourse processing. In most of successful cases the scope of a condition is recognized by the default rule (default segmenta-
tion, see section 3).  

5   Conclusion 

We have presented in this paper a system capable of performing automatic segmentation of clinical practice guidelines. Our aim was to automatically fill an XML DTD 
from textual input. The system is able to process complex discourse structures and to 
compute  the  scope  of  conditional  segments  spanning  several  propositions  or  sen-
tences. Moreover, our system is the first one capable of resolving the scope of conditions over several recommendations.  
