OWL-DL as a Power Tool to Model Negotiation

Mechanisms with Incomplete Information

Azzurra Ragone

SisInfLab, Politecnico di Bari, I-70125, Bari, Italy

a.ragone@poliba.it

Abstract. We propose a logic-based framework to model negotiations among
agents in scenarios with fully incomplete information. In particular, we address
multi-issue bilateral negotiations, with issues are expressed and related to each
other via an OWL ontology. In particular we use OWL-DL sub-language and exploit its formal semantics, based on SHOIN (D). Agents goals are expressed
through OWL-DL as (complex) concept expressions, and the worth of goals as
weights over concepts. Noteworthily, we adopt a very general setting with incomplete information by letting agents keep both goals and worths of goals as
private information. Moreover we propose a protocol for agents to negotiate on
and reach an agreement, exploiting inference services. Agents, according to the
protocol, can pursue different sets of strategies depending on their type and
we illustrate and motivate two possible strategies.

1 Introduction

Several recent research efforts have been focused on automated negotiation in various
contexts, including e-marketplaces, resource allocation settings, online auctions, supply
chain management and, in general terms, e-business processes. Negotiation mechanisms
usually model resource and task allocation problems where issues to negotiate on are
well established and defined in advance, e.g., online auctions. Many other negotiation
mechanisms instead model e-marketplaces of undifferentiated products (commodities)
where the only issues to negotiate on are price or quantity. Nevertheless there a number
of frameworks where agents have to reach an agreement on a product (car, house, etc.)
or service (travel booking, wedding service, etc.) that can be described by many issues
amenable to negotiation, and such issues may well be not necessarily all established
in advance. Moreover Buyer (Requester) and Seller (Provider) may be not necessarily
interested in the same set of issues and may have different preferences on bundles of
interrelated issues. Obviously, if issues are not fixed there is the problem to express
what agents want or prefer. For instance, considering an housing scenario, how to
express a request for a double room within an apartment provided with a washing machine for a period of six month or, conversely an offer for single or double room in an
apartment where pets are not allowed and the bills are included in the lease? Is there
any negotiation space? Can an agreement in an automated way be reached? Trying
to answer to this and other questions, we present a framework for multi-issue bilateral
negotiation, with issues expressed and related to each other exploiting OWL-DL formal-
ism. Agents goals are expressed through (complex) concepts, and the worth of goals as

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 941945, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

A. Ragone

weights over concepts. We consider a very general setting with incomplete information,
i.e., agents keep both goals and worths of goals as private information. We introduce a
negotiation protocol and possible agents strategies for such a setting, exploiting inference servicessatisfiability and subsumptionavailable as services in DL reasoners.
In a nutshell, satisfiability can be useful to catch inconsistency between agents goals
w.r.t. the ontology T , i.e., inconsistent goals cannot be in the same agreement, (e.g.,
agents cannot agree on A and B at the same time if in T A is defined as disjoint from
B). Through subsumption one can discover if an agents goal is implied by a goal of
its opponent, even if this fact does not immediately appear at the syntactic level.

2 Scenario

We set the stage of our approach in a generic framework with incomplete information:
we assume agents do not reveal their goals either to the opponent or to a mediator, but
they keep as private information both goals and their worths. Actually, the difficulty to
model scenarios with incomplete information is due to the fact that the agent cannot be
sure how the opponent will evaluate its offers, and therefore it may be unable to negotiate to the best of its capacity [4]. Usually, to overcome such drawback, a preliminary
step is added to strategic negotiations where agents reveal some (or all) private infor-
mation. Obviously, the revelation mechanism has to ensure agents truthfully report their
private information and punish liars [12]. Yet it is not always possible to design truthful
revelation mechanisms, since they depend on the particular scenario taken into account
(see [4, p.64] for an extensive discussion). When negotiation involves organizations,
e.g., companies, revealing information may conflict with companys interests and assessing the truthfulness of the agents declarations can can be very hard or impossible.
An advantage of our proposal is that having considered a worst case scenario, we can
then in a principled way study simplified negotiation scenarios.

The protocol we propose here is able to deal with such incomplete information without forcing agents to reveal neither their goals nor thier utility functions, so it suits all
scenarios where agents are not willing to reveal private information or when it is hard
to design a truthful revelation mechanism. In this paper we refer, as an example, to a
scenario where agents negotiate for a lease. Let us suppose that Amy is a student having
to spend a period of about six months abroad as visiting student, so she needs to find a
room in an apartment and she has to negotiate with the landlord about the lease terms.
She is searching for a bedroom, which is not a multiple room, in an apartment provided
with washing machine; actually she would prefer a single room, but this is not a mandatory constraint. She is looking for an apartment where cats are not allowed, because of
her allergy, and where no security deposit is required and bills are included; finally she
would prefer to have a parking (street parking or own parking) near the apartment. The
following goals can be formalized as in Fig. 1. On the other hand also the landlord
Oscarhas some goals, that can be formalized as in Fig. 2. Relations among issue are
expressed in the Ontology reported in Fig. 3. Obviously, the one described above is not
the only feasible scenario to apply the approach proposed, since the negotiation framework we propose is very general and can be applied to several negotiation scenarios
where resource descriptions can be modeled through KR languages.
?

?

?
A1 = hasBedroom.( 1 hasPlaces)  hasBedroom.MultipleRoom
A2 = appliances included.Washing machine
A3 = hasBedroom.(= 1 hasPlaces)
A4 = pets allowed.Cats
A5 = lease period = 6
A6 = bills included.Gas
A7 = lease requirements.SecurityDeposit
A8 = hasParking

Fig. 1. Amys goals formalized using the logic SHOIN (D)

O1 = hasBedroom.DoubleRoom
O2 = hasSharedRoom.Laundry
O3 = pets allowed
O4 = lease period negotiable
O5 = bills included.
O6 = lease requirements.SecurityDeposit
O7 = hasParking.StreetParking  hasParking

Fig. 2. Oscars goals formalized using the logic SHOIN (D)

SingleRoom  Bedroom  (= 1 hasPlaces)
DoubleRoom  Bedroom  (= 2 hasPlaces)
MultipleRoom  Bedroom  ( 3 hasPlaces)
Laundry  Room  appliances included.(Washing machine  Dryer)
hasRoom.Laundry  appliances included.(Washing machine  Dryer)
hasSharedRoom  hasRoom
hasBedroom  hasRoom
lease period negotiable  lease period  12
Bills  ONE-OF{Gas, Electricity, Water}
House  hasBedroom  hasRoom.Bathroom

Fig. 3. The Ontology used in the example

3 The Negotiation Protocol

Following the idea in [5] agents negotiate making proposals and counter-proposals. At
each round the agent can decide to accept the proposal made by its opponent, to reject
such a proposal or to refine the proposal itself, until an agreement is reached or an
agent quits the negotiation. In order to define the protocol we define the utility of a
proposal and a motivated proposal. A motivated proposal is a proposal such that 1. it
is not in conflict with what has been agreed in the previous rounds of the protocol: 2. it
increases the utility of the agent making it. We call such a protocol Cumulative protocol
because the agreement is reached in an incremental way, adding at each round a goal or
a set of goals, which can be satisfiable w.r.t. the ontology. It is possible to demonstrate
that such a protocol converges. Given the rules of the protocol it is possible to pursue
different strategies. We analyzed the properties of two strategies, the IWIN strategy and

A. Ragone

CoCo strategy. The former aims at maximizing in the first step the utility of the agent
making the first proposal; although we demonstrated that this strategy allows to reach
Pareto-efficient agreements, it may yield to highly unfair distributions of utilities in a
proposal, hence, a negotiation where both agents immediately saturate their utility is
likely to be a very long sequence of proposals and rejections. Therefore we introduced
another strategy called CoCo, where agents try to compensate the loss in utility when
they accept a proposal made by the opponent. Since the CoCo strategy uses a greedy
approach the final agreement might not be Pareto-efficient, yet a computational analysis
has clearly shown that CoCo has a low computational effort compared to IWIN1.

4 Relations with Related Work and Conclusion

Automated bilateral negotiation between agents has been widely investigated, both in
artificial intelligence and in microeconomics research communities. AI-oriented research has usually focused on automated negotiation between agents and on designing
high-level protocols for agent interaction. Agents can play different roles: act on behalf
of buyer or seller, but also play the role of a mediator or facilitator. In the following we
give a brief overview of logic-based approaches to automated negotiation, comparing
our approach with existing ones and highlighting differences. In [1] the use of propositional logic in multi-issue negotiation was investigated, while in [2] weighted propositional formulas in preference modeling were considered. However, in such works,
no semantic relation between issues is taken into account. In our approach we adopt a
logical theory, i.e., an ontology, which allows one e.g., to catch inconsistencies between
demand and supply, model implication, find out a feasible agreement in a bundle, which
are fundamental issues to model in a negotiation setting. In [13] an agreement is defined
as a model for a set of formulas from both agents. The approach does not take preferences into account, so that it is not possible to guarantee that the reached agreement is
Pareto-efficient. With reference to the work presented in [14], adopting a propositional
logic setting, common knowledge is considered as just more entrenched preferences,
that could be even dropped in some deals. We adopt a knowledge base, or ontology
T , of formulas which are common knowledge for both agents, whose constraints must
always be enforced in the negotiation outcomes. Moreover we use additive utilitites
over formulas: this allows an agent to make compensations between its requests and
its concessions, while in [14] the concession of a more entrenched formula can never
be compensated by less entrenched ones, no matter how many they are. Finally we devised a protocol which the agents should adhere to while negotiating; in contrast in [14]
a game-theoretic approach is taken, presenting no protocol at all, since communication
between agents is not considered. Prior to considering description logics as logical language for bilateral negotiation, we have studied different negotiation mechanism with
the presence of a mediator [7,6,11] and without a mediator with partial incomplete information [10], in the framework of theory-endowed propositional logic. To the best of
our knowledge, our approach is the first one using DLs to design a logic-based negotiation mechanism, ensuring a greater expressiveness w.r.t. propositional logic. Moreover,

1 For the sake of conciseness we omit a lot of details about the protocol and the evaluation of

strategies, which can be found in [9].
?

?

?
w.r.t. to non-logic-based approaches, the use of an ontology T allows exploiting inference services that are used in the actual negotiation mechanisms. In future work we are
planning to validate our approach with agent-based simulations and we are also setting
up an analysis of the game theoretic properties, as related properties of the negotiation
protocols ( e.g., Pareto-efficiency), equilibrium strategies or properties of the agents
(e.g., individual rationality). Research is also ongoing exploiting, in the negotiation
mechanism, non-monotonic inferences in DLs [3]namely Concept Contraction to
identify and manage conflicting information [8].
