Recipes for Semantic Web Dog Food  The

ESWC and ISWC Metadata Projects

Knud M oller1, Tom Heath2, Siegfried Handschuh1, and John Domingue2

1 Digital Enterprise Research Institute, National University of Ireland, Galway

knud.moeller@deri.org, siegfried.handschuh@deri.org

2 Knowledge Media Institute and Centre for Research in Computing, The Open

University, Milton Keynes, UK

{t.heath,j.b.domingue}@open.ac.uk

Abstract. Semantic Web conferences such as ESWC and ISWC offer
prime opportunities to test and showcase semantic technologies. Conference metadata about people, papers and talks is diverse in nature and
neither too small to be uninteresting or too big to be unmanageable.
Many metadata-related challenges that may arise in the Semantic Web
at large are also present here. Metadata must be generated from sources
which are often unstructured and hard to process, and may originate from
many different players, therefore suitable workflows must be established.
Moreover, the generated metadata must use appropriate formats and vo-
cabularies, and be served in a way that is consistent with the principles
of linked data. This paper reports on the metadata efforts from ESWC
and ISWC, identifies specific issues and barriers encountered during the
projects, and discusses how these were approached. Recommendations
are made as to how these may be addressed in the future, and we discuss how these solutions may generalize to metadata production for the
Semantic Web at large.

1 Introduction

This paper reports on the efforts made to generate, maintain and deploy structured metadata for both the European and the International Semantic Web Conferences (ESWC and ISWC). In particular, we discuss the experiences gained and
lessons learned during ESWC2006 and ISWC2006. However, the work done for
those conferences is continued and further refined in the 2007 ESWC in Inns-
bruck, Austria and the 2007 ISWC in Busan, South Korea. The main contributions of this paper are the in-depth reporting of real deployments of Semantic
Web technologies, and analysis of the technical lessons learned. Through analyzing our own experiences we provide a number of recommendations to others
pursuing similar projects. Whilst the deployments were carried out by Semantic
Web enthusiasts, the lessons learned apply to a wide range of potential deployment scenarios. As the Semantic Web moves from research and development
into deployment and adoption, understanding these experiences and their implications becomes increasingly important. Crucially, challenges encountered by

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 802815, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007
?

?

?
those knowledgeable about the Semantic Web will almost certainly be encountered by those with less experience.

The following section discusses the aims of the projects, and related work.
Section 3 characterizes the source data from which the metadata was gener-
ated, and discusses the output requirements. Sections 4.1 and 4.2 discuss the
approaches taken at ESWC2006 and ISWC2006 respectively, the problems encountered and the solutions applied. In Section 5, we make recommendations for
those undertaking such efforts at future conferences. These may also be relevant
to any generation of metadata on a larger than personal scale.

2 Background and Aims of the Metadata Projects

The ESWC2006 and ISWC2006 metadata projects addressed a number of related
aims. Firstly, to generate data for use with existing Semantic Web applications
(thereby providing a showcase for such applications) and to further Semantic
Web research. Secondly, to evaluate the practicality and feasibility of producing,
managing, and deploying Semantic Web data for events such as ESWC2006 and
ISWC2006. Only by undertaking such projects can we fully understand these
processes. By reporting our experiences we believe we can inform similar projects
in the future, whilst also highlighting the challenges of producing, managing
and deploying Semantic Web data. Finally we argue that the Semantic Web
community has an obligation to carry out such activities, if we are to better
comprehend the challenges faced by others who may wish to adopt Semantic
Web technologies. Eating our own dog food [4] is an essential mechanism by
which to gain the appropriate insights.

2.1 Related Work

The use of technologies to support technology-related events is not novel. For ex-
ample, [8] reports on the deployment of IRC backchannels at the ACM 2004 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 2004), as a means
to complement existing communication channels at the event.

Given the specific metadata requirements of the Semantic Web compared to
other technological advances, the production of structured metadata describing
events has greatest prevalence at conferences in the Semantic Web and related
fields. For example, [3] reports on the W3Photos project, an initiative to enable
the addition of semantic descriptions to photos taken at the Worldwide Web
Conferences and related events. At the Worldwide Web Conference in 2006, a
version of the conference programme was produced in RDF/XML1 and deployed
together with related services aimed at end users, such as the mSpace Schedule
Explorer2. Organizers of the 4th International Semantic Web Conference in 2005
made the PiggyBank semantic web browser extension[6] available to delegates,

1 http://www2006.org/programme/dynamic
2 http://www06.mspace.fm/

K. M oller et al.

as a means to annotate items related to the conference such as papers presented
or local restaurants.

Whilst each of these initiatives is commendable, they share a common limitation due to the restricted scope of the metadata produced. To the best of
our knowledge, the metadata projects at ESWC2006 and ISWC2006 represent
the first instances of conferences attempting to offer comprehensive semantic
descriptions of the event. Furthermore, as a result of this comprehensiveness,
we believe that these events have moved significantly closer to integrating metadata production with broader conference workflows than previous events. These
integration attempts raised a number of issues and challenges, which will be
examined in the remainder of this paper.

3 Problem Description

In the course of the metadata efforts for both ESWC2006 and ISWC2006 we
faced a number of specific problems and challenges, which will be discussed in
this section. These challenges can be divided into two main areas: those arising from the specific characteristics of the input source data, and those arising
from the requirements on the output data (the RDF metadata). If we view the
metadata efforts as a process, then those challenges define its input and output,
respectively. We will describe both in turn in the following sections.

3.1 Data Characteristics

When describing an academic conference, the three object types of greatest interest are people, events, and publications. People may take the role of paper au-
thors, delegates at the conference, and committee members. Events may consist
of talks (e.g. paper or poster presentations), conference sessions in which several
papers are presented, or entire tracks. Various kinds of non-academic events also
occur, such as meals, social events, and even coffee breaks. Publications can consist of full papers and poster/demo papers, plus a bound or electronic volume of
the entire conference proceedings. In addition, artefacts such as sets of slides can
be of great value, whilst not being formally published. Apart from this core set
of data, other kinds of information, such as rooms within the conference venue,
or sponsoring organizations, can be relevant.

In the course of producing metadata for both conferences, it became apparent
that the source data from which both corpuses were produced had some novel
characteristics relative to other Semantic Web data sets we had previously en-
countered. We predict that these characteristics are common to academic conferences in general, and found that they raised a number of challenges in producing
the RDF descriptions of the conferences.

Firstly, data sets related to academic conferences are typically small in volume,
compared to existing, established data sets available as RDF, such as DBLP3.

3 http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/dblp/
?

?

?
Secondly they are heterogenous in nature, covering concepts as diverse as peo-
ple, places, artefacts, and events. Consequently there are few economies of scale
in producing this data, as many different export or conversion tools may be
required, relative to large, homogenous datasets from one central source.

Thirdly the input data set typically originates from many different sources,
such as conference submission and registration systems, email messages, or text
documents, and is traditionally managed by many different people, and each
may use different methods to manage the data. In our experience these ranged
from spreadsheets, to lists in documents, and HTML pages. This presented a
number of challenges, as very few of these systems were already web-based, or
designed to publish to public web sites.

3.2 Output Requirements

Just as the input data influenced the metadata efforts, so did the requirements on
the output data. The metadata was to be used in a Semantic Web context, and
so needed to adhere to the principles of linked, Semantic Web data. This made
RDF a natural choice of data model. It was also important to use established
vocabularies and ontologies. This was done to an increasing extent, starting with
the integration of FOAF and SWRC at ESWC2006 and continuing with the
iCalendar and BibTEX standards at ISWC2006. Where existing URIs could not
be used to identify resources (as was often the case) new URIs were necessary.
These were minted following consistent patterns and based on domains within
our control. This allow for the configuration of properly de-referenceable URIs.
Many tools that used the conference metadata were targeted at visualisation,
and so needed to traverse the RDF graph in all ways and access resources from
all kinds of angles. This made the use of inverse properties very useful, if not
necessary. Also, inverse functional properties are a good way of getting around
the URI problem, and transitive properties can simplify ontology modeling sig-
nificantly. OWL lite provides these features, and was therefore chosen to model
the ontologies.

4 Approaches Taken

4.1 3rd European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC2006)

The ESWC2006 Semantic Web Technologies project4 combined the creation and
publishing of metadata describing the conference, with deployment of a range
of applications (such as a semantic Wiki, photo annotation tool, and semantic
search engine) that were intended to enhance the conference for delegates by
making use of the ESWC2006 Conference Ontology and associated RDF/XML
dataset. Fuller descriptions of these applications are given in [5] alongside the
results of an evaluation into how they were received by conference delegates.

4 http://www.eswc2006.org/technologies

K. M oller et al.

Ontology. Existing event and conference ontologies, such as the AKT Reference
Ontology5, the Conference ontology by Jen Golbeck6, and the eBiquity Conference Ontology7 were initially surveyed to assess their suitability for use in the
ESWC2006 Technologies project. These ontologies were found to lack the expressivity required for the project. Consequently an exercise was carried out to model
the Conference domain as the basis for a new ESWC2006 Conference Ontology.
The ESWC2006 Conference Ontology has the following top-level classes: Arte-
fact, Call, Event, Place, Role, Sponsorship, all of which (except Sponsorship)
are extensively sub-classed to provide a high degree of expressivity. In contrast
to other ontologies, the ESWC2006 Conference Ontology explicitly models relationships between people, roles, and events. So for example, the act of giving
a paper at a conference is modeled in terms of a person holding a role of presenter at a specific talk event, with which there may be one or more associated
artefacts, such as a paper or a slide set.

Wherever possible the ontology sought to reuse existing classes from widely
deployed ontologies, instead of starting from scratch. Consequently, the ontology makes use of the Person and ResearchTopic classes from the FOAF8 and
SWRC [12] ontologies, respectively. For example, the eswc:heldBy property has
a domain of eswc:Role and a range of foaf:Person. It is hosted at9, according
to the Best Practice Recipes for Hosting RDF Vocabularies [10].

Metadata Creation. RDF descriptions10 were made available of
the
ESWC2006 Organizing Committee, the tracks, sessions, talks, and roles that
existed at the conference, the papers, posters, and demos presented, rooms in
the conference venue, and delegates who opted into the public Semantic Delegates List. Where an Organizing Committee member was responsible for a
particular area (such as posters and demos, or workshops), that individual provided the source data for the corresponding RDF descriptions. These data sets
were generally small in volume, and came in a range of different formats, such as
Excel spreadsheets, tables in documents, and HTML, as this was generally how
members of the organizing committee managed the data for which they were re-
sponsible. These characteristics influenced how the RDF descriptions were then
produced. It was not deemed efficient to automate the production of RDF descriptions where the source data was not already well structured, or in areas such
as workshops, tutorials, or demos, where there were relatively few instances. Con-
sequently, the majority of descriptions were produced manually using a generic
XML editor. Aside from being very resource intensive this created issues with
maintenance, for example when sessions changed venue.

The one area where automation was clearly beneficial was in producing the
Semantic Delegates List. On an opt-in basis, additional data was collected from
5 http://www.aktors.org/publications/ontology/
6 http://www.mindswap.org/golbeck/web/www04photo.owl
7 http://ebiquity.umbc.edu/ontology/conference.owl
8 http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1
9 http://www.eswc2006.org/technologies/ontology
10 http://www.eswc2006.org/rdf
?

?

?
delegates at registration via the conference registration system. Those who gave
their consent were featured in the Semantic Delegates List, an RDF representation of people present at the conference. This gave basic information such as the
delegates name, and a hash of their mailbox URI, in addition to any further information they had supplied such as their homepage URI, the URI of their FOAF
file, their workplace homepage, and their areas of interest. The information provided by delegates was exported from the conference registration system as an
Excel spreadsheet, and processed by a PHP script to generate RDF according to
the FOAF ontology. This strategy proved very effective where specific pieces of
information has been given dedicated fields in the registration system. However,
due to limitations in the registration system, information about delegates areas
of interest had to be provided into one text field, despite the interests coming
from a fixed vocabulary. This presented numerous challenges when parsing the
data to produce RDF.

An additional challenge concerning topics of interest centered around how the
Areas of Interest for a specific conference are managed and integrated with other
data sources. For ESWC2006, the existing topic hierarchy from the SWRC ontology [12] was used when collecting delegates interests. A preferable approach
would be for conference topics to be marked up using SKOS11 from an early
stage, as this topic listing could then be reused within other systems deployed
for the conference. Such an approach would also facilitate the creation of mappings between topics occurring at related conferences whilst still allowing local
flexibility in how topics are defined and how they evolve.

One objective of the ESWC2006 Technologies project was to bring the same
degree of semantic descriptions to workshops, as to the main conference track.
This presented significant challenges, in that all workshops maintained separate web sites maintained by different people, and all structured differently. The
intended approach was to use GRDDL12 to generate RDF descriptions of workshop proceedings, participants, and committees. This objective was not met at
ESWC2006 due to time constraints, however, we believe it would be a valuable
objective for future conferences.

Finally, creation of the metadata for ESWC2006 required the minting of new
URIs to identify all relevant entities. A lack of tools to support this process
made it difficult to ensure they were being used consistently across all RDF
descriptions (for example in the RDF describing full papers, and in the Semantic
Delegates List). The most pragmatic solution to this problem involved simply
using a consistent syntax for minted URIs.

Metadata Deployment. In deploying the RDF descriptions of the conference,
close integration of the RDF with the conventional Web site was desired. Con-
sequently, and to aid human management of the data, many separate RDF files
were created and deployed on the conference web site13. The FOAF Autodiscovery

11 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/
12 http://www.w3.org/TR/grddl/
13 http://www.eswc2006.org

K. M oller et al.

technique14 was used to link HTML pages to their corresponding RDF files. The
Apache web server running the conference web site was also configured to ensure
URIs could be de-referenced, using approaches similar to those outlined in [1].

4.2 5th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC2006)

The approach taken and decisions made during the planning of the ISWC2006
metadata efforts15 were largley influenced by the metadata efforts of ESWC2006.
In this section we will therefore concentrate on the aspects where changes or a development between the two conferences took place. Just like for for ESWC2006,
the data corpus was made available prior to the conference, and a number of
applications who used the data were featured on the metadata website.

Ontology. Since the ESWC schema had already proved useful and adequate, its
adoption for ISWC2006 was clearly desireable. By using the same schema, both
datasets become interoperable, can be queried and visualized in an integrated
fashion and will together have greater impact on the community. However, a
number of issues were identified which needed to be addressed. The main points
were: (i) increased integration of existing standards and vocabularies, (ii) rearrangement of the document concept space, and (iii) fully utilising the possibilities
OWL lite offers, such as inverse properties, which aid in data visualization.

Addressing those points did not mean literally changing the existing ESWC
ontology, but instead establish a new ISWC ontology. However, instead of starting afresh, this new ontology simply imports the old one, adds a number of new
concepts and properties, makes some additional statements about existing concepts and properties and deprecates others. In effect, a dataset conforming to
the ISWC ontology is still largely compatible with the ESWC ontology. In the
following paragraphs we will discuss some of the changes made in moving from
one conference ontology to the next. We think this discussion illustrates very
well some typical issues for ontology evolution.

Even though the ESWC ontology integrated FOAF for people-related meta-
data, it still used custom classes and properties to represent events and publica-
tions. For ISWC, we decided to integrate more established standards for those
kinds of entities. For event data, the iCalendar format [2] was adopted. Since
iCalendar itself does not have an RDF schema, we decided to use the schema
suggested in a W3C interest group note16. For representing publications, we
adopted the widely used BibTEX schema [11]. A number of implementations in
RDF exist, but we decided to use the BibTEX-related classes from the SWRC
(Semantic Web for Research Communities) ontology17, due to reasonably wide
usage (outside SWRC-related projects, the ontology is also used by Flink [9] and
openacademia [7]) and tool support.

14 http://rdfweb.org/topic/Autodiscovery
15 http://iswc2006.semanticweb.org/program/tech links.php
16 http://www.w3.org/TR/rdfcal
17 http://ontoware.org/projects/swrc/
?

?

?
ical:Vevent

eswc:

OrganisedEvent

NonAcademic

eswc:

Event

eswc:

TalkEvent

eswc:

SessionEvent

eswc:

AcademicEvent

eswc:

TrackEvent

Fig. 1. Integrating the iCalendar Ontology

The integration with both iCalendar and BibTEX was performed in a straightforward fashion. We chose an appropriate concept from the ESWC ontology as
the entry point and established a subclass relationship to a matching concept
in the external ontology. Figure 1 gives an example of how this worked with
the iCalendar integration. The eswc:OrganizedEvent concept, which is the superconcept of all event types in the ESWC ontology was made a subconcept of
ical:Vevent, thereby allowing all ESWC event types to be treated as iCalendar
events.

The document concept space in the ESWC ontology is homogeneous  pa-
pers, posters, slide sets, proceedings and programmes are all grouped under a
common superconcept eswc:Artefact. Properties regarding scientific discourse
such as eswc:influencedBy or eswc:agreesWith are defined to apply to instances of eswc:Paper only (see Fig. 4.2). For ISWC, we decided to split the
document concept space into argumentative documents (papers, posters and slide
sets) and non-argumentative documents (proceedings and programme). This allowed us to redefine the properties listed above so that they apply to all kinds
of argumentative documents. Also, we wanted to further strengthen the integration with FOAF and establish a relation to FOAFs Document class. In order to
achieve this, we introduced a new class iswc:ArgumentativeDocument, which
is the superclass of all relevant document classes in the ESWC ontology, and
a subclass of foaf:Document18. All document classes which are deemed nonargumentative are direct subclasses of foaf:Document. In addition, we had to
introduce new properties such as iswc:agreesWith and at the same time deprecate the ones like eswc:agreesWith (see Fig. 4.2).

To utilize the expressiveness of OWL lite to a greater degree, the ISWC ontology defined owl:inverseOf relationships for a number of properties from the
ESWC ontology. Finally, transitivity was used in defining properties that express
sub- and super-event relationships (e.g. a talk is a sub-event of a session, is a
sub-event of a track).

Metadata Creation. The process of creating the metadata for ISWC2006
was affected by the same issues that had already surfaced during ESWC2006.
Again, the source data came in a variety of different formats, none of which were
particulary suitable for automatic transformation. This reflects the fact that,

18 Note that, since existing statements from the ESWC ontology are not changed, all

document classes are still also subclasses of eswc:Artefact!

K. M oller et al.

wordnet:
Document

eswc:Artefact

eswc:influencedBy

eswc:extends

eswc:implements

eswc:agreesWith,
eswc:disagreesWith
eswc:evidenceFor,

eswc:evidenceAgainst

eswc:Paper

(a) ESWC

eswc:

Programme

eswc:

Proceedings

eswc:
Poster

eswc:
SlideSet

wordnet:
Document

foaf:Document

iswc:influencedBy

iswc:extends

iswc:implements

iswc:agreesWith,
iswc:disagreesWith
iswc:evidenceFor,

iswc:evidenceAgainst

iswc:

Argumentative

Document

(b) ISWC

eswc:

Programme

eswc:

Proceedings

eswc:
Poster

eswc:
SlideSet

eswc:Paper

Fig. 2. The Evolution of the Document Concept Space from ESWC to ISWC

even though ESWC and ISWC are Semantic Web conferences, data integration
wasnt yet a critical point to consider in organizing them.

The main portion of the generated data was papers, authors and events such
as talks and panels. In addition to that, conference and session chairs were
represented, as well as those conference attendees who volunteered to provide
a FOAF profile of themselves. The source data for both papers and authors
was an Excel table provided by the proceedings chair, as well as the actual
PDF documents of the papers. Automated generation of structured metadata
was partially possible. However, author email addresses and affiliations, as well
as paper abstracts still had to be extracted by hand. The source data for the
events list was a timetable in HTML, which was sufficiently unstructured to
make automatic conversion to RDF difficult.

To ease the creation of RDF, we therefore decided to add an intermediate
step. We first generated ordinary, non-RDF BibTEX and iCalendar documents.
The benefit was that we were now able to edit and maintain the data with
dedicated tools that are tailored towards dealing with such data and make this
task much less frustrating and error-prone that maintaining the data in a generalpurpose text editor. Also, it was now possible to use other tools to automatically
generate the desired target RDF (we used a modified version of the customizable
bibtex2rdf converter19 and Python scripts made available by the W3C Semantic
Web Interest Group20).

Not all data could be generated and maintained in this way. Email addresses
and affiliations of authors cannot be represented in ordinary BibTEX, and so had
to be added by hand later. Similarly, links between papers and their talks, links
between events (e.g. between individual talks and their session), as well as the
various conference and session chairs were added manually.

Table 1 provides an overview of the two datasets that were generated for both
conferences. Even though almost identical ontologies were used, some obvious
differences can be observed. The ISWC dataset did not contain any workshops,
and was thus less comprehensive than that of ESWC. As a result, much fewer
instances of eswc:Role and eswc:Artefact were defined. On the other hand, it
19 http://www.l3s.de/siberski/bibtex2rdf/
20 http://www.w3.org/2002/12/cal/
?

?

?
Table 1. Overview of the ESWC2006 and ISWC2006 datasets

Top Level Class
eswc:OrganisedEvent
eswc:Role
eswc:Artefact
foaf:Person
swrc:Topic
eswc:Place
Total Number of Triples

ESWC2006 ISWC2006
?

?

?
is striking that the ISWC dataset has a much larger number of triples (before
inferencing). This is mainly due to a small change in the ontology, which was
introduced to improve the immediate usefulness of the data for consuming SW
tools: the authors of publications were modelled as complex foaf:Person objects
with various assertions about them, whereas at ESWC they were represented by
a URI that was not further defined. This also explains the rise in person instances
from ESWC to ISWC.

Hosting/Serving the Metadata. In a move from ESWC2006, we decided
to use a database solution for hosting, instead of individual files. The complete
dataset first created in the form of RDF documents and then loaded into a
Jena RDF store21 and made available through a Joseki22 SPARQL server at
a public URL23. Using a hosting setup based on an RDF store made reasoning
capabilities available to all external consumers of the conference data (mainly the
tool providers), and, more importantly, made it possible to perform queries over
the complete dataset. Again, the webserver was configured to allow dereferencing
of resource URIs.

5 Recommendations for Semantic Web Dog Food

Having encountered the challenges reported above, work has been undertaken
towards their resolution; both in the evolutions seen between ESWC2006 and
ISWC2006, and in further changes being made in how the metadata will be
produced for ESWC2007 and ISWC2007. However, many issues remain. Consequently we offer the follow recommendations to others undertaking similar
projects in the future, and to those planning any deployment of metadata for
the Semantic Web.

5.1 Process Recommendations
 Release metadata early, thereby allowing tools to be developed using real
data, and deployed in advance of the conference. This may be of particular

21 http://jena.sourceforge.net/
22 http://www.joseki.org/
23 http://128.192.251.191:8080/joseki/iswc

K. M oller et al.

significance where tools are designed to support delegates in planning their
travel to and schedule at the conference. An example is the conference scheduler that was deployed during ISWC200624.

 Provide sample data with which developers can work in the period before
the final conference data is available. Datasets from previous conferences
may be sufficient for this purpose.

Addressing these recommendations requires more integrated and efficient workflows across the entire conference planning process.

5.2 Workflow Recommendations

At ESWC2006 and ISWC2006 metadata was produced centrally by one person,
but from heterogenous sources. This differs from a number of existing metadata production workflows. For example, Semantic Web-compatible versions
of databases such as DBLP (see Sect. 3.1) are produced by exposing existing
databases as RDF, enabling a simple workflow and single source to yield large
amounts of data. In contrast, production of personal FOAF files has traditionally
been carried out by one individual creating RDF by hand, or semi-manually. We
argue that production of conference metadata to date has followed a third work-
flow, of production by one individual with relatively low degrees of automation,
but from many sources. This may provide an interesting case study relevant to
Semantic Web deployments in general, as not all metadata will be produced on a
very large or very small scale, as in the DBLP and FOAF examples. However, we
believe that future conference workflows should attempt to distribute production of metadata across many individuals, ensuring production is as automated
and integrated with wider conference organization as possible. In addition to
increasing efficiency, automating production may also help ensure comprehensiveness of the resulting dataset  something that can be hard to achieve with
more manual production. Automation may be aided by the use of commmon
platforms for managing conference information that are capable of publishing
data directly to the Semantic Web, or through an intermediate conversion step.
On this basis we offer the following recommendations:

 Reuse wherever possible. Ontologies, and tools and methodologies for producing data may all be sufficiently generic to be reused. Naturally, the SWC
conferences all build on the work that has been done at the preceeding con-
ferences, and all reuse vocabularies such as FOAF, iCal or BibTEX.

 Integrate metadata production into conference workflows at all possible stages: in the work of the organizing committee members, and in the
submission and registration systems. For ISWC2007, this has been applied
by using the same submission system throughout (for both conference and
all workshops) and ensuring that the system provides all necessary data.

 Devolve responsibility for metadata production to authors, delegates,
and members of the organizing committee. For example, for ISWC2007, all

24 http://schedule.semanticweb.org
?

?

?
authors of accepted papers are required to add additional data to be used
in the metadata corpus.

5.3 Technical Recommendations
 Define clear formats for minted URIs. This will help ensure consistency
in the absence of URI management tools. E.g., starting with ESWC2007, all
conference metadata will be hosted at http://data.semanticweb.org, and
the URIs for all entities adhere to strict format within this domain, such as
http://data.semanticweb.org/conference/eswc/2007/person-59437.
 Support the de-referencing of URIs by configuring web servers appro-
priately. Servers should ideally support HTTP 303 redirects and Content
Negotiation.

 Provide crawlable and browsable metadata on the conference web site

that is well integrated with conventional HTML content.

 Provide a queryable repository of all metadata that supports the

SPARQL query language and protocol.

 Provide mechanisms to update metadata that require minimum man-

ual intervention.

 Maintain a central repository of data in order to deliver the features
recommended above. For the SWC conferences starting with ESWC2007,
this is http://data.semanticweb.org.

 Move towards a layered architecture that takes a service-oriented ap-

proach, adding a Services layer on top of Data and Query layers.

5.4 Functionality Recommendations

 Define and enable, at the Services layer, a range of common functions associated with a conference, or shown to be beneficial to delegates.
 Support conference organization workflows by exploiting Semantic

Web technologies.

Common functions or services might include a session attendance suggestion
service, such as that proposed in the ESWC2006 Design Challenge 25 Prior to
the conference a travel arrangement service may also be beneficial. Different
services are likely to be of value before, during, and after the conference. Understanding which provides maximum value at each point in time requires further
investigation.

There are also many areas in which Semantic Web technologies may assist with
organization of a conference itself, and these deserve further consideration. For
example, Semantic Web technologies may be able to assist with Programme Committee selection, ensuring that a suitable range of location, affiliation, and expertise is achieved. Research into scheduling on the Semantic Web may be able to
inform the development of systems able to plan transfers between airports and the
conference venue. Using Semantic Web technologies in planning a conference adds
further motivation for using structured data at all stages of the planning process.
25 http://www.eswc2006.org/technologies/designchallenge/semantic-

conference-program.eps.

K. M oller et al.

6 Conclusions

We argue that the metadata efforts at ESWC2006 and ISWC2006, and the ongoing efforts of 2007, have brought numerous benefits to the Semantic Web
community, such as the creation and deployment of significant datasets which
can be used in future research, opportunities for the deployment of applications,
and demonstrations of the communitys commitment to eating its own dog food.
That these efforts are seen as important is supported by the ongoing efforts to
generate and deploy metadata at ESWC2007 and ISWC2007. The ontology used
for the metadata efforts which was started with ESWC2006, was refined during
the following conferences and has now reached a relatively stable version26.

Furthermore, and perhaps most significantly, the projects represent a form of
action research by which the community can identify issues for ongoing research,
and barriers to wider adoption of the Semantic Web. We believe that the value
of this paper lies in the fact that we report on real world use cases of Semantic
Web technology, albeit in the context of research-focussed Semantic Web confer-
ences, identify issues encountered, and make recommendations about how they
may be overcome. These are important lessons to be learned for the application
of Semantic Web technology in general; in broader settings and by other groups
outside the core Semantic Web community. Despite being Semantic Web enthu-
siasts, in coordinating the metadata projects at both conferences we found the
experience of eating our own dog food just as challenging as the idiom implies.
We hope that by sharing our recipes and ideas for improvements, eating ones
own dog food can become significantly more appetizing.

Acknowledgements

The work presented in this paper was supported (in part) by the L on project
supported by Science Foundation Ireland under Grant No. SFI/02/CE1/I131 and
(in part) by the European project NEPOMUK No FP6-027705. Furthermore,
it was supported (in part) by the Advanced Knowledge Technologies (AKT)
project, an Interdisciplinary Research Collaboration (IRC), which is sponsored
by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council under grant
number GR/N15764/01. The AKT IRC comprises the Universities of Aberdeen,
Edinburgh, Sheffield, Southampton and the Open University.
