Cultural Adaptivity for the Semantic Web

Katharina Reinecke

Department of Informatics, University of Zurich,

Binzm uhlestr. 14, 8050 Zurich, Switzerland

reinecke@ifi.uzh.ch

Abstract. Our research explores the possibilities for factoring culture
into user models, working towards cultural adaptivity in the Semantic
Web. The aim is to automate the localization process by acquiring details
about an individuals cultural background. The paper shows how we have
based our approach on research findings from related fields, outlining
the connection between the cultural user and domain model ontologies,
and a test environment. Furthermore, we describe a preliminary plan of
how to validate our cultural user model by comparison to our previous
experience in the manual adaptation of imbuto.

1 Motivation

Culturally adapted user interfaces have been demonstrated to outperform ordinary applications for culturally diverse user groups with regard to user acceptance and usability in general. Our experience with imbuto, a learning software
developed for Rwandan agricultural advisers, underlined the assumption that
work efficiency and user satisfaction drastically increased with the manual localization of the UI [1]. On the other hand, extensive circular adaptations over five
months were required to be implemented on-site in Rwanda. An extension of the
target group to encompass other cultures would require even greater time. Cultural software localization can, therefore, be seen as extremely time-consuming
and prohibitively expensive. However, this is not the only problem with manual localization: Culture, by its elusive and intangible nature, makes it hard to
recognize ones own preferences. Therefore, users cannot be expected to know
themselves where the system should be adapted [2].

We propose to tackle these problems with cultural adaptivity, and thus, to automate the personalization process with the help of a cultural user model. After
exploring our requirements and aligning them with several techniques for building adaptive systems (see [3]), our requirements for a distributed and reusable
user profile  enabling an extension to numerous application and devices for
cross-system personalization [4]  led to the decision to exploit Semantic Web
services for our purposes.

In the following, we discuss the current state of related research (Section
2), present our own advances towards a semantically represented cultural user
model and provide a research plan for advancing and evaluating this system
(Section 3). The paper closes with a discussion of our contribution to current
Semantic Web research and Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) in general.

K. Aberer et al. (Eds.): ISWC/ASWC 2007, LNCS 4825, pp. 946950, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007
?

?

?
2 Related Work

The idea of semantic user modeling for culturally adaptive systems is based on
work from the related fields of international usability and culture, semantic user
modeling and adaptive hypermedia. However, these isolated research efforts have
not yet brought forward an approach comparable to ours. To our knowledge, Kamentz [5] is alone in her attempt to integrate culture in an approach to modeling
learner characteristics of an adaptive e-learning application. The resulting sys-
tem, however, does not meet our requirement for cross-system personalization,
as introduced in [4].

Culture and Usability. Considering culture in the software development process
has been suggested by many researchers in the field of HCI. The motivating factor
behind it is the enormous improvements in working efficiency seen as a result of
(manually) localized UIs [6,7]. Researchers in this area have mainly concentrated
on applying measurable classifications of culture developed by cultural theorists
Hofstede and Trompenaar [8,9] to the field of UI design [10,7,5]. In our approach,
the cultural dimensions developed by Hofstede serve as a basis for the initial
classification of the user model (please refer to [3] for more details).

Semantic User and Domain Modeling. With the rise of the Semantic Web, application specific user models have been countered with approaches to distributed
user modeling [11], sharing user models through ontologies [12]. The Portal
Adaptation Ontology [13], for example, includes a user profile ontology as well as
an adaptation ontology that holds knowledge about the adaptation process. Further efforts include the General User Model Ontology (GUMO), which supplies a
method for the uniform interpretation of distributed user models in intelligent
Semantic Web enriched environments [14]. Parts of GUMOs user modeling
functionalities have been used by the Personal Reader project, which provides
an environment for the construction of personalized Web content readers [15].
GUMO also serves as a supplement for our cultural user model.

Apart from the representation of a user model, user modeling requires the
acquisition of data throughout the users interaction with the system. So far,
most personalization mechanisms have constructed their user model by analyzing
navigational behavior [16]. A more detailed approach to tracking user behavior
is described in [17]: Here, a semantically rich user model is built by combining
the web development technique AJAX with the Semantic Web. Advantages of
this approach are the on-the-fly adaptation that removes the need for reloading
a page and the ability to record scrolling, mouse-over and keystroke events [17].
As we assume that inferring the users culture does require such a sophisticated
navigation analysis, we have adopted this approach for our test application.

Furthermore, we need to perform some kind of inferencing on the obtained
data to access implicit information. Efforts in this direction include the Web
Usage Ontology Generation [12] that applies fuzzy logic techniques to derive
knowledge about the users behavior. Only recently, Roberto and da Silva [18]
presented an algorithm to classify the users intentions recorded in a semantic

K. Reinecke

log. Again, this approach presumes that the analyzed web site has an underlying
adaptation ontology. In the past, many projects also made use of the strong
reasoning support provided by the Ontobroker inference engine [19].

3 Research Plan

The aim of our work is to extend existing approaches to user modeling in the Semantic Web by adding cultural dimensions to the users profile. The information
about the users position in the cultural dimensions will provide applications in
different domains with the ability to adequately localize the UI and its content.
We will integrate our cultural user model in an AJAX portal, which we are
currently developing to support the online storage of to-do lists and notes. The
application will be accessible to different devices such as mobile phones or com-
puters. The target group consists of people from around the world, however,
we will initially test the portal with students from Switzerland (thus being influenced by the French, German, Italian and Swiss cultures) as well as with
Rwandan students.

3.1 Current State of Our Research

User and Domain Model. So far, we have developed an OWL ontology that is
composed of essential classes for outlining the users culture. This cultural user
modeling ontology covers general information, such as the users birthplace, the
religion or the parents nationality. Each of these classes have been allocated an
influence factor. According to the users age, the duration of stays abroad is also
included in the determination of his culture.

Furthermore, the cultural user modeling ontology contains Hofstedes five dimensions (see [8]) which can be extracted to represent the users cultural position in a five-dimensional space. This information is then linked with the domain
model ontology which we are currently working on. Our preliminary work in this
respect includes the integration of results from existing evaluations on the effects of culture on UIs and content adaptation. The outcome were guidelines for
a cultural domain model that explain the necessary localization strategies for
each of the five dimensions. The classification of the user into the dimensions is
carried out by taking the information gained from an initial interview about his
origin and other cultural influences. Taking the percentages of each influencing
factor, we can calculate the users exact score for each dimension. Our cultural
domain model then gives information about the effect on the UI localization:
A high score in the dimension Uncertainty Avoidance, for example, triggers the
adaptation to a linear navigation and a complex but clearly arranged spatial
organisation of elements, among others.

Reasoning. Making inferences about culture works nearly the same way as in
conventional personalization systems: The cultural dimensions are represented
by integer values in the user modeling ontology and are assigned a default value
that describes the average rating. Additionally, we are going to allocate each
?

?

?
cultural dimension to a certain user behavior. In our approach, this behavior is
tracked by an annotated AJAX interface and is stored in the user model. Fur-
thermore, we plan to align the resulting patterns with the underlying adaptation
ontology which triggers the adaptation of UI elements.

Application Domain. At present, we are implementing a portal combining Semantic Web and AJAX technologies. From our experience with imbuto we have
gained substantial information about the manual localization of a UI and the
content to the Rwandan culture. This provides the means for the verification of
our cultural user and domain model: If evaluations with Rwandans using the portal produce comparable results regarding user satisfaction and work efficiency,
our approach can be assumed to have successfully automized the UI localization.

3.2 Plan for Further Research

Although we have laid the foundations for cultural adaptivity, there are still
several steps to take: Firstly, we have to revise the user and adaptation ontologies before connecting them to the portal. The adaptation mechanisms have to
be extended with adequate inference rules that map certain user behaviour to
interface adaptations. Secondly, we plan to validate the ontologies. Evaluations
will be carried out in 2008 with Bachelor and Master students from the University of Zurich and at the National University of Rwanda. Each user group has to
work with a non-localized version first in order to be able to classify the usability
tested after the automatic localization. The evaluations with Rwandan students
are especially useful to verify our results: We plan to compare the automatic
adaptations resulting from the use by the Rwandan students with our results of
the manual adaptation in imbuto. More precisely, the evaluations will include the
same usability test procedures as used for imbuto, as well as an analysis of the
interface characteristics after the adaptation. These evaluations will then help
us to refine our ontologies.

4 Conclusion

We presented our approach to cultural adaptivity using the Semantic Web for
both user modeling and adaptation. We extend upon research cited throughout
this paper in various ways. Firstly, we combine knowledge about cultural localization with personalization techniques. Secondly, we work towards a reusable,
distributed user model that allows for the mapping of culture to various application domains. Thirdly, we are implementing a test environment that allows
for extensive usability tests in regards to culturally extended ontologies and
personalization in general. Therefore, our scientific contribution in the field of
personalization in the Semantic Web is an extended user model ontology that
we will verify by comparing manual and automatic adaptation to a target cul-
ture. The practical impact of our approach is an automatic cultural localization
possibility that reduces both development time and expenses.

K. Reinecke
