Exploring the Wisdom of the Tweets:

Towards Knowledge Acquisition from Social

Awareness Streams

Claudia Wagner

JOANNEUM RESEARCH,

Steyrergasse 17, 8010, Graz, Austria

claudia.wagner@joanneum.at

Abstract. Although one might argue that little wisdom can be conveyed in messages of 140 characters or less, this PhD research sets out
to explore if and what kind of knowledge can be acquired from different
aggregations of social awareness streams. The expected contribution of
this research is a network-theoretic model for defining, comparing and
analyzing different kinds of social awareness streams and an experimental
prototype to extract semantic models from them.
Keywords: Knowledge Acquisition, Social Web, Semantic Analysis.

1 Introduction

In the last decade, the emergence of social media applications such as Wikipedia,
Del.icio.us and Flickr has inspired a community of researchers to tap into usergenerated data as an interesting alternative to knowledge acquisition. Instead of
formally specifying meaning ex-ante through for example agreed-upon ontolo-
gies, the idea was to capture meaning from user-generated data ex-post.

With the emergence of social awareness streams, popularized by applications
such as Twitter or Facebook and formats such as activitystrea.ms, a new form of
communication and knowledge sharing has enriched the social media landscape.
Personal awareness streams usually allow users to post short, natural-language
messages as a personal stream of data that is being made available to other
users. We refer to the aggregation of such personal awareness streams as social
awareness streams (short streams), which contain a set of short messages from
different users usually displayed in reverse chronological-order. Although one
could argue that little wisdom can be conveyed in messages of 140 characters or
less, this PhD research aims to explore (1) if and what kind of knowledge can
be acquired from different aggregations of social awareness streams and (2) to
what extent the semantics of social awareness streams are influenced by stream
characteristics and vice versa.

2 Related Work

Semantic analysis of social media applications is an active research area, in
part because on the one hand social media provides access to the collective

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 493497, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

C. Wagner

intelligence of millions of users while on the other hand it lacks explicit se-
mantics. Exploiting the collective intelligence of social media applications is
therefore a promising and challenging aim of current research efforts.

The work of Mika [1] and Heymann et al [2] illustrate how graph-based mea-
sures, such as centrality and clustering coefficient, can be used to extract broader
and narrower terms from tag spaces. Schmitz et al. [3] describe how a statistical
subsumption model can be applied to induce hierarchical relations of tags. Clustering approaches (e.g., [4]) identify groups of highly related tags and establish
hierarchical relationship between these clusters.

Although social awareness streams and tagging systems have common characteristics (e.g., in both systems users relate resources with free-form tags), they
are used for different purpose and reveal significant, structural differences (e.g.,
in social awareness streams users may relate resources with other resources or
other users). Due to its novelty, little research on social awareness streams exists
to date. Some recent research (e.g., [5]) investigates user activities on Twitter.
Another line of research (e.g., [6]) focuses on analyzing and characterizing content of social awareness stream messages.

3 Proposed Approach and Methodology

To characterize and compare different aggregations of streams we will develop a
network-theoretic model and measures for social awareness streams. To explore
if and what kind of knowledge can be acquired from streams, a system (KASAS)
for characterizing and comparing stream aggregations and extracting emerging
semantic models from them will be developed.

3.1 The KASAS System
Figure 1 shows the basic steps of the KASAS system which takes one or several keywords as input and returns as output a model of concepts and relations
between them. The resulting model could for example be used to enrich existing ontologies such as DBpedia with semantic models (containing e.g. recent
information about events or users relevant for a specific DBpedia concept). The
Stream Aggregation and Characterization component creates for a given
keyword one or several aggregations of streams and characterizes them via various stream measures. These measures can e.g. help to identify the most promising streams in terms of semantic analysis. The streams are then preprocessed
by the Lexical Normalization component. Concepts (denoted by one or several labels) and their relations are extracted by the Concept and Association
Mining component. This component will use simple network transformations,
latent and explicit concept models to extract concepts from stream aggregations.
To mine associations between concepts we will use various information-theoretic,
statistical, semantic similarity measures. Finally, the Entity Discovery component will discover types of concepts by harnessing the Web of Data as background
knowledge and by analyzing stream characteristics. Stream characteristics can
help to infer the basic type of a streams topic, which is e.g. event in case of the
#eswc2010 stream.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. The KASAS (Knowledge Acquisition from Social Awareness Streams) system

3.2 Evaluation

When it comes to the semantic analysis of social awareness streams, the extent
to which different streams approximate the semantic understanding of users
participating in these streams is interesting to investigate. We will conduct evaluations that include user assessments of concepts, relations and their ranking.
In addition, to evaluate the quality of extracted concepts and their relations,
we may use external, hand-crafted taxonomies, such WordNet, the Open Directory Project or DBpedia as semantic grounding, and internal, semantic models
emerging through users usage of special syntax, such as microsyntax1 or Hyper-
Twitter2.

To evaluate concept-user relations we can select a defined set of user accounts
belonging to researchers and compare their list of ranked concepts with a list of
keywords of their papers. In addition, we may ask themselves (self-assessment)
and other researchers (peer-assessment) to asses the extracted and ranked list
of concepts related with them.

4 Results

Based on the existing tripartite structure of folksonomies, we introduce a networktheoretic model of social awareness streams consisting of messages, users and content of messages. As an adaption of the folksonomy data structure, the model of
social awareness streams introduces qualifiers on the tripartite structure that allow
to accommodate user generated syntax. We formally define the model as follows:

Definition 1 A social awareness stream S is a tupel S = (Uq1, Mq2, Rq3, Y, ft),
where

http://microsyntax.pbworks.com/
http://semantictwitter.appspot.com/

C. Wagner

 U, M and R are finite sets whose elements are called users, messages and

resources.

 Qualifier q1 represents different ways users are involved in a stream (e.g.
users can be author or target of message), q2 represents the different types
of messages M (e.g. public broadcast messages or private direct messages),
and q3 represents the different types of resources that can be included in
messages of streams (e.g. hashtags, links or keywords)

 Y is a ternary relation Y  U  M  R between U, M, and R.
 ft is a function which assigns to each Y a temporal marker.

In addition, we created various stream measures (such as the social, conversa-
tional, temporal, informational and topical diversity measure) to characterize
and compare different stream aggregations. Based on the formal model of social awareness streams and the predefined measures, we analyzed and compared
different aggregations of Twitter streams (user list, user directory, hashtag and
keyword streams), which were all related to the concept semantic web and were
all recorded within the same time interval (8 days).

Since measures for similarity and relatedness are not well developed for threemode networks we considered various ways to obtain qualified two-mode networks (resource-author, resource-message, resource-hashtag and resource-link
networks) from these stream aggregations. To surface semantic relations between
resources, we produced one-mode networks (see e.g. Figure 2) by multiplying the
corresponding two-mode network matrices with their transpose M  M T . Different semantic relations are created because of the different ways associations are
established between resources. We compared the resulting networks by assessing their most important concepts and relations. Our empirical results indicate
that hashtag streams are in general rather robust against external events (such
as New Years Eve), while user list stream aggregations are more perceptible to
such disturbances. Networks generated via resource-hashtag transformations

Fig. 2. Resource network computed from the resource-hashtag network of the #se-
manticweb hashtag stream
?

?

?
seem to have the power to reduce the non-informational noise in streams and
reveal meaningful semantic models.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

While the developed network-theoretic model of social awareness streams is gen-
eral, the first empirical results of this PhD research are limited to a single concept
(semantic web). In future, we will expand our analysis to a broader variety of
social awareness streams and conduct experiments over greater periods of time.
Since the semantic analysis conduced in our first experiments is based on simple
network transformations, we will study whether more sophisticated knowledge
acquisition methods produce different results. Finally, we will evaluate the semantic models produced by different stream aggregations and explore to what
extend they approximate the semantic understanding of users that are involved
in these streams.

Acknowledgments. I would like to thank my supervisor Markus Strohmaier
for his guidance, support and fruitful discussions and JOANNEUM RESEARCH
for funding this research.
