A Contextualized Knowledge Framework for

Semantic Web

Mathew Joseph1,2

1 FBK-IRST, Via Sommarive 18, 38050 Trento, Italy

2 DISI, University of Trento, Italy

mathew@fbk.eu

Abstract. This thesis focuses on developing an efficient framework for contextualized knowledge representation on Semantic Web. We point out the drawbacks
of existing formalism for contexts that hinder an efficient implementation and
propose a context formalism that enables the development of a framework with
desired properties. Some of the future milestones for this thesis work are to (i)
develop a proof theory for the logical framework based on Description Logics
(DL) (ii) develop reasoning algorithms (iii) verify and compare the performance
of these algorithms to existing distributed reasoning formalisms and (iv) implement the system.

1 Problem, Motivation and Related Work

Contexts[1] have been appreciated for their ability to use the Divide and Conquer
strategy for problem solving. They helps to localize reasoning[2] and search tasks, allow us to represent conflicting information by separating them in different contexts.
Moreover they are a potential hope for the current state-of-the-art semantic web reasoners and ontology development tools for handling todays large Knowledge Bases (KB)
by allowing to partition these KBs to distributed smaller ones.

In spite of past initiatives for contextualized knowledge representation[3,4] not
enough focus has been applied on producing a computationally tractable framework.
As far we know not a single approach has been implemented to demonstrate its fruitfulness on the semantic web.

Also the initiatives in the past to provide a logical framework of contexts, many
have been propositional in nature[5,6,7] and the other expressive versions based on
quantificational logic such as the one given in [3] do not provide a sound and complete
proof theory. [8] is based on the assumptions such as rigid identifier property1, barcan
formula compliance2 and does not have a decidable logic. Also complications due to
arbitrary nesting of contexts and lack of efficient decision procedures are some of the
reasons for unsuitability of these frameworks on the Semantic web.

Some of the inherent problems in the works done so far is that contexts have been
treated as first-class objects [3,8], allowing to use any fragment of first order logic on
these objects. But how a relation R(C1, C2) between two context objects C1 and C2
reflects reasoning in the knowledge part of these contexts is unspecified.

1 Same URI denotes the same entity every where.
2 Interpretation domains are the same for every context.

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 467471, 2010.
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

M. Joseph

Fig. 1. Contextualized knowledge repository

2 Proposed Approach

A schematic diagram for a Contextualized knowledge repository is given in Fig. 1.
Inspired by [2,9], we also comply to the fact that contexts have a logical theory and a
fixed set of dimension values. These dimension values (time, location, topic etc.) can
be used to qualify the contexts and are thus meta-knowledge for the contexts, hence the
logical formalism employed for representation should allow for this meta-knowledge
description and use this description for reasoning.

For reasons of tractability and applicability of our logical framework on the semantic
web we ground our approach on OWL2 DL. We suppose that this can be extended to
full first order logic. We arrive at the following definitions:
Definition 1 (Contextual dimension). A context dimension, D is an OWL2 knowledge
base whose signature (D) contains a set of constant symbols, D, called dimension
values, and a strict partially ordered binary relation  called coverage relation, which
is the only relation present3
Definition 2 (Context). Given a set of n dimensions {Di}i=1..n, and a signature , a
context C in the dimensions {Di}i=1..n is a pair d(C), K(C), where
1. d(C) = d1, . . . , dn  D1  . . .  Dn;
2. K(C) is an OWL2 knowledge base on the signature ;

We define the knowledge about the context objects in context description space and
restrict its logic to contain only one predicate  with a well defined semantics to relate
any two context objects4. This is because we currently restrict our focus on qualifying
context objects with dimensions  location, time and topic, where we use the  to
3 Strict partially ordered relations can be represented in OWL2.
4 This can be extended to a fixed number of predicates with well defined semantics.
?

?

?
represent geographic containment, temporal containment and topic coverage relations
respectively5.
Definition 3 (Context Description Space). A context description space, K is an OWL2
knowledge base whose signature (K) contains a set of context objects Ci, a set of
functional symbols Di-Of(.), the binary relation  called context cover relation, which
is the only binary relation on context objects.
Intuitively the Di-Of(.) is a function to associate a context C to value of Di, contextcover relation  is such that for any two contexts Ca and Cb, Ca  Cb iff Di-Of(Ca) i
Di-Of(Cb) for i = 1, ..., n.
Definition 4 (Contextualized Knowledge Base). Given a signature , a contextualized knowledge base (CKB) is a tuple K = (D, K, C) where
1. D = D1, . . . ,Dn is an n-tuple of context dimensions
2. K is the outer context
3. C is a set of contexts on dimensions D1, . . . ,Dn
The relation  between any two context objects C1 and C2 describe the relation between domains of these contexts. For example if C1  C2 then, (i) domain of C1 is
contained in the domain of C2 (ii) identifiers in C1 and C2 are rigid. We strongly identify the need of such a relation  with such special semantics for contexts, because in
the semantic web we are normally dealing with URIs and these normally retain their
meaning across contexts.

Also note the use of meta-knowledge in our framework, such meta-knowledge values
such as time, location, topic or provenance can reveal significant facts about contexts.
For example if it is the case that all the dimension values for two Contexts C1 and C2
are respectively equal, then C1  C2 and C2  C1, this means that information in these
contexts are highly coherent and there can be much greater extent of lifting of axioms
and migration of individuals between them.
Example 1. Suppose Cgreece and Ceurope are two contexts in our context description
space and Cgreece  Ceurope, then for a formula such as

it is also the case that

Cgreece : Conference(eswc-2010)

Ceurope : Conferencegreece(eswc-2010)

In this case the assumption is that domain of discourse of Cgreece is covered by that
of Ceurope. The constant symbol eswc-2010 means the same across these contexts
and extension of concepts Conference and Conferencegreece are equal.such lifting of
axioms across contexts can be taken care by rules of the system such as

C : 

where K is the context description space and 

and  are formulas

C :  K : C  C

5 This is a philosophically debatable assumption, but in general setting a fixed set of dimensions

can completely qualify the context space[9].

M. Joseph

3 Methodology

Problem definition. The problem is to develop a usable framework for context dependent knowledge representation for the semantic web. The framework developed should support the growing semantic web needs like distributed reasoning,
tractability, scalability, reasoning on meta-knowledge for deriving facts in the
knowledge.

Survey of existing approaches. A description of alternate approaches on contexts that
has been considered is in Section 1. We also consider existing works on distributed
reasoning like DDL[10,11] and collaborate with their inventors for reusing existing
results and implementations. Some of the shortcomings of these existing frameworks and the ones in[12,13], are that they do not take into consideration, the
use of meta-knowledge. Although approaches like [14] does reasoning on meta-
knowledge, their semantics do not suffice to relate two distinct pieces of knowledge
and how axioms can be lifted across them.

Design of Initial framework and Prototype Implementation. A brief description of
the designed framework has been given in Section 2, We are currently working on
specifications of syntax and semantics of our framework. The current problem we
are addressing is the semantics of lifting rules6. Currently we limit our selves to
simple syntax of lifting rules. A Prototype Implementation has been constructed
for testing and for running future experiments.

Development of proof theory and reasoning algorithms. The next immediate step to
be considered is development of a proof theory that is sound and complete with respect to semantics employed. For every DL axiom , We have an associated context
C, and hence we denote this fact by C : . Then we need to consider development
of sound and complete reasoning algorithms.

System Implementation and Testing. Proposed framework once designed need to be
implemented to test its ability of applicability on semantic web, verify correctness
of implemented reasoning algorithms.

4 Results and Status

We have implemented a first prototype of a contextualized knowledge repository, by
restricting the expressivity of data in the repository to RDF(S).7 Such a restriction is
explained by the scalability issues of available tools. Practically, we grounded our prototype on Sesame RDF(S) storage and querying framework8. We also demonstrated
with this prototype application how search efficiency and accuracy on semantic web
can be benefited with our notion of contexts[15]. In this work we demonstrated the use
of context dimensions to form a hierarchical structure of contexts, which can guide the
order of search. Another application of contexts for semantic enrichment was demonstrated in [16]. We are currently in the phase of development of the required proof
theory.9

6 The rules that relate information in different contexts.
7 The prototype is available at https://dkm.fbk.eu/index.php/CKR
8 http://www.openrdf.org/
9 I am a first year PhD Student.
?

?

?
5 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper introduced the current problems of semantic web, that motivates the idea of
a contextualized knowledge representation framework. We explained the related work
done before on contexts. We introduced our approach (section 2) as a solution and stated
the methodology of research adopted during this thesis (section 3) and results obtained.
Some of the future milestones to be achieved for this thesis work are (i) develop a
proof theory for the logical framework based on Description Logics (DL) (ii) developing reasoning algorithms (iii) verify and compare the performance of these algorithms
to existing distributed reasoning formalisms and (iv) system implementation.
