The Semantic Gap of Formalized Meaning

Sebastian Hellmann

AKSW Research Group,

Universit at Leipzig, Germany

hellmann@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

http://aksw.org

Abstract. Recent work in Ontology learning and Text mining has
mainly focused on engineering methods to solve practical problem. In
this thesis, we investigate methods that can substantially improve a wide
range of existing approaches by minimizing the underlying problem: The
Semantic Gap between formalized meaning and human cognition. We deploy OWL as a Meaning Representation Language and create a unified
model, which combines existing NLP methods with Linguistic knowledge
and aggregates disambiguated background knowledge from the Web of
Data. The presented methodology here allows to study and evaluate the
capabilities of such aggregated knowledge to improve the efficiency of
methods in NLP and Ontology learning.

1 Problem

Decades of research have been spent on answering the question How can we
teach machines to understand natural language? and the unanimous response
is: It is impossible (for obvious reasons). Any approach that indulges in formalizing the meaning of natural language faces the same problem: the Semantic
Gap between formalized meaning and human cognition. So instead, we should
modify the question and ask: How big is the current Semantic Gap?, How
can we reduce it? and How can we measure the reduction?. We argue that, if
we choose OWL as a unifying Meaning Representation Language (MRL), we are
in a position to utilize several advantages (interoperability, expressiveness, available linguistic ontologies, available structured knowledge from the Web of Data,
mature tool support) not only to reduce the Semantic Gap, but also to define
processes for potential reductions, combined with an evaluation methodology.

2 State of the Art

Currently, work towards standardization of linguistic annotations is in progress
(see work by Nancy Ide). Wintner (2009)[8] argues that interest in grounding
NLP in Linguistic theories has been declining for two decades with the focus
now being on engineering solutions to practical problems and corpora as our
source of (implicit) knowledge. A claim that can be verified by looking, for
example, at methods included in two recent surveys of Ontology learning from

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 462466, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
?

?

?
text by Buitelaar et al.(2005)[1] and Zhou (2007)[9]. Parallel to these trends, a
large number of mature linguistic ontologies has emerged formalizing knowledge
about linguistic features. A representative example are the Ontologies of Linguistic Annotations ([2], OLiA), an architecture of modular OWL-DL ontologies that
formalizes several intermediate steps of the mapping between concrete annotations (such as POS tags) and a Reference Model. While such ontologies exist,
the question arises in which ways they can be exploited besides their intended
purpose of unifying annotation schemes. One key to knowledge acquisition is
clearly a deep linguistic analysis: by using OWL to aggregate knowledge on all
levels of Linguistics in a single model and in a formal way, we are able to create
a powerful preprocessing step, which can potentially improve a range of current
methods.

The advantages become obvious, if we look, for example, at a recent approach
by V olker et al. [7], which applies transformational rules to acquire OWL axioms
from text. V olker et al. have a three-page long discussion about necessary linguistic features to improve their approach. As an enhancement, the conditional
part of these proposed rules can, however, be directly replaced by expressive
reasoner queries when employing our approach.

In his keynote talk at the ISWC 20091, Tom Mitchell presented an approach to
extract facts from the Web with the help of a bootstrap ontology. He mentioned
several shortcomings such as missing morphological features (why not more?)
and incorporation of existing background knowledge (such as DBpedia2).

In this thesis, we will investigate the above-mentioned limitations as a whole,
i.e. not just engineering solutions to specific tasks. By combining existing NLP
methods with linguistic knowledge in OWL and adding disambiguated background knowledge from the Web of Data, we argue that we can shed light on
the underlying problem of knowledge acquisition: The Semantic Gap of Formalized Meaning. Such an integrated approach has several advantages: errors in
one layer can be corrected by other layers and external knowledge and also new
OWL axioms can be induced based on given positive and negative sentences (see
Section 5, where we learned the definition for a passive sentence.)

3 Proposed Approach

We begin with converting natural language text (a character sequence with implicit knowledge) into a more expressive formalism, in this case OWL, to grasp
the underlying meaning. This explicated meaning then serves as input for (high-
level) algorithms and applications (with a focus on machine learning). The central working thesis is the following:

If features extracted by different NLP approaches (ranging from low-level morphology analysis to higher-level anaphora resolution) are explicated and combined
with matching background knowledge (parser-ontology pair) in a model and if,
additionally, this model is further enriched by fragments of existing knowledge

http://videolectures.net/iswc09_mitchell_ptsw
http://dbpedia.org

S. Hellmann

Fig. 1. Left: Display of the integration of NLP approaches and background knowledge
connected via a Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) component. Right: Actions which
potentially lead to a measurable increase of the stack (cf. Section 4 for evaluation).

bases from external sources such as DBpedia, it will be possible to reduce the Semantic Gap and improve performance on common knowledge acquisition tasks
such as Ontology learning and Text understanding.

Figure 1 gives an overview of the conversion approach in form of a stack
(on the left side). In a first step, sentences are tokenized and aggregated in
a Structured Sentence ontology (SSO), consisting of a minimal vocabulary to
denote the basic structure of the sentence such as tokens and relative position of
a token in a sentence. The SSO (bottom) serves as the backbone model, which
will be augmented by (1) features from NLP approaches (in light gray), (2) rich
linguistic ontologies for these features, (3) background knowledge from the Web
of Data (in dark gray) and, finally (4) knowledge which can be derived or inferred
and which improves and corrects steps 1-3.

In most cases, output generated by NLP methods can be modeled in RDF
in a straightforward way (e.g. POS-Tags are connected to tokens, dependencies
are connections between tokens). An increasing number of linguistic ontologies
already exist for certain NLP tasks (see [2] and Section 5 ) and serve as valuable addition to parser output (forming a parser-ontology pair). Both types of
information aggregated from several parsers and integrated into the backbone
model represent the basis for selecting background knowledge from the Web of
Data. Fragments[3] of DBpedia, for example, can be retrieved on the basis of
disambiguated entities as seed nodes and added to the model.

Preliminarily, we will define the Semantic Gap in a negative way, i.e. meaning
that is not covered by the current stack. The stack in Figure 1 can be increased
by the four measures depicted on the right side. We created a reference implementation NLP2RDF3, which outputs an aggregated OWL ontology.

3 Available as open-source at http://code.google.com/p/nlp2rdf
?

?

?
4 Methodology

Based on the formulation of the working thesis, progress will be driven by rigid
evaluation. Although, the reduction of the Semantic Gap can not be conceived
directly, the growth of the stack can be measured very well. We will collect a list
of suitable machine learning approaches and knowledge acquisition tasks which
normally depend on some form of NLP methods for preprocessing. Then, we will
use the DL-Learner[5], a supervised concept learner, to repeat experiments and
compare existing methods. As the expressiveness and availability of background
knowledge directly affects the learning capability, we deem it an ideal evaluation
setting because we can study the influence of available knowledge on the performance of certain tasks (e.g. relation extraction). In this way a benchmark suite
can be created in which we can vary parsers or deactivate the inclusion of ontolo-
gies. This allows to evaluate the conditions under which the aggregated model
was created and can thus measure potential improvements of the NLP2RDF
stack in Figure 1 (right side).

Initially, we plan to participate in SemEval 20104 Tasks 4 (VP Ellipsis -
Detection and Resolution) and 7 (Argument Selection and Coercion). Task 4
is similar to already achieved results on learning a concept for passive sentences
presented in the next Section. Furthermore, we assume that the key to task 7 is a
mixture of DBpedia and syntactical features. Likewise, the Reuters5 benchmark
is interesting, as we argue that text classification methods can be improved the
more a machine can grasp the meaning of the text.

As parsers are error-prone, we will deploy several parsers at the same time

and experiment with probabilistic logics for correction.

5 Results

The output of Stanford Parser6 for POS-tagging and dependency parsing was
converted to RDF and mapped to the Stuttgart-T ubinger Tagset ontology7.
Based on 20 passive and 20 active German sentences from the Negra Corpus,
the following concept was learned by DL-Learner: (Sentence  hasToken.(
VVPP  previousToken.(APPR ! VAFIN))) signifies a sentence with a past
participle (VVPP) preceded by temporal, causal, modal and local prepositions
(APPR) or finite auxiliary verbs (VAFIN)  a precise description (for German
passive), which can be understood as the intentional meaning of a class PassiveSentence and used to classify new sentences. Given a proper background
corpus, it is possible to create expressive concepts just by selecting sentences.
This scenario was realized in the TIGER Corpus Navigator8, which achieved

http://semeval2.fbk.eu/semeval2.php
http://www.daviddlewis.com/resources/testcollections/reuters21578/
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml
http://nachhalt.sfb632.uni-potsdam.de/owl/stts.owl by Chiarcos [2]
http://tigernavigator.nlp2rdf.org

S. Hellmann

a high F-measure (above 86%) in an Active Learning approach with only few
training sentences [4].

We assume that it is even possible to learn such concepts for semantic relations
 just by selecting sentences  after sufficient concepts have been created at the
syntactic level.

At the time of writing the work on this project is still in an early phase.
Adapters to several other NLP tools have been implemented and evaluation
has just begun. Furthermore, the Wortschatz9 (a source for statistical data
about sentences acquired from the web) was converted to RDF and mapped
to DBpedia[6]. NER methods, a prerequisite for relation extraction, will be improved by linking to instances from DBpedia and including parts of the hierarchy.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

Planned contributions include: (1) analyzing and pinpointing the underlying
problem in Text mining and Ontology learning, (2) theoretical research to acquire a clear definition of the Semantic Gap, (3) leveraging existing (statistical)
NLP approaches with an ontology mapping (parser-ontology pair), (4) instrumentalization of background knowledge from the Web of Data (especially DBpedia and Wortschatz), (5) acquisition of additional linguistic knowledge by supervised machine learning, (6) evaluation-driven methodology and (7) creation
of an open-source tool that can be used to improve existing solutions.
