 

PoolParty: SKOS Thesaurus Management Utilizing 

Linked Data 

Thomas Schandl and Andreas Blumauer 

punkt. NetServices GmbH, 

Lerchenfelder Gurtel 43, 1160 Vienna, Austria 

schandl@punkt.at, blumauer@punkt.at 

Abstract. Building and maintaining thesauri are complex and laborious tasks. 
PoolParty  is  a  Thesaurus  Management  Tool  (TMT)  for  the  Semantic  Web, 
which  aims  to  support  the  creation  and  maintenance  of  thesauri  by  utilizing 
Linked Open Data (LOD), text-analysis and easy-to-use GUIs, so thesauri can 
be managed and utilized by domain experts without needing knowledge about 
the semantic  web. Some  aspects of thesaurus  management, like the editing of 
labels, can be done via a wiki-style interface, allowing for lowest possible access barriers to contribution. PoolParty can analyse documents in order to glean 
new  concepts  for  a  thesaurus.  Additionally  a  thesaurus  can  be  enriched  by  
retrieving  relevant  information  from  Linked  Data  sources  and  thesauri  can  be 
imported  and  updated  via  LOD  URIs  from  external  systems  and  also  can  be 
published as new linked data sources on the semantic web. 

Keywords: Semantic Web, Linking Open Data, Thesaurus, SKOS, RDF, Wiki. 

1   Introduction 

Thesauri  have  been  an  important  tool  in  Information  Retrieval  for  decades  and  still 
are [1]. While they have the potential to greatly improve the information management 
of  large  organisations,  professionally  managed  thesauri  are  rarely  used  in  content 
management systems, search engines or tagging systems.  

Important  reasons  frequently  given  for  this  are:  (1)  the  difficulty  of  learning  and 
using  TMT,  (2)  the  lacking  possibilities  to  integrate  TMTs  into  existing  enterprise 
information systems, (3) it's laborious to create and maintain a thesaurus, and while 
TMTs often support either automatic or manual methods to maintain a thesaurus they 
rarely combine those two approaches, and (4) companies don't have enough  knowledge about thesaurus building  methodologies and/or valuable use cases  utilizing semantic knowledge models like SKOS thesauri. 

The  TMT  PoolParty1  addresses  the  first  three  issues.  The  demo  will  show  Pool-
Partys thesaurus management features including document analysis, its Linked Data 
capabilities and its Wiki interface. 
                                                           
1 http://poolparty.punkt.at/PoolParty/ - A screencast is available at http://bit.ly/6OqhYZ 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 421425, 2010. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

T. Schandl and A. Blumauer 

2   Use Cases 

PoolParty  is  a  tool  to  create  and  maintain  multilingual  SKOS  (Simple  Knowledge 
Organisation System)2 thesauri, aiming to be easy to use for people without a Semantic Web background or special technical skills. Utilizing  semantic  web technologies 
like  RDF  and  especially  SKOS  allow  thesauri  to  be  represented  in  a  standardised 
manner [2]. While OWL would offer greater possibilities in creating knowledge mod-
els, it is deemed too complex for the average information worker. 

PoolParty was conceived to facilitate various commercial applications for thesauri. 
In  order  to  achieve  this,  it  needs  to  publish  them  and  offer  methods  of  integrating 
them  with  various  applications  [3].  In  PoolParty  this  can  be  realized  on  top  of  its 
RESTful  web  service  interface  providing  thesaurus  management,  indexing,  search, 
tagging and linguistic analysis services. 

Some of these (semantic) web applications are:  

- Semantic search engines 
- Recommender systems (similarity search) 
- Corporate bookmarking 
- Annotation- & tag recommender systems 
- Autocomplete services and facetted browsing. 

These use cases can be either achieved by using PoolParty stand-alone or by integrating it with existing Enterprise Search Engines and Document Management Systems. 

3   Technologies 

PoolParty is  written in Java and uses the SAIL  API3,  whereby it can be  utilized  with 
various triple stores, which allows for flexibility in terms of performance and scalability. 
Thesaurus  management  itself  (viewing,  creating  and  editing  SKOS  concepts  and 
their relationships) can be done in an AJAX Frontend based on Yahoo User Interface 
(YUI). Editing of labels can alternatively be done in a Wiki style HTML frontend. 

For  key-phrase  extraction  from  documents  PoolParty  uses  a  modified  version  of 
the KEA4 5 API, which is extended for the use of controlled vocabularies stored in a 
SAIL  Repository  (this  module  is  available  under  GNU  GPL).  The  analysed  documents  are  locally  stored  and  indexed  in  Lucene5  along  with  extracted  concepts  and 
related concepts. 

4   Thesaurus Management with PoolParty 

The main thesaurus management GUI of PoolParty (see Fig. 1) is entirely web-based 
and utilizes AJAX to e.g. enable the quick merging of two concepts either via drag & 
drop or autocompletion of concept labels by the user. An overview over the thesaurus 
can be gained with a tree or a graph view of the concepts. 
                                                           
2 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos  
3 http://www.openrdf.org/doc/sesame2/system/ch05.html  
4 http://www.nzdl.org/Kea/index.html  
5 http://lucene.apache.org/  

 
?

?

?
Fig. 1. PoolPartys main GUI with concept tree and SKOS view of selected concept 

Consistent  with  PoolParty's  goal  of  relieving  the  user  of  burdensome  tasks  while 
managing  thesauri  doesn't  end  with  a  comfortable  user  interface:  PoolParty  helps  to 
semi-automatically expand a thesaurus as the user can use it to analyse documents (e.g. 
web pages or PDF files) relevant to her domain in order to glean candidate terms for her 
thesaurus. This is done by a key-phrase extractor which is based on KEA. The extractor 
not only detects concepts within a text which are already part of the thesaurus but also 
new canditate terms ("free concepts"). These can be approved by a thesaurus manager 
and can be integrated into the thesaurus, turning them into "approved concepts". 

Documents can be searched in various ways  either by keyword search in the full 
text,  by  searching  for  their  tags  or  by  semantic  search.  The  latter  takes  not  only  a 
concept's preferred label into account, but also its synonyms and the labels of its related concepts are considered in the search. The user might manually remove query 
terms  used  in  semantic  search.  Boost  values  for  the  various  relations  considered  in 
semantic search may also be adjusted. In the same way the recommendation mechanism for document similarity calculation works.  

PoolParty by default also publishes an HTML Wiki version of its thesauri, which 
provides an alternative way to browse and edit concepts. Through this feature anyone 
can  get  read  access  to  a  thesaurus,  and  optionally  also  edit,  add  or  delete  labels  of 
concepts. Search and autocomplete functions are available here as well.  

The Wikis HTML source is also enriched with RDFa, thereby exposing all RDF 
metadata  associated  with  a  concept  as  linked  data  which  can  be  picked  up  by  RDF 
search engines and crawlers.  

PoolParty  supports  the  import  of  thesauri  in  SKOS  (in  serializations  including 

RDF/XML, N-Triples or Turtle) or Zthes format. 

5   Linked Open Data Capabilities 

PoolParty  not  only  publishes  its  thesauri  as  Linked  Open  Data  (additionally  to  a 
SPARQL  endpoint)6,  but  it  also  consumes  LOD  in  order  to  expand  thesauri  with  
                                                           
6 Example thesaurus published as Wiki with embedded RDFa to expose linked data:  
   http://bit.ly/aM7LSL 

T. Schandl and A. Blumauer 

information  from  LOD  sources.  Concepts  in  the  thesaurus  can  be  linked  to  e.g. 
DBpedia7 via the DBpedia lookup service [4], which takes the label of a concept and 
returns possible matching candidates. The user can select the DBpedia resource that 
matches the concept from his thesaurus,  thereby creating a owl:sameAs relation between the concept URI in PoolParty and the DBpedia URI. The same approach can be 
used to link to other SKOS thesauri available as Linked Data. 

Other triples can also be retrieved from the target data source, e.g. the DBpedia abstract can become a skos:definition and geographical coordinates can be imported and 
be  used  to  display  the  location  of  a  concept  on  the  map,  where  appropriate.  The 
DBpedia category information may also be used to retrieve additional concepts of that 
category as siblings of the concept in focus, in order to populate the thesaurus. 

PoolParty is not only capable of importing a SKOS thesaurus from a Linked Data 
server,  it  may  also  receive  updates  to  thesauri  imported  this  way.  This  feature  has 
been implemented in the course of the KiWi8 project funded by the European Com-
mission. KiWi also contains SKOS thesauri and exposes them as LOD. Both systems 
can  read  a  thesaurus  via  the  others  LOD  interfaces  and  may  write  it  to  their  own 
store.  This  is  facilitated  by  special  Linked  Data  URIs  that  return  e.g.  all  the  topconcepts of a thesaurus, with pointers to the URIs of their narrower concepts, which 
allow other systems to retrieve a complete thesaurus through iterative dereferencing 
of concept URIs.  

Additionally  KiWi  and  PoolParty  publish  lists  of  concepts  created,  modified, 
merged or deleted  within  user specified time-frames. With this  information the systems can learn about updates to one of their thesauri in an external system. They then 
can compare the versions of concepts in both stores and may write according updates 
to their own store. 

Data transfer and communication are achieved using REST/HTTP, no other protocols or middleware are necessary. Also no rights management for each external systems  is  needed,  which  otherwise  would  have  to  be  configured  separately  for  each 
source. 

6   System Demo 

In the demonstration session visitors will learn how to manage a SKOS thesaurus and 
how PoolParty supports the user in the process of creating, editing, relating and merging of SKOS concepts using the web GUI, autocomplete and drag and drop. We will 
explore different views of concepts (tree, graph, triples and location on a map). 

Well take a tour of the Wiki interface and learn how to use it to edit labels and 

take a look at the RDFa output exposed in the Wiki. 

The document analysis features will be presented, showing how new concepts can 
be  gleaned  from  text  and  integrated  into  a  thesaurus.  The  visitor  will  learn  how  to 
conduct a semantic search function as well as how the similarity recommendations for 
indexed documents tagged with concepts work. 

It will be shown how to interlink local concepts from DBpedia, thereby enhancing 
ones thesaurus with triples from the LOD cloud. Finally the data synchronisation via 
                                                           
7 http://dbpedia.org/ 
8 http://kiwi-project.eu/ 

 
?

?

?
LOD will be shown by way of example interactions between the semantic framework 
KiWi and PoolParty. 

7   Future Work 

In the course of project LASSO funded by Austrias FFG9 we will research improved 
methods of interlinking local thesauri with relevant entities from the LOD cloud. This 
will enable PoolParty to support thesaurus managers e.g. by semi-automatically populating a thesaurus by looking for related terms on external sites. Tighter interlinking 
with the LOD cloud can also enable PoolParty to suggest how new concepts could be 
classified, i.e. recommend possible parent concepts from a thesaurus for a concept in 
focus. 

The  synchronisation  process  via  Linked  Data  will  be  improved  in  the  ongoing 
KiWi project. We will implement an update and conflict resolution dialogue through 
which  a  user  may  decide  which  updates  to  concepts  to  accept  and  to  consequently 
write to the systems store. 

Most importantly  we  will  work on integrating PoolParty  with existing Enterprise 

Search Engines, Enterprise Wikis and Content Management Systems. 
