BioNav: An Ontology-Based Framework to Discover

Semantic Links in the Cloud of Linked Data

Mar a-Esther Vidal1, Louiqa Raschid2, Natalia M arquez1,

Jean Carlo Rivera1, and Edna Ruckhaus1

1 Universidad Sim on Bol var,

{mvidal,nmarquez,jrivera,ruckhaus}@ldc.usb.ve

Caracas, Venezuela

2 University of Maryland
louiqa@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract. We demonstrate BioNav, a system to efficiently discover potential
novel associations between drugs and diseases by implementing Literature-Based
Discovery techniques. BioNav exploits the wealth of the Cloud of Linked Data
and combines the power of ontologies and existing ranking techniques, to support discovery requests. We discuss the formalization of a discovery request as
a link-analysis and authority-based problem, and show that the top ranked target
objects are in correspondence with the potential novel discoveries identified by
existing approaches. We demonstrate how by exploiting properties of the ranking
metrics, BioNav provides an efficient solution to the link discovery problem.

1 Introduction

Emerging infrastructures provide the basis for supporting on-line access to the wealth
of scientific knowledge captured in the biomedical literature. The two largest interconnected bibliographic databases in biomedicine, PubMed and BIOISIS, illustrate the extremely large size of the scientific literature today. PubMed publishes at least 16 million
references to journal articles, and BIOSIS more than 18 million of life science-related
abstracts. On the other hand, a great number of ontologies and controlled vocabularies
have become available under the umbrella of the Semantic Web and they have been used
to annotate and describe the contents of existing Web available sources. For instance,
MeSH, RxNorm, and GO are good examples of ontologies comprised of thousands of
concepts and that are used to annotate publications and genes in the NCBI data sources.
Furthermore, in the context of the Linking Data project, a large number of diverse
datasets that comprise the Cloud of Linked Data are available. The Cloud of Linked
Data has had an exponential growth during the last years; in October 2007, datasets consisted of over two billion RDF triples, which were interlinked by over two million RDF
links. By May 2009 this had grown to 4.2 billion of RDF triples interlinked by around
142 million of RDF links. At the time this paper was written, there were 13,112,409,691
triples in the Cloud of Linked Data; datasets can be about medical publications, airport data, drugs, diseases, clinical trials, etc. It is of particular interest, the portion of
the Cloud that relates life science data such as diseases, traditional Chinese medicine,
pharmaceutical companies, medical publications, genes and proteins, where concepts

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 441445, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

M.-E. Vidal et al.

are derived from sites such as ClinicalTrials.gov, DrugBank, DailyMed, SIDER, TCM-
GeneDIT, Diseasome and OMIM. To fully take advantage of the available data, and
to be able to recognize novel discoveries, scientists will still have to navigate through
the Cloud and compare, correlate and mine linked data; thus, they may have to spend
countless hours to recognize relevant findings.

To provide support on the discovery task of potential novel associations between
already published topics in existing bibliographic datasets, Literature-based discovery
(LBD) techniques have been developed. LBD methods follow a disease-cure trajectory
to guide the search in the space of implicit associations between scientific publications
and their annotations or cites. Annotations correspond to concepts from controlled vocabularies or ontologies. LBD can perform Open or Closed discoveries, where a scientific problem is represented by a set of articles that discuss a particular topic A, and the
goal is to prove the significance of the associations between A and some other topics
C discussed in the set of articles reachable from the publications relevant to the topic
A. Srinivasan et al [5] improved previous LBD techniques by recognizing that articles
in PubMed have been curated and heavily annotated with controlled vocabulary terms
from the MeSH (Medical Subject Heading) ontology. Srinivasans algorithm considers
that topics A, B and C are MeSH terms used to annotate or index PubMed publications.
Thus, links from topic A to publications in the second layer are built by searching with
topic A on PubMed. Links from publications in the second layer of the graph to MeSH
terms in the third layer, are constructed by extracting the MeSH terms annotations from
the publications and selecting the ones associated with the UMLS (Unified Medical
Language System) semantic types: Gene or Genome; Enzyme; and Amino Acid, Peptide or Protein. The extracted MeSH terms or B set, are used to search on PubMed
and a new set of publications is recovered. Again MeSH term annotations are extracted
from these publications, and the terms of the UMLS types Disease or Syndrome and
Neoplastic Process are retrieved to comprise the set of topics C. Figure 1 illustrates the
LBD experiment reported by Srinivasan et al [5] where the MeSH term curcumin is
associated with top-5 MeSH terms. Edges of the graph are labeled with weights that are
computed by using an extension of the TF*IDF scores; these scores are used to rank the
different paths and determine the potential novel associations.

Although Srinivasans approach enhances previously LBD methods, this solution
may be still costly. To provide an efficient solution, we propose the ontology-based

Curcumin

Topic A

9856863

7602115

10363643

10557090

12807725

9278996

9278995

11245094

3651539

6116594

11481236

Fibroblast
 Growth Factor 2

Nerve Growth
 Factors

Protein
Kinases

Membrane
Proteins

Topics B 

Retina

Spinal
Cord

Testis

Pituitary
Gland

Sciatic
 Nerve

Topics C 

Fig. 1. Example of a Literature-Based Discovery experiment where the MeSH curcumin is related
to the retinal disease
?

?

?
system BioNav that provides a framework to discover potential novel associations between drugs and diseases. In this demonstration, we will use the Srinivasans experiment
to show effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed discovery techniques. The paper
is comprised of three additional sections: BioNav is presented in section 2, section 3
describes the use cases to be demonstrated, and conclusions are given in section 4.

2 The BioNav Architecture

In Figure 2 we present the BioNav architecture [6]. BioNav is comprised of four main
components: a Catalog, a Query Optimizer, a Source Path Discovery component, and a
Semantic Link Discovery Engine.

Literature-Based
Discovery
Services

Health and 
Life Science
Ontologies

Cloud of 

Linked Data 

Source

Descriptions

Catalog

Ontology
Statistics

Ontology
Source

Linking Data

User's
queries

SPARQL-based API

Query Optimizer

Source Path 
Discovery
Component

Semantic Link 
Discovery Engine

Cloud of Linked 

Data

Fig. 2. The BioNav System

The Catalog maintains information about the sources and data that comprise the
Cloud of Linked Data; also ontologies are used to describe the meaning of the data.
Queries are expressed in terms of the ontology concepts and they are evaluated against
the data stored in the Cloud. The result of evaluating a query corresponds to a list of
MeSH terms that are semantically associated with terms in the query.

Once a discovery query is received, the parser checks if it is syntactically correct,
and cost-based optimization techniques are performed to identify an efficient query
execution. An execution plan corresponds to an ordering of the concepts referred in the
query, and minimizes the cardinality of the intermediate facts that need to be computed
to answer a query and the execution time [4].

Once the input query is optimized, it is rewritten in terms of the data sources that need
to be accessed to evaluate the query; a graph-based meta-heuristic Best-First is used to
enumerate the paths between data sources that need to be traversed to evaluate the query.
Source paths are evaluated by traversing the sources in the order specified in the path.

M.-E. Vidal et al.

The answer of the query will be comprised of paths in the Cloud of Linked Data that
are locally stored in the BioNav catalog. Paths in the query answer will be computed
by traversing the source paths. BioNav uses link-analysis and authority-flow ranking
metrics to rank the discovered associations. BioNav ranking techniques assume that the
data paths to be ranked comprise a layered graph lgODG=(Vlg, Elg) of k layers, l1, ..., lk.
Odd layers are composed of MeSH terms while even layers are sets of publications. An
edge from a term b to a publication p indicates that p is retrieved by the PubMed search
engine when b is the search term. An edge from a publication p to a term b represents
that p is annotated with b. Each edge e = (b, p)(resp., e = (p, b)) between the layers li
and li+1 is annotated with the T F  IDF that represents how relevant is the term b in
the collection of documents in li+1, or a document relevance regarding to a set of terms.
The most important terms or publications correspond to the highly ranked Mesh terms
or publications in the last layer of the lgODG. In this paper we focus on an extension of
the Object Rank [1,2] and Path Count [3] metrics for layered graphs or layered graph
Weighted Path Count (lgWP), which is defined as follows:

A ranking vector R of the target objects in the layered Open Discovery graph lgODG

of k layers is defined by a transition matrix A and an initial ranking vector Rini:

R = Ak1Rini = (

k1

l=1

A) Rini

An entry A[u, v] in the transition matrix A, where u and v are two data objects in lgODG,
corresponds to (u, v) or 0. The value of (u, v) is the weight that represents how relevant is the object u for the object v. Nodes with high lgWP scores are linked by many
nodes or linked by highly scored nodes.
?

?

?
A[u, v] =

(u, v) if (u, v)  Elg,

otherwise.

To speed up the tasks of computing the lgWP, we build a Bayesian network with the
knowledge encoded in the layered Open Discovery graph, and we perform a Direct
Sampling algorithm to traverse the network and just visit the publications or MeSH
terms that conduce to potential novel discoveries. This sampling approach has the ability to identify a large number of the potential novel discoveries, while a reduced number
of nodes that need to be visited by at least one order of magnitude.

3 Demonstration of Use Cases

In this demonstration, we will show the different steps of the BioNav LBD process
in several real-world experiments. The objective is to show the applicability and performance of BioNav for the top-5 diseases that can be treated with the MeSH terms
curcumin and aloe. We will demonstrate the following scenarios:

 We show effectiveness by demonstrating the process to compute the potential novel
associations between the substance curcumin and MeSH terms that correspond to
diseases. We use a ranking metric lgWP to discriminate the potential novel discov-
eries. Weights in the edges of the graph represent the relevance of the MeSH terms
?

?

?
or publications, and they are computed by using an extension of the T F  IDF
scores. We show that the top-5 MeSH terms in the last layer of the graph correspond to 80% of the top-5 potential novel diseases discovered by Srinivasan
et al. [5].

 We show efficiency by computing the number of intermediate and target MeSH
terms and publications that need to be visited to identify the novel associations.
In BioNav, properties of lgWP are exploited with approximate methods to avoid
traversing MeSH terms or publications that do not directly or indirectly link a potential novel discovery. We show that for the MeSH terms curcumin and aloe, the
number of visited MeSH terms and publications can be reduced by at least one
order of magnitude when these approximate methods are executed.

 Finally, we show the different steps of the open LBD process by selecting a MeSH
term that corresponds to a drug or substance, and the potential novel associations
of this term with MeSH terms that correspond to diseases. We discuss the impact
of the proposed techniques in the Linked Data Cloud.

4 Conclusions

In this demonstration, we present BioNav, an ontology-based tool that supports the discovery of semantic associations between linked data. We demonstrate how link-analysis
and authority-based ranking metrics can be used in conjunction with ontology annotations on linked data, to discover potential novel discoveries; also we demonstrate how
the properties of the ranking metrics can be exploited to avoid traversing MeSH terms
and publications that do not conduce to novel potential discoveries. We show real-world
use cases that suggest BioNav is able to efficiently discover almost all the associations
identified by state-of-the-art approaches.
