Global Semantic Graph as an Alternative

Information and Collaboration Infrastructure

Yan Shvartzshnaider

School of Electrical and Information Engineering,

The University of Sydney, Australia

yshv6985@uni.sydney.edu.au

www.ee.usyd.edu.au

Abstract. We propose the development of a Global Semantic Graph
(GSG) as the foundation for future information and collaboration-centric
applications and services. It would provide a single abstraction for stor-
ing, processing and communicating information based on globally interlinked semantic resources. The GSG adopts approaches and methods
from the Semantic Web and thus facilitates a better information sharing
abstraction.

1 Problem and Motivation

New and emerging Web technologies are gradually transforming the way information is communicated. In particular, popular social networks sites such as
Facebook, MySpace and Twitter represent a real shift in the communication
paradigm. The latest paradigm puts the focus on information itself and draws
on collaboration methods between users, applications and services. The core
building block for collaboration between applications is sharing/syncing of information or state, however, now it is not just about syncing within a specific
application or context, but rather into a single global context. A prime example
of such is the recently unveiled Google Wave [1], where users collaborate within
a shared context of a single document (i.e., Wave). Despite their enhanced ca-
pabilities, however, Google Wave and other upcoming technologies are strictly
limited to social interactions and operate in isolation from other existing Web
applications.

Therefore, as the Internets usage patterns gradually become more involved
with multiple interactions between a variety of services and systems, there is an
increasing demand for an architecture and infrastructure for interconnectivity
and information exchange between applications on a global level. Although some
applications may interoperate, for example, an email client might have an access
to a contacts manager[2], the current Internet architecture does not provide
the desired interoperability[3] as there is no consistent approach for allowing
interoperation and a system wide exchange of data between applications[2]. So,
each application operates on a separate data structure and is unaware of related
and relevant data in other applications[2].

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 483487, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

Y. Shvartzshnaider

Motivated by these shortcomings of the Internet architecture and inspired
by the new collaboration approaches, we propose a standardised architecture
for information capture as well as communication between different information
realms in the form of a global semantic graph (GSG). The GSG is a persistent,
globally shared information space that is securely accessible and manipulated
from/by any application and service.

In other words, the GSG forms a single global context within which the applications sync their respective data and state, so that it can be accessed and
used for a variety of collaboration and interoperability purposes.

2 Approach and Methodology

In our approach, as depicted by Figure 1, we propose to have all future collaboration and communication processes carried out via the GSG. The GSG adopts approaches and methods from the Semantic Web that provides the means to build
the semantic bridges necessary for data exchange and application integration[2].
It is essentially, large-scale distributed tuple store to which applications and services simply publish their internal state changes via simple tuple insertion
while a subscription is essentially a standing query that keeps the internal
state synchronised with any new information provided by others.
We are currently interested in the following research questions:

1. How to insure good load balancing, scalability and information routing ca-

pabilities in a global storage system?

2. What is most efficient way to implement the pub/sub paradigm on top of a

scalable semantic graph?

3. What is a proper security model that will work well with the GSG?

Fig. 1. The GSG combines Network, Database and Semantic Web in a single abstrac-
tion. Information is filtered by the subscription to a particular context pattern (e.g.
Johns emails) and then mapped on to a specific application (e.g. message reader).
?

?

?
To answers the above questions we are examining the work in the following

research areas:
Large tuple store. We are considering the utilisation of a DHT-based Structured
P2P overlays distributed storage system. However, while, on one hand it provides efficient data item discovery and uniform load distribution, in addition to
self-organisation and node failure tolerance, on the other hand the DHT inherently does not support much needed wildcard and multi-attribute queries.
Publish/Subscribe communication paradigm. Our approach builds on evaluation
of long-standing queries, also called continuous queries, which are issued once
and remain in the system to return results every time the database is updated.
We are looking at porting this approach to a large-scale distributed tuple store
where an active standing query evaluation would act as a filter on the stores data
and effectively provide a pub/sub service. In the case of the GSG, a standing
query is essentially a set of tuple templates (or conditions) that return matching
tuples. Therefore, an implementation of an efficient pattern matching algorithm
(e.g. RETE [4]) with data-dependent, dynamic template re-writing on top of a
distributed environment might serve as a possible solution.
Reasoning. The GSG architecture provides support to anytime distributed rea-
soning, similarly to the MARVIN [5] platform. Reasoning agents compute the
deductive closure of the subscribed parts of the graph, and publish the results
back into the GSG.
Security. We have some thoughts that involve using Named Graphs [6] for authentication and authorisation controls, however these initial ideas require further research and discussions with security experts.

To address above challenges we plan to follow the following research method-
ology: first, we will conduct an extensive literature review of current state-of-
the-art technologies and methods in order to better understand them. Second,
we plan to implement an efficient pattern matching algorithm and integrate it
into a prototype system. Next, we will deploy the prototype system on top of
a distributed environment through a testbeds framework (for LAN and WAN).
Finally, we seek to evaluate the results and in order to optimise the system for
better overall performance.

3 Results

This PhD research is a continuation of an Engineering Honours project thesis
which looked into the GSG as an alternative to the Internets information communication infrastructure. In particular, we were interested to see how the GSG
abstraction impacts on the design and implementation of new services. That
research project was awarded The Best Research Project prize in the Engineering Sydney Research Conversazione 20091, organised by The University

1 http://www.eng.usyd.edu.au/engineeringsydney/conversazione.shtml

Y. Shvartzshnaider

of Sydney. We are currently in the process of implementing and subsequently
testing the GSG prototype. In particular, we have developed a basic prototype
of a pub/sub system based on the RETE [4] algorithm. At the time of writ-
ing, the prototype was successfully deployed on top of the OMF (cOntrol and
Management Framework)2 testbed.

4 Related Work

The implementation of the GSG builds on many existing standards and systems.
Due to space restrictions, we only discuss here related work highlights, in two
key research areas: globally distributed content storage and the publish-subscribe
communication paradigm.
Distributed storage: The increasing demand for online services has prompted
a number of research efforts both in the academic community and the industry
to develop a robust and scalable storage systems.

For example, Amazons Dynamo [7] is a highly available key-value global storage system. Dynamo is guided by Amazons e-commerce target requirements,
which are mainly concerned with providing an always-on experience, even at
a cost of temporarily sacrificing information consistency. Consequently, Dynamo
completely lacks any security or data integrity mechanisms as it was designed
to operate in a fully trusted domain. Nevertheless, there are a number of Dy-
namos design aspects and assumptions that we see useful in relation to the GSG
implementation. These include the use of a Distributed Hash Table (DHT) for
data storage and routing, the always-writeable data store assumption (i.e. no
updates, only writes), failures handling, versioning and replica synchronisation
protocols.

In other related work, RDFPeers [8], one of the first distributed RDF stores

was developed on top of Multi-Attribute Addressable Network (MAAN) [9].
RDFPeers supports atomic, disjunctive and conjunctive multi-predicate RDF
queries, however it suffers from poor load balancing capabilities [10].
Publish/Subscribe communication paradigm: The implementation of a
pub/sub schema on a global, Internet like scale is still an open research prob-
lem. Interesting work is being done by the EU funded PSIRP3 project [11] that
aims to develop an information-centric internetworking architecture based on
the publish-subscribe paradigm[12]. The PSIRP project employs label switching forwarding to deliver information[3] and in this it differs to our approach
described in Section 1.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

We have described our vision and motivation for a new Internet informationcentric collaboration architecture in a form of a global semantic graph (GSG).

2 http://omf.mytestbed.net/
3 Publish-Subscribe Internet Routing Paradigm
?

?

?
GSGs design is motivated by the poor ability of Internets architecture to provide the desired interoperability between applications [3]. The GSG is a persis-
tent, distributed global graph that provides storage as well as publish/subscribe
based communication. It differs from classical pub-sub systems in that publications to it permanently persist, and that the subscriptions are on the shared
graph and not on the individual publications.

Our approach builds on many existing standards and systems that need to
work together. Therefore, the implementation aspects include many challenges in
a wide range of research areas. In particular, we wish to find a way to facilitate
multi-attribute and range queries over distributed large-scale storage systems
without compromising scalability and load balancing properties. Moreover, implementing a pub/sub communication paradigm on a global scale based on a
persistent shared-state, together with the security aspects, is a clear must for a
global system.

To seek answers to these and other related research questions, we plan to follow
the methodology set out in Section 1, to develop a prototype implementation
for the GSG.
