 

A Software Tool for Visualizing, Managing and  

Eliciting SWRL Rules 

Saeed Hassanpour, Martin J. OConnor, and Amar K. Das 

Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research  

MSOB X215, 251 Campus Drive, Stanford, California, USA 94305 
{saeedhp,martin.oconnor,amar.das}@stanford.edu 

Abstract.  SWRL  rule  are  increasingly  being  used  to  represent  knowledge  on 
the Semantic Web. As these SWRL rule bases grows larger, managing the resulting complexity can become a challenge. Developers and end-users need rule 
management tools to tackle this complexity. We developed a rule management 
tool  called  Axiome  that  aims  to  address  this  challenge.  Axiome  support  the 
paraphrasing  of  SWRL  into  simple  English,  the  visualization  of  the  structure 
both  of  individual  rules  and  of  rule  bases,  and  supports  the  categorization  of 
rules based on an analysis of their syntactic structure. It also supports the automatic  generation  of  rule  acquisition  templates  to  facilitate  rule  elicitation. 
Axiome  is  available  as  a  plugin  to  the  Protege-OWL  ontology  development  
environment. 

Keywords:  Rule  Management,  Rule  Elicitation,  Rule  Visualization,  Rule  
Paraphrasing, Rule Categorization, OWL, SWRL.  

1   Introduction 

SWRL rules [4] are increasingly being used to represent knowledge on the Semantic 
Web.  As the size of rule bases increases, users can face problems in understanding the 
content of these rule bases and managing the complexity of resulting knowledge. To 
support  this  rule  management  task,  and  to  assist  in  the  rapid  exploration  and 
understanding of rule bases, we have developed a tool that assists in the interpretations 
of rule bases through the generation of high-level abstractions of rule base structure. In 
particular,  this  software  uses  rule  paraphrasing  and  rule  visualization  to  help  nonspecialists understand and manage potentially complex rule bases. It also supports the 
automatic  detection  of  common  patterns  in  rule  bases  through  the  categorization  of 
rules into related groups. These categorizations are used as a basis of rule elicitation 
functionality  that assists non-specialists in developing new rules.  

This tool is called Axiome [3] and was developed as a plug-in to the popular Pro-
tege-OWL ontology development environment. It provides an array of tools for managing SWRL rule bases in OWL ontologies. It supports visual rule base exploration, 
automated  rule  categorization,  rule  paraphrasing,  and  rule  elicitation  functionality 
with the goal of facilitating the management of large SWRL rule bases. 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 381385, 2010. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

S. Hassanpour, M.J. OConnor, and A.K. Das 

2   Axiome: Core Features 

Axiome  has  five  main  functional  areas,  which  are  available  as  sub-tabs  within  the 
plug-in: (1) a Rule Graph tab that provides a graph structure to browse and explore 
the SWRL rule base; (2) a Rule Visualization tab to visualize individual rules; (3) a 
Rule Paraphrasing tab that displays an English-like text explanation for each rule; (4) 
a Rule Categorization tab to automatically categorize rules in a rule base; and (5) a 
Rule Elicitation tab that provides a graphical templates to acquire new rules based on 
analysis of existing rules in a rule base. A Rule Browser component is permanently 
displayed to show a tree-table representation of the SWRL rules in an ontology. This 
tree-table enables users to explore the rule base and launch any of five sub-tabs for the 
rule or group being explored.  

2.1   Rule Graph 

The Rule Graph tab provides a graphical representation of a SWRL rule base (Figure 1). 
Each rule in the rule base  is  shown as a  node; edges between two  nodes indicate  the 
SWRL atoms shared by the rules and the dependency direction. A number of graphical 
layouts  are  supported.  The  JUNG  visualization  framework  [2]  was  used  to  generate 
graph layouts. Search functionality is also provided. Rules matching a search term can 
be visually highlighted in the graph. Rule groups and dependencies between rules can 
also  be  indicated  visually.  Different  types  of  dependency  groups  can  be  filtered  and 
indicated separately in the dependency graph. Also, cyclical dependencies between rules 
can be found and visually highlighted. 

 
Fig. 1. An example of a rule base visualization in Axiomes Rule Graph tab. This visualization 
shows the dependencies between rules in a clinical care auditing rule base.  

 
?

?

?
2.2   Rule Visualization 

The Rule Visualization tab (Figure 2) allows the arrangement of atoms in a rule to be 
visualized  as  a  tree  structure.  These  trees  are  generated  by  performing  a  depth-first 
search  for  each  variable  chain  in  the  rule.  A  number  of  heuristics  are  employed  to 
ensure that the most significant clauses in a rule are given more prominence [1]. 

Fig. 2. An example of the visualization of a simple rule in the Rule Visualization tab 

2.3   Rule Paraphrasing 

The Rule Paraphrasing tab (Figure 3) uses a similar approach to build a tree structure 
for  each  rule  and  then  uses  additional  heuristics  to  generate  understandable  English 
paraphrases of that rule [1]. 

 

Fig. 3. An example of rule paraphrase generated by Axiomes Rue Paraphrasing tab. The rule is 
selected from a clinical care auditing rule base. 

S. Hassanpour, M.J. OConnor, and A.K. Das 

2.4   Rule Categorization 

The Rule Categorization tab uses the data structure that is generated for the rule visualization and paraphrasing tabs to automatically group rules with a similar syntactic 
structure [1]. It then graphically displays the results of this grouping. These groupings 
can then be used in the Rule Graph tab when exploring the rule base. 

2.5   Rule Elicitation 

The Rule Elicitation tab (Figure 4) provides graphical rule templates to facilitate acquisition of rules. It generates these templates using the syntactic structures generated 
for  rule  grouping.  Users  can  select  an  appropriate  rule  group  and  then  generate  a 
graphical acquisition template to enter rules  with the structure of other rules in that 
group. 

Fig. 4. Screen shot of Axiomes Rule Elicitation tab. This tab can automatically generate a rule 
acquisition template from an existing rule group. 

 

3   Summary 

We  have  described  Axiome,  a  free,  open-source  Protege-OWL  plug-in  to  support 
SWRL  rule  management.  We  have  shown  how  the  various  features  of  the  tool  can 
facilitate understanding of SWRL rule bases through rule base graphing, rule visuali-
zation,  and  rule  paraphrasing.  The  tool  also  supports  the  extension  of  rule  bases 
through  the  elicitation  of  new  rules  using  rule  templates.  It  is  included  as  one  the 
default plug-ins in the latest Protege-OWL 3.4 release [3]. We are currently testing its 
utility  in  the  development  and  management  of  biomedical  rule  bases.    We  are  also 
implementing  a  web-based  version,  which  will  to  be  available  as  a  plugin  to  Web 
Protege. 

 
?

?

