Computational and Crowdsourcing Methods for

Extracting Ontological Structure from

Folksonomy

Huairen Lin and Joseph Davis

Knowledge Discovery and Management Research Group,

School of IT, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia

{lin,jdavis}@it.usyd.edu.au

Abstract. This paper investigates the unification of folksonomies and
ontologies in such a way that the resulting structures can better support
exploration and search on the World Wide Web. First, an integrated
computational method is employed to extract the ontological structures
from folksonomies. It exploits the power of low support association rule
mining supplemented by an upper ontology such as WordNet. Promising
results have been obtained from experiments using tag datasets from
Flickr and Citeulike. Next, a crowdsourcing method is introduced to
channel online users search efforts to help evolve the extracted ontology.

1 Introduction

Social tagging systems, such as Flickr1 , Delicious2, have recently emerged as
some of the rapidly growing web 2.0 applications. The product of this kind of
informal social classification structure, also known as folksonomy, has provided
a convenient way that allows online users to collectively annotate and categorize
large number of distributed resources from their own perspectives. However, as
the amount of resources annotated using folksonomy has increased significantly,
exploration and retrieval of the annotated resources poses challenges due to its
flat and non-hierarchical structure with unsupervised vocabularies.

At the same time, the development of semantic web is creating a cyberspace
that contains resources with relations among each other and well-defined machinereadable meaning. In this vision, ontology is the enabling technology for most of
the semantic applications, such as semantic search. However, there are significant
challenges to be overcome before we can build tools for sophisticated semantic
search. It is not easy to establish a single and unified ontology as a semantic backbone for a large number of distributed web resources, and manual annotation of
resources requires skilled professionals or ontology engineers [1]. Furthermore, ontology needs to be constantly maintained to adapt the knowledge emerging from
daily work of users [2].

1 flickr.com Flickr is an online photo management and sharing application.
2 delicious.com Delicious is a social bookmarking service.

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 472477, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
?

?

?
The goals of our research is to extract ontological structure from folksonomy
and to facilitate its automatic evolution with changing usage patterns, in such
a way that the resulting structure can better support semantics-based browsing
and searching of online resources. With the unification of the seemingly exclusive features of folksonomy and ontology, they can complement each other by
providing full advantage of colloquial terms from folksonomy and semantic relations from ontology. We can exploit the semantic relation in the ontological
structure to satisfy users query or navigation requests using terms that they are
familiar with in order to access millions of annotated resources, and translating
and integrating the resources from different sources.

2 State of the Art

Computational Approaches. There are several promising techniques for extracting knowledge from the existing resources, such as hierarchical clustering
[3], statistical model [4], and association rules mining [5]. Most of hierarchical
clustering algorithms are based on bottom-up methods. First it computes pairwise tag similarities, and then merges most similar tags into groups. After that,
pairs of groups are merged as one until all tags are in the same group [3]. Association rule mining has also been adopted to analyse and structure folksonomies.
The output of association rule mining on a folksonomy dataset are association
rules like A  B, which implies that users assigning the tag A to some resources
often tend to also assign the tag B to them [5].

To further discover the relationships within tags in clusters, several existing
upper ontology resources can be used as references, such as WordNet and other
semantic web resources. Ontology mapping and matching techniques are commonly applied to identify relationships between individual tags, between tags
and lexical resources, and between tags and elements in an existing ontology.
For example, by mapping apple and fruit in a food ontology, we can find the
relation that apple is a subclass of fruit [6,7].
Crowdsourcing Human Computation. While the most sophisticated computational techniques cannot substitute the participation of knowledge engi-
neers, the recently proposed crowdsourcing method provides new ways to have
users engage in ontology engineering and to aggregate their deep knowledge
through a mass collaboration technique [8][9]. A computer program that can
attract humans interest, fulfill their needs, and collect, interpret humans solution is important. Ontogame [10] proposed a game for ontology building. One
of the game scenarios is to asks users to check the structure and abstraction
from random wiki pages. Recently, experiments show that online service such as
freeware, or a successful login procedure [11] can also be used to motivate public
users to participate in a specific task. With a purpose-designed system, we will
be also able to embed the task of building and maintaining ontologies into users
everyday work process and create the conditions for the ontology to continuously evolve without the help of knowledge engineers [2]. In [12], a semantically
enriched bookmarks navigation system provides functionality that enables users

H. Lin and J. Davis

to reject or accept the more general/narrow tags. These inputs were recorded
for further ontology maintenance.

In summary, although several computational approaches have been proposed
to bring structure to folksonomies, they do not come without limitations. These
include the inability to decide the super/sub class relations of terms generated by
association rule mining. Such problem can be partially solved by introducing an
upper ontology such as WordNet. However, such an approach can only deal with
the standard terms and has no effect on terms that do not appear in the upper
ontology. Moreover, several attempts have shown that crowdsourcing human
computation is promising method to bring non-experts together to tackle some
difficult problems. These include problems like ontology refinement and evolution
which normally need domain experts participation.

3 Methodology

In this paper, our research concerns following specific research problems: (1)
How to extract shared vocabularies from large folksonomy datasets? (2) How to
find the semantic relations for these shared vocabularies? (3) How to handle the
non-standard tags in the folksonomies? For instance, terms like folksonomy,
ESWC that cannot be found in traditional dictionary. (4) How can the resulting ontological structure be automatically evolved with the constant change of
domain knowledge and patterns of usage?

We first propose an integrated computational approach to extract ontological
structures. Our approach combines the knowledge extracted from folksonomies
using data mining techniques with the relevant terms from an existing upperlevel ontology. Specifically, low support association rule mining is used to analyze
a large subset of a folksonomy. Knowledge is expressed in the form of new relationships and domain vocabularies. We further divided the tag word-formation
into standard tag, compound tag and jargon tag and handle them respectively.
Standard tags in the vocabulary are mapped to WordNet to get semantic rela-
tions. Jargon tags and user defined compounds are then incorporated into the
hierarchy based on domain knowledge extracted from folksonomy. Thus, the
hidden semantic knowledge embedded in the folksonomies is transformed into
formalized knowledge in the form of ontological structures.

A semantic search assist is designed based on crowdsourcing model to update
the extracted ontology for evolving folksnomy while it suggests helpful search
terms and semantic relationships to help refine users search. First, we elicit
the inputs from users by providing terms semantically related with their query
keywords and candidate semantic relationships such as is-a after user conducts
a normal search. With this assist, user can make explicit the semantic concept of
what s/he is looking for by simply selecting the related term provided by ontology
and assigning the relationship between the query keyword and related term. The
semantic search engine will then return better result with a reasoning technology
based on the disambiguated query. For example, by appointing apple as is-a
kind of computer, the system will expand the results to more specific class such
?

?

?
as Mac or a individual model such as MacBook Air and remove results belong
to fruit. We then collect and aggregate these terms and relationships from
different search sessions. Every user-assigned relationship is recorded even it is a
disagreement with existing knowledge. The long-term records will be split into
several clusters to reflect knowledge from different domains. We assume that
the user specified semantic relationship is correct based on some aggregation
mechanisms such as the rule of majority. After that, we introduce a mechanism
to periodically merge changes with old version of ontology and release improved
version. In short, we show how users search intent can be captured to help to
evolve the ontology while helping to improve their desired search results.

We attempt to engage web users in evaluation tasks using a crowdsourcing
medium such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk)3. Based on this service,
we ask users to manually evaluate the collected term pairs and give monetary
award to every complete task. We will also attempt to verify the quality of
the extracted ontology against other manually built gold standard ontology.
The measurement should reflect how well the extracted terms cover the target
domain and the accuracy of the relationships among the terms, especially for
standard terms. Furthermore, we take the task-based evaluation approach to
measure how far the extracted ontological structure will help to influence and
improve the search result. We investigate four potential application scenarios of
the extracted ontological structures: multi-dimensional views, cataloguing and
indexing, query expansion and tagging suggestion. We will use those widely used
measures such as precision, recall, and F-measure to assess the quality and see
how ontology would improve the search result.

4 Preliminary Results and Future Work

We have implemented a prototype system for the described computational extraction strategy. The implementation and evaluation are reported in [13]. Through
the investigation into four kinds of word-formations (standard tags, jargon tags,
compound tags, and nonsense tags) in folksonomies, our approach has produced
promising initial results using two datasets from Flickr and Citeulike.

To explore potential application scenarios with the resulting ontological struc-
ture, we are building a semantic photo organizing system, SmartFolks, based on
a subset of Flickr image collection. With the extracted ontology as background
knowledge and Jena4 tool kit as semantic web framework, the system enables
user to find the resources through the navigation of ontological structure or to
get better results with the technology of semantic web such as ontology based
query expansion. This demo site is available at http://smartFolks.thetag.org

Our future work is focusing on the ontology evolution using crowdsourcing
method. A semantic search assist component will be integrated in the SmartFolks
system to channel users search efforts for ontology evolution.

3 mturk.com MTurk is a web based service that enable developers outsource certain

task to human across the world. The unit work typically costs only few cents.

4 jena.sourceforge.net/ Jena is a framework for building Semantic Web applications.

H. Lin and J. Davis

5 Conclusion

Recent research indicates that there are significant challenges in the area of
ontological structure extraction from collaborative tagging systems. The integrated framework proposed in this thesis allows a systematic approach to this
emerging area. We have not only identified computational methods for ontology extraction, but also presented a proposal for crowd-sourcing model which
is capable of aggregating the human intelligence without the need for the involvement of ontology experts. A semantic search engine is recommended as
the medium for this integration. The application of this conceptual framework
might assist folksonomy based systems to improve the query performance and
enhance the organization of resources. It is hoped that the crowdsourcing approach will complement the computational methods to help create robust ontological resources that can advance the state-of-the-art with respect to semantic
search.
