 

OntoFrame S3: Semantic Web-Based Academic Research 
Information Portal Service Empowered by STAR-WIN 

Seungwoo Lee, Mikyoung Lee, Pyung Kim, Hanmin Jung, and Won-Kyung Sung 

Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information (KISTI),  

335 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Korea 305-806 

{swlee,jerryis,pyung,jhm,wksung}@kisti.re.kr 

Abstract. We have developed a prototype of a practical knowledge-driven semantic portal, OntoFrame S3, which provides various reasoning-based analysis 
services on academic research information. To realize this semantic portal, we 
developed  and  applied  several  Semantic  Web  and  linguistic  technologies. 
Through this demonstration, we will show how Semantic Web technologies can 
be  utilized  for  information  connection  and  fusion  in  the  academic  research  
information service sector and empowered by linguistic knowledge. 

Keywords: Academic research information portal service, semantic search,  
ontology, reasoning, semantic word network. 

1   Introduction 

According to the US National Science Foundation (NSF)1, researchers are spending 
more than half of their total research and development hours for hunting information. 
Thus, to allow researchers to have more time to spend on research and development 
itself, it is crucial to reduce time spent on gathering information.  Currently, leading 
search  engines  only  provide  a  keyword-based  matched  list  as  the  result  of  a  
search  query,  which  is  limited  in  terms  of  accuracy  and  efficiency  of  information 
comprehension. A new type of information service is required that can find the information  desired  by  the  researcher,  and  then  connect,  combine,  and  analyze  it  to  
provide as much value to the user as possible. To address this need, we have developed  a  prototype  of  a  knowledge-driven  semantic  portal,  OntoFrame  S3 2,  which  
provides  various  analysis  services  on  academic  research  information  combining  
OntoFrame and STAR-WIN, which are implemented by Semantic Web and linguistic 
technologies.  

In this demonstration, we will show you various semantic analysis services focused 
on topics and researchers. Topic-focused services include trends, leading researchers 
and researcher networks on a topic and researcher-focused services include research 
areas,  research  outputs,  co-working  researchers,  and  similar  researchers  of  a  re-
searcher. More detail description about these services is given in the next section. 
                                                           
1 http://www.nsf.gov/ 
2 S3 means STAR-WIN-enabled Semantic Service. 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 401405, 2010. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

S. Lee et al. 

2   Related Work 

There are some research information service systems similar to OntoFrame S3. BiomedExperts  (www.biomedexperts.com)  and  Authoratory  (authoratory.com)  provide 
useful  services  such  as  domain  experts,  researcher  and  article  details,  statistics,  researcher  network  and  researcher  map  in  biomedical  domain  mainly  dependent  on 
PubMed3 database. ResearchGATE (researchgate.com) also provides similar network 
community services like domain experts, researcher details, and researcher network. It 
requires users to provide the profiles of their own and colleagues. These service systems  have very similar features to ours in the  viewpoint of service  functions. How-
ever,  they  are  typical  database  applications  based  on  data  mining  technologies 
whereas OntoFrame S3 is developed with Semantic Web technologies such as ontology  and  reasoning,  which  enable  to  achieve  a  flexible  and  precise  service  in  both 
connecting knowledge and planning services. 

3   Technologies Used 

OntoFrame  S3  shows  a  service  example  that  combines  Semantic  Web  technologies, 
implemented on OntoFrame, and linguistic technologies, implemented in STAR-WIN. 
OntoFrame  is  an  information  service  platform  that  uses  Semantic  Web  technolo-
gies. It includes OntoURI  a semantic knowledge management tool that creates ontology instances by referring ontology schemata and resolves co-references between 
ontology  individuals;  and  OntoReasoner    a  reasoning  engine  that  stores  and  infers 
ontology-based RDF triples and answers SPARQL queries. It also involves Mariner  
a  commercial  search  engine  provided  by  DiQuest  (www.diquest.com)    to  provide 
search  functionalities.  STAR-WIN  (Science  &  Technology  Assister    Word  Intelligent Network) is a semantic word network of technical terms that represents semantic 
and conceptual relationships among the terms in science and technology domain. In 
the following subsections, we explain each component in detail. 

3.1   Ontology Engineering 

The goal of OntoFrame S3 is to provide connection, fusion, and analysis services on 
academic research information to enable researchers to effectively obtain information 
needed  for  their  work.  In  order  to  achieve  the  goal,  we  have  developed  the  KISTI 
Reference  and  Academic  Ontologies4.  They  model  research  agents  such  as  persons 
and institutions, their accomplishments such as articles, reports and patents, publications  which  indicate  specific  journal  issues  or  proceedings,  locations  and  topics.  In 
contrast with other research-related ontologies, our ontology connects researchers to 
their affiliations of which they were members at the time they had their accomplish-
ments.  It  also  connects  institutions  to  their  locations  such  as  countries,  states  and 
cities. The ontology schemata are composed of 16 classes and 89 properties, and designed using RDF, RDFS and OWL (strictly, OWL-Lite) vocabularies. 
                                                           
3 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ 
4 http://isrl.kisti.re.kr/ontologies/ReferenceOntology1_0.owl, 
http://isrl.kisti.re.kr/ontologies/AcademicOntology1_0.owl 

 
?

?

?
is 

in 

as 

service 

Currently,  OntoFrame  S3 

a  practical  prototype 
(http://www.ontoframe.kr/S3/english). It contains about 4 million articles in English, 
which have been written by 12.7 million researchers, on 400,000 topics, who work for 
90,000  institutions,  spanning  410,000  locations.  In  total,  the  system  has  a  total  of 
about 826 million RDF triples. These data were populated partly from CiteSeer OAI 
(Open Archive Initiative) metadata5 and partly from NDSL (National Digital Science 
Links) metadata6. We applied an elaborate process to identify and disambiguate samename authors and populate them into ontology instances [1].  

3.2   Storing and Reasoning 

The populated ontology instances are stored and inferred using OntoReasoner [2]. That 
is, OntoReasoner consists of roughly two parts: Triple store and Reasoner. The triple 
store  gets  ontology  instances  and  stores  them  to  back-end  DBMS  such  as  MS-SQL 
Server according to predefined table schema. It also can answer to a query represented 
in  SPARQL,  which  is  converted  into  appropriate  SQL  and  executed.  The  reasoner 
performs  rule-based  reasoning  based  on  RDF  Semantics7 and  OWL  Semantics8 in 
ways of forward-chaining. It currently supports entailments of full RDFS and some of 
OWL vocabularies such as owl:inverseOf, owl:sameAs, and owl:TransitiveProperty. 

3.3   Semantic Word Network 

OntoFrame S3 is empowered by STAR-WIN to get linguistic flexibility. STAR-WIN 
is a semantic work network for Korean language developed by KISTI and represents 
semantic and conceptual relationships between  words [3]. It covers technical terms9 
of science and technology domain. It also includes Korean-English translation information for technical terms. Thus, it is highly applicable to linguistic information applications such as information retrieval and machine translation.  

Linguistic flexibility of OntoFrame S3, provided by STAR-WIN, includes following three points: auto-complete of search keywords, semantic word network for keyword extension, and Korean-English translation of search keyword. Auto-complete of 
keyword also functions as keyword recommendation. Semantic word network shows 
various  relations  such  as  broad  and  narrow  terms,  sibling  terms,  similar  terms  and 
other  related  terms.  Keyword  translation  makes  it  possible  to  query  in  Korean  although the ontology instances only have English literals. 

4   Services 

 

OntoFrame S3 is designed to be topic and researcher-centric (Fig. 1). This is because 
authors  (i.e.,  researchers)  and  research  topics  are  useful  starting  points  for  finding 
academic  research  information.  When  a  user  performs  a  search,  a  keyword-based 
search  engine  is  used  to  find  results,  but  URIs  for  the  terms  are  also  retrieved  and  
                                                           
5 http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/oai.html 
6 http://www.ndsl.kr 
7 http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-mt/ 
8 http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-semantics/ 
9 Currently, it contains about 350,000 technical terms. 

S. Lee et al. 

Fig. 1. OntoFrame S3 service snapshot 

 

used to search the ontology instances for more information relating to the term. The 
results are presented to the user by appropriate visualization.  

The semantic portal currently implements and provides many service components 
such as topic trends, identification of leading researchers or research institutes for a 
topic, main research topics of a researcher, researcher publication network, research 
trends  of  a  publication  network,  recommendation  of  associated  researchers,  similar 
researchers,  similar  papers,  and  geographical  distribution  of  researchers.  These  services provide knowledge that has been analyzed by connecting and fusing fractional 
information along with proper visualization. 

The  service  prototype  has  been  designed  and  developed  considering  user-centric 
service layout and usability. We selected three main services considering user preference and distinguished these services from add-on services considering service prior-
ity. Through this, each service component was properly placed at main area or right 
area of service user interface. 

5   Conclusion 

We have developed a prototype of a knowledge-driven semantic portal, OntoFrame S3, 
which provides various analysis services on academic research information combining 
OntoFrame and STAR-WIN. This semantic portal service shows how Semantic Web 

 
?

?

?
technologies  can  be  utilized  for  information  connection  and  fusion  in  the  academic 
research information service sector and empowered by linguistic knowledge. 

We will continue to evaluate the services and develop new useful services to open 
real services to the public. Thus, we plan to measure the usefulness of service attributes  by  comparatively  evaluating  OntoFrame  S3  and  other  similar  service  systems 
mentioned in the Related Work. 
