 

Towards Trust in Web Content Using Semantic Web 

Technologies 

Qi Gao 

TU Delft, Web Information Systems, EWI/ST/WIS, 

P.O. Box 5031, 2600 GA Delft, The Netherlands 

q.gao@tudelft.nl 

Abstract. Since the amount of user-generated content has been sharply increasing  in  recent  years,  mainly  due  to  Web  2.0  technology  and  effects  of  social 
networking, it is necessary to build mechanisms to assess the reliability of the 
content. On the web this notion of trust is a key ingredient for an effective manipulation of knowledge on a (world-wide) web scale. The web of trust has thus 
become an important research area both for web science and semantic web. In 
the PhD research we have laid out for us, we focus on the notion of trust and 
methods for representing and computing trust of users in the web content. This 
paper outlines the vision at the start of the PhD period on the research problem 
and the semantic web-based approach to solve that problem.  

Keywords: trust, web science, semantic web. 

1   Problem Statement and Motivation 

The volume of web content is sharply increasing in the recent years mainly because of 
Web 2.0 technology and applications for social networking, e.g. discussion boards in 
online  communities,  social  network  profiles,  videos,  photos,  reviews  and  ratings  of 
products, hotels, restaurants.  

With  the  enormous  and  still  growing  amount  of  content  on  the  Web,  it  becomes 
more and more necessary for users to be able to assess the trustworthiness of content 
on  the  Web.  For  example,  it  will  help  for  information  retrieval  systems  or  recommender systems to find the most relevant and reliable content that matches the users 
preference. Building a trust mechanism for the Web is also helpful to make the interaction between users and content more reliable and controllable.  

Dealing with trust on the Web is a difficult and complex task, since it involves a 
wide range of factors such as user history, user preferences, demographical information and the context in  which the trust relationship is built. These factors have very 
different characteristics and it is a challenge to measure these factors. So, it is necessary to create an approach for modeling and computing the trustworthiness of content 
on the Web for individual user.  

Ideally, there would be a trust model that tells for each user and each content element how trustworthy that content element is for that user. A giant barrier for obtaining such a trust model is that if we would have obtained accurately the trustworthiness 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6089, pp. 457461, 2010. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 

Q. Gao 

for a given set of users and content elements, it is very hard to predict the trustworthiness for new content.  

Instead of focusing on the content, many approaches therefore choose to build the 
notion of trust and trust metrics within networks of people, agents or peers that have 
trust relationships between them [3]. Such trust networks are often obtained by taking 
explicit  trust  relationships  between  pairs  of  people  firstly  and  then  propagating  the 
trust through the network. In a social environment, such a trust network can easily be 
acquired from social networks of friends or connected people. The trustworthiness of 
content that is unknown for a given user is then predicted in an indirect way by utilizing the trust relationships for that user to other people. 

A  major  shortcoming  with  these  approaches  is  that  they  cannot  adequately  deal 
with the semantics of the content and so we observe that the current approaches are 
limited to work only in a specific context or domain. For example, the trust relationship  predicted  using  a  friends  network  acquired  from  a  website  for  books  does  not 
work effectively in the domain of movies, even for the same people. 

Since it is now feasible to know more of the content's semantics, exploiting explicit 
and implicit representations with semantic web technology and using access to linked 
open  data,  we  see  the  opportunity  to  build  a  better  global  trust  metric.  In  our  ap-
proach, each user maintains the trustworthiness for a set of content elements. Instead 
of propagating this through the network of users, we directly predict the trustworthiness of new, unknown content by analyzing the semantic relationship between these 
two pieces of content. So, by using a more explicit representation of what we know 
about the concept and their relationships,  we  make it possible for the users to get a 
better grip on their trust in content and not only in the people behind the content.   

This PhD work will propose a model for trust of users in Web content in order to 
make the user-oriented exploitation of data on the Web more reliable and controllable. 
In the model we will represent trust with semantic standards and utilize the analysis of 
semantic relations between content elements for the trust computation and inference. 

2   State of the Art 

In this section, we briefly discuss the state-of-the-art of approaches that are related to 
our work. The Web of trust [4] has become an important area both for academia and 
industry.  Many  trust  metrics  have  been  developed.  Each  approach  stresses  various 
characteristics of trust.  Artz and Gil [1] demonstrated a comprehensive overview of 
existing trust metrics in computer science and semantic web. Due to the lack of space 
we focus on two tasks that are most relevant to our problem and motivation. 

2.1   Representing Trust 

One category of approaches to representing trust on the Web is based on the concept 
of a Web of Trust that is a network of people, agents or peers with trust relationships. 
Golbeck [3] represented trust within web-based social networks by defining the functional properties of trust. In Rays paper [12], trust is specified as a relationship between a truster and a trustee at a particular time instance and for a particular context. 
Heath and Motta [8] provided a way to collect reviews and ratings data from distributed sources and generated a metric to represent trust relationships, which is used as 

 
?

?

?
an input to a Web-based system with the purpose of information seeking and recom-
mendation. These approaches focus on the trust among users on the Web.  

In  contrast  to  these  approaches,  some  work  has  been  done  related  to  trust  in  the 
content itself. Gil et al. [2] used the term of content trust to acquire trust in the content provided by a web resource. Rich factors are included in their model. However, 
their  work  did  not  provide  a  mechanism  to  deal  with  the  semantic  of  the  content. 
Groth  et  al.  [5]  proposed  a  content-based  trust  assessment  in  electronic  contracts 
based on similarity of content in different contracts. Hartig et al. [7] presented a trust 
model  for  RDF-based  content  for  representing  the  trustworthiness  of  the  data  published  on  the  Web.  But  these  approaches  do  not  provide  a  sufficient  mechanism  to 
represent the trustworthiness of certain content for individual user.  

2.2   Computing Trust 

In computer science, Marsh [10] was the first one to analyze trust as a computational 
concept.  Guha  et  al.  [6]  proposed  a  method  to  propagate  both  trust  and  distrust 
through  social  networks.  In  Zieglers  work  [13],  a  trust  algorithm  called  Appleseed 
has been developed. It employs a spreading activation model that is originally from 
psychology, to produce a trust ranking of individuals in the network. TidalTrust [3] is 
another  algorithm  that  performs  a  breadth-first  search,  using  trust  values  within  the 
social  network.  In  a  trust  network,  it  calculates  trust  values  for  a  sink  node  with  a 
weighted average of the sources neighbors ratings of the sink. Massa [11] proposed 
a trust propagation metric of searching for trustworthy users over the trust network to 
alleviate the cold start problem in a collaborative filtering (CF) algorithm.  

3   Approach 

The  previous  section  addresses  the  lack  of  a  uniform  model  for  representation  and 
computation  of  trust.  We  propose  an  approach  that  concentrates  on  the  following 
research issues: 
  How to represent a trust relationship between a user and web content? 
  How to start to assess the trust value in that trust relationship? 
  How to further compute trust by investigating the semantic relation between dif-

ferent pieces of content? 

We discuss these issues now in more detail. First of all, our approach requires a representation model of trust that defines and represents a trust relationship between a user 
and  content  on  the  Web.  There  are  three  critical  elements  to  be  investigated  in  our 
representation model: the trust value that is a rating to certain content from a certain 
user, the semantics of the content, and the context. The trust model will be formalized 
using RDF-based vocabularies. 

Based  on  this  approach  of  trust  representation,  in  order  to  boot  the  computation 
process of trust,  we first need to acquire initial trust  values. Basically there are two 
solutions:  providing  the  trust  values:  manually  by  users  and  generating  them  automatically by utilizing existing data. For the first one, it is very difficult to choose a set 
of Web content as a sample for rating when our task is not domain specific. Another 

Q. Gao 

disadvantage is that sometimes it is not practical to push the users to give these trust 
ratings.  Since  there  are  already  many  data  sources  that  include  the  users  ratings  
and  reviews  on  the  Web  content  and  more  and  more  web  content  is  enriched  with 
semantic  data,  we  adopt  the  latter  one  as  our  solution  to  start  assessing  the  trust.  
Here we propose two kinds of automatic trust assessment methods: user-based rating 
methods  that  integrate  various  data  of  ratings  and  reviews;  and  semantic-based  
methods that consider meta-information such as provenance to assign the initial trust 
values. 

The third task is the further computation and inference of trust, of which the main 
goal  is  to  predict  a  trust  value  of  web  content  that  the  user  never  rated  or  obtained 
before. Comparing the propagation method we mentioned in section 2, we reach this 
goal by analyzing the semantics of the relationship between two pieces of content, of 
which one already has a trust value and the other one not yet. Given the semantically 
annotated and linked data, it is possible to reveal the  semantic relationship between 
the content. To illustrate, we give a simple example. Using RelFinder[9], a semantic  relation  discovery  tool  for  DBpedia,  we  can  find  the  relationship  between  two 
entities in DBpedia: Johannes Vermeer1 and Night Watch2. By observing the graph of 
paths that represent the relationship, we found six different paths, each of which connects  these  two  entities  by  chaining  several  other  entities  from  the  knowledge  base 
(DBpedia). The discovered entities located in each path can demonstrate the specific 
semantics of the relationship that connects these two requested entities. For example, 
they can be geographically connected because of the entities Netherlands and Am-
sterdam  in  one  path  or  connected  by  artistic  characteristics  because  of  the  entity 
Baroque painting in another path. After  matching these  semantics and context  information such as user preferences to analyze which path is more relevant to the trust 
computation in the specific context, a new trust value can be inferred. 

4   Methodology 

Our methodology for solving the above questions has three main phases. In the first 
phase,  we  will  build  the  representation  model  for  trust,  which  will  take  the  context 
into account. Based on the model, a trust vocabulary will be developed to enable the 
description and access of trust information. In the second phase, based on the representation model and the approach we discussed in the previous section, we will process the computation of trust. For the first implementation, we limit the web content to 
structured  data,  e.g.  DBpedia  or  DBLP,  or  some  web  pages,  e.g.  some  movie  list 
page, which can be easily transferred to structured data. We will develop a browser 
plug-in to recommend a trust value when the user browses the web content. The third 
phase will include the evaluation of our approach. Because of the nature of trust, we 
will  conduct  several  user  studies  to  evaluate  our  representation  and  computation 
methods.  Furthermore,  due  to  the  semantic  web  technologies  that  we  are  using,  we 
will consider uncertainty as a key factor in the evaluation.  

                                                           
1 http://dbpedia.org/ page/Johannes_Vermeer 
2 http://dbpedia.org/page/ Night_Watch_%28painting%29 

 
?

?

?
5   Conclusion 

We identified the lack of a suitable model for trust between user and content on the 
Web.  This  PhD  symposium  paper  sketched  our  approach  that  addresses  these  two 
main problems:  we provide a  mechanism  for an individual user to represent his/her 
trust in certain web content and to assess trust values by collecting data from distributed sources. We also propose to compute the trust by utilizing the semantics of the 
relationship between the various content elements. With our work we hope to make 
the user-centric data exploitation on the web more reliable, efficient and controllable 
than it is today. For the first phase of the PhD work, according to the approach and 
methodology we proposed, the next step is to formalize trust in our scenario. We will 
build a representation model and an RDF-based vocabulary based on which the further actions can be pursued.  
