Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 278286

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Exploring the Geospatial Semantic Web with DBpedia Mobile
Christian Becker, Christian Bizer

Freie Universitat Berlin, Web-based Systems Group, Garystr. 21, D-14195 Berlin, Germany

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 4 May 2009
Received in revised form 27 July 2009
Accepted 16 September 2009
Available online 24 September 2009

Keywords:
Geospatial Semantic Web
Linked Data
Semantic Web
DBpedia
Location-aware applications

The Geospatial Semantic Web makes locations first-class citizens of the Web by representing them as
original Web resources. This allows locations to be described in an open and distributed manner using
the Resource Description Framework and provides for interlinking data about locations between data
sources. In addition to using geo-coordinates to express geographical proximity, the Geospatial Semantic
Web provides for relating locations as well as regions to each other using explicit semantic relationship
types such as containment or shared borders. This article gives an overview of the Geospatial Semantic
Web and describes DBpedia Mobile, a location-aware Semantic Web client that can be used on an iPhone
and other mobile devices. Based on the current GPS position, DBpedia Mobile renders a map indicating
nearby locations from the DBpedia data set. Starting from this map, the user can explore background
information about his surroundings by navigating along data links into other data sources. DBpedia
Mobile has been designed for the use case of a tourist exploring a city. Besides accessing Web data,
DBpedia Mobile also enables users to publish their current location, pictures and reviews to the Semantic
Web so that they can be used by other Semantic Web applications. Instead of simply being tagged with
geographical coordinates, published content is interlinked with a nearby DBpedia resource and thus
contributes to the overall richness of the Geospatial Semantic Web.

 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Todays World Wide Web contains a wealth of geospatially referenced information: business and event listings, news article, blog
posts, encyclopedia articles, transport information, photos, videos
and advertisements all have locations associated with them, either
explicitly or implicitly. Until recently, little effort was made to harness this geospatial component.

The introduction of mapping APIs by services such as Google
Maps,1 Yahoo! Maps,2 and Microsoft Virtual Earth3 led to the
widespread integration of maps into web applications. It also
resulted in a wide spectrum of mapping mashups which display
data from multiple web services on a map.4 Services such as the
photo sharing site Flickr5 and the community-authored encyclopedia Wikipedia6 began encouraging their users to geo-tag content,
i.e. to associate it with geographical coordinates. This allows content to be arranged by geographic location, as for instance shown
by the Wikipedia overlay in Google Maps.

 Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: chris@beckr.org (C. Becker), chris@bizer.de (C. Bizer).

1 http://code.google.com/apis/maps/.
2 http://developer.yahoo.com/maps/.
3 http://dev.live.com/virtualearth/.
4 http://www.programmableweb.com/tag/mapping.
5 http://www.flickr.com/.
6 http://www.wikipedia.org/.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2009.09.004

The term Linked Data [6,10,13] refers to a set of best practices
for publishing structured data on the Web and for setting data-level
links between data items published by different sources. In analogy to the classic Web, data-level links connect data from different
sources into a single global data space, which can be explored by
generic data browsers or can be crawled by Semantic Web search
engines. Technologically, the core idea of Linked Data is to use
HTTP URIs not only for the identification of Web documents, but
also for the identification of arbitrary real-world entities [33]. Data
about these entities is represented using the Resource Description
Framework (RDF) [24]. Whenever one such URI is dereferenced,
the corresponding Web server provides an RDF/XML [5] or RDFa
[1] description of the identified entity. These descriptions may contain links to entities described by other data sources. Links take the
form of RDF triples where the subject of the triple is a URI in the
namespace of one server, while the object of the triple is a URI in
the namespace of the other [10]. The predicate URI of the triple
determines the type of the link. Whenever a predicate URI is deref-
erenced, the corresponding server responds with a RDF Vocabulary
Definition Language (RDFS) or Web Ontology Language (OWL) definition of the link type [9]. These descriptions may in turn contain
links pointing at other vocabularies, thereby defining mappings
between related vocabularies [13].

By applying the Linked Data principles to geographic locations,
the Geospatial Semantic Web is created. The Geospatial Semantic
Web makes it possible to interlink data about locations between
data sources and to relate locations to each other, as well as to

further Web content using explicit typed links, in addition to geographic coordinates. For instance, a location could be linked to its
encompassing locations in an administrative hierarchy (such as
region, state, country), as well as to persons who were born, died or
worked there. Semantic Web clients may then navigate across these
explicit links to retrieve data describing the interlinked entities.

This article aims to show the advantages of a Linked Data
approach to geospatial browsing, and to demonstrate the current
state of the Geospatial Semantic Web. The Geospatial Semantic
Web is described in Section 2. Section 3 introduces DBpedia Mobile,
a location-aware Semantic Web client for mobile devices. Section
4 discusses related work.

2. The Geospatial Semantic Web

The World Wide Web contains a wealth of geospatially referenced information. Content is attached with geo-coordinates,
which allows it to be arranged by geographic location. However,
semantic links between locations are generally not provided, and
data is generally not linked across different data sources.

The Geospatial Semantic Web makes locations first-class citizens of the Web by representing them as original Web resources
that are addressable using URIs. These Web resources can represent
single points of interest as well as areas such as administrative divi-
sions, regions, or countries. The resources may then be described
in an open and distributed manner using RDF.

This approach allows locations to be related to each other
using explicit semantic relationships in addition to simple geo-
coordinates. An example of such a relationship type is the
GeoNames7geoNames:parent-Feature relation, which may be
used to identify administrative hierarchies such as town, region
and country, and thus permits to refer to resources at different
levels of abstraction. For instance, this makes queries such as all
hotels in a region easier to process than with an approach that
relies only on geo-coordinates and would have to take complex
regional boundaries into consideration. A second example is the
factbook:landboundary relationship used by the Linked Data
version of the CIA Factbook8 to identify adjacent countries.

Besides relating locations to each other, the Geospatial Semantic Web also allows other types of Web resources to be related to
locations. For instance, people or organizations are related to locations using the foaf:based near relationship type; photos using
foaf:depiction; web sites using foaf:homepage; and reviews
using rev:hasReview.

These relationships may span Web data sources and thus function as data links connecting the sources. For instance, a data source
providing information about a town may state that another data
source also provides information about the same town using the
owl:sameAs relationship type. This data source may in turn state
that a third data source provides pictures or videos depicting the
town and that further data sources provide listings of companies
that are located in the town. By being connected through data links,
all data that is published according to the Linked Data principles
becomes part of a single global data space [13].

Client applications can access this data space by dereferencing URIs over the HTTP protocol into RDF descriptions [10]. The
retrieved descriptions may in turn contain data links pointing
at resources served by other data sources. By dereferencing the
URIs identifying these resources, clients can navigate between data
sources [7]. Just as the traditional document Web can be crawled by
following hypertext links, the Semantic Web can be crawled by following data links. Applications that work on the crawled data can

provide sophisticated query capabilities, similar to those provided
by conventional relational databases [20,37].

2.1. The Linking Open Data project

A practical testbed for geospatial integration using Semantic Web technologies is the W3C Linking Open Data community
project.9 The project aims to extend the Web with a data commons
by publishing various open-license data sets as RDF on the Web
and by setting data links between data items from different data
sources [12].

As of October 2009, the resulting data space contains around 7.7
billion RDF triples (see footnote 9) describing millions of resources,
including many physical locations. Data sets are often interlinked
using the predicate owl:sameAs to indicate that two items from
distinct data sets refer to the same real-world entity. Fig. 1 shows
data sources that provide location information with a shaded background and illustrates their linkage relationships to other data
sources. In the following, we describe these data sources in more
detail.

 DBpedia: The DBpedia data set has been extracted from Wikipedia
[14]. For currently more than 2.6 millionthings, it features labels
and short abstracts in 30 different languages, 609,000 links to
images and 3,150,000 links to external web pages. The DBpedia
data set contains information about more than 320,000 locations.
Altogether there are around 4,900,000 data links pointing from
DBpedia into other Linked Data sources. Of these links, 300,000
connect locations in DBpedia with locations in Freebase, 300,000
links point at photo collections generated by the flickr TM wrappr,
85,000 links point at data about locations provided by GeoN-
ames, 200 links connect data about countries between DBpedia
and the CIA World Factbook, and 200 links point from DBpedia
to statistical data about European regions provided by EuroStat.
Within DBpedia, locations are frequently interlinked with other
resources using properties such as dbpedia-owl:location,
dbpedia-owl:city and dbpedia-owl:country, which relate a
resource to a location, city or country, or dbpedia-owl:capital,
which relates a country or region to its capital city.
 GeoNames: The GeoNames geographical database provides
data such as names in different languages, feature type and
geo-coordinates for over 8 million places. The predicate geoN-
ames:parentFeature is used to link to a resources parent
within GeoNames, resulting in a feature hierarchy that maps
administrative subdivisions of a country (states, districts, coun-
ties, etc.), and links countries to a continent, which are linked to
a single Earth resource. The Linked Data interface further provides pointers to retrieve a resources children features, nearby
features, and for countries, neighboring countries. GeoNames
contains 85,000 cross-dataset links pointing at DBpedia.
 US Census Data: The RDF version of the US Census data10 comprises population statistics at various geographic levels, on the
order of 1 billion RDF triples. A feature hierarchy links the United
States to its states, districts and counties. Many locations are geographically referenced.
 Freebase: Freebase11 is an online database which users can edit in
a similar fashion as they edit Wikipedia articles today. Freebase
currently contains data about 874,000 locations which is served
as Linked Data on the Web.

7 http://www.geonames.org/.
8 http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/factbook/.

9 http://esw.w3.org/topic/SweoIG/TaskForces/CommunityProjects/

LinkingOpenData.
10 http://www.rdfabout.com/demo/census/.
11 http://www.freebase.com/.

C. Becker, C. Bizer / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 278286

Fig. 1. Data sets that provide geospatial entry points within the Linking Open Data cloud and the data sets they directly link to, as of 04/2009 (adapted from [13]).

 LinkedGeoData: The LinkedGeoData project [4] publishes geo data
collected by the OpenStreetMap12 project as Linked Data on the
Web. Its data structure is composed of individual nodes that represent individual points, and ways that form collections of nodes,
such as roads and rivers. The Linked Data output indicates nearby
features.
 flickr TM wrappr: The flickr TM wrappr13 provides image collections depicting locations. The images are interlinked with
DBpedia using the foaf:depiction relationship type.
 YAGO: The YAGO data set [35] provides type information for locations such as museums, train stations or monuments. Locations
are interlinked with DBpedia.
 CrunchBase: Semantic CrunchBase14 is a Linked Data interface to
CrunchBase, a free directory of technology companies, people,
and investors. It provides geographical coordinates for company
locations. Companies are linked to their DBpedia equivalents.
 Wikicompany: Wikicompany15 is a free content licensed, worldwide business directory that anyone can edit. Like Wikipedia,
it allows the specification of geographical coordinates that are
translated to RDF. Wikicompany entries are interlinked with
DBpedia.
 EuroStat: EuroStat collects statistical information about the European Union. A subset of the EuroStat data about European regions
is served as Linked Data by Freie Universitat Berlin.16

12 http://www.openstreetmap.org/.
13 http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/flickrwrappr/.
14 http://cb.semsol.org/.
15 http://wikicompany.org/.
16 http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/eurostat/.

 Revyu: The Revyu rating website [21] collects user reviews about
anything, including locations. Reviews are interlinked with the
corresponding DBpedia entities.
 FOAF profiles: The Friend of a Friend project [17] facilitates
machine-readable Web homepages for people, groups and com-
panies. FOAF profiles often include location information in the
form of geographical coordinates. Other profiles use DBpedia URIs
to express the location where the profile owner lives, works or
was born.

2.2. Geo-coordinates and data links

Web resources that are tagged with geo-coordinates and connected to other data sources via data links can be used as entry
points into the Geospatial Semantic Web. By correlating a geographic position with those of geo-tagged resources within linked
data sets, nearby resources can be found. By following data links
from these resources into other data sets, additional information about a location can be discovered. This allows to better
understand a given resources context, for example by determining its type using YAGO, or its parent element using GeoNames.
In Fig. 1, data sets that are directly reachable from data sets
that provide geo-coordinates are shown with a white back-
ground.

In a mobile scenario, this process can be applied to infer the current context based on the users geographical coordinates. Fig. 2
illustrates this approach by correlating a users current position
with the closest DBpedia resource in the users proximity, in this
case the resource http://dbpedia.org/resource/Brandenburg Gate.

When this identifier is dereferenced, DBpedia provides labels
such as Brandenburger Tor (German) and Porte de Brandebourg
(French) expressed using rdfs:label statements, and types such

Fig. 2. A DBpedia resource in the users vicinity serves as an entry point into the Geospatial Semantic Web.

yago:Attraction111426530,

as
yago:Building102913152,
yago:Gate103427296 and yago:Landmark108624891 indicated
using rdf:type statements. Besides inferring context, type information can also be used to find an appropriate icon to depict the
resource on a map, as illustrated by the included icons. It also
allows for the filtering of locations according to their type, which is
especially important on mobile devices with limited screen space
in order to prevent maps from overpopulating.

By following links included in DBpedia data and issuing the
URI to Semantic Web search engines such as Sindice [37] and Falcons [20], additional information can be obtained. In this case,
Revyu lists a review for an identical resource, the flickr TM wrappr
provides a depiction from Flickr, and a person indicates that he
is foaf:based near the resource in his personal FOAF profile.
The aforementioned review, photo and person are themselves
resources that may feature further relations, as is indicated by the
... bubbles.

3. DBpedia Mobile

DBpedia Mobile 17 is a location-aware client for the Semantic
Web. It allows users to discover, search and publish Linked Data
pertaining to their current physical environment using an iPhone
and other mobile devices, as well as standard web browsers. The
application consists of a map view and a Fresnel-based [31] Linked
Data browser. Starting from this map, users can explore background information about their surroundings by navigating along
data links into other Web data sources. Besides accessing Web data,
DBpedia Mobile also enables users to publish their current location,
pictures and reviews to the Semantic Web. Instead of simply being

17 http://beckr.org/DBpediaMobile.

tagged with geographical coordinates, published data is interlinked
with a nearby DBpedia location.

3.1. Browsing the Geospatial Semantic Web

DBpedia Mobiles initial view is a map display that indicates the
users position and nearby DBpedia resources, using appropriate
labels and icons. Fig. 3 shows DBpedia Mobiles initial view on an
iPhone. The map can be moved by dragging it on the touch screen.
It can be zoomed using a pinch gesture or the provided controls.

Locations are depicted with adequate icons based on a mapping
of selected YAGO categories. DBpedia Mobile allows users to switch
between 14 languages to be used for labels and summary texts
(English, German, French, Dutch, Polish, Italian, Spanish, Japanese,
Portuguese, Swedish and Chinese).

Clicking on a resource brings up a summary view of the selected
item. A summary view includes a short text describing the resource
and optionally an image, which is often provided by DBpedia or the
flickr TM wrappr; a link to the resources foaf:homepage as well
as reviews of the resource from Revyu. It also shows persons who
have indicated that they are foaf:based near the resource in their
FOAF profile or using DBpedia Mobile. At the bottom of the page,
links are provided to access a photo view and a full view for the
resource.

Fig. 4 shows a summary view for the Brandenburg Gate which
includes a review obtained from Revyu as well as a photo obtained
from the flickr TM wrappr, and lists nearby DBpedia Mobile users.
Specific site icons (such as a blue star for Revyu) are used to indicate
the provenance of displayed data.

The photo view displays further depictions of the resource,

obtained from DBpedia and the flickr TM wrappr.

The full view displays all known properties of the resource. Fig. 5
shows a full view of the Brandenburg Gates district Tiergarten,
which incorporates Linked Data from GeoNames, the flickrTM

C. Becker, C. Bizer / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 278286

Fig. 3. DBpedia Mobile running on an iPhone 3G and showing a map view of resources in the users proximity.

Fig. 4. A summary view of the Brandenburg Gate that includes a review obtained
from Revyu as well as an abstract text and a photo obtained from DBpedia, and lists
a nearby DBpedia Mobile user.

wrappr and DBpedia. If the displayed data contains RDF links into
other data sets, the user may click them to obtain a full view of the
referenced resource. In this manner, he can navigate from the DBpedia data set into other interlinked data sources. DBpedia Mobile is
not limited to a fixed set of data sources but may be used to access

all data sources that are or will in the future be interlinked with
DBpedia or with other data sources that are reachable from DBpe-
dia. This allows interesting navigation paths: For instance, a user
may navigate into GeoNames and traverse its parentFeature hierarchy to find out more about the city, state and country in which
a resource is located. From a location, he may navigate to a person within the DBpedia data set who was born, died or worked at
the location. If the person is an author, he may then follow data
links into the RDF Book Mashup [11] or the Project Gutenberg data
sources and explore information about the authors books.18 If a
tourist is interested in local bands, he may navigate from DBpedia
into Musicbrainz and find out more about albums of the bands.

DBpedia Mobile generates the different views using Fresnel
lenses and formats on the server side. Prior to rendering a view for
a resource, DBpedia Mobile performs data augmentation, whereby
it retrieves interlinked data from the Web and caches retrieved
data in a server-side RDF store. This involves dereferencing the
resource URI and querying the Sindice and Falcons Semantic Web
search engines for related information, as well as Revyu for reviews.
In a similar manner as the Semantic Web Client Library,19 specific predicates found in retrieved data such as owl:sameAs and
rdfs:seeAlso are then followed for up to two levels in order to
gain more information about the resource, and to obtain humanfriendly resource labels. Because of this approach, there is no
inherent restriction on which data sources are discovered. In fact,
anyone may make statements about a DBpedia resource, and once
this data link has been picked up by a Semantic Web search engine,
it will be found by DBpedia Mobile and integrated into its output.
The map view is plotted based on resource coordinates
expressed using the geo:point predicate of the W3C Geospatial Vocabulary [28]. As with the displayed data, coordinates may
stem from arbitrary data sources. The W3C Geospatial Vocabulary
was chosen over the more established Basic Geo (WGS84 lat/long)
Vocabulary [16] because it provided for atomic storage of latitude
and longitude components.

Retrieved data is stored in individual Named Graphs [18] which
are identified by the URI from which the data was retrieved. A separate metadata store tracks the date of the last request as well

Fig. 5. A full view of the Brandenburg Gates district Tiergarten, which incorporates
Linked Data from GeoNames, the flickr TM wrappr and DBpedia. From here, the user
may navigate into other interlinked data sets.

18 For example, this works for the navigation paths Bedford John Bunyan and
then to his publications on Project Gutenberg, or University of Southampton Tim
Berners-Lee and then to his publications on DBLP.
19 http://sites.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/suhl/bizer/ng4j/semwebclient/.

as caching-related response headers for every URL, which indicate the caching recommendations of the data source. Based on
this information, the application determines whether a required
URL should be re-requested from its source, or whether the cached
version is sufficient. Cached data is persisted across user ses-
sions.

Different data sources may contain statements about the same
resource, but may each use their own URIs to identify the resource.
In order to incorporate statements that pertain to URI Aliases, an
owl:sameAs inferencer is employed for the resource of interest
before a view is rendered.

3.2. Filtering information

The user may filter the map for resources that match specific
constraints. A Filter Builder supports the creation of Simple and
SPARQL Filters: Simple Filters consist of one or multiple conditions
that are applied in conjunction. Conditions can pertain to resource
types, ratings that are associated with resources, and for demonstration purposes, the population of inhabited areas and the number of
levels of buildings. Resource types may be chosen from pre-defined
sets that encompass one or more YAGO categories, such as Museums
or Train Stations, whereas ratings and numeric conditions are specified using an operator drop-drown and an associated operand input
field. In Fig. 6, the Simple Filter Builder interface is used to limit the
display to resources of type Sightseeing which have received a rating
of at least three stars.

A server-side Query Service rewrites the Simple Filter into a
SPARQL CONSTRUCT query [32]. If the checkbox Limit to map view
is checked, a custom SPARQL FILTER condition will be included
in order to limit results to the currently visible map area using
a custom SPARQL extension function that accepts bounding box
coordinates. Otherwise, the map view will be adjusted to show all
returned results.

SPARQL Filters are SPARQL CONSTRUCT queries which are evaluated against the RDF store. The resulting RDF graph is then used
to generate the map display. For example, the filter Stations of
Berlins U7 train line restricts the display to resources that have
DBpedia infobox properties system and line with the values
BVG, Berlins transportation company, and U7, respectively.
Fig. 7 shows the resulting map display.

Sample queries may be loaded from a drop-down menu. Users
who are logged into the application may also contribute new
queries, which then become available to all users of the application.
Due to the lack of display space and comfortable editing capabilities on mobile phones, SPARQL Queries may only be created and
edited on personal computers. However, they may be applied on
both mobiles and PCs.

Fig. 6. The simple filter builder interface.

Fig. 7. Specific train lines plotted using the filter Stations of Berlins U7 train line.

3.3. Area-based crawling of Linked Data

DBpedia Mobiles RDF store initially includes only those DBpedia
data sets that are required to generate the map display, i.e. geo-
coordinates, labels and YAGO classes. To build filters that involve
data from other sources, a user may request the currently visible
area to be crawled using a crawling button.

The crawling process determines all DBpedia resources in the
area and then queries DBpedia, Sindice and Falcons for the URIs
of related resources. These URIs are then dereferenced, and links
found in the data are followed as described in Section 3.1. Retrieved
data is loaded into DBpedia Mobiles RDF store, where it can be used
for filtering and display.

3.4. Publishing Linked Data to the Semantic Web

DBpedia Mobile facilitates the publication of content with
attached location information to the Semantic Web, directly from
the mobile device. A user may publish his current location as well
as photos and reviews, interlinked with DBpedia resources.

When users

sign up for a DBpedia Mobile account,
they are provided with a personal resource URI
in the form
http://beckr.org/DBpediaMobile/users/username, which is associated
with all content created by the respective user. When this URI is
dereferenced, the client is forwarded to the associated User Graph
which is located at http://beckr.org/DBpediaMobile/graphs/username
using HTTP 303 See Other redirection [10]. The User Graph contains
the users current location as well as the photos taken by him.

DBpedia Mobile wraps the triple generation process in user
interface dialogs, which dramatically reduces the technical expertise required to publish content. To publish content, the user logs in
and opens the Content Creation Panel (depicted in Fig. 8). He then
selects the type of information to publish (i.e. position, photo or
review) and chooses a DBpedia location to be used to tag the published content. Based on his location, the nearest DBpedia resource
is automatically suggested, as shown in Fig. 9.

A location update is automatically reflected in his User Graph as
a triple stating that he is foaf:based near the selected resource.
In the case of a photo, he is prompted to upload the image,
which is then stored on the server and is published in his User
Graph as a foaf:depiction of the selected resource. If the user
chose to publish a review, he is presented with a review form
which will be directly submitted to Revyu. The form is prepopulated with the DBpedia resource URI of the selected resource,
which allows Revyu to establish equality between the reviewed
resource in its own namespace and DBpedia using an owl:sameAs
link.

C. Becker, C. Bizer / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 278286

API, such as Safari on the iPhone or Opera Mobile 8 on Windows Mobile, and all major desktop browsers. DBpedia Mobile may
be initialized with the users GPS position using a supplemental
launcher application, or via the Yahoo! FireEagle21 web service.
Alternatively, the users position may be estimated based on his IP
address location.

Marbles is implemented as a Java Servlet and uses the Sesame
RDF framework.22 The triple storage is realized in conjunction with
a MySQL database, whereby Sesames RDBMS storage capabilities
were enhanced to support inference, as well as storage and filtering
of geospatial points using MySQL Spatial Extensions.23 The filtering
of geospatial points is realized through a custom SPARQL extension
function that allows to test point values for their location within
a bounding rectangle. The SIMILE Fresnel Engine24 and the Saxon
XSLT processor25 are used for the generation of resource views.
The JavaScript client and the PHP scripts interface with Marbles via
its SPARQL endpoint and a lightweight API26 that allows to obtain
XHTML views and to selectively populate and update the cache for
specific URIs or URLs.

Marbles has three RDF stores. The cache store holds data
retrieved from the Semantic Web. Using Named Graphs [18],
retrieved data is stored in a graph that is named after its origin URL.
The cache store is pre-populated with DBpedia data sets, which
are stored under designated read-only graphs. A separate metadata
store caches request time and HTTP response headers, and an ontology store is used to provide human-readable labels for common
ontologies in the XHTML views.

Marbles may also be used outside of DBpedia Mobile as a generic
Linked Data browser. For instance, it is suitable for the display
of FOAF profiles. Fig. 10 shows the FOAF profile of Tim BernersLee viewed using Marbles. Colored dots allow to identify facts
that are mentioned in several data sources, such as his name.
Furthermore, an URI Alias at http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de is indi-
cated.

4. Related work

4.1. Semantic Web Browsers

Several Semantic Web browsers support the plotting of geographical coordinates in map views. Examples include Tabulator
[7,8], Piggy Bank [23] and the OpenLink Data Explorer.27 Compared
to these systems, DBpedia Mobile especially targets mobile devices
by having an user interface that is optimized for limited screen
space.

Both Tabulator and DBpedia Mobile support the publication
of Linked Data by users. Specifically, Tabulator creates graphs
that anyone may edit [8], while DBpedia Mobile assigns each
user an individual RDF graph that only he can update and
which is Web-accessible via the URI http://beckr.org/DBpediaMobile/
graphs/username.

A related work in the area of city exploration is mSpace
Mobile [38], a faceted RDF browser for local information. Our work
mainly differs in that it provides resource-centric views of a single
global data space, while mSpace Mobile follows a dataset-centric
approach where a priori configured data sets are browsed in their
individual dimensions.

21 http://fireeagle.yahoo.net/.
22 http://www.openrdf.org/.
23 http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.1/en/spatial-extensions.html.
24 http://simile.mit.edu/wiki/Fresnel.
25 http://saxon.sourceforge.net/.
26 http://marbles.sourceforge.net/#services.
27 http://demo.openlinksw.com/rdfbrowser2/.

Fig. 8. The content creation panel.

Fig. 9. The nearest DBpedia resource is suggested based on the users position.

User-contributed content is immediately available to other
users of DBpedia Mobile, as updates to the User Graph are automatically loaded into the RDF store. Reviews hosted on Revyu become
available for display and filtering when the resource is browsed or
the area is crawled.

A user may wish to interlink the location updates and photos
he publishes using DBpedia Mobile with his FOAF profile. To do
so, he states that the resource URI he uses to refer to himself in
his FOAF profile is identical (owl:sameAs) to his personal resource
URI with DBpedia Mobile. This enables Semantic Web crawlers and
Linked Data browsers to find and merge information from both
sources.

3.5. Technical background

DBpedia Mobile is realized as a clientserver application.
Queries, data retrieval and storage, as well as formatting activities are performed by the server-side Marbles engine,20 which was
developed in conjunction. This provides the application with high
bandwidth, processing and storage resources and allows search
requests as well as the Fresnel-based view generation to touch on
large amounts of data. A small set of PHP scripts provide query
rewriting, login and user graph services.

The client application is written in JavaScript and can be
accessed with web browsers that feature adequate Document
Object Model (DOM) support to host the underlying Google Maps

20 http://marbles.sourceforge.net/.

Fig. 10. A full view of a FOAF profile rendered by Marbles, containing data from a multitude of sources. Colored dots are used to indicate source origins for duplicate facts.

4.2. Geospatial Mashups

Google Maps was one of the first mapping services to provide an
API, allowing developers to build custom map displays that combine data from different data sources. Google Maps own overlay
layers, such as the Wikipedia layer, can be considered a mashup
as well. In any case, current geospatial mashups are built against a
fixed, limited set of data sources. Conversely, DBpedia Mobile is able
to browse content from arbitrary sources and to discover new data
sources at run-time by following data links. In addition, DBpedia
Mobile actively queries Semantic Web search engines to discover
further content from other data sources. Its use of semantic links
means that more meaningful relations between locations can be
supported than simple geographic proximity based on geographical
coordinates.

4.3. Geospatial Semantic Web

The idea of a Geospatial Semantic Web was first introduced
in [19], whose contributions included generic requirements for a
geospatial query syntax. Our SPARQL-based filter mechanism can
be seen as a realization of such a query language. [15] and [26]
discuss current standardization and organizational efforts for a
Geospatial Web infrastructure that is based on an integrated, discoverable collection of geographically related Web services and
data that spans multiple jurisdictions and geographic regions. Con-
trarily, our work is based on already openly available, interlinked
RDF data.

The Geospatial Semantic Web was a topic of the Terra Cognita
2006 workshop28 at the International Semantic Web Conference
2006, the W3C Ubiquitous Web Workshop29 and the First and
Second International Conference on Geospatial Semantics.30 The
research field is largely dedicated to ontology design and reconciliation (e.g. [2,22,25,30]) and the use of Semantic Web Services for
geospatial data integration (e.g. [3,29,34,36]).

Semantic Web and Geographic Information System communities have recognized the complementary relation of their work:
The Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc. (OGC),31 a GIS industry
consortium, has performed a Geospatial Semantic Web Interoperability Experiment that sought to address several important steps
towards the development of a Geospatial Semantic Web (GSW),
where discovery, query, and consumption of geospatial content
are based on formal semantic specification [27]. The difference
to our work can be seen in that the experiment aimed at introducing Semantic Web standards to existing GIS systems with limited
public access, while our work is based on the idea of the Semantic
Web being an open, decentralized data space.

Conversely, the W3C Geospatial Incubator Group built upon
work by the OGC in the course of developing the W3C Geospatial
Vocabulary [28].

28 http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/partnerships/research/
research/terracognita.html.
29 http://www.w3.org/2006/02/ubiwebws-agenda.html.
30 http://geosco.org/.
31 http://www.opengeospatial.org/.

C. Becker, C. Bizer / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 278286

[14] C. Bizer, J. Lehmann, G. Kobilarov, S. Auer, C. Becker, R. Cyganiak, S. Hellmann,
DBpediaa crystallization point for the Web of data, Journal of Web Semantics
7 (3) (2009) 154165.

[15] K. Breitman, M. Casanova, W. Truszkowski, Geospatial Semantic Web, in:
Semantic Web: Concepts, Technologies and Applications, Springer, 2007, pp.
265312.

[16] D. Brickley

(Ed.): Basic Geo (WGS84 lat/long) Vocabulary. URL:
http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/, W3C Semantic Web Interest Group,
2006.

[17] D. Brickley,

L. Miller,

FOAF Vocabulary

Specification 0.91. URL:

http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/, 2007.

[18] J. Carroll, C. Bizer, P. Hayes, P. Stickler, Named graphs, Journal of Web Semantics

3 (4) (2005) 247267.

[19] M.J. Egenhofer, Toward the semantic geospatial web, in: GIS 2002: Proceedings of the 10th ACM International Symposium on Advances in Geographic
Information Systems, ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 2002, pp. 14.

[20] H.W. Gong Cheng, W. Ge, Y. Qu. Searching Semantic Web objects based on class
hierarchies, in: 1st Workshop about Linked Data on the Web (LDOW 2008),
April 2008. URL: http://events.linkeddata.org/ldow2008/papers/12-cheng-ge-
searching-semantic-web-objects.pdf.

[21] T. Heath, E. Motta, Revyu: linking reviews and ratings into the Web of data,

Journal of Web Semantics 6 (4) (2008) 266273.

[22] H. Hochmair, Ontology matching for spatial data retrieval from internet portals,
in: Proceedings of the First International Conference on GeoSpatial Semantics
(GeoS 2005), Springer, 2005, pp. 166182.

[23] D. Huynh, S. Mazzocchi, D. Karger, Piggy bank: experience the semantic web
inside your web browser, in: Proceedings of the 4th International Semantic
Web Conference (ISWC2005), LNCS, vol. 3729, Springer, 2005, pp. 413430.

[24] G. Klyne, J. Carroll (Eds.), Resource Description Framework (RDF): Concepts
and Abstract SyntaxW3C Recommendation. URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-
concepts/, W3C, 2004.

[25] D. Kolas, J. Hebeler, M. Dean, Geospatial Semantic Web: architecture of ontolo-
gies, in: Proceedings of the First International Conference on GeoSpatial
Semantics (GeoS 2005), Springer, 2005, pp. 183194.

[26] R. Lake, J. Farley, Infrastructure for the Geospatial Web, in: The Geospatial Web,

Springer, 2007, pp. 1526.

[27] J. Lieberman (Ed.), Geospatial Semantic Web Interoperability Experiment ReportOGC Discussion Paper. URL: http://portal.myogc.org/
files/?artifact id=15198, Open Geospatial Consortium Inc., 2006.

[28] J. Lieberman, R. Singh, C. Goad, W3C Geospatial VocabularyW3C Incubator
Group Report. URL: http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/geo/XGR-geo/, W3C
Geospatial Incubator Group, 2007.

[29] M. Lutz, R. Lucchi, A. Friis-Christensen, N. Ostlander, A rule-based description framework for the composition of geographic information services, in:
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on GeoSpatial Semantics
(GeoS 2007), Springer, 2007, pp. 114127.

[30] H. Mizen, C. Dolbear, G. Hart, Ontology ontogeny: understanding how an
ontology is created and developed, in: Proceedings of the First International Conference on GeoSpatial Semantics (GeoS 2005), Springer, 2005, pp.
1529.

[31] E. Pietriga, C. Bizer, D. Karger, R. Lee, Fresnel: a browser-independent presentation vocabulary for RDF, in: International Semantic Web Conference
(ISWC2006), LNCS, vol. 4273, Springer, 2006, pp. 158171.

[32] E. Prudhommeaux, A. Seaborne (Eds.), SPARQL Query Language for RDFW3C
Recommendation. URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/, W3C, 2008.
[33] L. Sauermann, R. Cyganiak (Eds.), Cool URIs for the Semantic WebW3C Interest

Group Note. URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/cooluris/, W3C, 2008.

[34] D. Roman, E. Klien, SWINGa semantic framework for geospatial services, in:

The Geospatial Web, Springer, 2007, pp. 229234.

[35] F. Suchanek, G. Kasneci, G. Weikum, YAGO: a core of semantic knowledge, in:
WWW 2007: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World Wide
Web, ACM, 2007, pp. 697706.

[36] V. Tanasescu, A. Gugliotta, J. Domingue, L. Villarias, R. Davies, M. Rowlatt,
M. Richardson, S. Stincic, Geospatial data integration with semantic web ser-
vices: the eMerges approach, in: The Geospatial Web, Springer, 2007, pp. 247
256.

[37] G. Tummarello, R. Delbru, E. Oren, Sindice.com: weaving the Open Linked Data,
in: Proceedings of the 6th International Semantic Web Conference and 2nd
Asian Semantic Web Conference (ISWC/ASWC2007), LNCS, vol. 4825, Springer,
2007, pp. 552565.

[38] M. Wilson, A. Russell, D. Smith, A. Owens, A.M. Schraefel, mSpace mobile:
a mobile application for the semantic web, in: Proceedings of the End User
Semantic Web Workshop at ISWC2005, Galway, Ireland, 2005.

5. Conclusions

This article gave an overview of the Geospatial Semantic Web
and described the geo-related data sets that have been published
and interlinked in the context of the W3C Linking Open Data
community effort. Afterwards, we introduced DBpedia Mobile,
an application that allows users to discover, search and publish
Linked Data on the Semantic Web using mobile devices. The application is not restricted to a fixed set of data sources but may
retrieve and display data from arbitrary Linked Data sources. This
enables DBpedia Mobile to be employed within unforeseen use
cases. Realized and proposed use cases include tourism,32 nearby
events33 and personal recommendations.34 DBpedia Mobile publishes user-generated content to the Semantic Web and interlinks
it with nearby DBpedia resources. This advances geo-tagging to
resource-tagging and allows users to contribute to the overall
richness of the Geospatial Semantic Web.

More information about DBpedia Mobile is available at

http://wiki.dbpedia.org/DBpediaMobile.
