Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 287297

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

HealthFinlandA national semantic publishing network
and portal for health information
Osma Suominen a,, Eero Hyvonen a, Kim Viljanen a, Eija Hukka b

a Semantic Computing Research Group (SeCo), Helsinki University of Technology (TKK), Department of Media Technology,
University of Helsinki, Department of Computer Science, Finland
b National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Finland

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 22 April 2009
Received in revised form 9 July 2009
Accepted 16 September 2009
Available online 24 September 2009

Keywords:
Health information
Semantic portal
Metadata
Faceted search
Content aggregation
Ontology service

1. Introduction

Providing citizens with reliable, up-to-date and individually relevant health information on the Web is
done by governmental, non-governmental, business and other organizations. Currently the information
is published with little co-ordination and co-operation between the publishers. For publishers, this means
duplicated work and costs due to publishing same information twice on many websites. Also maintaining
links between websites requires work. From the citizens point of view, finding content is difficult due to
e.g. differences in laymans vocabularies compared to medical terminology and difficulties in aggregating
information from several sites.

To solve these problems, we present a national scale semantic publishing system HealthFinland which
consists of (1) a centralized content infrastructure of health ontologies and services with tools, (2) a distributed semantic content creation channel based on several health organizations, and (3) an intelligent
semantic portal aggregating and presenting the contents from intuitive and health promoting end-user
perspectives for human users as well as for other websites and portals.

 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Health information is one of the most frequently searched materials on the Web. Among American Internet users, about 8 million
adults searched for information on at least one health topic on a typical day in August 2006, most commonly information about specific
diseases and problems, treatments, diet and nutrition or exercise
[26]. However, a citizen searching for health information on the
Web faces many challenges [18].

General Web search engines are the most common starting
points used to find health information [26]. Web search engines
require that users know or can guess suitable keywords. Search
engines are generally not aware of the context of use and cannot match content to user needs based on, e.g., target audience
or other demographic information. Apart from information that
search engines can infer from link structure and other statistical
measures, there is no notion of trusted information sources or quality measures relevant to assessing the trustworthiness of health
information and advice.

 Corresponding author. Tel.: +358 9 451 3346.
E-mail addresses: osma.suominen@tkk.fi (O. Suominen), eero.hyvonen@tkk.fi (E.

Hyvonen), kim.viljanen@tkk.fi (K. Viljanen), eija.hukka@thl.fi (E. Hukka).
URLs: http://www.seco.tkk.fi (O. Suominen), http://www.seco.tkk.fi

(E. Hyvonen), http://www.seco.tkk.fi (K. Viljanen), http://www.thl.fi (E. Hukka).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2009.09.003

In practice, general Web search result listings for common
health topics often contain a heterogeneous mix of health-related
Web pages. As an example, the top twenty search results for
diabetes retrieved by Google on April 21, 2009 include news
sites, non-governmental organizations such as patient groups, a
Wikipedia article, commercial sites that promote health-related
products and services, as well as government sites that seek to
inform citizens. More specific queries such as diabetes pregnant also turn up user-generated content, e.g., discussion forum
postings, blogs and video clips.

Sorting out relevant, reliable and useful content from this mix,
and assessing the quality of health websites, requires background
knowledge about the organizations that publish health information on the Web. When users do find interesting resources, finding
related relevant content is not very easy as no single website
can provide everything a user may be interested in, and the linking between sites is often insufficient. Many common information
needs and situations, such as when a baby is born into a family,
require aggregation of content from several information providers.
The quality and trustworthiness of information varies. In many
cases, it is difficult to know whether information on a Web page
is based on scientific research, layman opinions and rumors, or
whether it is motivated by commercial interests. Even basic quality indicators such as information sources and publication dates
are often absent on health websites, and users do not consistently
check for them [26]. Even when good quality information is found,

O. Suominen et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 287297

it may not be targeted for the right audience: a treatment recommendation for gestational diabetes issued by a government agency
for doctors may be useless for an anxious future mother.

From the health information publishers point of view, a central
problem today is that there are many actors and websites but little
co-ordination and cooperation between them, resulting in duplicate work even between non-competitive organizations such as
different government institutions [18]. Reusing pre-existing Web
content is mainly done by manually linking websites, but such links
quickly expire when websites are restructured or shut down. Creating good quality health content is problematic and requires a
process for quality control, e.g., regular reviews and updates.

The annotation of Web content with metadata is not very common on health websites, but it is sometimes mandated by, e.g.,
government standards. In these cases, the annotation processes are
often tedious and require expertise in the use of large vocabularies
such as the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH).1

HealthFinland2 is a semantic health information publishing
system that addresses these problems both from the publishers and citizens viewpoints. The concept and ideas behind
HealthFinland have been presented in [18,17]. The design and
implementation of the portal information architecture and user
interface was presented in [32], and the design and implementation of the portal in more detail in [34]. The FinnONTO ontology
service infrastructure and services used in the system are presented in [42,19,36]. This article complements our earlier work
and publications by providing a more detailed description of the
HealthFinland portal components, the content creation infrastruc-
ture, the user interface, and the evaluations performed. Based on
the lessons learned in developing the prototype, the system has
been developed further and published in a production environment
as a national health portal.

In the following, we first present and overview of the ideas
underlying HealthFinland and the major components and architecture of the system. We then present the ontologies and other
domain vocabularies used in the system as well as the metadata
model and the underlying content production system. Finally, we
present the user interface of the semantic portal. In each section,
lessons learned in designing and implementing the prototype are
discussed, and related work is pointed out. In conclusion, contributions of the research are summarized and directions for further
research are outlined.

2. The HealthFinland approach

The main reasons for developing HealthFinland using Semantic
Web technologies are [18]: facilitating cost-effective, distributed
content creation in an interoperable way, aggregating contents
automatically based on semantics, and providing the end-users
with intelligent services.

First, HealthFinland minimizes duplicate redundant work and
costs in creating health content on a national level by collaboration.
A goal of the HealthFinland collaborative production network is to
ensure that information about a health topic is produced only once
and by the organization that has the best professional experience
about the topic. By using semantic technologies, the content can
then be re-used in different Web portals by the other organizations,
not only in the organizations own website. This possibility is facilitated by annotating the content locally with semantic metadata
based on shared ontologies, and by making the global repository
available by a semantic portal and as mash-up Web services.

1 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/
2 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/applications/tervesuomi/

Fig. 1. Three main components of HealthFinland.

The second key idea behind HealthFinland is to try to minimize
the content maintenance costs of portals by letting the computer
take care of semantic link maintenance and aggregation of content from the different publishers. This possibility is also based on
shared semantic metadata and ontologies. New content relevant
to a topic may be published at any moment by any of the content
providers, and the system is able to put the new piece of information in the right context in the portal, and automatically link it with
related information.

The third major idea of HealthFinland is to provide the end-user
with intelligent services for finding the right information based on
his or her own information needs or conceptual view to health, and
for browsing the contents based on their semantic relations. The
views and vocabularies used in the end-user interface are independent of the content providers organizational perspective, and are
based on a laymans vocabulary that is different from the medical
expert vocabularies used by the content providers in indexing the
content [32].

To implement these ideas, HealthFinland has three main components (cf. Fig. 1): (1) The domain vocabularies describe the
different aspects of health information such as topics, genres and
audiences, and they are published in an ontology repository as
part of the FinnONTO system of mutually interlinked vocabular-
ies/ontologies [19]. (2) The content production system contains
specifications and tools for annotating, harvesting, and verifying
content. (3) The Semantic Portal for providing the contents for
human users through semantic search and browsing services and
for machines, i.e., other Web applications, as semantic widgets
(called floatlets) [23].

Fig. 2 gives a more detailed overview of the HealthFinland
system architecture. Metadata and documents are collected from
the content publishers either by harvesting content and metadata
from their content management systems or by annotating content manually using the SAHA metadata editor [37] connected to
ONKI ontology services [36]. The content is validated and possible
problems are reported to the content providers. The successfully
validated metadata is finally published through the portal for
humans and machines to use.

3. Domain vocabularies

A semantic portal needs a set of vocabularies which are referenced by the metadata. The ontologies should describe all the
relevant concepts in the application domain of the portal. In
HealthFinland, ontologies and other controlled vocabularies are
used for describing document subject matter, content genres and
target audiences.

Fig. 2. HealthFinland system architecture.

3.1. Subject vocabularies

In the case of health information and health promotion, the subject matter ontologies must describe a large number of possible
topics such as diseases, treatments and anatomy as well as living
habits such as diet, exercise and substance use.

We started by analyzing pre-existing, established ontologies
and other structured vocabularies for describing health-related
content. Reusing existing ontologies offers several advantages: it
eases semantic interoperability with other applications, saves time
and money by avoiding unnecessary ontology engineering work,
and helps to ensure broad coverage of the subject area as established ontologies typically have been used and developed for a long
time. We settled on three core subject domain ontologies that are
used for describing the subject matter of Web contents:

(i) The General Finnish Upper Ontology (YSO)3 that includes
approximately 20 000 concepts. The YSO ontology was created by transforming the General Finnish Thesaurus YSA4 into
RDF/OWL format using the Protege editor5 and by manually
crafting the concepts into rdfs:subClassOf hierarchies [19].

(ii) The international Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) which
includes approximately 23 000 concepts. We transformed the
vocabulary into the SKOS Core format6 without changing the
semantics of the vocabulary or its structure using conversion
tools and methods developed at the Free University of Amsterdam [38].

(iii) The European Multilingual Thesaurus on Health Promotion7
(HPMULTI), which included a Finnish translation. HPMULTI
contains approximately 1200 concepts related specifically to
health promotion. We transformed HPMULTI into SKOS/RDF
in a similar way as MeSH using a custom conversion
tool.

All three vocabularies are required to cover the subject matter
of the portal properly. YSO is broad but does not include enough
concepts that describe detailed medical content. On the other hand,
MeSH contains lots of useful medical concepts, is widely used in the
health sector, but is focused on clinical healthcare. HPMULTI com-

3 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/ontologies/yso/
4 http://www.vesa.lib.helsinki.fi
5 http://protege.stanford.edu
6 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/
7 http://www.hpmulti.net/

plements the two vocabularies by focusing on health promotion
specific terminology.

To make the three subject vocabularies semantically compatible with each other, we created the Health Promotion Ontology
using YSO as the structural basis and extended it manually, using
the Protege ontology editor, with concepts from the two other
vocabularies. Currently, the Health Promotion Ontology contains
all concepts from YSO and HPMULTI together with some 2500 concepts from MeSH.

3.2. Content genre vocabulary

Content genres describe different types of documents based
on purpose, form and content [29]. Genres can be specific to the
application domain, and in the case of health information, some
important genres include articles, tests (for assessing your current
health or habits), official recommendations and news. Although genres are currently not very widely used in Web search, they provide
interesting means for restricting content searches in addition to
subject- or keyword-based searching.

We could not find a suitable pre-existing genre vocabulary for
health information, so we used a lightweight user-centered process
very similar to Rossos card sorting survey method [29] to construct
a classification of genres. Five test subjects (Rossos experiment had
only three participants in the initial phase) were asked to sort a
selection of forty printed content pages into groups based on their
form and structure, and finally label them with descriptive names.
An initial genre vocabulary was constructed based on an analysis
of the results. The vocabulary was later extended and restructured
as new genres were identified that were not well represented in
the original experiment. Some categories were merged or renamed
based on experiences from user testing. The resulting genre classification currently includes 21 content genres and is expressed as a
SKOS Core vocabulary.

3.3. Target audience vocabulary

Describing the target audience of documents allows content to
be selected and promoted to certain users. Audience-based matching requires a vocabulary of audiences and a user interface that
makes use of audience information.

To describe the different target audiences of the HealthFinland
portal, we initially created a Target Audience Ontology. We constructed the ontology by taking into account five possible ways
of segmenting audiences: by age, gender, occupation, and patient
group as well as some other special groups and roles, e.g., par-

O. Suominen et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 287297

ents and exercise teams. We used the classification of occupations
published by Statistics Finland8 and a smaller target audience classification used in a publication database at the UKK Institute9
as starting points for the ontology. We organized the different
occupations based on a division into health professionals (e.g. doc-
tors, nurses and therapists) and other, non-health occupations. The
ontology was built using the Protege ontology editor and transformed into the SKOS Core format. The final ontology contains more
than 800 target audiences.

However, we soon discovered that the size and structure of
the ontology was unwieldy for annotations, and the hierarchies
often unsuitable for processing search queries in a health portal.
The occupation classification we used was intended for a different purpose (collecting national level statistics about, e.g., salaries)
and mainly distinguished different occupations by the level of
education they require, which had little bearing on the needs
of portal audiences. Additionally, as the needs of professionals
are very different from those of ordinary citizens, we decided to
drop health professionals as a target audience altogether in order
to better serve ordinary citizens in situations and tasks involving their personal health. Many other websites and portals that
fulfil work-related needs of health professionals already exist,
and new ones, such as THL.fi10 published by the National Institute for Health and Welfare, were being developed in parallel to
HealthFinland.

Finally, we settled on a relatively small audience classification
that takes into account the needs and goals of users as well as
the tone of discussion in the available content. The classification
consists of two levels: special categories for specific situations 
e.g. families with a baby, occupational health, and information for
travellers  as well as three general categories for disease- and
problem-oriented information, health improvement, and environmental issues, respectively. The intent is that content that fits one
of the special categories is classified therein, while the rest is classified into one of the general categories. The current classification
includes nine categories, but more special categories are expected
to be defined when new content is added into the HealthFinland
portal. The classification is expressed using the SKOS Core vocabu-
lary.

3.4. National ontology library service ONKI

Methods for publishing controlled vocabularies and using them
in applications are required when used in professional content
creation work such as in the case of the HealthFinland content
creation network. At the start of the HealthFinland project, none
of the Content Management Systems (CMS) used by the content
publishers supported referencing concepts described in controlled
vocabularies by URIs in the metadata, as would be required by true
Semantic Web applications. Vocabularies also evolve constantly,
so methods for publishing the latest versions are needed in such
a way that all parties are always using the latest version of the
vocabularies.

The HealthFinland content creation network uses The Finnish
Ontology Library Service ONKI11 for publishing all the domain
vocabularies discussed above. ONKI is a pilot system for deploying ontologies and using them on a national scale [41]. ONKI
focuses especially on ontology publishing and using them in content indexing and information retrieval through both end-user and
application interfaces. ONKI ensures that all content creators use

8 http://www.stat.fi
9 http://www.ukkinstituutti.fi
10 http://www.thl.fi
11 http://www.yso.fi

the latest versions of each ontology. From the point of view of the
content creators, ONKI is used for browsing the ontologies and to
support annotation of content with ontological concepts. ONKI is
also used by the HealthFinland content aggregator application for
finding concept URIs for the term labels.

4. Content production system

A semantic portal requires rich metadata with well-defined
object types, properties (fields) and value ranges in order to provide rich search facilities to end-users. To ensure interoperability
and ease integration of systems, metadata schemes should be based
on common standards and frameworks such as Dublin Core [4].
However, general-purpose metadata frameworks may be adapted
for particular domains and applications by specifying additional
constraints and extensions.

A trade-off exists between the level of semantic richness and
ease of metadata creation. If annotating objects requires large
amounts of manual work and the results and benefits of metadata production are not clearly visible, less metadata will likely
be produced, or shortcuts will be taken that compromise metadata
quality [8]. Metadata schemas should focus on effective annotations with an appropriate breadth and expressivity that does not
hinder annotation while still giving benefits for the users who rely
on the metadata.

We designed the HealthFinland metadata schema using the
Dublin Core Metadata Element Set and the Finnish JHS143 recommendation on document metadata [20] as starting points, choosing
only fields that were relevant in the domain of health information.
The schema was extended with a domain-specific Genre field that
describes health information content types such as article, guide,
news item and campaign. The original schema has been published
in [18], and a detailed metadata specification for system implementors is available in [33].

The metadata in HealthFinland is represented using RDF, conforming to the recommendations for expressing Dublin Core in RDF
[6]. A subset of the metadata can also be embedded in (X)HTML
pages using META and LINK elements based on the Dublin Core
recommendation [5].

4.1. Metadata production tools

Creating good quality metadata requires suitable tools that
assist content creators and annotators in the metadata production process. Many content producers use a content management
system (CMS) to produce and publish Web documents. Adding support for metadata production using the HealthFinland metadata
schema into such systems makes it easy for content authors to
produce metadata and keep it synchronized with updates in the
content. In such a setting many metadata fields such as publication
and modification dates can also be automatically assigned values.
To make it easier to assign subjects and other concept values
from the vocabularies used in the HealthFinland metadata schema,
we have developed the ONKI Selector Widget (Fig. 3) [40]. It is an
AJAX-enabled component that can easily be integrated into any
HTML form and allows the selection of concepts from any vocabulary available on the ONKI server. The concepts picked using the
component are stored in an HTML form field like any other meta-
data. This way, the content management system does not need to
be aware of the vocabularies, and the newest vocabulary versions
are always directly available from the ONKI server.

To publish the metadata for use by the HealthFinland system,
the content management system must be configured to expose its
metadata either embedded into individual HTML pages or as RDF
data retrievable using HTTP.

Fig. 3. Finnish Heart Associations metadata production tool using ONKI Selector Widget. The widget has been integrated into the Navigo portal software used by the
association.

Not all content publishers use a CMS, and even if they do, adding
metadata support to Web publishing systems may not always be
technically or economically feasible. To create metadata for such
content sources, we have developed the browser-based metadata
editor SAHA [37] that can be configured with the HealthFinland
metadata schema. It was used in HealthFinland for manual annotation of health information. SAHA uses the above mentioned ONKI
Selector Widget for supporting concept lookup from vocabularies
available on the ONKI server.

4.2. Content publishers

Eight Finnish health organizationsthe Finnish Diabetes Asso-
ciation, the Finnish Medical Society Duodecim, National Public
Health Institute, Social and Welfare Services of Oulu, Savonia University of Applied Sciences, Finnish Centre for Health Promotion,
Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, and UKK Institute for
Health Promotion Researchcontributed to the health contents
available in the portal protype. The system contains almost 3500
health content objects.

Depending on the organization and content, the content was
created in different ways: two organizations used embedded markup conforming to the HealthFinland metadata scheme on their
HTML pages; two organizations provided their content in XML formats that were then transformed into RDF by special transformers;
one organization provided a relational database that was similarly
transformed into RDF; and three organizations provided the metadata directly in the specified RDF format using the SAHA editor
attached to ONKI services. The XML and database sources used different subject vocabularies that had to be mapped to the Health
Promotion Ontology before the transformation could be completed.

4.3. Metadata aggregation and quality control

Using heterogeneous data sources presents some challenges
with regard to data validity and quality control. We have developed an aggregation and validation tool that collects metadata from
different sources and processes it into a well-defined format for
use in the HealthFinland portal. The metadata is collected either
by crawling the Web sites of content publishers or by retrieving

metadata published in RDF format. Metadata expressed as part of
HTML documents is syntactically transformed into RDF, and any
concepts expressed using concept labels are converted into URI references using Web Service facilities for concept lookups provided
by the ONKI server. Finally, the aggregator validates the metadata
against the HealthFinland metadata schema, and produces output in an RDF format that is guaranteed to conform strictly to the
HealthFinland metadata schema. Any problems encountered during the aggregation and validation process are reported back to the
publisher by creating a problem report, shown in Fig. 4, which is
implemented as a set of browsable static HTML pages.

4.4. Experiences and feedback

To gain some understanding into how the initial content creation infrastructure works from the content publishers point of

Fig. 4. Metadata feedback report.

O. Suominen et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 287297

Table 1
HealthFinland metadata schema. Required fields are marked in bold.

Name

Identifier
Locator
Title
Description
Language

Publication time
Acceptance time
Modification time

Publisher
Creator
Rights
NoIndex

Genre
Presentation type
Format

Subject
Keyword
Audience

Qualified name

dc:identifier
ts:url
dc:title
dc:description
dc:language

dct:issued
dct:dateAccepted
dct:modified

dc:publisher
dc:creator
dc:rights
ts:noindex

ts:genre
dc:type
dc:format

dc:subject
ts:keyword
dct:audience

Cardinality

0..1

0..1
0..1

1..*
0..*
0..*
0..1

1..*
0..*

Value type

Literal
Literal
Typed literal

Typed literal
Typed literal
Typed literal

Instance
Instance
Literal
Typed literal

Concept
Concept
Typed literal

Concept
Literal
Concept

Value range

Non-empty string
Non-empty string
RFC 4646

W3CDTF (ISO 8601)
W3CDTF (ISO 8601)
W3CDTF (ISO 8601)

foaf:Organization
foaf:Agent
Non-empty string
Boolean value

Genre classification
DCMI type vocabulary
IANA MIME types

Subject vocabularies
Non-empty string
Audience classification

view, we collected user feedback from annotators after several
months of use. The feedback was collected using an e-mail survey
and a meeting between the content editors where the experiences
of different content producers was discussed and summarized into
a list of notable problems and possible improvements. Overall, the
processes and tools were considered functional, but many improvements were also suggested.

The annotators suggested that the metadata schema and related
annotation tools could be improved by removing or hiding some
optional fields (e.g., Coverage) that were seldom used. They also
requested tools that could help them avoid repetitive work, e.g.,
by using previous annotations as templates for annotating new
content.

The use of three different complementary subject vocabularies was considered somewhat impractical as it forced annotators
to look up concepts in each vocabulary. The annotators had also
encountered situations where a concept they needed was not
present in any of the available vocabularies, and requested some
means to add new necessary concepts into the vocabularies during
the annotation work.

The feedback reports were considered a useful tool for metadata
quality control, but the details shown in the initial reports were
often overwhelming. A way to suppress warnings about acknowledged but unimportant problems, such as systematic syntactic
errors, was requested.

The content publishers also requested a way to suppress content from appearing in the HealthFinland portal even though valid
metadata had been created. This was necessary for situations where
content had been produced that was useful for the intended audience of the originating website but not relevant or useful to the
general public.

4.5. Refined content creation process and metadata schema

Based on the feedback, we made several improvements to the
content creation process. The usability of SAHA and the problem reports has been enhanced in many ways, such as fixing
user interface glitches and removing unimportant problems from
the reports. The metadata schema has been updated, removing many optional fields that were not widely used in practice.
The new schema allows the direct use of the Health Promotion Ontology as a subject vocabulary. The content publishers
can thus avoid using all the other subject vocabularies except
when they consider them necessary due to legacy metadata or

requirements of direct semantic interoperability towards third
party systems. However, as the Health Promotion Ontology contains mappings to the original source vocabularies, expressed using
the SKOS mapping properties, indirect semantic interoperability
with systems using the original vocabularies is possible regardless of which subject vocabularies the content publishers decide to
use.

The new metadata schema, shown in Table 1, has been improved
by removing fields that were not considered useful. Some fields,
such as Spatial and Temporal coverage, Part of relations, References
and Translations, had not been used in practice by annotators. The
Media type field was intended to be used for distinguishing between
Web content and other publications such as printed books and CDs,
but it was dropped as the scope of the portal search functions was
restricted to Web content. The Source field was sometimes used in
the metadata, but its usage was not consistent. The inconsistencies
caused some technical and presentation issues in the portal user
interface, so the field was dropped from the metadata schema and
publishers were instead advised to present sources in the content
itself.

The definition of some metadata fields were also made stricter.
In the original schema, documents could be categorized into multiple Genres, Audiences, Presentation types and Languages. After
analyzing the situations where multiple categorizations for these
fields had been used, we found that in most cases the content being
described was not suitable for inclusion in the portal. For example,
when the metadata for a document claimed that it was intended
for multiple audiences, in reality it was typically not written for
anyone in particular and thus would not be very helpful for any
practical task faced by the users of the portal. Thus, we decided
to allow a single document to be placed in only one category for
each of these fields. Problematic documents that cannot obviously
be classified into a single category will either be classified into
the most relevant category, reworked, or dropped from the portal entirely. As a side benefit, this restriction also simplified the
implementation of the portal user interface and the forms used for
annotation.

Some metadata fields were also added to the schema at the
request of annotators. A literal field for Keywords was added with
the intent that annotators can use it to describe subjects that cannot
be found in any of the available subject vocabularies. Frequently
occurring keywords can then be considered candidates for inclusion as concepts in the Health Promotion Ontology. Additionally, a
field for preventing the inclusion of content into the HealthFinland

portal (NoIndex) was added, to give content publishers a degree of
control over the publishing of their content through the HealthFinland portal.

The specification for representing metadata on Web pages has
also been updated to reflect the updated recommendations of the
Dublin Core workgroup [5]. The representation of metadata on
HTML pages now includes a reference to the Dublin Core metadata profile that, in principle, allows the metadata to be parsed
and transformed into a valid RDF/XML representation by any software agent that supports the W3C GRDDL recommendation [43].
However, our content aggregator still uses a custom HTML metadata parser as it is more robust than typical GRDDL parsers in the
face of syntactical problems in the HTML code and can also process legacy representations of HealthFinland metadata based on
our older specifications. Our parser can also make domain-specific
assumptions and corrections that a general-purpose GRDDL agent
cannot be expected to make.

5. Semantic portal

In order to fulfil its purpose, a citizens health portal must be
usable from the perspective of ordinary citizens. The usability of an
information portal is affected by, e.g., the layout and functionalities of the user interface. In a semantic portal used for information
retrieval, additional factors that affect usability include the search
facilities available and the user-visible parts of ontologies and other
vocabularies used in the portal.

The faceted search paradigm [16] was chosen as the basis for the
search facilities in the HealthFinland portal, as it had been successfully applied in other semantic search systems [9,15]. In faceted
search, users navigate and make search queries in the portal by
making category selections along the available facets. However,
finding a useful and intuitive set of facets and categorizations in
the domain of health information was a challenge.

In many faceted search systems, the facets are directly constructed using the values found in metadata fields and the
vocabularies that define the sets of possible field values [9,27,30].
In some systems, such as MuseumFinland, logical rules are used
to define additional facets that do not directly correspond to the
structure of the ontology [15].

In HealthFinland, the main subject matter vocabularies have
been created for and by professionals such as doctors, nurses and
librarians for use at work or for scientific purposes. Their struc-

ture and choice of terms are not always appropriate for the general
public and typical tasks and goals related to personal health, so a
faceted navigation system directly based on the vocabularies would
likely not be very useful for users of a portal devoted to personal
health issues. Instead, we constructed new, citizen-centric facets
and mapped these to the underlying ontologies. The end-user facets
were created using a user-centered card sorting method [32]. In the
search facets, the Subject metadata field is represented by the four
independent facets Topic, Life event, Group of people and Body part.
The additional facets Document type (genre), Publisher and Audience
were created by using the values of the corresponding metadata
fields directly.

5.1. User interface design and implementation

The user interface of the HealthFinland portal was designed
using a design process inspired by the discount usability engineering philosophy [24,21] that stresses the application of lightweight
usability evaluations performed between incremental design
updates. The design was based on experiences with earlier portals and search systems, lightweight design methods such as paper
prototypes, and evaluation using heuristics and opportunistic user
testing. Our evaluation was focused on a qualitative approach as we
tried to find problems early on and thus guide the design process.
The first user interface sketches were drawn on paper and we
made extensive use of design pattern collections such as [35] and
earlier faceted search systems. The presentation of search results
was designed to show rich metadata that helps users quickly find
relevant items and filter out non-relevant results. The design of
the search results listing was based on research by Crystal and
Greenberg that evaluated the usefulness of metadata for health
information seekers [2]. The display of facets and search results
is shown in Fig. 5.

In addition to faceted search, the portal provides recommendation links based on ontological knowledge (e.g. smoking is a risk
factor for lung cancer) and an alphabetical index of concepts.

The user interface is multilingual and supports Finnish, Swedish
and English. Cross-language queries are supported, so that, e.g.,
an English user interface and English-language categories may be
used to perform searches for the Finnish-language content items,
demonstrating the potential of multilingual ontologies. However,
not all facet categories and ontological concepts have been translated into all three languages.

Fig. 5. HealthFinland portal with facets and search results.

O. Suominen et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 287297

Fig. 6. AJAX-based Semantic Web Widget showing dynamic context-based links to the HealthFinland content. The widget has been integrated into another portal by adding
a small amount of JavaScript code into the HTML page.

In addition to serving end-users directly, the portal also provides
a floatlet (Fig. 6), i.e., an AJAX-based Semantic Web Widget that can,
with a small amount of JavaScript code, be incorporated into other
portals to display related content items from the HealthFinland
system. This way, the portal contents are exported for machine processing and mash-up applications. The implementation is similar to
the related museum item display described in an earlier publication
[42].

The portal was implemented as a Java Servlet application running on Apache Tomcat. It was built using the Tapestry framework
and uses Jena for RDF functionality. Search and recommendation
functionality was implemented using the Lucene search engine,
which we enhanced to handle category and concept queries.

5.2. Evaluation

The portal application was evaluated with a series of user tests.
The first user interface mock-ups were presented to potential users
of the portal and the test subjects were asked to describe the user
interface elements they saw. The mock-ups were refined until subjects were able to understand the purpose and function of the user
interface.

The first working implementation of the portal was evaluated
with a two-phase usability test. The test subjects represented the
target audience of the portal, i.e., ordinary citizens with varying
backgrounds such as students of different disciplines, administrative staff at the Helsinki University of Technology and a freelance
journalist. A pilot test with two users was used to refine the test
setup and the information retrieval tasks, expressed as realistic
scenarios involving the test subjects.

In the second phase, six users completed four retrieval tasks
using the portal. The tasks were expressed as realistic situations
where the users had to solve problems or seek advice related to
their own personal health. For a task to be considered successfully
completed, the user was required to come up with a solution backed
by information retrieved using the portal and to express being satisfied with the solution. Each task was successfully completed by at
least three users, with an average task success rate of 70%. Typical
task completion times were 310 min depending on the difficulty
of the task. Users started each task from the portal front page that

shows the top level of the topic hierarchies, constructed using a
user-centered card sorting process [32]. The vast majority of the
first actions of test subjects took them closer to their goal, indicating that the front page design was successful and thus that the
topic structure was not confusing or misleading at this level. How-
ever, deeper in the topic hierarchy the subdivision of topics was
often confusing or overwhelming, as it reflected the structure of
the underlying ontology. Most users did not make use of secondary
query facets or recommendation links between documents, commenting that they didnt seem to help them achieve their task goals.
The alphabetical index was seldom used, but was useful for the
users who tried it.

A post-test questionnaire of subjective usability was used to calculate a System Usability Scale (SUS) [1] score. The scale represents
the subjective usability of a system on a scale of 0 (worst) to 100
(best) points. The calculated SUS score of the portal was 70.8 points,
representing the finding that most users considered the usability
of the portal to be generally good.

5.3. Refined user interface

Based on the user tests and feedback from content publishers,
we made several changes to the user interface. The most significant
change was the separation of search and browsing facilities, which
had been combined into one interface in the prototype portal. In
the new portal, both the browsing and search user interfaces are
based on the categorization of documents by Section (audience),
Topic, Situation, Genre and Publisher. Compared with the prototype
portal, we have dropped the facets for Group of people, Body part and
Life event, which were not considered very useful in our usability
tests, and added the Situation facet, which partly serves the same
purpose as the Life event facet but is specific to particular topics.

The section (audience), situations, genre and publisher for a
document are directly described in the metadata. The topic of a
document is indirectly inferred based on a mapping between the
citizen-centered portal topics and subject concepts described in the
Health Promotion Ontology, as in the prototype portal.

The portal has been split into top level Sections that correspond
to the target audiences defined in the Audience Classification.
Within each section, the content is organized into browsable Top-

Fig. 7. Browsing interface that is dynamically constructed from faceted metadata.

Fig. 8. Search interface, allowing queries to be restricted by five facets as well as keywords.

ics, such as the Exercise topic shown in Fig. 7, and each topic may
contain content areas devoted to specific Situations. The browsing
interface resembles many traditional health portals such as BBC
Health12 and Yahoo! Health,13 but the interface is dynamically generated based on the data model that defines the sections, topics and
situations which are referenced in the metadata.

12 http://www.bbc.co.uk/health/
13 http://health.yahoo.com

The search facility is shown in Fig. 8. Searches are usually initiated by entering keywords, but can be further constrained by the
five available search facets.

6. Related work

The idea of the HealthFinland portal architecture and ontologybased faceted search was inspired by earlier semantic portals such
as SWED [28], the MultimediaN E-culture demonstrator [31] and
MuseumFinland [15]. An early approach of creating and using an

O. Suominen et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 287297

ontology infrastructure is presented in [22]. The infrastructure
underlying HealthFinland was developed within the FinnONTO
project [19] where HealthFinland has been a major application
case, in addition to the analogous CultureSampo system [14] for
cultural heritage content. Both systems are based on distributed
semantic content creation, centralized ontology library services,
and a portal supporting semantic search and recommendation [12].
Vocabulary and ontology development in the health domain has
a long tradition and has produced very large and comprehensive
systems such as MeSH, UMLS14 and SNOMED CT.15 In our work,
existing vocabularies are used with additional mutual ontology
mappings [7] and mappings to a general vocabulary (YSO).

The pitfalls of metadata about Web resources have been well
documented [8]. We have tried to avoid some of the problems by
creating tools that make vocabularies easily available for annotators and to report problems back to the source. Transforming
metadata from literal sources and databases has been discussed e.g.
in [25]. In our case manual annotation using the online metadata
editor SAHA together with ontology services is also used. While we
have not performed rigorous evaluations of different annotation
interfaces, our own experiences are consistent with a recent enduser study of manual metadata creation using ontology services
[10].

Faceted search, also called view-based search or dynamic taxonomies in IR research, has been studied by various authors for
a long time [27,9,30]. Several semantic portals are based on the
paradigm, both domain-specific systems such as the SWED environment portal [28] as well as generic search systems, e.g., /facet
[11]. Separating end-user facets from annotation ontologies is discussed in [13]. The automatic construction of a browsing interface
based on faceted metadata has been discussed in [3].

Several health portals share important aspects with our portal.
The HONsearch system,16 published by the Health on the Net Foun-
dation, allows the searching of health Web sites accredited with the
HONcode quality seal using keywords as well as target audiences
to restrict the search. The commercial Healia search engine17 similarly allows searches for health websites to be restricted by gender,
age and heritage.

7. Conclusions

The HealthFinland system demonstrates how shared mean-
ings, expressed using ontologies, can be used to bind together
syntactically and semantically heterogeneous content sources from
different publishers. The content creation, validation and aggregation infrastructure, including ontology services and tools, enables
the collaborative publication of health content and reduces duplicate work. From an end-user perspective, the underlying semantic
technology enables a citizen-centered faceted search user interface
as well as more traditional services such as keyword search and
topical index. All the tools and services discussed above have been
implemented and tested in a real world setting, and the prototype
portal has been published on the Web in 2008.18 The HealthFinland system was awarded the third prize at the Open Track of the
Semantic Web Challenge 2008 competition.19

The National Institute for Health and Welfare is building a production version of the HealthFinland portal. The first public version

14 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/
15 http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/
16 http://www.hon.ch/HONsearch/Patients/
17 http://www.healia.com
18 http://demo.seco.tkk.fi/tervesuomi/
19 http://challenge.semanticweb.org

of the portal20 was published in May 2009. The portal utilizes the
same content creation infrastructure discussed above, which has
been integrated into the Alfresco content management system. The
user interface is implemented using Java portlet technology and
built using Liferay portal software.

8. Future work

Our ongoing research is focused on building personalization
services into the HealthFinland portal, such as push e-mail and recommendation links based on user profile information. The portal
will also be expanded with a registry of health services that will be
semantically interlinked with the information resources currently
in the portal.

Creating and maintaining the current portal, the content production infrastructure, vocabularies and metadata, requires a
relatively large amount of manual work. While vocabulary maintenance is a necessary burden for most semantic applications, we are
developing tools and processes that facilitate collaborative ontology development and will apply these to the maintenance of the
vocabularies used in HealthFinland.

Manual annotation work could further be reduced using
semiautomatic annotation tools [39] to suggest, e.g., document
languages and subjects based on text analysis. We are currently
investigating the use of automatic categorization and topic extraction for dynamic contentsuch as news feeds and discussion forum
postingsthat could then be integrated as content sources into the
portal with little or no manual effort.

The situations referenced by documents in the portal are currently only defined within the content repository of the portal. In
the future they may be published as a controlled vocabulary on the
ONKI server so that they can be referenced by content producers
and third parties.

While some HealthFinland content publishers already expose
their metadata, mainly through HTML meta tags, the aggregated
and validated RDF data that the portal relies on is not currently
republished back to the Web. In the future the portal will be
configured to expose at least some of its metadata. We are also
investigating ways to expose the portal search results in machineprocessable formats such as RSS feeds, in addition to the AJAX
floatlets that we already provide.

Acknowledgements

This work is part of the national Semantic Web ontology project
FinnONTO21 20032010, funded by the National Funding Agency
for Technology and Innovation (Tekes) a consortium of 38 companies and public organizations, and the Ministry of Social Affairs and
Health. The HealthFinland project is co-ordinated by the National
Institute for Health and Welfare in Finland. We thank Johanna
Eerola, Marko Ruohoranta, Matti Sarjakoski, Katri Seppala and Jouni
Tuominen for their input to the work reported in this paper.
