Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 317331

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Ontology driven semantic profiling and retrieval in medical
information systems
Mehul Bhatt a,, Wenny Rahayu b, Sury Prakash Soni b, Carlo Wouters b

a Cognitive Systems, Universitat Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany
b Data Engineering and Knowledge Management Group, Department of Computer Science and Computer Engineering,
La Trobe University, Australia

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 5 September 2008
Received in revised form 8 March 2009
Accepted 27 May 2009
Available online 12 June 2009

Keywords:
Semantic contextualization and profiling
Medical information systems
e-Health information systems
Ontology
Semantics
Knowledge representation and data models
Interoperability

We propose the application of a novel sub-ontology extraction methodology for achieving interoperability
and improving the semantic validity of information retrieval in the medical information systems (MIS)
domain. The system offers advanced profiling of a users field of specialization by exploiting the concept
of sub-ontology extraction, i.e., each sub-ontology may subsequently represent a particular user profile.
Semantic profiling of a users field of specialization or interest is necessary functionality in any medical
domain information retrieval system; this is because the (structural and semantic) extent of information
sources is massive and individual users are only likely to be interested in specific parts of the overall
knowledge documents on the basis of their area of specialization. The prototypical system, OntoMOVE, has
been specifically designed for application in the medical information systems domain. OntoMOVE utilizes
semantic web standards like RDF(S) and OWL in addition to medical domain standards and vocabularies
encompassed by the UMLS knowledge sources.

Crown Copyright  2009 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

1.1. Ontologies on the MOVE

The new era of e-health information systems has introduced a
number of research and development issues whereby the efficient
i ntegration of various health information domains is needed and
timely retrieval and access to best practice information resources
is vital. In general, underlying these issues are the closely related
themes of interoperability of medical information sources and
the efficient retrieval of semantically correct data from them
[1,27]. In the last decade or so, the application of ontologies in
information systems as a shared platform for information integration and for establishing a consensus on meaning has been
promoted [19]. Grounded in the fundamental problems of integration and retrieval, applications of ontologies in the medical
information systems (MIS) domain have been aplenty [10,14].
A comprehensive review of ontological applications in MIS is
beyond the scope of this paper. As specific references, see [2] for
a work on constructing medical domain terminological systems
and [38] for a review of biomedical domain specific ontolo-
gies.

 Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 421 218 64 237; fax: +49 421 218 98 64 237.
E-mail addresses: mbhatt@gmail.com, bhatt@informatik.uni-bremen.de

(M. Bhatt), w.rahayu@latrobe.edu.au (W. Rahayu).

In this paper, we present our system OntoMOVE Ontologies
on the MOVE  that combines the use of ontology driven annotations and the application of a novel sub-ontology extraction
methodology (called MOVE) for achieving interoperability and
improving the effectiveness of information retrieval for the specific
MIS domain. The main difference between our work and existing work in ontology-based information retrieval is the fact that
our approach begins with the process of extracting a sub-ontology
that meets the user requirements, which is then followed by the
Contextualization of the sub-ontology through annotating existing documents or resources to the specified sub-ontology. One of
the most significant objectives of our approach is to reduce the
search space of information retrieval by establishing a semantic
scope through the sub-ontology Contextualization and profiling.
Our ontology is based on the Unified Medical Language System
(UMLS) knowledge sources, namely the UMLS Semantic Network
(UMLS-SN) and UMLS Metathesaurus. As such, the approach is
compatible with controlled vocabularies and classifications used
in patient records, administrative health data, bibliographic and
full-text databases that are based on the UMLS initiative [11,23,48].
Although we restrict ourselves to a specific type of resource in this
paper, namely information documents contained in the Medical
Therapeutic Guidelines (TG) [45], it should be noted that the precise nature of the resources being retrieved is of no relevance to the

1570-8268/$  see front matter. Crown Copyright  2009 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2009.05.004

M. Bhatt et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 317331

system (see Section 5.1). For instance, resources could even consist of patient records or other forms of health or operational data
generated over a period of time. As long as annotational requirements (Section 5.3) of the framework are met, any type of resources
repository can be integrated within the system presented in this
paper.

1.2. Ontology, semantics and MOVE

The use of an ontology is intended to produce semantically correct results whilst retrieving information from knowledge sources
consisting of large repositories of medical resources. The retrieval
phase of the OntoMOVE system is based on the specialization of
a general Materialised Ontology View Extraction (MOVE) framework for the medical domain exemplar presented in this paper.
MOVE is our system for deriving semantically correct and independent sub-ontologies from potentially large base ontologies
[6,8,9,50]. We exploit the general capability of the MOVE framework
for deriving sub-ontologies toward operationalizing the concept
of semantic profiling (Sections 4 and 6) of users requirements
based on the field of specialization and/or interest. The concept of semantic profiling is based on the premise that different
users/customers/stakeholders of medical data have different informational requirements. This is especially important, keeping in
mind the structural and semantic extent of most realistic medical domain information sources, such as the medical TG. Indeed,
an individual user is not likely to be interested in every conceivable category of medical data that is present in the information
sources or repositories. For instance, keeping in line with the medical domain application scenario discussed in this paper, consider
the case of retrieving information from the medical therapeutic
guidelines. Here, potential users include researchers, medical practitioners and even patients. In this scenario, a pharmacist may be
more interested in drug and treatment related information whereas
a biomedical scientist may be more interested in information about
the latest findings related to certain cell malfunctions or new gene
products. To serve user-specific (e.g., pharmacist, medical practi-
tioner, biomedical scientist and so forth) information requirements,
semantic profiling of their requirements is therefore a necessary
functionality in any medical information retrieval system.

1.3. Organization

The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 consists
of a review of work related to the use of ontologies in medical
information systems. Section 3 presents a brief overview on the
use of ontological formalism in the medical domain. The use of the
OWL as a medium for information representation for UMLSKS content is introduced and the representational capability of OWL is
highlighted. In Section 4, we illustrate the concept of sub-ontology
extraction using the MOVE framework and also explain the intuition
that underlies the use of sub-ontologies as semantic requirement
profiles. In Section 5, all aspects of the OntoMOVE framework are
presented in detailed and the framework is experimentally evaluated in Section 8. Finally, we conclude in Section 9 with a brief
discussion of our approach and pointers to the future directions of
this work.

2. Related work

A recent study conducted by Gartner, Inc. [17] indicates that
an integrated Semantic Web will be one of the highest impact
emerging technologies in the next five to ten years and that many
public domain industries have started to engage in this technology.
Ontologies are utilized as a foundation to enable interoperability
within the Semantic Web, and as a result the number of domain

ontologies have grown significantly in the last few years. In the
medical domain, researchers and health care standard bodies have
also started to introduce semantic standard encoding for their clinical data specification [10]. It is crucial that medical information
systems are built with an underpinning technology that supports
global information interactions and management, and the various
works in ontology have played an important role in this area.

The past few years have witnessed a range of applications and
studies in the area of ontology management and processing. From
the viewpoint of this paper, we categorise existing research and/or
systems into the following groups: (a) foundational work encompassing topics such as ontology evolution, ontology editing and
alignment, ontology merging, etc. (b) applications of ontologies in
diverse domains, (c) ontological tools that provide general support
within arbitrary domains of interest, and (d) specialized information retrieval systems in the medical/biomedical domain that utilize
ontologies in some way. Here, we selectively describe some of the
existing works from these categories and outline how our approach
differs from that of existing systems.

2.1. Ontology evolution

Research in this area encompasses foundational work that focus
on the ontology manipulation and tailoring techniques with an
ultimate goal of ontology reuse and integration. The work by Maedche et al. [29] covers the area of ontology reuse and evolution in
the context of ontology management within a distributed system
environment. Their proposed method allows the creation of a new
ontology by reusing an existing ontology, whilst taking into consideration ontology evolution and integration given the fact that
the created ontologies are distributed on many different sites. Similar work by the same authors in [30] also describes the notion of
ontology registration in order to provide means to locate existing ontologies for reuse. Whilst this work has addressed many
important issues in a distributed ontology environment, there are
a few areas that have not been fully addressed. Firstly, the proposed method lacks a proper technique to optimize the created
(reused) ontologiesalthough an algorithm to check the validity of
the ontology is proposed, the method does not include a mechanism
to derive the most optimum ontology. Note that optimality involves
several criteria revolving around the size of the resulting ontology,
e.g., semantic simplicity and/or the minimization of redundant content in the resulting ontology. Secondly, the proposed technique
only focuses on the extraction of a new ontology from an existing ontology, without consideration for retrieving other artefacts
or resources that might be linked or annotated against the existing
ontologyany refinement of the structure or extent of the ontology bears a direct relation to its semantic scope within whatever
resources have been described using that ontology.

2.2. Ontological applications

The second category of existing works in the ontology area
include a variety of ontology-based domain specific applications. In
particular, there have been numerous research and developments
in the area of medical ontologies as mentioned in Section 1. Most
of these works can be categorised into: utilizing medical ontologies to build a knowledge repository such as [39,46], consolidating
and merging biomedical ontologies such as [4,26,28], integration of
medical terminologies [16], and ontology based collaborative work
in medical domain such as [39]. All these existing applications are
focussing on utilizing a domain ontology (in this case a medical
ontology) to support collaboration and communication between
resources, domain experts, etc., in the area. As opposed to utilizing
the whole large ontology or engineering a new medical ontology
[12], our work focusses on extracting and optimizing a sub-ontology

from a given large domain ontology that fulfills a user requirement
profile.

2.3. Ontology engineering tools

It is important to differentiate the system proposed here with
existing tools for ontology editing and alignment such as Protege
[33,40], or OntoEDIT [34]. Whilst the above tools provide efficient
techniques to create, view, visualize, edit and align ontologies, they
do not particularly address the issues of (i) user-driven automatic
extraction of valid sub-ontologies, and (ii) semantic and structural
optimization of the resulting ontologies. In addition, these tools
do not address application level annotation and semantic map-
ping.

2.4. Specialized information retrieval systems

There are many different information retrieval and browsing
systems from a specialized medical/bio-medical viewpoint. Principal among them include Textpresso, GoPubMed and XplorMed.
Textpresso is an information retrieval and extraction system that
processes the full-text of biological papers [31]. The system tokenizes text into several categories with respect to an ontology.
GoPubMed is a information retrieval engine that presents PubMed
results in an ontology-based hierarchical form [15]. The focus here is
on presenting a dynamic taxonomical view for users queries based
on ontologies. Similarly, XplorMed is an exploratory tool that is
aimed at overcoming the limitations of keyword based search [37].
The contributions of our research are foundational and are, in prin-
ciple, aimed at leveraging upon the utility provided these or other
specialized information retrieval algorithms and tools: we focus on
the semantic profiling of a users requirements prior to performing
a query so that an underlying information retrieval system has a
better approximation on the scope of the users interest within a
resource or document repository.

All of the above-mentioned works highlight the increase of interest to utilize ontology as a means to standardize processes or tasks.
However, despite these recent efforts, there has been no real focus
on tailoring the ontologies to meet user-specific needs as well as to
integrate them with the extraction of ontology-annotated data sets
or resources. Our proposed techniques will play an important role
in applying the notion of reuse in ontology engineering.

3. Ontological representation for the medical domain

Ontologies play a pivotal role by providing a source of shared and
precisely defined terms that can be used as meta-data, e.g., annotation of information-sources and other resources in order to make
them accessible to automated agents. Although there are inherent
distinctions between a taxonomy and an ontology, ontologies as
typically used on the semantic web and software engineering applications consist of a hierarchical description of important concepts in
a domain, along with descriptions of the properties of each concept.
The degree of formality employed in capturing these descriptions
can be quite variable [32], ranging from natural language to logical
formalisms, but increased formality and regularity clearly facilitates machine understanding [21,44].

3.1. OWLa formal knowledge representation structure

The Web Ontology Language (OWL) is a knowledge representing scheme designed specifically for use on the semantic web;
it exploits existing web standards (XML and RDF), adding the
familiar ontological primitives of object and frame based systems,
and the formal rigor of a very expressive description logic (DL)
that emerges from research in the field of Artificial Intelligence

Table 1
OWL axioms.

Axiom

Sub class
Equivalent class
Disjoint with
Same individual
Different from
Sub property
Equivalent property
Inverse
Transitive property
Functional property
Inverse functional property

Table 2
OWL class constructors.

DL syntax
C1  C2
C1  C2
C1  C2
x1  x2
x1  x2
P1  P2
P1  P2
P1  P2
P+  P
  1P
  1P


Example
Alga  Plant  Organism
Cancer  Neoplastic Process
Vertebrate  Invertebrate
Blue Shark  Prionace Glauca
Sea Horse  Horse
has mother  has parent
treated by  cured by
location of  has location

part of
  1has tributary
  1has scientific name

+  part of

Constructor

DL syntax
C1  . . .  Cn
Intersection
C1  . . .  Cn
Union

Complement
x1  . . .  xn
One of
All values from P.C
P.C
Some values
 nP
Max cardinality
 nP
Min cardinality

Example
Anatomical Abnormality  Pathological Function
Body Substance  Organic Chemical
Invertebrate
Oestrogen  Progesterone
co occurs with.Plant
co occurs with.Animal
 1has ingredient
 2has ingredient

[22]. As exemplified in Tables 1 and 2, OWL consists a rich set
of knowledge representation constructs that can be used to formally specify medical-domain knowledge, which in turn can be
exploited by description logic reasoners for purposes of inferenc-
ing, i.e., deductively inferring new facts from knowledge that is
explicitly available. The knowledge base (KB) of a typical DL based
system comprises of two components, the TBOX and the ABOX.
The TBox introduces the terminology, i.e., the vocabulary of an
application domain (e.g., Neoplastic Process is a Biological Func-
tion), whilst the ABox contains assertions about named individuals
in terms of this vocabulary (Cancer is an instance of a Neoplastic
Process). The logical basis of the language means that reasoning
services can be provided in order to make OWL described resources
more accessible to automated processes thereby allowing one to
infer implicitly represented knowledge from the knowledge that is
explicitly contained in the knowledge base. From a formal point of
view, OWL can be seen to be equivalent to a very expressive DL, with
a OWL ontology corresponding to a DL terminology (TBox) whereas
instance data pertaining to the ontology making up the assertions
(ABox).

Our use of the OWL language to represent the medical ontology
is driven by the fact that OWL is industry standard and is recommended by the W3C [49] for the representation of ontologies.
Furthermore, numerous semantic web tools, for example, Protege
[18,40] and its associated OWL Plugin [41], OntoMat [35], etc.,
supporting OWL have been already developed in the open-source
community. In addition, tool builders have developed powerful reasoning systems that support reasoning with ontologies represented
in the OWL language, the best example here being RACER [42]. As
a part of further extensions to the work presented in this research
(Section 9), we envisage to apply formal description logic based
reasoning functionality supported by such tools in the medical
domain.

3.2. UMLS Knowledge Source Server

The Unified Medical Language System Knowledge Source Server
(UMLSKS) has been used in this work to gain access to the vast
amount of knowledge contained in the UMLS by way of its two
main components, vizthe UMLS Metathesaurus and the UMLS

M. Bhatt et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 317331

plete [6] and a valid ontology independent of the base ontology.
This is achieved in MOVE through the enforcement of relevant
constraints that take the form of various optimization schemes
such as requirements consistency, semantic completeness, well-
formedness, and total simplicity, which ensure the correctness
and the optimality of the resulting sub-ontology. Broadly, the following four categories of optimization schemes (OS1OS4) are
applied for deriving a independent sub-ontology from a base ontol-
ogy:

OS1. Requirements consistency: before a sub-ontology is derived,
a user or application must provide an approximate indication of
its interests in the form of a labelling (Section 6) of conceptual
categories in the base ontology. Requirements consistency checks
for the consistency of these user specified labelling/requirements
for a specific sub-ontology derivation process. Henceforth, we refer
to this labelling as the r equirements specification.
OS2. Semantic completeness: semantic completeness considers
the completeness of the concepts, e.g., if one concept is defined
in terms of an another concept, the latter cannot be omitted from
the sub-ontology without loss of semantic meaning of the former
concept.
OS3. Well formedness: it might be possible that the user requirements (labelling) is consistent, but there might be statements
that inevitably lead to a solution that is not a valid ontology.
Well-formedness contains the proper rules to prevent this from
happening.
OS4. Total simplicity of solution: finally, applying total-simplicity
to an existing solution (along with its requirements specification)
will result in the smallest possible solution that is still a valid
ontology. Total-simplicity achieves this by working on not only the
solution, but also its requirements specification.

An elaboration of these optimization schemes in (OS1OS4) and
the overall extraction process of Fig. 2 is described in our earlier
work [7,8,50]. However, what is relevant in the present context is
the manner in which the specialization and application of MOVE
for deriving sub-ontologies may be utilized as a foundational basis
of user-specific semantic requirement profiling. An overview is
presented in (P1P2):
P1. The extraction process: Fig. 2 shows a schematic of the sequential extraction process. The process begins with the import of the
ontology represented in the OWL language. The actual extraction process/execution of optimization schemes is initiated by
way of requirements specification by a user or another application
and the execution of the other optimization schemes. The externally provided requirements specification is used as the basis of the
derivation/extraction process. The derived sub-ontologies are valid
independent ontologies, known as Materialized Ontologies, that
are specifically extracted to meet certain user/application needs.
The result of the extraction process is not just simply an extracted
sub-ontology, but rather an extracted materialized ontology view.
In the extraction process, no new information is introduced (e.g.
adding a new concept). However, it is possible that existing seman-

Fig. 2. The sequential sub-ontology extraction process.

Fig. 1. UMLS semantic typeentity.

Semantic Network. Fig. 1 is a rather narrow view of the semantic
network and is indicative of the sort of semantic types present in
it. The information provided by the UMLSKS is accessed through a
UMLS Plugin [47] that can be integrated with the Protege ontology
engineering environment [40]. This approach is useful and timesaving for our project since the plugin facilitates easy browsing
of the UMLS Semantic Network and Metathesaurus in addition
to supporting a mechanism whereby the knowledge contained
therein may be easily integrated into our ontology. The UMLSKS
allows a user/application to request information about particular
Metathesaurus concepts, including attributes such as the concepts
definition, its semantic types, concepts that are related to it, hierarchical context details, etc., all of which can be restricted to source
specific details.

4. Sub-ontology view extraction for semantic profiling

As information on the web increases significantly in size, Web
Ontologies also tend to grow bigger to such an extent that they
become too large to be used in their entirety by any single application (e.g., the UMLS base ontology [48]). Also, because of the size of
the original ontology, the process of repeatedly iterating the enormous number of nodes and relationships to derive a sub-ontology
becomes very computationally extensive, thereby necessitating the
use of parallel and/or distributed techniques for the extraction of
the same from a massively sized base ontology. These problems
have stimulated our work in the area of sub-ontology extraction in
a general context and its optimization using a distributed architec-
ture.

4.1. Materialized ontology view extraction

The extraction process, referred to as Materialised Ontology
View Extraction (MOVE) [7,8,50],
is capable of deriving sub-
ontologies, also referred to as materialised views, from a (typically
large) base ontology. More important in the context of this paper,
it should be noted that the resulting ontology is semantically com-

tics are represented in a slightly different manner (i.e., a different
view is established). Intuitively, the definition states thatstarting
from a base ontology, elements may be left out and/or combined,
as long as the result is a valid ontology, i.e., should be a valid ontology even if the base ontology is taken away. In the process, no new
elements should be introduced (unless the new element is a combination of a number of original elements, i.e., the compression of
other elements).
P2. Sub-ontologies as semantic requirement profiles: Given the
foundational (domain-independent) basis of the MOVE framework
as afore-discussed, consider a scenario where the base ontology
consists of a medical domain vocabulary encompassing one or
more sources such as Gene Ontology [3], GALEN [43] and the UMLS
[48]. Using the approach proposed herein, the area of interest for
each medical practitioner (or any arbitrary user) is modelled using
the notion of a semantic requirement profile, or simply a user
profile, that semantically represents a users interests or require-
ments. The user profile is essentially modelled as a sub-ontology,
which is derived from a universal base ontology (e.g., the UMLS
ontology) on the basis of user specified preferences/requirements.
Precisely, the profile consists of user specific requirements in
terms of the ontological constructs, concepts, relationships and
associated constraints as definable using the OWL language. The
concepts and relationships themselves are representative of the
knowledge contained in the original base ontology from which the
sub-ontology or the profile is derived by the application MOVE. In
the context of this paper, the base ontology takes the form of the
knowledge contained in the UMLS ontology. Further details pertaining to the ontology and the application of semantic profiles is
presented in Sections 5.2 and 6 respectively.

5. OntoMOVE: a semantic requirement profiling and
retrieval framework

Our earlier work in [9] describes the general framework of OntoMOVE for the purpose of ontology reuse in software development
processes in general. In this paper, we highlight the idea of optimizing the processes of ontology-based information retrieval through
the utilization of sub-ontology annotation and extraction. We also
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposal through a prototypical implementation in a medical domain with large size document
resources in the form of the Medical Therapeutic Guidelines (TG)
[45] and an empirical analysis of the results from the viewpoint of
Contextualization.

5.1. Overview of the framework

OntoMOVE stands for Ontologies on the MOVE. The term MOVE
itself is an acronym for Materialised Ontology View Extraction (see
Section 4), which is foundational to the work reported herein. A
brief overview of the main aspects of the OntoMOVE framework
illustrated in Fig. 3 follows in (F1F6):

F1. Component requirement specification: We use the general
term component to refer to an application or user that can supply
a set of requirements/preferences that are expressed as a partial
labelling with respect to a base ontology (e.g., the UMLS-SN). This
labelling is indicative of the semantic types (concepts and rela-
tionships) that reflect the components field of specialization or
interest. Indeed, for practically deployable scenarios, we do not
expect users to manually provide such a labelling. However, its
provision is achieved as such in our prototypical implementation.
Henceforth, this will be referred to as a component requirement
specification or simply a requirement specification. Also, note the
term requirements specification, which is utilized in several disciplines such as software and process modelling, where, in general,

Fig. 3. OntoMOVE Framework.

it refers to the description of a system or process being modelled
[24]. The usage of this term in this work must be disambiguated  we
categorically state that here it refers to the approximately or incompletely specified knowledge by an user or an application program
in the form of a partial labelling of a base ontology.1

F2. Requirement profile: On the basis of the initial requirement
specification, a profile of the requesting component is derived (see
requirement profile derivation in Fig. 3) based on the concept of
a sub-ontology (Section 4). A component requirement profile is
a complete 2 requirement specification that is derived using the
partial (initial) requirement specification that is provided by the
component. Between the initial requirements specification for a
component and the derivation of its complete semantic requirement profile lies the derivation of sub-ontologies (i.e., MOVE), as
explained in Section 4. Finally, it is instructive to disambiguate
a components requirement specification from a components
semantic requirement profile. Whereas the former is a partial
specification of interest from a base ontology, the latter is a com-
plete, independent sub-ontology derived from the base ontology
on the basis of the former. The derivation itself is achieved by the
application of the extraction process in (P2), i.e., the optimisation
schemes in (OS1OS4).

F3. Resource: We subscribe to a general notion of a resource
since the actual type of a resource is irrelevant to the resource
acquisition framework, i.e., OntoMOVE. However, in so far as this
paper is concerned, we focus on resources as being unstructured
or semi-structured data sets (i.e., medical therapeutic guide-
lines) that are of interest in medical information retrieval domain
that is being exemplified in this paper. However, in general, the
assumption that is applicable in this context is that irrespective
of the precise type of a resource, the resource under consider-

1 We disambiguate, and use this term to conform with its usage as defined in

previous works [7,8,50].

2 The concept of completeness is non-trivial and involves qualitative benchmarks

along several dimensions. Details are presented in [50].

M. Bhatt et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 317331

entire UMLS-SN in the OWL language.3 Instead, we intend to incrementally enrich and extend the SN relationships only in so much as
what is required for us to encompass a given collection of medical
TG documents. We use Protege [40] and its associated OWL plugin
[41] for the ontology development tasks. As mentioned previously,
the Protege UMLS tab (i.e., a plugin) [47] supports browsing of the
UMLSKS and can be used to query the UMLS knowledge sources for
medical terms and retrieve the results in a terminological format.
The results can be exported into our own medical ontology. Obvi-
ously, the ontology that results is basically a very small view of the
base UMLSKSone that concerns our use of UMLSKS. The resulting
ontology is imported in OntoMat [35] in synchrony with the medical
information sources, namely the Medical Therapeutic Guidelines
(TG) [45]. A subset of the guidelines can then be annotated using the
ontology that we imported into OntoMat following which the modified (annotated) documents are serialized as a different version for
purposes of testing.

5.3. Semantic categorization of information sources

We are using OntoMat [35], which is a publicly available annotation tool, for purposes of annotating the collection of Medical
Therapeutic Guidelines (TG) used in this project. OntoMat annotizer supports the task of creating and maintaining ontology-based
OWL mark-ups, i.e., creation of OWL-instances, attributes and rela-
tionships. It includes an ontology browser for the exploration of
the ontology and instances and an HTML browser that displays the
annotated parts of the text. OntoMat serves our purposes since
it allows easy import of externally develop OWL ontologies and
HTML mark-up, which in our case are the UMLS-SN ontology and
the Medical TG respectively.

5.3.1. The annotation process

An annotation refers to the instantiation of an UMLS-SN ontology class in order to relate a chosen term from a TG document with
a semantic type from the UMLS-SN ontology. To preserve consistency with industry based medical vocabularies, we constrain our
selection only to those terms that are identifiable with the concepts
that are present in the UMLS Metathesaurus. The chosen terms
placement in the ontological hierarchy is selected on the basis
of its registered UMLS Semantic Network type in the thesaurus.
Presently, the selected terms are essentially keywords present in
the static HTML pages of the Medical Therapeutic Guidelines (TG)
with the annotations being embedded in the TG documents using
a pre-defined RDF vocabulary. For example, in Listing 1, the RDFcode representing one annotation object has been representedthe
annotation object consists of the following information:

(1) The semantic type from the UMLS-SN ontology of the UMLS

Metathesaurus term being annotated.

(2) The exact location of the term within the Medical Therapeutic

Guidelines using XPointers.

(3) The precise term being annotated and a well-formed label asso-

ciated with it meant for internal/system use.

Although the annotation objects are instances of semantic types
in the UMLS-SN ontology (i.e., the TBox), the RDF based instantiations are different from the actual instances (i.e., the ABOX) that
corresponds to the UMLS-SN terminology. Note that the example in
Listing is only one form of annotation; additionally, we also distinguish between other forms of annotations, namely those obtained

3 The ontological or knowledge engineering perspective to be applied whilst mapping all parts of the UMLS semantic network to the OWL language is problematic
[25].

Fig. 4. OntoMOVEUMLS-SN ontology class view.

ation should be (semantically) categorised using a well-defined
ontology that is comprehensively representative of the resource
domain.

F4. Resource annotation: Resource annotation refers to the categorization or classification of resources based on a some domain
specific criteria such as functionality, its semantic type and similarity to others resources. Although shown as a part of the framework,
resource annotation is presently semi-automatically performed
using a external tool (see Section 5.3.1).

F5. Resource acquisition: Resource acquisition refers to the process of selectively acquiring (i.e., filtering) resources from a resource
repository.

F6. Component requirement manager: By a component requirement manager, we refer to that part of the framework which
facilitates the creation and maintenance of component requirement
specifications, associated requirement profiles, resource repositories and the mapping between a requirement profile and the
corresponding resource repository.

In the sub-sections to follows, we elaborate every aspect of the
OntoMOVE framework depicted in Fig. 3 for the specific case of
requirement profiling, document Contextualization and resource
retrieval in medical information systems domain.

5.2. UMLS semantic network ontologythe domain knowledge

The UMLS semantic network (UMLS-SN) represents the metalevel of the medical ontology that we develop for purposes of
annotation. This is because the UMLS Metathesaurus uses UMLS-SN
as its meta level to define medical domain concepts from various
medical vocabularies. We represent selective parts of UMLS-SN taxonomy in the form of a subsumption hierarchy in the OWL language,
i.e., as an OWL ontology (referred to as the UMLS-SN ontology
henceforth). Fig. 4 illustrates a limited part of the entire UMLS-SN
ontology; although all semantic types have been mapped, we have
not mapped every property or relationship that exists between the
semantic types since the set of relationships between the semantic types is too massive to be used in its entirety and also because
it is not our objective to develop a comprehensive mapping of the

by establishing relationships between the UMLS-SN semantic types
by way of datatype and object properties. Whilst such properties are
very important from an information retrieval viewpoint since they
establish links between disparate but conceptually related information sources, we regard such links to be only orthogonal to the main
annotation task (by a domain expert) that establishes the semantic
types of medical terms contained within the therapeutic guidelines.
Once the main annotation task is achieved, the secondary annotation task of providing fillers or values for the domain and range of
properties can be handled even by a non-specialist on the basis of
the UMLS-SN semantic types and their instances that are already
obtained via term annotation by the domain expert.

Listing 1: Annotation object.

the OntoMOVE framework is applicable in domains other than
the one considered herein. As such, in order to preserve the
generality and re-usability in other domains, it is necessary that
the system remain functional when annotations for information
sources from other domains are being utilized. This concept if
re-usability is illustrated in Fig. 5: the annotation database consists of multiple indexes, with each possibly corresponding to a
different set of information sources from which data needs to
be retrieved

A built-in Annotation-Indexer maintains and builds the relation-
ships, namely index entries, between the existing semantic types
and their instances in the medical TG. For purposes of efficiency,

5.3.2. Scope of annotations

For our present demonstrative purposes, 1156 UMLS Metathesaurus t erms from a collection of 170 TG documents were selected
for annotation on the basis of their UMLS-SN semantic type. Toward
this task, 98 semantic types from a total of 135 have been uti-
lized; with the difference representing those semantic types that
did not have any instances in the selected document collection. It
must be pointed out that these metrics (and others available within
our system) are useful in determining the quantity and quality of
the annotations being performed and can be dynamically obtained
from within the system. For flexibility, the Annotation-Indexer (Sec-
tion 5.3.3) and its associated statistics generation capabilities (for
examples, see Sections 7.1 and 7.2 and the evaluation in Section 8)
have been implemented to be usable either with or independent of
the main OntoMOVE application.

5.3.3. Dynamic annotation and indexing

Dynamic annotation and indexing, in so far as this work is
concerned, refers to the capability to dynamically integrate new
annotations and build respective index entries thereby supporting
integration of incremental updates and extensions to the underlying information sources (e.g., medical therapeutic guidelines). The
new annotations could either belong to an existing index or they
could be entirely new set of annotations for a different domain alto-
gether. This functionality is important and essential for primarily
two reasons, as stated in the following:

(1) Incremental annotations and information update: Annotation
is not a one time task and is indeed often performed in an
incremental manner. This is primarily because the task is inherently qualitative (or human expertise driven) in nature and as
such, requires considerable refinements before a complete and
consensual semantic categorization of data is obtained. Further-
more, existing information sources may possibly be extended so
as to include completely new information thereby necessitating
new annotations.

(2) Applicability in multiple-domains: We presently focus on
semantic information retrieval the medical domain. However,

the index generated by the Annotation-Indexer is serializable-
deserialisable; as such, generation of the index is a one-time task
and a user may either choose to reload an existing index or regenerate one if there has been some change in the information
sources.

6. An application of OntoMOVE in the bio-medical domain

We incorporate the idea of a sub-ontology based user profile
that contextualizes the respective users area of specialization on
the basis of the semantic types (and relationships) that are present
in the corresponding sub-ontology. The concept of utilizing subontologies has an interesting application: when only partial views
or sub-ontologies of an existing ontology are used, the semantic range of the sub-ontology in the overall annotated dataset is
significantly narrowed (see Fig. 6); something that leads to the
idea of a requirement specification based semantic profile deriva-
tion.

This scenario, intuitively depicted in Fig. 6, illustrates a base
ontology comprising of a collection of semantic types (solid cir-
cles) and relationships among them.4 As evident from Fig. 6, the
resulting sub-ontology (from the application of the process of subontology extraction) essentially corresponds to a sub-set of the
overall medical information sources. This is denoted in Fig. 6 by
a collection of primitive annotation types5 (solid rectangles). An
annotation index connects the semantic types to the terms occurring
in the medical document source, which in our case is the Medical
Therapeutic Guidelines (TG) [45]. The annotation index (Section
5.3) is a mapping between individual terms in the TG and their
semantic types in the ontology. Using this setup, a users interest or

4 Relationships are not explicitly represented in Fig. 6 since that is not relevant
in the present context and would unnecessarily take up space. Indeed, it may be
presumed that the conceptual entities, denoted as solid circles in Fig. 6, also have
relationships among them.

5 Depending on the granularity, this could be one document, or a medical vocab-

ulary defined term occurring in it. In this paper, the latter interpretation applies.

M. Bhatt et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 317331

implicit relevant concepts considered essential for inclusion by
our system to make it a valid sub-ontology. For example, the valid
sub-ontology for Cancer Treatment is created from the UMLS,
and a sub-ontology for Cancer Genome is created from the Gene
Ontology.

Semantic context based information retrieval: once a context
has been established, all search queries that are performed within
the context will narrow the range of the information documents to include only those documents (or their parts thereof)
that are relevant to the context. Note that this functionality is
encapsulated within the application of the sub-ontology extraction algorithm. In our example, we will retrieve all documents
related to Cancer Palliative Treatment from within the palliative care document repository (e.g., TG) and documents related
to Cancer DNA Mutation from the biosciences PubMed document
repository.
Stage 3. Finally, collaborating end-users with disjoint and even
overlapping specializations in the base ontology may obtain context specific sub-ontologies, and consequently, specialized search
results whilst looking-up annotated resources in an annotated
resource database. For example, the Centre for Cancer Genome
would focus on the specific information from the Gene Ontology
context, whereas a general Cancer Research Centre may need to
create a context that combines concepts from the Medical ontology (Cancer Treatment) as well as the Gene Ontology (Cancer
Genome information).

In essence, there are 3 types of changes that have to be taken

into consideration in the aforementioned OntoMOVE stages:
 Document collection updates: in this case, the Contextualization process in Stage 2 will need to be incrementally updated
each time a new set of documents are required to be included or
removed.
 User requirement changes: a new sub-ontology based on the new
set of requirements will need to be created. The new sub-ontology
can be created simply as a new version of the previously built
sub-ontology.
 Domain ontology evolution: whilst ontology is expected to be
mostly stable, there are cases where the main ontology evolves. In
this situation, the changes will have to be broadcasted to all relevant sub-ontologies. Whilst this is an important issue to address,
the main focus of this paper is on the novelty of our proposed
extraction process.

7. OntoMOVE: an implementation overview

We briefly present the accessibility information relevant to
retrieving information from the medical sources via the OntoMove
Search Interface (see Fig. 8(a)). The user performs a search query
consisting of N keywords. In addition, the user may also specify
the means of combining the keyword, viz - either conjunctively or
disjunctively. By default, the AND operator will be used to combine the search keywords in case where N > 1. In addition, the
user may optionally choose to apply a profile (Fig. 9(a)) in the context of which the search is to be performed. Note that it is also
possible to apply more than one profile at the same time, for exam-
ple, applying a patient and pharmacist profiles in conjunction. As
discussed previously, the effect of applying a profile (or a combination thereof) is to establish context based on semantic information
about the users area of interest that is contained in the profile. As
can be seen in Fig. 8(a), the retrieved search results are sequentially
listed in the lower part of the interfacethe precise order of the
results is based on the conceptual similarity/distance between the
identifiable semantic type of the search keywords with the anno-

Fig. 5. Dynamic annotation and indexing.

field of specialization from the overall collection of TG is defined
to be the mapping produced by a independent sub-ontology of
the base ontology that reflects the semantic types related to the
users interest. Obviously, different sub-ontologies will map to different sets of documents/resources in the overall TG set, with the
mapping information coming from a (pre-computed or dynamically generated) annotation index. This is denoted in Fig. 6 by the
dashed-arrow connecting the two dashed-circles.6 As discussed
in Section 4, the semantic requirement profile itself is derived
by applying the sub-ontology extraction algorithm on an incompletely specified requirements specification supplied by a end-user
or application.

In Fig. 7, we apply the general idea of requirement driven
resource retrieval (in Figs. 6 and 3) for the bio-medical domain.
A brief description of the entire process,
illustrated with an
application-centric viewpoint in Fig. 7, follows:

Stage 1. Domain knowledge base: The domain ontology which represents the entire knowledge within the specified domain. In this
example, we utilize and extract from UMLS (Unified Medical Language System) and GO (Gene Ontology) as the two base ontologies
to contextualize the bio-medical area.

Requirements specification: a set of concepts and properties
from both the UMLS-SN and GO base ontology are extracted on
the basis of the area of interest or specialization of the end-user.
Note that this specification is rather crude and does not constitute
a valid sub-ontology. Basically, this specification takes the form
of a labelling of concepts, attributes and relationships that are
of users interest. For example, labelling for concepts related to
Cancer
Stage 2. Conceptualizing the requirements specification: Our system will extract a valid sub-ontology based on the requirement
specification labelling as mentioned in Stage 1 above. The subontology is indicative of the users preferences as well as some

6 In Fig. 6, solid lines denote information flows whereas dashed lines refer to

conceptual links between related components.

Fig. 6. Ontology based profiling and document contextualization.

Fig. 7. OntoMOVE: a sample application in the bio-medical domain.

tations that are present in the retrieved documents. In addition to
a brief summary of every document that is retrieved, the user also
has access to a detailed S emantic Report (Fig. 9(b)) and an utilityoriented Annotation Viewer (Fig. 8(b)). A brief description for the
two is provided in the sections to follow.

7.1. Detailed semantic report

The report consists of (semantic) information about other
Metathesaurus items, which might possibly be of interest to the
user, that are present in a certain document retrieved as a result of
the search process. For an example, see the report in Fig. 9(b) that is

obtained for the very first result/document out of a total result set of
7 documents by searching for the key-wordsPalliative Care Can-
cer. Note that in addition to a provision for easy navigation of search
results, the interface (see middle portion of Fig. 8(a)) also allows for
direct browsing of the hyperlinked information sources directly in
the form of a tree-structure. This tree-structure is obtained solely
on the basis of the structural organisation provided by the information source and is derived (only once) by parsing the complete set
of HTML based information sources. As a pointer to future work, it
would be interesting to obtain a dynamic taxonomy from the set
of documents that are retrieved for a search query in question.
However, this is beyond the scope of our project and presently

M. Bhatt et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 317331

Fig. 8. OntoMOVE information retrieval interface I. (a) TG information retrieval. (b) Annotation viewer.

remains a speculative note deemed worthy of further investiga-
tion.

7.2. Annotation viewer

An Annotation Viewer (Fig. 8(b)) is available wherein the
conceptual range of any arbitrary semantic type form the UMLS-

SN ontology within the TG documents may be obtained. The
viewer exploits the existing annotation indexer and/or a previously serialized index (if one is available). For every semantic
type within the presently loaded ontology (or sub-ontology if
p rofiles are active), the steps illustrated in Listing 2 are performed to determine the range of a selected semantic type or
property.

Fig. 9. OntoMOVE information retrieval interface II. (a) Profile selector. (b) Semantic report.

Listing 2: Establishing semantic scope.

In the following, we briefly explain the algorithm in Listing for
establishing the semantic scope of semantic type from the profile
within a annotated resource repository: firsly, if a primitive concept is selected, then it is simply added to the established semantic
scope denoted by ResultSet. If a property is selected instead, then
the task is to find the Domain (domainConcept) and Range (rangeCon-
cept) of the selected property and perform this algorithm for each of
them. In the final step of the algorithm, the ResultSet that is obtained
is essentially a set of concepts from the profile. This set is complemented with all concepts that have been defined to be equivalent
(using OWL : sameAs property) to any concept present in the original result set. This final step (potentially) widens the semantic scope
of the results by including the synonym concepts.

Once the set of concepts resulting from the application of
above mentioned steps is obtained, the annotation index is queried
to retrieve the list of annotation objects that exist for each of
the concept included the result set. Finally, the information in
each annotation object is used to dynamically generate an HTMLdocument that provides a list of documents represented by the list
of annotations (see Fig. 8(b)).

8. Analyzing contextualization capability

OntoMOVEs performance can be evaluated along two fronts.
Firstly, the sub-ontology extraction mechanism, which underlies the OntoMOVE framework, can be evaluated independently
from its proposed application in the form of profiling and

Contextualization for the medical information retrieval domain.
Here,
the focus is on OntoMOVEs capability to generate
sub-ontologies that are semantically complete, optimal and independent of a base ontology. Secondly, performance of OntoMOVEs
proposed application toward semantic requirement profiling and
Contextualization in the medical information systems domain may
be evaluated. Here, OntoMOVEs capability to contextualize or
restrict an information retrieval request to only those parts of the
overall repository that are semantically related to the users area
of interest is highlighted. Considering the medical domain-specific
scope of this paper, we restrict ourselves to the evaluation along
the latter application front.7

8.1. Scope of analyses

We restrict the evaluation to the Contextualization capability of
the system, as opposed to the empirical investigation of the precision and recall abilities of the information retrieval phase. Here,
we are primarily interested in ensuring the consistency of two-way
Contextualizationspecialising a context or further expanding it
by the refinement of the requirements specification. The manner
in which such a refined, i.e., expanded or further specialized, con-

7 The underlying sub-ontology extraction has been qualitatively analysed with

practical illustrations in [50].

M. Bhatt et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 317331

Value

UMLS-SN

95/135

for the number of annotations per document that resulted from the
annotation process for the document-set under consideration. Both,
the concept and annotation coverage data as well as associated
statistics are generated within the system for the singular reason
that they are reflective of the qualitative aspects of the annotation
process. This functionality is useful for fine-tuning the annotation
strategy, which, with or without a domain expert, is generally considered to be a key component in the quality and improved accuracy
of the information retrieval [13,36].

Annotations
per concept

Annotations
per document

8.4. Contextualization capability

Table 3
Annotation metrics.

Setup

(a) Annotation and concept coverage
Ontology
Total concepts

Annotated documents
Total annotations

Concept coverage

Statistic

(b) Annotation statistics
Max
Mean
Standard deviation

text is exploited by a information retrieval module, and its resulting
precision and recall abilities, is independent of the Contextualization module per se. Hence, here we focus on the Contextualization
capability.8

8.2. Base setup

For evaluation purposes, we use the setup illustrated in Table 3.
The base medical domain ontology (i.e., UMLS-SN; see Section 5.2)
being used consists of a total of 135 concepts. Using these con-
cepts, a total of 170 documents from the overall Medical Therapeutic
Guidelines have been annotated, resulting in a total of 1156 annota-
tions. Note that from the overall 135 concepts in the base ontology,
a majority of 70% have corresponding annotations in the document-
set, with the remaining concepts being those that did not have any
semantically related resources in the medical TG document-set. The
absence of corresponding resources to annotate results from the
fact that the (test) TG document-set chosen for the analysis is a
small fraction (approximately 10%) of the complete TG collection.

8.3. Annotation quality

From the viewpoint of a conventional information-retrieval
centric analyses, which is not the objective here, a limitation of
our prototype is that our annotations are not performed by a
domain-expert. As such, the annotation process also lacks a global
annotation strategy. A general measure of the optimality or correctness of a particular distribution is not quantifiable, that being
governed by the nature of the document-set being annotated. As
a guideline toward preventing over/under representation of some
medical resources within the resource repository, we adopt the
heuristic that the annotations be (approximately) normally distributed throughout the document-set. However, note that this is
simply a work-in-progress heuristic and will be no more applicable once a domain expert is involved (see Section 9). The heuristic
also ensures that every document in the test-set is annotated in
order to provide coverage to every identifiable semantic content
present in it.9 Given the availability of annotation statistics, such
as in Fig. 10(a), this, or potentially other annotation heuristics, are
easily achievable within the framework.

Table 3(b) consists of basic statistical data relevant to the annotation process. Fig. 10(a) reflects the overall frequency distributions

Toward the main evaluation task, we utilize a base requirement specification that approximately spans the entire UMLS-SN
ontology. Based on this requirement specification, a complete and
independent sub-ontology (referred to as ontology A) is created.
The same process is repeated 3 times, each time using the subontology from the preceding stage as the base ontology for the next
stage. The result is a collection of four sub-ontologies (referred to
as A, B, C and D) or user profiles that share the following relation-
ship: [A  B  C  D]. The rationale behind this approach is that
since the semantic scope (see Section 6) of the overall base ontology spans the entire test document-set, further specialization of the
base ontology should result in a corresponding contraction of the
semantic scope within the document-set. The results in Fig. 10(b)
illustrate that this is indeed the resulting behaviour, i.e., the semantic scope of profile A, which consists of 107 concepts, spans 168
documents, whereas with profile D, the scope is narrowed down to
113 documents. Note that although multiple, non-related profiles
can be applied toward a certain Contextualization task, we use the
afore-discussed process of incremental specialization with one profile in order to make the results comparable since multiple profiles
without non-overlapping requirements are not comparable.

Once the semantic-scope for a profile within the overall
document-set is derived, the resulting scope essentially provides
a means for the retrieval of semantically valid information for the
user. Table 4(a), consisting of results for individual search queries,
reflects the effects of Contextualization of the users interest or
requirement for sample queries. We highlight the results for 4
queries (called Q 1, Q 2, Q 3 and Q 4) and additionally, also include
the average results for a total of 21 queries. For instance, the results
for profile A in row one of Table 4(a) indicate that from a total
of 168 documents, queries Q1 results in 67 relevant documents
whereas for profile C, which is a specialized profile in relation to
A, the result drops down to 55 documents. The overall trends for
all the profiles and the respective queries are shown in Table 4(a).
Similarly, the effects of Contextualization when multiple, disjoint
profiles are applied are shown in Fig. 11. For ease of reference,
the results obtained when comparing both related and non-related

Table 4
Effects of context specialization and expansion.

Profile

Query result

Q1

Q2

Q3

(a) Setup I: Incremental specialization of context

Q4

Mean (21 Queries)

8 Section 9 further elaborates the potentiality of a precision and recall based

analysis from a conventional information retrieval viewpoint.

9 This identification process itself is complex, given the fact that it pre-supposes
intricate domain-specific knowledge that is typically available only to a qualified
expert.

(b) Setup II: Specialization and expansion of context

E  G

Profile

Concepts

Documents in context

Fig. 10. Annotation frequency and document contextualization. (a) Annotations/document frequency distribution. (b) User requirement contextualization.

Fig. 11. Two-way consistency of contextualization.

(i.e., disjoint) requirement profiles are illustrated together. Here,
we compare three profiles, E, F and G, which are related in the
following way: [E  F] and [E  G  {}]. The objective of using the
setup in Table 4(b) and Fig. 11 is to show that Contextualization
can operate both ways, i.e., for further (incremental) specialization of interest (as exemplified with the setup in Table 3(a) and
Fig. 10(b) involving profiles A, B, C and D) as well as for the expansion of the semantic scope with the document collection. Note from
the setup in Table 4(b) that profiles E and G are disjoint and that
[|E  G| = |E| + |G|]10 holds, this relationship being important for
our present exemplary purposes. The following should be noted
from Fig. 11, which illustrates the results for 14 test queries: (a)
Where a profile is a specialization of another (e.g., F is a subset of
E), the resulting documents with the specialized profile are consistently lesser than those for the general profile across all queries (this
was illustrate in Fig. 10(b) as well). (b) When independent profiles
are applied in conjunction (e.g., E  G), the results are consistently
greater than those for any of the individual profiles applied in isolation across all queries. Note that the total number of results for

10 This implies that the profiles under consideration do not share any common
concepts. Here, cardinality of a profile is equal to the number of distinct concepts
included in the profile.

the combined profiles need not be a sum-total of the results for
the individual profiles since a document may consist of annotations of concepts from both the profiles (this is exemplified in Fig. 6
with overlapping ovals). Obviously, as mentioned previously, disjoint profiles (e.g., E and G) are not comparable in isolation. As such,
the respective data for profiles E and G in Fig. 11 are not relevant.

9. Summary and outlook

Although our methodology of sub-ontology based semantic
requirement profiling and information retrieval is generally applicable in any domain where it is possible to annotate resource-sets,
as an exemplar, we have designed OntoMOVE so as to be specifically
applied in the medical information systems domain. OntoMOVE
utilizes semantic web [5] standards like RDF(S), and the Web Ontology Language (OWL) in addition to medical domain standards
and controlled vocabularies encompassed by the UMLS Knowledge
Sources (UMLSKS), namely the UMLS Metathesaurus and the UMLS
Semantic Network. The system offers advanced profiling of a users
field of specialization and/or interest by exploiting materialised
sub-ontologies produced by MOVE. Our methodology consists of
making the semantic content present in the medical information
sources explicit and building a system that takes advantage of the
explicitly represented knowledge. At the core of our system lies

M. Bhatt et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 317331

semantic web based medical domain knowledge in the form of
an ontology and its preference/user dependent sub-ontologies. For
demonstration purposes, we utilize the Medical Therapeutic Guidelines [45] documents as the information source and selectively
annotate a partial collection of the TG documents encompassing
a few select categories form the overall collection.

9.1. Expert-driven annotation and empirical study

The current focus of our work in this paper is to utilize a subontology profiling technique to perform contextual search and to
filter relevant documents based on the users profile as defined
by the sub-ontology. As such, our goal is to prune document corpus based on our sub-ontology Contextualization approach. It is
expected that this process will be further refined in the future,
whereby the relevance of the document collections are then ranked
based on their relevance to the user profile. Because our focus here
is to demonstrate a novel approach of document filtering based on
a sub-ontology extraction technique, our evaluation technique is
currently experimental-based, and our future aim will be to perform the evaluation on real domain experts in the area. Indeed, this
will also be necessary to perform a realistic empirical study from
an information retrieval viewpoint since the quality and/or correctness of information retrieval and their benchmarking in terms
precision and recall is not possible without domain-expert driven
annotation strategy [13,36] and result ranking.

tation based information retrieval system will benefit from our
Contextualization approach. For instance, as illustrated in the Contextualization analyses in Section 8, incremental specialization and
expansion of the context is consistently achievable by the application of our profile derivation approach. These may in turn be
utilized together or in isolation by an information retrieval system to fine-tune/control its search space and improve the quality
of its results from a semantic viewpoint. In this context, an important functionality that need development is the automation of the
requirements specification (Section 5.1) stage so that any arbitrary
application may communicate its needs automatically to our sys-
tem. Once this is achieved, in conjunction with the aforementioned
task of involving expert-driven quality annotation, a conventional
precision and recall study of the entire Contextualization-backed
information retrieval phased would be feasible, and beneficial.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge the financial and infrastructural support of the
Victorian Partnership for Advanced Computing (VPAC, Australia) for
conducting this research. VPAC, Australia: http://www.vpac.org/.
M.B. also acknowledges funding provided by the Alexander von
Humboldt Foundation, Germany. W.R. acknowledges the support from the Australian National University AIGRP collaborative
research.

9.2. Annotation automation potentiality
