Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 135

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Editorial
Special issue: The Web of Data

As the core of the Semantic Web matures, we see parallel trends
such as microformats, RDFa, and Linked Data evolve with it, all
of which complementing each other in what we may well call a
machine-readable Web. Yet, scalable techniques for dealing with
this Web of Data in its entirety, i.e. using the Web as a database, as
the Semantic Web has been envisioned, still misses some important pieces of the puzzle. Scalability here does not mean solely the
ability to handle amounts of data at Web scale in terms of actual
data processing, but it also refers to the human scale in the form of
user-friendly tools that open the Web of Data to the current Web
user.

The present special issue of the Journal of Web Semantics brings
together the latest research on several aspects of the Web of Data,
from the efforts to surface data from the text Web, to algorithms
for resolving keyword queries to structured queries, to novel data
modeling techniques.

Automated Ontology Instantiation from Tabular Web Sources 
The AllRight System (Jannach) presents a novel approach to instantiate ontology data from tabular data on Web sites by clustering
documents that describe the same instance data. The main pillars
of the system are a new high-recall focused crawling technique
(xCrawl), a novel table recognition algorithm, innovative methods
for document clustering and instance name recognition, as well as
techniques for fact extraction, instance generation and query-based
fact validation.

DBpedia  A Crystallization Point for the Web of Data (Bizer,
Lehmann, Kobilarov, Auer, Becker, Cyganiak, and Hellmann) details
the data extraction process that populates DBpedia as well as the
current status of interlinking DBpedia with other data sources on
the Web. It also gives an overview of applications that facilitate the
Web of Data around DBpedia, which now consists of more than 2.6
million entities and links to 4.7 billion pieces of information, covering a variety of domains such as geographic information, people,
companies, films, music, genes, drugs, books, and scientific publi-
cations.

Accessing such amounts of structured data for useful information is not a trivial task for most users. From Keywords to Semantic
Queries  Incremental Query Construction on the Semantic Web
(Zenz, Zhou, Minack, Siberski, and Nejdl) presents an algorithm that
can translate keyword queries  which most web users are familiar with  into structured queries that take advantage of semantics
within the data of a particular domain.

Tackling the same timely topic of semantic search, A Scalable IR Approach to Search the Web of Data (Wang, Liu, Penin,
Fu, Zhang, Tran, Yu, and Pan) also translates keyword queries
into structured queries but using an IR-based approach for handling uncertainties. Their system, Semplore, allows the user to

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2009 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/S1570-8268(09)00039-0

build up each resolved query further through faceted browsing
features.

Hermes: DataWeb Search on a Pay-As-You-Go Integration
Infrastructure (Tran, Wang, Haase) is a third paper focusing on
semantic search. Hermes novelty lies in its ability to integrate several data sources and perform automatic schema mapping in order
to resolve queries that span over multiple sources.

Dealing with data from multiple sources not only presents data
integration challenges but also brings forth other issues such as
authority and credibility. Querying for Provenance, Trust, Uncertainty and other Meta Knowledge in RDF. (Dividino, Sizov, Staab,
and Schueler) proposes an extension to SPARQL query processing
in such a way that given a SPARQL query for data, one may request
meta knowledge, such as authority, certainty, etc., without modifying the query proper. It achieves highly flexible and automatically
coordinated querying for data and meta knowledge, while completely separating the two areas of concern.

The task of modeling data itself must also be simplified so that
more people can do it, and can produce high quality data to populate the Web of Data. Recognizing complexities in the original
RDFS language design, Simple and Efficient RDFS (Mu noz, Perez,
Gutierrez) introduces a small fragment which, while preserving the
normative semantics and the core functionalities of RDFS, avoids
the complexities of the original specification, and captures the main
semantic functionalities of RDFS. The paper also introduces a minimalist deduction system over this fragment, which by avoiding
certain rare cases, obtains a simple deductive system and a computationally efficient entailment checking.

Together, this selection of papers illustrates the latest efforts
toward making the Web of Data accessible to the typical web user
by making Web data easier to model, easier to integrate from
several sources, and easier to query using familiar interface mechanisms such as faceted browsing and keyword search.

Axel Polleres 1
Digital Enterprise Research Institute, National
University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland
E-mail address: axel.polleres@deri.org
(A. Polleres)

David Huynh
Metaweb Technologies, Inc., 631 Howard St., Suite
400, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA
E-mail address: david@metaweb.com (D. Huynh)

1 Axel Polleres work is supported by Science
Foundation Ireland under Grant No.
