Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 341

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Editorial
The Semantic Web Challenge, 2009

The Semantic Web Challenge1 is organized since 2003 and in the
years since has developed into the premiere event for demonstrating practical progress towards achieving the vision of the Semantic
Web as well as for showcasing the value of Semantic Web technologies within enterprise settings. The Semantic Web Challenge
provides researchers and industry with a forum to showcase the
best Semantic Web applications. The Semantic Web Challenge 2009
took place at the 8th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC
2009) near Washington, DC. As in the previous year, the challenge
consisted of two tracks: the Open Track and the Billion Triples Track.
The Open Track requires that the applications utilize the semantics
(meaning) of data and that they are designed to operate in an open
Web environment, whilst the Billion Triples Track focuses on dealing with very large amounts of RDF data, which has been crawled
from the Web and thus exhibits characteristics like vocabulary heterogeneity and varying data quality. For the 2009 challenge, we
provided the participants of the Billion Triples Track with a RDF
data set consisting of 1.1 billion triples.

Altogether we received 20 submissions for the Semantic Web
Challenge 2009 (17 for the Open Track and 3 for the Billion Triples
Track). A jury consisting of 11 experts from both academia and
industry evaluated the submissions before and at the conference
and after a three-step evaluation process awarded prizes to the four
best applications. In this issue we present articles about the winning systems: The three winners of the Open Track and the winner
of the Billion Triple Challenge.

The winners of the Open Track were Chintan Patel, Sharib Khan,
and Karthik Gomadam from Applied Informatics, Inc with their
application TrialX. TrialX enables finding new treatments by intelligently matching patients to clinical trials using advanced medical
ontologies to combine several electronic health records with user
generated information. The second prize was awarded to Andreas
Harth from the Institute of Applied Informatics and Formal Description Methods, Universitat Karlsruhe, Germany for the Semantic
Web search engine VisiNav. The application enables end-users to

ask complex queries against a large corpus of Web data and offers an
innovative user interface for the explorative formulation of queries.
The third prize in Open Track was awarded to Giovanni Tum-
marello, Richard Cyganiak, Michele Catasta, Szymon Danielczyk,
and Stefan Decker from the Digital Enterprise Research Institute,
Ireland for the development of Sig.ma, a Semantic Web Search
engine which integrates and merges data about entities from a
large, open set of Web data sources. A very innovative aspect of
the application is the methods that it provides to its users for dealing with the information quality challenges that arise in the open
Web setting. The Billion Triples Track was won by Scalable Reduction
by Gregory Todd Williams, Jesse Weaver, Medha Atre, and James
Hendler from the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA. The entry
showed how massive parallelization can be applied to quickly clean
and filter large amounts of RDF data. These four papers demonstrate
the diversity of ways that Semantic Web data can be used, and
represent some of the best applications developed in the research
community. Again, congratulation to the winners!

We would like to thank all members of the jury for their extraordinary commitment and their detailed judgment of the strengths
and weaknesses of the submitted applications. Special thanks also
go to the sponsor of the Semantic Web Challenge  Elsevier  for
their long-standing support.

Christian Bizer
Freie Universitat Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Peter Mika
Yahoo! Research
 Corresponding author at: 177 Diagonal 8th Floor,
08018 Barcelona, Spain. Tel.: +34 93 183-8846;
fax: +34 93 183-8901.
E-mail address:pmika@yahoo-inc.com (P. Mika)

Available online 24 August 2010

1 http://challenge.semanticweb.org.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
