A semantic model for scholarly electronic 
publishing in Biomedical Sciences 

Editor(s): Phillip Bourne, University of California at San Diego, USA; Tim Clark, Harvard Medical 
School and Massachusetts General Hospital, USA; Anita de Waard, Elsevier Laboratories, USA; 
Alexander Garcia, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, USA; Carole Goble, University of 
Manchester, UK; Steve Pettifer, University of Manchester, UK; David Shotton, University of Oxford, UK 
Solicited review(s): Paul Groth, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Alexander Garcia-
Castro, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, USA; Tim Clark, Harvard Medical School and 
Massachusetts General Hospital, USA  

Carlos H. Marcondes*, Luciana R. Malheiros and Leonardo C. da Costa 
Department of Information Science, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Department of 
Computer Science 
University Federal Fluminense, R. Lara Vilela, 126, 24210-590, Niteroi, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, phone 55 
21 26299758 

Abstract. Despite numerous advancements in information technology, electronic publishing is still based on 
the  print  text  model.  The  natural  language  textual  format  prevents  programs  from  semantically  processing 
article  content.  A  semantic  model  for  scholarly  electronic  publishing  is  proposed,  in  which  the  article 
conclusion  is  specified  by  the  author  and  recorded  in  a  machine-understandable  format,  enabling  semantic 
retrieval, identification of traces  of scientific discoveries and knowledge  misunderstandings. 89 biomedical 
articles were analyzed for this purpose. A content model comprising semantic elements and their sequences in 
articles is developed. Four patterns of reasoning and sequencing of semantic elements were identified in the 
analyzed articles. The development and testing of a prototype of a Web submission interface to an electronic 
journal system that partially implements the proposed model are reported.   

Keywords:  electronic  publishing,  scientific  communication,  knowledge  representation,ontologies,  semantic  content 
processing, scientific discovery, e-Science 

* Corresponding author. Email: marcon@vm.uff.br 

Before  the  advent  of  the  World  Wide  Web 
scientific  knowledge  was  distributed  across 
publications  in  libraries  worldwide.  The  Web  is 
fast  becoming  a  universal  platform  for  the 
disposal,  exchange,  and  access  of  knowledge 
records.  An  increasing  amount  of  records  of 
human  culturefrom  text,  static  and  motion 
images,  and  sound,  to  multimediaare  now 
being created directly in digital format.  

in 

scientific 

communication. 

Since  the  Philosophical  Transactions  of  the 
Royal  Society 
the  seventeenth  century, 
scientific  articles  have  become  privileged 
channels  of 
In 
scientific  articles  authors  bring  discoveries  into 
the  public  knowledge.  However 
scholarly 
electronic  publishing  is  still  based  on  the  print 
linear text model. These texts are also distributed 
across  various  information  resources  such  as 
digital  libraries,  electronic  journal  systems,  and 
repositories.  Althoght  modern  bibliographic 
information  systems  exploit  the  potential  of 
information technology (IT), it is not yet used to 
directly process the  knowledge embedded in the 
text of scientific articles. Web based publication 
of  scientific  articles  can  serve  as  knowledge 
bases, as stressed by Gardin [21]. In spite of their 
digital 
these  knowledge  bases  are 
comprehensible  only  to  humans.  The  content  of 
scientific  articles  deserves  critical 
reading, 
inquiry,  and  citation  through  a  long  social 
process  until 
it  becomes  part  of  human 
knowledge.  Their  textual  format  hinders  the 
their  semantic  content  by 
comparison  of 
computers 
identify  gaps  and 
contradictions and agreements in knowledge.   

in  order 

format, 

to 

in  an 

cataloging) 

these  records 

Information  Retrieval  Systems  manage 
metadata  records  of  scientific  articles  which 
provide access to them. Metadata is essential for 
managing 
increasingly 
complex  digital  environment.  Since  the  MARC1 
(machine-readable 
record  was 
established  in  the  1960s,  bibliographic  record 
models  have  slightly  changed.  A 
typical 
bibliographic  record  comprises  sets  of  database 
fields,  including  a  flat  space  of  a  list  of 
unconnected fields for content description, where 
keywords  or  descriptors  are  assigned,  each 
having  an  equal  weight  for  retrieval  purposes. 
Content  access 
in  modern 
bibliographic  information  retrieval  systems  is 
still  achieved  by  matching  user  queries  formed 
by  keywords connected by Boolean operators to 
keywords  comprising  the  bibliographic  records, 

to  documents 

1 MARC Standard, http://www.loc.gov/marc/ 

in  a  manner  similar  to  early  bibliographic 
retrieval and library automation systems.   

Typical  bibliographic  records  do  not  hold 
explicit  relations  between  elements  comprising 
the content of documents they represent. Boolean 
operators  are  too  general  and  lack  the  semantic 
expressiveness  necessary  for  content  retrieval  in 
specific  scientific  domains.  Relations  expressed 
by Boolean operators are processed as extensive 
set  operations  on  the  keywords  included  in  the 
bibliographic  records,  and  not  as 
intensive 
semantic relations between concepts. In a search 
for  policies  for  dealing  with  AIDS  in  PubMed 
the system recovered an article  with the title A 
statewide  observational  assessment  of 
the 
pedestrian  and  bicycling  environment  in  hawaii, 
2010,  PMID-  22172181,  which  deals  with 
traffic policies including street accommodations 
(ie, sidewalks and crossing aids). 

Institutes 

In comparison with the poor expressiveness of 
the three Boolean operators, the Unified Medical 
Language  System  (UMLS)  Semantic  Network 
(SN)2,  which  is  the  classification  schema  of  the 
of  Health 
UMLS  National 
Metathesaurus,  organizes  every  concept 
in 
hierarchy trees, each having as its root a top level 
Semantic Type. The UMLS SN uses 54 Relation 
Types  to  express  the  semantic  relations  used 
between  concepts  in  Semantic  Type  hierarchies. 
The  UMLS  SN  holds  the  permitted  relations 
between  Semantic  Types.  Although 
this 
semantically  richer  schema  is  supported  by  the 
UMLS, 
in 
databases  such  as  Medline  are  incapable  of 
exploiting this potential.  

the  bibliographic  record  models 

(SW) 

technologies 

Semantic  Web 

[38] 
constitute  a  step  forward  semantic  retrieval  and 
processing  in  computational  environments.  The 
proposal content of a Web document is no longer 
a  matter  of  keyword  match  as  in  conventional 
computational environments since the 1960s, but 
instead  comprises  structured  sets  of  concepts 
connected  by  precise  meaning  relations  as  in 
RDF3  (Resource  Description  Framework)  and 
RDF Schema4 statements. Such a rich knowledge 
representation schema enables software agents to 
perform  inferences  and  more  sophisticated 
tasks based on the document content. 

The  objetive  of  this  paper  is  to  propose  a 
richer  semantic  content  publishing  model,  in 
which  scientific  claims  made  by  authors 
throughout  articles  are  expressed  by  relations 
between  phenomena.  In  the  proposed  model, 
each  article,  in  addition  to  being  published  in 

2 UMLS Semantic Network, 
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/umlssemn.html 
3  RDF, http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-primer/ 
4  RDF Schema Specification, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2000/CR-rdf-schema-20000327/  

structured  relations  and  recorded  in  a  machineunderstandable  format  using  Semantic  Web 
standards  such  as  RDF  and  OWL  [31].  In  the 
proposed  model,  article  records  comprise  full-
text,  conventional  bibliographic  metadata,  and 
semantic metadata conveying the claims made by 
the  author.  Based  on  the  processing  of  these 
enhanced  article  records  by  software  agents  two 
research lines were developed: a- the use of such 
retrieval  systems;  b-  
records 
comparison  of 
records  with  public 
knowledgee.g.,  published  scientific  articles
or  with 
terminological  knowledge  bases 
throughout the Web in order to identify traces of 
scientific discoveries (this last aspect is reported 
elsewhere [8], [27]).  

in  semantic 
these 

these  features 

The  development  of 

for  knowledge 
identification  of 

into 
software  systems  may  provide  scientists  with 
retrieval,  claim 
new 
tools 
comparison, 
contradictory 
claims, use of these claims in different contexts, 
and 
identification  and  validation  of  new 
contributions 
to  science  made  by  specific 
articles.  

taken  here  bibliographic 

As other authors previously [3] we propose to 
engage  authors  in  developing  a  richer  content 
representation  of  their  own  articles;  in  the 
approach 
record 
instances in compliance with the proposed model 
will be generated by a Web authors submission 
interface  to  a  journal  system,  as  a  byproduct  of 
submitting  his/her  articles  to  the  system.  Such  a 
system,  during  the  upload  process  of  scientific 
article  files,  will  perform  an  interactive  dialog 
with  authors  in  order  to  extract  the  semantic 
content  of  the  claims  made  in  the  scientific 
articles  and  record  them  in  a  machine-readable 
format. The initial steps toward the development 
of such a system are reported too.  

The  remainder  of  this  article  is  organized  as 
follows.  The  next  section  presents  a  review  of 
the  theoretical  concepts  which  the  proposed 
publication model is based on along with similar 
experiences and projects. Section 3 describes the 
materials and methods used. Section 4 describes 
the model, its elements and the development of a 
prototype  system  of  a  Web  authors  submission 
interface  to  a  journal  system  which  partially 
implements the model. Finally, section 5 presents 
the  results  obtained  thus  far  and  discusses  the 
conclusions.  It  also  outlines  the  future  research 
steps.        

2. Related studies 

publishing 

technologies 

to  enhance 
and  exploit  SW 
scientific  communication,  management,  sharing, 
and reuse of knowledge; others aim at providing 
direct  access  to  semantic  content  of  scientific 
articles.  Thus,  there  is  an  increasing  trend  in 
electronic 
toward 
formalizing  the  text  of  articles  or  structuring 
them,  marking  them,  and  identifying  significant 
parts to facilitate more direct reading by humans, 
potentially  by  relating 
to  formal 
ontologies  [1]  as  a  means  to  overcome  the 
ambiguity  of  natural  language  texts  and  allow 
their semantic processing by programs. 

experiences 

the 

text 

Scientific articles are documents embedded in 
definite social relations concerning the scientific 
communication protocols exhaustively studied in 
Information Science [5], [6]; with regard to their 
textual  structure,  scientific  articles  are  also  textembedded  rhetoric/logical  theories  [2],  [11], 
[24].  The  focus  of  the  proposed  model  is  the 
second  aspect,  i.e.,  the  reasoning  and  rhetorical, 
and  the  semantic  structure  of  the  scientific 
articles in Biomedical Sciences.  

such 

to  highly 

The  landscape  of  the  so-called  biomedical 
concept  systems  has  been  evolving  fast  during 
the  last  decade.  In  the  literature  [30]  the  term 
biomedical ontology is a slight imprecise concept 
naming  biomedical  concept  systems  ranging 
from  terminologies  used  to  index  scientific 
literature 
formal  computational 
as  OpenGALEN5.  Their 
ontologies 
development, 
and 
integration 
scientific 
enterprise, as some of them - such as GO - Gene 
Ontology6-  were  developed  recently  in  order  to 
provide  a  shared  and  common  terminology  to 
annotate  gene  products,  while  others,  as  MeSH7 
  Medical  Subject  Headings,  which  is  part  of 
UMLS, has to cope with a legacy of millions of 
records  indexed  in  bibliographic  databases  as 
PubMed and Medline.  

evolution,  management 

is  a  high  complex 

are 

Biomedical 

terminologies 

evolving 
towards  knowledge  bases  [28]  as  they  are 
becoming formal. According to National Library 
of Medicine, USA, UMLS Fact Sheet [39]: The 
purpose  of  NLM's  Unified  Medical  Language 
System (UMLS) is to facilitate the development 
of  computer  systems  that  behave  as  if  they 
understand  the  meaning  of  the  language  of 
biomedicine and health.  

Particularly 

in  Biomedical  Sciences,  new 
research  methods  challenge  the  conventional 
Scientific  Method  and  Popperian  hypothesisdriven  research.  The  so-called  high-throughput 
methods  like  DNA  microarrays  and  proteomics 
[25] allow scientists to process a great amount of 
data  rapidly  and  in  parallel,  thus  conducting 

Several  alternatives  have  already  been 
proposed  as  new  types  of  publications  that 
address the previously discussed issues; some try 

5  OpenGALEN, http://www.opengalen.org 
6  Gene Ontology, http://www.geneontology.org 
7  MeSH, http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/ 

made  because  no  hypotheses  have  been 
constructed,  as  stressed  by  Westein  [23].  This 
author also stresses the following:  

Given the layered, evolutionary complexity of 
biological  systems,  it  will  not  be  possible  to 
understand them comprehensively on the basis 
of hypothesis-driven research alone. Likewise, 
it  will  not  be possible  to do so solely through 
omic  studies  of  genes,  proteins,  and  other 
molecules  in  aggregate.  The  two  modes  of 
research are complementary and synergistic.  
Several  alternatives  have  been  considered  as 
the 
new 
previously  discussed 
to  exploit 
Semantic Web technologies to enhance scientific 
communication, management, sharing, and reuse 
of knowledge, and to provide direct access to the 
semantic  content  of  scientific  articles.  The 
following  text  comments  on  these  experiences 
and their conceptual bases. 

types  of  publications 

issues  and 

to  address 

in  order 

journal  Cell 

The Prospect Project8 is a publishing initiative 
of  the  Royal  Society  of  Chemistry,  in  which 
terms  in  the  texts  of  articles  that  refer  to 
chemical  or  biological  entities  have  links  to 
dictionaries  or  ontologies  that  define  them.  The 
Elsevier publishing group is developing a project 
called  Article  of  the  Future  associated  with  the 
biomedical 
to  add 
functionality to several articles, including change 
in  presentation 
(hierarchical  presentations), 
summary  charts,  and  a  section  on  Highlights 
that briefly outline the conclusions of the article. 
These  facilities  are  only  possible  in  a  Web 
environment  for  digitally  published  articles. 
Sample articles are available on the project Web 
site  to  demonstrate  these  facilities.  A  previous 
study [12] has described the experience of using 
different  semantic  technologies  in  the  journal 
PLoS, 
ontologies, 
comments  on  the  articles,  and  an  ontology  of 
types or reasons for citation.  

biomedical 

including 

HyBrow  [35]  is  a  system  aimed  at  helping 
scientists  with  hypothesis 
formulation  and 
evaluation  against  previous  knowledge.  The 
work by Baumgartner and co-authors [41] aimed 
to 
identify  concepts  for  extracting  protein 
interaction  relations  from  biomedical  text.  The 
approach  of  [13]  to  semantic  annotations  in 
medical  articles  considers  assertions  to  be  the 
fundamental  units  of  knowledge.  The  HypER 
approach [4] also considers claims to be the basic 
unit  of 
scientific  knowledge.  Groth  and 
colleagues  [34]  present  a  publication  model 
called  nanopublications,  consisting  of  core 
their 
scientific 
annotations  which 
context; 
scientific  statements  are  coded  as  RDF  triples. 

statements  associated  with 

specify 

their 

8 http://www.rsc.org/Publishing/Journals/ProjectProspect/ 

The Utopia project [37] proposed the assignment 
of semantic comments to articles in PDF format.  
A  growing  number  of  scientific  publications, 
especially  in  the  biomedical  area,  such  as  the 
BMJ  (British  Medical  Journal)  and  the  JAMA 
(Journal  of  American  Medical  Association),  are 
using  structured  abstracts  [7]  as  a  way  to 
optimally extract the contents of articles. 

3. Materials and methods 

The  domain  of  biomedical  sciences  was 
chosen  because  scientific  articles  in  this  area 
follow a  strict formal pattern  in their  texts,  with 
sections  defined  according  to  a  standard  called 
IMRAD  (Introduction,  Method,  Results,  and 
Discussion) [18]. 

89  articles 

in  biomedical  sciences  were 
analyzed  to  develop  the  model  with  the  aim  of 
identifying  the  semantic  elements  of  scientific 
methodology, reasoning patterns, and sequencing 
that combine these elements. 

Articles analyzed comprise 3 thematic groups, 

the last one subdivided in 2 subgroups. 

-  articles  from    two  outstanding  Brazilian 
research journals, 20 articles from the Memorias 
do  Instituto  Oswaldo  Cruz,  which  has  its  scope 
mainly  in  Microbiology,  (published  during  the 
period 1999-2004), 20 articles from the Brazilian 
Journal  of  Medical  and  Biological  Research 
(published  during  the  period  1998-2004).  We 
used  the  20  most  downloadable  articles  of  each 
journal  at  the  moment  of  the  beginning  of  the 
research.  

-  20  articles  about  stem  cells  were  also 
analyzed  (published  during  the  period  1994-
2004).  Stem  cells,  as  an  emerging  research  area 
in  rapid  development,  were  chosen  expecting  to 
find articles reporting important discoveries. The 
three 
articles  analyzed  were  selected  from 
reviews  which  present  stem  cell 
research 
development in a historical perspective, pointing 
out  the  advances  in  research,  thus  of  special 
interest for our work.  

-  Telomerase  1  group  -  15  articles  from  the 
Albert  Lasker  Basic  Medical  Research  Award 
2006  key  publications  were  analyzed.  This  last 
group  is  of  special  interest  to  the  objectives  of 
this  research  because  the  articles  report,  step  by 
step,  the  rise  of  a  new  scientific  discovery,  the 
discovery of the telomerase enzyme from 1978 - 
the first article - to 2001 - the last article of this 
group. The analysis of this group of articles was 
guided by an article [14] by the three winners of 
Lasker  Award  2006  which  comments  the  steps 
toward the discovery of telomerase enzyme.  
-  Telomerase  2  group  -  14  additional  articles 
reporting  the  development  of  research  on  the 
telomerase  enzyme  were  selected  from  three 

reviews:  the  first  from  Cech  [39],  a  balance  of 
research  on 
the  
previously  mentioned  paper  [14]  and  articles 
listed  in  the  timeline  available  at  Telomerase 
Database site9. Each of these 14 articles appears 
at least in two of the former three reviews.  

the  date, 

A  comprehensive  list  of  references  of  the  89 
articles,  separated  by  the  previous  groups  is 
presented in Annex 1. 

Each  article  was  analyzed  in  4  steps:  (1) 
identify  patterns  of 
reasoning  developed 
throughout  the  article;  (2)  identify  the  main 
conclusion  posited  by  the  author  in  the  text;  to 
each  article  the  research  group  comes  to  a 
consensus  concerning  to  the  article  text  which 
holds  the  conclusion  synthesizing  the  articles 
main  findings,  and  to  its  representation  as  a 
relation  according  to  the  model  proposed;  (3) 
format  the  claim  made  in  the  conclusion  as  a 
relation  according  to  the  proposed  knowledge 
representation  format;  and  (4)  tentatively  map 
each  element  of  the  relation  to  concepts  in  the 
UMLS/UMLS  SN.  Mapping  is  achieved  by 
comparing terms in the relation extracted in step 
3  to  MeSH/UMLS  terms  indexing  the  article  in 
PubMed records. 

The  Analysis  Form  used  with  examples 
illustrative  of  the  analysis  process  for  4  articles 
are presentd in Annex 2.  

A  prototype  of  a  submission  interface  to  an 
electronic  journal  system  was  developed,  which 
formats  the  natural  language  text  of  conclusions 
of  articles  submitted  by  authors  as  semantic 
relations; this was developed using MetaMap10, a 
program 
to 
identify terms from the UMLS Thesaurus. 

that  processes  biomedical 

texts 

The possibility to apply the model to different 
areas  depends  upon  the  existence  of  twofold 
essential elements: the articles must have a clear 
conclusion  that  can  be  stated as  a  claim  and  the 
existence  of  a 
in 
machine-readable  format  which  should  include 
terms  and  relations  between  them.  Biomedical 
area  fulfills  both  elements.  The  appliance  of  the 
model 
further 
experiments.   

terminological  databank 

areas  needs 

to  different 

4. Results and discussion 

We  have  worked    for  years  [9]  on  the 
development  of  a  semantic  model  of  electronic 
publishing.  This  paper  reports  the  results  of  a 
partial 
the  model  as  a 
prototype  of  a  journal  submission  system.  The 
aim  of  this  model  is  to  achieve  a  semantically 
richer  content 
representation  of  biomedical 

implementation  of 

9 http://telomerase.asu.edu/ 
10 MetaMap, http://mmtx.nlm.nih.gov/  

content 

of 

articles, 

to  extract  inferences  about 

articles  in  a  program  understandable  format. 
Such  a  knowledge  representation  format  allows 
the 
programs 
knowledge 
enabling 
semantically  powerful  content  retrieval  and 
management  relative  to  current  bibliographic 
Information  Retrieval  Systems. 
Instead  of 
manually annotate the text of a paper as in SALT 
or SWAN [3], [42] the approach taken herein to 
add  semantic  metadata  to  papers  is  the  natural 
language  processing  (NLP)  of  the  conclusion  of 
a  paper  to  format  it  as  a  semantic  relation. 
Conclusions  are  typed  by  authors  in  addition  to 
conventional  bibliographic  metadata  through  a 
journal submission system.  
proposed  model 

two 
components: an enhanced semantic record model 
and  a  Web  interface  for  authors  self-publishing 
and  self-submitting  articles  to  a  journal  system. 
The semantic record model extends conventional 
bibliographic  record  models,  which  comprise 
such  as 
conventional  descriptive  elements 
authors, 
and 
publication 
content 
information  such  as  keywords  or  descriptors. 
Scientific claims made by authors in their papers 
are 
two 
different  phenomena  or  between  a  phenomenon 
its  characteristics  [17],  e.g.  telomere 
and 
causes 
shortening 
senescence 
(Type_of_relation) 
(Phenomenon) 
extracts 
(Phenomenon) 

(Type_of_relation) 
tranferase 
specific 
activity 
relations  could  be 
(Characteristic).  Such 
represented 
of 
<Antecedent><Type_of_relation><Consequent>

represented  as  relations  between 

cellular 
Tetrahymena 

together  with 

(Phenomenon) 

bibliographic 

title, 

date 

as 

triples 

or 
show 

telomere 

The 

comprises 

source, 

Our study also includes the development of a 
prototype  system  of  a  Web  authors  submission 
interface  to  a  journal  system,  which  implements 
the model [26], described in Section 4.2, and the 
use  of  the  general  framework  proposed  to 
identify discoveries in scientific papers based on 
two  aspects:  their  rhetoric  elements  and  formats 
and  by  comparing  the  content  of  the  conclusion 
of  articles  with  terminological  data  banks  [8], 
[27].  This  feature  corresponds  to  step  4  of  the 
analysis process described in section 2 and to the 
task performed by authors as illustrated in Figure 
5.    

The  following  figure  shows  an  overview  of 
the  semantic  model  of  electronic  publishing, 
which  includes  the  following  components:  the 
Web interface to a system  for the submission of 
articles  to  electronic  publications,  the  Database, 
the 
the  public  Web  knowledge  base,  and 
Discoveries 
tool.

identification 

Fig. 1. Overview of the components of the semantic publication model

4.1. A semantic content model for electronic publishing 

Relations  are  the  core  of  the  proposed 
knowledge  representation  scheme.  A  relation 
has  the  form  of  an  Antecedent  (a  concept 
referring 
to  a  phenomenon),  a  Semantic 
Relation, and a Consequent (a concept referring 
to  a  phenomenon  or  a  characteristic  of  the 
phenomenon  in  the  Antecedent).  A  Semantic 
Relation  may  be  a  specific  Type_of_relation 
such as  causes,  affects, or indicates, or a 
has/have_characteristic  relation.  Examples  of 
knowledge  representation  according 
this 
schema are the following: 

to 

-  Tetrahymena  extracts  (Antecedent)  show 
have_Characteristic 

specific  telomere  terminal  transferase  activity 
(Consequent). 

(Type_of_relation) 

-  Telomere  shortening  (Antecedent)  causes 
senescence 

cellular 

(Type_of_relation) 
(Consequent). 

Relations  may  also  appear 

in  different 
semantic  elements  throughout  the  article  text, 
such  as  within  the  Problem  that  the  article 
addresses, as a Question, in which either one of 
the  two  relata  or  the  type  of  relation  is 
unknown; 
the 
Conclusion.  Frequently,  the  Conclusion  also 
poses new Questions. 

the  Hypothesis;  or 

in 

in 

Questions,  Hypothesis,  and  Conclusion  are 
the  semantic  elements  comprising  the  proposed 

model.  They  are  the  elements  related  to  the 
knowledge  content  of  an  article,  which  this 
research  aims  to  identify  and  record  in  a 
machine-processable  format.  The  Conclusion  is 
an  essential  semantic  element  that  synthesizes 
the knowledge content of an article. In the scope 
of  a  recently  published  article,  it  is  provisional 
knowledge; however, it is at least guaranteed by 
the experiment reported in the article. Semantic 
elements  such  as  Questions  and  Hypothesis  are 
important because they enable the evolution of a 
claim  to  be  determined.  Other  elements  have 
rhetoric  functions,  as  extensively  discussed  in 
[19] 
to  describe 
methodological 
experiment 
performed,  its  context,  or  the  obtained  results 
more clearly.  

[22],  or 

options, 

serve 

and 

the 

In  Biomedical  Sciences,  there  are  some 
standardized  methodological  procedures,  such 
as  PCR  (polymerase  chain  reaction),  and  some 
standardized  contexts  where  experiments  can 
take  place,  for  example,  in  humans  (e.g., 
children, women, embryo), rats, etc.  

Thus fhe semantic elements that comprise the 

proposed record model are the following: 

- the problem the article is addressing and the 

question derived from it,  

- an antecedent,  

the  relation  in  a  domain,  for  example,  in 
Biomedical Sciences), 

- and the consequent. 
The antecedent and consequent may be two 
different  phenomena  or  a  phenomenon  and  its 
characteristics. 

An  empiricall  experiment  is  also  described 
with  the  aim  of  observing  the  phenomenon 
described  and  specific  characteristics 
  of 
experimental articles divided into: 

-  results    tables,  figures,  and  numeric  data 

reporting the observations made;  

- measure used;  
-  a  specific  context  where  the  empirical 

observations take place, subdivided into:  

- environment  a hospital, a daycare center, 

a high school, 

-  a  geographical  place  where  the  empirical 

observations take place,  

- time when the empirical observations occur,  
-  a  specific  population    pregnant  women, 
the 

in  which 

early  born  babies,  mice   
phenomenon occurs,  

- conclusion  a set of propositions made by 

the author as a result of his/her findings.  

A conclusion corroborates totally or partially 
the  hypothesis  of  an  article  or  negates  it.  A 
conclusion  may  also  be  conclusive  or  not  yet 
conclusive. 

antecedent, 

type_of_relation, 

In  every  analyzed  article,  concepts  found  in 
the 
and 
consequent  were  tentatively  mapped  (and  will 
be 
web 
authoring/publishing  tool)  to  concepts  taken 
from the UMLS. Not all elements are present in 
all articles.  

annotated 

future 

the 

in 

The  previous  hypotheses 

(from  other 
the 

authors)  are  not  satisfactory  to  solve 
problem due to the following criticism...; 

Therefore,  we  propose  this  new  hypothesis 
(original), which we consider a new pathway to 
solve the problem. 

Experimental-inductive 

articles 
propose  a  hypothesis  and  develop  experiments 
to  test  and  validate  it;  the  reasoning  is  as 
follows: 

(EI) 

A  problem  is  identified,  with  the  following 

aspects and data...; 

A  possible  solution  to  this  problem  can  be 

based on the following new hypothesis...; 

We  developed  an  experiment  to  test  this 

hypothesis and obtained the following results. 

In 

articles, 

it  corroborates 

experimental-inductive 

these 
conclusion  may  be  mainly  one  of 
the  hypothesis, 
alternatives: 
the 
refutes 
hypothesis.  However, 
the 
Conclusion  is  not  one  of  the  former;  it  simply 
reports intermediate, and not conclusive, results 
toward the hypothesis corroboration.   

it,  or  partially  corroborates 
in  some  cases, 

Experimental-deductive  (ED)  articles  use  a 
hypothesis  proposed  by  other  researchers  cited 
by the articles author and apply it to a slightly 
different context; the reasoning is as follows: 

A  problem  is  identified,  with  the  following 

aspects and data...; 

In the literature, the previous hypotheses (by 

other authors) have been proposed...;   

We 

choose 

the 

following 

previous 

hypothesis...; 

We 

enlarge 

this 
hypothesis; we develop an experiment to test it 
in this new context...; 

recontextualize 

and 

Articles  differ  in  the  way  they  are  built 
around  previously  stated  hypothesesthose 
stated  by  authors  other  than  the  author  of  the 
current article, or new, original hypotheses, i.e., 
those stated by the author of the current article. 
Articles  may  also  differ  by  the  existence  of  a 
documented  experiment  or  simply  theoretical 
considerations  comparing  previously  stated 
hypotheses.  

Four patterns of reasoning  were found in the 
analyzed articles, resulting in four article types: 
theoretical  articles,  which  employ  abductive 
(TA) reasoning and experimental articles, which 
may  simply  be  exploratory  (EE),  or  employ 
inductive (EI) or deductive (ED) reasoning. 

Theoretical-abductive  (TA)  articles  analyze 
different,  previous  hypotheses,  showing  their 
faults  and  limitations  and  proposing  a  new 
hypothesis; the reasoning is as follows:  

A  problem  is  identified,  with  the  following 

aspects and data...; 

The  experiment  shows  the  following  results 

in this new context. 

(EE) 

Experimental-exploratory 

articles 
usually  are  not  hypothesis  driven; 
their 
objective is to acquire knowledge about a poorly 
understood 
by 
performing  an  experiment;  the  reasoning  is  as 
follows:    

phenomenon 

scientific 

There 

is  a  phenomenon 

that 

is  poorly 

understood in a scientific domain. 

We developed an experiment that permits the 
identification of the following characteristics of 
this phenomenon. 

Within  the  group  of  89  articles  that  were 
analyzed,  we  classified  27  as  experimental- 
inductives  (EI),  44  as  experimental-deductives 
(ED),  15  as  experimental-exploratories  (EE), 
and 3 as theoretical-abductives (TA). 

We  are  interested  not  in  correlating  these 
patterns with the rhetoric or surface structure of 
scientifc  papers  but  with 
the  reporting  of 
discoveries in a paper. We found also that these 
patterns  of  reasoning  are  related  to  fact  that 

these  articles 
Articles classified as experimental-exploratories 
(EE) have achieved the lowest grade of mapping 
of their conclusions to UMLS terms [8], [25].   

These  basic  semantic  elements  of  scientific 
articles are interrelated and structured. Together 
with  the  corresponding  bibliographic  metadata 
and  article  full-text,  they  form  richer  article 
representations 
in  machine-understandable 
formats and constitute single digital objects that 
may  be  stored  in  a  digital  library  or  electronic 
journal publishing system.  

The  different  reasoning  semantic  elements 
and  reasoning  procedures  discussed  previously 
can be formalized in the Model of Knowledge in 
Articles  (MKA),  as  illustrated  in  Figure  2  with 
the 
and 
componentsproperties.

hierarchy 

of 

classes 

Fig. 2. MKA: model of knowledge representation in articles as a UML class diagram. For clarity different colors 

show the components of each kind of article

The  proposed  knowledge 

representation 
framework enables the following types of queries 
to a semantic information retrieval system: 

(Type_of_relation) 

involves 
nontemplate 
addition  of  telomeric  repeats  onto  the  ends  of 
chromosomes (Consequent)? [20]? 

-  Which  other  articles  have  hypotheses 
the  cause  of  cervical 

suggesting  HPV  as 
neoplasias in women? 

-  Which  articles  have  hypotheses  suggesting 
other causes of cervical neoplasias different from 
HPV in women? 

-  Which  articles  have  hypotheses  suggesting 
HPV  as  the  cause  of  cervical  neoplasias  in 
groups different from women? 

-  Which  articles  have  hypotheses  suggesting 
HPV  as  the  cause  of  pathologies  different  from 
neoplasias? 

-  Which  articles  have  hypotheses  suggesting 
HPV  as  the  cause  of  cervical  neoplasias  in 
different  contexts  (not  in  women  from  the 
Federal District, Brazil)? 

     The  model  also  enables  queries  that  may 
indicate  new  discoveries,  for  example,  new 
causes for cellular senescence: 

-  Which 

experimental-inductive 

articles 
propose (Antecedent?) causes (Type_of_relation) 
for cellular senescence (Consequent) that are not 
mapped to UMLS concepts? 

-  Is  there  any  confirmation  of  the  hypothesis 
that  Several  aspects  of  both  the  structural  and 
dynamic  properties  of  telomeres  (Antecedent) 
led  to  the  proposal  that  telomere  replication 

-  Who  and  when  first  maintained  that  the 
RNA  component  of  telomerase  (Antecedent) 
may  be  directly  involved  in  (Type_of_relation) 
recognizing 
three-dimensional 
structure of the G-rich telomeric oligonucleotide 
primers (Consequent) [10]?                        

unique 

the 

Previous  examples,  taken  from  the  articles 
analized,  show  how  the  proposed  knowledge 
representation  schema  may  improve  semantic 
retrieval  and  the  use  of  knowledge  in  different 
and unpredicted contexts.   

system  poses 

The implementation of the model described in 
a  Web  submission  interface  to  an  electronic 
journal 
challenges  of 
representing  the  model,  even  partially,  in  a 
machine-understandable  format,  and  extracting 
and  formatting  a  relation  from 
the  article 
conclusion.  How  we  addressed  these  challenges 
is  described  as  follows.  MKA  was  implemented 
in  RDF  as  it  enables  semantic  retrieval  using 
SPARQL  [36].  The  following  figure  shows  the 
conclusion  telomere  replication  (Antecedent) 
involves 
terminal 
transferase-like  activity  (Consequent),  found  in 
[12], represented in RDF format.  

(Type_of_relation) 

the 

<rdf:RDF 
    xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#" 
    xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" 
    xmlns:sa="http://example.org/semarticles/" 
    xmlns:umls="http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/"> 
    <rdf:Description rdf:about="http://art_id/"> 
      <dc:title>title</dc:title> 
      <dc:creator>creator</dc:creator> 
      <dc:subject>subject</dc:subject>     
       <dc:date.publisher>date</dc:date.publisher> 
       <sa:conclusion> 
           <rdf:Description rdf:about="http://art_id/conclusion"> 
             <sa:antecedent content="telomere 

replication">http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/CUI01</sa:antecedent>   

             <sa:type_rel content="involves">http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/CUI02</sa:type_rel>  
             <sa:consequent conten="a terminal transferase-like activity"> 

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/CUI03</sa:consequent>  

      </rdf:Description> 
     </sa:conclusion> 
    </rdf:Description> 
</rdf:RDF> 

Fig. 3. Conclusion of article, represented in RDF. CUI means concept unique identifier. 

4.2.  Web  submission  interface  to  an  electronic 
journal system  

is  developed  with 

A  prototype  of  the  submission  system  was 
developed  to  evaluate  the  dialog  with  authors 
and  the  extraction  routine.  The  prototype  of  the 
interface is in its initial phase of development. It 
is not yet a final version or a production system. 
the  specific  aim  of 
It 
demonstrating 
the  system 
proposed.  It  is  developed  as  a  Java  application 
using  MetaMap  program  and  Lingpipe11  library 
and  running  in  a  notebook  in  order  to  provide 
portability to test it with authors interviewed and 
observe their reactions.  

the  feasibility  of 

the 

and 

results; 

This  prototype  processes  selected  parts  of  the 
title,  abstract,  keywords, 
text,  namely, 
introduction,  methods, 
the 
introduction  and  abstract  are  used  to  extract  the 
objective of the article through the identification 
of  phrases  such  as  objectives  of  our  work...  and 
The  goal  of  the  present  work...  The  author  is 
asked  by  the  system  to  enter  the  conclusion  of 
the  article  being  submitted.  The  extraction 
routine  uses  a  formula,  which  is  based  on  the 
frequency  of  occurrence  of  a  term  in  the  title, 
abstract,  keywords,  method, 
and 
objective,  to  weigh  terms  in  the  conclusion  in 
order  to  format  it  from  a  textual  format  to  a 
relation.  The  syntactic  components  found  in  the 

results, 

conclusion  with  higher  weights  are  candidates 
for  the  Antecedent  and  Consequent  of  the 
relation.  

The  natural  language  processing  analysis  is 
performed  by  the  prototype  in  the  following 
steps: 

a - Text in articles Introduction is processed 
in order to identify  which  would be the articles 
Objective; the Objective identified by the system 
is  displayed  to  authors  and  he/she  is  asked  to 
validate  the  Objective;  if  he/she  do  not  agree 
with the identified Objective the system asks the 
author to enter the Objective.      

b  -  Weka12  data  mining  program  was 
previously  used  to  define  which  sections  of  an 
article  have  strongest  correlation  between  their 
terms with terms in the Conclusion. Correlations 
were 
in  Title,  Objective,  Abstract, 
Keyword,  Introduction,  Material  and  Methods 
and  Results;  sections  with  strongest  correlation 
were Title, Keywords and Objective.  

found 

Text  in  all  these  sections  was  analyzed  by 
MetaMap.  MetaMap  program  parses  natural 
language  utterances  into  components  as  phrases 
and assigns to these phrases syntactic categories 
as VERB_PHRASE (candidates do be relations), 
NOUN_PHRASE  (candidate  to  be  phenomena), 
PREP_PHRASE 
to  be  context 
information).  

(candidate 

-  NOUN_PHRASEs 

the 
Conclusion  typed  by  the  author  are  weighted 
according  to  their  frequency  and  their  presence 

found 

in 

11 Lingpipe, http://alias-i.com/lingpipe/. 

12 Weka, http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ 

UMLS concepts. 

After  the  author  validates  the  Relation,  the 
system  records  it  as  an  instance  of  the  MKA 
according  to  the  format  illustrated  in  Fig.  3, 
together  with  the  conventional  bibliographic 
metadata  and  the  article  full-text.  In  the  future, 
we plan to integrate this prototype with the PKP 
Open  Journal  System14,  an  electronic  journal 
system  largely  used  in  Brazil.  In  its  present 
implementation,  among  the  semantic  elements 
that  comprise  the  content  model,  the  prototype 
processes only the Conclusion.  

Some  of  the  steps  described  above  when 
processing the conclusion The results presented 
herein  emphasize  the  importance  to  accomplish 
systematic 
during 
pregnancy in order to prevent the occurrence of 
elevated  number  of 
infants  with  congenital 
toxoplasmosis  [15]  are  shown  in  the  following 
Figures. 

serological 

screening 

in  Title,  Objective,  Abstract,  Keyword, 
Introduction, Material and Methods and Results; 
The  weight  formula  is  the  following  and  is 

based on [16]: 
W(np(n))=A(np(n))+I(np(n))+M(np(n))+R(np(n)
)+T(sn(n))+K(sn(n))+O(sn(n)), 
Where: 

-  W(np(n))  is  the  weight  of  the  n  th. 

noun_phrase, 

-    A(np(n))  is  the  frequency  of    the  n  th. 

noun_phrase in the Abstract, 

-    I(np(n))  is  the  frequency  of    the  n  th. 

noun_phrase in the Introduction section, 

-    M(np(n))  is  the  frequency  of    the  n  th. 
noun_phrase in the Material and Method section, 
-    R(np(n))  is  the  frequency  of    the  n  th. 

noun_phrase in the Results section, 

-    T(np(n))  is  the  frequency  of    the  n  th. 

noun_phrase in the Title, 

-    K(np(n))  is  the  frequency  of    the  n  th. 

noun_phrase in the Keywords, 

-    O(np(n))  is  the  frequency  of    the  n  th. 

noun_phrase in the Objective. 

the 

strongest 

correlation  with 

All sections receive weight 1 except sections 
with 
the 
Conclusion  as  Title,  Keywords  and  Objective 
which  received  respectively  weights  =15,  =5 
and  =10.  These  weights  were  adjusted 
comparing  results  obtained  automatically  by  the 
system  with  results  obtained  by  processing 
articles by the research group.  

d  -  The 

two  first  raked  not  adjacent 
NOUN_PHRASEs  in  the  Conclusion  are  the 
candidates  to  be  the  Phenomenon  which  will  be 
mapped to the two relata of a relation;  

e  -  The  system  then  looks  for  a  VERBPHRASE  occurring  in  the  text  between  the  two 
NOUN_PHRASEs  previously  identified  as  a 
candidate to be the relation. 

A  relation  dictionary  is  developed  on  the 
base  of  the  54  relations  which  comprise  UMLS 
Semantic  Network  and  their  synonyms  found  in 
WorldNet Dictionary (2010)13.  

the 

representation 

then  mapped 

to 
elements, 

f  -  These  linguistic  level  elements  previously 
the  article 
identified  are 
conclusion 
the 
Phenomenon  to  Antecedent,  the  Relation  to 
Type_of_relation, the second Phenomenon to the 
Consequent.  Then 
article  Conclusion 
representation  elements  obtained  are  mapped  to 
concepts  in  UMLS.  The  MetaMap  program  is 
used  in  order  to  map  the  article  Conclusion 
representation elements identified to concepts of 
UMLS  Metathesaurus.  At  this  phase  we  ask  the 
author  for  validation  both  of 
the  relation 
identified and of its mapping to UMLS concepts. 
Authors  will  browse  UMLS  Metathesaurus  and 
will  be  asked  to  validate  the  mapping  of  the 

13 WordNet, http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 

14 PKP Open Journal System, http://pkp.sfu.ca/   

Fig. 5. Author specifies the article conclusion

Fig. 6. The article conclusion is formatted as a relation

Fig. 7. Authors are asked to map concepts in the articles conclusion to UMLS terms

5. Conclusions 

and 

Nowadays,  researchers  are  accustomed  to 
publishing 
papers 
themselves  when  submitting  them  to  digital 
libraries, 
conference  management 
systems, 
digital repositories or journal systems.  

describing 

their 

to 

try 

We consider the  submission  of an article to a 
journal system to be a privileged process during 
which  authors  are  particularly  motivated  to 
clarify  and  disambiguate  questions  about  their 
articles.  In  our  proposal,  we 
take 
advantage  of  this  moment.  The  pathway  that 
seems  more feasible to reach this objective is to 
provide authors with an interactive interface that 
enables  them  to  validate  the  automatic  NLP 
carried out by the system. Some elements of the 
proposed  model  can  be  directly  obtained  by 
asking questions of the authors, such as whether 
the article is theoretical or experimental, whether 
the 
the 
hypotheses,  and  whether  the  article  is  based  on 
the hypothesis of other authors or is original. The 
NLP  of  short  pieces  of  text  as  the  articles 
conclusions also seems a more feasible and error 
free option.    

confirms  or  denies 

conclusion 

A  great  difficult  is  to  test  such  a  system  in 
operational  conditions.  This  would  require  the 
agreement  and  collaboration  of  editors  and 
authors. We tested the prototype with six authors 
of our university and in all cases the system was 
able  to  format  the  conclusion  of  articles  as  a 
relation.  Our  challenge  for  now  on  is  to  test  the 
system in near operational conditions. 

After  the  claims  made  by  an  author  from 
anywhere  in  the  article  text,  for  example,  the 

are 

richer 

forming 

extracted, 

key  words, 

conclusion, 
they  will  be 
represented in a structured form as relations. All 
these  semantic  elements  can  be  added 
to 
conventional  bibliographic  elements  such  as  the 
title,  author,  abstract,  publication  data,  abstract, 
and 
article 
representations.  This  knowledge  content  will 
then  be  represented  in  a  standard  machineunderstandable  format  such  as  RDF.  Articles 
published  according  to  the  model  proposed  can 
be  interlinked  and  have  their  content  annotated 
with  an  increasing  number  of  Web  public 
ontologies,  forming  a  rich  knowledge  network. 
This  will  enable  software  agents 
to  help 
scientists to identify and validate new discoveries 
in  Science  by  comparing  the  knowledge  content 
of  articles  with  the  knowledge  content  held  in 
public knowledge bases such as the UMLS.   

just 

in  a  generic 

The evidences found of a correlation between 
articles  which  conclusion  is  poorly  represented 
or  represented 
in 
level 
biomedical 
scientific 
discoveries  are  preliminary  and  deserve  more 
experiments.  They  may 
indicate  a  fruitful 
pathway 
the  use  of  Semantic  Web 
technologies to process articles content.  

terminologies 

and 

to 

inclusion  of 

 Although  relations  play  a  key  role 

in 
scientific  knowledge,  conventional 
indexing 
languages  do  not  take  them  into  consideration. 
The 
in  knowledge 
representation  makes  an  expressive  difference 
[43]  by  enhancing  meaning  and  making  more 
precise  the  role  of  subject  headings  used  to 
represent the document content.  

relations 

The 

inclusion 

conclusions 
formatted as relations to enhance article metadata 
is  just  a  proposal.  The  prototype  developed  just 

articles 

of 

record lay-out is under development. 

The  body  of  scientific  literature  published  on 
the  Web  is  becoming  increasingly  vast  and 
complex.  It  will  be  necessary  for  scientists  to 
have  enhanced  software  tools  in  order  to  make 
inferences  based  on  this  content.  Library  and 
Information Science can go beyond conventional 
indexing  techniques  to  provide  fast  access  to 
full-text  scientific  articles.  This  would  help 
scientists  to  directly  process  the  knowledge 
content  of  scientific  articles  and  to  recover  the 
reasoning that leads to a scientific discovery. The 
proposed model also points to the standardization 
of  an  SkML  (Scientific  Knowledge  Markup 
Language) encompassing the knowledge content 
of  scientific  articles  published  on  the  Web,  as 
also  proposed  by  other  studies  [29],  [32],  [33]. 
This  opens  a  new  perspective  in  scientific 
electronic  publishing,  knowledge  acquisition, 
storage, processing, and sharing.  

This article reports the proposal of a model of 
semantic  publications,  not  of  a  production 
system;  such  a  model  aims  to  evaluate  the 
feasiability of  using  Semantic Web technologies 
to  enable  the  processing  of  articles  content  by 
computers.  The  development  of  the  proposed 
model  to  its  full  potentialities  depends  on  the 
development of software tools that have not been 
developed yet. More tests and experiments must 
be achieved to arrive at full journal and semantic 
retrieval production systems. Our research group 
has  not  been  able  to  fully  develop  the  model  to 
the  potentialities  outlined  here.  The  proposed 
model should, however, serve as a starting point 
that  can  be  discussed  and  built  upon  by  the 
scientific community. 

Acknowledgments 

This  research  was  supported,  at  different 
times,  by  CNPq,  CAPES,  FAPERJ,  and 
PROPPi/UFF.  We  would  also  like  to  thank 
Marilia Alvarenga Rocha Mendonca.  
