Contextual Information Retrieval in 
Research Articles: Semantic Publishing Tools 
for the Research Community 

Editor(s): Phillip Bourne, University of California at San Diego, USA; Tim Clark, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hos-
pital, USA; Anita de Waard, Elsevier Laboratories, USA; Alexander Garcia, Florida State University, USA; Carole Goble, University of 
Manches-ter, UK; Steve Pettifer, University of Manchester, UK; David Shotton, University of Oxford, UK 
Solicited review(s): Sudeshna Das, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, USA; Tim Clark, Harvard Medical School 
and Massachusetts General Hospital, USA 

M.A. Angrosh, Stephen Cranefield, Nigel Stanger 
Department of Information Science, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand 

Abstract.  In recent years, the dramatic increase in academic research publications has gained significant research attention. 
Research has been carried out exploring novel ways of providing information services using this research content. However, 
the task of extracting meaningful information from research documents remains a challenge. This paper presents our research 
work on developing intelligent information systems that exploit online article databases. We present in this paper, a linked 
data application which uses a new semantic publishing model for providing value added information services for the research 
community. The paper presents a conceptual framework for modelling contexts associated with sentences in research articles 
and discusses the Sentence Context Ontology, which is used to convert the information extracted from research documents 
into machine-understandable data. The paper reports supervised learning experiments carried out using conditional probabilistic models for achieving automatic context identification. The paper also describes a Semantic Web Application that provides 
various citation context based information services. 

Keywords:  Semantic Publishing Models, Sentence Context Ontology, Linked Data Application, Conditional Random Fields, 
Maximum Entropy Markov Models, Citation Classification, Sentence Context Identification

1. Introduction 

In recent years, there has been a dramatic increase 
in  research  output  by  scientists  across  the  globe.  A 
comparative  analysis  of  published  research  during 
the  years  1996-2002  and  2002-2008  by  Research4Life [39], an organization which offers health, 
agriculture and environmental research for free or at 
a subsidized price to developing countries, observed 
194%  or  6.4fold  increase  in  articles  published  in 
peer reviewed journals. Furthermore, a recent report 
by  UNESCO  observes  that  developing  countries 
more than doubled their annual spending on research 
and  development  activities  between  2002  and  2007, 
from $135 billion to $274 billion, leading to a drastic 
increase  in  research  output  [15].  While  this  overwhelming  increase  in  research  output  has  certainly 

benefitted  the  research  community,  it  has  also 
brought in its wake various challenges that need to be 
addressed  in  order  to  obtain  optimum  value  from 
these invaluable resources. It is becoming increasingly difficult to keep abreast of research developments 
in ones field due to the wide range of research outputs  coupled  with 
inter-
disciplinary research activities.  

the  complexities  of 

Institutional  digital  libraries  and  information  content providers are beginning to establish the required 
infrastructure  for  tracking  research  developments. 
However, there still remains a larger gap in the provision  of  information  services  using  the  content  extracted  from  research  documents.  Current  information  search  services  for  research  content,  mainly 
based  on  bibliographic  metadata,  are  not  intelligent 
enough to understand the  meaning of the content  in 

providing services based on contextual data. Identifying  the  limitations  of  current  digital  libraries,  Shum 
et al. observed that none of the digital libraries were 
capable  of  providing  information  about  the  publications  that  support  and  challenge  a  given  document 
and would not be able to trace the intellectual lineage 
for a given idea [8].  In order to offer such services, it 
is required to identify, extract and manage meaningful  information  about  the  content  embedded  in  research document, which is not readily available.  

Besides  providing  information  about  the  number 
of  publications  that  support  and  challenge  a  given 
document, it would be beneficial to provide researchers  with  contextual  information  about  how  a  given 
document is cited by other documents. Besides eliminating the tedious and time-consuming task of looking into each cited document to learn about the contexts  in  which  the  work  is  cited,  such  information 
services would also facilitate easier and more meaningful  understanding  of  the  cited  work.  In  order  to 
provide such information services, it is  necessary to 
extract  contextual  information  associated  with  sentences in research documents. This contextual information  would  also  help  in  offering  a  wide  range  of 
services. For example, it would be possible to see the 
context  of  citation  sentences  in  a  given  article  in  a 
single view. Furthermore, while it would also be possible to learn about citation contexts of works of individual authors, it would also pave ways for developing systems that could trace the intellectual lineage 
for  a  given  idea.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  present 
study  is  taken  up  for  developing  intelligent  information systems based on the context associated with 
sentences in research articles. 

Preliminary  reports  on  this  work  have  been  published previously [1, 2]. [1] reports on modeling the 
contexts of sentences in related work sections of research  articles  and  supervised  learning  experiments 
for context identification and [2] describes the ontological  modelling  of  these  contexts.  The  framework 
was  extended  to  cover  citation  sentences  appearing 
throughout the article and an ontology has been developed  for  modelling  these  contexts.  Experiments 
with  supervised  learning  methods  were  carried  out 
and  an  information  retrieval  system  was  developed 
that used SPARQL queries.  

The key focus of this paper is the development of a 
linked  data  application  that  provides  intelligent  information  services  using  the  extracted  information 
from research articles. To this end, we begin by proposing a framework for defining the contexts associated with sentences in research articles. We then pre-

sent  our  Sentence  Context  Ontology  for  modelling 
these  contexts  and  describe  our  experiments  carried 
out  with  supervised  learning  methods  for  achieving 
the  task  of  sentence  context  identification.  Finally, 
we describe the linked data application developed for 
volumes  published  in  the  European  Semantic  Web 
Conference (ESWC) series.  

2. Related Work 

In order to achieve the key objective of this study 
i.e., to develop intelligent information systems using 
the  contexts  associated  with  sentences  in  research 
articles, we use techniques from the following different areas.  

1.  Citation Context Analysis 
2.  Machine Learning Experiments using Condi-

tional Probabilistic Models 

3.  Semantic Web Initiatives for modelling Scien-

tific Discourse 

The following sections describe the prior work in 
these areas. 

2.1. Citation Context Analysis 

In  recent  times  there  has  been  a  lot  of  interest  in 
identifying and using the citation context for providing information services. We categorize the research 
work in this field into the following three areas: citation  classification  schemes,  automatic  extraction  of 
citation  contexts  and  using  citation  contexts  for  information retrieval. 

2.1.1. Citation Classification Schemes 

Several  studies  have  focused  on  identifying  the 
reasons for citations in research articles. As early as 
1965, Garfield identified fifteen different reasons for 
authors to cite other works [17]. Based on an analysis 
of  30  research  articles  in  theoretical  high  energy 
physics, Moravcsik and Murugesan proposed a classification  scheme  consisting  of  four  categories  [31].  
Nanba  and  Okumara  presented  a  simplified  citation 
classification scheme involving three categories [33] . 
Recently  Teufel  et  al.  presented  an  annotation 
scheme  for  classification  of  citations 
involving 
twelve categories [44]. 

Nanba and Okumara used cue phrases for extracting citing areas in research papers. The citing areas 
are defined as a succession of sentences that have a 
connection  with  the  sentence  that  includes  the  citation in the paragraph [33]. The study created the citing  area  corpus  by  hand  and  applied  n-word  gram 
analysis  to  this  corpus.  The  study  developed  160 
rules  for  automatic  determination  of  citation  types. 
The  rules  were  based  on  84  cue  phrases  extracted 
from the corpus. 

Nanba et al. described methods for classifying research  papers  using  citation  information  [32].  The 
authors  proposed  bibliographic  coupling  using  citation  types  that  identified  problems  or  gaps  in  cited 
works  as  an  effective  way  of  classifying  research 
papers. 

Garzone and Mercer presented an automated citation classifier, which involved a pragmatic grammar 
consisting of 195 lexical matching rules and 14 parsing rules that was developed based on cue words extracted from a citation and its location in the article 
[18].  Pham  and  Hoffmann  developed  a  Knowledge 
Acquisition  Framework  for  Tasks  in  Natural  Language (KAFTAN), capable of acquiring cue phrases 
for classifying citations [37]. Mercer and Marco extended the work of Garzone and Mercer [18] to propose the use of fine-grained cue phrases within citation sentences for classifying these citation sentences 
[30]. 

Teufel  et  al.  presented  an  annotation  scheme  and 
employed machine learning techniques for achieving 
automatic classification of citation sentences following the annotation scheme [44]. 

Kaplan  et  al.  experimented  with  co-reference 
chains  for  extracting  citations  from  research  papers 
and  achieved  7-10%  precision  as  compared  to  the 
cue-phrase-based technique. The study created a corpus  of  citations  comprising  citing  papers  for  four 
cited papers [22]. 

There have also been several studies using conditional probabilistic models such as Conditional Random  Fields  (CRFs)  and  Maximum  Entropy  Markov 
Models (MEMMs) for extracting information related 
to citations, which are discussed in Section 2.2. 

2.1.3. Using Citation Contexts for Information 
Retrieval 

Nanba  and  Okumara  investigated  the  automatic 
generation  of  a  review  article  based  on  citation  in-

formation  and  relationships  [33].  The  study  developed  a  prototype  using  citation  relationships.  The 
system identified the citing areas and the type of citing  relationships  and  used  this  information  for  cita-
tion-based topical clustering of papers.  

Nanba et al. [32] extended the prototype of Nanba 
and Okumara [33] by including support for classifying research papers based on citation types. Ritchie et 
al. conducted experiments using terms from citations 
for scientific literature search [40]. The authors used 
terms  used  by  citing  documents  to  describe  a  docu-
ment, in combination with the terms of the document 
itself.  The  authors  found  that  the  combination  of 
terms  yielded  better  retrieval  performance 
than 
standard indexing of the document terms alone. 

2.2. Machine Learning Experiments using 
Conditional Probabilistic Models 

The present study views the task of context identification  as  a  sequential  classification  problem.  The 
sequential  classification  is  achieved  by  using  conditional  probabilistic  models  Conditional  Random 
Fields (CRFs) and Maximum Entropy Markov Models  (MEMMs).  Various  experiments  have  been  carried  out  using  these  models  for  extracting  bibliographic and citation information from documents. 

Le et al. used Hidden Markov Models and Maximum Entropy Markov Models for identifying citation 
types  [24].  The  authors  noted  that  this  method  of 
using  finite  state  machines  required  neither  user  interactions  nor  explicit  knowledge  about  cue  phrases 
and thus provided flexibility for extension. Feng and 
McCallum used CRFs for extracting various common 
fields from the headers and citations of research papers [36]. Hirohata et al. employed CRFs for identifying  rhetorical  roles  in  scientific  abstracts.  They 
carried out experiments to classify sentences in scientific abstracts into four sections  objective, methods, 
results and conclusions and achieved an accuracy of 
95.5%  per  sentence  and  68.8%  per  abstract  [20]. 
French  et  al.  used  CRFs  for  automatic  extraction  of 
brain  region  mentions  in  neuroscience  literature.  
Using a rich feature set derived from morphological, 
lexical,  syntactic  and  contextual  information,  the 
study showed that CRFs performed well compared to 
dictionary methods [14].  

Zou et al. conducted experiments using CRFs and 
Support  Vector  Machines  (SVMs)  for  locating  and 
parsing  bibliographic  references  in  HTML  medical 
articles  [50].  While  a  CRF  was  used  to  model  the 
word sequence, the SVM was focused on classifying 

that both the classifiers achieved about 97% accuracy 
at chunk level.  Gao et al. developed a parser of bibliographic  information  in  Chinese  electronic  books 
using  CRFs  [16].  Lopez  used  CRFs  for  extracting 
bibliographical  references  in  patent  documents  [25]. 
The author observed that  CRFs achieved better performance  compared  to  rule-based  algorithms  by  reducing  the  error  rate  by  75%.    Councill  et  al.  have 
developed ParsCit  an open source tool,  which besides  identifying  reference  strings,  identifies  their 
citation contexts. The tool uses a trained CRF model 
for  labelling  the  token  sequences  in  the  reference 
string [10]. Zhang et al. employed CRFs for extracting bibliographic fields such as author, title, journal, 
year  from  citations.  Using  a  subset  of  open-access 
PubMed Central articles, the study achieved an overall 97.95% F-Score [49]. 

2.3. Semantic Web Initiatives for Modelling Scientific 
Discourse 

Researchers in the field of the Semantic Web have 
also shown interest in modelling scientific discourse. 
The  SWAN  project  (Semantic  Web  Application  in 
Neuromedicine) has developed the SWAN Ontology 
  a  knowledge  schema  for  personal  and  community 
organization  and  annotation  of  scientific  discourse 
[9]. The SWAN Ontology includes the Citations Ontology  for  defining  a  set  of  entities  useful  for  referencing scientific publications [43]. The Bibliographic 
Ontology (bibo) was developed for defining the various constructs of bibliographic data [45]. CiTO  the 
Citations  Typing  Ontology    was  developed  for  describing the nature of reference citations in research 
articles  [41].  Groza  et  al.  (2007)  have  proposed  the 
SALT    Semantically  Annotated  LaTeX    framework for annotating research documents [19]. As part 
of  the  framework,  the  study  combines  three  ontologies  the Document ontology, the Rhetorical ontology  and  the  Annotation  ontology  for  achieving  this 
task.  

3. The Rationale and Contributions for this Study 

3.1. Why an application based on citation contexts? 

Though there have been several studies on identifying citation contexts and using this information for 
providing  information  services,  there  still  does  not 
exist a robust application that fully exploits the cita-

tion context information. The key focus of this study 
is to develop systems for automatic context identification  and  demonstrate  the  use  of  this  information 
through  developing  a  robust application.  In  order  to 
achieve this we define a framework defining contexts 
associated  with  citation  sentences  and  non-citation 
sentences. The justification for defining our own set 
of contexts is provided in the following section. 

3.2. Why another set of citation contexts? 

Even though there are different citation classification schemes available as mentioned in Section 2, the 
present study resorted to defining its own set of citation contexts as explained in Section 4.  The available classification schemes are developed for specific 
disciplines and create difficulties in applying them to 
other  disciplines.  White  observes  that  most  of  these 
classification schemes are idiosyncratic and are hard 
to code, resulting in difficulties for using them across 
literatures [48]. The citation contexts identified in the 
present  study  resulted  after  manually  analyzing  331 
citation  sentences  from  20  research  articles  selected 
from the Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) 
collection  at  springerlink.com  [42],  which  formed 
our training dataset. The process of defining contexts 
also included identifying  features present in each of 
these citation sentences that would justify the defined 
context for a given citation sentence. Thus, based on 
the presence of these features the new set of citation 
contexts  was  evolved.  We  explain  in  Section  6  the 
various features defined in the study. Further, besides 
defining contexts  for citation sentences,  we also define contexts for non-citation sentences. The contexts 
for non-citation sentences were defined after manually analyzing 838 sentences extracted from the training set of 20 research articles. Section 4 describes in 
detail the different contexts defined for sentences in 
our  study.  The  proposed  framework  facilitated  in 
developing our Sentence Context Ontology for deriving  machine-understandable  data.  The  justification 
for the ontology is provided in the following section. 

3.3. Why Sentence Context Ontology 

While  there  have  been  efforts  in  building  ontologies for modelling scientific discourse, these ontologies have focused on specific entities in research arti-
cles. For example, the focus of the SWAN ontology 
is  to  model  research  statements  and  research  questions  [9].  The  Bibliographic  Ontology  provides  a 
more  formal  way of describing bibliographic details 

bibliographic details, the  Citations Typing Ontology 
(CiTO)  takes  one  step  further  to  include  different 
reasons for citations in research documents [41].  

The key focus of our study is to identify contexts 
associated  at  sentence  level  in  research  documents 
and  use  this  information  for  providing  intelligent 
information  services.  However,  to  the  best  of  our 
knowledge, there is no ontology which describes the 
contexts associated with different types of sentences 
in  research  documents.  Therefore  we  developed  the 
Sentence  Context  Ontology  for  modelling  contexts 
associated  with  sentences.  We  explain  in  this  paper 
the  conceptual  basis  for  the  ontology  and  demonstrate how the ontology is used for developing intelligent  information  retrieval  tools  for  the  research 
community.   

3.4. Key Contributions of this paper 

The  following  form  the  key  contributions  of  this 

paper: 

1.  We  propose  a  framework  for  defining  contexts associated with sentences in research ar-
ticles. The framework is described in Section 
4.  

2.  We developed the Sentence Context Ontology 
based on the above framework. The ontology 
is described in Section 5.  

3.  We carried out machine learning experiments 
using the labels resulting from the framework 
for achieving automatic identification of contexts associated with sentences. The details of 
these experiments are provided in Section 6.  
4.  We developed a linked data application for research papers published in the proceedings of 
the  European  Semantic  Web  Conference 
(ESWC)  series.  Section  7  provides  details  of 
the  linked  data  application  and  explains  the 
unique services provided by this application  

4. Identifying Contexts associated with Sentences 
in Research Articles  Conceptual Framework 

A research article can be viewed as a collection of 
sections appropriately placed in relation to each other 
for  presenting  the  authors  research  work.  The  individual sections in the article are a collection of para-
graphs,  with  each  paragraph  comprising  a  sequence 

of  sentences.  Sentences  in  research  articles  can  be 
broadly categorized into two different types  citation 
sentences  and  non-citation  sentences.  While  citation 
sentences point to an external publication for various 
reasons, non-citation sentences have their own meanings and contexts associated with them. The present 
study  distinguishes  between  citation  sentences  and 
non-citation sentences based on the following defini-
tion. 

Citation sentences are defined as those sentences 
that  have  a  reference  to  a  published  or  unpublished 
source. Specifically, this is an expression in the sentence that points to an entry in the bibliographic references  section  of  the  article  for  the  purpose  of  acknowledging  the  cited  work.  This  expression  can 
either be a numeric expression such as [1], [1, 2] 
etc.  or  author  names  used  in  the  sentence  for  referring to the cited work. For example, in the sentence 
Toulmin proposed the ..., the word Toulmin is the 
name  of  the  author  and  is  used  to  refer  to  the  cited 
work.  Non-Citation  Sentences  are  defined  as  those 
sentences that do not have any expressions as defined 
above. 

Instead  of  considering  all  sentences  of  an  article, 
the present study limits its focus to those paragraphs 
that  have  citation  sentences.  We  assume  that  these 
paragraphs are sufficient to provide a rich representation  of  the  article  that  can  be  used  for  delivering 
unique  information  services.  Nanba  and  Okumara 
identify  passages  with  citation  sentences  as  citing 
areas  and  note  that  these  passages  provide  a  summary  of  the  cited  paper  from  the  current  authors 
viewpoint [33]. Further, a citation sentence is usually 
associated with one or more sentences in the article.  
Figure 1 shows our framework for modelling contexts  of  sentences  in  paragraphs  with  citation  sentences in research articles.  The framework is developed based on the generic rhetorical pattern observed 
in these paragraphs. As seen in Figure, citation sentences  with  different  contexts  (light  shaded  blocks) 
are either preceded or followed by non-citation sentences  (dark  shaded  blocks)  with  different  contexts. 
The  study  defines  the  following  contexts  associated 
with non-citation sentences and citation sentences in 
research articles. 

4.1. Contexts associated with Non-Citation Sentences 

A  variety  of  contexts  could  be  associated  with  a 
non-citation  sentence.  For  example,  it  could  be  an 
introduction  sentence,  introducing  the  reader  to  the 
research  ideas  addressed  in  the  article  or  a  back-

research ideas. It can also be a shortcoming sentence, 
identifying gaps in the research area or a cited work. 
The dark shaded blocks in Figure 1 identify the different contexts associated with non-citation sentences, 
which are defined as follows: 

4.1.1. Issue Sentences (ISSUE) 

The study considers a number of sentence types as 
Issue  sentences.  This  facilitates  in  having  control 
over labels for sentences which otherwise would result  in  difficulties  in  carrying  out  machine  learning 
experiments  for  context  identification.  Sentences 

with  the  following  characteristics  are  considered  as 
Issue sentences. 

Background/Introduction sentences (Block ) 

These sentences are used to introduce the reader to 
the  research  article  or  provide  background  about  issues addressed in the article and generally appear at 
the start of the paragraphs.  

Such sentences generally precede citation sentences and are considered as issue sentences as they present  an  introductory  or  background  issue  against 
which  the  author  uses  a  cited  work  to  progress  his 
argument. 

Cites for Related Issues 

(IRCW) 

Cites for Extending Cited 

Work (CWECW) 

Shortcomings in Cited 

Work (SCCW) 

Uses Outputs from Cited 

Works (WUCW) 

Cited Work Identifies 

Gaps (CWIG) 

Different Types of  

Citations 

Description Sentence      

(DES) 

Related Work            

Shortcomings (RWSC) 

Current Work 
Shortcomings 

(CWSC) 

Background / 
Introduction Sentence (ISSUE) 

Shortcomings 
in Research Area 

(RWSC) 

Issues raised / 
pointed out by 
author (ISSUE) 

Methodology / 
Experiments / Data 

(MET) 

Results 
(CWO) 

Future Work 

(FW) 

Description Sentence      

(DES) 

Related Work  

Shortcomings (RWSC) 

Cites for Subject Related 

Issues (SRCW) 

Relates Results with Cited 

Works (RWRW) 

Overcoming Gaps in Cit-

ed Work (OGCW) 

Compare Cited Works     

(CCW) 

Cited Work Overcomes 

Gaps (CWOG) 

Different Types of  

Citations 

  Non-Citation Sentence 

  Citation Sentence 

Figure 1: Contexts of sentences in paragraphs with citation sentences in research articles 

These sentences identify an issue pointed out by 
the author in relation to the cited work and generally 
follow a citation sentence. 

Generally, in a research article, after citing a related work, the author points to issues of his interest. 
Such  sentences  fall  into  this  category.  While  these 
sentences  follow  citation  sentences,  they  can  also 
form preceding issue sentences for the citation sentences that follow them. These sentences are characterized as issue sentences in this study. 

4.1.2. Shortcoming Sentences (RWSC) 

Shortcoming  sentences  are  defined  as  those  sentences that identify research gaps or shortcomings in 
the research discussed in the paper. These sentences 
form  an  important  component  in  developing  the 
authors argument. The study distinguishes between 
two different types of shortcoming sentences:  

Shortcomings in research area (Block ) 

These sentences identify shortcomings or gaps in 
the  research  area  being  addressed  in  the  research 
article and generally precede a citation sentence. 

Shortcomings in cited work (Block ) 

These sentences identify shortcomings or gaps in 
the  cited  work  used  by  the  author  in  the  research 
article and generally appear after a citation sentence. 

4.1.3. Description Sentences (DES) (Block ) 

These  sentences  further  describe  the  cited  work 
used  in  the  article  and  generally  follow  a  citation 
sentence. 

4.1.4. Methodology Sentences (MET) (Block ) 

These  sentences  describe  the  methodology  used 

in the research article 

4.1.5. Current Work Outcome Sentences (CWO) 

These sentences describe the outcomes or results 

of the current paper. 

4.1.6. Future Work Sentences (FW) (Block ) 

These  sentences  describe  the  future  work  that 

could follow on from the current paper. 

4.1.7. Current Work Shortcoming Sentences 
(CWSC) (Block ) 

These sentences describe the shortcomings of the 

current paper. 

4.2. Contexts associated with Citation Sentences 

The  contexts  associated  with  citation  sentences 
reflect the reason  for referring to the cited  work in 
the  research  article.  The  following  defines  the  different  contexts  that  are  identified  for  citation  sentences in the present study. 

4.2.1. Cites for Related Issues (IRCW) (Block ) 

These  are  citation  sentences  in  which  the  author 
uses the cited work to refer to issues in the research 
area of the article. 

4.2.2. Shortcomings in Cited Work (SCCW) (Block 

These  are  citation  sentences  in  which  the  author 

identifies shortcomings in the cited work. 

4.2.3. Cited Work used for Identifying Gaps (CWIG 
(Block ) 

These  are  citation  sentences  in  which  the  author 
uses  the  cited  work  for  identifying  gaps  in  the  research area addressed in the article. 

4.2.4. Current Work Extends Cited Work (CWECW) 
(Block ) 

These are citation sentences in which a statement 
is  made  about  how  the  current  work  extends  the 
cited work. 

4.2.5. Uses Outputs from Cited Works (WUCW) 
(Block ) 

These  are  citation  sentences  in  which  the  author 

refers to the outputs used from the cited work. 

(Block ) 

These  are  citation  sentences  in  which  the  cited 
work is mainly used to refer to subject related issues 
addressed within the research article. 

4.2.7. Overcomes Gaps in Cited Works (OGCW) 
(Block ) 

These are citation sentences in which the current 
paper  makes  claims  about  overcoming  the  gaps 
identified by the current paper in the cited work. 

4.2.8. Cited Work Overcomes Gaps (CWOG) (Block 

These  are  citation  sentences  in  which  the  author 
references cited works that overcome the gaps gaps 
identified in the current paper.  

4.2.9. Results with Related Work (RWRW) (Block 

These are citation  sentences in  which the results 
of  the  current  paper  are  compared  with  the  cited 
works. 

4.2.10. Compare Cited Works (CCW) (Block ) 

These are citation  sentences in  which the results 

or works of the cited works are compared. 

5. Sentence Context Ontology 

While in the previous section we defined various 
contexts that could be associated  with a given sen-
tence, it is also necessary to define relations between 
these  sentences.  For  example,  in  the  sample  paragraph provided in Figure 2, each sentence is related 
to the adjacent sentences. If we specifically consider 
the second sentence in the paragraph, we would notice that the third sentence is a shortcoming sentence 
identifying shortcomings in the cited works, cited in 
the second sentence. Also, the second sentence has 
preceding  and  following  citation  sentences  in  sentence 1 and sentence 4 respectively. Further, each of 
these citation sentences is related to a specific cited 
work, the details of which are provided in the references section of the article. In order to model these 
relations, we propose the Sentence Context Ontolo-
gy, which forms our vocabulary for modelling contexts of sentences in research articles. 

There is a large amount of literature addressing the problem of automated composition of web services. However, most of the 
approaches address composition at the functional level (see, e.g. [12, 4]), and much less emphasis has been devoted to the problem 
of process-level composition. Different planning approaches have been proposed to address the problem of on-the-fly composition, 
from HTNs [17] to regression planning based on extensions of PDDL, to STRIPS-like planning for composing services described 
in DAML-S [15]. However, none of these techniques addresses the problem of composing web services with conditional outputs, 
non-nominal outcomes, and with process models describing interaction protocols that include conditional and iterative steps. In [8, 
11, 7], the authors propose an approach to the automated composition of web services based on a translation of DAML-S to situation calculus and Petri Nets. Also in these papers, however, the automated composition is limited to sequential composition of 
atomic services, and composition requirements are limited to reachability conditions. 

Shortcoming Sentence 

Preceding and Following Citation Sentence 

Citation Sentence in Question 

Figure 2: Example Paragraph from Pistore et al.[38] 

SENTCON, the Sentence Context Ontology, is an 
ontology  for  describing  the  context  of  sentences  in 
scientific  research  articles  with  a  specific  focus  on 
citation  sentences  and  their  adjacent  sentences. 
Though  SENTCON  has  been  initially  designed  for 
application to research articles published in the Lecture Notes in Computer Science series, it can easily 
be extended for other domains. SENTCON is developed using the Web Ontology Language (OWL) [4] 

and 
12.otago.ac.nz:8090/sentcon/  

available 

is 

at 

https://info-nts-

In order to refer to various properties of research 
articles,  SENTCON  imports  the  Bibliographic  Ontology 

namespace  http://purl.org/ontology/bibo/.  The  ontology was developed using the ontology editor and 
knowledge-base framework Protege 4.0.2 [35]. The 
ontology is shown in diagrammatic form in Figure 3. 

with 

[45] 

section  provides  details  of 

SENTCON. 

owl:Thing

bibo:contributor

bibo:Document

bibo:DocumentPart

bibo:Excerpt

SENTCON:citesDocument

sentcon:Author

SENTCON:hasFollowingCitationSentence

sentcon:NonCitationSentence

sentcon:CitationSentence

SENTCON:hasPrecedingCitationSentence

SENTCON:hasFollowingIssueSentence

SENTCON:hasPrecedingIssueSentence

SENTCON:hasFollowingShortcomingSentence

sentcon:IssueSentence

SENTCON:hasPrecedingShortcomingSentence

SENTCON:hasFollowingDescriptionSentence

sentcon:ShortcomingSentence

sentcon:DescriptionSentence

sentcon:CitationSentence

CompareCitedWorks

sentcon:CitationSentenceIdentify

ShortcomingsInCitedWorks

sentcon:MethodologyDescriptionSentence

sentcon:CitationSentence

ExtendsCitedWork

sentcon:CitationSentenceOvercome

GapsInCitedWorks

sentcon:CurrentWorkSentence

sentcon:CitationSentenceCitingWork

OvercomesGaps

sentcon:CitationSentenceCitingWork

RelatedToSubjectIssues

sentcon:FutureWorkSentence

sentcon:CurrentWorkOutcomeSe

ntence

sentcon:CitationSentenceCitingWork

IdentifiesGaps

sentcon:CitationSentenceCitingWorkTo

UseOutputsInCitedWork

sentcon:CurrentWorkShortcomingSe

ntence

sentcon:CitationSentenceCitingWork

RelatedToIssues

sentcon:CitationSentenceRelatesResults

WithCitedWork

Figure 3: Sentence Context Ontology 

The 

The primary purpose of SENTCON is to facilitate 
modelling contexts of sentences in research articles, 
with a key focus on citation sentences and their adjacent  sentences  and  to  publish  these  in  Resource 
Description  Framework  (RDF)  format.  Figure  4 
shows  a  schematic  diagram  resulting  from  modelling the sample paragraph provided in Figure 2 using the SENTCON ontology. 

The  key  classes  of  SENTCON  are  the  Citation 
Sentence class, the Non-Citation Sentence class and 
the  Author  Class.  The  Citation  Sentence  class  and 
the Non-Citation Sentence classify various contexts 
associated with sentences in research articles as de-

scribed  in  Section  3  and  the  Author  class  defines 
authors of published articles and cited articles. The 
Sentence Class and the Non-Citation Sentence Class 
are  defined  as  subclasses  of  the  bibo:Excerpt  class 
which is defined as a passage  selected from a larger work in the Bibliographic Ontology.  

The  bibo:Excerpt  class  is  a  subclass  of  the 
bibo:DocumentPart  Class,  which  in  turn  is  a  subclass  of  bibo:Document  Class  in  the  Bibliographic 
Ontology.  The  key  classes  of  SENTCON  are  as 
shown in Table 1. 

sentcon:CitationSentence

There is a large amount of literature addressing the 
problem of automated composition of web services. 
However, most of the approaches address composition at 
the functional level (see, e.g. [12, 4]), and much less 
emphasis has been devoted to the problem of processlevel composition

sentcon:CitationSentence

In [8, 11, 7], the authors propose an approach to the 
automated composition of web services based on a 
translation of DAML-S to situation calculus and Petri Nets. 

sentcon:hasPrecedingCitationSentence

sentcon:hasFollowingCitationSentence

Different planning approaches have been proposed to address 
the problem of on-the-fly composition, from HTNs [17] to 
regression planning based on extensions of PDDL, to STRIPSlike planning for composing services described in DAML-S [15]. 

sentcon:CitationSentence

sentcon:type

sentcon:ShortcomingSentence

However, none of these techniques addresses the 
problem of composing web services with conditional 
outputs, non-nominal outcomes, and with process 
models describing interaction protocols that include 
conditional and iterative steps.

bibo:cites

sentcon:hasFollowingShortcomingSentence

Citation Sentence Citing 
Work Related to Issues

15. M. Sheshagiri, M. desJardins, and T. Finin. A Planner for 
Composing Services Described in DAML-S. In Proc. AAMAS03, 2003.

17. D. Wu, B. Parsia, E. Sirin, J. Hendler, and D. Nau. Automating 
DAML-S Web Services Composition using SHOP2. In Proc. ISWC03, 
2003.

Figure 4: Modelling a Sample Paragraph using the Sentence Context Ontology 

Table 1: Key classes of SENTCON 

Class 

Membership Condition 

sentcon:CitationSentence  bibo:Except 
sentcon:NonCitationSentence  bibo:Except  A non-citation sentence in a research article 
sentcon:Author 

A citation sentence in a research article 

Authors associated with research article; instances include 
both citing authors and cited authors 

5.2. The sentcon:CitationSentence Class 

The  sentcon:CitationSentence  class  defines  various  subclasses  for  describing  different  contexts  associated with citation sentences in research articles . 

The subclasses of Citation Sentence class are listed 
in  Table 2.  Each  of  these  subclasses  characterize  a 
specific context as explained earlier in Section 3 

Table 2: Subclasses of sentcon:CitatationSentence Class 

Subclasses of  

Citation Sentence class 
sentcon:CitationSentenceCompares 
CitedWorks 
sentcon:CitationSentenceExtends 
CitedWork 
sentcon:CitationSentenceCitesWorks 
IdentifyingGaps 
sentcon:CitationSentenceCitesWorks 
OvercomingGaps 
sentcon:CitationSentenceCitesWorks 
RelatedToIssues 
sentcon:CitationSentenceIdentifies 
ShortcomingsInCitedWork 
sentcon:CitationSentenceOvercomeGaps 
InCitedWork 

sentcon:CitationSentenceCitesWorks 
RelatedToSubjectIssues 
sentcon:CitationSentenceUsesOutputs 
InCitedWork 
sentcon:CitationSentenceCompares 
ResultsToCitedWork 

Description 

Citation sentences that compare cited works 

Citation sentences that extend current work with cited works 

Citation sentences that cite works that identify gaps in the 
research area addressed in the article 

Citation sentences that cite works that overcome the identified gaps 

Citation sentences that cite works related to issues addressed 
in the research article 

Citation sentences that identify shortcomings or research 
gaps in the cited work 

Citation sentences that state how the current work overcomes shortcomings or research gaps identified in the cited 
work 
Citation sentences that cite works related to subject issues 
addressed in the research paper 

Citation sentences that discuss how the current work uses 
outputs from the cited work 

Citation sentences that compare results of the current work 
to the cited work 

Sentence class. 

Table 3: Properties of sentcon:CitatationSentence Class 

Range 

Domain 
sentcon:CitationSentence  bibo:Document 
sentcon:CitationSentence 
sentcon:CitationSentence 
sentcon:CitationSentence 
sentcon:CitationSentence 
sentcon:CitationSentence 
sentcon:CitationSentence 
sentcon:CitationSentence 

sentcon:CitationSentence 
sentcon:CitationSentence 
sentcon:IssueSentence 
sentcon:IssueSentence 
sentcon:ShortcomingSentence 
sentcon:ShortcomingSentence 
sentcon:DescriptionSentence 

Table  4  lists  the  various  subclasses  of  the  Non-

Citation Sentence class 

Table 4: Subclasses of sentcon:NonCitatationSentence Class 

Description 

SENTCON defines various properties for relating 
instances of Citation Sentence class. These sentences  characterize  the  relations  between  citation  sentences and non-citation sentences in research articles. 

Property 
bibo:cites 
sentcon:hasFollowingCitationSentence 
sentcon:hasPrecedingCitationSentence 
sentcon:hasFollowingIssueSentence 
sentcon:hasPrecedingIssueSentence 
sentcon:hasFollowingShortcomingSentence 
sentcon:hasPrecedingShortcomingSentence 
sentcon:hasFollowingDescriptionSentence 

5.3. The sentcon:NonCitationSentence Class 

The  sentcon:NonCitationSentence  class  defines 
various subclasses for describing contexts associated 
with non-citation sentences in research articles 

Subclasses of  

Non-Citation Sentence class 

sentcon:IssueSentence 

sentcon:ShortcomingSentence 

sentcon:DescriptionSentence 

sentcon:MethodologyDescription 
Sentence 
sentcon:CurrentWorkOutcomeSentence  Non-Citation sentences that refer to the outcome or results of 

Non-Citation sentences that identify the issues addressed in 
the research paper. These could be either background issues 
or issues raised by the author of the article. 
Non-Citation sentences that refer to shortcomings or research 
gaps, which could be either in the related research area or 
the cited work in the research article. 
Non-Citation sentences that further describe the earlier cited 
work. 
Non-Citation sentences that refer to the methodology adopted 
in the research article 

the current paper 
Non-Citation sentences that refer to potential future work 
following from the current paper 
Non-Citation sentences that refer to the shortcomings or research gaps in the current paper 

sentcon:FutureWorkSentence 

sentcon:CurrentWorkShortcoming 
Sentence 

Identification 

We report in this section, the experiments carried 
out  with  Maximum  Entropy  Markov  Models 
(MEMMs)  and  Conditional  Random  Fields  (CRFs) 
using  sixteen  different  labels  resulting  from  the 
framework described in Section 3. 

6.1. Maximum Entropy Markov Models (MEMMs) 

MEMMs are variants of Hidden Markov Models 
(HMMs),  wherein the observed state data is conditioned over observations instead of building a joint 
model  of  observation  and  states.  HMMs  are  observed to suffer from two key problems: (a)  they do 
not  provide  for  incorporating  features  that  allow 
richer  representation  of  observations  and  (b)  they 
follow a traditional approach of employing a generative  model  for  solving  a  conditional  problem  with 
given  observations.  MEMMs  were  introduced  for 
solving  these  problems  [29].    MEMMs  encode  the 
 the  probability  of 
probability  distribution 
making the transition to   from 
 given the observing 

The maximum entropy distribution is a condition-

al exponential model of the form 

ture also facilitates a functional form of the distribu-
tion. This function combines several different terms 
known  as  clique  potentials  into  a  single  product, 
wherein  each  term  forms  a  subset  of  the  variables 
drawn from the full model.  

More formally, let G be an undirected graph with 
edge set E and vertex set V. The conditional probability of the labels given the observations in a CRF 
factors according to the following equation 

The normalization constant is computed by summing over all possible label  sequences 
,  which is 
tractable  for  linear  chain  structures  using  dynamic 
programming: 

Conditional Random Fields use a particular func-

tional form for their clique functions: 

where w is a real-valued weight vector and f is a 
vector  of  feature  functions.  The  weights  w  are  the 
model  parameters  that  are  estimated  during  the 
training phase. 

6.3. Feature Definition 

where 

 are parameters to be estimated from the 
training  data, 
 are  binary  feature  functions 
that  capture  important  relations  between  the  state 
and  the  observed  sequence  and 
 is  the  normalizing  factor  that  makes  the  distribution  sum  to 
one across all next states  . 

6.2. Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) 

MEMMs  are  observed  to  suffer  from  label  bias 
problems [23]. In order to overcome these problems 
CRFs were introduced. These are undirected graphical models that define a single log-linear probability distribution over label sequences given an observation sequence [23]. The structure of the graph in a 
CRF  encodes  independence  relationships  between 
labels and not the observations. This graphical struc-

The following are the three different kinds of fea-

tures defined for our study:  

6.3.1. Citation Features 

Citation  features  indicate  whether  a  given  sentence is a citation sentence. The distinction is made 
based on the presence of a citation reference in the 
sentence.  References  to  citations  in  our  dataset 
drawn  from  the  LNCS  collection  is  made  using 
terms such as [1], [11], [1, 11, 12]. The application  uses  regular  expressions  for  identifying  the 
presence  of  these  terms  and  decides  whether  the 
given sentence is a citation sentence or not. 

In  addition,  references  to  citations  can  be  made 
using referenced names of authors listed in the references  section  in  the  sentence  without  using  the 
number reference. In such cases, the feature genera-

to  decide  about  the  status  of  the  sentence.  Thus,  a 
feature sentHasCitation is added to indicate that a 
given sentence is a citation sentence. A second citation feature prevSentHasCitation is also defined to 
indicate that the previous sentence is a citation sen-
tence. 

6.3.2. Section Features  

We defined various section features for indicating 
the  section  of  the  article  to which  the  sentence  be-
longed.  In  order  to  define  section  features,  we 
adopted  the  following  criteria.  The  content  of  the 
research  article  was  divided  into  three  categories: 
the  Introduction  Block,  the  Body  Block  and  the 
Conclusion  Block.  The  sections  of  the  article  with 
headings  Introduction,  Related  Work,  Over-
view, and Motivation  were considered as part of 
Introduction Block, the sections of the article as part 
of the heading Conclusions and Future Work were 
considered  as  part  of  Conclusion  Block.  The  other 
sections were considered as part of the Body Block

 It needs to be noted that the Related Work section 
in the article may appear anywhere in the article. 
Irrespective of its position, this section is considered 
under the Introduction block. 

features 

sentSec=Intro, 

This demarcation is made in order to differentiate 
between  citation  sentences  referring  to  research  issues and subject issues dealt within the paper. Thus, 
the 
sentSec=BGR, 
sentSec=RelWork, sentSec=Conc were defined to 
indicate  that  sentences  belong  to  the  Introduction, 
Background, Related Work and Conclusion sections 
of the paper respectively. A feature sentSec=Sub is 
defined  for  sentences  which  do  not  belong  to  the 
above sections. This feature indicates that these sentences  belong  to  the  Body  block,  which  represents 
the core subject of the paper. 

6.3.3. Term Features 

We  followed  a  generalization  strategy  for  defining term features for sentences. This involved identification  of  terms  and  phrases  that  indicated  the 
context  and  meaning  of  the  sentence.  We  defined 
eight categories as listed  in  Table 5 for identifying 
different kinds of terms. Accordingly 396 terms and 
phrases belonging to different categories were identified  in  the  training  dataset.  Additionally  these 
terms were also identified in the test dataset (i.e. the 
ESWC  collection)  and  a  total  of  717  terms  were 
identified  in  both  the  training  and  test  dataset. The 
details of the number of terms identified in each of 
these categories are provided in Table 5. 

Table 5: Categories of Terms defined under Generalization Strategy 

Category 

Description 

Example Terms 

Connecting Terms 
(CT) 

Shortcoming Terms 
(SCT) 

Methodology Terms 
(MET) 

Result Terms (RES) 

Future Work Term 
(FWT) 

Terms or phrases that indicate 
relations between sentences. 
These terms, usually connect a 
sentence with its preceding sen-
tence. 
Terms or phrases that describe 
the shortcomings or gaps. 

Terms or phrases that describe 
the methodology adopted or followed in the paper.  
 Terms or phrases that describe 
the results achieved either by the 
current paper or the cited paper.  
Terms or phrases that describe 
the future work of the paper 

They,  
Therefore,  
According to these, 
For this purpose, Furthermore 
Nevertheless, performance suffers, 
perform poorly,  
are not studied 
we consider,  
we use,  
we assume 
we will show,  
we discover,  
we summarize 
future work,  
we plan to extend,  
will be investigated 

Terms Identified 
(ESWC + 

Training Dataset) 

(Training 
Dataset) 

Terms (OGT) 

Identifier Terms 
(IDT) 

Extending Terms 
(EXT) 

Comparing Terms 
(COM) 

 Terms or phrases that describe 
the characteristic of overcoming 
the identified gaps or shortcomings 

Terms or phrases that identify 
gaps or shortcomings in the related work or the cited work. 
Terms or phrases that discuss 
extending the current work with 
cited work.  
Terms or phrases that mention 
comparison studies.  

enhanced,  
superior,  
promising,  
improved,  
better potential 
as shown,  
observations in, according to 
builds on previous 
work,  
Similar to 
compared,  
evaluated 

Total number of terms identified using generalization strategy 

The  process  of  feature  selection  using  citation 
features, block features and term features resulted in 

15 different features for sentences as listed in Table 
6.  

Feature 

Citation Features 
sentHasCitation 
prevSentHasCitation 
Block Features 
sentSec=Intro 
sentSec=BGR 
sentSec=RelWork 
sentSec=Sub 
sentSec=Conc 
Term Features 
sentHasTerm=CT  
sentHasTerm=SCT 
sentHasTerm=MET 
sentHasTerm=RES 
sentHasTerm=FWT 
sentHasTerm=OGT 
sentHasTerm=IDT 
sentHasTerm=EXT 
sentHasTerm=COM 

Table 6: Features defined for Sentences in Research Articles 

Description 

Sentence has citation 
Previous sentence has citation 

Sentence belong to the Introduction section of the article 
Sentence belongs to the Background section of the article 
Sentence belongs to Related Work section of the article 
Sentence belongs to Body block 
Sentence belongs to Conclusion block 

Sentence contains a connecting term or phrase 
Sentence contains a shortcoming term or phrase 
Sentence contains a methodology term or phrase 
Sentence contains a resulting term or phrase 
Sentence contains a future work term or phrase 
Sentence contains an overcoming gap term 
Sentence contains an identifier term 
Sentence contains an extending term 
Sentence contains a comparing term 

from 

The dataset was developed from 20 research articles  selected 
the  LNCS  collection  at 
springerlink.com  [42].  The  training  set  of  20  research articles yielded 250 paragraphs with citation 
sentences,  which resulted in  1162 sentences.  Each 
paragraph was represented as a sequence of sets of 
features and was manually assigned one of the labels 
signifying its context.  

6.5. Training CRFs and MEMMs 

 to state 

A 10-fold cross validation was performed. Mallet, 
a Java-based package that provides an implementation  of  linear  chain  CRF  and  MEMM  algorithms, 
was used for training CRF and MEMM [27]. In the 
case of CRFs, we used two different CRF structures: 
a first-order linear chain and a linear chain with additional zero-order features. While a first order linear  chain  uses  distinct  copies  of  features  for  each 
, zero-order featransition from state 
tures are dependent only on the current state 
. Our 
earlier  experiments  with  first-order  linear  chains 
show that these perform poorly for states which appear less often in the training dataset [1]. Therefore, 
we experimented using a combination of both zeroorder  and  first-order  features.  Zero-order  features 
can prove to be useful when used in addition to the 
first-order  features,  particularly  in  situations  where 
sequences do not occur enough times in the training 
data.  They  provide  a  back-off  capability  i.e.,  a 
source of information to use when the main source 
is not available. 

6.6. Results 

The results of the classifier are tabulated in Table 7. While an accuracy of 93% was obtained using 
first and zero-order features in CRFs, a lower accuracy of 89% was obtained using first-order features 
alone in CRFs. The accuracy decreased to 68% with 
MEMMs.  Also,  while  MEMMs  failed  completely 
for  four  classes,  CRFs  with  first-order  features 
failed for two classes and CRFs using both first and 
zero-order features failed for one class, respectively. 
The  experiments  show  that  a  CRF  with  first  order 
and zero-order features provide a suitable classifier 
for our classification task.  

Table 7: Results of the Classifier 

Label 

Accuracy: 
93.37% 

Accuracy: 
68.33% 

Accuracy: 
89.58% 
st
CRF    1
Order 
P  R 

 & 0 Order 

P  R 

1st
P  R 
1.00  0.96  0.98  1.00  0.93  0.96  1.00  0.64  0.78 
0.96  1.00  0.98  0.92  0.90  0.91  0.00  0.00  0.00 
0.97  0.97  0.97  0.93  0.96  0.95  0.79  0.93  0.86 
0.91  0.98  0.94  0.90  0.92  0.91  0.57  0.66  0.61 
0.94  0.92  0.93  0.90  0.94  0.92  0.86  0.84  0.85 
0.88  0.98  0.92  0.84  0.91  0.88  0.78  0.65  0.70 
0.89  0.96  0.92  0.81  0.95  0.87  0.31  0.54  0.39 
0.90  0.94  0.92  0.86  0.94  0.90  0.75  0.85  0.80 
0.89  0.89  0.89  0.85  0.86  0.85  0.75  0.59  0.66 
0.91  0.68  0.78  1.00  0.50  0.66  0.66  0.12  0.21 
0.86  0.67  0.76  0.77  0.50  0.60  1.00  0.14  0.25 
0.77  0.73  0.75  0.66  0.42  0.51  1.00  0.10  0.19 
1.00  0.50  0.66  1.00  0.25  0.40  0.00  0.00  0.00 
0.62  0.45  0.52  0.66  0.18  0.28  0.00  0.00  0.00 
1.00  0.12  0.22  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 
0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00 

P = Precision; R = Recall; F = F-Score 

7. Developing the Linked Data Application: 
Extracting and Generating RDF Data 

The  term  linked  data  coined  by  Tim  BernersLee  refers  to  a  style  of  publishing  and  interlinking 
structured data on the web [5]. The basic characteristics of linked data are to use an RDF data model to 
publish  data  and  use  RDF  links  to  interlink  data 
from  different  sources  [6].  In  this  section,  we  explain  about  the  process  of  extracting  information 
from research articles and generating the RDF data. 

7.1. Extracting and Preparing the Data 

The  task  of  sentence  context  identification  involves  extraction  of  different  types  of  data  from 
research articles. This includes the following activi-
ties: 

  Obtaining and processing PDF documents for 

extracting sentences and other information 
from the articles 

  Identifying features and keywords in sentences 
  Parsing the reference sections of articles for 
obtaining information about cited documents 

to  achieve  these  tasks  is  provided  in  Figure  5.    As 
seen  in  the  Figure,  a  number  of  components  were 
developed  for  extracting  information  from  research 
articles. The following sections explain each of these components briefly. 

PDF Manager 

Download  PDF  Files,  Crop 
PDF  Files,  Convert  PDF  to 
text, Convert PDF to XML 

Paragraph Extractor 

Feature 
Manager 

Keyword 
Manager 

Classifier 

Relation 
Manager 

Bibliographic Data  

Manager 

Figure 5: System Architecture of Information Extraction System 

Download  Manager    This  module  comprises 
XPath  expressions  and  Java  HTTP  URLs  and  is 
used for web scraping Springerlink pages. The fulltext documents and the bibliographic data from the 
ESWC collection is downloaded through our institutional  license.  While  the  full-text  documents  are 
stored  in  PDF  form,  the  associated  bibliographic 
data is stored in XML format.   

PDF Document Manager  The PDF Document 
Manager handles PDF documents and extracts usable text for context identification. The following are 
the key functions of the PDF Document Manager. 

  Download  PDF  Files    the  full-text  links  of 
PDF  documents  provided  by  the  Download 
Manager  are  used  for  obtaining  PDF  docu-
ments. The PDF documents are stored by their 
digital object identifiers (DOIs). 

  Crop PDF Files  It is important to remove the 
header and footer information from PDF doc-
uments, as it might be difficult to identify these components after conversion to text format. 
This is carried out by cropping PDF files at a 
pre-designated margin. 

  Convert  PDF  to  text  to  XML  files    The 
cropped  PDF  files  are  then  converted  to  text 
and XML files. The processing of PDF files is 
performed  using  the  batch  processing  mechanism of Adobe Acrobat. 

Paragraph Extractor  The Paragraph Extractor 
extracts paragraphs with citation sentences from the 
text files. This Python module performs this activity 
by  checking  for  the  presence  of  citations  in  paragraphs  and  accordingly  obtains  only  those  paragraphs  with  citations.  The  Extractor  also  identifies 
the section to which the extracted paragraph belongs. 
In  order  to  achieve  this,  the  PDF  document  bookmarks  are  used  from  the  converted  XML  files, 
which  provide  section  headings  of  the  article.  The 
section  information  facilitates  in  defining  section 
features for each sentence using the Feature Manag-
er. 

Keyword  Manager  The  Keyword  Manager  is 
responsible  for  extracting  keywords  from  citation 
sentences  obtained  from  the  article.  In  order  to 
achieve 
the 
topia.termextract  python  extraction  library,  which 
uses  Parts-Of-Speech  (POS)  and  simple  statistical 
analysis  for  determining 
their 
strengths [47]. The Keyword Manager facilitates in 
building a list of keywords from citation sentences, 
which can then be used for information services. 

terms  and 

employs 

system 

this, 

the 

the 

Feature  Manager    The  Feature  Manager  receives  paragraphs  as  text  files  from  the  Document 
Manager  and  is  responsible  for  generating  features 
for each sentence in the text file. This module uses 
NLTK  [34]  for  carrying  out  sentence  segmentation 
and  it  employs  regular  expressions  for  identifying 
the presence of different entities to generate features 
for a given sentence. 

Classifier    The  Classifier  receives  the  features 
generated by the Feature Manager and uses them as 
test data to run against the classifier model obtained 
from the training data as discussed in Section 6. The 
classifier returns labels for each of these feature sets, 

es. 

Relationship Manager  The Relationship Manager  combines  together  the  results  obtained  in  the 
Document Manager, Feature Manager and the Clas-
sifier.  Apart  from  this,  the  Relationship  Manager 
also links related sentences. For example if a shortcoming sentence follows a citation sentence, a relationship between these sentences is recorded. 

Reference Manager  The Reference Manager is 
responsible for handling the bibliographic references 
of research articles. The functions of this module are 
as follows: 

  Extractor  This extracts the reference section 

from the text files 

  Splitter  Each of the individual references is 
identified from the extracted reference section 
  Term  Identifier    After  identifying  individual 
references,  different  terms  in  the  reference 
such  as  author  names,  article  title,  article 
source are identified. 

 Bibliographic Data Manager  The function of 
the  Bibliographic  Data  Manager  is  to  handle  the 
bibliographic details of research articles. The bibliographic details stored in XML format are handled by 
the module using lxml [26]  a library for working 
with XML and HTML in Python. 

Database  Manager   The  Database  Manager  is 
responsible for storing data in the relational database 
management  system.  The  system  uses  MySQL  as 
the  back  end  for  storing  data  drawn  from  different 
sources. 

D2R  Server    The  application  uses  the  D2R 
Server [7] for publishing linked data from the relational database. The mapping file of the D2R Server 
is  appropriately  configured  in  accordance  with  the 
SENTCON ontology for deriving RDF data. 

Semantic Web Application  The resulting RDF 
data from the D2R server is used as data for the Semantic Web Application. The details of the application are discussed in the following section. 

7.2. Data Model 

Using  the  system  described  above,  the  research 
articles published in ESWC are processed to extract 
contextual  information  from  these  articles.  Table  8 
provides  the  details  of  the  extracted  data  from  the 
ESWC proceedings that have been published as volumes of Springers Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence.  As  seen  from  the  table,  presently,  we  have 
extracted data from seven volumes published in the 
ESWC series. This provided a total of 355 articles

Paragraphs  with  citation  sentences  were  extracted 
from  these  articles  and  a  total  of  10564  sentences 
were extracted from these paragraphs. This included 
a  total  of  6158  citation  sentences  and  4406  noncitation sentences respectively. The details of different types of citation and  non-citation sentences extracted in different volumes are provided in Table 9 
and 10 respectively. Further, as may be seen in Table 8, a total of 17844 authors were extracted from 
cited  works  (citations)  in  these  articles.  Further,  a 
total number of 6125 documents were cited by these 
articles.  

The  data  extracted  from  research  articles  are 
stored in different tables in the relational database as 
shown in Figure 6.  As may be seen in Figure 6, the 
article table (table 1) and the author table (table 2) 
hold  data  related  to  both  citing  articles  as  well  as 
cited articles. A series of tables (tables indicated by 
6) are created for storing each type of citation sentence separately. For example, the table titled ircw 
sentence holds only citation sentences citing works 
related to issues.  

A  table  is  also  created  for  storing  citation  sentences with their reference ID (table 3). This table is 
important as it creates a unique identifier for each of 
the  references  cited  in  the  given  sentence.  For  ex-
ample, if there are two cited works in a given sen-
tence,  a  unique  identifier  is  created  for  each  cited 
work  and  the  citation  sentence  is  associated  with 
each  identifier.  Tables  are  also  created  for  holding 
the  full  reference  data  (table  4)  and  the  keywords 
associated with each citation sentence (table 5). 

 A Few articles published in these seven  volumes 
were not considered for various reasons. Some were 
invited  talks  and  a  few  followed  a  different  reference format. Some articles were not included due to 
unresolved errors  while extracting information. We 
intend to resolve these errors. 

Articles 

Sentences 

Citations 

Citation    
Sentences 

Non-Citation 

Sentences 

Year 

Volume 
Number 

Total 

Authors 

Cited Documents 

                                                               Total Number of Sentences: 10564 

Year 

Volume 

Total 

Table 9: Details of Citation Sentences extracted from ESWC volumes 

Citation Sentences 

                                                          Total Number of Citation Sentences: 6158 

  A  Citation Sentence Cites Works Related to Issues 
  B  Citation Sentence Cites Works Related to Subject Issues 
  C  Citation Sentence Cites Works Identifying Gaps 
  D  Citation Sentence Cites Works Overcoming Gaps 
  E  Citation Sentence Identifies Shortcomings in Cited Work 

  F  Citation Sentence Extends Current Cited Work 
  G  Citation Sentence Uses Outputs in Cited Work  
  H Citation Sentence Overcome Gaps in Cited Work 
  I  Citation Sentence Compares Results to Cited Work 
  J  Citation Sentence Compares Cited Works 

Table 10: Details of Non-Citation Sentences extracted from ESWC volumes 

Non-Citation Sentences 

Year 

Volume 

Total 

  DES  Description sentences 
 RWSC  Shortcoming sentences 

  CWO   Current work outcome sentences 
  CWSC  Current Work Shortcoming Sentence  

  FW  Future Work Sentence 
  MET  Methodology Description Sentence 

                                                        Total Number of Non Citation Sentences: 4406 

Figure 6: Different tables defined for storing data extracted from research articles 

7.3. Generating RDF Data 

7.3.1. Choosing URIs 

The use of the D2R server for the data model described  above  facilitates  in  defining  URIs  for  the 
database entities. The D2R Server assigns URIs for 
database  entities  using  URI  patterns  [7].  As  described above, the citationwithreferenceid table (ta-
ble 3) is an important table as it holds data for each 
of  the  reference  works  cited  in  the  given  sentence, 
along with the citation sentence itself. The mapping 
file of the D2R Server is configured to define URIs 
for  a  citation  sentence  using  this  table.  We  also 
specify in the mapping file how data from different 
tables are related for a given citation sentence using 
properties  defined  in  Sentence  Context  Ontology 

described  in  Section  5. The  following  provides  details of the URIs defined for different entities in our 
application  and  also  shows  the  resulting  RDF  data 
for these entities. 

7.3.2. URI for Citation Sentence 

relative 

produces 

pattern 
citationwithreferenceid/@@citationwithreferenceid
.num@@ 

citationwithreferenceid/1001  by 
the 
number  of  the  given  citation  sentence.  Thus,  the 
URI: 
http://info-nts-12.otago.ac.nz:8090/-
page/citationwithreferenceid/1001  provides  identifies  the  citation  sentence  with  number  1001.  The 
resulting  RDF  data  for  the  citation  sentence  numbered 1001 is as shown in Listing 1. 

inserting 

The 

Listing 1 

<rdf:Description rdf:about="citationwithreference/1001"> 

</rdf:Description> 

<sentcon:purpose>Article Uses Cited Work for Research Is 
sues</sentcon:purpose> 
<rdfs:label>Previous reports on our work contain additional  
details on the unsupervised miner [22], its application to a bio- 
medical corpus [21], and a qualitative evaluation [25]. 
</rdfs:label> 
<sentcon:sentence>Previous reports on our work contain  
Additional details on the unsupervised miner [22], its application  
to a bio-medical corpus [21], and a qualitative evaluation  
[25].</sentcon:sentence> 
<bibo:doi>10.1007/11431053_38</bibo:doi> 
<rdf:type  
rdf:resource="sentcon/resource/SentenceCitingWorkRelatedToIss 
ues"/> 
<sentcon:hasFollowingIssueSentence>To 
our 
knowledge, so far only one other approach has been presented that 
addresses the quantitative and automated evalation of an ontology 
by referring to its source corpus. 
</sentcon:hasFollowingIssueSentence> 
<dc:title>Lexically Evaluating Ontology Triples Generated  
Automatically from Texts</dc:title> 
<sentcon:keyword>Previous reports</sentcon:keyword> 
<sentcon:keyword>bio-medical corpus 1,</sentcon:keyword> 
<sentcon:keyword>qualitative evaluation</sentcon:keyword> 
<sentcon:keyword>unsupervised miner</sentcon:keyword> 

best 

the 

of 

7.3.3. URI for Article Data 

The  application  distinguishes  between  two  types 
of articles: Citing Articles and Cited Articles. While 
citing  articles  are  those  articles  published  in  the 
ESWC, cited articles are those that are cited in these 
articles. The article table in the database holds data 
related to both of these kinds, and defining the mapping  properties  for  the  article  table  results  in  the 
URIs for article data.  

The pattern article/@@article.num@@ produces  a  relative  URI  article/1001  by  inserting  the 
number of the respective article. Thus, the following 
URI: 
http://info-nts-12.otago.ac.nz:8090/page-
/article/1  identifies  information  about  the  article 
with  number  1.  The  resulting  RDF  data  for  the 
citing article numbered 1 and cited article numbered 
1001 is as shown in Listing 2 and Listing 3 respec-
tively. The different properties defined for both citing  articles  and  cited  articles  can  be  seen  in  these 
listings. 

<rdfs:label>Automatic Location of Services</rdfs:label> 
<dc:title>Automatic Location of Services</dc:title> 
<sentcon:year>2005</sentcon:year> 
<sentcon:documentType>Citing  
Article</sentcon:documentType> 
<rdf:type rdf:resource="sentcon/resource/article"/> 
<dc:creator>Uwe Keller</dc:creator> 
<dc:creator>Ruben Lara</dc:creator> 
<dc:creator>Holger Lausen</dc:creator> 
<dc:creator>Axel Polleres</dc:creator> 
<dc:creator>Dieter Fensel</dc:creator> 
<bibo:abstract>The  automatic  location  of  services  that  fulfill  a 
given need is a key step towards dynamic and scalable integration. 
In this paper we present a model for the automatic location of services  that  considers  the  static  and  dynamic  aspects  of  service     
descriptions and identifies what notions and techniques are useful 
for  the  matching  of  both.  Our  model  presents  three  important     
features: ease of use for the requester, efficient pre-filtering of relevant  services,  and  accurate  contracting  of  services  that  fulfill  a     
given requester goal. We further elaborate previous work and results on Web service discovery by analyzing what steps and what     
kinds of descriptions are necessary for efficient and usable automatic  service  location.  Furthermore,  we  analyze  intuitive  and 
formal  notions of  match that are of  interest for  locating services 
that fulfill a given goal. Although having a formal underpinning, 
the  proposed  model  does  not  impose  any  restrictions  on  how  to 
implement  it  for  specific  applications,  but  proposes  some  useful     
formalisms for providing such implementations.</bibo:abstract> 
<bibo:doi>10.1007/11431053_1</bibo:doi> 
<sentcon:authorType>Citing Author</sentcon:authorType> 

Listing 2 

<rdf:Description rdf:about="article/1"> 

</rdf:Description> 

Listing 3 

<rdf:Description rdf:about="article/1001"> 

</rdf:Description> 

<rdfs:label>Efficient semantic matching</rdfs:label> 
<dc:title>Efficient semantic matching</dc:title> 
<sentcon:year>2005</sentcon:year> 
<sentcon:documentType>Cited Article</sentcon:documentType> 
<rdf:type rdf:resource="sentcon/resource/article"/> 
<sentcon:normalizedReference>Efficient semantic  
matching</sentcon:normalizedReference> 
<sentcon:fullReference>14. F. Giunchiglia, M. Yatskevich, and E. 
Giunchiglia.  Efficient  semantic  matching.  In  Proceedings  of 
ESWC, 2005</sentcon:fullReference> 
<sentcon:citID>10.1007/11431053_21_14</sentcon:citID> 
<sentcon:citationSentence>As  a  matter  of  fact,  [14]  shows,  that 
when  we  have  conjunctive  concepts  at  nodes  (e.g.,  Images,  Eu-
rope),  these  matching  tasks  can  be  resolved  by  the  basic  DPLL 
procedure  in  polynomialtime;  while  when  we  have  full  proposition concepts at nodes (example, Images, Computers Internet), the 
length  of  the  original  formula  can  be  exponentially  reduced  by  
structure preserving transformations.</sentcon:citationSentence> 
<sentcon:authorType>Cited Author</sentcon:authorType> 
<dc:creator>M Yatskevich</dc:creator> 
<dc:creator>F Giunchiglia</dc:creator> 
<dc:creator>E Giunchiglia</dc:creator> 
<sentcon:citingArticleTitle>Web  Explanations  for Semantic  Heterogeneity Discovery</sentcon:citingArticleTitle> 

Research Articles  Semantic Web Application 
using Linked Data 

We explain in this  section the semantic  web application which uses linked data for providing value 
added information services for the research commu-
nity.  

The  architecture  of  the  application  is  shown  in 
Figure  7.  The  application  uses  Semantic  Web  Semantic Tags (SEWESE) [11] and the EXHIBIT API 
[21]  for  querying  the  RDF  data  resulting  from  the 
process described above. The use of these APIs facilitates  the  development  of  interactive  user  inter-
faces. SEWESE uses SPARQL queries for querying 
the  RDF  data.  However  The  Exhibit  API  requires 

the RDF data to be converted into the JSON (Exhib-
it) [12] format before querying the data. The data is 
therefore converted into the JSON (Exhibit) format 
using the Babel service provided by Exhibit [3]. The 
application  uses  Timeline  [46],  a  web  widget  provided  by  Exhibit  for  visualizing  temporal  data  in 
rich user interfaces. The application allows a user to 
search and browse the contextual data in the following three ways: 

1.  Search and browse articles published in 

2.  Search articles cited by articles in ESWC 
3.  Search citation sentences using keywords 

Contextual Data  

(relational) 

Contextual Data 

(RDF) 

DBLP Linked Data 
(rkbexplorer.com) 

D2R  

Keywords  
Timeline 

JSON (EXHIBIT)      RDF         

Consumes data from 
SPARQL Endpoint 

EXHIBIT 

SEWESE 

JENA API 

Citation Sentences 

Timeline 

Author  
Timeline 

Citations  
Timeline 

Search citation 
sentences with 

keywords 

Search cited articles in ESWC 

Search published articles in 

Figure 7:  Architecture of CIRRA  A Semantic Web Application for  

Contextual Information Retrieval in Research Articles 

The application supports searching and browsing 
articles published in ESWC. The interface facilitates 
keyword  search,  which  retrieves  published  titles  in 
ESWC  along  with  author  information  from  DBLP 
linked  data  available  at  the  SPARQL  endpoint 
(http://rkbexplorer.com). Figure 8 provides a screenshot of the results obtained for the search term Semantic Web, retrieved from the SPARQL endpoint. 
As  seen  in  Figure  8,  retrieved  titles  from  ESWC 
along with author information for the searched term 
are  displayed.  Further,  for  each  of  these  titles,  the 
interface also provides a link titled View Contexts 
of Cited Works in the Article (indicated by the label  in Figure 8), which allows users to navigate to 
citation  sentences  timeline.  This  timeline  allows 

users to view the contexts of all citation sentences in 
the  selected  article.  The  citation  sentences  timeline 
is explained later in this section. 

The application uses SPARQL queries for obtaining title and author information from  the  SPARQL 
endpoint  at  rkbexplorer.com.  The  SPARQL  query 
shown in Listing 4 is used for retrieving titles; year 
and web address of each retrieved title for the keyword  Semantic  Web  from  the  ESWC  collection. 
The web address is further used to retrieve authors 
for each retrieved titles. The SPARQL query shown 
in Listing 5 uses the web address for retrieving authors of an individual title. The application uses Jena, 
a Java framework for building Semantic Web applications [28]. The application uses Jena for interacting with the SPARQL Endpoint through the use of 
SPARQL queries. 

Figure 8: List of retrieved articles published in ESWC Collection

The  citation  sentences  timeline  allows  users  to 
view  the  contexts  of  citation  sentences  for  the  selected  article  in  a  single  view.  Figure  9  provides  a 
screenshot of the Citation Sentences Timeline which 
displays the citation sentences along with their contexts on the timeline. 

The  timeline  allows  for  horizontally  moving  the 
timeline with the year of publication as the reference 
point. This provides a good interface for viewing the 
citation sentences of the article, placed with respect 
to the citations year of publication on the x-axis of 
the timeline.  

The  following  are  the  key  features  provided  by 

this timeline: 

8.1.2 View details of the selected article on the 
timeline 

The  citation  sentences  timeline,  which  displays 
all  citation  sentences  on  the  timeline  also  provides 
for viewing the bibliographic details of the selected 
article on the timeline. The selected article title appears  on  the  timeline  (indicated  by  the  label    in 
Figure 9), which can be clicked to display the bibliographic details in the lens view. The details of the 
article title, authors and the abstract are displayed in 
the lens. Figure 10 shows the screenshot of the details of the article displayed for a given article. The 
names of the authors displayed in the lens are hyper-
linked,  and  when  clicked,  these  links  navigate  the 
user  to  the  author  timeline,  which  provides  details 
about  all  works  of  an  author  across  the  collection. 
The  author  timeline  is  explained  in  detail  later  in 
this section. 

?paper rdf:type akt:Book-Section-Reference .  
?paper akt:has-title ?title . 
?paper akt:has-date ?publishedyear . 
?publishedyear akts:year-of ?year . 
?paper akt:has-web-address ?webaddress . 
?paper akt:article-of-journal ?journal . 
?journal akt:has-title ?journaltitle . 
FILTER  
((?journaltitle = "ESWC" || ?journaltitle = "ESWC (1)"  
|| ?journaltitle = "ESWC (2)") && regex(?title, 'Semantic  
Web')) 

Listing 4 

PREFIX id:   <http://dblp.rkbexplorer.com/id/> 

PREFIX  rdf:    <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-

ns#> 

PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> 
PREFIX akt:  <http://www.aktors.org/ontology/portal#> 

PREFIX owl:  <http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#> 

PREFIX akt:  <http://www.aktors.org/ontology/portal#> 

PREFIX akts: <http://www.aktors.org/ontology/support#> 

SELECT distinct ?title ?year ?webaddress ?title1 WHERE { 

Listing 5 

PREFIX id:   <http://dblp.rkbexplorer.com/id/> 

PREFIX  rdf: 

ns#> 

PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> 

PREFIX akt:  <http://www.aktors.org/ontology/portal#> 
PREFIX owl:  <http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#> 

PREFIX akt:  <http://www.aktors.org/ontology/portal#> 

PREFIX akts: <http://www.aktors.org/ontology/support#> 

SELECT distinct ?authors WHERE { 

?paper rdf:type akt:Book-Section-Reference . 
?paper akt:has-author ?author . 
?author akt:full-name ?authors . 
?paper akt:has-web-address ?webaddress . 
FILTER  
(?webaddress =  
"http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-13486-9_1") 

  <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-

Figure 9: Screenshot of the Citation Sentences Timeline displaying citation sentences of the selected article 

Figure 10: Viewing article details on the timeline 

8.1.3 View contexts of citation sentences on the 
timeline 

The  citation  sentences  timeline  displays  citation 
sentences  of  the  article  on  the  timeline,  placed  according to the year of publication of the cited work 
(indicated by the label  in Figure 9). Each of these 
citation  sentences  has  a  context,  which  is  defined 
according to the subclasses of the Sentence Context 
Ontology and is distinguished in the timeline by the 
use of different colours. Each of these citation sentences is clickable and when clicked provides details 
of  the  sentences  related  to  citation  sentence.  The 
following  are  the  different  types  of  associated  sentences displayed (if available) when the user clicks 
on a citation sentence: 

1.  Preceding issue sentence 
2.  Preceding shortcoming sentence 
3.  Preceding citation sentence 
4.  Following description sentence 
5.  Following shortcoming sentence 
6.  Following issue sentence 
7.  Following citation sentence 

The properties relating the citation sentence class 
to non-citation sentence classes are used to relate the 
sentences  associated  with  a  citation  sentence,  and 
these  relations  are  used  for  displaying  associated 
information  on  the  timeline.  Figure  11  provides  a 
screenshot of the citation sentences timeline, where 
a citation sentence is clicked for viewing the associated sentences. 

Figure 11: Screenshot of viewing associated sentences of a selected citation sentence 

a  citation  sentence  are  displayed  in  the  lens  view, 
which pops up when the user clicks on the citation 
sentence. The lens also displays the full reference of 
the cited  work used in the citation sentence. Clicking on the reference would navigate the user to citations timeline which provides details about how the 
selected cited work is cited across the entire collec-
tion. The citations timeline is explained later in this 
section. 

8.1.4 View result sentences of the article on citation 
sentences timeline 

The citation sentences timeline also facilitates in 
viewing  sentences  in  the  article  that  characterize 
results  or  outcomes  of  the  selected  article.  A  link 
titled Claims of the Article appears on the timeline 
(indicated by the label  in Figure 9) and allows the 

user to view all result sentences of the article. Figure 
12  provides  a  screenshot  of  the  timeline  showing 
result sentences of the selected article. 

8.1.5 Select article or citation sentence type 

The interface displaying citation sentences of the 
article allows users to filter information on the time-
line. The first facet on the right hand side (RHS) of 
the  timeline  with  caption  Select  Article  Title  and 
Citation Sentence Type (indicated by the label  in 
Figure  9)  allows  the  user  to  select  the  title  or  the 
required  citation  sentence  types  for  display  on  the 
timeline. For example, if a user is interested in viewing  only  those  citation  sentences  used  to  discuss 
research issues, he/she can select accordingly in the 
first facet to control the display of citation sentences 
on the timeline. 

Figure 12: Citation sentences timeline displaying result sentences of the selected article 

words 

The citation sentences timeline also facilitates in 
displaying citation sentences for specific keywords. 
The  second  facet  on  the  RHS  of  the  timeline  with 
the caption Keywords (indicated by the label  in 
Figure 9) allows the user to filter citation sentences 
and choose to display only those citation sentences 
with the selected keywords.  

8.1.7 Select other articles to view its citation 
sentences  

The interface also allows users to select other articles retrieved for the search term for viewing their 
citation sentences on the timeline. The article titles 
listed on the left hand side of the screen can be selected for displaying their citation sentences on the 
timeline (indicated by the label  in Figure 9). 

8.1.8 Navigation to the author and citations 
timelines 

The user can navigate to the author timeline and 
citations  timeline  from  citation  sentences  timeline. 
The  author  names  that  appear  when  viewing  the 
details of an article (indicated by the label  in Figure  10)  and  the  full  reference  that  appears  when 
viewing  the  full  details  of  a  specific  citation  sentence (indicated by the label  in Figure 11) can be 
clicked to navigate to author and citations timelines 
respectively. 

8.1.9 Author Timeline 

The author timeline forms an important feature of 
the application. This timeline facilitates  in  learning 
about  the  works  of  a  selected  author.  The  application currently distinguishes between a citing author 
and a cited author. While Citing authors are those 
who  have  published  articles  in  ESWC,  and  cited 
authors  are  those  who  have  been  cited  in  the  published articles. The author timeline shows the titles 
of  both  published  and  cited  works  of  the  selected 
author. The application provides different lens views 
for citing authors and cited authors. Figure 13 provides  a  screenshot  of  the  author  timeline  showing 
the works of a cited author.  

Figure 13: Screenshot of the author timeline viewing details of cited work 

works are displayed on the timeline and are placed 
according to their year of publication. For example, 
if  the  authors  work  is  published  in  the  year  2000 
and is cited two times, the title would appear twice 
on  the  timeline  placed  at  year  2000.  Each  of  these 
titles is hyperlinked and, when clicked, provides the 
following details in the lens view: 

1.  Role of the Author  Identifies the author as  

Cited Author 

2.  Citing Article Title  Shows the title of the 

article citing the selected work 

3.  Citation Sentence  Shows the citation sen-

tence where the current work is cited 

The user interested in learning more about the citation  sentence  can  click  on  the  full  reference  provided which would navigate the user to the citations 
timeline, where he can view the full details in which 
the selected  work is cited. The citations timeline is 
explained later in this section. 

The  lens  provides  a  different  set  of  details  with 
regard to work published by authors. Figure 14 provides  a  screenshot  of  the  author  timeline  showing 
the published works of the selected author. The published  titles  of  the  authors  are  placed  according  to 
their  year  of  publication  on  the  timeline.  Each  of 
these  titles  is  hyperlinked  and  when  clicked,  provides the following details in the lens view: 

1.  Role of the Author  Identifies the author as  

Citing Author 

2.  Citing Article Title  Shows the title of the 

article published by the author 

3.  Authors  Shows all the authors of the pub-

4.  Abstract  Shows the abstract of the pub-

lished work 

lished work 

The  article  title  displayed  in  the  lens  view  is 
clickable  and  when  clicked,  navigates  the  user  to 
article  timeline,  where  the  user  can  view  the  contexts of all citation sentences as explained earlier in 
this section. 

Figure 14: Screenshot of the author timeline viewing details of published work 

8.1.10 Citations Timeline 

The citations timeline forms an important feature 
of the application. The interface displays the different contexts in which the selected cited work is cited 
by  different  articles  across  the  ESWC  collection. 
Figure  15  provides  a  screenshot  of  the  citations 
timeline. 

As  seen  in  Figure  15,  the  selected  cited  work  is 
cited  nine  times  by  different  articles  and  each  of 
these contexts are displayed on the timeline, distinguished by the use of different colours. In order to 
achieve  this  functionality,  the  application  creates  a 
normalized title of each cited article and searches for 
this  across  the  collection  and  displays  the  results. 
The  citation  sentences  are  placed  according  to  the 

plained below: 

The  facet  on  the  RHS  of  the  screen  provides  a 
listing of both citing and cited authors in alphabetical order. The number preceding the authors in the 
facet indicates the total number of works of the author  across  the  collection.  This  includes  both  published works and cited works.The interface provides 
a search box on the LHS of the screen, which can be 
used by the user for searching the authors and article 
titles on the timeline. 

year of publication of the citing article on the time-
line, in order to provide information about the year 
when  the  work  was  cited.  For  example,  a  citation 
sentence placed on the year 2005 indicates the work 
was cited in the year 2005. 

The first facet on the RHS with caption Selected 
Reference  indicates  the  normalized  reference  title 
currently  selected.  The  second  facet  on  the  RHS 
shows the full reference of the cited work as cited in 
the  citing  article.  The  numbers  preceding  the  full 
reference  in  the  facet  indicate  the  number  of  times 
the cited work is cited in the article. The third facet 
on the RHS shows other available references along 
with  the  number  of  times  they  have  been  cited 
across the collection. 

The facet on the left hand side provides a list of 
keywords extracted from the citation sentences. By 
selecting  the  keywords,  users  can  filter  the  citation 
sentences and can opt to see only those citation sentences with selected keywords. Each of the citation 
sentences  displayed  on  the  timeline  are  clickable 
and, when clicked, provide details of the citing article and associated sentences for the selected citation 
sentence.  The  citations  timeline  provides  a  unique 
feature  in  comparison  to  current  search  engines  by 
allowing users to see when and how the cited work 
is cited by other researchers. 

Figure 15: Screenshot of citations timeline 

The application also provides for searching cited 
documents  in  the  published  articles  of  ESWC  col-
lection. The interface employs SPARQL queries  in 
order  to  display  various  details  of  the  cited  docu-
ments. To start with, the title of the cited document 
for  the  searched  term  is  obtained  through  the 
SPARQL query as shown in Listing 6: 

Listing 6 

SELECT  

?title ?doctype ?citid ?articletype ?sourcedoc  
WHERE { 

    ?x rdf:type sentcon:Article . 

    ?x sentcon:documentType ?doctype .  

    ?x sentcon:articleType ?articletype .  

    ?x sentcon:sourceDocument ?sourcedoc .  
    ?x sentcon:citID ?citid .  

    ?x dc:title ?title .  

FILTER regex (?title, '${searchstring}', 'i') } 

The title of the cited article obtained in the above 
query is used to obtain the normalized title from the 
RDF data as shown in Listing 7.  

Listing 7 

SELECT  

?normalized_reference  

{?x rdf:type sentcon:article .  

?x sentcon:normalizedReference ?normalized_reference .  

?x dc:title ?title .  

FILTER regex (?title, '${title}', 'i') } 

The normalized title obtained above is used to retrieve all citation sentences that have a reference to 
this  normalized  title.  For  example,  the  SPARQL 
query shown in Listing 8 is used to retrieve all citation 
of 
SentenceCitingWorkRelatedToIssues  which  use  the 
normalized title. Similarly, other classes of citation 
sentence are checked for the  use of the normalized 
title. This facilitates in identifying the different contexts in which the cited work is used in the article, 
which  helps  in  providing  unique  services  to  re-
searchers. 

sentences 

Figure  16  provides  a  screenshot  of  the  retrieved 
list of documents cited in the ESWC collection. Besides providing bibliographic details of the articles, 
the  interface  provides  the  following  useful  metrics 
about how a specific work is cited in ESWC collec-
tion. 

from 

class 

the 

8.2.1 Number of times a given work is cited 

The  application  identifies  the  total  number  of 
times a given work is cited in the ESWC collection, 
indicated by the label  in Figure 16. 

8.2.2 Identify contexts of cited work 

Besides  providing  the  total  number  of  times  a 
document is cited, the application also provides details  about  the  context  in  which  the  cited  work  is 
used. For example, if the document is cited six times, 
it  could  be  cited  for  issues  twice,  and  for  subject 
issues  twice  and  the  author  could  have  identified 
shortcomings in the cited work two times. The data 
indicated by  in Figure 16 shows these details. 

Listing 8 

SELECT  

?ircwsentence  
WHERE { 

?x rdf:type sentcon:SentenceCitingWorkRelatedToIssues .  

?x sentcon:sentence ?ircwsentence .  

?x sentcon:normalizedReference ?norm_reference .  

FILTER  
regex (?norm_reference, ${normalized_reference}', 'i') } 

8.2.3 Viewing citation contexts of cited articles 

The interface also provides  for viewing the contexts of citation sentences in the timeline view. The 
link  with the caption  View  Citation Contexts (in-
dicated  by  the  label    in  Figure  16)  navigates  the 
user  to  the  citations  timeline  discussed  in  Section 

8.3  Search Citation Sentences with Specific 

Keywords 

The application also facilitates in  searching citation  sentences  for  specific  keywords  across  the 
ESWC  collection.  The  keywords  timeline  displays 
all citation sentences for the selected keyword on the 
timeline. Figure 17 provides a screenshot where all 
citation  sentences  across  the  ESWC  collection  are 
displayed for the keyword Description Logics. The 
following are the key features of the keywords time-
line. 

Figure 16: Screenshot of retrieved articles from cited documents in the ESWC Collection 

8.3.1 Search citation sentences based on keywords 

To  search  for  citation  sentences  based  on  key-
words, the application uses topia.termextract, a Python extraction library  for extracting the keywords. 
Topia.termextract  uses  Parts-Of-Speech  (POS)  and 
simple statistical analysis for determining the terms 
and their strengths [47]. The first facet on the RHS 
with the caption Keywords (indicated by the label 
  in  Figure  17)  displays  all  keywords  extracted 
from  citation  sentences.  Users  can  select  the  required keyword in order to see related citation sentences for the selected keyword across the collection. 

8.3.2 Filter retrieved citation sentences by type 

The application also facilitates in selecting a specific type of citation sentence for a given keyword. 
The  second  facet  on  the  right  hand  side  under  the 
caption  Select  Citation  Sentence  Type  (indicated 
by the label  in Figure 17) provides this functional-
ity.  If,  for  example,  a  user  is  interested  in  viewing 
all  citation  sentences  that  identify  shortcomings  in 
cited works for the keyword Semantic Web, he can 

choose accordingly and can view only these kinds of 
citation sentences.  

8.3.3 Filter retrieved results with additional 
keywords 

The application also facilitates in filtering the retrieved citation sentences by using related keywords. 
The  facet  on  the  left  hand  side  under  the  caption 
Related  Keywords  (indicated  by  the  label    in 
Figure 17) helps in achieving this functionality. The 
facet lists all keywords extracted from the retrieved 
citation sentences. Thus, the user can further refine 
his  search  by  selecting  the  required  keyword  from 
this facet.  

8.3.4 View contexts of citation sentences in 
keywords timeline 

Besides  listing  all  citation  sentences  for  a  given 
keyword,  the  application  also  allows  viewing  the 
full  context  of  each  of  these  citation  sentences.   
Figure  18  provides  a  screenshot  where  a  citation 
sentence is selected in the keywords timeline. 

Figure 17: Screenshot displaying citation sentences for the selected keyword in the keyword timeline 

Figure 18: Screenshot displaying contexts of a citation sentence in the keywords timeline 

Discussion and Conclusion 

We presented in this paper our  work carried out 
for identifying contexts associated with sentences in 
research  articles  and  using  this  information  for 
providing  value-added  information  services.  The 
key focus of this paper has been to develop a linked 
data  application  using  contextual  information  extracted from papers published in the ESWC collec-
tion. In order to achieve this objective, the following 
steps were followed: 

Step 1  We deduced a conceptual framework for 
defining  various  contexts  associated  with  citation 
and  non-citation  sentences  in  research  articles  (as 
described in Section 4). 

Step 2  We developed the Sentence Context Ontology for modelling these contexts and derive ma-
chine-understandable  data  (as  described  in  Section 
5). 

Step  3    We  carried  out  supervised  learning  experiments using conditional probabilistic models for 
achieving  automatic  classification  (as  described  in 
Section 6). 

Step  4    Using  these  principles  and  techniques, 
we developed a linked data application, which uses 
contextual  information  extracted  from  papers  published in the ESWC collection (as described in Sections 7 and 8).  

The linked data application provides various features  and  services  for  the  research  community.  In 
the following section we identify some of the typical 
use cases of the linked data application. 

9.1  Literature Review System 

Literature  review  is  a  systematic,  explicit,  and 
reproducible method for identifying, evaluating and 
interpreting the existing body of recorded work produced  by  researchers,  scholars  and  practitioners 
[13].  This  activity  largely  uses  citation  links  for 
identifying  and  tracing  related  works  and  involves 
extensive  examination  and  analysis  of  the  passage 
where  a  given  citation  appear  for  establishing  its 
significance. We explain below how the linked data 
application would be helpful in carrying out a literature review. 

9.1.1 Identifying Contexts of Citing Articles 

The  present  citation  indexing  tools  such  as 
CiteSeerX,  Google  Scholar,  PubMed,  Scopus  and 
Science  Direct  provide  citation  link  based  information services. These services focus on identification of citing articles and links between the cited and 
citing articles.  

Though  these  services  are  beneficial  for  a  researcher carrying out a literature review, he/she still 
has to individually identify and understand the passages  within  the  citing  article  where  the  citations 
appear in order to learn the citing context, which is a 
time-consuming task. Further, the typical quest of a 
researcher  involved  in  literature  review  would  include  identification  of  works  that  have  gaps  or 
shortcomings;  or  that  overcome  gaps;  or  that  have 
been  used  as  background  material.  In  order  to  answer  such  queries,  it  is  required  to  solve  the  complex  task  of  identification,  extraction  and  indexing 
of the citation context from citing articles. 

The citations timeline interface of the linked data 
application (described in Section 8.1.10) solves this 
problem  and  provides  citation  context  based  information  services  for  researchers.  This  timeline  presents information about the contexts in which citing 
articles  have  cited  an  article.  This  helps  in  quickly 
learning  about  the  different  citation  contexts  and 
facilitates  decision  about  the  significance  of  citing 
articles. 

The  keywords  timeline  described  in  Section  8.3 
further  supports  this  task  by  presenting  all  citation 
sentences  on  a  given  topic  over  a  period  of  time. 
The  timeline  also  distinguishes  between  the  different contexts (reasons) for citations. Thus, this timeline provides views of different authors in different 
works  for  a  specific  keyword,  over  a  period.  This 
helps  in  sketching  the  intellectual  lineage  for  the 
topic, which is one of the tasks in literature review. 

9.1.2 Understanding the Use of Citations in the 
Article 

During the literature review process, it is also important to understand about the use of cited works in 
a given article. Most of the times, as a reader, it is 
often  difficult  to  identify  the  reason  for  using  citations  and  is  also  difficult  to keep  track  of  the  citations used in the article. Presently, there are no systems  that  provide  information  about  the  various 
roles played by citations in the article. It is difficult 

language and unstructured data. 

The citation sentences timeline (described in Section 8.1.1) provides this feature by presenting a classification of citations used in the article based on the 
reason  for  using  them.  The  user  can  easily  distinguish  between  the  different  types  of  citation  and 
obtain a quick understanding of the use of citations 
in the article. 

9.2  Efficient Forms of Citation Analysis 

The  traditional  methods  of  citation  analysis  are 
mainly  based  on  the  number  of  citing  articles  for 
evaluating  cited  works  and  authors.  The  citations 
timeline (described in Section 8.1.10) identifies different  contexts  of  citations  to  the  cited  works  and 
the  author  timeline  (described  in  Section  8.1.9) 
helps in understanding how an authors work is cited  over  a  period.  Thus,  this  offers  a  new  way  of 
looking at the notion of citation analysis and can be 
used for a better evaluation of the cited work and the 
author. 

9.3  Conclusion 

This paper presented our research on identifying 
contexts  associated  with  sentences  in  research  articles and employing this information for developing 
intelligent information services. The paper presented 
a  linked  data  application  developed  for  the  ESWC 
collection  and  explained  different  value-added  information  services  offered  by  the  application.  Our 
future work involves carrying out an inter-rater reliability study for establishing the choice of labels for 
sentences defined in Section 4. We intend to develop  a  larger  training  dataset  using  the  ESWC  data 
with  a  focus  on  achieving  a  higher  accuracy,  particularly  for  classes  that  currently  suffer  from  poor 
F-Scores. Further, we also intend to develop a web 
application  that  provides  citation  context  based  information services on the fly and carry out an evaluation study for assessing the application. The overall 
objective  would be to develop a robust linked data 
application for the research community based on the 
semantic publishing models presented in this paper. 
