Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Special Issue on the Semantics of Microposts

Editorial

Aba-Sah Dadzie a,, Matthew Rowe b and Milan Stankovic c
a The University of Birmingham, UK
E-mail: a.dadzie@cs.bham.ac.uk
b Lancaster University, UK
E-mail: m.rowe@lancaster.ac.uk
c Universite Paris-Sorbonne / Sepage, Paris, France
E-mail: milstan@gmail.com

1. Introduction

The call for this special issue on the Semantics of
Microposts resulted from discussions initiated by the
first Making Sense of Microposts workshop. The workshop was born out of the recognition of the invaluable
knowledge contained in the vast, heterogeneous, dis-
tributed, continuously updating data store comprised
of microposts  very small chunks of typically instantaneously published data, posted via social media and
other communication channels that restrict publication
unit size.

Microposts continue to grow in popularity as a
means of communication. This is despite, or maybe because of, the restrictions in post size (typically 140/160
characters  Twitter/SMS, and/or associated, small
multi-media elements, e.g., short YouTube videos, Instagram photos, Pinterest pins, Foursquare check-ins,
g+ chats, Facebook likes). Near permanent connectivity and the advent of inexpensive smartphones, and
specialised apps and short codes for microblogging via
even feature phones, has resulted in an explosion in the
generation of microposts, as they make possible near
real-time dissemination of news and events, both public and personal. Twitter, for instance, reported as at
2014, 78% of its active users tweeting from a phone.1
Facebook reported for Mar 2014, 609 million users active via a mobile device, out of a total of 802 million
active daily.2

*Corresponding author. E-mail: a.dadzie@dcs.shef.ac.uk
1https://about.twitter.com/company
2newsroom.fb.com/company-info

The availability of technology across all walks of
life increases the ease with which microposts are pub-
lished, from personal and shared devices, and even
public kiosks and digital displays. As a result, microposts are often used to document both day-to-day and
unusual events in the lives of individuals, support intercommunication between friends and with the general public, and enable interaction with other personas.
(Twitter and Facebook accounts for pets are not un-
usual; personas may also be created to disseminate information from or about a non-human entity, e.g., the
Mars rover Curiosity, wearable devices). Microposts
are used to ask questions, publish opinions about people and places, post news on breaking events, make
announcements within a community, or share a fleeting thought with the general public. Spontaneously
formed and purpose-driven hashtags, a particular feature of microposts and used across different communication channels, provide a sense of (transient) community and a filter that may be used in subsequent data
aggregation, exploration and analysis.

The Making Sense of Microposts workshop has
the sub-title Big things come in small packages. While
each individual post is very small, as a collection microposts capture a broad view on the physical and online lives of the connected public. Foursquare, for ex-
ample, reported over 6 billion check-ins as at May
2014, with millions more each day.3 Twitter, arguably
one of the most popular microblogging tools today, reported 500 million tweets per day as at 2014.1 The

3https://foursquare.com/about

1570-0844/0-1900/$27.50 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

A.-S. Dadzie & M. Rowe & M. Stankovic / Special Issue on the Semantics of Microposts

large volume of microposts published on a daily basis,
from a variety of devices and platforms, comprises collective intelligence that may be mined for reuse in different scenarios, e.g., to gauge the public mood at large
scale entertainment events, during periods of political
upheaval and in political or marketing campaigns; to
locate people and resources during natural and manmade emergencies and disasters; to provide contextand location-based guides to the traveller; to encourage discussion and collaboration in education.

The tasks involved in making sense of microposts,
which requires extraction of its semantic content, are
therefore addressed from a number of perspectives.
Within the Semantic Web community, Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics, approaches used typically involve automated and semisupervised methods for large-scale data mining, information extraction and content analysis. In Social and
Web Sciences, focused, qualitative analysis is carried
out on smaller datasets, to allow deeper insight to be
derived from investigation of, among others, the social element of this phenomenon. Findings from such
analysis are typically fed into augmenting large-scale
content analysis and knowledge acquisition. Visualisation is also often employed, to present the results of
data mining and analysis, and as research progresses,
to support deeper exploration and complex analysis of
micropost data. Information visualisation is also popular in data browsing and search applications targeted at
the lay user that reuse the content of microposts, e.g.,
tools that guide tourists through a city or visitors to an
exhibition.

A key challenge in the analysis of microposts is that
the brevity that eases publication and dissemination
introduces complexity in analysis, resulting as it does
in the use of non-standard abbreviations and terse lan-
guage. The need for novel approaches for effective, efficient analysis and reuse of this data continues to engage the research community and, increasingly, industry and commerce, government, state and other public bodies. This special call seeks to showcase the outcomes of work toward this aim and to point toward
new avenues of research and applications.

In Reality Mining on Micropost Streams, Balduini
et al. use the augmented reality Android app BOTTARI to demonstrate the application of information
retrieval with opinion mining and stream reasoning
to provide personalised, location-based recommenda-
tions. BOTTARI is built on the LarKC Semantic Web
framework4, and combines push with pull to provide
timely, context-based information to its users. The system relies on the BOTTARI ontology, which extends
the SIOC ontology5 and the WGS84 vocabulary6, to
allow encoding of opinion and location respectively.
BOTTARI has been trialled in a restaurant district in
Seoul, Korea, with 319 restaurants in a 2 km2 area.
The authors use, with a manually curated knowledge
base containing information about these restaurants, a
corpus of 109,390 tweets generated by approximately
30,000 users over 3 years, who rated 245 of the restau-
rants. Variation in the collection methods however resulted in 85% of the tweets falling within the last 6
months of the collection period. In an evaluation of
the quality and the efficacy of its recommendations the
authors found that data skew, with a large number of
tweets posted by a small number of users, resulted in
at best just over 50% of users receiving suitable or interesting recommendations. An interesting result discovered by the analysis was seasonal variation in preference for meal types and restaurants. The evaluation
also reported very good scalability of the approach em-
ployed. As at the time of writing the paper, plans were
underway to extend BOTTARI across Korea, and to integrate information from other social media platforms
along with Linked Data.

Social Influence Analysis in Microblogging Platforms  A Topic-Sensitive based Approach, by Cano
et al., assesses the influence exerted by posters about
a topic, by examining how others engage with the
ideas and opinions they express on micro-blogging
platforms such as Twitter. The authors enrich tweet
content using Zemanta7 and OpenCalais8, following
which they derive semantic profiles by translating the
enriched posts into triples, using the SIOC5, OPO9

We received 5 complete submissions, some of which
were extended versions of papers submitted to the first
Making Sense of Microposts (#MSM2011) work-
shop. The special issue features 2 out of these, one of
which follows on from work presented at #MSM2011,
and the other an independent submission to the open
call.

4See http://www.larkc.eu
5Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities ontology: http:

//sioc-project.org/ontology

6Basic Geo (WGS84 lat/long) Vocabulary: http://www.w3.

org/2003/01/geo

7http://www.zemanta.com
8http://www.opencalais.com
9Online Presence Ontology: http://online-presence.

net

Claudia Wagner GESIS  the Leibniz Institute for

the Social Sciences, Germany

Guillaume Ereteo Orange Labs, France
Annalisa Gentile The University of Sheffield, UK
Victoria Uren Aston Business School, UK
Bernhard Schandl mySugr GmbH, Vienna, Austria
Uldis Bojars SIOC Project, Latvia
Mischa Tuffield PeerIndex, UK
Alexandre Monnin INRIA Sophia Antipolis, France

and AO10 ontologies. These are then used to measure the importance attached to the original tweet or
poster, with relevance to the topic of interest, and also
as an endorsement of quality (of the original tweet).
The paper describes the derivation of a new algorithm,
the topic-entity PageRank (TPR), based on the TopicSensitive PageRank algorithm. The authors evaluate
their approach to ranking influence using a corpus containing 100,000 retweets written in English, out of over
2.2 million tweets collected over 5 days. The retweet
network comprised 32,626 unique users, of which
1,417 were retweeters, with 50739 edges (retweet re-
lationships). The evaluation compares TPR with three
state of the art algorithms: Hyperlink-Induced Topic
Search (HITS), In-degree (ID) and Topic-Sensitive
PageRank (TSPR), using two tasks, the first to rank
influence in 18 pre-selected topics, and a recommendation task. The authors found performance of TPR
and correlation between the different approaches to be
influenced by topic. Further, with the exception of 1
topic, TPR outperformed the other three algorithms.
The paper concludes with a description of a prototype
developed for visual exploration of the topic-based influence measure derived by TPR.

Putting together this special issue was a team effort.
To all who submitted papers, whether accepted or not,
interest and continued research in the topic is vital in
advancing the field. Each piece of work contributes to
our efforts to improve the extraction of semantics and
the knowledge content in micropost data, and therefore
optimise use of this rich knowledge.

Our reviewers, listed below, provided detailed feedback to the authors and suggestions for improving the
original submissions. We thank each one who dedicated their time and resources toward making this issue
possible.
Philippe Laublet Universite Paris-Sorbonne, France
Diana Maynard The University of Sheffield, UK
Harald Sack University of Potsdam, Germany
Jose M. Morales del Castillo El Colegio de Mexico,

Mexico

Jelena Jovanovic University of Belgrade, Serbia
Pablo Mendes IBM Research Almaden, USA
Sofia Angeletou British Broadcasting Corporation,

10Annotation Ontology: https://code.google.com/p/

