Next Generation Scientific Publishing and 
the Web of Data 

Editorial 

Tim Clark 
Harvard Medical School, Boston MA USA; Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston MA USA; School of 
Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester UK 

Abstract Next Generation scientific publishing will exploit both the web of documents and the web of data to help resolve 
many of todays serious problems in reproducibility, citation and citation-claim integrity, and publication volume intractabil-
ity. Here  we briefly review several developments in this field using new semantic models and approaches to help achieve 
more robust scientific, and particularly biomedical, communications. 

Keywords:  scientific publishing; biomedical communications; semantic web; argumentation; reproducibility; data integrity; 
ontologies; scientific data; reusability

The  entire  topic  of  what  has  been  called  Next 
Generation  Scientific  Publishing  has  garnered 
significant  interest  lately,  due  to  widely-reported 
defects  in  the  current  ecosystem  of  biomedical 
communications  affecting  among  other 
things, 
reproducibility, citation integrity, and intractability of 
the present volumes of publications per field.   

results 

they 

Reproducibility is a very real problem, particularly 
in therapeutic development.  Begley and Ellis [1] at 
Amgen  reported  in  2012  that  of  the  academic 
research 
in 
hematology-oncology,  only  11%  were  actually 
reproducible in the laboratory. Researchers at Bayer 
[2]  reported  similarly  disappointing  results.    The 
author  has  had  discussions  with  colleagues 
collaborating  with another pharmaceutical company, 
who quoted, again, very similar results.  

reviewed  and 

tested 

This issue was recently brought into even sharper 
focus  by  a  controversy  in  the  regenerative  biology 
community  over  the  findings  on  so-called  STAP 
(Stimulus  Transitioned  Acquisition  of  Pluripotency) 
cells.    Obakata  et  al.  [3,4]  reported  very  surprising 
and  promising  results  that  simply  could  not  be 
reproduced  in  many  laboratories.    An  investigation 
conducted by Riken subsequently found that she had 

mishandled  data  by  illicit  alterations  to  images.  
These alterations were first discussed on PubPeer and 
various blogs (see Figure 1).   

The  Obakata  et  al.  results  were  striking  and 
potentially  ground-breaking,  which  was  why  they 
were  scrutinized  so  rapidly  and  carefully.    But  how 
many  somewhat  more  mundane  articles,  that  do  not 
receive  this  scrutiny,  suffer  from  similar  if  not  as 
radical  problems?  Begley  and  Ellis  point  to  more 
insidious problems: cheery-picking data (experiment 
works  once  out  of  ten  tries,  publish  the  one  dataset 
only);  and  poor  description  of  research  reagents, 
preventing 
the  experiment  from  actually  being 
reproduced with the identical materials.  

Current efforts to deal with reproducibility include 
direct data citation [5-8] and resource citation [9,10].  
Groups  working in these areas are making intensive 
use  of  semantic  technologies  to  develop  solutions.  
The ELIXIR pilot project FAIRPORT,  to develop a 
common  web  services 
interface  for  biomedical 
databases,  is  an  example  of  this  kind  of  approach, 
and  will  make  the  tasks  of  newly-emergent  data 
publications  in  the  scientific  literature,  such  as 
Nature Scientific Data, easier.   

assertion  extraction  such  as  that  of  Groth  et  al. 
[11,12] or the article in this issue by Marcondes et al. 
must  generally  assume  as  an  underlying  base  for 
reasoning,  that  the  extracted  material  is  sound.  The 
questions  raised  on  reproducibility  and  integrity  of 
data  show  that  in  some  cases  they  may  not  be,  and 
that  sorting  out  ways  to  improve  data  integrity  in 
science 
necessary 
complement  to  semantics-based  reformulation  of 
portions of the material for ease of interoperation or 
search and retrieval.  

publications 

very 

are 

[13,14]  studied 

Citations  and  cited  claims  can  also  be  at  issue. 
Greenberg [13,14] and others [15,16] studying claim 
and citation networks have found that citations  as is 
anecdotally  well-known    are  often  corrupted  in 
various  ways.  Greenberg 
the 
selection  pressure  on  citation-based  claim  strength 
evolving through a chain from original research to 
review articles.  He found that qualifiers tended to be 
removed from claims as they were successively cited 
  in  some  cases  all  the  way  from  we  hypothesize 
and  it  may  be  that  to  it  has  been  shown  that   
without  the  introduction  of  any  actual  confirmatory 
data along the  way.  Other researchers [15,16] have 
found extensive use of copied citations where it is not 
possible  that  the  citing  researchers  actually  read  the 
relevant articles.   

Greenbergs  approach  to  constructing  a  claim 
network  is  too  labor  intensive  to  be  brought  into 
general  production  use.  However  other  authors 
[17]  have  developed  methods  for  creating  entire 
argument  graphs,  such  as 
the  Micropublication 
(http://purl.org/mp),  which  can  be 
vocabulary 
adapted  to  pre-  and  post-publication  peer  review,  if 
treated as stand-off annotation, using ontologies such 
as W3C Open  Annotation [18]. Such argumentation 
models require characterization of the purpose of the 
citation    is  it  citing  material  as  support,  or  is  it 
challenging or discussing the cited material.    

The articles by Angrosh et al. and Ciccarese et al. 
in this issue, both deal  with this problem.    Angrosh 
and colleagues developed a method for automatically 
classifying  the  type  citations  by  characterizing  their 
context.    Ciccarese  et  al.  used  David  Shottons 
Citation Typing Ontology (CiTO)[19] and the Peroni 
et al. FaBIO bibliographic ontology[20], to introduce 
a standardized method of inter-claim/inter-hypothesis 
relationship 
[21,22]  of 
hypotheses  and  claims.    Methods  such  as  these  will 
be  essential  to  develop  robust  ways  of  determining 

the  SWAN  model 

to 

has 

that 

been 

growth 

reported 

reported 

[23] 
articles 

It  has  often  been 

lineage  of  scientific  claims,  and 

the  real 
the 
relationship of arguments,  in an automated manner.   
that  scientific 
publication volumes are intractable.  Hunter et al. for 
example, 
in 
Medline/PubMed 
double-
exponential  in  the  recent  period.  Improvements  to 
queryability  is  of  articles  is  one  method  to  address 
this  problem.    The  Marcondes  et  al.  article  in  this 
issue  exploits  the  high-leverage  point  at  final 
article  submission  time,  to  require  a  fairly  simple 
software-supported  semantic  enhancement  of  each 
article by its author, to this end.  An important insight 
of this article is this point of leverage.  The question 
in  practice,  as  some  publishers  have  discovered,  is 
how to keep authors from gaming the system  as 
they  have  incentive  to  be  published,  not  to  be 
correctly  annotated  from  an  ontological  perspective 
[24].  It may be that   feedback  from author citation 
metrics  could  help  establish  a  better  incentive  for 
proper annotation term choice, assuming that authors 
can  be  kept  in  mind  of  the  relationship  between 
findability and citation counts.  

of 

the 

been 

appearance 

As  a  final  note,  a  very  significant  development 
since the articles in this Special Issue were accepted, 
has 
standardized 
interoperable  methods  for  representing  semantic 
annotation  on  linear  text  documents  [25-27].  The 
W3C Open Annotation Model (OA), developed in a 
large  (100+member,  50+  organizations)  Community 
Group,  is  now  on  standards  track.    At  this  writing 
several colleagues are attending a workshop on using 
OA  and  various  software  tools  for  post-publication 
peer  review.  This  model  is  intriguing  and  may  be 
successful  because  it  can  integrate  new  semantic 
models  into  the  current  publication  process  as 
transparent semantic overlays on the existing linear 
document.  

As  noted  in  [25],  the  OA  model  is  stand-off 
annotation  and  can  be  aggregated  and  mashed  up 
independently of the site it  was originally  generated 
on. It is a first-class web object.  This will allow new 
semantic  models  to  be  introduced  to  the  scientific 
communications 
backward-
compatible way.  

ecosystem, 

in 

Perhaps  establishing  backward  compatibility  for 
new methods is a good way to move forward to the 
next generation of scientific publishing.  

citation  networks.  Journal  of  Evaluation  in  Clinical 
Practice 17: 389-393.  
15.  Ramos  M,  Melo  J,  Albuquerque  U  (2012) 
Citation behavior in popular scientific papers: what is 
behind  obscure  citations?  The  case  of  ethnobotany. 
Scientometrics 92: 711-719.  
16.  Simkin  MV,  Roychowdhury  VP 
(2005) 
Stochastic modeling of citation slips. Scientometrics 
62: 367-384 
17.  Clark  T,  Ciccarese  P,  Goble  C  (submitted) 
Micropublications:  a  Semantic  Model  for  Claims, 
Evidence, Arguments and Annotations in Biomedical 
Communications.  Journal  of  Biomedical  Semantics. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.3506 
18.  Sanderson  R,  Ciccarese  P,  Sompel  HVd, 
Bradshaw  S,  Brickley  D,  et  al.  (2013)  W3C  Open 
Annotation  Data  Model,  Community  Draft,  08 
February 2013. World Wide Web Consortium. 
19.  Shotton  D  (2010)  CiTO,  the  Citation  Typing 
Ontology.  J  Biomed  Semantics  1  Suppl  1:  S6. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20626926 
20. Shotton D, Peroni S, Ciccarese P, Clark T (2011) 
FaBiO,  the  FRBR-aligned  Bibliographic  Ontology, 
version 1.2. 
21. Ciccarese P, Wu E, Wong G, Ocana M, Kinoshita 
J,  et  al.  (2008)  The  SWAN  biomedical  discourse 
ontology. J Biomed Inform 41: 739-751.  
22. Ciccarese P, Ocana M, Clark T (2009) Semantic 
Web  Applications 
(SWAN) 
Ontology,  W3C  Interest  Group  Note  20  October 
2009. World Wide Web Consortium.  

in  Neuromedicine 
