
CiTO + SWAN: The Web Semantics  
of Bibliographic Records, Citations, Evidence  
and Discourse Relationships 

Editor(s):  Phillip  Bourne,  University  of  California  at  San  Diego,  USA;  Anita  de  Waard,  Elsevier  Laboratories, 
USA;  Alexander  Garcia,  Florida  State  University,  USA;  Carole  Goble,  University  of  Manchester,  UK;  Steve 
Pettifer, University of Manchester, UK; David Shotton, University of Oxford, UK 
Solicited reviews(s): John Westbrook, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, USA; Cameron Neylon, Public 
Library of Science, UK. 

Paolo Ciccaresea,b *, David Shottonc *, Silvio Peronic,d, Tim Clark a,b  

a Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Neurology, Mindinformatics, 65 Landsdowne 
Street, Cambridge, 02139 MA, USA.   
b  Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
c Image Bioinformatics Research Group, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South 
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK.  
d Department of Computer Science, University of Bologna, Mura Anteo Zamboni 7, 40127 
Bologna (BO), Italy  
*  These authors contributed equally to this work. 
  Corresponding author.  Email: tim_clark@harvard.edu 

Abstract.  Most  literature  searching  in  biomedicine  is  now  conducted  via  PubMed,  Google 
Scholar  or  other  web-based  bibliographic  search  mechanisms.  Yet  until  now  a  public,  open, 
interoperable  and  complete  web-adapted  information  schema  for  bibliographic  citations, 
bibliographic  references  and  scientific  discourse  has  not  been  available.  Such  a  schema, 
expressed in the form of a description logic compatible with current web semantics approaches, 
would provide the ability to treat bibliographic references and citations, and rhetorical discourse 
in scientific publications, as semantic metadata on the web, with all the benefits that implies for 
organization, search and mash-up of web-based scientific information.  
In this paper we present CiTO + SWAN, a set of fully harmonized ontology modules resulting 
from the harmonization of CiTO (the Citation Typing Ontology) with SWAN (Semantic Web 
Applications  in  Neuromedicine),  which  we  have  developed  by  jointly  adapting  and  evolving 
version  1.6  of  CiTO,  the  Citation  Typing  Ontology,  and  version  1.2  of  the  SWAN  Scientific 
Discourse  Ontology  (v1.2).  The  CiTO  +  SWAN  model  is  specified  in  OWL  2  DL,  is  fully 
modular, and inherently supports agent-based searching and mash-ups.  
Through the harmonization activity presented here, and previous work that harmonized SWAN 
with  the  SIOC  (Semantically-Interlinked  Online  Communities)  Ontology  for  describing  blogs, 
wikis and discussion groups, we have construct the basis of a powerful new web framework for 
scientific communications.   

Keywords: Bibliographic ontology, FRBR, scientific discourse, OWL 

Introduction 

in 

in 

  Most 

(b)  encoded 

research  data. 

Motivation 
The  web  is  now  the  primary  platform  by 
which biomedical scientists find, retrieve and 
share  textual  information  and,  in  certain 
cases, 
literature 
searching  in  biomedicine  is  now  conducted 
via  PubMed,  Google  Scholar  or  some  other 
web-based  bibliographic  search  mechanism.   
Such  approaches  have  substantially  replaced 
physical  searching 
library  stacks  for 
periodicals, and PubMed is now processing in 
the  range  of  60  million  web  searches  per 
month [1]. 
Each  web-based  (or  other  electronic)  search 
method  constructs  and  uses  an  information 
schema to represent the cataloguing metadata 
for  publications,  and  has  methods 
for 
interrogating  and  displaying  these  metadata. 
However,  so  long  as  the  schemas  for  these 
metadata  are  either  (a)  not  made  publicly 
sui  generis 
available, 
representations,  and/or  (c)  made  available 
programmatically only in application-specific 
APIs (if at all), we all have a problem.  The 
problem  is  that  each  repository  of  metadata 
and  publication  contents    and  each 
application for searching and processing them 
 must stand alone as an information island.   
While  stand-alone  programs  and  databases 
were reasonable in the pre-web world, this is 
no 
  Modern  web 
programming depends on reuse and extensive 
cross-linking  of  information.    For  scientific 
information in particular, we need the ability 
to  mash-up  (integrate)  and  query  data  and 
metadata  across  multiple  repositories,  using 
computer  programs  to  undertake  this  work 
automatically, as in e.g. Miles et al. [2]. The 
style  of  programming  current  on  the  web 
which  best 
(a) 
surfacing  data  and  metadata  in  machine 
readable  standard  form  such  as  REF  and 
OWL  [3-6],  and  (b)  making  data  and 
metadata  queries  available  to  programs  via 

supports 

involves 

longer 

this 

the 

case. 

to 
