An Egocentric Semantic Reference System
for Affordances

Editor(s): Aldo Gangemi, Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, Italy
Solicited review(s): Giovanni Pezzulo, Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, Italy; Gaurav Sinha, Ohio University, USA; Aldo
Gangemi, Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, Italy

Jens Ortmann a,,, Giorgio De Felice b, Dong Wang c and Desiree Daniel c
a Softplant GmbH, Munchen, Germany
Email: jens.ortmann@softplant.de
b Department of Mathematics and Informatics
University of Bremen, Germany
E-mail: defelice@informatik.uni-bremen.de
c Institute for Geoinformatics (IfGI)
University of Munster, Germany
E-mail: {wang.dong,desiree.daniel}@uni-muenster.de

Abstract. This article suggests a theory of egocentric semantic reference systems for human observations of affordances that can
be used to semantically account for subjective human observations on the web. Based on the perceptual theory of affordances,
which suggests that humans perceive the potential actions the environment affords, an egocentric semantic reference frame is
established, which is anchored in the observers specific capabilities for perception and action. The theory is completed with
transformations that allow to project values of observed affordances from one users ordinal reference frame into another users
ordinal reference frame. The potency of the theory to capture the semantics of human observations is demonstrated through
the implementation of a full fledged egocentric semantic reference system for the prototypical affordance of hikability that a
mountain path affords to a hiker. The prototype uses real user-ratings from a community driven web portal.

Keywords: Affordance, Egocentric Reference System, Human Observation, Semantic Reference System

. . . man is the measure of all things, of the existence of the things that are and the non-existence
of the things that are not. [Protagoras as quoted in
30, 152a]

*Corresponding author. E-mail: jens.ortmann@softplant.de.
**This work has been partly supported through the International
Research Training Group on Semantic Integration of Geospatial Information by the DFG (German Research Foundation), GRK 1498
and by the China Scholarship Council.

1. Introduction

The above quote, which is attributed to the Greek
philosopher Protagoras (490-420 BC)1 has not lost any
of its original significance and controversy. In particular in the field of observations and measurements the
reference to the observer is an important, but often
neglected aspect. Motivated by the opportunities and
promises of the semantic web, this paper suggests a
theory of egocentric semantic reference systems for
human observations of affordances, which uses an on-

1see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protagoras

(all websites in this article were accessed 27.01.2012)

theory can overcome the problems and inaccuracies
caused by a questionable objectivism, which assumes
human-independent observations and measurements.
Current approaches to represent human observation
fall short of representing the subjectivity of observations and often perform computations, such as averag-
ing, that are not possible on ordinal reference frames
typically used by human observers. For example, what
a Dutch tourist perceives as a challenging hike might
be a stroll for a Swiss mountaineer and what the
Swiss mountaineer perceives as a challenging hike
might actually put the Dutch tourist in serious danger.
Egocentric reference systems have been well established in Geographic Information Science. Most people are used to egocentric reference frames from car
navigation systems that adopt the drivers perspective.
Egocentric reference frames are often contrasted with
allocentric reference frames that use an external refer-
ence, for example the equator as reference for latitude
values of geographic coordinates. In this paper we extend the distinction between egocentric and allocentric
reference systems from geographic to semantic reference systems. A semantic reference system allows to
assign symbols to any observable instead of only coordinates to locations on earth.

This work adopts the theory of affordances [14,15],
to explain how and what humans perceive. The theory
of affordances suggests that humans perceive opportunities for action. These opportunities for action are always taken with reference to the observer. Hence, human observations are inherently subjective. The perception of opportunities for action fits well the many
social web platforms, where users can rate ameni-
ties, services and opportunities for activities. The affordance theory is combined with accounts of human
judgements in computer science [7,9,8] and introduced
to previous work on reference systems [22,23,32,33].
It is hypothesized that an egocentric semantic reference system for human observations of affordances allows capturing the subjective meaning of observation
values in ordinal reference frames. Thereby, an egocentric semantic reference system establishes the individual observer as the measure of her own observa-
tions, while at the same time making the subjective observation values usable in information systems and social web applications. Semantic transformations across
individual reference frames will enable a transformation of values from one persons reference frame into
another persons reference frame. We validate the theory of egocentric semantic reference system by provid-

ing a full implementation of a semantic reference sys-
tem. To the authors knowledge this is also the first implementation of a real semantic reference system with
all its components.

The next section presents the background on reference system, affordances and human observation
in information system. Section 3 introduces the two
leading examples of stair-climbability and mountain-
hikability. In Section 4 and 5 the theory of a semantic reference system with datum, reference frame and
transformations is presented and afterwards prototypically implemented as described in Section 6. Section 7 discusses the achievements and limitations of
this work, before concluding in Section 8.

2. Background and Related Work

This section presents the central ideas of reference
systems, affordances and human observations, which
we use to establish egocentric semantic reference systems for observations of affordances.

2.1. Reference Systems

Reference systems are fundamental to information
[31,5,22]. A reference system basically establishes a
set of shared reference entities (usually something ob-
servable) to allow describing new things in terms of the
reference entities. Reference systems emerged from
the need to compare observations and measurements.
One of the first to investigate reference systems on a
general level was Stanley Stevens, who suggests a very
basic definition of measurement as the assignment of
numbers to objects according to a rule [43, p. 677;
as quoted in [5]]. A reference system specifies these
rules. Chrisman [5] distinguishes reference systems for
space, time and attribute as the three types of reference systems for geographic information. Kuhn [22]
and Kuhn and Raubal [23] generalize from these types
of reference systems to a theory of semantic reference
systems.

2.1.1. Spatial Reference Systems

In a spatial reference system, the position of a point
is identified by two or three dimensional coordinates.
In a geographic reference system, a spatial reference
system for the earth, the coordinates are assigned to
places on earth. These coordinates are distributed on
a virtual grid and establish the reference frame. Some
fix-points (reference points) in the reference frame are

tory in London) was originally chosen to fix the zero
meridian. In this case, the great circles and the meridians form an ellipsoid that approximates the shape of
the earth. The ellipsoid serves as reference surface
for the coordinate system. It is anchored in a set of
known points. The ellipsoid can be described by a set
of parameters, such as length of major axis, flattening and parameters for the orientation relative to the
earth. These parameters specify the datum of the reference frame [5]. In Figure 1 the places denoted by
black coordinates show the fix points that anchor the
reference frame. The grey coordinates are assigned to
places by establishing the distance relation between
the place in question and places whose coordinates are
already known.

Depending on how a datum is specified, different
types of datums can be distinguished. Relevant for this
work are allocentric and egocentric datums. An allocentric datum is defined independently of an agent and
it does not depend on the choice of reference points
[21]. Most spatial datums that are used in Geographic
Information Systems are allocentric. An egocentric datum models the perspective of one particular agent
[21]. A car navigation system that gives direction of
right and left turns from the drivers perspective can
be seen to adopt the egocentric spatial datum of the
driver. The reference frame is solely anchored in the
location and orientation of the car driver and the reference frame moves as the car moves. A bridge that is
in front of the car will be behind the car after driving over the bridge and whether you have to turn left or
right to reach the city center depends on the direction
you are coming from.

The third component of a reference system is composed by transformations that allow an integration of
values across different reference frames. For example,
one might want to convert the coordinates given in a
regional reference frame such as Gauss-Kruger3 into
the global reference frame of the WGS84 using a polar coordinate transformation. Transformations are important when integrating datasets, for example across
different countries which use their individual national
reference systems.

2.1.2. Semantic Reference Systems

The commonalities of spatial, temporal and attribute
reference systems led Kuhn [22] to suggest semantic

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of a spatial reference system. The
reference frame (dotted grid) is anchored in landmarks whose coordinates are known (black coordinates). New places like the mountain peak or the road crossing get a coordinated (grey) based on the
distance to place whose coordinates are known.

tied to physical, observable points by explicitly assigning that this point in the reference frame represents
this physical location on earth. A regional reference
frame is often realized as a Cartesian coordinate sys-
tem. Global reference systems use angular distances
and their reference frame is realized as a polar coordinate system. Figure 1 illustrates how a reference frame
defines a virtual grid that assigns coordinates to places.
Additionally, a reference frame has a map scale
given by the ratio of distance in the representation and
distance in the real world. The map scale usually determines the level of detail displayed. An ontology design pattern to describe the map scale and to integrate
different information sources under explicit consideration of the map scale is presented in [4].

The reference points realize the datum. For exam-
ple, the World Geodetic System 84 (WGS84)2 uses angular distances from the equator (latitude) and from
the meridian that runs through Greenwich, UK (lon-
gitude). The reference entities can be chosen arbitrar-
ily. The choice of the zero meridian of, for instance the
WGS84, does not influence the accuracy and uniqueness of the reference system. However, to facilitate re-

2See

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_

3the Gauss-Kruger coordinate system is a regional reference sys-

Geodetic_System for more information.

tem used for instance in Germany.

10206040503070809010902060405030708010; 7030; 1550; 9085; 7090; 3065; 35reference systems as a generalization of the known reference systems. A semantic reference system is not restricted to assigning numbers to objects, but allows assigning any symbol to an object, thereby allowing to
account for the semantics of the symbol.

Kuhn and Raubal [23] and Janowicz and Scheider
[19] suggest implementing reference frames for semantic reference systems with ontologies. The semantic reference frame specifies a set of allowed symbols.
Probst [32,33] investigates semantic reference frames
for observations and measurements grounded in the
Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering (DOLCE) [26]. Probst provides an ontological theory for unary qualities and an implementation
in the Web Ontology Language (OWL)4. To overcome
the agent-independence of Probsts approach, Ortmann
and Daniel [27] suggest an ontology design pattern for
referential qualities that can be used to model qualities
that depend on their host and on an additional referent entity. The ontology design pattern for referential
qualities uses the same version of DOLCE as Probsts
work [32,33].

The datum in a reference system anchors the reference frame. It fixes the interpretations of the primitive terms and values in the reference frame. Fixing
the interpretation requires a reference to the real world.
The reference, which points from the system of symbols into the real world, is a foundational problem
of reference systems. It has been dubbed the symbol
grounding problem [16]. Two approaches have been
proposed for semantic reference systems to deal with
this problem. Firstly, one can simply assume the meaning of a fixed set of symbols to be given, for example by a foundational ontology [23]. A foundational
ontology defines the general and shared top-level no-
tions. Secondly, the meaning of symbols denoting observable entities can be grounded in perceptual operations that are shared across humans and that can be
specified in information systems [40,41,39]. In either
case, the meaning of new symbols can then be defined
in terms of the existing symbols, thereby restricting the
interpretation of the new symbols within the reference
frame. Figure 2 provides a schema that shows how a
semantic reference frame generalizes a spatial reference frame to reference observables of any type. Espe-
cially, the similar network structures of nodes that have
values and edges that specify the relations between the
nodes are shown in Figure 1 and 2.

4see http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of a simple semantic reference
frame. Similar to a spatial reference frame, observables are assigned
values. The values in a semantic reference frame are labels. From a
given set of values, for instance waypoint, peak and mountain, it is
possible to reference a new value for a hiking path and relate it to
the known values.

The distinction of allocentric and egocentric datums
and reference frames has not yet been investigated for
semantic reference systems. However, to the authors
knowledge all currently existing semantic reference
frames for observations and measurements are allocen-
tric. A closer examination of affordances in the next
subsection will indicate that the explicit inclusion of
the observing agent as a referent for its observations
leads to egocentric reference frames for affordances,
which take the personal perception and expression of
the observer as set of fixed terms.

Transformations across semantic reference frames
are the least explored component of semantic reference
systems. In Geographic Information Science, Schade
[38] offers an approach to transform schemata for geographic data sets encoded in the Web Service Modelling Language (WSML)5 using the functional language Haskell.

2.2. Affordances

Gibson [14,15] devises a theory of how animals6
perceive opportunities for action. These opportunities
for action are called affordances. Gibson introduces
the notion of affordance as follows:

The affordances of the environment are what it
offers the animal, what it provides or furnishes,
whether for good or ill. The verb to afford is found

5see http://www.w3.org/Submission/WSML/
6In this work the term agent is used as the more general term,
encompassing humans and animals. Gibson studied animals and hu-
mans, and most ecological psychologists study humans. When referring to specific work the respective types of agents are used.

"Route 27""Hiking Path""Red Peak""Peak""is a""is a""Waypoint""sub""Red Mountain""Mountain""is a""has-part""has-part""lays on""lays on""has-part""has-part"in the dictionary, but the noun affordance is not. I
have made it up. I mean by it something that refers
to both the environment and the animal in a way
that no existing term does. It implies the complementarity of the animal and the environment. [15,
p. 127, emphasis in original]

Even more important for our program, Gibson states
that

affordances are properties of things taken with reference to the observer. [15, p. 137, emphasis in
original]

Gibson characterizes an affordance as an observable
property of a thing that an animal can act upon. Fur-
thermore, Gibson establishes the perceiving animal as
the measure of all the things it observes.

Despite the intuitiveness and appeal of the idea of
affordances, there exists no single ontology of affor-
dances. Since Gibson was not able to fully develop the
theory of affordances [20], there exist competing views
on how the notion should be defined. We follow Shaw
et al. [42], who suggested that affordances are properties of the environment that are complemented by socalled effectivities, which are properties of the animal.
Turvey [45] formalized this dual model of affordances
and thereby provided the first formal specification of
what an affordance is.7

Warren [46] provides an early experimental proof of
the human ability to perceive affordances. His experiments show that humans can judge the climbability
of stairs nearly perfectly, and that this ability can be
modelled as depending on the observing humans leg
length, which is the reference for the riser height of the
stairs. Similar experiments have been conducted for
example, for reachability [3], sitability of chairs [24]
or crossability of a road [29]. Generally, these experiments provide evidence that humans can accurately
perceive which actions they can perform and how difficult these action are to them. In the cited experiments
the humans were asked to express their perceptions
and the degree to which the affordance was provided
to them (except for [29] where the actual actions were
observed).

Ortmann and Kuhn [28] investigate the place of affordances in an information system ontology of ob-
servations. Following the interpretation of affordances

7Stoffregen [44] suggests an alternative formal specification
where affordances are relational system-properties at the boundary
of animal and environment.

suggested by Shaw et al. [42] and Turvey [45], Ortmann and Kuhn [28] model affordances as qualities in
DOLCE. DOLCE characterizes qualities as the basic
entities we can perceive or measure [26, p. 16]. Ortmann and Daniel [27] refine the view of affordances
as qualities by making the observing agent as a referent explicit. In their view an affordance is a referential
quality, which is specifically dependent on its host and
on the observer.

2.3. Representing Human Judgements

Freksa [7,8] and Freksa and Lopez de Mantaras [9]
investigate human observations and their representation in information systems in comparison to metric
measurements. Measurements are well established in
the hard-sciences, where scientists mostly deal with
metric measurements, but in the soft-sciences the scientists often face descriptive observations and judgements made by human subjects. Experiments conducted by Freksa and Lopez de Mantaras [9] and
Freksa [8] suggest that human judgements of phenomena should be represented through verbal descriptions
rather than metric values. The verbal descriptions refer to ordered categories that are represented as simplified version of fuzzy sets [48]. Therefore, instead of
making the judgements appear more precise through
translating them into a metric system, the imprecision
is preserved, but made explicit. Hence, more information about the actual judgement is preserved. Freksa
[7] argues that this approach requires only comparatively small vocabularies of judgements, but is still
more accurate than metric human judgements. A small
set has the advantage that it is rather easy to handle,
yet its expressiveness and granularity might be limited.
However, experiments show that the results of human
judgements using even small sets of descriptions are
superior in accuracy and expressiveness to the results
of the same humans using numeric values, if the fuzziness of the judgements is made explicit [9,8].

Freksa [7] suggests two types of context-dependent
adaptation for the semantics of the terms used as
judgements. The concept of global adaptation refers to
the problem that the same set of values (terms) can be
used differently. For example, judgement of distance
is different whether you talk about your travel destination or your workout run. Local adaptation refers to
different judgements based on a set of given objects of
the same type. Encountering three trees with heights
4m, 6m, and 8m, an observer would refer to the latter
tree as tall, yet if there are three trees 8m, 10m and

equally high tree as small.

Such subjective and context-dependent judgements
can be made more objective when there is a reference
object. In the stair-climbing experiment it is possible to
objectivize the subjective judgements through the measurement of the leg length of the observing person, but
this is not possible in the case of user-ratings, where
every user has its own (local) set of ratings.

Aiming for a mathematical model of human observation Zadeh [49,50,51] promotes a computational
theory of perception. One of his observation is that

perceptions are f-granular, meaning that (1) the
boundaries of perceived classes are unsharp and (2)
the values of attributes are granulated, with a granule being a clump of values (points, objects) drawn
together [...]. [49, p. 73]

In contrast to this, measurements are numerical and
crisp. In a similar way to Freksa [7,8] and Freksa
and Lopez de Mantaras [9], Zadeh [49,50,51] first
argues for a distinct treatment of perceptions based
on their specific characteristics, but goes on to state
that the computational theory of perception applies
to both, perceptions and measurements, or in other
words, that measurements are a special case of percep-
tion. In essence, the computational theory of perception takes linguistic propositions and assigns fuzzy semantic constraints to them. The computational theory
offers means to compute and propagate the fuzzy truth
values.

The presented work imparts the important insights
that (1) the results of (technical) measurements and
(human) perception fall in different scales, but that
(2) there exists a theory of perception that is general
enough to cover the results of measurements and per-
ception.

3. Examples

Two exemplary affordances are used to show the potency of egocentric semantic reference systems for af-
fordances: (1) The stair-climbability afforded by a step
to a person and (2) the hikability afforded by a hiking
path to a hiker. The examples are chosen from very different domains and scales each capable of demonstrating the specific peculiarities and challenges that occur at that scale and domain. Additionally, this allows
highlighting the specific characteristics of very different domains and shows that our approach is general
enough to deal with them without any modification.

3.1. The Stair-Climbing Affordance

The stair-climbing affordance is the affordance that
is offered by a step to a person to climb up that step.
It can be easily extended to other objects like the affordance to climb on a chair. The stair-climbing affordance has been investigated in laboratory conditions
by the psychologist William H. Warren [46]. It has become a standard example in Ecological Psychology.

The practical relevance of investigating and documenting simple and daily affordances such as the stairclimbability affordance lies, for example, in the design
of navigation applications for elderly or handicapped
people and in the design of ambient assisted living en-
vironments.8 The greater difficulties that elderly people have in climbing stairs or reaching out to a cupboard have to be taken into consideration to design
conveniently liveable environments.

Warren [46] conducted a set of experiments with a
group of his students as his subjects. Warren used pictures of stairs instead of real stairs and asked his students to judge the climbability. His results show that
his students are perfectly capable to judge the least
climbable stairs (i.e. the maximum riser height that
the subject thought she or he could climb) and also
the optimally climbable stairs (i.e. the stairs with a
riser height that appeared most convenient for them
to climb). The results suggest two things. Firstly, the
perception of his subjects is in perfect accordance to
clinical studies and measurements of bodily capabilities and secondly, the riser height of the stairs chosen
for least or optimal climbability depends on the subjects leg length. Warren even identifies a ratio between
leg length and riser height that is the same across all
his subjects. The homogeneity of the group of subjects
with respect to their physical fitness and abilities allows for modelling the affordance of stair-climbability
based on only one parameter. A more heterogeneous
group of people and a more diverse set of objects
would require more parameters to accurately model
the stair-climbability.

The experiments show that humans have a reference
system for stair climbability according to which they
can judge the climbability of stairs upon perception. In
Warrens [46] set up, the reference frame for climbability can be anchored in the subjects leg length.

8Ambient assisted living environments are environments that are
equipped with non-intrusive technology to support elderly people in
independent daily life in their familiar surroundings.

The hikability affordance is the affordance to hike
that a mountain path offers to a hiker. This example is
inspired by a web portal9 where users can share their
reports and judgements of hiking tours. Similar portals exist for many amenities and activities such as ho-
tels, restaurants, running-, skating- and cycling tracks,
playgrounds etc. The ratings of the degree to which an
affordance is offered to a person is usually made after
acting on the affordance.

The individual rating of an amenity cannot be modelled through physical parameters as it is possible for
the stair-climbing affordance. Indeed, the hikability
of a mountain path depends on the hikers head of
heights, surefootedness, stamina, ability to cope with
thin air and on the mountain paths steepness, expo-
sure, height and on many other characteristics. Further-
more, it is not always clear how the properties of the
mountain paths are to be taken with reference to the capabilities of the hiker. When rating hotels and restau-
rants, parameters for social and cultural aspects have
to be added. In current rating portals, the rating of a
service, amenity or activity is simply the average of
all users. However, as indicated before this ignores a
bias in the group of observers. For example, a hotel in
an area with a lot of nightlife is rated by the predominantly young guests, the high rating might not apply
to a family and their expectations. The same applies
to the hiking example. A route in exposed and rocky
terrain might be rated in a medium difficulty by hikers
used to exposed routes, but regardless of the fitness, a
person from the lowlands might find the tour very dif-
ficult.

To model egocentric reference systems for the hikability affordance that a mountain path offers to a
hiker, we have crawled data from the online platform
hikr.org. Hikr.org is a community driven portal where
registered users can share tour reports. The tour reports have a name, date and contributing hiker, and
can have additional attributes such as a list of waypoints (peaks, huts and other landmarks), duration,
height gain, height loss, and most importantly a rat-
ing. There exist different ratings for hiking paths, winter tours, climbing routes etc. For this work, only the
hiking paths and their hikability ratings are of interest.
The hiking rating is given according to a scheme ranging from T1 (Valley Hike) to T6 (Difficult Alpine

9http://www.hikr.org

Hike). Tours from all over the world have been con-
tributed, but most tours are from Europe, with a particular bias to Switzerland. Therefore, only tours from
Switzerland are taken into account for the prototype.
The earliest tour crawled is from 2006 and the extracted dataset ranges until November 6th, 2011.

From the website, a total of 22913 tours were
crawled, 15956 of them have a rating. These tours were
contributed by 1152 users. The contributions made per
user follow a power law distribution, with the topcontributor having 668 tour reports, 81 users having
more than 100 reports and a long tail of 313 users having only one report. The tours have a total of 14042
waypoints assigned to them. The waypoints can appear
in several tour reports, for example, the waypoint for
the Matterhorn appears in 21 tour reports.

4. Datums and Reference Frame for Affordances

In this section the datum and the reference frame of
an egocentric reference system for affordances are in-
troduced. These two aspects are individual to the user
and manifest the man as measure postulation. The semantic datum specifies how the primitive values are related to the observable world. The semantic reference
frame specifies how the values are related to each other
and how values can be derived from the primitive ones.
This section develops generally applicable statements
about egocentric datums and reference frames for af-
fordances. Readers familiar with foundational ontologies will notice that the terminology used here is inspired by DOLCE. This is not necessary for the theory
but is a result of previous work [e.g. 32,33,28,27] and
the intention to make this theory applicable in semantic web applications.

4.1. The Egocentric Datum

The semantic datum specifies how observations values are related to the observables in the world. The semantic datum for affordances specifies how the terms
of one particular observer refer to the affordances she
observes in the world. Akin to the theory of affordances [15,17], the specification of the semantic datum
for affordances makes the observing agent explicit. It
takes the observing agent with her qualities and capabilities as the yardstick for the observations. This idea
of using the observing agent as a measure for its perception is found throughout the affordance literature
[e.g. 15,17,45]. We assume the observer expresses her

length is different but fixed for every observer. Hence,
the egocentric semantic datum for affordances is determined by the observer and has individual but fixed
parameters. The knowledge about the datum parameters allows specifying the perceptual operations, which
ground the meaning of expressions [41,39].

Unfortunately, the parameters that specify the semantic datum are not always known. The observer usually does not make the datum explicit. The datums
for observations of affordances that are more complex
than the stair-climbing affordances and that cannot be
modelled based on very few easily measurable physical parameters cannot be specified in this way. For ex-
ample, the hikability affordance does not only depend
on one property of the observer, but a whole set of
properties has to be considered, probably with a different individual weighting. In this case, only the realization of the datum through a set of reference points
that anchor the reference frame can be derived from
the observers expressions and judgements.

Every individually observed affordance of the same
type that is expressed by the observer explicates one
particular fix-point that realizes the egocentric datum.
For example, the set of rated reports that a hiker posts
online realizes the users semantic datum for hikability
in the information system.10

The statements about the egocentric semantic datum make an important assumption about the symbol
grounding problem [16]. The egocentric semantic datum for affordances does not explicitly deal with the
symbol grounding problem, but it can be seen to embrace the problem by assuming that there exists an environment that is shared by observers, and that the observers have equivalent access to.

For the egocentric datum this means that the parameters of an egocentric datum are given in other reference frames that are grounded in their respective da-
tum. For example, the leg length and riser height of the
stair-climbability datum require a reference system for
length and height measurement. Such reference systems exists and are well known and used. Therefore
the grounding problem of stair-climbability is shifted
to the grounding problem of length and height and thus
excluded from this work.11

10The rating can change according to seasonal or weather condi-

tions, which are not considered in this work.

11How to deal with the grounding problem has been scrutinized

by Scheider [39].

Fig. 3. The observer provides the datum for the reference frame. In
the information system the datum can be specified through parameters or realized through a set of fixed sample observations.

observation and thereby provides a set of initial values for observed affordances. This initial set of val-
ues, whose meaning is clear to the observer, suffices to
specify the semantic datum of the observer. Bringing
the theory of affordances into the research on datums
in semantic reference systems leads to egocentric semantic reference systems. In an egocentric reference
system the human observer is modelled as part of the
reference system in the information system. Hence, a
partial representation of the user is necessary, for example by specifying qualities or capabilities of the user
or by explicitly relating the results of observations to
the observer.

In general, we distinguish two ways to formalize the
semantic datum in an information system. Firstly, the
egocentric datum can be specified through a set of parameters that represent qualities or capabilities of the
observer taken with reference to an observable object
that provides the affordance. Secondly, the egocentric
datum can be realized through a set of reference observables that the user has expressed. The difference
between specifying and realizing a semantic datum is
similar to the difference between an intensional and an
extensional definition of a set. The specification uses
parameters to define a mapping between the observables to the values. The realization uses an explicit set
of values that are related to an explicit set of observ-
ables. Specification and realization of the datum are illustrated in Figure 3.

In the example of the stair-climbing affordance Warren specifies a datum with one parameter that is sufficient to approximate the persons judgements. The pa-

leg length"climbable"stairs1stairs2stairs3"not climbable"riser heightSpecification withparameters.Realization withexamples.For the realization of the datum through shared observations it is assumed that the observer performs the
same observation procedure for each individual hikability affordance. Additionally, it is assumed that observers can identify mountain paths and that a mountain path rated by one person can also be hiked and
rated by another person with her own egocentric da-
tum. This corroborates Gibsons claim of a shared environment across observers [15] and avoids solipsist
positions that could otherwise be derived from egocentric reference systems. Hence, the perceived affordance (its value) is specific to the observer, but the en-
vironment, which provides the affordances, serves as a
common ground for all observers.

The benefit of evading some of the challenges in the
semantic datum comes at the price of a stronger focus
on semantic translations. Interoperability among egocentric semantic reference frames ultimately depends
on semantic translations from one users egocentric
reference frame into another users egocentric reference frame.

4.2. The Egocentric Reference Frame

The egocentric semantic reference frame for affordances specifies the scale and units for the magnitudes
of an observed affordance. A magnitude can be seen as
a mapping from degrees of an affordance into units of
magnitude [2]. A scale is a mode of representation that
entails the order and the spacing of the magnitude units
that represent the degrees of the observable affordance
[2]. In the following the magnitude units are called
values. If the semantic datum that anchors the reference frame is realized, some of the values are explicitly
linked to representations of observables. Additionally,
the reference frame allows to assign values to observ-
ables, which are not yet explicitly rated by the user.
The datum can be seen to span the reference frame, and
the reference frame specifies how the spanned space is
filled with values.

The values do not need to have the same extent on
the scale, the values can be fuzzy and they might over-
lap. Theoretically, each observer can freely choose the
values she uses to describe her observations. Practi-
cally, the range of values is usually very limited [9,8].
In the mentioned social web applications where users
contribute their observations of, for example, the quality of a hotel or restaurant or the difficulty of a hiking
path, the values are usually fixed and only few values
are used.

Requiring a definite choice of only one rating per
observation excludes fuzzy ratings from the applica-
tion. For hotel ratings, portals often provide a reference
frame ranging from zero stars (lowest) to five stars
(highest) alluding to allocentric reference frames applied by hotelier associations. In the case of the hiking
example a reference frame of values ranging from T1
(Valley Hike) to T6 (Difficult Alpine Hike) is ap-
plied. Naturally, the values of human observations can
denote overlapping magnitudes and the values can be
fuzzy, but the fuzziness is often excluded by offering a
non-fuzzy set of predefined categories.

Predefined values might suggest that they are objec-
tive. Yet, the effects of local adaptation [7], when ratings are made in the context of previous experiences,
make judgements subjective. Every observer has his
own subjective mapping of observed degrees of an affordance to the values for his ratings. Every new rating
is adapted to the previous ones. For example, the rating of the same hiking path by a skilled mountaineer
and by a visitor on vacation might result in different
experiences of difficulty and in different values, even
though the same labels and descriptions of the values
are used.

The scale of the reference frame specifies the relations among the values. For example, an ordinal scale
defines an order among values and specifies an ordinal reference frame. Additionally, the relative extent of
the magnitudes that the values refer to can be speci-
fied. For example an interval scale has values that are
ordered and all values denote magnitude degrees of the
same extent. The values of an egocentric semantic reference frame for affordances are usually of different
size and denote categories. The judgements are usually
ordered, but categories can overlap so that the order
only applies to categories that do not overlap.

Figure 4, shows a reference frame for the affordance
of stair-climbability. The values are delimited according to the results of the maximal and optimal climabability of stairs [46]. In this case, four values termed
low, perfect, high and too high (as depicted in
Figure 4) can be assumed and are laid out on an ordinal scale. Perfect is the value that is used to denote the stairs that are perfectly climbable. This value
represents an atomic granule of the observers percep-
tion. Stairs lower than perfectly climbable steps fall
into the value low, higher stairs belong to the value
high, unless the value of the riser height/leg length
ratio exceeds the critical point. In a simplified case one
can group the first three values into one value termed
climbable, where climbable = low or perfect

different extent, from an atomic granule for perfect
climbabiliy to a theoretically unlimited extent for steps
that are too high. The categories in this simple reference frame do not overlap, and the order relation holds
across all categories.

In conclusion an egocentric reference frame specifies the allowed values and the relation among them. It
usually consists of a set of descriptive values that are
ordered on a nominal, ordinal or partly ordinal12 scale.
The values represent sometimes fuzzy and overlapping
sets of individual ratings. The ratings of individuals
fall into one of the values of the reference frame.

The theory presented so far allows to establish egocentric semantic reference frames for affordances. The
reference frames are grounded in egocentric semantic
datums defined by the observing agents. Often a set of
values can be predefined, but every user has her own
interpretation of the categories that is manifested in the
users personal ratings. It is even possible to let every
user have a personal set of units of any size and with
labels that the user chooses. Thereby, the egocentric
reference frame for affordances substantiates Protagoras postulation of man as measure in the context of
observations.

5. Transformations in Egocentric Semantic

Reference Systems for Affordances

Establishing egocentric reference systems at first
undermines the idea of interoperability, which typically relies on a common basis. The grounding in a
shared reference frame along with the transformation
that can be built between egocentric reference frames
of affordances turn affordances into operational ob-
servables. A subjective observations made by one user
becomes a valuable information source for another
user.

Borrowing from Geographic Information Science,
two types of transformations are distinguished: (1) datum transformations and (2) direct transformations. A
datum transformation is a transformation based on the
datum parameters. The direct transformation establishes a transformation function based on observables,
whose values are known in both reference frames.

12Partly ordinal in the sense that the order relation does not hold
between overlapping values. This is not to be confused with a partial
ordering.

5.1. Datum Transformations

The datum transformation requires explicit knowledge of the datum parameters. If all parameters are
known for the input and the output reference frame,
then a datum transformation can be derived.

For very simple, purely physical affordances the datum parameters are sometimes known and datum transformations can be derived. One such case is the stairclimbing affordance. In the following, one example
of a datum transformation for stair-climbing reference
frames (cf. Figure 4) is discussed. Despite the fact
that the datum parameter leglength is given on a ratio
scale, the datum transformation is a mapping between
two ordinal reference frames.

One can define a transformation function f that
takes the parameter pI of the input datum, the parameter pO of the output datum and the value vI that should
be transformed as input. The resulting transformation
function is shown in Equation 1. To keep the example
simple only the values climbable and too high are
used in the equation. If the leg length parameter pI of
the input datum is bigger than the leg length parameter pO of the output datum and the input value vI is
climbable, then the output value is climbable as
well. If in the same case the value vI is too high, then
no constraint can be projected into the target reference
frame and the output value can be climbable or too
high. If pI is smaller than pO and vI is too high",
then also the output value will be too high". If in this
case the rating is climbable", again no statement can
be made about the climabability and the output value
is climbable or too high.


f (pI , pO, vI ) =

climbable

too high

if pI > pO and vI =climbable

if pI < pO and vI =too high

climbable or too high

otherwise

(1)

The transformation function with all four above
mentioned values low, perfect, high and too
high is shown in Equation 2. The transformations of
ordinal reference frames can be seen as a transformation of qualitative boundaries into the output reference
frame that exclude certain values from the interpreta-

and metric scale as applied by Warren [46]. The illustration is inspired by [Figure 7.1 in 32, p. 89].

tion of the value in the output reference frame.


low

if pI < pO and vI =low
or perfect

low or perfect or high
if pI < pO and vI =high

climbable or too high

if pI < pO and vI =too high

f(pI , pO, vI ) =

climbable or too high

if pI > pO and vI =low

high or too high

if pI > pO and vI =perfect
or high
too high

if pI > pO and vI =too high
(2)
The function f and f apply to the case that pI = pO.
In the case of pI = pO the transformation function is
the identity function. The transformation functions f
and f are not uniquely defined as mappings into only
one of the original values, but there exist cases where
the original values are mapped to the union of two or
more values.

The practical benefit of a datum transformation for
semantic web applications might seem arguable. In
many applications of simple, physical affordances, datum transformations are not necessary because the
agents and the objects in the environment are sufficiently modelled to allow direct computations of the
ratios that stand for the affordance. For example, in an
ambient assisted living apartment all objects that afford climbing, in particular the stairs, are known with
their height. Therefore, the climbability affordances
for a new resident could be calculated when the new
residents length is known. In many cases, such an
apartment is already designed according to the parameters of prospective residents.

However, reference systems for simple, physical affordances can be used as a common ground for da-

tum parameters of more complex affordances. Further-
more, artificial agents, such as robots, which are usually equipped with technical sensors, can benefit from
datum transformations.13

5.2. Direct Transformation

A direct transformation requires the identification of
values denoting the same entity in the world in different reference frames. The identification of this entity assumes the existence of a reference system for
the entity that is shared across the agents who define
the input and output reference systems. Given a set of
entities whose values for the observed affordance are
known in the original and in the target reference frame,
there are different ways to derive the transformation
function. This work uses a method of transformation
that is closely aligned with the method of coordinate
transformation in Surveying [cf. 18,13]. In the following the representation of values, the establishment of
the transformation function and a small example are
discussed.

5.2.1. Representing the Values for Direct

Transformations

To allow for a direct transformation the representations of the values have to be brought into an interoperable form of representation. As there are no constraints
on this in the egocentric reference frame, it cannot be
assumed that the values and terms in one reference
frame are convertible into the values and terms of another reference frame in their respective form. This article employs a simple vector form, as used in Information Retrieval [37], to represent the values of the ordinal reference frame. The vectors dimension is equal to
the number of possible values. Such a vector allows to
better deal with the discrete nature of the values than a
single value for the rating. The vectors dimensions are

13see for instance [36,35] for an example of a system of agents
interacting with each other and with the environment and [34] for a
functional affordance-based model of a robot.

00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0lowhightoo highperfectleg lengthriser heightgranulecategorylinearly independent. The linear independence of the
vectors dimensions causes a loss of information about
relations between the values. In particular, the ordering
among values is not reflected. An extended model for
vector representation that allows linear dependence of
values has been suggested in [47]. To avoid overly increasing complexity of our transformations this model
has not been explored for this work.

As the vector representation is rather space consuming on paper, a simpler example than the six-value
reference frame of hiking paths is used.14 The reference frame has three values T1 (Valley Hike), T2
(Mountain Hike) and T3 (Challenging Mountain
Hike). These values correspond to the canonical unit
vectors as follows:

(3)

 , T2 =

 , T3 =

T1 =

It has to be kept in mind that even though vectors with
numbers are used, the values are not given on a metric scale, but they still represent ordinal values. For
computations, the simplest way is to interpret the zeros
and ones in the vector as boolean values, so that the
canonical unit vectors would represent only one value.
However, transformations can result in vectors different from those depicted in Equation 3. A vector resulting from a mapping from T1I in the input reference
system to either T1O or T2O would have a 1 in the
dimension for T1 and T2. These examples would be
interpreted into the following predicates:

  T1T2T3,

  T1T2T3 (4)

A slightly more expressive interpretation of the vectors in Equation 3 takes the component values as probabilities of value membership. The vectors in Equation 3 express that the rating is 100% certain. This is
reasonable for the user-ratings, which are directly contributed by the user. The move to interpret the numbers in the vector not as the ordinal value but as probability for an observable is a mathematical trick [2,
p. 106]. It allows for quantitative computations on the
values that are not possible with the original ordinal
values. However, this has to be kept in mind through-

14The reference frame used in the implementation has six values.

Only the first three values are used here.

out the transformation. In the initial case when users
give a rating according to a predefined scheme of ordinal or nominal values, the values correspond to the
canonical unit vectors given in Equation 3. The resulting vectors can carry probability values that must add
up to 1.15 For example, it is possible to express that the
transformed rating of the path is T1 with a probability of 0.8 and T2 with a probability of 0.2 in a target
reference frame:

  (T1, 0.8)  (T2, 0.2)  (T3, 0)

(5)

The vector represents a fuzzy predicate, and a translation back into a reference frame with non-fuzzy values is only possible by giving up the information about
the probabilities or by approximating it through a fixed
set of special predicates. Alternatively, the reference
frame can be modelled to take fuzzy values.

5.2.2. Establishing the Transformation Function

Given the algebraic representation of the values as
vectors, the transformation function takes the form
of a weight matrix. The weight matrix is multiplied
with the input vectors and results in the output vec-
tor, which represents the value in the target reference
frame. Again, the mathematical approach is closely related to well-known approaches for coordinate transformations in Surveying [e.g. 18,13]. The general formula is written down as follows:

O = W  I

(6)

Writing out the vectors and the weight matrix the general form of the equation looks like this:

 O1

...
Om

 w11  w1n

...
...
wm1  wmn

...

I1

...
In

(7)

The matrix W is an interaction matrix [2] between the
two sets of values given by the two users for the shared
observables. It contains weights that state which impact the various components from the input vector
have on the output vector. wij models the impact that

15This claim ignores cases where rounding leads to a sum different than 1, for example, when the three values denote one third,
which is represented as 0.33, then the sum only adds up to 0.99. This
problem does not change the theory.

O. In the general case the matrix does not need to be
a square matrix, but can also transform between reference systems with different numbers of values. The
major challenge is to find the values for the weight matrix W .

In geographic reference systems the matrix is built
up by first identifying points whose coordinates are
known in both systems. When a sufficient number of
points has been identified in both systems, a system
of equations is set up and solved to derive the matrix
weights.

There is no sufficient number of shared observables for a transformation between semantic reference
frames for human observations. A higher number usually results in more accurate results, but there are exceptions to this rule, for example, when the observables are not exactly equivalent. This can be caused by
time difference between the observations, a restaurant
might be renovated or change the chef, the area of a hotel might change, or a hiking path can be in a different
condition in fall than it is in summer. Additionally, in
many cases the very high values might not be used for
ratings by a user. In the hikability rating scenario the
tours given the highest value typically require substantial experience and mountaineering skills, which only
few users have. Hence, a matrix with missing weights
in some places is the normal case rather than the ex-
ception. Additionally, the ratings are not unique as coordinates for locations are. Different observations of
affordances are very likely to take the same descriptive
value. For a boolean weight matrix this work suggests
three simple rules to fill the weight matrix:
(1)

wij = 1

if there exists a shared referent
that is rated with the jth value
in the input reference frame, and
that is rated with ith value in the
output reference frame.
if there exist one or more shared
referents that are rated with the
jth value in the input reference
frame, and none of them are
rated with ith value in the output
reference frame.

(2)

wij = 0

(3) wij = NA if there is no shared referent that
is rated with the jth value in the
input reference frame the weight
is assigned the value NA for
not available.

An approach to reduce the number of unspecified
places is to exclude the dimensions that represent val-

ues that the user does not use. The changes in the components have to be considered when establishing the
matrix.

Moving to a weight matrix for the transformation of
vectors that represent probabilities, rules (2) and (3)
remain the same as compared to establishing a boolean
weight matrix, only rule (1) has to be adapted:
(1) wij =

|vO,i|
|vI,j|

if
there exists a number
| vI,j |> 0 of shared referents that are rated with the
jth value in the input reference frame and that are
rated in the output reference
then wij is the ra-
frame,

tio of the number | vO,i
of shared referents that are
rated with the ith value in
the output reference frame to
the number of shared referents | vI,j |.

For example, if in a three value rating system with
values T1, T2, T3 there are three tours rated T1I in the
input reference frame, and these tours are rated T1O,
T1O and T2O, then w11 = 0.67 and w21 = 0.33,
rounded to the second decimal place.

5.2.3. Example

In the following example, we consider two avid
hikers Ian and Otis who both completed six similar paths and rated their individual experiences. Otis
would like to hike a seventh path that Ian has hiked
before and needs a transformation of Ians rating into
his own rating. Table 1 shows the values Ian and Otis
assigned to the hikabilities of the paths. The table also
shows that the entity in the real world that Ian refers to
as Path 1 must be the same as the entity that Otis refers
to as Path 1. This assumes an underlying allocentric
reference frame for the paths (not their affordances) as
reference objects.

Table 1

Values resulting from Ians and Otis tour ratings.

Ian
T1I
T1I
T2I
T2I
T1I
T3I
T2I

Path 1
Path 2
Path 3
Path 4
Path 5
Path 6
Path 7

Otis
T2O
T1O
T3O
T2O
T1O
T3O

ping from T1I to values in O are calculated from the
given matches. In the example the three paths rated
with the value T1I, are rated two times with T1O and
once with T2O. According to rule (1), the weight w11
is constructed as follows: There exists a path rated with
value 1 (T1) in the input reference frame (Path 1, 2 and
5) and two of these paths (Path 2 and 5) are rated with
value 1 (T1) in the output reference frame, which gives
a ration of 2/3 for the weight w11. Likewise, there exists one path (Path 1) among the three paths rated T 1I
that is rated with value 2 (T2) in the output reference
frame. This gives a ratio of 1/3 for the weight w21.
This leads to a mapping of T1I as follows (the components are rounded to the second decimal place):

tive meaning of observation values in ordinal reference frames. This section presents a prototypical implementation of an egocentric semantic reference sys-
tem. The prototype illustrates at hand of a social web
application how user ratings can be represented accurately and ontologically correct, how this helps to overcome the challenges of individual and subjective ratings and how these ratings can be transformed across
the users ordinal reference frames without making unnecessary and invalid assumptions about the users reference frame and its values.

Throughout this section typewriter font will be used
to indicate RDF16 nodes like User. RDF classes start
with a capital letter, RDF properties start with a lower
case letter.


The mapping expresses that a path that is rated with
T1I is rated with a probability of 0.67 as T1O and
with a probability of 0.33 as T2O. Applying rule (1)
to each weight in W the resulting weight matrix looks
like this:

0.33 0.5 0
0 0.5 1.0


0.67 0

0.67 0

0.33 0.5 0
0 0.5 1.0

W =

Hence, Path 7 would result in a probabilistic rating

of 0.5 for T2O and 0.5 for T3O:

As a result, a theory that allows to account for the values of individual user-ratings taken with reference to
the users specific capabilities is established. Further-
more, the transformations allow to estimate additional
ratings, based on transformations from a second users
values into the first users reference frame.

6.1. The hikr.org Dataset

(8)

(9)

(10)

After crawling the data from the hikr.org website,
the proprietary stored data have been processed according to the Linked Data principles [1] and stored
as an RDF-graph. The Linked Data approach focuses
on linking data items and datasets and describing them
by reference to URIs. It allows representing the hiking
dataset in a flexible way, which also complies to semantic web standards. The adherence to semantic web
standards such as RDF and SPARQL17 also increases
the reproducibility of the results. The original data is
retrievable through the hikr.org portal.

The graph structure of the dataset is depicted in
Figure 5.18 The respective properties and classes have
been added in the processing step, aiming to approximate the structure of the dataset as presented on
the website as closely as possible. The total number of triples added up to 552912 and is stored in
a Jena19 triple store with a fuseki SPARQL server.
The SPARQL endpoint20 allows to query the RDF
graph through the SPARQL Query Language for RDF.
The RDF graph has five classes: Tour, Waypoint,
User, Region and HikingDifficulty. The
class Region is not used in this work. Addition-
ally, the individuals of these classes are connected
through relations, i.e. RDF object properties. Each

6. Egocentric Semantic Reference Systems for

Semantic Web Applications

In the introduction it was hypothesized that an egocentric semantic reference system for human observations of affordances allows capturing the subjec-

16The Resource Description Framework (RDF), see http://

www.w3.org/RDF/

17see http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/
18The concept maps have been created in CMap Tools, available

for download at http://cmap.ihmc.us/

19See http://jena.apache.org/index.html
20At http://spatial.linkedscience.org/sparql

number of subject-property-object triples for properties. Large round boxes represent classes, small square boxes represent datatypes.

Tour individual, which represents a rated tour is
related through hike-rating to an individual of
HikingDifficulty. User individuals are related
to Tour individuals through the relation has-hiked,
and the inverse relation hiked-by. Similar relations has-visited and visited-by exist between User individuals and Waypoint individuals.
Waypoint individuals are assigned to Tour individuals through the waypoint relation, and through the
inverse has-tour relation. The datatype properties
height-gain, height-loss and duration are
specified for the individuals of the class Tour. The
Waypoints can have a datatype property altitude.
Additionally, all individuals have a datatype property
title from the Dublin Core Metadata Element Set21.

6.2. Establishing an Egocentric Semantic Reference

Frame and Datum

To establish a semantic reference system for observations of affordances, this work draws from previous work by Probst [32,33] and is loosely aligned to
DOLCE. DOLCE models observable qualities in a socalled EQQS-pattern [25], wherein a quality (Q) inheres in an entity (E). The magnitude of the quality is
a quale (Q), which is a region in a quality space (S).
Probst [32,33] suggests modelling qualities according
to the DOLCE pattern and then built a reference frame
as a second layer of representation of qualities and
qualia in a partitioned reference space. This model cor-

21see http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/

responds closely to Bunges [2] analysis of measure-
ment, which distinguishes properties (DOLCE quali-
ties) from property degrees (DOLCE qualia), which
are mapped to magnitude units (Probsts reference re-
gions), which then are ordered on a scale (Probsts reference space). The ontology design pattern for referential qualities [27] together with Probsts [32,33] reference spaces allows to establish an egocentric semantic
reference frame and a semantic datum for affordances.
The prototypical implementation of the egocentric
semantic reference system makes one important sim-
plification. The implementation does not make the distinction between qualia and quality spaces on the one
hand and reference regions and reference spaces on the
other, which is suggested by Probst [32,33]. Instead,
the implementation only requires a part of the DOLCE
pattern and models the qualia as values and the quality
spaces as reference frame. This simplification comes
with a significant reduction in the complexity and size
of the implementation. This simplification does not affect any of the reference systems parts.

The datum in the egocentric reference system is
given through the observer. The ontology design pattern for referential qualities [27] allows to include the
observing agent as a required entity for the observed
affordance. Ergo, the observer as datum is accounted
for. In the case of the hikability example, no datum
parameters, i.e. qualities of the observer, are speci-
fied. However, the explicit consideration of the observing agent is manifested in modelling every individual observer with its own egocentric semantic reference frame. That is, instead of six values for the whole

plementation of the egocentric semantic reference systems for hikability affordances.

Classes and individuals that represent the affordance-
quality, the quale and the quality space have to be
added. The extended EQQS pattern requires at first an
entity in which the quality inheres, i.e. the thing that
provides the affordance. The implementation uses the
class that originally was intended to represent the tour
report.

Here, one could argue that the assignment of a difficulty to a tour report is ontologically inaccurate because the path is rated and not the tour report. For the
hikability affordance a new class Hikability is created along with individuals for every rating given by
a user. As the user is an integral part of the hikability affordance, paths hiked by more than one user, also
have more than one hikability affordance. This leads
to 29677 individuals for the hikability affordance, each
related to a path and a user.

The classes so far represent the affordance as a
quality but not yet the rating. The actual rating that
is assigned to the affordance is the quale (the class
hQuale). Since not all paths were rated in the original dataset, only 20559 out of 29677 Hikability
individuals have a quale assigned to them. A quality
has one quale in each reference frame in which it is
observed. Given 1152 users, there are 1152 egocentric frames with six values each. Therefore, there exist
6912 hQuale individuals, which are part of the 1152
respective quality spaces (class hQSpace).

The dataset modelled with reference frame and datum is depicted in Figure 6. In total, the tripleset including the semantic reference frame is with 715241
triples about 30% bigger than the original dataset. The
reference frame and the datum capture the semantics
of human judgements of the hikability affordance that
a mountain path affords to a hiker. The human judgements are given as terms referring to six possible val-
ues. The meaning of the term is grounded in the user,
and by extension in the users use of these terms to
refer to specific paths in the mountains. The resulting
category of individual judgements with the same value
establishes the extension of the terms meaning for a
user.

6.3. Performing Semantic Transformations

The final step to an operational notion of affordance
observation is the implementation of semantic trans-
formations. Unfortunately, there is far less previous

work that can be drawn from. Therefore, some pragmatic simplifications have to be made throughout the
establishment of semantic transformations.

There are 1152 reference frames in the dataset, and
transformations are specific to each pair of two reference frames. Not only the sheer amount of possible transformation functions, but also the dynamic nature of community driven portals, with an ever changing (increasing) dataset impedes a pre-computation of
weight matrices. To provide an idea of a typical application that requires a semantic transformation a small
scenario is chosen:

Rita plans to visit a friend in Lucerne and would
like to hike up the famous Rigi Mountain close by.
As she has never hiked in this region before, she
would like to know how difficult it would be for her
to hike the Rigi (and maybe even which route to
take).
The waypoint for Rigi Kulm22, the top of the Rigi
Mountain appears in 91 tour reports. 89 of these reports are rated, with ratings ranging from value T1 to
T5. Rita is a frequent user of the hiking portal, she contributed 92 reports to the portal. 85 of her reports are
rated according to the given six-value rating scale. Rita
has hiked mostly in the Canton of Ticino.

The matching of tours poses an additional challenge
in the hikr dataset. Each tour report is unique, and
refers to a specific hike on a hiking path at a certain
date. A shared reference frame for hiking path referents in the real world is missing. Therefore, the approach here has to resort to the waypoints assigned to
the hiking path. The waypoints are predefined in the
hiking portal, and the set of waypoints can be considered an allocentric reference frame. The matching of
paths can only be performed at hand of a similarity
measure that allows to treat sufficiently similar paths
as equivalent. This work uses an overlap of waypoints
among paths as naive measure for the similarity of
paths.

To derive an expected rating of a path to the Rigi in
Ritas reference frame the following steps have to be
performed:

1. Find users that have hiked paths that include the

waypoint for Rigi Kulm.

2. Find the waypoints that these users have hiked.

22Waypoint Rigi Kulm: http://www.hikr.org/dir/

Rigi_Kulm_4131/

dataset are depicted in white, the classes for the reference frame extension are shown in grey. Properties between individuals are depicted as
arrows between the classes of individuals.

3. Find matches between Ritas waypoints and the

waypoints found in Step 2.

4. Rank the users resulting from Step 1. according

to the number of matches found in Step 3.

5. Select the highest ranked user from Step 4. and
fill the matrix according to the three rules stated
above (cf. Section 5).

The first two steps can be solved with SPARQL
queries to the triplestore. The respective queries are
shown in Listing 8 and Listing 8 in the Appendix.
Steps 3 and 4 are more complex and are explained in
the following.

6.3.1. Similarity-based Tour-matching

The ratings in the hiking portal face one problem
that other rating portals (for example, for hotels or
restaurants) do not have: Users do not rate the same observable over and over again, but users rate their own
individual hiking tour. For the semantic translations,
we have to make the assumption that the users rating
of the tour is actually a rating of the hiking path or
route that this tour comprised. Thereby, the rating abstracts from temporal influences, such as varying conditions due to different seasons. Yet, even with this assumption equivalent paths have to be identified among

the individual reports. In the hikr.org portal a set of
waypoints is predefined, so that users can assign the
same waypoints to their individual tour report. The
waypoints that different paths have in common can be
exploited to come up with a simple similarity mea-
sure. Sufficiently similar paths are potential candidates
of shared observables for the weight matrix. A simple
algorithm matched the paths according to their common waypoints. However, a closer examination also
revealed that the user Rita, has hiked the same paths
several times. To preclude a bias towards certain paths,
only the most recent tour of a set tours with equivalent
paths is taken into account.

The similarity based strategy bears some peculiari-
ties. In a heterogeneous landscape such as mountains,
an additional waypoint, maybe an additional peak, can
add substantially to the difficulty. There might also exist several paths of different difficulties between the
same two waypoints. Moreover, the paths have very
different total amounts of waypoints, ranging from
zero to more than ten. First queries indicated that the
paths seldom share more than four waypoints. To obtain a sufficient number of equivalent paths the threshold for assumed equivalence of paths was set to two
shared waypoints. This is very low and comes with a

totype and as proof of concept this uncertainty is ac-
cepted.

The peculiarity is mostly induced by the automatic
matching that even exceeds the state of the art for geographic reference systems. Even today, direct transformations are usually based on shared points that have
to be identified manually. A manual identification, or
at least verification, is possible, but requires more user
interaction and was not feasible for the example in this
work.

All users that have hiked a path, which includes the
waypoint Rigi Kulm are querried. The result is a set
U of 65 users. For each user ui in U, the waypoints
that this user has visited are queried returning sets Wi
with waypoints. Each set of waypoints Wi is compared to Ritas set of waypoints WRita and the users ui
are ranked according to the number of waypoints they
have in common with Rita. The highest ranked user
is selected as suitable candidate to establish the transformation matrix between this users reference frame
and Ritas reference frame. In our implementation the
highest ranked user was named chaeppi. He has 56
waypoints and 13 paths in common with Rita.

6.3.2. Establishing the Matrix

Given user chaeppi and his paths that match one of
Ritas paths, the weight matrix can be established. First
the ratings for the paths are queried for Rita and for
chaeppi to derive rating pairs, which reflect the unique
paths rated in Ritas and in chaeppis reference frame.
From these pairs the probabilities for the weight matrix
can be calculated according to the rules (1), (2) and (3)
specified in Section 5. The resulting matrix is shown
in Equation 11, again rounded to two decimal places.


NA 0.14 N A 0.33 0 NA
NA 0.71 N A 0.67 1 NA
NA 0 N A 0 0 NA
NA 0.14 N A 0 0 NA
NA 0 N A 0 0 NA
NA 0 N A 0 0 NA

 (11)

WchaeppiRita =

The matrix is incomplete, because chaeppis did not
use the values T1, T3 and T6 in any of the shared paths.
The weights that cannot be specified are marked NA in
the matrix.

The final step is to query chaeppis path, which included the waypoint Rigi Kulm and its rating, and to
project this rating into Ritas reference frame. User
chaeppi has rated the path he took to the Rigi Kulm

waypoint with T2. The transformation into Ritas reference frame is shown in Equation 12.

NA 0.14 N A 0.33 0 NA
NA 0.71 N A 0.67 1 NA
NA 0 N A 0 0 NA
NA 0.14 N A 0 0 NA
NA 0 N A 0 0 NA
NA 0 N A 0 0 NA

 (12)

Hence, in our scenario the path that chaeppi took up to
the Rigi mountain, would be rated with 71% probability as T2 by Rita, and only with 14% probability as T1
and with another 14% probability as T4 (1% percent
has been lost to rounding errors). The implementation
of the example in R is documented online23.

6.4. Comparison of transformed ratings to actual

ratings

The example has shown that the method works and
results in a vector of probabilities. The probabilities
indicate how likely the user would perceive the suggested path in the categories of her egocentric reference frame. To gain an insight if the method also yields
results that actually match the users actual perception,
we have conducted a few more tests in our dataset.

After comparing the matches of tours across all
users we have selected four pairs of users that have
twenty or more matching tours and that have not hiked
too many tours together, using an equivalence measure of four shared waypoints among the tours. Table 2
shows the pairs of users with the number of matching
tours and the overlap between the users. The overlap
is the number of tours that were hiked together by the
two users and that are reported and rated in the same
tour report.

Table 2

User pairs with matching tours used for the comparison of transformed and actual ratings and the number of tours that were hiked
together by the two users.

User 1
Lena
Mauro78
Bombo
Ivo66

User 2
chaeppi
beppe
rgauss
alpstein

Matches

Overlap

For each pair of users we have calculated the matrices for each subset of matching tours that lacks one

23see http://www.jensortmann.de/R/ers.html

have computed 20 transformation matrices, each based
on a subset of 19 tours. We have then calculated the
transformed rating of the second user by multiplying
the vector representation of the first userss rating with
the transformation matrix. We have then compared the
transformed rating with the actual rating of the user.
Table 3 shows the accuracy of transformation results.

Table 3

Accuracy of the transformed rating between User 1 and User 2. The
column +/- 0 indicates the ratio of correct projections. The column
+/- 1 lists the ratio of transformations that were off by at maximum
one category in the ordinal rating scale.

User 1
Lena
Mauro78
Bombo
Ivo66

User 2
chaeppi
beppe
rgauss
alpstein

+/- 0

+/- 1

For example, the projected rating from Lenas reference frame into chaeppis reference frame resulted
in 52.5% of the cases in the actual rating that chaeppi
gave to the tour. In 72.5% of the cases the rating resulted in the actual category or in an adjacent category.
The best accuracy for matches +/- 0 among the four
test cases was achieved between the users Bombo and
rgauss. 63.6% of the projected ratings matched the actual rating. However, the two users had hiked 8 of the
25 tours used to compute the matrices together. Among
the four tested pairs of users, the highest percentage for
projected ratings that are only one rating off was found
between Mauro78 and beppe. 92.9% of the projected
ratings were in the actual or in the directly neighbouring category and only 7.1% of the projected ratings
were off by more than one category.

The results show that the projected ratings are plausible and that we can capture the subjective interpretation of the users hikability ratings. Thereby, the results
also validate the theory of egocentric semantic reference systems. Given the simplifying assumptions we
have made, there is space for improvements that yield
more accurate results in real applications.

7. Discussion

In this section the theory of egocentric semantic reference systems is discussed. First, we closely examine
the theory. We show what has been achieved and what
is possible with the theory that was not before, but also

point to remaining shortcomings and persisting prob-
lems. Then, the implementation of the theory for the
affordances of hikability is discussed. After that, we
point to some caveats and offer a critique of the work
done.

7.1. Discussion of the Theory

The theory of egocentric semantic reference systems for affordances provides a solution to describe,
interpret, compare and integrate the results of human observations of affordances. The suggested theory is the first attempt to capture the ontologically
challenging notion of affordances in a reference sys-
tem. The presented theory is compatible with existing
theories for affordances [e.g. 14,15,42,46,45], theories of human judgements in information systems [e.g.
48,7,9,8,49,50,51] and theories of reference systems
[e.g. 2,18,22,23,32,33,13,19]. Important tenets, for ex-
ample, affordances are subjective [15]; the environment is shared [15] and the observer serves as referent of its observation [15] are found compatible with
the suggested theory of egocentric reference frames for
affordances. In addition to that, our work corroborates
the findings in [39] that observations can be grounded
in observation procedures. Furthermore, the suggested
egocentric semantic reference frames can be seen as
knowledge patterns in the sense of [12], which capture
task-specific knowledge and at the same time facilitate
ontology design.

The reference system for affordances is developed
from an information science and semantic web per-
spective. The focus is on the symbolization of the observed affordances and not on attending to them in
the form of performing actions. Thereby, the actionrelatedness of an affordance fades into the background.
Instead the expression and communication of an affordances gains centerstage. The presented theory allows
to semantically integrate human observations of affordances across different observers. Furthermore, the
compliance with previous work on semantic reference
systems fulfils a major requirement for the integration
with other reference systems of observations and mea-
surements. A prototypical implementation has demonstrated the validity of the theory, the practical applicability of the approach and the plausibility of the projected ratings.

Specifically, an egocentric reference system offers
the opportunity to account for subjective observations.
An explicit consideration of the observer and the subjectivity of his/her observations is not possible with

sented theory offers a whole range of new opportunities to deal with human observations as information
sources. Akin to Freksa [7,8] and Freksa and Lopez de
Mantaras [9], making explicit the peculiarities of human observations ultimately leads to more accurate results and the increased knowledge about the observations provenance leads to more trustworthy information sources. With egocentric reference systems for human observations of affordances it is possible to represent ordinal reference frames of observations and to
translate observations across ordinal reference frames.
The theory allows to suggest transformed categorical
values and probabilities thereof. We avoid assumptions
of interval scales for our ordinal reference frames,
which are often made in current rating websites where
users rate on an ordinal reference frames, but the presented average rating assumes an interval scale. The
example of a reference frame for stair-climbability illustrates that this assumption cannot simply be made.
Finally, the presented approach to transform across different observations of affordances makes these observations operational. The transformation provides a solution to the challenge of subjectivity, thereby refuting
a possible conjecture such as: subjective observations
are not comparable. Through transformations, users
have access to other users observations in a novel way,
which respects the users own reference frames and
values.

Even though we find that the theoretical contribution of this article achieves our goals, there remain several opportunities for future expansion and improve-
ments. Transformation across reference frames of different observers are only discussed as to achieve the
minimal result. Especially, the consideration of the ordering across values during the transformation is a
desideratum for more reliable applications. Addition-
ally, the establishment of the transformation function
can be more sophisticated, for example by weighting
the shared observables.

Furthermore, the recent investigations in map scales
[e.g. 4] and resolution of sensor observations [e.g. 6]
are worthwhile exploring for improving the semantic integration of egocentric semantic reference system
using different scales.

7.2. Discussion of the Semantic Web Application

With the prototypical implementation of a semantic
reference system we have proven that the theory can be
put in practice and that it yields reasonable results. It

has been shown that the semantic reference system for
human observations of hikability affordances allows
to capture the semantics of subjective human observations and that we can perform semantic translations
of values from one users reference frame into another
users reference frame. The transformed results have
been found to correspond to that users rating. Yet,
the transformation makes simplifying assumptions and
only employs a very simple transformation function.
Thus, there is room for improvement that allows to
make the projections even more accurate.

One simplification is the reduction to qualia and
quality spaces to represent ratings, instead of using the
full system of qualia, reference regions, quality spaces
and reference spaces suggested by Probst [32,33].
Probst, akin to DOLCE, models a quality that inheres
in a host and is mapped to a quale in a quality space.
Though the quality is individual to the host, several individual qualities can be mapped to the same quale.
Qualia are then mapped to reference regions in reference spaces. A reference region is a unit in a reference frame. Through the structure and granularity of
reference frames, several qualia map to the same reference region. The distinction of qualia and reference
regions is reasonable for allocentric reference frames,
where the qualia of different agents can be mapped
to a shared reference frame. However, in the case of
an egocentric reference system, the qualia and reference regions are both individual to the agent. Further-
more, the exact mapping of qualia to reference regions in the egocentric reference frame is internal to
the agent. There is no need to replicate this mapping.
Instead, qualia can be used as reference regions. Reference regions as well as qualia are both subcategories
of regions in DOLCE. Thereby, our implementation of
an egocentric semantic reference system remains ontologically close enough to allocentric semantic reference frames established as in [32,33]. This in turn allows semantically integrating the results of egocentric
and allocentric reference frames. In addition to that,
we avoid unnecessary cognitive assumptions about the
internal world of the agent and at the same time have a
valid and sound semantic representation of the original
hikability dataset. Thereby, a new knowledge pattern
[12] that is used as an ontology design pattern [10,11]
for egocentric reference frames emerges.

The implementation uses an RDF triplestore to represent semantic reference frames and datums and it
uses R to query the triple store with SPARQL and execute the transformation based on the query results.
One could argue that (1) R is not a semantic web tech-

use reasoning in the semantic web sense and (3) the
results of the calculations in R are not semantically
integrated with the original semantic reference frame.
While we agree to the first two points, we disagree
with the third one. Firstly, the values that are used in
R are always taken as values in the semantic reference
frame. Even though the typing is not checked and enforced in R, we have taken care of the type consistency within the R transformations. Therefore, the resulting values are values that can be interpreted in the
semantic reference frames. Secondly, the R scripts are
mostly used to perform SPARQL queries on the triple
store and to iteratively perform more SPARQL queries
on the triple store, eventually counting the results and
performing ratios between values of the same type.
Thereby, we have manually bridged across the discontinuity between the semantic technologies and the nonsemantic technologies. The manual effort that is required to specify the transformations reduces the flexibility of using R for semantic interoperability. Semantic interoperability across reference frames remains restricted to the transformation operation that we have
specified. A functional language with a stronger typing
might allow to better approximate the semantics of the
reference frame and datum to offer a better support for
a richer semantic interoperability.

The implementation of the egocentric semantic reference system for the hikability affordance does not
exceed a prototype stage. Several simplifications have
been made and no effort has been put into increasing
the performance. Yet, it shows that it is possible with
current technologies to establish a full fledged semantic reference system for human observations of affordances that even allows semantic translations across
different reference frames in the same reference sys-
tem.

7.3. Critique and Caveats of Egocentric Semantic

Reference Systems

The theory of egocentric semantic reference systems is particularly useful for subjective human observations and where the group of users is very hetero-
geneous. An example are hotel ratings, where the observations are made by people of very different age
and with very different backgrounds, such as students,
families and pensioners. Another example are ratings
of restaurants and dishes where the subjective taste
of for example saltiness or spiciness differs strongly
across people.

Ratings of physical affordances, for instance the
hikability and the stair-climbing affordances fall into a
borderline category. On the one side, most humans are
equipped with more or less the same physical capabil-
ities. Stairs are standardized in many countries, so that
the stairs we encounter are usually easily climbable for
everyone. On the other side, physically more challenging activities and activities that require experience and
skill are more subjective because fitness and skills can
vary strongly from person to person.

Generally, the designer of a reference system has to
make a decision how subjective the ratings are, and
whether the influence of subjectivity can impact the
ratings to a degree that justifies or requires the additional implementation and data storage effort that
egocentric semantic reference systems require. The
database of prototypical implementation was about
30% larger after the semantic reference frames had
been established, and deriving the matrices for transformations is computationally much more expensive
then calculating a simple or weighted mean.

The accuracy currently achieved with the prototype might not suffice for applications where decision
with a high risk are based on the transformed ratings.
A mountain tour that exceeds the hikers capabilities
clearly puts the hiker in a high risk, but the hiker still
would have the chance to just turn around. This might
for instance not be the case for rock climbing. How-
ever, the accuracy of transformations strongly depends
on the assumptions made and it has been highlighted
that the assumptions made in the prototype are very
simple. More sophisticated assumptions about equivalence of tours are likely to increase the accuracy of
transformations.

Finally, transformations across categorical reference
frames require a rather high number of matches of
observables between the observers. For hiking tours
with a reference frame of six categories, we found that
about 20 equivalent tours are necessary to come up
with a conclusive transformation matrix. To have 20
matches between two users, these users must have contributed a significant number of hiking ratings. How-
ever, this also introduces a incentive for users to continue contribute reports to the portal.

In summary, the theory of egocentric semantic reference systems for human observations provides a valuable extension to the semantic reference systems. It
provides a solution to deal with and to respect the restrictions of ordinal reference frames, where the extends of the values cannot be assumed to be equal. The

observations.
