Undefined 0 (2012) 124
IOS Press

The Use of Semantic Web Technologies for
Decision Support - A Survey

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, University of California, Santa Barbara, US
Solicited review(s): Naicong Li, University of Redlands, US; Olivier Bodenreider,National Institutes of Health, US; Anonymous reviewer
Open review(s): Eva Maria Kiss, ontoprise GmbH, DE

Eva Blomqvist 
Linkoping University, 58183 Linkoping, Sweden. e-mail: eva.blomqvist@liu.se

Abstract. The Semantic Web shares many goals with Decision Support Systems (DSS), e.g., being able to precisely interpret
information, in order to deliver relevant, reliable and accurate information to a user when and where it is needed. DSS have in
addition more specific goals, since the information need is targeted towards making a particular decision, e.g., making a plan or
reacting to a certain situation. When surveying DSS literature, we discover applications ranging from Business Intelligence, via
general purpose social networking and collaboration support, Information Retrieval and Knowledge Management, to situation
awareness, emergency management, and simulation systems. The unifying element is primarily the purpose of the systems,
and their focus on information management and provision, rather than the specific technologies they employ to reach these
goals. Semantic Web technologies have been used in DSS during the past decade to solve a number of different tasks, such as
information integration and sharing, web service annotation and discovery, and knowledge representation and reasoning. In this
survey article, we present the results of a structured literature survey of Semantic Web technologies in DSS, together with the
results of interviews with DSS researchers and developers both in industry and research organizations outside the university. The
literature survey has been conducted using a structured method, where papers are selected from the publisher databases of some
of the most prominent conferences and journals in both fields (Semantic Web and DSS), based on sets of relevant keywords
representing the intersection of the two fields. Our main contribution is to analyze the landscape of semantic technologies in
DSS, and provide an overview of current research as well as open research areas, trends and new directions. An added value is
the conclusions drawn from interviews with DSS practitioners, which give an additional perspective on the potential of Semantic
Web technologies in this field; including scenarios for DSS, and requirements for Semantic Web technologies that may attempt
to support those scenarios.

Keywords: Decision Support Systems, Semantic Web

1. Introduction

Decision Support (DS) is a field that is classically
attributed to the social sciences, e.g., supporting managers to make better decisions. However, since the inception of the IS (Information Systems) field of research in the 60s, part of this community has been

*This work was partly financed by the SecurityLink strategic
research center at Linkoping University, and the research project
Semantic Technologies for Decision Support (funded by CENIIT,
Linkoping University).

devoted to Decision Support Systems (DSS). Under
this label we have seen many different kinds of systems presented, e.g., anything from spreadsheet applications for analyzing data, via communication support for group decision making, to Expert Systems and
other kinds of intelligent approaches. Similar to the
Semantic Web, DSS could be viewed more as an application area rather than a basic research field. Nev-
ertheless, in the Semantic Web field a number of fundamental results have emerged, such as logical languages for knowledge representation and their syntactic formats for sharing information on the Web. These

0000-0000/12/$00.00 c 2012  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

could potentially impact other application fields that
also make use of the Web as a medium for sharing in-
formation, or simply act as an inspiration for information sharing in general. In this paper we thereby attempt to provide a comprehensive view of the current
intersection between the DSS and Semantic Web areas,
by (i) performing a structured literature survey, and (ii)
presenting the results of a set of interviews with DSS
practitioners and comparing them to previous studies,
as well as (iii) analyzing the potential future needs of
the DSS area where Semantic Web technologies could
contribute (based on (i) and (ii)).

Superficially, the Semantic Web shares many goals
with DSS, e.g., being able to precisely interpret infor-
mation, in order to deliver relevant, reliable and accurate information to a user when and where it is needed.
DSS have in addition more specific goals, since the information need is targeted towards making a particular
decision, e.g., making a plan or reacting to a certain sit-
uation. In the following section (Sect. 1.1), we provide
a brief background of DSS (the reader is assumed to
be familiar with the Semantic Web field, or is referred
to surveys on Semantic Web technologies for DSS
researchers and practitioners such as [17,24,41,65]).
Section 2 describes the setup and results of the structured literature survey, which is used for mapping out
the current semantic DSS landscape, and subsequently
in Section 3 our interview study with DSS practitioners
is presented. In Section 4 we summarize our findings,
and discuss the potentials and limits of Semantic Web
technologies for DSS, as well as future needs, before
we conclude in Section 5.

1.1. Background

DSS research has, ever since first introduced in the
1960s (initially the term was Management Information Systems - the DSS term did not become widely
used until the early 80s), been a highly diverse field of
research, drawing on influences from numerous other
areas, including both social sciences and technology
development. As already mentioned, one could view
DSS more as an application field, rather than a basic research field. Both DSS and the Semantic Web
have, for instance, been known to apply technologies
originally developed in the context of Artificial Intelligence (AI), as well as general Web technologies,
e.g., for so-called Web DSS. DSS have also had a
strong focus on models since the start, and today some
of the main techniques of Business Intelligence (as
a sub-field of DSS) include multidimensional mod-

els, data cubes, and OLAP (Online Analytical Pro-
cessing) [76] - all making heavy use of formal mod-
els. Another related field is Information Retrieval (IR),
where many early search engines and document indexing approaches were originally targeted at Knowledge
Management (KM) or managerial support within en-
terprises, hence, related to DSS.

The diversity of the field is partly due to the many
types of stakeholders involved, i.e., since we are all
decision-makers in some context (either personal or
professional) different DSS need to target all such
types of decision-makers and decision-making contexts respectively. DSS can also be viewed from several different perspectives. For instance, according to
[77] DSS can be divided into Model-driven DSS, Datadriven DSS, Communications-driven DSS, Documentdriven DSS, and Knowledge-driven DSS.

The Model-driven DSS operates on some model of
reality, in order to optimize or simulate outcomes of
decisions based on data provided. In these systems the
model is at focus, and can be accessed and manipulated by the decision maker in order to analyze a certain situation, while the amount of data may not be
large. A classical example is a financial decision support system, using financial models to predict the impact of certain managerial decisions on the economical key indicators of the business. Data-driven DSS
on the other hand focus on the access and manipulation of large amounts of data, e.g., Data Warehousing
systems, or even more elementary system such as file
systems with search and retrieval capabilities.

While data-driven DSS focus on retrieving and manipulating data, Document-driven DSS use text or multimedia document collections as their basis of decision
information. Document analysis and IR systems are
simple examples from this category. Communicationsdriven DSS, on the other hand, focus on the interaction
and collaboration aspects of decision making. Simple
examples include groupware and video-conferencing
systems that allow distributed and networked decision-
making. Finally, Knowledge-driven DSS are those that
actually recommend or suggest actions to the users,
rather than just retrieve information relevant to a certain decision, i.e., these systems try to perform some
part of the actual decision making for the user through
special-purpose problem-solving capabilities. As can
be noted, many of the examples above include systems
that we may not consider as particularly decisionoriented by todays standards, but which were in
many cases originally proposed as DSS tools.

In this paper, however, we choose to refer to an alternative categorization of DSS, which divides DSS into
the following (overlapping) categories [11], targeting
the purpose of the DSS rather than its internal struc-
ture:

 Personal DSS  A DSS supporting individuals in

their decision-making.

 Group DSS  A DSS supporting a group of peo-

ple making a joint decision.

 Negotiation DSS  A DSS supporting negotiation

leading up to a decision situation.

 Intelligent DSS  A DSS incorporating some
form of intelligent analysis functionality, i.e.,
not only supplying a user with raw (possibly fil-
tered) data, but processing that data in some way
as to produce more meaningful information.

 Business Intelligence (BI)  A DSS targeted at

data representing the state of an enterprise.

 Data Warehousing  A DSS infrastructure incorporating a set of data sources that are integrated
by means of some unifying model.

 Knowledge-management DSS  A DSS targeted
at Knowledge Management (KM) in some orga-
nization.

Compared to the categorization of [77] we note that
BI and Data Warehousing are today most often Datadriven DSS, while Intelligent DSS are more related
to Knowledge-driven DSS or in some cases Modeldriven DSS. Communication-driven DSS are usually
either Group DSS or Negotiation DSS. Personal and
Knowledge-management DSS are cross-cutting categories which may be of more or less any of the categories in [77].

2. Literature Survey

In order to characterize the research that has been
conducted on Semantic Web technologies for DSS so
far, we have performed a structured literature review,
which is described in this section.

2.1. Structured Method

To generate a manageable but comprehensive set of
articles for our survey, we have chosen to target research publications where the authors explicitly claim
to work within this intersection. Later, in Sect. 4 we
will discuss the research areas more broadly, and draw
on our own knowledge and experience from the Se-

mantic Web field, but in this part of the paper we take a
more structured approach. Below we describe first the
literature collection method, next, the data collection
performed based on the collected literature, and subsequently in the following section we present the results
of the structured literature survey.

2.1.1. Literature Collection

In order to make an unbiased selection, and generate a reasonable coverage of all literature that explicitly claims to treat the intersection of DSS and Semantic Web research, we first selected a number of
keywords representing each of these fields. The DSS
field was here represented by the two keywords decision support and business intelligence, the second one
selected because it is sometimes used as a synonym
for decision support in the more business-focused lit-
erature. The Semantic Web field was then represented
by the keywords Semantic Web, semantic technologies,
linked data, and any combination of ontology with either RDF or OWL. Apart from the first two, which are
quite obvious, we wanted to capture articles that used
some of the more prominent technologies of the field,
but without actually mentioning their origin in the Semantic Web. For each source (see further below) articles were retrieved that contained any combination of
a DSS keyword and a Semantic Web one, i.e., resulting
in up to 10 distinct searches being made within each
source.

The sources are of three main types; (i) general
online indexing service, (ii) publisher database, and
(iii) individual
journal or publication series. As a
representative of the first category, we used Google
Scholar, which indexes a multitude of online publication databases from various publishers. Due to the
huge number of articles indexed, we searched for the
presence of the 10 combinations of keywords only in
article titles and abstracts. Representing the second
category, we used the SpringerLink online database,
since it covers many of the publications within the Semantic Web field, e.g., proceedings of the most prominent conferences such as ISWC and ESWC. Also in
this case, the total number of indexed articles is huge,
hence, we restricted the search to articles with any of
the 10 keyword combinations in the title or abstract.

Finally, representing the third category, we selected
a number of journals from both fields. Here the Semantic Web field is being represented through the Journal
of Web Semantics (Elsevier) and the Semantic Web
Journal (IOS Press). Previous reviews of the DSS field,
e.g., [11], have listed the most prominent journals in

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

DSS research, whereas based on these results we chose
to focus on the Decision Support Systems journal (El-
sevier), Decision Sciences (Wiley), the International
Journal of Information Technology and Decision Making (World Scientific), Information and Management
(Elsevier), International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research (online journal by the Joint Research Centre of the European Commission), and MIS
Quarterly (University of Minnesota). The respective
online search facilities of the listed journals were used
for retrieving articles, by means of the keywords described above. Depending on the facilities provided by
the respective sites, if present we included a full-text
search of the article content in addition to searching
title and abstract. For searching the specific journals
we made an additional assumption; all articles of the
two Semantic Web journals were assumed to be about
the Semantic Web, hence only the two DSS-related
keywords were used for retrieval, and the opposite
for the clearly DSS-related journals (Decision Support Systems and Decision Sciences), where only the
5 keyword combinations representing Semantic Web
concepts were used, while all the remaining IS journals were treated similarly to the general databases.
All articles that were either directly available online,
or retrievable through library order were collected. A
few articles of Google Scholar turned out to constitute
broken links, and hence were not retrieved.

Subsequently, a manual assessment of the articles
was made. First, duplicates were removed, e.g., when
the same paper had been retrieved based on two separate queries, or when a paper for instance was available both through the authors website, hence indexed
by Google Scholar, and through the Journals own site.
Since many of the articles had been retrieved based on
a full-text search, it then had to be determined if Semantic Web and DSS technologies and solutions were
actually a topic of the paper, or simply mentioned in
brief. Articles where Semantic Web or DSS were only
mentioned as (i) part of the related work section, (ii) as
future work, or (iii) as part of the author bio (present
in the template of several of the journals), were dis-
carded. Additionally, a small number of articles were
discarded due to the keywords not actually representing the intended meaning, for instance, in one case
an article contained the sequence of words semantic
web but not as a term representing the concept of the
Semantic Web but as a part of a sentence mentioning
the inherent semantics of the text in web documents.
The remaining number of articles is 59, which is the
set used for the data collection described below.

2.1.2. Rationale and Method Critique

The above method is by no means the only possible
one, nor it is completely without bias. The selection
of sources, as well as the use of restrictions on keyword occurrence (i.e., title or abstract), was necessary
in order to retrieve a manageable set of articles. How-
ever, it also yields a high number of false negatives
in terms of missed articles. With respect to the source
selection, the reason for selecting Google Scholar was
mainly due to its high coverage of a wide variety of
publisher databases in the computer science field, such
as IEEE Xplore and the ACM digital library. In this
way we broadened the coverage of the study, but at the
same time had to restrict the search to hits only in title or abstract in order for the result to be manageable.
One publisher database that was however not covered
by Google Scholar is Springers, SpringerLink. Since
many of the most prominent Semantic Web books and
conference proceedings are published by Springer, it
was natural to add this database to the set of sources.
The selection of journals was done both based on the
authors experience, but additionally relying on the results from DSS surveys, such as [11], which lists the
most influential DSS journals at that time.

The keyword selection is the second large bias of
the study. The most obvious terms to use are the
ones found already in the title of this article; Semantic Web and Decision Support. However, when it
comes to selecting synonyms or other indicators it becomes more tricky. In addition to the keywords actually included, we have tried keywords such as planning support (since a large part of planning support
systems can be considered as DSS), but without any
additional results. Either such a term is not commonly
used in the title or abstract of a paper, or planning support systems applying Semantic Web technologies use
terms outside our set to describe the semantic technologies they exploit. We have not made an in-dept
analysis of this problem, but we merely conclude that
the selection of keywords has potentially impacted the
result of our study.

A minor source of errors, in particular affecting the
reliability of the statistical data for 2011 and 2012 is
the fact that some journals publish online preprints
of articles before they are actually published in the
printed journal. In the case where no publishing date
for the printed issue has been found, we have used the
online publishing date instead, which means that a few
publications initially dated in 2011 should actually be
moved to 2012, since they are now officially published
in a printed publication with publication date in 2012.

Finally, a remark on the manual assessment of articles (the last step of our literature collection method
described above) where a high number of articles
were actually discarded due to Semantic Web not being an essential part of the article topic. Originally
around 200 articles were collected (including dupli-
cates), hence, the manual assessment removed about
70% of the initial article collection. Apart from duplicate articles, the main problem was with the Semantic Web keyword, where numerous articles contained
this term in their future work sections or in the author biography. Since there has been a kind of hype
around the Semantic Web, it seems that (at least until a few years ago) this was a very common term to
just throw in there, possibly just to show that you are
aware of the latest developments.

2.1.3. Data Collection

Based on reading the 59 articles in the set, we have
then collected information about each one. First of all,
a set of metadata elements were collected, according
to the following:

 Year of publication
 Number of authors
 Author affiliations
 Author nationality (according to the affiliation)
 Type of publication (i.e., journal article, book

chapter, conference paper, or workshop paper)

In addition to these the topics of the articles were classified along three dimensions; (i) theoretical or applied research, (ii) main Semantic Web contribution,
and (iii) type of DSS. Here we have chosen to classify
something as theoretical research if the paper does not
describe a system or other implementation, e.g., use
case or empirical study, for the results. The category
for applied research thereby represent those contributions consisting of an implementation of some sort, either technical, such as a software system, or organizational in terms of a case study or similar. In addition to
these two categories we have singled out survey papers
and position papers, which cannot normally be classifies into either of the two previous categories.

The main Semantic Web contribution has been classified according to what Semantic Web technologies
or approaches are at focus in the paper. The categories were derived a-priori from the lists of conference topics of the research track of the past four International Semantic Web Conferences. These topics
have been quite stable, at least as far back as 2008,
where only one new category has appeared (NLP - rep-

resenting the increased hybridization of NLP and Semantic Web technologies) and one category has been
replaced (Applications of the Semantic Web is replaced with Semantic Web Engineering). The latter
is most likely due to the presence of a specific in use
track where applications are the main focus, hence,
the research track now only targets the development
rather than the applications themselves. We have chosen not to include the old applications category in
our categorization, simply because we view the intersection between DSS and Semantic Web technologies
as one such application area, hence, all papers could
be viewed as belonging to that category. Based on this,
we end up with the following 6 categories, where the
names and explanations have been slightly tailored to
this study:

 Semantic Web data  representation languages,
storage, search and querying of Semantic Web
data, e.g., RDF data and Semantic Web Ser-
vices, including approaches for using or producing linked data, as well as quality assurance and
provenance tracking of data.

 Ontologies and semantics  representation languages and patterns, engineering, management,
retrieval and usage of Semantic Web ontologies
and rules, including reasoning services and rule
execution engines.

 Semantic Web engineering and development -
building of Semantic Web applications, methods,
tools and evaluations of applications.

 Natural Language Processing (NLP)  machine
learning and information extraction for the Semantic Web, Semantic Web population from text
or from exploiting tags and keywords, or using
semantic technologies to perform NLP.

 Social Semantic Web  social networks and pro-
cesses, collaboration and cooperation, context
awareness and user modelling, trust, privacy, and
security.

 User interfaces  interaction with and creation of
Semantic Web data and models, information pre-
sentation, visualization and integration, personal-
ization.

To exemplify how these categories have been assigned,
assume a paper presenting an approach to use ontologies for information integration and subsequently presenting that information using a novel visualization
method exploiting the underlying semantics of the in-
formation. Such a paper would be classified as belonging to both the second and final category of the list

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

above, while an application using ontologies for information integration, but using standard user interface
components not tailored to the Semantic Web, would
be classified as belonging only to the second category
of the list. Similarly a paper discussing privacy and
security has only been assigned the social Semantic
Web category if Semantic Web-related technologies in
some way contribute to those issues or their solution.
Hence, we have only classified the contribution of the
Semantic Web technologies used in the paper into these
categories, not the overall approach of the paper, and
each paper may have multiple classifications.

Finally, we have studied the type of DSS addressed
in the paper. For this we have used the categories of
DSS listed in [11], as presented in the bullet list of
Section 1.1. We have slightly adapted one of the category definitions, compared to [11]; a personal DSS is
not restricted to a DSS that is tailored for, or used by,
only a small number of users, instead we define a personal DSS as being targeted towards the decision support of a single decision-maker, as opposed to group
DSS where decisions are made jointly. Hence, in our
view the number of users of a personal DSS can be
large, but each user is supported individually in his or
her decisions. An example could be a personal online
shopping agent; such a system may have millions of
users, but each agent supports one single user specifically in his or her shopping decisions. In addition to
the above categories, we have added a general cate-
gory, representing approaches that can be used for supporting most of the above DSS categories, e.g., general
theories or infrastructure approaches. Also in this case,
multiple categories may apply.

2.2. Current State of Semantic DSS Research

Based on the data collected as described above, we
can now analyse the nature of the intersection between
Semantic Web and DSS research. Figure 1 illustrates
the number of publications per year, belonging to the
different categories, as well as the yearly total. We note
that there has been a steady increase in the total number of publications from 2005 (which is the publication year of the oldest article we found) and onwards,
with an exception of 2010 when there was a considerable decrease compared to the year before. We have
not been able to find a good motivation for this dip in
publication numbers, however it may be due to some
external factors, such as conference focus and journal
special issues of that year, or be due to some glitch
in our data collection, e.g., a missing keyword that

was particularly popular at that time. Nevertheless, for
2012 we note that already in the first four months (un-
til April 2012 when the data was collected) a number
of articles have been published, hence, we see that if
an equal amount is published during the next 8 months
we would end up at a level that at least equals 2009,
however, it should also be noted that none of the major
conferences in the Semantic Web field have yet been
held this year. In Figure 2 we note that most articles
describe applied research, rather than theoretical work,
while there is also a small number of survey articles
and position papers in our collection.

Fig. 1. Number of articles of each category, as well as the summed
total for each year.

Fig. 2. Type of study reported.

With respect to where this research is being con-
ducted, we have plotted the number of publications
based on the country of origin of its authors (a paper with several authors could thus belong to two cate-
gories) in Figure 3. Here we can see that a small number of papers include authors from Central and South
America, and those have all appeared in the last few
years. There is a steady participation from both Asia
(only one paper comes from the Pacific region) and
North America (US and Canada), while the large increase in publications is mainly due to an increased

number of contributions from European countries, in
particular for 2011. On average each paper has about
3.5 authors, from an average of 2.2 different institu-
tions, and 30% of the papers have at least one author coming from outside academia (besides univer-
sities, we include univeristy hospitals, and publicly
funded research centers and institutes in the notion of
academia), e.g., a company or a private healthcare
facility. These numbers indicate that most research is

(RDF, OWL etc.) for knowledge representation, replacing older representation conventions or specialpurpose languages. Since Expert Systems have traditionally been ontology- or rule-based, it is easy to
see how they can quickly assimilate novelties in terms
of new logical formalisms and modelling languages,
while adopting such technologies has proved much
more difficult in the general Web scenario.

Fig. 3. Geographical distribution of affiliations.

Fig. 4. Number of publications reporting the use of specific Semantic
Web technologies.

done jointly between several parties, and that there is
a healthy involvement of industry actors, although it
could be discussed if the latter should futher increase.
When studying the contribution of Semantic Web
technologies to the DSS field, as illustrated by Figure
4, we note that the two high-impact areas have been
ontologies and semantics and Semantic Web data, with
particular emphasis on the former. Many DSS applications use ontologies and rules as a means for making the DSS intelligent in some data analytics sense.
The same phenomenon can be seen in Figure 5 where
Intelligent DSS has been one of the main categories
of Semantic Web-supported DSS throughout the years.
An explanation for this is also the fact that DSS and
Semantic Web share a common ancestry in early AI
technologies, which are still acknowledged as a part of
DSS legacy for data analysis.

While many Semantic Web applications use rather
light-weight solutions and ontologies, DSS on the
other hand have often been used in more closed scenarios than the Web and have many times utilized
quite complex ontological reasoning and rule bases,
more similar to Expert Systems of AI than todays
Semantic Web applications. Much of the Semantic
Web-related work in DSS, especially in the medical
and health care domains, could be viewed as a direct continuation of the Expert Systems tradition, e.g.,
[8,26,27,28,32,34,47,51,52,75,79,80,82,84,92],
sim-
ply adopting the emerging Semantic Web standards

This also becomes evident when studying the application domains of Semantic Web-supported DSS,
as seen in Figure 6, where traditional Expert Systems domains such as the health care and biomedical domains have been among the most prominent,
e.g., as illustrated by applications in Clinical Decision Support (CDS)[28,32,79,80,82], medical training
[46], and biomedical research [32,81]. Legal knowledge management is another field where Expert System approaches have classically been applied, and this
domain is represented in our article collection as well,
i.e., through the modelling and automatic monitoring
of Service Level Agreement compliance [74] and general modelling of legal ontologies [90] for DS. Another
context where the common AI tradition is visible is the
use of agent architectures, e.g., e-Commerce scenarios
such as intelligent shopping agents [50,58,60].

Semantic Web data can be utilized for DSS in several ways. Some approaches use formats such as RDF
and OWL to integrate and allow access to data from
existing data sources [8,12,16,18,25,56], e.g., Data
Warehousing-like approaches to database integration
but with new formats, while others focus on extracting Web data [15] or even utilizing Semantic Web
data, already in RDF, as an entirely new data source
[33,69,85,86], e.g., by incorporating Linked Data (LD)
in their DSS application, or simply proposing to move
from current data publishing principles to LD [70].

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

Fig. 5. Fraction of the publications each year treating different types of DSS.

Fig. 6. Fraction of the publications each year applying Semantic Web technologies to specific domains (only domains with more than one paper
appear in the graph).

Still, more often than not, some form of ontology
is used on top of this data, to allow for integrated
querying and reasoning, as in [12,16]. This high interest in ontologies is most likely due to the DSS
domain already being highly focused on models, not
only through the Expert Systems tradition but through
approaches such as multidimensional modelling, data
cubes, and OLAP (although these primarily utilize
mathematical models rather than logical ones), which
are common especially in the BI area. This, as opposed
to the Semantic Web community where data rather
than models has been the main focus of practitioners
the past few years. In our paper collection we even
find approaches for annotating and integrating models themselves, based on OWL ontologies, e.g., annotation of general data analysis and decision models
[40,19,18] or business process models [78,39], as well

as interest in model integration and matching [57], and
transformation between models, e.g., from topic maps
to ontologies [67].

Returning to Figure 4, we note that in addition to a
steady interest in ontologies and Semantic Web data,
the other areas are also represented, even if only by a
few papers each. Examples of where Semantic Web engineering has impacted DSS are the use of triple stores
as part of the DSS infrastructure [9,16,17,41,69,81],
and the deployment of Service Oriented Architectures (SOA) enhanced by Semantic Web technologies
[24,42,56,60,68,83] for sharing and accessing data.
Some approaches even take this one step further and
apply Semantic Web technologies in peer-to-peer net-
works, for interpreting messages, e.g., facilitating offers in a negotiation scenario [43].

The increased interest of hybridization between
NLP and Semantic Web technologies that has been observed in general Semantic Web research recently, has
also been taken advantage of for DSS, e.g., by exploiting Information Extraction (IE) to populate Semantic
Web datasets for later analysis by a DSS [33,65,81],
and through various kinds of ontology and rule learning approaches [44,50,55,90] for bootstrapping semantic models.

The intersection between DSS and the social Semantic Web is in our paper collection mainly focused
on contextualizing data [16,23], utilizing social annotations such as tags [45], and providing better decision
support through advanced user modelling [23,30]. Fi-
nally, with respect to user interfaces, a few DSS approaches have actively exploited data semantics and
ontologies to personalize and contextualize user interfaces [71,24], as well as describing graphical elements
by means of semantic models, e.g., statistical charts
[45], or 3D models [14].

As already mentioned, Figure 5 shows the high fraction of articles focused on Intelligent DSS, however,
also Personal DSS is a recurring topic throughout the
dataset. This result is consistent with the earlier study
of the complete DSS domain in [11], which concluded
that personal DSS is one of the major focus areas
of DSS in general. Knowledge-management (KM) focused DSS is another common topic, which is not very
surprising considering that one focus of the Semantic Web in general is improved information manage-
ment, hence, it is quite straight forward to transfer
those technologies to KM within organizations as well.
One prominent example of this category is health care
KM [8], as also mentioned above, but our paper sample additionally includes KM in other areas, such as
management of railway knowledge [64], and transfer
of empiric (tacit) knowledge [35].

Another interesting aspect is that papers discussing
Semantic Web in relation to general aspects of DSS,
rather than specific solutions, have dropped in num-
bers, while two new types of DSS have emerged only
in the past three years; Business Intelligence and Data
Warehousing. This illustrates how Semantic Web technologies and ideas have gone from being something
mainly for Intelligent DSS, i.e., a continuation of the
AI tradition, or something discussed in general terms
in a survey article, to being applied in almost every
area of DSS research. A similar trend can be spotted
in Figure 6, where Semantic Web-related DSS have
gone from being applied in two or three domains (e.g.,
medicine, general business scenarios, and legal DSS)

to now having a much broader field of application (e.g.,
in 2011). This is in line with the Semantic Web field
in general, where techniques are today applied to numerous industry domains, and for numerous types of
business use cases, as envisioned already by [61].

One classic DSS field is military command and con-
trol, but in our collection we only find one single article treating this topic [88]; a bit more surprising is that
this is also one of only three papers [33,68,88] mentioning the more general concept of situation aware-
ness. In Figure 6 we have additionally omitted the
long tail of application areas (only categories with
more than one paper have been included). However, if
considering the long tail it actually shows that we
have gone from between 2 and 5 distinct application
areas per year between 2005 and 2010 to as many as 9
distinct areas in 2011 (in addition to the ones listed in
Figure 6 we have noted applications for environmental data analysis, project planning, and command and
control).

3. Interview Study

In order to additionally capture a snapshot of viewpoints from non-university research and industry to-
day, we decided to conduct a small set of interviews.
The main aim of the interviews is to survey what challenges are perceived by DSS researchers and practitioners today, and what requirements, typically addressed by Semantic Web technologies, are highlighted by those challenges. Larger interview studies
have been conducted in various projects during the
past years, e.g., such as in the Value-IT project [73].
We start by giving a brief summary of their findings
in the next section, nevertheless, we see an additional
need for presenting a more detailed analysis of industry needs through examples scenarios, which is then
provided by our own interview results in Section 3.3.

3.1. Related Studies

With respect to mapping out industrial needs and
current state, there exist several studies that also include aspects of DSS. The Value-IT project1 studied
the application of semantic technologies in enterprises,
in particular from a business perspective. In their Deliverable 3.2 [73] they present the results of an extensive survey, consisting of both literature surveys of use

1http://www.value-it.eu/

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

case reports as well as interviews with 675 decisionmakers around Europe, from a variety of industry sec-
tors. One important class of applications mentioned
is DSS, which is actually presented as one of the areas that currently has the largest gap between existing applications and perceived needs, in particular for
larger companies. In that survey, interoperability is
found to be the overall top priority need for enterprises,
with searching and linking of information, and collaboration support as runners-up. They also note that
database interoperability is one of the most commonly
addressed problems in enterprise projects today, i.e.,
an area where most enterprises already have ongoing
efforts. Despite pointing at the need for better solutions
in most application areas where semantic technologies
could indeed help, many enterprises still showed relatively low interest in semantic technologies, which according to the report authors may be due to a lack of
understanding of such technologies and their benefits,
and lack of trust in their maturity.

Another survey that comes to similar conclusions is
the SAP report by Dau [38], which studies the benefits
and costs of semantic technologies in enterprise appli-
cations. He lists data integration, separation of schema
from data, schema evolution, semantic search, and semantically supported collaboration as the key areas
where benefits arise when using semantic technolo-
gies. On the downside, he sees technical challenges
such as scalability and immaturity of currently available frameworks, the cost of modelling and creating
good ontologies, especially considering the lack of experience most enterprises have with the languages in-
volved, subsequent education costs for enterprise per-
sonnel, as well as the difficulty of measuring actual
quantitative improvements that the technologies pro-
vide. Nevertheless, the author concludes by noting that
semantic technologies come with a number of clear
benefits, and it is only a matter of time until they become a mainstream technology in enterprise systems.
While this report is not directly targeted at DSS, the
conclusions most likely hold for this category of applications as well.

Given this broader picture of enterprise needs, we
now proceed to report on the views of our sample enterprise DSS experts, which largely confirms but additionally further detail the above conclusions.

3.2. Interview Setup

In this section we summarize the interview setup.

3.2.1. Participants

In our research project Semantic Technologies for
Decision Support, at Linkoping University, we have
two industrial partners as well as two partners constituting research institutes, each of which are working
with different aspects of DSS. One industrial partner is
a large Swedish corporation providing security and defence solutions, ranging from aviation to military training and support systems for civil security and crisis
management. The interviewee (a) from this partner is
a project manager and solutions developer with background mainly in systems for situational awareness in
security and crisis management, as well as for monitoring of societal functions by citizens and decision
makers. Examples of DSS of this partner include Web
applications for traffic monitoring, both land and sea
traffic, citizen-driven fault reporting systems for mu-
nicipalities, and DSS applications for customs officers
tracking goods and vessels.

The second industrial partner is a small Swedish
company providing systems and consultancy for professional training, e.g., training decision-makers for
day-to-day activities or crisis situations focusing on
core functions of society such as nuclear power plants,
water and electricity supply, airports and harbours etc.
The interviewee (b) from this partner is co-founder of
the company, but also an active consultant and project
manager who has been involved in developing the
companys training management software. Examples
of DSS of this partner include tools for planning and
monitoring large scale training scenarios, in addition
the interviewee has experience from a multitude of
DSS belonging to their trainees that are usually integrated into the training scenarios.

The third partner is a large Swedish research in-
stitute, targeted at research for security and defence
applications. The two interviewees (c and d) are researchers and system developers, involved in projects
related to simulation and prediction systems for realtime decision support, mainly based on sensor information integration and formal models. Examples of
DSS of this partner include simulation systems for predicting individual and population behaviour, from single units in a battlefield up to simulations of national
and global scenarios.

The fourth partner is a US research center, focused
on DSS research and applications for the US Navy.
The interviewee (e) is a researcher and project manager involved in applications for situation awareness
and information sharing and integration, mainly for
emergency management and space situation aware-

ness. Examples of DSS of this partner include information integration applications for message passing and information sharing between emergency man-
agers, e.g., police, fire departments, medical personnel,
logistics, etc., in a crisis situation, as well as situation
awareness applications with map-based interfaces for
plotting events of interest.

Since the project involving these four partners is
slightly biased towards the security field we decided,
for the sake of broadening the scope of this paper, to include two additional interviews. The first interviewee
(f ) being a clinical practitioner and researcher, with
long experience in medical decision support applica-
tions, e.g., clinical decision support and systems supporting drug prescription, who is currently the head of
a government-funded foundation for supporting medical drug research, epidemiology, and drug economy
issues. The interviewee was previously responsible for
the national project of implementing electronic health
records in Sweden. Examples of DSS in the experience of the interviewee are the Clinical DSS (CDSS)
applied today in Swedish primary and specialist care,
e.g., related to the electronic health records, and DSS
used by medical practitioners and farmacies for drug
prescription.

The second additional interviewee (g) being a Business Intelligence (BI) consultant with long experience
of a multitude of different BI applications and scenar-
ios. This interviewee is currently head of the BI department of his consultancy firm, and has mainly experience with large-scale data warehousing, OLAP, and
different kinds of model-based BI applications.

The DSS exemplified by the interviewees consist
mainly of Personal DSS, in combination with Intelligent DSS, BI, Data Warehousing, and KM-focused
DSS (see Section 1.1 for an explanation of the cate-
gories). While none have particular support targeted
at collaboration, some still support group decisionmaking in some sense, e.g., through information sharing and delegation:

 Personal DSS - The situation awareness applications of interviewees (a) and (e), the training management systems of interviewee (b), the CDSS of
interviewee (f), and the BI systems of interviewee
(g).

 Group DSS - Partly implemented in the training
management systems of (b), and the emergency
management systems of (e).

 Intelligent DSS - Simulation systems of (c) and
(d), as well as the CDSS for drug prescription of
(f).

 BI and Data Warehousing - Main target of inter-

viewee (g).

 KM DSS - Partly the target of the CDSS of inter-

viewee (f).

3.2.2. Interview Script

The interviews were carried out in a semi-structured
manner, using open questions where the interviewees
were always free to add comments and reflections to
their answers. The interviews were divided into three
parts; the first part (i) being devoted to the background
of the interviewee and their experience in DSS and potentially with Semantic Web technologies, the second
part (ii) being devoted to a number of themes, representing certain features or functionalities of a DSS,
where the interviewees were asked to either reject the
presence or need of such features in DSS of their field
of expertise, or to confirm the presence or the future
need of such functionalities by describing scenarios
where such features would be needed, or are currently
used, and finally the third part (iii) being devoted to
recording the opinion of the interviewee with respect
to where the most urgent challenges of DSS within
their field of expertise lie, and (if known to them)
where they believe that semantic technologies could
give the most benefit. All but one of the interviews
were conducted in Swedish, whereby their responses
have been translated and are here interpreted and explained in English. The answers of part (i) are reported
as part of Sect. 3.2.1, while the two latter parts are reported in Sect. 3.3.

The themes used for the second part of the inter-
views, were based on a list of system feature categories
for which we believe that Semantic Web technologies
and approaches could be particularly useful. For each
such feature category, we have listed a number of in-
dicators, which if present could indicate the need for
solutions related to that particular category (sets are
overlapping, i.e., the same indicator can support several feature categories, and several indicators may be
needed in orders to deduce the need of one feature).
Before the interviews we listed 40 distinct indicators,
which in different constellations point at the need for
the 7 hypothetical feature categories below. For in-
stance, the feature category information integration
is supported by indicators such as the presence of several datasources, with different formats, some of which
may be external and hence are not under our own
control, may change frequently, etc. The list of feature categories and conditions consist of (main fea-
tures, with a sample of indicators in parenthesis):

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

 Information integration (several data sources, different formats, external data sources, high change
rate, exchangeable data sources)

 Information filtering and selection (several large
data sources, different tasks and roles of users, ab-
straction)

 Information extension, exploration, and explanation (data may be missing in internal sources, user
explanations, browsing relations between data,
drill-down of information)

 Information interpretation, event detection, and
prediction (large data sources, high change rate of
data, abstraction and aggregation, situation detec-
tion, real-time data, data analysis)

 Information tracking and post-event analysis (large
data sources, abstraction and aggregation, situation detection, post-session evaluation and session follow-up, provenance)

 Models and model evolution (different changing
data formats, external data sources, changing user
tasks and views, model-based analysis, relations
between information, browsing and linking)

 Sharing decisions (trust, provenance, accountinteraction between

ability, user created data,
users, delegation)

When asking the interviewees to give examples of (or
reject) the need for the detailed indicators they were
asked to describe example scenarios taken from the
projects and systems they have been involved with, and
within those scenario descriptions we recorded their
mentions of the detailed feature indicators. In Sect. 3.3
their responses are described, and compared, in particular to find common system scenarios that apply to
several fields, and thereby might constitute particularly
important features to support. Finally, their answers to
the open questions of part (iii) constitute an indication
of the needs and priorities of DSS practitioners today.

3.3. Interview Results

In this section we summarize their responses, pre-

sented by feature category.

3.3.1. Information Integration

All of the interviewees recognized the need for
some form of information integration in their respective fields. Interviewees (a), (b), and (e) all exemplified
this through scenarios of integrating sensor information with reports from human actors, as well as external information from the web.

For the training scenarios of (b) this may mean to integrate sensor data from a training field, with observer
reports entered by human observers as text in a dedicated software, while (a) exemplified through scenarios of monitoring a municipality, where sensor information such as weather and state of important infrastructures (e.g., water and energy supply, traffic etc.)
should be integrated with reports from inhabitants regarding disturbances and problems. Interviewee (e) exemplified this through an emergency management scenario where human and machine communication between emergency managers from different organiza-
tions, e.g., fire department, police, and medical per-
sonnel, need to be integrated with sensor information
and background knowledge, such as maps of the area.
Interviewees (c) and (d) took examples from integration of simulation outcomes from several simulators,
as well as integration of spatial data, e.g., map layers,
expressed using different standards and from several
sources as input to simulations. In health care, information integration is needed for combining the information in electronic health records with background
knowledge about drugs and health conditions, according to interviewee (f). For the BI scenarios of interviewee (g) information usually comes from within the
same organization, but from different source systems
that collect that data, and since a BI system usually is
not tightly integrated with those systems, it has to react
to constant changes in the original sources and their
schemas.

Although the need for information integration ex-
ists, several interviewees, e.g., (a) and (f), confirm that
there is not a good solution for this in their systems
at the moment. Most often static connections between
systems are set up including tailored transformation
software, which has to be constantly maintained as
schemas or technologies of data sources change.

Those that today are not using external data sources
for direct input, also confirm the need for doing this
in the future, e.g., to incorporate information from the
support systems of the trainees own organization to
monitor what they do during training (b), and to incorporate web sources into BI systems, for monitoring the
environment of an enterprise (g). The only difference
in needs that can be noted is with respect to the integration of user-created data, where interviewees (c) and
(d) do not see this need in their simulation systems,
and interviewee (g) currently do not see the integration
of user-created data on the BI side, but certainly on
the side of the enterprise information and management
systems where the BI software gets its data.

3.3.2. Information Filtering and Selection

With respect to filtering, all interviewees acknowledge the presence of large amounts of data, more than a
user can cope with without some sort of filtering. Several of the interviewees also exemplify limitations in
todays systems (e.g., interviewees (a) and (e)) where
the systems claim to perform some intelligent analysis but in fact are only plotting the data on a map -
which is more about moving data around (according
to interviewee (e)) than actually filtering out the interesting things.

In all systems, except the simulation and prediction
systems of interviewees (c) and (d), there are several
types of users with different roles and motivations for
using the DSS, which results in the presence of different views (based either on the login category of the
user, or selected manually through preferences). To-
day, these views are most often generated by a fixed set
of filtering rules that are decided at design time, e.g.,
as in the BI applications of (g) where predefined reports are the representations of such tailored views.

Usually, as a user you can also select among a predefined set of filters, or perform some kind of free text
search over data. However, all interviewees (except the
BI specialist (g)) acknowledge an urgent need for better and more flexible information filtering and selection methods.

3.3.3. Information Extension, Exploration, and

Explanation

Information extension in this context means to
be able to incorporate new data and data sources if
needed, e.g., to find related information on the web, or
to generate explanations or drill-down of information
presented, all based on a users need for more information related to the current data elements in focus. Most
DSS today seem not to have an open world view but
seem rather static, where the sources are determined
at design time and data is not usually linked or brows-
able, e.g., through some kind of drill-down with increased levels of detail in data, or through associative
relations. The only concrete example of drill-down
we get is the ability to click on an icon on a map, as explained by interviewee (a), to see the data values associated to that icon, or the display of metadata or provenance information related to the data being viewed. In
BI scenarios interviewee (g) mentions that it is important to include specific views on information tailored
to power users who want to explore the raw data
items and create their own analyses and filters, how-

ever, in other types of interfaces the opportunity to see
the underlying data is not present.

The only example of a system that actually explains
to the user how something was derived, is the CDSS
of interviewee (f), where warning flags are raised if a
patient is at risk of getting prescribed a medicine he or
she is allergic to, or a medicine that can interact in an
unwanted way with another of their prescribed drugs.
Such flags can be examined further by the healthcare
professional, to see what the reason is for the warning being raised, and even get suggestions for suitable
actions, such as changing the dose of a medicine. The
same system also allows for browsing the data about
medical conditions and drugs in such a way that the
user may end up retrieving information from external
sources, such as the drug providing company or a patient association.

None of the other interviewees could give any examples of such scenarios, while it seems rather common to have a static link collection available for the
users, so that they can proceed to investigate external
web sources on their own, which could be interpreted
as a need for retrieving and extending information in
the system in some cases. Explanations of derived in-
formation, and drill-down in terms of exploring the underlying data or its sources, seems uncommon, how-
ever, this may simply be due to the very simple forms
of aggregation and analysis that is currently performed
(as mentioned previously).

3.3.4. Information Aggregation, Event Detection, and

Prediction

Only a few of the interviewees claim that their
systems today perform some kind of data aggrega-
tion. The BI area has a long tradition of data ag-
gregation, and has developed specialized methods for
pre-aggregation to improve system performance, e.g.,
through OLAP cubes (as also explained by interviewee
(g)). However, in other DSS areas such aggregation
seems to be done sparsely or not at all. Interviewee (f)
explains that in their medical decision support today,
the focus is mainly on individuals, and the only aggregation is on the level of collecting all the data about
that particular patient, while one could imagine interesting opportunities, e.g., for research, if data were to
be aggregated also over the health records of a popula-
tion. Here there is also a problem of legislation largely
forbidding the aggregation of health data in Sweden,
however, if appropriately aggregated and anonymized
it could provide a highly valuable research basis.

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

Both interviewees (a) and (b) point at the graphical
user interface of their system as the point where filtering and data selection or aggregation happens, mainly
through fixed views over data. Interviewee (a) explains
this through an example from their situation awareness
systems using map interfaces, where data about certain
places are aggregated based on the zoom level of the
map, i.e., by zooming out, more and more events are
considered to happen in the same place (in relation
to the granularity of the map) and are thereby shown
through one single icon rather than individual ones.
Hence, we note that aggregation, if present, is usually
done along very elementary dimensions.

agers have to make split-second decisions in order to
save lives. In such cases, they rely on long experience
rather than careful analysis of data for making the right
decision, however, this is also a requirement for faster
and more accurate event detection in data, to provide
the decision-makers with an accurate information to
base decisions on. In particular, detecting unwanted
situations or anomalies in data seems to have a high
priority.

The systems of interviewee (c) and (d) are the only
ones targeted at performing predictions based on the
current situation, in this case through simulation mod-
els, hence, the prediction is the outcome of the complete execution session. The BI systems of interviewee
(g) are also to some extent used to find trends in data
and to make suggestions on future actions, and so are
the CDSS systems of interviewee (f). Although both
acknowledge that these capabilities are usually very
basic, e.g., restricted to analyzing the effects of one
single action of the user, such as prescribing a certain
drug in the medical case, or changing some business
parameter in the BI case. Predictions are on the other
hand not something explicitly mentioned by the inter-
viewees, possibly since a more imminent need is still
to be able to analyze the current situation in a better
manner.

3.3.5. Information Tracking and Post-Event Analysis
While the previous feature category dealt with near
real time data, tracking of large data flows is concerned with historical data, and related to issues such
as data provenance, post-analysis of how a situation has unfolded etc. Rather than focusing on single
events, here we need to analyze the complete scenario.
Probably the most self-evident situation when this
is needed is the follow-up of training situations, as exemplified by interviewee (b), where there is a plan of
the training scenario, and a number of goals to achieve,
which are all to be evaluated after the training session,
in order to explain the outcome as well as to learn from
it. Similar follow-ups are conducted in medical DSS
(f), which are not only used for follow-up of the patients and their treatment, but also for conducting research (so-called evidence based medicine).

The need for this kind of follow-up and tracking of
situations was not acknowledged by all the intervie-
wees, e.g., interviewee (a) pointed at the fact that some
kinds of data are not legally allowed to be stored more
than a certain amount of time, and many open systems on the web are targeted at giving users an accurate picture of the current situation rather than being

When moving from more or less static datasets to
data flows, even more challenging scenarios arise, i.e.,
making sense of large amounts of rapidly changing information (from a user perspective) through scalable
intelligent analysis over large datasets. Filtering could
be seen as a prerequisite to this kind of analysis, while
the features we discuss here target more challenging
scenarios with near real-time data, such as Complex
Event Processing (CEP) or anomaly detection.

Several of the interviewees exemplify the use of
some form of data representing the current situation,
e.g., traffic situation on land or at sea (a), situation of
a municipality or region (a), situation of an emergency
or crisis (a,e), situation in a training scenario (b), situation in an enterprise (g). Today this data is commonly
analysed manually, e.g., by plotting the data on a map,
in a table, or as a graph, and then letting the user analyse it by simply viewing it, such as manually detecting
traffic jams from sensor data and roadside cameras (a),
or a limited rule-based analysis is made, such as detecting the presence of two interfering drugs prescribed to
a patient (f).

Very few systems perform more advanced analysis
of data, however in closed simulation settings, where
agents represent humans to simulate the actions of a
population under certain conditions, more advanced
models are used to specify how those agents detect certain conditions (situations) in their environment (c,d).
Despite the overall lack of support for this kind of situation detection, several of the interviewees mention
this as one of the most important challenges, e.g., interviewee (e) emphasizes that just shuffling data around
is pretty useless, unless the system also helps users
to detect the important things that are going on, and
presents those in a high-level view so that the situation
is immediately understandable by the user.

Interviewee (e) emphasizes the time aspect of decision-

making, especially in a crisis situation, where man-

able to evaluate the past, e.g., the current traffic monitoring systems by interviewee (a). Nevertheless, interviewee (a) acknowledges that interesting conclusions
could also be drawn from statistics and past situations,
e.g., road and harbour conditions and capacity in the
land and sea traffic cases, as well as frequencies of certain disturbances or emergencies in the case of municipal monitoring, although this is not being done today.
In the BI case, historical data is often used to analyze
the outcome of managerial decisions (g), however, this
is rarely performed in an automated fashion, rather reports are printed and manually analysed.

In summary, all the interviewees acknowledge the
need for tracing data and user actions, e.g., related to
issues of security, provenance, and individual respon-
sibility, but rarely see the need for advanced analysis
capabilities related to such tracked sessions or situa-
tions.
3.3.6. Models and Decision Sharing

The last two feature categories, i.e., models and
model evolution and decision sharing, are related to
a meta-perspective since these features concern specific ways of supporting solutions discussed previ-
ously. This makes the need for these solution categories harder to derive and exemplify based on the
interviews. Nevertheless, it is clear that several interviewees already today exploit some kind of mod-
els, while the need for providing dynamically evolving models rather than static ones is present but not
currently met. Evidence for the need of models is also
quite clear from the discussion of information integra-
tion, since most interviewees claim to be having problems with changing information schemas, exchange of
data sources, and incorporating external information.
Additionally, they all mention the lack of flexibility as
a severe problem, whereby also models need to be dynamic and change along with evolving data, schemas
and technologies in general. Similarly, the storing of
meta-level information, i.e., information about decisions themselves, appear in example scenarios from
emergency management (e), e.g., how to convey a decision by an incident manager to the agencies involved,
and BI (g), e.g., how to express the information that
a certain managerial decision was based on certain BI
information, are expressed by the interviewees.
3.3.7. Challenges

When asked for the main challenges of their respective DSS fields, five of the interviewees directly mention the need for better data aggregation, abstraction,
and analysis in order to provide more intelligent and

user-relevant analysis of data, to detect the interesting
situations (or events), in the vast amount of data avail-
able. As expressed by interviewee (a), we have spent a
lot of time and effort in recent years on getting access
to data in the first place, but now that we have it we are
not sure how to treat data and extract the truly interesting things hidden within it. This largely confirms the
top-ranked issues for enterprise systems found in the
surveys presented in Sect. 3.1.

Interviewee (e) explains this issue further by exemplifying the need for data at several levels of aggregation and abstraction, drawing on a newspaper analogy;
in a newspaper we can read the front page to get the
main headlines, if we are interested in a specific topic
we flip to that page, and get a more detailed headline
and short summary, only if we really find that interesting we have to go further and read the whole text. In
the opinion of interviewee (e) this kind of data summarization and drill-down constitutes and important
feature, together with concise descriptions of the information at all these levels, tailored to the user needs.
The remaining two interviewees mention this issue in-
directly, by asking for better access to data, through
better user interfaces that point the user to the relevant
parts of the data.

Other important challenges are to handle huge
amounts of data (so called big data (g)), handling
flows of data rather than static data in a store (b), providing true interoperability of data sources, i.e., not
only on a syntactic level (c, d, and f), and letting DSS
affect our organizations by integrating the tools closer
into our work processes (g) and finding new ways of
collaborating that incorporate these services (e).

3.3.8. Potential Contribution of Semantic Web

Technologies

All the interviewees had some previous idea of what
semantic technologies might be (we did not check
if these ideas were correct or not, and to what extent they were familiar with specific aspects), and were
asked if they were able to envision where they think
such technologies would create the most value for DSS
users.

Several of the interviewees considered the use of semantic representations as a prerequisite to remedy the
current problems in interoperability and information
sharing and integration, as well as a means for creating
more flexible system, e.g., mirroring the changing environment around them, as well as a means of creating
more intelligent detection models for spotting interesting events in data. Again, this is in line with the ex-

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

pectations on semantic technologies for enterprise systems reported in previous studies (see Sect. 3.1).

Some also saw an opportunity to create more abstract models, for reusability in DSS design, and sharing solutions between different DSS. The opportunity to standardize descriptions, e.g., vocabularies,
for describing data was mentioned, as well as modelling non-hierarchical relations between concepts, to
improve the information structures and models used
within DSS. Finally, one interviewee (g) also pointed
at some possible drawbacks, in that Semantic Web representation languages, e.g., their XML-serialization,
add too much overhead when dealing with big data
and hence a lot more work on scalability and efficiency
of semantic data management is needed.

In relation to the Semantic Web technology categories explained in Section 2.1.3, we can conclude that
the use of Semantic Web data, ontologies, and the software frameworks supporting these are confirmed to be
important prerequisites to future cross-fertilization of
DSS and Semantic Web. A particular limitation today,
is related to the Semantic Web engineering and Semantic Web data categories, i.e., efficiency of the formats
and algorithms in order to be able to handle big data.
The remaining categories, i.e., NLP, social aspects, and
user interfaces, are not mentioned explicitly in relation
to Semantic Web technologies. This is not highly sur-
prising, it is to be expected that if the tasks considered
as basic prerequisites by the interviewees, e.g., information integration, are not satisfactory solved yet, then
it is difficult to envision the use of more advanced tech-
nologies. However, when surveying the problems and
challenges as listed in the previous sections, we note
that several of the interviewees mention the integration
of sensor data with unstructured information provided
by users, the need for better contextualized and individually tailored data analysis methods, as well as better data access through special-purpose user interfaces
(which are issues related to the NLP, social Semantic
Web, and user interfaces categories respectively).

4. Discussion and Future Challenges

In this section we proceed to analyze the intersection
between DSS and Semantic Web research, by drawing
on the previous sections, i.e., the current state of research and applications in the area and the expressed
needs of the sample DSS specialists that have been
interviewed, together with general Semantic Web approaches or research directions that has the potential to
influence DSS research in the future.

4.1. Semantic Web data

One of the most important basic needs of DSS,
which cuts across all the application domains of the
interviewees, is the need for easier and more flexible
information integration methods. To some extent this
need has already been addressed by research as presented in Section 2.2, e.g., by exploring RDF/OWL
and Linked Data as a formal data representation in
DSS [69,70,86], and analysing the feasibility and qualities of different ontology alignment methods [57].
Nevertheless, using Semantic Web technologies does
not necessarily imply the use of (or existence of) standardized vocabularies for describing your data, nor the
reuse of URI:s for data linking. The Web of Data today is a true bottom-up effort, where de-facto standards are growing out of use rather than set by standardization organizations. If such de-facto standards
are present and used, linking and integration often becomes quite straight forward, while in other cases data
integration can still require a large effort, consisting of
URI-mapping and vocabulary reconciliation.

Once such integration is done, however, Linked
Data enables many new opportunities. One which is
highlighted by [70,81], namely that using Semantic
Web technologies for data integration also enables new
research opportunities, by allowing the linking and
federated use of datasets from different researchers and
even different fields of research. In addition, this does
not only apply to research data, but data in general,
as shown by numerous use cases of the Linking Open
Data (LOD) project [20], although few have so far had
a DSS focus.

Naturally, trust, provenance and data quality become important aspects when incorporating Web data
in DSS, and unfortunately these aspects are only beginning to be researched in the context of the Semantic Web, e.g., as illustrated by the W3C Provenance
Working Group started only last year [6]. In particular,
Semantic Web approaches and available frameworks
have so far largely overlooked security issues, such
as data confidentiality or intellectual property rights.
Although the semantic technologies as such cannot
be expected to in themselves handle such issues, the
frameworks where they are embedded need to address
this problem. Since many such frameworks have so
far been more of research prototypes rather than commercial tools, there is generally a low level of trust in
that security and confidentiality of data can be ensured
when applying Semantic Web approaches.

So far Linked Data has been mostly discussed in an
open Web setting, however, the same techniques and
principles can be applied to closed scenarios, such as
enterprise data. Numerous software tools exist for performing so called triplification of data, e.g., starting
from relational databases or XML schemas [49,3], as
well as for transforming data and aligning it to one or
more vocabularies (e.g., [72]), and even automated link
discovery has been proposed [91]. Hence, by expressing appropriate transformation rules in a high level rule
language the bulk transformation of data, and possibly even some linking, can then be performed without much human intervention  letting the human engineers focus on data quality rather than syntactic issues.
Once linked data has been produced, the links between
data and datasets can be utilized in several ways, both
for information integration and aggregation, as well as
using links to browse data through associative relation-
ships, which was another need expressed by the inter-
viewees. Linked enterprise data, i.e., combining LOD
with enterprise-internal information, has the potential
to revolutionize the way enterprises view their data and
build DSS for both BI and other scenarios.

An obstacle to this development is efficiency, as
one of the interviewees note: if you have really large
amounts of data, and in particular when concerned
with lots of literal values, it can create a huge overhead
to transfer and manipulate URIs and formats such as
RDF/XML, rather than raw data in a streamlined for-
mat. Scalability problems have lately received much
attention in the Semantic Web community, e.g., by development of efficient triple stores [2] and scalable
Web reasoning methods (e.g., see the LARKC project
[1] and the series of NeFoRS workshops [5]). Nev-
ertheless, relational database systems and Data Warehousing methods have had a few decades of head start,
while we are still to see the bulk of research on optimization of Semantic Web technologies. Addition-
ally, few studies have been made on the overhead and
possible streamlining of the formats themselves (al-
though several syntaxes are available for most lan-
guages), rather most research targets the procedures
for manipulating data and ontologies using their formal semantics. A important path is also the continued hybridization between classic techniques, e.g., relational databases and Data Warehousing, and Semantic Web technologies, both in order to make use of the
more efficient methods from other areas as well as taking into account the multitude of legacy data sources
that exist.

The fact that DSS are often domain-specific and
potentially even organization-internal also affects the
data filtering and selection methods that should be
used. Traditional approaches, such as statistical methods and other kinds of free text search (e.g.,using
Google-like methods, primarily operating on the syntactical level), might not work as well as in the general case since keywords are highly specialized and
alone may not be enough to discriminate between doc-
uments. In most DSS tasks it is also important to find
data elements relevant to an information need, rather
than documents. In particular in time critical scenarios,
such as emergency management, browsing through
documents to find the right information is not feasi-
ble. This is one of the main drivers for using Semantic
Web technologies in the DSS field, since the Semantic Web has boosted the development of data-centric
rather than document-centric retrieval methods. On the
other hand, general Semantic Web methods operate in
a more unstructured and open scenario than relational
databases and their query languages, which are also
highly data-centric.

Recently the notion of semantic search has been
discussed in the Semantic Web community, which
could be seen as ways to query Semantic Web data
rather than search in the classic Information Retrieval sense (e.g., see [87]), and where user interaction
is usually more similar to Question Answering rather
than keyword search (e.g., as in [63]). In the field of
DSS the situation is different from the general Web set-
ting, for instance, DSS users are already used to getting tailored reports and data elements related to their
needs, hence, keyword search is not the main mode of
interaction as on the Web. This means that semantic
search is a highly relevant paradigm, which might even
be easier to develop and more easily adopted by users
in the DSS domain than in an open Web setting. How-
ever, we need to provide easy-to use interfaces and efficient solutions that provide accurate answers for timecritical decisions if semantic search is to be adopted
for DSS on a large scale.

4.2. Ontologies and Semantics

In order to make sense of Linked Data, and enable
views and queries over datasets, ontologies are commonly used as vocabularies for the data. In the set of
papers we have studied, ontologies are likely the most
common Semantic Web technology that is applied to
DSS, and some ontologies are quite complex. This is
a little bit surprising, since this is usually not the case

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

on the Semantic Web in general, where much research
is simply about utilizing data while using only a very
simple data model (or no ontology at all). We have already proposed one explanation for this, i.e., it may be
due to the common AI origin of the two fields, which
means that the use of ontologies for DSS was common
already before the Semantic Web, and the contribution
has thereby mainly been new languages, and to some
extent reusable ontologies on the Web.

This is visible through the numerous Expert Systemlike applications proposed in our paper collection, e.g.,
in the CDSS area [8,28,32,34,47,51,52,79,80,82,84,
92]. A recent study from the ONTORULES project
[59] even proposes Expert System as a near-synonym
to what they call decision support type systems,
claiming that many DSS carry on the Expert Systems
tradition, although they are today called by different
names. However, constructing and using applicationspecific ontologies in this way suffers from the same
well-known problems as in the Expert Systems tradi-
tion, possibly the most prominent being the so-called
knowledge acquisition bottleneck. While automatic
ontology construction has been tried both for DSS,
e.g., by [44,50,90], an in the general case for the
Semantic Web (sometimes called Ontology Learning
[31,36]), it has so far not been considered as highly
successful in practice, while ontology evolution ap-
proaches, in particular user-assisted ones such as [93],
may prove more feasible.

Other approaches for reducing the effort in ontology engineering have also been proposed, e.g., reuse of
general top-level ontologies, and reuse of smaller ontological components such as Content Ontology Design
Patterns (CPs) [48,21]. An advantage of DSS scenarios
is that they often focus on particular domains, or even
more or less closed sets of data sources, as opposed
to the general open Web scenario. This might imply
that both automatic methods, such as Ontology Learn-
ing, and component based modelling, such as using
catalogs of CPs (possibly domain-specific), potentially
could become quite successful in this restricted set-
ting. Similarly, the Semantic Web today is also a huge
source of reusable ontologies. Not all of them are of
high quality nor of high complexity, but some are actually widely used, e.g., the FOAF ontology2, SKOS3,
Semantic Web versions of the Dublin Core vocabu-

lary4, the DBPedia ontology5 etc. The mere fact that
ontologies are shared and reused, supports easier information integration in all fields, including DSS. How-
ever, in our paper collection we note that most ontologies described are tailor-made and do not refer to any
of these common vocabularies, which shows an area of
possible improvement.

One area that has received quite some focus in the
LOD community is spatial data, e.g., datasets such as
GeoNames, for adding a spatial aspect to data, and
for instance, being able to link events and objects to
places, and use a map interface to visualize data. Although there were no such papers in our collection,
there exists approaches for spatial decisions support
(e.g., recent examples in [53,54,94]), in particular approaches for using ontologies, which could potentially
make use of the large amount of spatial data available
in the LOD cloud, as well as efforts in using ontologies
to organize and better access spatial decision support
resources (data, models, tools) [62]. The emerging interest in Semantic Web technologies in this community is also evident when looking at the program of the
past few years conferences of the Global Spatial Data
Infrastructure Association6.

Once basic information access, integration, and selection processes are in place, requirements move towards intelligent data aggregation and analysis - or as
expressed by one of the interviewees: we now know
how to retrieve and integrate data, but it is not equally
clear what to do with data. In DSS scenarios the focus is often on large amounts of highly dynamic data,
e.g., data streams. In the Semantic Web community
there has recently been a shift in focus from more static
datasets towards handling RDF data streams [89], e.g.,
of sensor data, and performing intelligent analysis,
such as event detection and processing (sometimes
called Complex Event Processing - CEP) [10,13,66].
However, there may be another underlying issue that
hampers the combination of current DSS technologies for data analysis and Semantic Web approaches,
namely the different types of models used. Apart from
the DSS that actually already use ontologies, many
model-based DSS rely on mathematical models, e.g.,
statistical models, rather than symbolic ones such
as ontologies. It may not be straight forward to use
such models together, as have been seen also on the
Web, where despite recent developments there is still a

2http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/
3http://www.w3.org/2008/05/skos

4http://purl.org/dc/terms/
5http://dbpedia.org/ontology/
6http://www.gsdi.org/gsdiConferences

wide chasm between statistical search techniques and
semantic search, and between statistical and fuzzy approaches on one side and crisp logical approaches on
the other, for instance.

When considering scale, projects such as LARKC
[1] have attempted to address scalability issues of Semantic Web technologies, in particular complex tasks
such as reasoning, and plug-ins for the LARKC software platform provides support for stream reasoning and CEP. Nevertheless, these approaches mainly
rely on expressing event detection rules as SPARQL
queries, hence, they do no incorporate the use of standard reasoners or declarative pattern descriptions, e.g.,
through OWL ontologies, but rather lets the user express detection mechanisms implicitly as queries. In
addition, streams are usually assumed to be expressed
in known vocabularies, rather than interpreted at run-
time, and systems are set up with a predefined number
of streams.

In order to support DSS in closed scenarios, the latter assumptions are probably reasonable, however, we
envision the need for more flexible ways to interpret
data and express patterns in data. For instance, currently there is a lack of research on modelling incomplete and uncertain event patterns, as well as the evolution and extension of detection patterns at runtime
(c.f. the discussion on Ontology Learning and Evolution previously). Using SPARQL for event detection
also suffers from some clear limitations with respect to
performing temporal reasoning over the RDF streams,
while a multi-layer approach using cascaded SPARQL
queries can potentially assist in data aggregation.

Subsequently, these approaches may need to be
combined with statistical approaches for tracking general event trends, or prediction models for analysis of
decision consequences, which are already quite common in the DSS field. In fact, when considering the
use of models for data analysis, the Semantic Web field
may actually benefit from studying well-established
models in the DSS field, for improving data analysis in the general Semantic Web setting. Such crossfertilization is already underway, where for instance
vocabularies have been proposed for expressing multi
dimensional data in RDF [37], and applying wellknown DS analysis methods on top of RDF data [69].

4.3. NLP, Social Semantic Web, and User Interfaces

The previous two general topics have been the backbone of Semantic Web research, hence, they are also
the areas with the most mature and well-known ap-

proaches. However, during the past few years the Semantic Web community has acknowledged the need
for broadening research to also incorporate more useroriented research topics, e.g., social and interaction as-
pects, as well as the need for utilizing and/or producing
natural language in addition to data in order to leverage
the use of the human readable Web and other legacy
systems and data sources. As could be seen, this has
also been a focus of some DSS-related Semantic Web
approaches. Although, similarly to within the the general Semantic Web area, such approaches and publications constitute a minority of the total body of re-
search.

Important aspects, related to DSS, include the ability to personalize and contextualize data, in order to
create tailored filters, views and analysis mechanisms
on data. Such approaches have already been proposed,
e.g., for personal shopping agents as noted previously.
Nevertheless, other areas of DS could benefit from
more flexible views and analysis mechanisms, as for
instance suggested by the BI expert we have inter-
viewed.

Several of the interviewees also express the need
for further integration between text sources and data,
e.g., in order to incorporate human communication as
a data source in areas such as emergency management
and monitoring of municipal communities. Today, the
NLP community has developed stable and scalable entity recognition methods, Information Extraction (IE)
methods, and even to some extent deep parsing tech-
niques, which will enable the detailed analysis of text
sources in DSS. However, the integration between Semantic Web and NLP is still in its infancy.

The development of novel user interfaces for the
Semantic Web has contributed to tie together the socalled Social Web with the Semantic Web and the
classical human readable Web [29], for instance by
providing user interfaces for contributing and editing
Semantic Web data directly in a Web browser [7].
The Semantic Web can be utilized for numerous different purposes, including support for developers and
power users with in-depth knowledge of semantic
formalisms, however, when applied to DSS the users
are most often decision-makers in some organization,
who may not even be very used to computers or the
Web. In such cases it is of essence that intuitive user
interfaces hide all the underlying complexity of algorithms and data formalisms, while still being flexible
and providing intelligent yet transparent support for
user tasks.

E. Blomqvist / Semantic Web Technologies for Decision Support

This is a user interaction challenge that is still not
sufficiently researched in the Semantic Web commu-
nity. Considering these types of users, also the requirements for proper explanations and drill-down of information become essential, i.e., for a user to trust an intelligent system, that system must be able to explain
how something was derived and what the user should
potentially do about the situation. As we have seen,
this is done in a few DSS today, but in a quite crude
fashion. Since current research in the Semantic Web
field is addressing similar issues, a suitable use case for
explanation and trust scenarios could be to investigate
their application in DSS.

Finally, taking a metalevel perspective, Semantic
Web technologies could also support the sharing of information about decision-making processes and decisions themselves. Such information is rarely made explicit in DSS, and even more rarely shared between
DSS or published for later use (whether internally or
externally). In the context of consumer products and
e-Commerce, there is a tradition of storing information about user behaviour, e.g., buying decisions,
in order to provide better services to similar kinds of
users, c.f. the other users who purchased this item
also bought. . .  suggestions provided by many large e-
Commerce sites. In a similar manner one could imagine DSS in the general case storing information about
decision behaviour, and learning from such behaviour
to in the future provide even better DS services, or being able to later follow-up and present the decision process history and relevant decisions to a user. In line
with this there have been attempts to analyze the needs
of a semantic decision vocabulary [22], e.g., for reasoning on decision consequences, tracking past decisions and their motivations etc., and this is currently
being investigated by a W3C Community Group [4].

5. Summary and Conclusions

In this paper we have provided an overview of the
area of Semantic Web-related DSS research, through a
structured literature survey. It turns out that the amount
of research publications has boomed during the past
three to four years (except for an unexplained dip in
2010), and the main increase can be attributed to research in European institutions. During the past 2-3
years we also noted a significant broadening of the
scope, both in terms of the Semantic Web technologies
that are applied, the type of DSS applications, as well
as in the industry domains that are targeted  in our

opinion most likely due to the increased maturity and
increased business interest within the Semantic Web
field itself.

Confirming the results of similar surveys of the DSS
field as a whole, we find that the most common type
of DSS is the Personal DSS, supporting individual
decision-making. For natural reasons, also Intelligent
DSS is a prominent category, relying on the Semantic
Web providing means for intelligent knowledge representation and reasoning. The latter also points at the
common legacy of the two fields, i.e., technologies developed within AI research, which is for instance visible in the high amount of approaches using ontologies and rules for Expert System-like functionalities
(in particular within the CDSS domain). Nevertheless,
there are also approaches that propose more specific
uses of Semantic Web ontologies, such as for annotating DSS models, or providing background knowledge
to the use of such models on top of data. Other prominent usages of Semantic Web technologies include the
exploitation of Semantic Web data formats, both for
integrating existing data sources in legacy formats, and
for extending current sources with data from the Semantic Web.

Our interview study, where 7 DSS researchers and
practitioners from 6 different organizations (4 none
research-oriented) were interviewed, shows that the
state of DSS practice today differs from the state reported in our collection of papers, which is not very
surprising. There is usually a gap between research and
industry practice, and only 30% of our collected papers actually had industry participants as co-authors,
which still leaves room for improvement. The interviewees note two kinds of challenges; (i) areas where
technologies should be made more flexible and effec-
tive, and (ii) areas where they do not yet have good
solutions and where new technologies and ideas are
needed. For (i) the main challenges relate to better and
more flexible information integration, sharing, and improved data filtering, while related to (ii) there are numerous challenges concerning data aggregation, ab-
straction, and analysis, and the scalable management
of big and dynamic datasets. For the latter, we would
like to point at this as a great opportunity for Semantic Web researchers to use DSS as a testbed for calability and efficiency experiments, in order to optimize
and streamline the technologies. Despite possible chal-
lenges, these are all areas where Semantic Web approaches may be able to improve current DSS solu-
tions, and we emphasize that information interoperability and integration seems to be a key facilitator for

most DSS scenarios, as also noted by previous studies of semantic technologies for enterprise systems in
general.

In addition to the more well-researched areas of
Semantic Web research we also see a clear need in
DSS for NLP-related approaches, improved user interfaces for visualizing and interacting with semantic data, as well as approaches for incorporating the
social aspects of the Web. Here DSS could provide
the use cases for advancing Semantic Web research
in these areas. A number of limitations of current Semantic Web technologies relate to their lack of support
for trust, provenance and assurance of data quality, together with scalability and efficiency problems related
to the formalisms used. While the latter has been a hot
topic for several years in the Semantic Web commu-
nity, the remaining topics still need an increased focus.
Areas where surprisingly little cross-fertilization
has so far taken place (at least judging from our literature survey) include spatial decision support and planning support, e-government, and applications related
to the natural sciences (e.g., environmental applications and life sciences, except for CDSS). These are
areas where a lot of Semantic Web data and ontologies
exist, but has so far not been utilized for DSS to a large
extent.

Although some approaches for Semantic Websupported BI have been proposed, this is still the area
the Semantic Web has probably influenced the least
 in our opinion mainly due to the high requirements
of BI with respect to both trust, security, and effi-
ciency, but also the difference in current technologies
and models used. Once these obstacle can be over-
come, Semantic Web can greatly contribute to BI, for
instance, by not only letting an enterprise analyze its
internal state, but to integrate that information with external data and analyze the situation in relation to the
outside world, e.g., including competitors, events reported in the news, etc. As is also noted by [11], BI is
a field where a lot of money is made and spent, hence,
a focus of many IT companies, which should make
this an interesting focus also for Semantic Web-related
research.

In summary, Semantic Web technologies have been
used to support DSS since 2005, when the first paper
in our collection appeared. However, it is not until the
last 2-3 years that technologies from the Semantic Web
have been applied to a broader range of DSS applications and domains. An obstacle to the adoption of Semantic Web technologies is still their scalability and
immaturity with respect to optimization and efficiency,

compared to classic data management solutions, but
not all DSS fields have strict efficiency requirements.
On one hand, Semantic Web technologies can help to
solve basic DSS needs such as information interoper-
ability, integration and linking, while additionally potentially continuing to support the development of Intelligent DSS, but in a new and more open manner
than what was traditionally possible with AI technolo-
gies. An interesting aspect is also the potential of DSS
providing data for the Semantic Web, e.g., by providing Semantic Web vocabularies for expressing metadata about decisions and decision-making, which can
then be shared with others.

Acknowledgements

This work was partly financed by the SecurityLink
strategic research center at Linkoping University, and
the research project Semantic Technologies for Decision Support (funded by CENIIT, Linkoping Univer-
sity). Furthermore, we would like to thank Naicong
Li, Olivier Bodenreider, Eva Maria Kiss, and the additional anonymous reviewer for their valuable comments on how to improve this paper, as well as Marie
Gustafsson Friberger at Malmo hogskola for valuable
comments during the writing process.
