EARTh: an Environmental Application Reference Thesaurus in the Linked Open Data 
Cloud 

Editor(s): Pascal Hitzler, Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio, USA; Krzysztof Janowicz, 
University of California, Santa  Barbara, USA 
Solicited review(s): Natasha Noy, Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research (BMIR), Stanford, Cali-
fornia, USA; Tomi Kauppinen, Aalto University School of Science, Finland; Marta Sabou, MODUL University 
Vienna, Austria.  

R. Albertonia,b*, M. De Martinob, S. Di Franco c, V. De Santis c and P. Plinic  
aOntology Engineering Group. Dpto. de Inteligencia Artificial Facultad de Informatica, Universidad Politecnica 
de Madrid 28660, Boadilla del Monte, Madrid, Spain, ralbertoni@fi.upm.es  
bCNR-IMATI, Via De Marini, 6, 16149 Genova, Italy, {albertoni, demartino}@ge.imati.cnr.it  

CNR-IIA-EKOLab - Environmental Knowledge Organization Laboratory, Area della Ricerca di Roma 1, Via 
Salaria Km 29,300 C.P. 10,I-00016 Monterotondo stazione RM, {difranco, vds, plini} @iia.cnr.it 

Abstract. The paper aims at providing a description of EARTh, the Environmental Application Reference Thesaurus. It represents a general-purpose thesaurus for the environment, which has been published as a SKOS dataset in the Linked Open Data 
cloud. It promises to become a core tool for indexing and discovery environmental resources by refining and extending GE-
MET, which is considered the de facto standard when speaking of general-purpose thesaurus for the environment in Europe, 
besides it has been interlinked to popular LOD datasets as AGROVOC, EUROVOC, DBPEDIA and UMTHES. The paper 
illustrates the main characteristics of EARTh as a guide to its usage. It clarifies (i) the methodology adopted to define the 
EARTh content; (ii) the design and technological choices made when publishing EARTh as Linked Data; (iii) the information 
pertaining to its access and maintenance. Descriptions of EARTh applications and future relevance are highlighted. 

Keywords: SKOS, Linked Data, EARTh, Thesaurus, Environment

1. Introduction 

Although  different  directives  (e.g.  INSPIRE)  and 
policy  communications  (e.g.  SEIS)  have  been 
launched at European-scale with the objective of improving  the  management  of  heterogeneous  environmental  data  sources,  an  effective  sharing  of  these 
resources is still part of the desiderata due to the intrinsic  multicultural  and  multilingual  nature  of  the 
environmental domain.  

Thesauri are widely employed as common ground 
enabling  communication  among  the  different  com-

* Corresponding author. E-mail: albertoni@ge.imati.cnr.it  

munities  working  in  environment-related  domains: 
they  allow  users  to  share  and  agree  upon  scien-
tific/technical  terms  in  the  target  domain  and  to  express them in multiple languages. In the recent years 
several  controlled  vocabularies  and  thesauri  have 
been  deployed  by  different  communities  having  a 
large  spectrum  of  competencies.  They  have  been 
created embodying different points of view and based 
on different  ways of conceptualization. Their development  reflects  different  scopes  and  implies  quite  a 
range of levels of abstraction and detail. 

 Nowadays  networked  information  access  to  het-

teroperability  of  these  controlled  vocabularies  [1]. 
The  Linked  Data  publishing  paradigm  [2]  jointly 
with  Simple  Knowledge  Organization  System 
(SKOS) [13] provides a promising framework to face 
with the aforementioned problems: it allows to represent and publish distinct thesauri and their interlinks 
as a whole enabling a joint exploitation of them. 

This  paper  presents  the  latest  release  of  EARTh, 
the Environmental  Application Reference Thesaurus 
(ver.  Linked  Data  1.4)  that  takes  advantage  of  this 
framework providing a SKOS dataset available in the 
Linked Open Data (LOD) Cloud.  

Compared  to  other  environmental  thesauri  available as Linked Data as AGROVOC2, EUNIS3, Geological  Survey  of  Austria  (GBA)  Thesaurus 4 , 
EARTh5  provides  a  more  general  purpose  and  thematically  neutral  terminological  support.  Compared 
to  the  GEneral  Multilingual  Environmental  Thesaurus (GEMET)6
, namely the de facto general purpose 
thesaurus  standard,  EARTh  provides  a  minor  multilingual  support,  but  it  extends  GEMET  with  more 
than 9000 concepts and revises the GEMET concept 
hierarchy.  Being  EARTh  one  of  the  largest  general 
purpose and structured environmental terminological 
resources available in the LOD cloud, it aims at providing a bridge for the integration of other terminological  resources  dealing  with  environmental  topics. 
It  already  includes  more  than  12000  links  towards 
thesauri  such  as  GEMET,  AGROVOC,  EUROVOC 
and  UMTHES  enabling  in  the  traditional  thesaurusbased indexing of digital resources, as well as the use 
of digital resources across multi-thesauri applications 
[12].  Besides,  further  interlinkings  will  be  provided 
as  part  of  the  activity  committed  in  the  European 
funded  project  eENVplus  (CIP-ICT-PSP  grant  no. 
325232). 

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  fol-
lows. Section 2 describes EARTh in terms of its con-
tent, the methodology followed and the extension of 
GEMET. Section 3 describes how EARTh has been 
published in the LOD cloud. Section 4 describes the 
dataset applications. Future steps and conclusions are 
drawn in Section 5. 

2 http://aims.fao.org/website/AGROVOC-Thesaurus/sub  
3 http://eunis.eea.europa.eu/  
4 http://thedatahub.org/dataset/geological-survey-of-austria-
thesaurus  
5 http://thedatahub.org/dataset/environmental-applications-
reference-thesaurus 
6 http://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet 

2. EARTh thesaurus 

EARTh is a project run since 2001 by CNR-IIA-
EKOLab aiming at creating a new thesaurus for the 
environment.  It  extends  the  GEMET  content  and 
revises its categorical and thematic structure.  

Originally  GEMET,  developed  by  CNR-IIA-
EKOLab  and  by  German  Federal  Environmental 
Agency  within  an  international  consortium,  was  intended to be used as an indexing, retrieval and control tool for the European Topic Centre on Catalogue 
of Data Sources (ETC/CDS) and the European Environment  Agency  (EEA).  The  basic  idea  for  the  development of GEMET was to use the best of the currently  available  excellent  multilingual  thesauri,  in 
order  to  save  time,  energy  and  funds.  GEMET  was 
conceived as a general thesaurus, aimed to define a 
common  general  language,  a  core  of  general  terminology  for  the  environment.  Specific  thesauri  and 
descriptor  systems  (e.g.,  on  Nature  Conservation, 
Wastes,  Energy)  have  been  excluded  from  the  first 
step of development of the thesaurus and have been 
taken into account only for their structure and upper 
level terminology. 

Since  2001,  CNR-IIA-EKOLab  performed  an 
overall checking of GEMET in order to improve both 
its content and its structure. In particular the following activities have been undertaken: 
  quality assessment of GEMET structure and content towards ISO standards on  mono- and  multilingual thesauri; 

  assessment of English concept representation vs. 

source language(s);  

  deletion of incorrect terms and removal of about 
1000  terms  potentially  useful  for  specific  lists, 
such as name of plants, animals, minerals, etc.; 

  updating  the  content  with  new  terms  (e.g.,  land 
management  strategies,  pigmy  forest,  cryodiver-
sity)  and  extension  of 
the  system  of  non-
descriptors; 

  management  of  the  correspondence  of  the  terms 
in  British  and  American  English  (e.g.  sulphur 
hexafluoride/sulfur hexafluoride); 

  revision  of  the  thematic  structure  and  development of a new categorical/hierarchical setup (e.g., 
Entities,  Attributes,  Dynamic  Aspects,  Dimen-
sions) to emphasize the different functions of hierarchy in comparison to themes; 

  extension  of  the  horizontal  and  the  vertical  rela-

tions system;  

  representation of the accessory elements: singular 
and plural forms (e.g., biological index/biological 

acid/desoxyribonucleic acid), etc. 

in 

them 

EARTh is based on a multidimensional classificatory 
and semantic model [10]. The vertical structure of the 
thesaurus  is  built  through  a  deductive  (top-down)
inductive (bottom-up) approach. It is basically mono-
hierarchical.  It  is  developed  according  to  a  tree  semantic model and is based on a system of categories. 
The  first  level  of  categories  corresponds  to  entities, 
attributes,  dynamic  aspects,  and  dimensions.  The 
vertical structure analyses the primary meaning of the 
terms  and  places 
the  classificatoryhierarchical tree aiming to orientate the users towards 
the  most essential characteristics of terms' seman-
tics.  

Besides  from  GEMET,  EARTh  terminological 
content  is  derived  from  various  mono  and  multilingual  sources  of  controlled  environmental  terminologies such as UN Environment and Development 
[6],  Italian  Thesaurus  of  Earth  Sciences  [3],  Inland 
Water terminology (derived from EDEN-IW project), 
Emergency  Management  Terms  Thesaurus 7
  and 
other  terminologies  collected  from  reference  documents in specific fields or coming from the daily research activity. EARTh currently contains more than 
15.000  terms  in  English  and  Italian.  Its  content  includes  terms  related  to  earth  structure  (lithosphere, 
hydrosphere and atmosphere) and to natural sciences 
(biosphere),  terms  dealing  with  the  human  society, 
activities  and  products  (anthroposphere,  built  envi-
ronment).  In  addition  the  terminology  covers  physi-
cal,  chemical,  natural  and  social  processes,  proper-
ties,  effects,  events,  health  and  safety,  productive 
sectors,  data,  parameters,  methods  and  techniques. 
The content is constantly updated following the evolution of environmental terminology. 

3. Publishing EARTh as Linked Data 

From the technological point of view, the latest release of EARTh has been published combining Virtuoso  Open-Source  Edition  6.1.6 8  and  Pubby 9
.  In 
order  to  publish  EARTh  as  Linked  Data  we  have 
adopted the following Linked Data patterns [5]: 
  Natural Key for identifier: the internal identifiers 
for EARTh concepts are assumed as Natural Keys 
in order to keep coherence  with EARThs previous (not linked data) releases and usages;  

8 http://sourceforge.net/projects/virtuoso/files/virtuoso/6.1.6/ 
9 http://wifo5-03.informatik.uni-mannheim.de/pubby/  

7 http://library.ema.gov.au/emathesaurus/  

  Label  Everything:  every  concept  has  its  English 
human-readable name expressed as rdfs:label. So 
human-readable  names  can  be  exploited  debugging queries and exploring EARTh;  

  Preferred  Label:  every  concept  has  its  preferred 
label  expressed  as  skos:prefLabel.  Both  English 
and Italian lexical representations are provided; 

  Materialize  Inferences:  SKOS  entailments  have 
been  materialized  to  support  clients  with  limited 
processing  power.  In  particular,  considering  the 
SKOS  entailments,  entailments 
in 
[13] as  S7,  S8,  S11,  S17,  S21,  S22,  S23,  S25, 
S26, S39, S40, S41, S42, S43 have been material-
ized. Besides, rdfs:labels are obtained as materialized inferences of English skos:prefLabel;  

indicated 

  Equivalence 

than 

Links:  more 

skos:exactMatch are provided to indicate equivalent URIs between EARTh and GEMET. That has 
been possible because EARTh is a significant extension of GEMET and explicit references to the 
GEMET  ID  have  been  maintained  for  the  concepts  shared  with  GEMET.  Further  equivalences 
have  been  created  by  working  out  the  transitive 
closure  on  GEMETs  skos:exactMatch.  So  that, 
we have been able to import the GEMETs outgoing  links  to  AGROVOC,  EUROVOC,  DBpedia 
and  UMTHES  in  EARTh.  Unfortunately,  links 
obtained  by  this  procedure  only  pertain  to  the 
subset  of  concepts  that  EARTh  shares  with  GE-
MET.  In  order  to  complement  that  set  and  find 
out  a  more  complete  connection  among  EARTh 
and GEMETs linked datasets, a two-steps process has been put in place: firstly, SILK10
 has been 
applied to discover new links, then the SILK results have been validated by the expert members 
of CNR-IIA-EKOLab in order to verify the accuracy of the links and to identify the most suitable 
types 
(i.e., 
skos:exactMatch  or  skos:closeMatch).  The  joint 
exploitation of skos:exactMatch transitive closure 
and  the  manually  validated  SILK  link  discovery 
have  almost  triplicated  the  number  of  outgoing 
links  available  with  respect  to  the  previous 
EARTh  releases.  In  particular,  about  7171  links 
have  been  discovered  relying  on  the  transitive 
closure,  465  have  been  generated  deploying 
SILK.  The  result  is  quite  reliable:  only  3  links 
have  been  rejected  during  the  manual  validation 
and 
to 
skos:closeMatch. That reliability is a consequence 

interlinking 

switched 

property 

been 

have 

only 

of 

http://wifo5-03.informatik.uni-mannheim.de/bizer/silk/  

place when using SILK: we have been assessing 
as  linkable  those  concepts  whose  skos:prefLabel 
and  skos:altLabel  had  a  levenshtein  similarity 
greater  than  0.95,  preferring  a  minor  number  of 
links  with  a  greater  confidence  that  many  links 
but minor confidence. This new release paves the 
way for a combined exploitation of EARTh with 
GEMET, AGROVOC, EUROVOC, DBpedia and 
UMTHES  (about  the  33%  of  EARTh  concepts 
have  a  link  to  other  thesauri)  enabling  EARTh 
adopters  in  taking  advantage  of  their  respective 
strengths and complementarities. 

3.1.  EARTh in the LOD cloud 

Since the late 2011, EARTh is included in the LOD 
Cloud.  EARTh  content  is  accessible  through  (i) 
HTTP  dereferenceable  URIs 11 ;  (ii)  RDF/XML 
dump 12 ;  (iii)  SPARQL  end  point 13 .  Moreover 
EARTh  is  part  of  a  framework  that  includes  other 
SKOS  linked  datasets  [4],  thus  accessing  EARTh 
concepts via SPARQL end point requires to make a 
good  use  of  EARThs  GRAPH  pattern14
,  as  shown 
below:  

Query 1: SPARQL making use of GRAPH pattern 
PREFIX skos: <http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#> 
SELECT DISTINCT * WHERE {  

<http://linkeddata.ge.imati.cnr.it:2020/resource/EARTh/> {  
      ?s skos:prefLabel ?o } 

It is worth noting that EARTh concepts can work as a 
bridge  between  different  thesauri.  For  example, 
Query  2  retrieves  some  EARTh  concepts  pertaining 
to  meteorological  station.  As  depicted  in  Fig.  1, 
EARTh  meteorological  station  concept  and  its  related  concepts  connect  DBPEDIA  and  AGROVOC 
to GEMET and UMTHES. 

Query 2: Meteorological stations linked entities     

PREFIX EARTh: 
<http://linkeddata.ge.imati.cnr.it:2020/resource/EARTh/> 
PREFIX DBPEDIA: <http://dbpedia.org/resource/Category> 
PREFIX GEMET: <http://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet/concept/> 
PREFIX AGROVOC: <http://aims.fao.org/aos/agrovoc/> 
PREFIX UMTHES: <http://data.uba.de/umt/> 
SELECT DISTINCT  * WHERE {  
   EARTh:46920 ?property ?hasValue 
   OPTIONAL {  
     {?hasValue skos:exactMatch ?RConceptMatches } UNION    

11 http://linkeddata.ge.imati.cnr.it:2020/directory/EARTh  
12 http://purl.oclc.org/net/DumpEarthRDF 
13 http://linkeddata.ge.imati.cnr.it:8890/sparql 
14 http://linkeddata.ge.imati.cnr.it:2020/resource/EARTh/  

     {?hasValue skos:closeMatch ?RConceptMatches }}} 

Fig. 1.  Meteorological stations linked entities. 

).  

Query 3: Third-party thesaurus concepts related via EARTh  
SELECT ?RConceptMatches1 ?RConceptMatches WHERE {  
GRAPH <http://linkeddata.ge.imati.cnr.it:2020/resource/EARTh/> 
  {?x ?property ?y} 
  OPTIONAL {?x skos:mappingRelation ?RConceptMatches }  
  OPTIONAL {?y skos:mappingRelation ?RConceptMatches1}  
  FILTER (?RConceptMatches!=?RConceptMatches1 
  FILTER(SUBSTR(STR(?RConceptMatches1), 1,20)   
!=SUBSTR(STR(?RConceptMatches), 1,20))} 
Query 3 shows all the couples of concepts from distinct  thesauri  that  can  be  put  in  relation  by  using 
EARTh  as  bridge.  EARTh  bridges  around  9110 
couples  considering  skos:exactMatch  and  34000 
couples  considering  both  skos:exactMatch  and 
skos:closeMatch.  Compared  with  GEMET  bridging 
potential (respectively 3006 and 28758), this gives an 
insight into EARThs higher potential when integrating other terminological resources.  

Table 1 provides statistics pertaining to the number 
of  SKOS  concepts  and  the  availability  of  properties 
for those concepts. The first column of the table provides information about the number of skos:Concept 
and those having at least one occurrence of the indicated  SKOS  relations.  For  example,  the  first  row 
indicates  that  14351  skos:Concept  are  available,  the 
second  row  indicates  that  14350  concepts  have  a 
skos:inScheme  property.  The  second  column  shows 
their SKOS lexical representations. For example, the 
first  row  shows 
them  have  a 
skos:prefLabel in English and 14002 in Italian. Table 
2  shows  statistics  about  EARTh  outgoing  interlinks 
respectively  towards  GEMET,  AGROVOC,  UM-
THES, etc. 

that  14350  of 

Further details pertaining to linkset and accessibilin  VOID  description 15  and 
.  EARTh  is  available  under  by-nc-nd  creative 

ity  are  available 
Hub16

16 http://thedatahub.org/dataset/environmental-applications-

http://purl.org/NET/EARThVOID   
reference-thesaurus  

,  which  grants  the  right  to  copy, 
distribute  and  transmit  it  for  non-commercial  pur-
poses,  but  implies  explicit  attribution  of  work  and 
forbids derived works. 

source to compile ISO 19115 metadata: for example, 
it is employed in Geonetwork SDI on Mercury emissions and Geonetwork SDI KnowSeas.  

Table 3 

Table 1 

 EARTh applications at national and international level 

Statistics about EARTh SKOS concepts and their properties availability (materialized properties are not listed being easily obtain-

Property 
skos:concept 

able from the below).  

Property 
skos:prefLabel 

skos:inScheme 

14350     rdfs:label 

skos:broader  or 
skos:narrower 
skos:related 

skos:definition 

4084    skos:altLabel 

Table 2 

14350 (en) 
     13813 (it) 
14350 (en) 
13813 (it)  
6362 (en) 
     5383 (it) 
1004 (en) 
       743 (it)  

 Statistics about EARTh outgoing interlinks 

Interlinks 

skos:exactMatch 
to GEMET 
skos:exactMatch 
skos:closeMatch 
to AGROVOC 
skos:closeMatch 
to UMTHES 

Interlinks 

skos:exactMatch  
to EUROVOC  
skos:exactMatch 
skos:closeMatch   
to DBpedia 

4. EARTh application/relevance 

EARTh  is  exploited  in  different  projects  to  support 
both  indexing  and  retrieval  of  environmental  re-
sources. Table 3 summarises EARTh applications at 
national and international level distinguishing among 
the  different  strands  in  which  EARTh  is  adopted: 
LOD, RDF or other depending if the applications use 
EARTh exploiting its published linked data version, 
its SKOS/RDF dump, or an old fashion access to its 
relational database version.  

At national level, EARTh is deployed by the Italian Environmental  Agency (ISPRA) in its portal for 
Indexing  and  Networking  of  Documents  on  Environmental Knowledge Sharing (INDEKS)18

At international  level, EARTh is object of a continuous collaborative exchange with FAO Term Por-
. EARTh SKOS/RDF dump is often employed in 
tal
combination  with  Geonetwork  as  a  terminological 

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/ 
18http://www.indeks.isprambiente.it/INDEKS/public/welcom
19 http://www.fao.org/termportal/partnerships1/en/  
e.do 

Applications 

ISPRA INDEKS 
FAO Term Portal (FAOTERM)  
SDI  Geonetwork  on  Mercury 
emissions 
SDI Geonetwork KnowSeas 
eENVplus (EU Project) 
Nature-SDI (EU Project) 

 t  GS-Soil (EU Project) 

LOD  RDF 
Dump 

Other 

EnvEurope (EU Project) 
ExpeER (EU Project) 

EARTh availability as linked dataset has raised its 
relevance  at  international  level,  especially  in  EU 
funded projects where different controlled vocabularies  for  specific  environmental  data  themes  are  employed  to  support  data  sharing  within  Spatial  Data 
Infrastructures,  in  particular  their  interoperability  is 
desirable 
the  semantic  harmoniza-
tion/integration  of  heterogeneous  data.  Specifically 
the EU projects are: 
  NatureSDIplus20 and eENVplus21

: EARTh is employed  as  backbone  thesaurus  for  a  thesaurus 
framework for Nature Conservation [4].  

to  support 

  GS-SOIL

:  the  thesaurus  for  Soil  SoilThes  has 
been  created  with  a  domain  specific  thesaurus 
with  direct  outgoing  skos:exactMatch  links  to 
EARTh.  
  EnvEurope

  and  ExpeER:  the  common  controlled  vocabulary  EnvThes  for  long  term  ecological research and monitoring data themes provides explicit outgoing links to EARTh. 

The  new  release  of  EARTh  has  empowered  its 
bridging  nature  with  respect  to  other  well-known 
thesauri,  and  then  we  expect  that  EARTh  will  be 
even more largely adopted, not only to support finding  and  understanding  environmental  data/metadata, 
but  to  enable  semantic  interoperability  of  data  and 
metadata  within  the  data  infrastructure  and  its  ser-
vices. 

In a scenario of a thesaurus-enhanced search for re-

21 http://www.eenvplus.eu/  

20 http://www.nature-sdi.eu/  
22 http://gssoil-portal.eu/ingrid-portal/ 
23 http://www.enveurope.eu/  

cases  developed  in  other  domains  (e.g.,  Social  Sci-
ences, Economics, Medicine) [7, 8, 11, 12, 14, 15]. In 
particular, it can be deployed for: 
  Query  expansion  and  reformulation  to  supplement additional terms to the original query in order  to  improve  the  retrieval  performance  [7,  8]. 
Reasoning  over  thesaurus  semantic  relationships 
supports the seeker in finding alternative concepts 
and  expanding  or  reformulating  his  queries  by 
automatically suggested term refinements. In par-
ticular, 
links  between  concepts  of  different 
thesauri can be used automatically to expand the 
search for terms inside the other non-EARTh thesaurus taking advantages of their complementarities  in  term  of  domain  specificity  and  multilin-
gualism. 

  Index  interoperability  and  Facet  Browsing.  The 
thesaurus  interlinking  eases  the  heterogeneity 
coming from the usage of different thesauri in order  to  index  environmental  resources.  It  makes 
accessible  and  connectable  the  content  of  traditional  databases  for  the  applications  of  the  Semantic  Web,  i.e.  as  Linked  Open  Data  [11,  15]. 
Crosswalks between vocabularies can play a relevant role in interoperability, because they serve as 
a  bridging  hub  for  the  interlinking  of  different 
published and indexed data sets [12]. 

5. Conclusion and future work 

The  paper  illustrates  the  main  characteristics  of  the 
linked  dataset  EARTh,  an  environmental  thesaurus 
that  promises  to  become  pivotal  for  environmental 
data  sharing  serving  as  bridging  hub  for  different 
environmental thesauri. EARTh content continuously 
evolves  as  a  result  of  CNR-IIA-EKOLabs  research 
activity, whist EARTh Linked Data releases are provided once a year by CNR-IMATI.  

On-going  and  future  activity  includes  improvement  in  terms  of  EARTh  content  as  well  as  its 
Linked Data publication. Concerning the content, an 
overall revision of the thesaurus structure and content 
is  currently  undergoing  as  consequence  the  recent 
publication of ISO 25964-1:2011 [9]. The linked data 
version of EARTh will be maintained and updated in 
the context of the EU project eENVplus, which aims 
at  establishing  semantic  interoperability  between 
different  existing  thesauri  for  the  environment.  In 
particular,  the  activities  planned  within  eENVplus 
project are: (i) RT properties, which have been indis-

tinctly mapped into skos:related in order to avoid the 
adoption  of  user-defined  RDF  vocabularies,  will  be 
differentiated  as  in  the  original  version  of  EARTh; 
(ii)  EARTh  connection  with  other  environmentrelated thesauri  will be strengthened providing links 
to  other  thesauri  (e.g.,  NALT  Agricultural  Thesau-
rus). 

Acknowledgements 

This  activity  has  been  carried  out  within  the  EU 
funded  project  NatureSDIplus 
(ECP-2007-GEO-
317007)  and  eENVplus  (CIP-ICT-PSP  grant  No. 
325232). Part of Albertonis contribution to this work 
has been carried out during the tenure of an ERCIM 
"Alain  Bensoussan"  Fellowship  Programme  supported  by  the  Marie  Curie  Co-funding  of  Regional, 
National  and  International  Programmes  (COFUND) 
of the European Commission. 
