Semantic Web 1 (2011) 15
IOS Press

Inductive Reasoning and Machine Learning
for the Semantic Web

Guest Editorial

Editor(s): Claudia dAmato, Nicola Fanizzi, Marko Grobelnik, Agnieszka Lawrinowicz, Vojtech Svatek

Claudia dAmato aNicola Fanizzi a Marko Grobelnik b, Agnieszka Lawrinowicz c and Vojtech Svatek d
a Department of Computer Sciece - University of Bari, Italy E-mail: {claudia.damato | nicola.fanizzi}@uniba.it
b Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia E-mail: marko.grobelnik@ijs.si
c Poznan University of Technology, Poland E-mail: agnieszka.lawrynowicz@cs.put.poznan.pl
d University of Economics, Prague, Czech Republic E-mail: svatek@vse.cz

1. Introduction

The goal of the Semantic Web research is to extend
the current World WideWeb into one where information is given semantically precise meaning. The Semantic Web is supposed to provide a medium to share
such information and is often perceived to be a global,
distributed database of meaningfully represented data.
From the speed of the development of initiatives like
Linked Open Data or community efforts to integrate
various ontological resources like bio-ontologies, we
may expect to have, in the near future, access to immense data resources that would by orders of magnitude escape the possibility of direct human analy-
sis. Hence, the problem of mining from the Semantic
Web currently becomes as important as it used to be
that of data mining from local databases. Exploiting
this global resource of data requires new kinds of approaches to data mining and data analysis that would
be able to deal at the same time with its scale and
with the complexity, expressiveness, and heterogeneity of the representation languages, leverage on availability of ontologies and explicit semantics of the re-
sources, and account for novel assumptions (e.g., the
"open world") that underlie reasoning services within
the Semantic Web. The open, distributed and inherently incomplete nature of the Semantic Web environment poses problems for deductive approaches, traditionally employed to reason with logic-based ontological data. Hence, one may witness a recent trend in
the Semantic Web community to propose complemen-

tary forms of reasoning, preferably more efficient and
noise-tolerant.

This Special Issue of SWJ builds upon three consecutive editions of the International Workshop on Inductive Reasoning and Machine Learning for the Semantic Web (IRMLeS), held in 2009-2011 and devoted to the the topic area outlined above. Out of a
pool of 22 papers accepted, five have been selected by
votes of the IRMLeS workshop chairs and their authors invited to submit an extended version to the Special Issue. Eventually, three extended papers were submitted and passed through the review process. Huang
et al. addressed learning from general graph data expressing facts about entities, such that missing relationships could be predicted. Novel use of (urn-model-
based) statistical sampling was elaborated for this pur-
pose. Experiments have been carried out both in lay
domains (FOAF and DBpedia data) and in a specialized (biomedical) domain. Vidal et al. focused on prediction of a special kind of relationship - that between
a document and ontology/vocabulary terms that characterize its content. Technically, the relationship is first
approximated using ranking functions. The task can
however be viewed as a pre-processing task for actual discovery of novel, scientifically valid relationships among entities, which is analogous to the previous case. The life science domain was once more
addressed. Bouza & Bernstein addressed the recommender systems domain, and for this purpose introduced classification-based similarity metrics for comparing user preferences and discussed the concept

1570-0844/11/$27.50 c 2011  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

of partial preference similarity based on a machine
learning model. Their method enables incorporation
of background knowledge in the form of ontologies
into recommendation systems in cases when a machine
learning algorithm exploiting ontologies is used. Regarding the type of (semantic) data sources, the approaches by Huang et al. and Vidal et al. both operate on data published in the form of semantic graphs
represented in RDF. Huang et al. argue that Statistical
Relational Learning (SRL) is particularly well suited
to operate on interlinked, sparse and incomplete data
(such as LOD) in contrast to classical machine learning approaches that operate on attribute-value representations and to Inductive Logic Programming (ILP)
approaches that tackle machine learning in close-to-
deterministic domains. They also show how ontological background knowledge can be integrated into their
approach. Vidal et al. stressed that not only knowledge
represented within the ontologies but also the knowl-

edge encoded in annotations may together provide the
basis for new discoveries. Bouza & Bernstein differ
from the previous two in that they do not directly address Semantic Web data; however, they model user
preference similarity taking advantage of a preference
ontology. Their approach thus mainly features the opposite direction of interaction between data mining and
semantics: using semantic models in order to guide the
analysis of data collected from the real world.

Generally, the Special Issue appears representative
of the recent advances in this interdisciplinary field,
and will hopefully become one of the seeds of future
research. We would like to express our thanks to all
people who contributed to its completion, from the authors through reviewers to the SWJ editorial staff.

Claudia dAmato, Agnieszka Lawrynowicz, Nicola
Fanizzi, Marko Grobelnik, Vojtech Svatek, guest edi-
