Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Special issue on Linked Data for Health Care
and the Life Sciences

Editorial

Mikel Egana Aranguren a,, Jesualdo Tomas Fernandez-Breis b, Michel Dumontier c
a Centre for Plant Biotechnology and Genomics (CBGP), Technical University of Madrid (UPM), Spain
b School of Computer Science, University of Murcia (UM), Spain
c Department of Biology, Carleton University, Canada

Health Care and Life Sciences (HCLS) have long
been a test-bed for the standards proposed by the W3C
to build the Semantic Web1: since HCLS is descriptive by nature and its descriptions have traditionally
been produced according to ad-hoc schemas in isolated resources, HCLS offers an ideal use case for technologies like RDF2, SPARQL3 and OWL4 [1,4]. This
marriage of the HCLS domain with semantic technologies has resulted in a collection of resources that
can be regarded as an HCLS-focused working implementation of the idea of the Semantic Web: the socalled Life Sciences Semantic Web (LSSW).

As part of the process of implementing the LSSW,
the HCLS community has adopted the Linked Data
practices to publish information in a machine-friendly
and linkable fashion [3], as a down-to-earth version
of a prospective fully-fledged Semantic Web. This has
resulted in members of the HCLS community, like the
W3C HCLS Interest Group5, considerably contributing to the Linked Open Data (LOD) endeavour, with
datasets like Bio2RDF [2] and Linked Open Drug Data
(LODD) [5].

As the LOD network grows, producers and consumers alike are facing new challenges regarding interoperable vocabularies, filtering, graphical interfaces,
best practices for dataset production, dataset quality
evaluation, role of automated reasoning, etc. The aim

*Corresponding author. E-mail: mikel.egana.aranguren@upm.es
1http://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/
2http://www.w3.org/standards/techs/rdf
3http://www.w3.org/standards/techs/sparql
4http://www.w3.org/standards/techs/owl
5http://www.w3.org/blog/hcls/

of this special issue is to showcase some of the latest developments in the application of Linked Data in
HCLS and help pave the way to solve such challenges.
The issue comprises the following manuscripts: in
Applying Linked Data Approaches to Pharmacology:
Architectural Decisions and Implementation Alasdair J. G. Gray et al. describe the technical decisions made when building the Open Pharmacological
Space (OPS), a drug discovery platform part of the
Open PHACTS project6; in Using the relation ontology Metarel for modelling Linked Data as multidigraphs Ward Blonde et al. describe Metarel, an ontology that describes class-level relations that can be
used for SPARQL queries; in A collaborative methodology for developing a semantic model for interlinking
Cancer Chemoprevention linked-data sources Dimitris Zeginis et al. describe how they used a new collaborative methodology to build a semantic model related
to cancer chemoprevention.

The manuscripts went through a rigorous review
process in which half of the submissions were ac-
cepted. We would like to thank the referees for their
time and effort: Robert Stevens, Iker Huerga, Erick
Antezana, Mari Carmen Suarez Figueroa, Mark D.
Wilkinson, Andrea Splendiani, Helena Deus, Richard
Boyce, Simon Jupp, Carlos Buil Aranda, Alejandro
Rodriguez Gonzalez, Matt-Mouley Bouamrane, Boris
Villazon Terrazas, Rafael Valencia-Garcia.

We hope that this special issue will inspire HCLS
members to publish and consume HCLS related Linked
Data in innovative ways, and in doing so help to build,

6http://www.openphacts.org/

1570-0844/0-1900/$27.50 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

/ Linked Data for Health Care and the Life Sciences

in the long term, a more efficient LSSW that can yield
new discoveries more rapidly. This should ultimately
serve as an example of the utility of semantic technologies for the mainstream Web.

Acknowledgements

Mikel Egana Aranguren is funded by the Marie
Curie-COFUND Programme (FP7) of the EU. Jesualdo Tomas Fernandez-Breis is funded by the Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad of Spain through
grant TIN2010-21388-C02-02 and co-funded by the
EU through FEDER.
