Semantic Web 0 (2014) 10
IOS Press

Five Stars of Linked Data Vocabulary Use

Editorial

Krzysztof Janowicz a, Pascal Hitzler b, Benjamin Adams c,
Dave Kolas d, and Charles Vardeman II e
a University of California, Santa Barbara, USA, e-mail: jano@geog.ucsb.edu
b Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA, e-mail: pascal.hitzler@wright.edu
c The University of Auckland, New Zealand, e-mail: b.adams@auckland.ac.nz
d Raytheon BBN Technologies, MD, USA, e-mail: dkolas@bbn.com
e University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA, e-mail: cvardema@nd.edu

Abstract. In 2010 Tim Berners-Lee introduced a 5 star rating to his Linked Data design issues page to encourage
data publishers along the road to good Linked Data. What makes the star rating so effective is its simplicity, clarity,
and a pinch of psychology  is your data 5 star? While there is an abundance of 5 star Linked Data available
today, finding, querying, and integrating/interlinking these data is, to say the least, difficult. While the literature
has largely focused on describing datasets, e.g., by adding provenance information, or interlinking them, e.g., by
co-reference resolution tools, we would like to take Berners-Lees original proposal to the next level by introducing
a 5 star rating for Linked Data vocabulary use.

A Brief Motivation

Originally, the Linked Data design issues page
introduced four rules on how to publish and interlink data in a human and machine readable
way by using Semantic Web technologies [3]. While
these rules are broad guiding principles, the provided explanations are fairly technical, e.g., discussing HTTP 303. Similarly, other authors have
provided detailed best practice guidelines for publishing Linked Data [10,13].

Later,

in 2010, Berners-Lee added a section
about a 5 star rating for Linked (Open) Data [3].
This section has a different goal than the rest of
the document and is largely non-technical. The
goal is not to teach engineers how to create good
Linked Data, instead it targets decision makers
and stakeholders. It ties to encourage 1 (govern-
ment) data owners to publish their data according to Linked Data principles by asking: Is your

1We will use italics type for direct quotes from [3].

Linked Open Data 5 Star?. The first star is assigned for the big first step of making the data
available on the Web (in whatever format). All following stars are intended to make the data easier to discover, use, and understand. The second
star is assigned for making the data available in a
machine readable, structured way (this can even
be an Excel spreadsheet). The third star is for using non-proprietary formats (e.g., the Open Document Format; ODS instead of XLS). The fourth
star is for using open W3C standards such as RDF
to identify resources. Finally, the fifth star is for
linking your own data to other datasets.

Again, the motivation here is to have a simple
stack of consecutive steps that reward improved
access to data by additional stars.

The Five Stars of Linked Data Vocabulary Use

So how powerful, eas[y] for people to use is 5 star
Linked (Open) Data? Increasingly, we have come

1570-0844/14/$27.50 c 2014  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

Fig. 1. Spatial DBpedia relations between the city of Seattle
and other typed entities.

to believe that 5 star Linked Data is just the necessary precondition to what we really need. Just
converting a CSV file to a set of RDF triples and
linking them to another set of triples does not necessarily make the data more (re)usable to humans
or machines. Various reasons/challenges and potential solutions have been discussed in the litera-
ture; e.g., see [2,8,12,14,17]. Recently, for instance,
a major effort has been undertaken to standardize
provenance information about Linked Data [15].
Here, however, we focus on a less active but not
less important aspect: vocabularies. We use the
term vocabulary here in a very broad and inclusive sense and do not further distinguish between schemata, ontologies, lightweight vocabular-
ies, and so forth. Consequently, examples of vocabularies include FOAF,2 DOLCE [7], schema.org,
or the SSN-XG [6].

To give a concrete example, the statements

ex:HoratioNelson ex:diedIn ex:BattleOfTrafalgar.
ex:BattleOfTrafalgar rdf:type ex:NavalBattle.

are using a vocabulary if ex refers to a resource
that states that

ex:NavalBattle rdfs:subClassOf ex:Battle.
ex:diedIn rdfs:subPropertyOf ex:participatedIn.

Similarly, stating that Horatio Nelson is of type
foaf:Person is making use of the FOAF vocabulary.
Interestingly, the original 5 star rating does not
make any assumptions about the use of vocabu-
laries. In practice, however, querying Linked Data
that do not refer to a vocabulary is difficult and

understanding whether the results reflect the intended query is almost impossible. While there
is a danger of over-engineering, a good vocabulary should restrict potential interpretations of
the used classes and roles towards their intended
meaning. Fig. 1, illustrates the fact that even in
the presence of a lightweight ontology, querying
even major Linked Data hubs, such as DBpedia [16], is challenging. How would you phrase a
SPARQL query for companies located in Seattle?3
Instead of proposing new rules for engineering
good vocabularies, we introduce 5 stars for Linked
(Open) Data vocabulary use to encourage data
owners, engineers, and practitioners to publish and
use vocabularies on the Web. Similar to BernersLees stars, which do not refer to the quality of
the data as such (e.g., accuracy), our star rating is
not concerned with the quality of the vocabularies
(e.g., their consistency).


Linked Data without any vocab-
ulary. Zero stars are assigned to 5 star Linked
Data that do not refer to any Web-accessible
description of the used vocabulary.4 For in-
stance, LA temp 37. may refer to a very cold
night in the city of Los Angeles (in F) or a hot
summer day (in C). LA is also the US postal
abbreviation for Louisiana; so the statement
could also refer to an average low temperature
in the winter. Note that describing the dataset
as being about temperatures of places does
not really help, i.e., using VoID [1] is an important first start but does not replace a good
vocabulary.

There is dereferencable humanreadable information about the used vocabu-
lary. This information can be a detailed Web
page documenting the vocabulary, a PDF file,
a simple listing with selected examples, or
even merely contact information. The intention here is similar to the second and third
star in the original rating. We would also categorize controlled vocabularies here, as well
as thesauri, as long as they are expressed in
(controlled) natural language, graphics, ta-
bles, and so forth.

3Clearly, querying for all triples with roles that include
Seattle and instances of Company is not a good solution.
4Though, visiting http://lov.okfn.org/dataset/lov/

2http://www.foaf-project.org/

may give you half a star

The information is available as
machine-readable explicit axiomatization of
the vocabulary. Note that this is not restricted to a particular representation lan-
guage. Ideally RDFS [5], OWL [11], RIF [4],
or related W3C standards are used which are
part of the Semantic Web stack. This is comparable to Berners-Lees 4 star data rating.
It is interesting to note that this is the level
where SW reasoning comes into play, e.g., by
exploiting the transitivity of certain roles, or
inferring the type of an entity based on the
defined domains and ranges.

The vocabulary is linked to other
vocabularies. We believe that explicit align-
ments, e.g., via subClassOf or equivalentClass
axioms, are often better than direct reuse of
external vocabularies but both are accept-
able. When working with data providers and
software engineers, we often observe that they
prefer to have control over their local vocabulary instead of importing a wide variety of (of-
ten under-specified, not regularly maintained)
external vocabularies.5 It is important to note
that we refer to vocabulary-level
links between classes and properties, not to links between individuals (e.g., via owl:sameAs).

Metadata about the vocabulary
is available (in a dereferencable and machinereadable form). This can be in form of the Ontology Metadata Vocabulary (OMV) [9], Vocabulary of a Friend (VOAF)6, or other ap-
proaches. This can include information about
the license model, contact person, last modification date, the used ontology language, the
knowledge management methodology used to
arrive at the vocabulary, and so forth.

The vocabulary is linked to by
other vocabularies. Note that this is the reverse of the 3-star rating, i.e., the links point
in the opposite direction. This is the only star
on which the creator of the vocabulary has
limited influence as it reflects the external usage and perceived usefulness. However, since 4
star Linked Data vocabularies are more pow-

5The same observation was recently highlighted by Oscar

Corcho bit.ly/1hKVj2F.

6See http://purl.org/vocommons/voaf

erful, easy to use than vocabularies with fewer
stars, they will more likely earn the fifth star
in the future. As explained before, these links
have to be on the vocabulary-level.

Is your Linked Data vocabulary usage 5 star?

Whats Next?

As a start, you could submit your next 5 star
dataset and vocabulary to the Semantic Web journals linked dataset descriptions or ontology description calls.7
