Undefined 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Special Issue on Real-time and Ubiquitous
Social Semantics

Editorial

Alexandre Passant a,, Fabien Gandon b and Harith Alani b
a DERI, NUI Galway, Ireland
E-mail: Alexandre.Passant@deri.org
b INRIA Sophia Antipolis, France
E-mail: Fabien.Gandon@inria.fr
c KMi, The Open University, UK
E-mail: h.alani@open.ac.uk

the means to support the architecture of such real-time
social and ubiquitous platforms.

In this special issue, we present two papers that
tackle the issues of real-time and ubiquitous Social Se-
mantics. The first paper is by Matthew Rowe (Open
University, UK) and Milan Stankovic (Hypios, France)
where they used machine learning and semantics to
automatically map Twitter feeds about a particular
conference to the actual events taking place during
that conference. The second paper is authored by Stefan Zander (University of Vienna, Austria) and Bernhard Schandl (Gnowsis.com, Austria) who developed
a framework for mobile devices to efficiently retain
some data from the Semantic Web to operate services offline. The framework they produced selectively
replicates data from external sources using semantic
descriptions of users contextual information needs.

The field of real-time ubiquitous social semantics is
still in its infancy, and we hope that this special issue will draw more attention to it and help focussing
research and development on the various topics highlighted in this issue.

The Web has shifted from its initial document and
librarian paradigm to an ecology of socially-generated
data and services. Websites such as Twitter, Face-
book, and FourSquare, emphasise the huge popularity of sharing information in real-time. In addition, the
wealth and breadth of applications that exploit open
social networking APIs to provide new services and
functionalities are growing rapidly, enabling new ways
to interact and browse this user-generated content.

At

the same time,

the deployment of networkenabled mobile devices, RFID and sensors, is realising
the ubiquitous nature of social networks. More objects
from our everyday life are getting connected to the Internet to become part of its applications, including the
Web and social networking services. We are only starting to contemplate the potential of a wide Internet of
things, but it is certain that in that new augmentation
of our reality, the Semantic Web will be one of the
cornerstones of interoperability.

Advances in the Semantic Web and Linked Data
realms offer new capabilities for such paradigms, ranging from data integration to knowledge representation for such social data, objects, and service descrip-
tions. However, many challenges remain to be addressed such as scalability, reasoning in dynamic con-
texts, quality and provenance, privacy and security,
multi-modal accesses, context capture and awareness,
etc. Nevertheless, Semantic Web frameworks provide

*Corresponding author. E-mail: Alexandre.Passant@deri.org

