
Supporting Multilingual Bibliographic 
Resource Discovery with Functional 
Requirements for Bibliographic Records 

Editor(s):  Dimitrios  A.  Koutsomitropoulos,  University  of  Patras,  Greece;  Eero  Hyvonen,  Aalto  University, 
Finland; and Theodore S. Papatheodorou, University of Patras, Greece 
Solicited  review(s):  Kate Byrne, Edinburgh University, UK; Ray R. Larson, University of California, Berkeley, 
U.S.A.; two anonymous reviewers 

Hugo Manguinhasa,b, Nuno Freirea,b,c, Jorge Machadoa,d and Jose Borbinha a,b 
a Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Instituto Superior Tecnico, Av. Rovisco Pais, 1049-001 
Lisboa, Portugal 
E-mail: {hugo.manguinhas, nuno.freire, jlb}@ist.utl.pt 
b Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores, Rua Alves Redol, no 9, 1000-029 Lisboa, Portugal 
c The European Library, The National Library of the Netherlands, Willem-Alexanderhof 5 
2509 LK The Hague, Netherlands 
d Instituto Politecnico de Portalegre, Praca do Municipio, 7301-901, Portalegre, Portugal 
E-mail: jmachado@estgp.pt 

Abstract. This paper describes an experiment exploring the hypothesis that innovative application of the Functional Requirements  for  Bibliographic  Records  (FRBR)  principles  can  complement  traditional  bibliographic  resource  discovery  systems  in 
order  to improve  the  user  experience.  A  specialized  service  was  implemented  that,  when  given  a  plain  list of  results  from  a 
regular online catalogue, was able to process, enrich and present that list in a more relevant way for the user. This service preprocesses the records of a traditional online catalogue in order to build a semantic structure following the FRBR model. The 
service also explores web search features that have been revolutionizing the way users conceptualize resource discovery, such 
as relevance ranking and metasearching. This work was developed in the context of the TELPlus project. We processed nearly 
one  hundred  thousand  bibliographic  and  authority  records,  in  multiple  languages,  and  originating  from  twelve  European  national libraries. This paper describes the architecture of the  service and the main challenges  faced, especially  concerning the 
extraction and linking of the relevant FRBR entities from the bibliographic metadata produced by the libraries. The service was 
evaluated by end users, who filled out a questionnaire after using a traditional online catalogue and the new service, both with 
the same bibliographic collection. The analysis of the results supports the hypothesis that FRBR can be  implemented for resource discovery in a non-intrusive way, reusing the data of any existing traditional bibliographic system. 

Keywords: Resource Discovery, Multilingual Metadata, FRBR, MARC, UNIMARC 

1.  Introduction 

Users often find traditional libraries Online Public 
Access  Catalogues  (OPAC)  display  of  results  to  be 
poor  and  inefficient,  mainly  due  to  the  catalogues 
usually  linear  structure  and  consequent  multiple  hits 
displayed  on  search  results  for  equivalent  resources 
[1].  This  is  especially  true  for  long  lists  of  multiple 

occurrences of a same work, when different manifestations are represented in different formats. 

Web  search  engines  like  Google,  and  popular  e-
commerce  interfaces  such  as  Amazon,  provide  simple  but  powerful  displays,  which  have  been  revolutionizing  the  way  users  conceptualize  resource  dis-
covery. These systems provide three key features that 
distinguish  them  from  most  of  the  traditional  OPAC 

interfaces: searching by propagation of a single query 
(single  search);  reordering  of  search  output  according to relevance criteria (relevance-ranked results); 
and  feedback  to  the  user  of  similar  terms  (did  you 
mean)  that  may  provide  more  relevant  results  than 
the current query (relevance feedback) [2]. Recently, 
Internet  search  engines  also  have  been  exploring  the 
clustering  of  results  according  to  their  source  (pre-
senting the list of results through facets).  

The  FRBR  (Functional  Requirements  for  Bibliographic  Records)  [3]  proposes  a  new  conceptual 
model  to  serve  as  the  basis  for  relating  specific  attributes  and  relationships  to  the  various  tasks  that 
users  perform  when  using  bibliographic  records. 
Rather than just changing cataloguing rules, the conceptual model introduced by FRBR has the potential 
to  improve  not  only  the  intrinsic  quality  of  the  bibliographic  information,  but  also  the  user  experience 
when  searching  and  browsing  bibliographic  cata-
logues. 

The  publication  of  the  FRBR  report  started  active 
discussions  and  created  interest  for  many  theoretical 
and  research  activities.  An  important  constraint  for 
the  application  of  this  model  has  been  the  difficulty 
in  adapting  the  traditional  cataloguing  rules,  and  accordingly the existing cataloguing systems, to it. The 
complexity  of  the  paradigm  change  is  a  real  challenge for cataloguing professionals, thus still making 
it a high risk for software providers to consider it for 
their  products.  However,  an  important  line  of  work 
has  been  the  development  of  techniques  for  transforming  legacy  data  into  an  FRBR  implementation 
model,  a  process  often  referred  to  as  FRBRization 
[4].  The  millions  of  bibliographic  records  in  use  all 
over  the  world    created  at  a  high  cost    make  the 
problem  of  FRBRization  a  very  relevant  one.  Even 
though  some  library  management  systems  are  being 
designed from the start according to FRBR, they address the conversion of legacy data as a manual cataloguing process. 

This  paper  presents  an  experiment  aiming  to  take 
advantage  of  FRBR  to  integrate  new  features  provided  by  web  search  technology  into  traditional  library resource discovery systems. The main assumption  behind  this  work  is  that  it  is  possible  to  make 
good use of the semantically richer organization proposed  by  FRBR  to:  (i)  cluster  the  results  of  a  traditional  search  into  groups  of  manifestations  of  the 
same  work,  and  (ii)  to  expand  each  group  with  all 
the  related  FRBR  manifestations  and  expressions  by 
taking  advantage  of  the  linked  information  between 
the  entities  of  the  model.  The  second  assumption  is 
that one might be able to offer a better ranking of the 

results  by  taking  advantage  of  the  information  contained within each FRBR work. 

This work was developed in the context of the international project TELPlus1, with the goal of exploring  potential  new  techniques  to  improve  the  user 
searching  experience  with  the  service  TEL  (The 
European  Library)2.  In  order  to  make  it  easier  to  assess  the  results,  we  decided  to  focus  these  experiments  on  a  specific  collection  of  works  from  Nobel 
Prize  winners  in  Literature.  These  were  found  suitable due to the expected numerous editions and translations  of  these  works  into  a  large  number  of  lan-
guages.  Therefore,  we  collected  as  many  as  possible 
related MARC3 4 bibliographic and authority records, 
from libraries contributing to TEL. 

The  remainder  of  this  paper  presents  an  historical 
overview and the most relevant developments regarding FRBR, followed by an introduction to its conceptual  and  concrete  models  (ontologies).  It  continues 
with  a  description  of  our  proposal,  followed  by  a 
more detailed analysis of the process for the creation 
of  FRBR  data  from  the  bibliographic  records  received  from  the  libraries.  Next,  we  provide  an 
evaluation  of  the  survey  results.  Finally,  we  discuss 
conclusions. 

2. Historical Background and Related Work 

This section presents the historical background and 
related  work  on  improving  the  user  experience  with 
OPACs,  particularly  focusing  on  FRBR  related  ex-
periments. 

By  the  late  1980s,  library  professionals  realized 
that  great  changes  were  happening  in  the  library  en-
vironment. The way information was being organized 
  especially  considering  the  use  of  automated  sys-
tems,  new  formats,  electronic  publishing,  networked 
access  and  new  web  resources    needed  careful  reevaluation The Stockholm Seminar on Bibliographic 
Records,  held  in  1990  and  sponsored  by  the  IFLA 
Universal  Bibliographic  Control  and  International 
MARC (UBCIM) Programme and the IFLA Division 
of Bibliographic Control, was the moment chosen for 
a debate of these issues. 

The participants in the Seminar were aware of the 
economic  realities  faced  by  libraries  and  the  need  to 
reduce  the  cost  of  cataloguing,  but  they  also  ac-

1 http://www.theeuropeanlibrary.org/telplus/ 
2 http://www.theeuropeanlibrary.org 
3 http://www.loc.gov/marc/ 
4 http://www.ifla.org/unimarc 

knowledged the importance of  meeting  the changing 
user  needs.  One  of  the  nine  resolutions  approved  in 
that Seminar led to a study of the functional requirements for bibliographic records (FRBR). The studys 
purpose was to delineate in clearly defined terms the 
functions performed by the bibliographic record with 
respect to various media, applications and user needs. 
The  study  group  was  also  charged  with  recommending a basic level of functionality and basic data 
requirements  for  records  created  by  national  bibliographic  agencies.  The  result  of  that  process  was  the 
creation of the IFLA Study Group on the Functional 
Requirements  for Bibliographic Records,  which  produced  the  original  report  Functional  Requirements 
for  Bibliographic  Requirements  (FRBR)  [3].  This 
report  describes  a  model  that  identifies  and  clearly 
defines  the  entities  of  interest  to  users  of  bibliographic records, the attributes of each entity, and the 
types  of  relationships  that  operate  between  entities. 
The  intent  was  to  produce  a  new  conceptual  model 
that  would serve as the basis  for relating  specific attributes  and  relationships  (reflected  in  the  record  as 
discrete data elements) to the various tasks that users 
perform when consulting bibliographic records. 

The publication of the FRBR report started an active  discussion  and  increased  interest  in  many  theoretical  and  research  activities.  The  on-going  discussions  and  outcomes  can  be  followed  in  online  resources such as the FRBR Bibliography5, maintained 
by the FRBR Review Group, and the FRBR Blog6. 

One  of  these  activities  has  been  the  development 
of  a  new  generation  of  Integrated  Library  Systems 
(ILS) designed from the start according to  the FRBR 
principles,  including  the  OPAC  interface.  Examples 
of  these  systems  are  AustLit7 (the  Australian  Literature  Gateway),  [5]  a  cooperative  service  involving 
eight universities and the National Library of Austra-
lia, and the Virtua ILS8 from VTLS. 

Another  important  line  of  work  has  been  the  development  of  processes  to  convert  existing  catalogues  to  new  implementations  following  the  FRBR 
model,  which  is  often  referred  to  as  FRBRization. 
Some  relevant  studies  show  us  that  much  of  the  information  needed  to  FRBRize  catalogues  is  already 
present  in  MARC  data  [6],[7].  The  challenge  of 
FRBRizing  legacy  data  and  the  reality  of  current 
catalogue  systems  were  also  addressed  in  [8],  which 

stresses  that,  to  make  the  transition  to  FRBR  possi-
ble,  it  is  necessary  to  extract  the  FRBR  structure 
from  existing  data.  Following  this  line  of  work,  in 
[4]  an  attempt  was  made  to  analyse  MARC  records 
and determine  what attributes could best be used for 
FRBRization. 

Several  efforts  have  been  undertaken  to  develop 
algorithms for the FRBRization of bibliographic data, 
the  OCLC  FRBR  Work-Set  Algorithm 9  being  the 
most  important  reference.  This  algorithm,  used  in 
both  OCLC  FictionFinder 10 and  OCLC  Curiouser 11 
prototypes, is focused on the clustering of data looking  at  the  FRBR  group  1  (Work,  Expression,  Manifestation and Item) but  with  special  attention paid to 
Works. Subsequent efforts tried to take FRBRization 
further  by  allowing  clustering  of  all  entities  defined 
in the FRBR.  An example  is  the BibSys FRBR conversion tool [9], which actually builds a FRBR-based 
structure from bibliographic records and tries to cluster  all  entities  of  that  structure  by  comparing  their 
keys  (combination  of  properties  found  in  a  FRBR 
entity).  In  spite  of  all  these  efforts,  authors  further 
explain that algorithms for eliciting FRBR structure 
will  only  work  as  well  as  the  bibliographic  data  on 
which they are based [10]. 

On the other hand, web search engines like Google, 
and  popular  e-commerce  websites  such  as  Amazon, 
provide  simple,  powerful  displays  that  have  been 
revolutionizing the way users search for information. 
One  of  the  key  features  of  these  systems  is  the 
ability  to  converge  searching  into  a  single  search 
form, which is expanded to all information resources. 
This  simplifies  the  access  to  resources  by  guiding 
users  to  where  they  are  most  likely  to  find  results 
quickly  and  therefore  should  satisfy  the  needs  of 
the majority of users [2]. 

Another  important  technique  is  the  ranking  of 
search  output  according  to  its  relevance  (relevance 
ranking).  This  feature  transformed  the  way  people 
search  for  information.  Before  these,  most  search 
technology focused not on bringing relevant material 
to  the  top  of  the  list,  but  on  eliminating  irrelevant 
material  from  the  result  set.  This  approach  did  not 
always  make  it  easy  to  find  material  if  the  result  set 
was large. It made it harder to search very large data-

http://www.oclc.org/research/projects/frbr/algorithm.
htm 

http://www.ifla.org/VII/s13/wgfrbr/bibliography.htm 

6 http://www.frbr.org/ 
7 http://www.austlit.edu.au 
8 http://www.vtls.com/products/virtua 

10 http://fictionfinder.oclc.org/ 

http://www.oclc.org/research/projects/curiouser/defa
ult.htm 

bases,  within  which  many  items  might  be  somewhat 
relevant. [11]. 

Another technique is to offer feedback to the user 
about  similar  keywords  that  may  provide  more  relevant  results  than  the  current  query  (relevance  feed-
back). These alternative searches are typically found 
next  to  the  search  query  and  accompanied  by  more 
like  this  or  did  you  mean  expressions.  Works  like 
[12]  show  that  this  kind  of  feature  can  also  be  provided to users of library catalogues. Their work consisted  of  applying  relevance  feedback  strategies  to 
analyse the content of the records retrieved and identify  terms  that  are  likely  to  retrieve  other  relevant 
documents.  The  perceived  assumption  behind  that 
seems to be the one that if a term occurs in most of 
the  records  found  relevant  by  the  user  and  occurs  in 
few  non-relevant  records,  then  it  is  likely  to  retrieve 
other relevant records. 

In  fact,  techniques  like  relevance-ranking  and 
relevance  feedback  were  already  present  in  some 
experimental  catalogues  [13],  called  next-generation 
OPACs,  which  date  back  to  the  late  eighties  and 
early  nineties  (long  before  the  web-search  engines). 
These next-generation OPACs took advantage of the 
research  on  information  retrieval  (IR)  to  add  new 
features  to  catalogues.  However,  according  to  the 
work  by  [11],  the  standard  relevance-ranking  algorithms  present  in  next-generation  OPACs  have  been 
mostly  developed  for  full-text  documents  and  additionally  attempted  to  improve  results  by  taking  advantage  of  the  highly  structured  nature  of  bibliographic records (therefore, they rely on a set of principles for ranking data contained in specific fields in 
the bibliographic record). 

Finally, another technique worth mentioning is the 
clustering  of  results  according  to  some  relevant  cri-
teria, as demonstrated by the  OPAC of the Research 
Libraries  Information  Network  (RLIN),  which  used 
similar  techniques  to  cluster  bibliographic  records 
with the same title [14]. 

Although  successful,  these  techniques  only  became popular after the emergence of  web-search engines like Google. Sources like [2] point out that the 
popularity  of  the  web  appears  to  have  influenced 
users mental models and thus their expectations and 
behaviour when using a web-based OPAC interface. 
The  same  source  also  attribute  the  increase  to  the 
prevalence  of  web  search  engines  and  suggest  that 
metasearching,  relevance-ranked  results,  and  relevance  feedback  (more  like  this)  are  now  expected 
in user searching and should be integrated into online 
catalogues as search options. 

3. An Ontology for FRBR 

The  conceptual  model  as  defined  in  the  initial 
FRBR report is composed of ten entities divided into 
three  groups.  The  first  group  (Endeavours)  is  comprised  of  the  products  of  intellectual  or  artistic  endeavours  named  or  described  in  bibliographic  re-
cords:  Work,  Expression,  Manifestation  and  Item. 
The  second  group  (Responsible  Entities)  is  comprised  of  the  entities  responsible  for  the  intellectual 
or  artistic  content,  the  physical  production  and  dissemination  or  the  custodianship  of  such  products: 
Person and Corporate  Body. The third group (Sub-
jects) is comprised of an additional set of entities that 
serve  as  the  subjects  of  intellectual  or  artistic  en-
deavour:  Concept,  Object,  Event  and  Place.  The 
model also defines the attributes and relationships to 
be applied to each entity. 

Figure 1 shows an overview of the base entities of 
the  FRBR  model  and  the  most  important  relationships  defined  to  relate  them.  Note  that  only  a  brief 
overview of the model is given in this section. For a 
more  detailed  description  of  the  model,  see  Sections 
4 and 5 of the FRBR report [3]. Note also that all the 
definitions  presented  in  this  section  were  obtained 
from the same report. 

A  Work  is  an  abstract  entity;  there  is  no  single 
material  object  one  can  point  to  as  the  work.  The 
work is recognized through individual realizations or 
expressions  of  the  work,  but  the  work  itself  exists 
only  in  the  commonality  of  content  between  and 
among  the  various  expressions  of  the  work.  A  work 
is  defined  by  a  title,  a  form  (e.g.  novel,  play,  poem, 
map  or  painting),  a  date  and  context  of  its  creation, 
and  an  intended  termination  and  audience  for  the 
work. Other attributes can be defined that are specific 
to  musical  (e.g.  medium,  key)  and  cartographic 
works (e.g. coordinates, equinox). 

An  Expression  is  the  intellectual  or  artistic  realization of a  work in the  form  of  alphanumeric,  musical  or  choreographic  notation;  sound,  image,  object, 
movement  etc.;  or  any  combination  of  such  forms. 
The boundaries of the entity  Expression are defined, 
however,  so  as  to  exclude  aspects  of  physical  form, 
such as typeface and page layout, that are not integral 
to the intellectual or artistic realization of the work as 
such. Following this, an Expression is defined by one 
or more titles, a form (the means by which the Work 
is realized), a date of creation, a language, its extensibility and revisability, its extent (a quantification of 
its content, e.g., number of words in a text, images in 
a  comic  strip),  a  summarization  of  its  content,  its 

context (e.g. art period) and a description of the critical  response  and  use  restrictions.  As  with  Works, 
Expressions  can  be  further  defined  by  attributes  that 
are  specific  to  a  particular  kind  of  Expression  (e.g. 
serial, music notation, sound, cartographic, projected 
and remote sensing images). 

A Manifestation is the physical embodiment of an 
expression of a work. It encompasses a wide range of 
materials,  including  manuscripts,  books,  periodicals, 
maps,  posters,  sound  recordings,  films,  video  re-
cordings,  CD-ROMs  and  multimedia  kits.  As  an  en-
tity,  manifestation  represents  all  the  physical  objects 
that share the same characteristics, in respect to both 
intellectual  content  and  physical  form.  As  such,  it  is 
defined  by  an  identifier,  one  or  more  titles,  a  statement of responsibility, an edition/issue designation, a 
publisher/distributor  (modelled  as  an  object  property 
in  this  work),  a  place  of  publication  and/or  distribu-
tion,  fabricator/manufacturer  (also  an  object  prop-
erty),  a  series  statement,  a  designation  of  the  form, 
extent,  medium  and  dimensions  of  the  physical  car-
rier,  the  source  of  acquisition  and  capturing  mode, 
terms of availability and access restrictions. A manifestation  can  be  further  detailed  through  specific  attributes  for  printed,  hand-printed,  serial,  sound  re-
cording,  image,  microform,  visual  projection  and 
electronic resource materials. 

An  Item  is  a  concrete  entity  corresponding  to  a 
single  exemplar  of  a  manifestation.  It  is,  in  many 
instances,  a  single  physical  object  (e.g.,  a  copy  of  a 
one-volume  monograph  or  a  single  audio  cassette). 
There  are  instances,  however,  where  the  item  comprises  more  than  one  physical  object  (e.g.,  a  monograph  issued  as  two  separately  bound  volumes  or  a 
recording  issued  on  three  separate  compact  discs). 
An  Item  is  defined  by  an  identifier;  a  fingerprint; 
descriptions  of  its  provenance,  exhibition  and  treatment  history;  condition;  marks/inscriptions  and  access restrictions. 

A Person is an individual involved in the creation 
or  realization  of  a  Work  (e.g.,  as  author,  composer, 
artist,  translator,  etc.),  or  who  is  the  subject  of  a 
Work  (e.g.,  as  the  subject  of  a  biographical  or  autobiographical  work,  of  a  history,  etc.).  A  Person  is 
defined  by  a  name,  a  date  of  birth  and  death  (if  ap-
plied), a title and an attribute for additional informa-
tion. 

A Corporate Body is an organization or group of 
individuals  and/or  organizations  acting  as  a  unit  that 
are  identified  by  a  particular  name,  including  occasional groups and groups that are constituted as meet-
ings,  conferences,  congresses,  etc.  It  is  defined  by  a 
name,  a  number/identifier,  a  place  and  date  associated  with  the  Corporate  Body  and  an  attribute  for 
additional information. 

has as subject 

has as subject 

GROUP 1 ENTITIES 

Work 

is created by 

is realized  

through 

Expression 

is realized by 

is embodied in 

Manifestation 

is produced by 

GROUP 2  
ENTITIES 

Person 

Corporate Body 

is exemplified by 

Item 

is owned by 

GROUP 3 ENTITIES 

has as subject 

Concept 

Object 

Event 

Place 

Fig. 1. The conceptual model defined in the FRBR report. 

A  Concept  is  an  abstract  notion  or  idea.  An  Object  is  a  material  thing,  which  may  encompass  both 
animate  and  inanimate  objects  occurring  in  nature; 
fixed,  movable,  and  moving  objects  that  are  the 
product of human creation; or objects that no  longer 
exist.  An  Event  is  an  action  or  occurrence  in  time 
(e.g. historical events, epochs and periods of time). A 
Place  is  a  location  (terrestrial  or  extra-terrestrial) 
which  might  be  expressed  as  a  historical  or  contemporary  name,  a  geographic  feature,  a  geo-political 
jurisdiction, etc. All subjects (Concept, Object, Event 
or Place) are only defined by a term. However, some 
additional  properties  were  defined  to  accommodate 
information specific to each kind of subject. 

As mentioned in the FRBR report, The model operates  at  the  conceptual  level;  it  does  not  carry  the 
analysis to the level that would be required for a fully 
developed  model.  For  the  purpose  of  this  work, 
therefore,  a  concrete  specification  of  the  model  (an 
ontology  as  defined  by  Gruber  in  [15])  was  needed, 
both  to  serve  as  the  basis  for  the  integration  of  several  data  sources  and  to  expose  the  information  for 
the semantically enriched search. 

After a careful analysis of the two best-known ontologies that follow the FRBR conceptual model, the 
FRBR in RDF12 ontology was chosen. It defines only 
the  basic  entities,  keeping  the  data  structure  very 
simple,  and  offers  a  digital  format  for  encoding  the 
data.  An  alternative  could  have  been  the  more  complex  FRBRoo  [16]  ontology  (about  23  classes), 
which,  although  it  is  a  well-formed  and  mature  on-
tology, has no available formal representation.  

In this study, the FRBR in RDF ontology  was extended to include as class properties all of the attributes  and  relationships  defined  in  the  FRBR  conceptual  model.  Appendix  A  gives  an  overview  of  the 
class properties that  were  actually  used in this  work. 
It  also  provides  some  statistical  information  on  the 
number of classes and properties found for each class. 
Although all properties defined in the FRBR were 
specified in the ontology, only a subset of  them  was 
actually  used  since  they  were  not  available  in  the 
source  data  or  no  structured  or  semi-structured  field 
was  used  to  encode  them.  As  examples  are  some  of 
the  properties  related  to  musical,  cartographic  and 
serial  works,  and  some  very  specific  properties  like: 
intended  termination  and  context  of  a  work;  revis-
ability,  critical  response  and  user  restrictions  for  ex-
pressions; and typeface, type size, foliation, collation, 
polarity,  reduction  ratio,  generation  for  manifesta-
tions. 

12 http://vocab.org/frbr/core.html 

For  the  remainder  of  this  paper,  the  term  FRBR 
ontology  will  be  used  to  refer  to  the  extended  version of the FRBR in RDF ontology designed for this 
work. 

4. Improving Resource Discovery 

A  number  of  studies  suggest  that  with  the  prevalence of web search engines, users now expect to see 
features  found  in  these  systems  when  searching  an 
OPAC  [2].  On  the  other  hand,  the  work  developed 
under  the  FRBR  has  provided  a  semantically  richer 
and more mature model for the representation of bibliographic  information.  The  idea  behind  this  work  is 
to combine these  two perspectives,  taking advantage 
of their key features. 

To  accomplish  this,  a  search  interface  was  designed that offers the ability to present the results of a 
search  in  two  alternative  options:  as  a  traditional 
OPAC,  and  using  a  semantically  enriched  search, 
which  takes  advantage  of  the  FRBR.  This  ability  to 
switch between both options enables the user to easily  compare  and  evaluate  the  results.  Searching  in 
both modes can be done using a simple search or, as 
with  a  traditional  OPAC,  using  multiple  metadata 
elements.  The  semantically  enhanced  search  is  done 
the same way as for the traditional OPAC, but before 
presenting  the  results  to  the  user,  they  are  sent  to  a 
new  service,  outside  the  OPAC,  where  they  are 
linked,  clustered,  expanded  and  reordered  according 
to the FRBR.  

This new service, called semantic  cluster, is thus 
responsible for receiving a list of bibliographic references  and  delivering  a  tree-like  structure  containing 
the same references, but now clustered, expanded and 
reordered. 

The clustering of results in the semantic cluster is 
done by taking advantage of the relationships (of the 
types  realization,  embodiment  and  exemplar)  between  the  first  group  of  entities  (work,  expression, 
manifestation and item). It is important to note that in 
most cases the bibliographic records are conceptually 
placed  at  the  manifestation  level  of  the  FRBR  conceptual  model.  The  list  of  bibliographic  references 
can be mapped into the corresponding manifestations, 
which  can  then  be  clustered  according  to  their  indirect  relationship  with  a  work.  This  interface  seems 
closer  to  what  Internet  search  engines  do  when 
grouping  references  from  the  same  site  or  Internet 
domain. 

After  the  results  are  grouped  into  clusters,  each 
cluster is expanded with all the manifestations available  for  the  work.  This  is  particularly  important  for 
reaching  expressions  of  a  work  in  languages  other 
than  the  language  of  the  query.  Each  cluster  is 
ranked  by  combining  the  ranking  given  by  the 
OPAC (which in this experiment uses common ranking algorithms used in IR) with the number of manifestations  within  the  cluster.  The  idea  is  to  take  advantage of the default relevance ranking of the search 
engine  and  expand  it  with  information  about  the 
number of manifestations of a work. It is important to 
note  that  this  approach  assumes  the  OPAC  already 
applies  standard  ranking;  therefore,  the  purpose  of 
this  work  is  to  complement  and  not  replace  these 
algorithms.  The  formula  logarithmically  lowers  the 
weight  of  the  number  of  manifestations;  otherwise 
the  ranking  given  by  the  search  engine  would  have 
very  little  influence  on  the  final  ranking.  The  logarithm of base ten was found adequate after analysing 
the ranking results delivered by the OPAC. Although 
it provides satisfactory results, a better evaluation of 
this  function  would  be  required.  The  complete  formula for the ranking of cluster is shown in Eq. (1). 

(1)  Cluster  ranking  =  Highest  ranking  manifesta-

tion x log10 (Total number of manifestations) 

For the ranking of manifestations within each clus-
ter,  the  formula  uses  first  the  publication  date  of  the 
manifestation (from the lowest date  least recent  to 
the  highest    most  recent)  and,  if  absent,  uses  the 
default  ranking.  This  way  the  sorted  results  give 
more relevance to the first publications of a work. 

The relevance feedback technique is used by both 
OPACs,  which  consists  of  finding  the  most  relevant 
terms  returned  by  the  engine  and  using  them  to  improve the search task. In the case of the FRBR OPAC, 
this  function  was  adapted  to  re-rank  clusters  using 
score  functions  that  take  advantage  of  the  cluster 
index  in  the  semantic  cluster.  The  main  idea  is  to 
consider clusters as documents in score functions.  

The  semantic  cluster  uses  a  common  repository 
fine-tuned  for  this  purpose.  To  improve  its  perform-
ance,  the  schema  of  this  repository  was  designed  to 
hold only the essential information needed to cluster, 
expand  and  rank  the  results.  Also,  the  indexes  were 
designed to allow  for a fast retrieval of the informa-
tion.  On  average,  the  semantic  cluster  takes  about  a 
quarter of a second to do its work, which is essential 
for a good response time of less than one second. 

Prior  to  being  used  for  clustering,  the  repository 
must  be  loaded  with  the  bibliographic  information 

provided  by  the  twelve  participating  libraries.  Since 
the  information  encoded  in  the  original  MARC  records  is  defined  in  a  semantically  poorer  model,  the 
records need to be transformed into the FRBR ontol-
ogy, a process often called as FRBRization (see Section 5). This is a very time-consuming process, due to 
the  amount  of  work  required  to  normalize,  extract 
and aggregate all the FRBR entities. For this reason, 
the  work is done in a prior stage and not at runtime. 
Additionally,  both  new  clustering  algorithms  and 
user feedback can further improve pre-built clusters. 

The  service  interface  of  the  semantic  cluster  was 
designed  for  easy  integration  with  any  common 
OPAC.  This  way  any  OPAC  can  take  advantage  of 
the  new  features  provided  by  the  application  of 
FRBR, assuming that the semantic cluster is updated 
with the same records as the  OPAC. The integration 
between the two services, the OPAC and the  semantic cluster, is  shown in Figure 2. Steps 1 to 4a show 
the  interactions  between  the  components  of  the 
OPAC  during  a  search  request  using  the  traditional 
OPAC  interface,  while  steps  1  to  8b  show  the  interactions  when  the  semantically  enhanced  search  is 
used. 

Figure  3  shows  the  presentation  of  the  search  results  produced  by  a  traditional  OPAC.  It  shows,  for 
the  specific  collection  that  was  used,  the  fourteen 
results of a generic search for the title "The Outsider 
(also  commonly  translated  to  English,  especially  in 
the United States, as The Stranger). Figure 4 shows 
the  same  results,  but  rearranged  according  to  the 
FRBR. The results are grouped into six clusters (cor-
responding  to  six  different  works)  containing  206 
results (each one corresponds to a different  manifestation and links to the original bibliographic record), 
and  not  just  fourteen  results.  This  is  a  result  of  the 
aggregation  of  all  the  manifestations  associated  with 
each work, which in the case of the first search result 
corresponding  to  the  work  (LEtranger)  gathers 
about  151  results.  Another  interesting  feature  is  the 
clustering  of  titles  in  different  languages,  which  can 
be seen in the fourteen titles found for the first work 
(LEtranger). 

Another user interface was also built to search entities  found  in  the  bibliographic  records.  The  idea  is 
the  same  as  for  the  OPAC,  but  instead  of  searching 
for  bibliographic  information,  the  user  may  search 
for  responsible  entities  (person,  corporate  body  or 
family). The added value of this interface is the ability  to  access  all  the  information  related  to  a  given 
authority:  along  with  the  names,  dates,  and  roles  of 
an authority, the user  may also see all the identifiers 

(Authority  Record  Number)  that  were  given  in  each 
library and thus access its source record. 

This interface also uses the semantic cluster to retrieve  the  list  of  responsible  entities  that  match  a 
given query. In this scenario, the traditional OPAC is 
not  used,  since  it  is  designed  for  bibliographic  re-
trieval. The query is handled directly by the semantic 
cluster through a specific service interface. 

The  clustering  and  expansion  of  results  for  authority information is  already fulfilled by the reposi-
tory,  since  the  query  is  run  over  the  cluster  indexes 
and not the flat structure of the OPAC. Again, to improve  performance,  the  cluster  indexes  use  specialized  text  indexes  over  the  name  property  of  authors. 
When  loading  the  repository,  the  information  (de-
fined  in  the  FRBR  ontology)  must  already  be  clus-
tered.  This  is  done  in  the  entity  aggregation  step  of 
the FRBRization process. 

The ranking of each authority cluster is calculated 
as  the  sum  of  the  ranking  for  each  role  relationship 
with the authority. This ranking is itself calculated by 
combining the ranking of the role relationship (a controlled  list  of  roles  and  predefined  rankings)  and  the 
number  of  endeavours  related  to  that  authority 

through  that  specific  role.  The  main  idea  is  to  give 
more  weight  to  an  authority  with  more  endeavours 
associated  with  it,  while  giving  more  relevance  to 
some  roles  (e.g.  author,  creator)  than  others  (e.g. 
translator, owner), which are likely to be less relevant 
to the user. The complete formula for the ranking of 
the cluster is shown in Eq. (2). 

(2)  Authority  cluster  ranking  =    ranking  of  a 
given role x log10 (Total number of endeavour of a 
given role) 

Both  the  authority  and  bibliographic  search  interfaces  have  links  to  each  other.  The  user  may  switch 
between Group 1 entities (work, expression, manifestation and item) and Group 2 entities (person, corporate body and family) using linked-data relationships 
of  the  FRBR  ontology.  Figure  5  shows  the  author 
search results for the query  Camus  which retrieved 
eleven  results  (corresponding  to  eleven  different  au-
thorities) from the repository. One of them is for the 
Nobel Prize-winning author Albert Claude Camus. 

Fig. 2. Overview of the interactions between the components of the OPAC for a search using both traditional (steps 1 to 4a) and semantically 

enhanced (steps 1 to 8b) search interfaces. 

Fig. 3. Search results for The Outsider using the traditional OPAC interface. 

Fig. 4. Search results for The Outsider using the semantically enriched search interface. 

Fig. 5. Search result for Camus using the authority search interface. 

5. Building a semantically richer model 

The  semantic  cluster  is  loaded  with  the  information  resulting  from  the  FRBRization  of  the  bibliographic  records.  The  bibliographic  records  are  obtained from libraries voluntarily participating in TEL, 
as listed in Table 1. Both bibliographic and authority 
records  from  these  libraries,  encoded  in  UNIMARC 
or MARC21 formats, were processed for this purpose. 
A first analysis of the source collections identified 
several  data  quality  and  normalization  issues.  For 
example,  cataloguing  practices  followed  by  the  libraries  were  quite  heterogeneous.  Reasons  for  this 
are  usually  related  to  the  lack  of  proper  support  of 
cataloguing  applications  for  the  format  in  use  (e.g. 
use  of  older  versions),  and  also  the  inability  of  the 
format  in  use  to  keep  pace  with  cataloguing  needs. 
To  deal  with  these  heterogeneous  cataloguing  prac-
tices,  an  initial  step  was  defined  to  normalize  and 
assure  the  quality  of  bibliographic  records  for 
FRBRization.  An  overview  of  the  challenges  faced, 
along  with  an  explanation  of  the  chosen  solution,  is 
presented in [17]. 

The  FRBRization  of  bibliographic  data  was  thus 
performed  in  three  steps  (see  Figure  6):  normalization  of  the  data,  followed  by  entity  extraction  and 
entity aggregation. 

The  entity  extraction  step  is  responsible  for  extracting  the  semantic  entities  defined  in  the  FRBR 
ontology  from the bibliographic records. Several entities are generated from a single bibliographic record, 
since  the  entities  defined  in  the  FRBR  ontology  are 
defined  in  a  more  semantically  rich  model  than  the 
original  MARC  entities.  For  some  of  these  entities 
only  an  abstract/simplified  definition  is  extracted, 
given  that  the  information  provided  in  the  bibliographic record is limited. This is the case for the concepts  of  Work  and  Expression,  since  bibliographic 
records  are  conceptually  categorized  as  Manifestations and thus do not have a concrete correspondence. 
This step was done using a template containing rules 
for  identifying  elements  (e.g.  fields,  subfields  and 
data values) in the source record (encoded in MARC), 
transforming  its  data  and  creating  new  RDF  entities 
defined  in  the  FRBR  ontology.  The  first  version  of 
the template was based on the FRBRizer tool [1],[18], 
which was extended for the purposes of this work. 

Finally,  in  the  aggregation  step  semantic  entities 
are  combined  with  entities  identified  in  other  bibliographic  records  until  a  complete  graph  is  built.  This 
is  required  because  two  bibliographic  records  may 
share the same entity with each other (e.g. both were 
created by the same author, share the same subject or 
were published by the same editor). The entities generated  in  the  extraction  step  must  be  compared  with 
each  other  to  detect  and  merge  duplicate  references, 
until no duplicates exist in the ontology. To increase 
performance,  the  approach  chosen  was  to  develop  a 
clustering algorithm that would group entities sharing 
a  common  set  of  characteristics  and  thus  reduce  the 
total  number  of  comparisons  required  for  duplicate 
detection. This clustering algorithm is applied first to 
Manifestations,  then  to  Persons  by  looking  at  their 
relationship  with  Works  (assuming  that  there  are  no 
two  different  authors  of  two  different  works  sharing 
the same  name and title), then to Expressions  within 
the  same  work,  and  finally,  to  all  Manifestations 
within  the  same  Expression.  Also  the  third  group  of 
entities (Concept, Object, Place and Event) is aggregated using the clustering algorithm. 

Table 1 

Processed collections from the Nobel Prize winners in Literature 

Country Library 

Bibliographic 

Records 

Authority 
Records 

Spain 

France 

Portugal 

Germany 

Belgium 

Latvia 

BnF 

Czech Republic  NKP 

Lithuania 

Russia 

Serbia 

Hungary 

Total 

Fig. 6. Overview of the process used for the FRBRization of the records from the member libraries. 

6. Evaluation of the results 

Thirty-one  volunteers  performed  a  comparative 
evaluation  of  the  two  search  services  (the  traditional 
OPAC  and  the  semantically  enhanced  search  inter-
face). Invitations to evaluate the service were sent to 
the  libraries  that  provided  the  original  data,  and  to 
public mailing lists related to library users or profes-
sionals, along with instructions and an explanation of 
the purpose of the  initiative.  The respondents  identified  themselves  as  either  library  professionals  or 
regular library users. The respondents were not given 
specific  search  tasks.  Instead,  they  were  first  provided  with  a  description  of  the  test  collections;  then 
they  were asked to perform any  desired search tasks 
on  both  of  the  services;  and  finally  they  were  asked 
to  answer  an  online  survey  (this  evaluation  occurred 
over a week in December 2009). 

The complete survey contained a total of ten ques-
tions:  one  question  profiling  the  respondent;  five 
questions  evaluating  the  usefulness  of  FRBR  for  the 
semantic  clustering  of  the  results;  and  four  openended questions requesting feedback for future directions  in  this  work.  The  respondents  were  mostly  library  professionals,  and  their  knowledge  of  OPAC, 
search engines and The European Library, are shown 
in  Table  2. The  results  of  the  five  questions  that  addressed  the  usefulness  of  the  semantic  clustering  are 
summarized  in  Table  3.  The  responses  received  for 

the  open-ended  questions  can  be  found  in  Appendix 
B. The respondents were asked to answer these questions  while  keeping  in  mind  the  comparison  of  their 
experience using the two services. 

The general appreciation expressed by the respondents  was  positive,  and  the  validity  of  the  results  is 
supported  by  their  statistical  analysis  (P  <  0,05  was 
obtained  for  questions  1,  2  and  4;  P  <  0,01  was  obtained  for  questions  3  and  5).  It  is  important  to  note 
that  the  question  with  the  most  positive  feedback 
relates to the clustering of resources in different lan-
guages, stressing an interesting effect of the application of the FRBR model. 

In  general,  the  answers  to  the  open-ended  questions  reinforce  the  positive  feedback  received  from 
the survey, and most of the negative feedback can be 
related  to  problems  with  the  original  bibliographic 
data; minor software errors in the prototype; or functionalities  that  would  be  expected  in  a  final  service 
but  that  were  intentionally  not  implemented,  given 
that it was only a prototype. 

Additional  points  can  be  highlighted  in  the  analysis  of  the  answers.  Many  users  seem  to  have  performed  search  tasks  centred  on  a  particular  author. 
Some  answers  indicate  that  the  semantic  clustering 
was helpful for these  author-centred tasks, and some 
suggest  further  improvements  to  support  them  (for 
example,  to  identify  works  by  and  about  an  author). 
Further  semantic  relations  and  data  were  requested 
for improving the quality of the semantic clusters and 
their  navigation  (mainly  regarding  expressions  in 

 act FRBR processing of Bibliographic DataFRBRizationPre-ProcessingSatisfiesMinimalRequirements?DiscardedEntity ExtractionFRBR OntologySemantic EntitiesMARCXchangeRecordsEntityAggregationXMLPre-Processing ScriptsXMLFRBRization TemplateMARCXchangePre-Processed RecordsFRBR OntologyAggregated  Semantic Entities 

different  languages  and  media  types).  Although  the 
original  bibliographic  data  limits  what  can  be  done, 
these  answers  reinforce  the  usefulness  of  semantically  richer  organization  of  search  results  and  point 
to further areas in which the service might be devel-
oped. 

The analysis of the survey supports the hypothesis 
that  FRBR  clustering  is  feasible  with  existing  data, 
opening  doors  for  its  application  to  any  existing  traditional bibliographic system. 

Table 2 

Results for the respondent profiling question (multiple choice) 

Question: Which of these statements apply to you? 

Im a library professional 

Im  familiar  with  searching  in  libraries  online  catalogues 

Im familiar with searching in The European Library 

Im familiar with searching in Internet search engines 

Response 

count 

Table 3 

Results for question addressing the usefulness of the semantic 

clustering 

Question 

Is  the  clustering  of  results  helpful  for 
finding  the  relevant  resources  for  your 
queries? 

Is  the  clustering  of  results  helpful  for 
discovering  additional 
re-
sources to what you were looking for? 

relevant 

Is  the  clustering  of  results  helpful  for 
discovery  of  resources  in  different 
languages? 

Is  the  clustering  of  results  helpful  for 
finding  the  first  publication  of  a  re-
source? 

Is  the  clustering  of  results  helpful  to 
discover  which  libraries  hold  the  same 
resource? 

Yes, 

always 

Yes, 
some-
times 

No 

7. Conclusion 

The  work  described  tested  the  integration  of  new 
features  provided  by  web  search  engines    single 
search,  relevance  ranking,  and  relevance  feedback  - 
into  a  traditional  OPAC  by  taking  advantage  of  a 
semantically richer organization of the data available 
in  common  bibliographic  records.  Evaluations  performed  by library users and library professionals  using  the  semantically  enriched  interface  were  clearly 
positive,  in  particular  praising  its  ability  to  support 
the  clustering  of  related  resources  in  different  lan-
guages. 

Most  of  the  negative  feedback  was  related  to  minor  software  errors  of  the  prototype,  or  functionalities that would be expected in a final service but that 
were  consciously  not  implemented  in  the  prototype. 
Another  important  reason  for  negative  feedback  is 
related to problems with the original MARC data that 
could  not  be  solved  by  the  approaches  discussed  in 
this paper. We think that these problems are the biggest  challenges  when  migrating  from  a  traditional 
bibliographic catalogue to an FRBR-based catalogue, 
and  will  require  a  significant  effort  from  librarians 
and researchers. 

The  results  of  this  experiment  identified  new  research  opportunities.  The  relevance  ranking  of 
manifestations  within  the  same  cluster  (work)  could 
be  further  explored,  since  the  user  may  not  be  looking for the first publication of a work, but instead, for 
a  particular  expression  in  a  specific  language.  For 
example,  correlations  with  other  properties  of  the 
manifestation,  such  as  the  publication  date  and  lan-
guage,  could  be  also  explored.  Clustering  of  superworks  (a  work  being  a  bibliographic  antecedent  of 
several  other  works),  aggregated  works  (sets)  and 
serial works  were not  given detailed attention in this 
study. The clustering of these types of works is a big 
challenge,  both  algorithmically  and  visually,  but  has 
the  ability  to  greatly  improve  the  usability  of  an 
OPAC. 

This  experiment  supports  the  hypothesis  that  semantically  richer  models  can  be  built  from  existing 
bibliographic  data,  and  can  be  effectively  used  to 
improve  the  user  experience  when  searching  and 
browsing bibliographic catalogues. 

http://www.asis.org/Bulletin/Aug-07/salaba_zhang.html. 

2007. 

Available: 

[8]  Zumer,  M.  (2007).  FRBR:  The  End  of  the  Road  or  a  New 
Beginning.  Assis&t    The  Information  Society  for  the  Information  Age,  Bulletin,  August/September  2007.  Available: 
http://www.asis.org/Bulletin/Aug-07/Zumer.pdf. 

[9]  Aalberg,  T.  (2006).  A  process  and  tool  for  the  conversion  of 
MARC  records  to  a  normalized  FRBR  implementation.  In: 
Sugimoto,  S.,  Hunter,  J.,  Rauber,  A.,  Morishima,  A.  (ed.) 
ICADL 2006. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 4312, 283
292. Springer. 

[10] Pisanski,  J.,  &  Zumer,  M.  (2007).  Functional  Requirements 
For  Bibliographic  Records:  An  Investigation  Of  Two  Proto-
types. Electronic Library  &  Information Systems, 41(4), 400-
417. 

[11] Dellit,  A.,  &  Boston,  T.  (2007).  Relevance  ranking  of  results 
from  MARC-based  catalogues.  National  Library  of  Australia 
Staff 
Available: 
http://www.nla.gov.au/openpublish/index.php/nlasp/article/vie
wArticle/1052. 

Papers. 

[12] Khoo,  C.,  Poo,  D.,  Teck-Kang,  T.,  &  Hong,  G.  (1999).  E-
Referencer:  Transforming  Boolean  OPACs  to  Web  Search 
Engines.  IFLA  Council  and  General  Conference,  65.  Availa-
ble: http://archive.ifla.org/IV/ifla65/papers/010-143e.htm. 

[13] Antelman,  K.,  Lynema,  E.,  &  Pace,  A.K.  (2006).  Toward  a 
21st  Century  Library  Catalog.  Information  Technology  and 
Libraries, American Library Association, 128-139. 

[14] Michalko, James, & Haeger, John. (1994). The research libraries  group:  Making  a  difference.  Library  Hi  Tech,  12(2),  7  - 

[15] Gruber,  T.  R.  (1993).  A  translation  approach  to  portable  on-

tology specifications. Knowledge Acquisition, 5, 199220. 

[16] Bekiari, C., Doerr, M., & LeBoeuf, P. (2009). FRBR: ObjectOriented  Definition  and  Mapping  to  the  FRBR-ER.  Version 
1.0. International Working Group on FRBR and CIDOC CRM 
Harmonisation. 
Available: 
http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr/docs/frbr_oo/frbr_docs/FRBRoo_V1.0
_2009_june_.pdf. 

[17] Manguinhas, H., Freire, N., Borbinha, J. (2010). FRBRization 

of MARC records in multiple catalogs. JCDL 2010, 225-234. 

[18] Aalberg,  T.,  &  Zumer,  M.  (2008).  Looking  for  Entities  in 
Bibliographic  Records.  ICADL  (2008).  Lecture  Notes  in 
Computer Science, 5362, 327-330. Springer, Heidelberg. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by FCT (INESC-ID multiannual funding) through the national PIDDAC Program  funds,  and  by  the  European  Commission 
through  the  TELplus  project  (contract  ECP-2006-
DILI-510003). 
