Editorial

Semantic Web and Reasoning for Cultural 
Heritage and Digital Libraries

Dimitrios A. Koutsomitropoulos a, Eero Hyvonen b and Theodore S. Papatheodorou a

a HPCLab, Computer Engineering and Informatics Dpt., University of Patras, Greece

b Semantic Computing Research Group, Department of Media Technology, Aalto University, Finland

innovative  

Cultural   heritage   and   digital   libraries   are   two 
closely related disciplines that traditionally benefit by 
the   application   of  
information 
technologies. Currently, Semantic Web research has 
also grown satisfyingly mature to enable achieving 
tangible   results   and   added-value   in   both   these 
knowledge-intensive domains, in spite of the critical 
challenges of knowledge acquisition and reasoning 
about complex data. 

The purpose of this special issue is to put together 
a selection of high-quality research and development 
efforts in these areas that can offer an insight about 
the current state-of-the-art to the interested reader. 

Two   papers   in   the   issue   deal   with   the   idea   of 
repurposing   the   FRBR   standard   towards   semantic 
annotation and management of bibliographic records, 
revealing its importance and applicability for library 
curators in the Semantic Web context. Supporting 
Multilingual Bibliographic Resource Discovery with 
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records 
presents   an   FRBR-based   service   that   enhances 
existing   on-line   library   catalogs   in   a   more 
semantically   rich   and   relevant   way   to   the   user. 
Moreover, FRBR-ML: A FRBR-based Framework 
for Semantic Interoperability proposes a framework 
upon   which   legacy   bibliographic   data   can   be 

transformed   into   meaningful   semantic   descriptions 
based on the FRBR model. 

Semantic interoperability is a top-priority issue for 
cultural   heritage   applications,   due   to   the   need   to 
aggregate   legacy   and/or   disperse   data   within 
knowledge-aware   services.   In   Instance-based 
Semantic Interoperability in the Cultural Heritage 
the authors thoroughly review and evaluate ontology 
matching methods in cultural heritage scenarios and 
present  their lessons-learned  from  their  experience 
with the STITCH project. In addition, A Systemic 
Approach for Effective Semantic Access to Cultural 
Content discusses a system for mapping proprietary 
metadata   schemas   to   domain   models   within   the 
framework of Europeana, and discusses reasoningbased   techniques   and   optimizations   for   their 
discovery.

The Semantic Web can enable novel dimensions in 
cultural   information   management   and   utilization. 
This is exemplified in the paper How to Deal with 
Massively Heterogeneous Cultural Heritage Data  
Lessons   Learned   in   CultureSampo.   Here,   the 
authors give insights to transforming and publishing 
existing   cross-domain   cultural   heritage   data   of 
multiple  forms   as  linked  data,   and  to  maintaining 

novel user interfaces for their exploitation.

We are grateful to the various authors that trusted 
their work with this special issue. Thanks are due to 
professors   Pascal   Hitzler   and   Krzysztof   Janowicz, 
Semantic   Web   Journal   Editors-in-Chief,   for   their 
helpful remarks and support in preparing this special 
issue, and to the reviewers that readily shared their 
expertise to help make this issue successful. To what 
extend this may have been achieved, the reader will 
