Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 115

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Categorising social tags to improve folksonomy-based recommendations
Ivan Cantador a,c,, Ioannis Konstas b,c, Joemon M. Jose c

a Departamento de Ingenieria Informatica, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Calle Francisco Tomas y Valiente, 11, 28049 Madrid, Spain
b School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, EH8 9AB Edinburgh, United Kingdom
c Department of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, G12 8QQ Glasgow, United Kingdom

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 27 July 2010
Received in revised form 11 October 2010
Accepted 11 October 2010
Available online 20 October 2010

Keywords:
Social tagging
Recommender systems
Ontologies
Semantic Web
W3C Linking Open Data

In social tagging systems, users have different purposes when they annotate items. Tags not only depict
the content of the annotated items, for example by listing the objects that appear in a photo, or express
contextual information about the items, for example by providing the location or the time in which a
photo was taken, but also describe subjective qualities and opinions about the items, or can be related to
organisational aspects, such as self-references and personal tasks.

Current folksonomy-based search and recommendation models exploit the social tag space as a whole
to retrieve those items relevant to a tag-based query or user profile, and do not take into consideration the
purposes of tags. We hypothesise that a significant percentage of tags are noisy for content retrieval, and
believe that the distinction of the personal intentions underlying the tags may be beneficial to improve
the accuracy of search and recommendation processes.

We present a mechanism to automatically filter and classify raw tags in a set of purpose-oriented cat-
egories. Our approach finds the underlying meanings (concepts) of the tags, mapping them to semantic
entities belonging to external knowledge bases, namely WordNet and Wikipedia, through the exploitation of ontologies created within the W3C Linking Open Data initiative. The obtained concepts are then
transformed into semantic classes that can be uniquely assigned to content- and context-based cate-
gories. The identification of subjective and organisational tags is based on natural language processing
heuristics.

We collected a representative dataset from Flickr social tagging system, and conducted an empirical
study to categorise real tagging data, and evaluate whether the resultant tags categories really benefit a recommendation model using the Random Walk with Restarts method. The results show that
content- and context-based tags are considered superior to subjective and organisational tags, achieving
equivalent performance to using the whole tag space.

 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

1.1. Motivation

During the last few years, we have been witnessing an unexpected success and increasing popularisation of social tagging
systems. In these systems, users create or upload content (items),
annotate it with freely chosen words (tags), and share it with other
users. The whole set of tags constitutes an unstructured knowledge classification scheme that is commonly known as folksonomy
[32]. This implicit classification is then used to search and recommend items. The nature of tagged items is manifold: photos in

Flickr,1 audio tracks in Last.fm,2 video clips in YouTube,3 and Web
documents in Delicious,4 among others. A user can usually create
(upload) items, and annotate them with tags he considers appro-
priate. In some folksonomies, the user can also tag items he did not
create.

The main advantage of folksonomies is that users are not
requested to rely on a priori agreed knowledge structure or shared
vocabulary, and thus are not imposed any constraint in the tagging process and information management. Nevertheless, this issue
implies a number of limitations on the content retrieval mecha-
nisms. Social tags may explicitly describe the content of an item, e.g.
by listing physical objects that are shown in a photo or a video, or

 Corresponding author at: Departamento de Ingenieria Informatica, Universidad
Autonoma de Madrid, Calle Francisco Tomas y Valiente, 11, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
Tel.: +34 91 497 2358; fax: +34 91 497 2235.

E-mail address: ivan.cantador@uam.es (I. Cantador).

1 Flickr  Photo sharing, http://www.flickr.com.
2 Last.fm  Personal online radio, http://www.last.fm.
3 YouTube  Video sharing, http://www.youtube.com.
4 Delicious  Social bookmarking, http://delicious.com.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.10.001

I. Cantador et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 115

Current

by giving keywords that appear in a Web document or a song lyric.
They may also provide contextual information about the annotated
item, e.g. by identifying the place a photo was taken, or the date
a video was recorded. Furthermore, they may express subjective
opinions and qualities (nice picture, rock music, dark movie
scene, incomprehensible text), or self-references and personal
tasks (my wife, to read, work). This suggests that users have different intentions when tagging, and not all the tags available in a
folksonomy are related with the content of the annotated items [3].
folksonomy-based search and recommendation
engines do not take into account the above distinction of tags, and
run their content retrieval algorithms in the entire tag space. The
problem is that although useful subjective and organisational tags
are for the purposes (intentions) of an individual, still they may
fail to be of benefit when recommending items to other users. As a
result, mixing these with the rest content- and context-based tags
may not add or even deteriorate the overall quality of the recom-
mendations. We hypothesise that distinguishing and considering
purpose-oriented categories of tags could be extremely valuable to
improve the accuracy of recommendation approaches. Hence, the
corroboration of this assumption represents the main challenge to
address in the work presented herein.

In order to achieve such tag categorisation, we first have to
understand the meaning of each social tag. For example, to determine that kilt can be categorised as a content-based tag, it has
to be identified that a kilt is a Scottish piece of cloth, i.e. a physical entity. Similarly, to categorise glasgow as a context-based
tag, it has to be identified that Glasgow is a city in Scotland, i.e. a
location.

It is our objective to study the role of various tag categories
for item recommendation. However, categorising a set of general
purpose tags is not trivial. In this context, we have identified the
following research questions:
 RQ1: Is it possible to find out the underlying meanings of social
tags in a general way?

We should (1) identify the meanings of social tags independently of the domains covered by the folksonomies they belong
to; and (2) be aware of contemporary terminology that continuously appears in our daily lives (web 2.0, podcast, diy).
 RQ2: Is it possible to automatically categorise social tags based
on their intention?

The transformation of semantic concepts into purposeoriented categories could be done by exploiting external
knowledge bases such as thesauri, taxonomies and ontologies.
 RQ3: Is a purpose-oriented categorisation of social tags useful
for folksonomy-based recommendation strategies?

To validate the utility of the purpose-oriented categories, these
should be evaluated in a real folksonomy-based recommender
system.

1.2. Contributions

In this work, we address the research questions listed above,

and make the following contributions:
 We have developed a mechanism that automatically processes
and maps social tags to semantic concepts depicted in external
structured knowledge bases.
 Exploiting the semantic relations provided by the above
knowledge structures, we have designed a novel strategy to automatically infer the semantic classes of a given concept that allow
determining the intension of the corresponding social tag.
 We have conducted an empirical study to evaluate the effect
of various tag categories in photo recommendation. The experiments have been performed with a dataset obtained from Flickr, a

multi-domain tagging system where photos are freely annotated
by their owners. The results show there are certain tag categories that are superior to others in terms of recommendation
performance, and even equivalent to that obtained when using
the whole tag space.
 We have collected a dataset from Flickr system, which we have
made available to the research community.

1.3. Structure of the paper

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes
related works that have motivated our research. Section 3 presents
an overview of our approach to automatically categorise social
tags based on their purpose. Section 4 explains in more detail
the approach, describing how the semantic concepts underlying
social tags are identified, and how they are mapped to a set of
predefined purpose-oriented categories. Section 5 describes the
folksonomy-based recommendation model with which we have
evaluated our tag categorisation proposal. Section 6 presents the
conducted experiments, and Section 7 provides a discussion of the
obtained results. Finally, Section 8 contains conclusions and future
research lines.

2. Related work

2.1. Categorisation of social tags

A prior goal in many social tagging systems is to meet the
needs of individual users, e.g. by allowing personal organisation
of items and their subsequent retrieval. Nonetheless, social tags
should help other people to browse and find items. Furthermore,
being a mechanism of community-based item description, they
should also facilitate information sharing and discovery (recom-
mendation). Marlow et al. [22], and Ames and Naaman [3] discuss
an exhaustive list of incentives expressing the range of potential
motivations that influence tagging. Among them, content management and retrieval are shown as two of the most important
incentives to tag resources. Our work is based on this observation,
and aims to identify which social tags are more useful for content
retrieval and recommendation.

To provide such functionalities, it is not obvious how social tags
can be best exploited. Suchanek et al. [35] show that user-generated
tags present significant semantic noise more than terms extracted
from Web page contents or search queries. When tagging, people not only introduce misspellings (barcelona, barclona), and
use different synonyms (car, automobile), acronyms (nyc, new
york city) and morphologic derivations (blog, blogs, blogging)
for a given concept [36], but also include tags that express personal assessments (funny, to print), or even are unintelligible to
another person (#####) [35]. We deal with these issues making use
of a tag processing and filtering approaches presented in a previous
works [36,37], and mapping the resultant tags to semantic concepts
described in external knowledge bases (KB), similarly to [9], where
social tags are linked to ontology classes and instances.

The purposes of tagging and consequently the types of social
tags are manifold. Recent works have analysed this fact, aiming to
identify which are the social tags relevant for knowledge management and information retrieval. Apart from describing the content
of the items, social tags may represent contextual information [3],
subjective opinions and qualities [15,30], or self-presentation and
organisation aspects [41]. We consider these purpose-oriented tag
categories, and propose a more fine-grained categorisation within
them, in order to study which types of tags are useful for content
retrieval tasks.

Motivated by the previous works, Bischoff et al. [7] manually
classify a number of tag collections obtained from different social
tagging systems (Flickr, Delicious, Last.fm) in several tag types, and
study the distributions of tags assigned to each type, analysing
their usage implications on search tasks. The obtained results provide insight into the use of different kinds of tags for improving
search. Here we go a step beyond attempting to categorise the tags
automatically. In this case, the evaluation of the tag categorisation is assessed with a recommendation model [17], which does
not depend on a specific domain. In this paper, we have conducted
experiments with a dataset obtained from Flickr, where photos are
freely tagged by the owners in a multi-domain scenario.

To achieve such tag categorisation, the meanings of social tags
have to be found beforehand. We propose to map them to semantic
concepts described in external KBs, such as thesauri and ontologies.
Halpin et al. [16] show that tagging distributions tend to stabilise
into power law distributions, which is an essential aspect of what
might be user consensus around the categorisation of information
driven by tagging. The authors state that it is quite plausible that
folksonomies and ontologies are fundamentally compatible. We
follow this principle, and attempt to integrate social tags into YAGO
[34], a large ontology that covers WordNet [24] and a significant
part of Wikipedia.5

Constructing and linking folksonomies with structured semantic KBs is indeed a problem that has attracted much attention
recently [28]. Mika [23] is recognised as one of the first authors to
extend the traditional bipartite resource-concept model of ontologies with the social dimension. He presents a graph based approach
to construct a network of related tags, projected from either a
user-tag or resource-tag association graph. Applying clustering
techniques to tags, and using their co-occurrence statistics, he
produces conceptual hierarchies. Specia and Motta [33] present a
combination of pre-processing strategies and statistical techniques
together with knowledge provided by ontologies available on the
Semantic Web to generate clusters of highly related tags that correspond to ontology concepts. As explained in subsequent sections,
we shall also make use of tag processing and filtering techniques,
similar to those presented in [33]. Angeletou [4] proposes a semantic enrichment of folksonomies by exploiting online ontologies,
thesauri and other knowledge sources to make explicit the semantic relations between social tags. Instead of inferring such semantic
relations between tags, we use those explicitly defined in YAGO.
This is enough for our approach since our goal is to categorise the
tags, and we only have to exploit hierarchical relations between
them.

2.2. Folksonomy-based recommender systems

Collaborative tagging systems allow a user to search for the
content that he has tagged using a personal vocabulary. As users
with similar interests tend to have a shared vocabulary, tags created by one user may be useful to others, particularly those with
similar interests. This is in fact the essence of recommender sys-
tems. In these systems, a user does not usually declare explicitly
his information needs (e.g., by means of a keyword-based query).
In contrast, he is presented with items that may be interested for
him according to his profile (content-based approaches), or to the
profiles of similar people (collaborative filtering approaches). The
reader is referenced to [1] for an overview of the state of the art in
recommender systems. In the following, we focus our attention on
recommendation approaches that exploit folksonomy information.

5 Wikipedia encyclopaedia, http://wikipedia.org.

Au Yeung et al. [6] describe a strategy that clusters the items
tagged by the users. In the item-tag space, given a network of
items, a graph-based clustering algorithm to obtain sets of related
items is applied. As the different clusters should contain items
that are related to similar topics, a cluster can be considered as
corresponding to one of the interests of the user. Moreover, the
experiments presented in the paper show that the obtained groups
of tags and items seem to correspond to the different meanings
of ambiguous tags. In this work, we also use a graph-based algorithm on the item-tag space. In our case, using a Random Walk
strategy we aim to identify related tags and items relevant for the
user.

Similarly, Gemmell et al. explore in several works [14,31]
strategies that cluster the entire space of tags to obtain sets of
(semantically) related tags. These clusters may represent coherent
topic areas. By associating a users interest to a particular cluster,
the users interests in the topic are surmised. As discussed in the
last section of the paper, this type of clustering techniques could be
incorporated into our approach in order to enhance the automatic
categorisation of ambiguous social tags, according to the context of
the user profile in which a given tag appears.

Instead of implicit clusters, other personalisation and recommendation approaches aim to exploit explicit, and more structured
representations of folksonomies. Quintarelli et al. [29] propose
a personal multi-facet categorisation of tags, which allows the
exploitation of taxonomic relations to enhance content retrieval.
In a series of previous works [8,9,36], we have investigated recommendation approaches that make use of ontology-based user
profiles. Social tags are automatically transformed into ontology
concepts (classes and instances) using semantic knowledge bases
like WordNet and Wikipedia. Arbitrary ontology relations between
these concepts are exploited to expand the user profiles, and personalise search and recommendation results. In this work, we also
attempt to map social tags to semantic concepts. As explained in
subsequent sections, in this case, we propose to use YAGO ontol-
ogy, aiming to join and contribute to the W3C Linking Open Data
initiative.

Recent works have focused on exploiting folksonomies
as sources of semantic information,
integrating them with
content-based and collaborative filtering (CF) recommendation
approaches.

De Gemmis et al. [11] present a hybrid strategy that learns the
profile of the user from both static content and tags associated with
items rated by him, instead of relying on tags only. The authors propose to include in the user profile not only his personal tags, but
also the tags adopted by other users who rated the same items as
him. Since the main problem lies in the fact that tags are freely
chosen by users, and their actual meaning is usually not very clear,
they suggest to semantically interpreting tags by means of Word-
Net. Our tag categorisation also follows this idea, but extends the
use of WordNet to Wikipedia, allowing the consideration of social
tags related to proper nouns and contemporary terms not available
in a dictionary such as WordNet.

Tso-Sutter et al. [38] describe a generic method that allows tags
to be incorporated into standard heuristic-based CF algorithms,
such as user- and item-based CF, by reducing the three-dimensional
(user, item, tag) correlations to three two-dimensional correla-
tions, and then applying a fusion method to re-associate these
correlations. The integration of folksonomy information into CF
is also studied by Zhen et al. [44]. In this case, the authors propose to use the model-based CF algorithm based on probabilistic
matrix factorization. Differently to these approaches, as explained
in the paper, our tag-based recommendation model follows the
CF paradigm by means of applying Random Walk algorithm on
the global graph formed by users, items, tags and their explicit
relations.

I. Cantador et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 115

Table 1
Comparison of purpose-based categorisation of social tags.

Our categories

Content-based

Context-based

Subjective

Organisational

Adapted from [7].

Xu et al. [41]

Content-based

Attribute

Context-based

Subjective

Organisational

Sen et al. [30]

Golder and Huberman [15]

Factual

Subjective

Personal

What or who is about
What it is
Who owns it
Refining other categories

Qualities/characteristics
Task organisation
Self reference

Bischoff et al. [7]

Topic
Type
Author/owner
Time
Location
Opinions/qualities
Usage context
Self reference

Fig. 1. Purpose-oriented categorisation of social tags.

3. Overview of the approach

Our goal is to automatically categorise social tags based on their

intention, considering the following four main categories:
 Content-based. Social tags that describe the content of the items,
such as the objects and living things (animals, plants) that appear
in a photo or video, or are mentioned in a text document or a
song lyric. Some examples of tags belonging to this category are
vehicle, dog and tree.
 Context-based. Social tags that provide contextual information
about the items, such as the place where a photo was taken, the
date or period of time when a video was recorded, etc. Examples
of this kind of tags are madrid, mountain, summer and holidays.
 Subjective. Social tags that express opinions and qualities of the
items. Some examples of these tags are happy, sunny and contemporary art.
 Organisational. Social tags that define personal usages and tasks,
or indicate self-references. Examples within this category are to
look at, scan from print, myself and our best friend.

These tag categories are similar to those identified in the liter-
ature. Bischoff et al. [7] compare several categorisation schemas.
Table 1 summarises this comparison, and includes our categorisa-
tion, which fits with previous schemas.

In contrast to previous studies, we attempt to automatically
determine the most suitable category for a given social tag. Fig. 1
depicts the whole categorisation process. Depending on the nature
of the input tag, we distinguish two different cases. If the tag can
be mapped6 to a semantic concept of an external KB, then it will be
assigned to either content- or context-based categories (stages 1a,

6 In Section 4.2, we explain in detail how a tag is mapped to a semantic concept of
an external KB. At this point, the reader is asked to assume the existence of an automatic mechanism that links a tag with names of taxonomy categories, ontology
classes or instances, etc. available in the KB.

2a and 3a in the figure). In this case, we assume a semantic concept
corresponds to a physical or non-physical entity related to content or contextual information of an item: objects, living entities,
locations, time references, etc. On the other hand, if the tag is not
found in the available KBs, we employ Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques and categorisation heuristics to determine
whether the tag can be assigned to subjective or organisational
categories (stages 1b, 2b and 3b in the figure). In the following,
we briefly describe the above cases. More details are given in
Section 4.

3.1. Content-based and context-based categories

In principle, social tags belonging to content- and context-based
categories are nouns denoting physical and non-physical entities
whose definition can be found in dictionaries, encyclopaedias or
thesauri. Thus, the first step is to process and map an input tag to a
concept existing in a KB (stage 1a in Fig. 1). Let us suppose that the
input tag is nyc, which is the acronym for the city of New York, USA.
Looking for this term in KBs, we could obtain references to semantic entities related to that concept. For example, in Wikipedia, New
York city is identified by the URLs http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NYC
and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New York City, among others.
Let us say the identified concept for nyc is [New York city].

Once we have established the semantic concept underlying
a social tag, and assuming the existence of taxonomic relations among concepts in the KB, we propose to exploit such
relations expanding the concept towards its taxonomic ancestors until reaching a reference ancestor (stage 2a in Fig. 1),
which allows us to later categorise the concept as a contentor a context-based tag. In Section 4, we present and justify
the considered reference concepts. Here, continuing with the
example, we just mention that the concept [New York city]
is an instance of the class USA cities, and that expanding
USA cities we might find out that [New York city] also belongs
to the classes New York state citites, Cities and Locations.

Table 2
Proposed purpose-oriented categories and semantic subcategories, with examples of real Flickr tags
categorisations.

Category

Subcategory

Flickr tag examples

Physical entity

food, glue, heart, ice

Content-based

Artefact

comb, finger, helicopter, table

Living entity

cell, clone, life, mushroom

Animal

caterpillar, frog, pigeon, pet

Person

boy, daniel, friend, sister

Plant

cactus, cereal flower, tree

Non-physical entity

cloud, feminism, noise, tennis

Organisation

bmw, ibm, religion, rolling stones

Context-based

Subjective

Location

Time

Opinion

Quality

california, rome, spain, wedding

halloween, march, sixties, winter

oh damn, so cute, unforgettable

golden picture, geometric elegance

Self-reference

i love you, her, missing you

Organisational

Task

time for change,  do not want to know

Action

avoid, hiking, explore page, sit

In Wikipedia, this kind of classification is given by its Wiki
categories.7

In the example, the semantic expansion is stopped at Locations
class. This is a reference concept since it is uniquely associated to
the context-based category (stage 3a in Fig. 1).

3.2. Subjective and organisational categories

When a social tag is not a noun, we apply NLP techniques and
a number of categorisation heuristics to determine whether it can
be categorised as a subjective or an organisational tag.

The first step is to tokenise the tags, and determine the part of
speech (PoS), i.e. noun, verb, adjective, adverb, preposition, etc., of
each of the obtained tokens (stage 1b in Fig. 1). For example, let
us suppose that the input tag is to read. This is tokenised as (to,
read), and transformed into the tuple (to <preposition>, read
<verb>).

Next, we analyse the PoS tuple in order to find a subset of tokens
that satisfies one of a set of patterns predefined for each category.
In the example, the pattern [<preposition> + <verb>] may represent a task (stage 2b in Fig. 1).

Finally, through a heuristic approach, we assign the found pattern to a category (stage 3b in Fig. 1). Continuing with the example,
a task is assigned to the organisational category. In the next
section, we will describe our tag categorisation approach in more
detail.

7 Wikipedia categories, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special/Categories.

4. Categorisation of social tags

4.1. Tag categories

For each of the four purpose-based categories proposed in this
work, we define a set of subcategories encompassing the types of
entities that can be assigned to those categories. Table 2 shows
these subcategories and examples of Flickr social tags automatically
categorised by our approach.

In contents, we find physical and non-physical entities. As physical entities, we do have artefacts and living entities. Living entities
can be split into animals and plants. Persons are considered as ani-
mals, and similarly, organisations are non-physical entities. Related
to the context of an item, we find location and time entities. Within
the subjective category, we distinguish between personal opinions
and qualities. Finally, organisational entities are divided into self-
references, tasks and actions.

Instead of directly assigning a social tag to a purpose-based cat-
egory, we firstly identify the most suitable subcategory, and then
obtain the corresponding main category. We detail this process in
Sections 4.2 and 4.3.

4.2. Categorising content- and context-based social tags

The categorisation of content- and context-based tags is based
on their mapping to semantic concepts described in an external
KB. A major requirement imposed on the KB is that it has to provide a classification hierarchy (taxonomy) among its concepts. As
described in Section 3, given a social tag, we should not only be
able to map it to a semantic concept, but also to determine one of

I. Cantador et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 115

Fig. 2. Data sets published and interlinked by The W3C Linking Open Data project (July 2009). Coloured data sets represent the main semantic data sources exploited by our
social tag categorisation proposal. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

its taxonomic ancestors that would allow us to assign the tag to
either the content-based category or the context-based category.
The tag nyc (New York city) is not just a city, but also a location,
which is a contextual entity.

In this context, WordNet [24], being a lexical database for the
English language commonly exploited to support automatic text
analysis and artificial intelligence applications, could be a good
candidate for our categorisation goals. However, we are also interested in a repository flexible and capable of incorporating new
concepts appearing in our daily lives (e.g., web 2.0, podcast, diy).
Wikipedia, which is an online encyclopaedia updated collaboratively by the community, represents one of our best alternatives.

YAGO [34] is an ontological KB  supported by the W3C Linking
Open Data (LOD) initiative8  which contains information harvested from WordNet and Wikipedia. As of September 2009, YAGO
knows over 2 million entities such as people, organisations, cities,
etc., and about 20 million facts about these entities. Among other
semantic relations, it provides a multi-domain knowledge classification where the upper-level classes are the concepts existing in
WordNet, and the lower-level classes correspond to Wikipedia cat-
egories. YAGO thus can be understood as a taxonomy divided into
two parts: one invariant part which covers generic concepts that
can be found in a dictionary, and other open part that extends the
former with more specific classes about concepts not existing in a
dictionary, but in an updated modern encyclopaedia.

The LOD project aims to extend the Web with a data commons by
publishing open data sets as RDF9 on the Web, and by setting RDF
links between data items from different data sources. These RDF
links can be for example followed by crawlers and Semantic Web
search engines to provide sophisticated search and query capabilities over crawled data. Fig. 2 shows that YAGO ontology forms part
of the LOD repository, and directly links to WordNet and DBpedia [5], a huge knowledge base containing structured information
extracted from Wikipedia.

We propose to use YAGO in our social tag categorisation
approach, as a way of bridging the gap between folksonomies
(understood as non-interlinked social tag sets) and the Semantic Web (under the perspective of the LOD project). Fig. 3 shows
a portion of YAGO taxonomy. The coloured classes are reference
concepts linked to content- and context-based (sub) categories, as
explained in the following.

To categorise a social tag, the first step is to map it to a YAGO class
(stage 1a in Fig. 1). In many cases, a direct mapping between the
tag and the names of an ontology class is not possible. People add
tags in singular and plural forms indistinctively, use morphological
derivations (e.g., acronyms), make misspellings, and include compound nouns with different separation characters (e.g., NewYork,
New York, New York). For this reason, we perform a number of
morphological transformations of the tags obtaining a set of equivalent terms to be matched with YAGO class names. First, we apply
stemming and stop word removal techniques to the tags. We also

8 Linking Open Data project, http://esw.w3.org/topic/SweoIG/TaskForces/

CommunityProjects/LinkingOpenData.

9 Resource Description Framework (RDF), http://www.w3.org/RDF.

Table 3
YAGO reference classes associated to the considered content- and context-based subcategories.

Category

Subcategory

YAGO reference classes

Physical entity

physical_entity

Artefact

artifact

Living entity

living_thing, life_form, live_body 

Content-based

Animal

animal

Person person, human_body, kin

Plant

plant, plant_part

Non-physical entity

abstraction

Organisation

organization

Context-based

Location

Time

location, land, geological_formation, 
social_group

time, time_interval, time_period, time_unit

to the Wikipedia part of YAGO. Then, we extend that concept
through its ancestors, and obtain concepts such as larid, coastal
diving bird, seabird, . . ., bird, . . ., animal.

Finally, the linking between a semantic subcategory (reference
YAGO class) and a purpose-oriented category is direct (stage 3a in
Fig. 1). The social tag Seagulls is an animal, and therefore has to
be categorised as a content-based tag.

It is important to note that there is no overlap between reference
classes, i.e. the hierarchy branches of content- and context-based

Fig. 3. A part of YAGO taxonomy. Coloured classes are reference concepts mapped
to our purpose-oriented categories. (For interpretation of the references to color in
this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

use an efficient algorithm that makes use of Google10 did you
mean functionality to split compound nouns with no spaces, and
correct misspellings. All these tag processing and filtering techniques are presented in previous works [36,37]. Without going into
details, we just give a couple of example transformations. The social
tag newyork is transformed into the terms {newyork, Newyork,
NEWYORK, new york, New york, NEW YORK, New York}. The social tag
barclona is transformed into {barclona, barcelona, Barcelona,
BARCELONA}. The generated tag derivations are then searched as
names of the YAGO classes (see an example in Fig. 4).

If a mapping is found, we proceed with the search of a reference
YAGO class that uniquely identifies a content- or context-based
subcategory (stage 2a in Fig. 1). To do this, we recursively obtain
the ancestor classes of the mapped concept, stopping when reaching a predefined reference class (one of those shown in Table 3). For
example, let Seagulls be the social tag to categorise. After transforming it into different morphologic derivations, let us assume
that we find a matching with the concept seagull, which belongs

10 Google web search engine, http://www.google.com.

Fig. 4. Semantic subcategories, concepts and YAGO classes associated to the social
tag java.

I. Cantador et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 115

are disjoint. Moreover, although the hierarchy branches of contentbased subcategories intersect (e.g., a person is an animal, an
animal is a living entity, and a living entity is a physical entity), our algorithm takes into account the level in which
a mapping occurs. The lower-level reference classes are preferred
to the upper-level ones (e.g., Brad Pitt is categorised as person,
and not as animal, living entity or physical entity).

Of course, there are ambiguity problems when a tag-concept

mapping is done, as shown in Fig. 4 for the tag java.

Terms have different meanings, and only one should be chosen
for the corresponding social tag. Here, we obtain and categorise
all the possible concepts mapped to a tag, and do not perform
any disambiguation technique. We plan to do it in future work,
as discussed in Section 8.

4.3. Categorising subjective and organisational social tags

When no mapping between a social tag and a YAGO concept is
found, we analyse whether the tag can be categorised as subjective
or organisational.

We identify PoS of each term forming the tag using NLP techniques [2]. After removing some stop-words (e.g., conjunctions),
we consider the tag as a tuple of PoS [PoS1, . . ., PoSk], and compare it with a set of PoS-tuple patterns defined for the subjective
and organisational subcategories. Below, we list the PoS patterns
defined for the subcategories, which have to be interpreted as regular expressions. An asterisk (*) means any element, and the OR
operator is used when a subcategory is defined by several PoS pat-
terns.
 Opinions:
noun>*<adjective>*]
 Qualities: [*<adjective><noun>*]
 Self-references: [pronoun] OR [*<pronoun>*<noun>*] OR
[*<verb>*<pronoun>*]
 Tasks: [*<preposition><verb>*]
 Actions: [<verb>]

[<adjective>] OR [<adverb>] OR [*<pro-

If there is a match between the tag PoS-tuple and a subcategory PoS-pattern, then we categorise the tag with that subcategory.
Otherwise, we do not categorise the tag, and discard it.

Some refinements may be done in these categorisation heuris-
tics. For example, some tags categorised as qualities may be
considered as content-based if we discard the adjectives: the tag
big house could be transformed to the tag house.

Moreover, there may exist incorrect tag assignments within
the subjective subcategories. For example, the tag bad hotel is
categorised by our approach as a quality tag as it satisfies the
[*<adjective><noun>*] regular expression, whereas it should be
categorised as an opinion tag.

These issues have to be carefully studied in the future.

5. Recommendation algorithm

In general, recommender systems aim to provide personalised recommendations of items to users based on their previous
behaviour as well as on other information gathered by item descriptions and user profiles. In particular, given the success of item
recommendation in commercial websites, such as Amazon.com
and Netflix.com, it is considered worthwhile to exploit and evaluate
our tag categorisation technique via the recommendation problem,
using a graph-based algorithm, namely Random Walk with Restarts
(RWR) [20].

Yildirim and Krishnamoorthy [43] propose a novel recommendation algorithm which performs Random Walks on a graph that

denotes similarity measures between items. They evaluate their
system using movie rating data from MovieLens. Liu and Yang [19]
propose a collaborative filtering approach that models user preferences derived from the ratings, by measuring the correlation
between their rankings of the items rather than the rating values,
using a Random Walk model. They evaluate their method on EachMovie and NetFlix data. Konstas et al. [17] perform RWR on a social
graph using friendships and social tagging information, captured
from the social network Last.fm. In these studies, Random Walk
models are used based on their superiority to other collaborative
filtering methods. As a result, we also opted to perform evaluation
using an equivalent Random Walk model.

5.1. Random walk with restarts

A graph is a natural representation of data with some inherent
relational structure. In a graph, objects and their relationships can
be represented as nodes and weighted edges respectively, where
weights denote the strength of the relationships. This abstraction
allows us to integrate heterogeneous sources of data in a principled
manner.

Measuring the relatedness of two nodes in the graph can be
achieved using the Random Walks with Restarts (RWR) theory [20].
Starting from a node x, a RWR is performed by randomly following a link to another node at each step. Additionally, in every step,
there is a probability a to restart at x. Let p(t) be a column vector
where p(t)
i denotes the probability that the random walk at step t
is at node i. q is a column vector of zeros with the element corresponding to the starting node set to 1, i.e. qx = 1. Also let S be the
column normalised adjacency matrix of the graph. In other words,
S is the transition probability table where its elements Si,j give the
probability of j being the next state given that the current state is i.
The stationary, or steady-state, probabilities for each node can be
obtained by recursively applying (1) until convergence,
p(t+1) = (1   )Sp(t) +  q.
where   [0,1].

(1)

The stationary probabilities give us the long term visit rate of
each node given a bias towards a particular starting node. Therefore,
p(l)
, where l is the state after convergence, can be considered as a

measure of relatedness between nodes x and i.

5.2. Social graph

Random Walks with Restarts has recently attracted the interest
of researchers in many different areas within Information Retrieval,
starting from link analysis [25] to image annotation and retrieval
[26,39], text classification [42], click-through data analysis [10] and
collaborative recommendations [13].

In this study, we aim to evaluate the effect of tag categorisation
in the context of folksonomy-based item recommendation using
data crawled from the multi-topic social networking system of
Flickr. RWR allows us to directly predict the preference of users to
particular photos (to which we shall refer to as items from now on)
from the data collection acquired, by taking into account not only
their personal profiles in terms of item preferences (UI) but also
their tagging behaviour, social network as well as similarly tagged
items.

Specifically, we create our social graph by representing users,
items and tags as nodes. User relationships (UU) are encoded
using either uni- or bi-directional edges between the corresponding nodes. Similarly, we add edges between items and tags (ITg)
as well as users and tags (UTg). More details are given in a later
section.

6. Experiments

6.1. Data collection

For

the purposes of automatic tag categorisation and
folksonomy-based item recommendation, we collected live
data from the Flickr social network. Flickr is a photograph and
short-video oriented social network that allows users to upload
and share their media with other users. In order to evaluate our
tag categorisation strategy, we decided to use a dataset from
Flickr because this is a multi-domain social system. Our approach
could also be tested on a single-domain repository such as Last.fm
(music) or MovieLens (movies). In doing so, however, our conclusions may be biased, as long as we would not be covering a
significant part of the knowledge base (WordNet and Wikipedia)
when categorising social tags. Nonetheless, a comparison of tag
categorisation and recommendation results obtained with singleand multi-domain datasets constitutes an interesting study. We
postpone it as future work. In this paper, we focus on the study
of the feasibility of our automatic tag categorisation proposal in a
generic framework with a wide range of topics and domains.

The main characteristics of the data collection acquired could

be summarised as follows:
 Our main focus was on photos (items) rather than short videos,
since the former are more widely accepted by the Flickr community at the moment.
 We consider two types of relationship between users and items:
Users can either own photos or become fans of them, i.e. add them
to their favourite items list.
 Tags in Flickr are categorised as social (i.e. not specified by
experts), meaning that only the owner of an item can annotate
(tag) it.
 Items can be grouped by their owner into item-sets, based on
his/her personal notion of similarity among them.
 Friendships are essentially uni-directional, established when a
user decides to add another user into his contact list (similar
to followers in micro-blogs like Twitter11). Along with unidirectional friendships, we also consider bi-directional bonds
of friendship, defining them as mutual uni-directional links
between two users and regard them in our analysis differently.

We extracted a representative portion of the Flickr social network comprising of 3223 users, 240,648 items and 190,105 tags,
which are freely available12 for other researchers.

This initial dataset was exposed to a three part filtering pro-
cess. For the first part, our intention was to collect users who have
intense activity in their profiles. This can be interpreted as the
fact that they have popular items in their profiles, which means
lots of contacts that might link to them both through friendship
establishment and becoming fans of their items.

As a result, we collected the 500 items that were characterised
as the most interesting on the 1st of January 2009. For these items,
we extracted their owners profiles, composed of their 150 top tags,
the items tagged with these tags, and their contacts. Then, for each
of the above items, we also obtained a list of 10 fans (the first
10 users provided by Flickr API). Similarly to the owners profile
obtaining step, for each fan we extracted the 150 top tags, the items
tagged with these tags, and their contacts. In the previous steps, we
discarded those users without tagged items.

For the second part, we aimed to maintain a dense graph on the
user space. Firstly, we filtered all the gathered contacts, by discard-

11 Twitter  Social messaging, http://www.twitter.com.
12 Flickr dataset, http://mir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/flickr.

Table 4
Densities of the sub-matrices that comprise the social graph S, in the case of the full
tag space, and in the case of random selection of 4K tags (see Section 6.6).

User-User (UU)
User-Item (UI)
User-Tag (UTgall)
Item-Tag (ITgall)
Tag-Tag (TgTgall)

Social graph (S)

All tags
6.1 103
2.2 104
5.7 104
6.5 104
2.2 104
2.2 104

4K tags

2.2 104
2.2 104
2.2 104
2.2 104

ing those contact relations which were not linking to owners and
fans of most interesting items. To reduce the size of the item space,
we discarded those items that were not favourite of at least two of
the available users. Finally, we removed users with no tagged items,
and tags not associated to an item existing in the collection at this
point. Tags were also cut down if they were not used by at least two
users to tag their items, and were exposed to a cleaning process
(stemming, stop words removal, misspelling and compound noun
processing, etc.), which is exemplified in Section 4.2, and explained
in detail in previous works [36,37].

The third part dealt only with the tags collected so far. First of
all, we machine translate them if necessary, using Google translate tool,13 which automatically detected the language of origin (if
it was not English). Then, each tag was assigned one or more categories following the process described earlier. In case either of
these two steps failed for a certain tag, then this was not included
in the final set.

The outcome of this filtering process was a reduced data
collection of 2022 users, 24,263 items and 41,742 tags (20,055
content-based, 8300 context-based, 9013 subjective, and 4374
organisational14), with the derived sub-matrices densities shown
in Table 4, and which is as well made available at (blind for review).

6.2. Dataset

The combination of the UU, UI, plus UTgall, ITgall, TgTgall (which
from now on we shall refer to as the whole tag space) sub-matrices
derived by the data collection method described above, resulted in
the full social graph S, shown in Fig. 5.

In our case, most of these sub-matrices are binary,15 either by
definition (e.g., in the case of the UI sub-matrix, we only have evidence as of the ownership or preference of a user towards a certain
item, which is essentially binary information; Same thing applies
for the ITgall sub-matrix; an item may or may not be associated with
a single tag) or on purpose. Given the fact that the aforementioned
sub-matrices were naturally binary, we opted to keep everything
else bounded between 0 and 1.

More specifically, in the UU sub-matrix, we represent each
uni-directional bond of friendship with the value of 0.5 and each bidirectional with 1. In this way, we tend to favour the latter category
of friendships under the assumption that they are more concrete,
similar to real life. What is more, bi-directional friendships are usually the norm in many other social networks such as Facebook16 and
Last.fm [17]. In the UTgall sub-matrix, each edge is a normalised
weight between 0 and 1, indicating the frequency of use of each tag

13 Google translate, http://translate.google.com.
14 Note that due to ambiguity, a tag may belong to more than one category. See
Section 6.5 for more details.
15 In Flickr system, a photo can only be tagged by one user (the owner), and thus
the relation between a certain photo and each tag is binary. This is different to
other tagging systems, where users can annotate any item, and thus a weight can
be associated to an item-tag relation, in general based on the number of times the
item has been annotated (by different users) with that particular tag.
16 Facebook  Social networking, http://www.facebook.com.

I. Cantador et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 115

Note that in the case of the RWR method, we cannot directly
compute the rating (or equivalently the predicted preference or not
of a user for a certain item, as in our case with Flickr where ratings
are considered binary) for each item as in standard collaborative
filtering evaluation methodology. Instead we are only able to get a
rank of the items in order of predicted preference. As a result, we are
forced to evaluate the method as if it was being used in real-time
purposes, i.e. judging both the predictive accuracy and precision
of the system at the same time by using standard retrieval metrics such as Recall, MAP, and number of relevant retrieved items,
similarly to [36].

6.4. Experimental setup

In this section, we illustrate the methodology for the individual
recommendation experiments conducted using the RWR method.
The outcome of each experiment was the aggregation of the lists
containing the top 1000 items in descending order for each user,
which were tested against the ground truth, i.e. the items owned
or being indicated as favourite by a user.

As described in Section 5.1, there is a restart probability parameter  , which we set to the value of 0.8, so as to suppress the model
to return to the initial query vector q more often and consequently
perform random walks in the neighbouring elements of ua, what
was interpreted as stronger personalisation in [17]. After setting
 , we then conducted two series of experiments, which aimed to
validate our main hypothesis concerning tag categorisation.

The first series was preliminary using UI, the whole tag space
and parts of UU, namely different versions of the latter submatrix that included only uni-directional friendships UUuni (i.e.
bi-directional bonds were considered of equal importance to uni-
directional), only bi-directional friendships UUbi, and both. The
purpose of this series of experiments was to determine whether
the inclusion of friendships were of benefit in the social graph, and
thus be able to justify whether they should be included in the next
series.

As will be shown and explained in the next sections, friendships
were not found to be of significant importance and thus were not
considered furthermore. As a result, the second series of experiments were conducted on a part of the social graph that contained
UI and versions of UTgall, ITgall, TgTgall with either content-based,
context-based, subjective or organisational tags only. Four experiments were thus performed using all the tags in each category.
However, taking into account that there was not enough balance
as to the number of tags within each category (Section 6.1), we also
performed another five experiments17 with a reduced tag-set of
4374 (4K tags) in each category, i.e. the number of tags in the organisational category. The reduced tags were chosen randomly from the
original tag-set. Finally, in order to depict even more clearly that
the performance of the recommendation is ascribed to the discriminative power of tags belonging to different categories, rather than
the density of the graph, we performed a single experiment for the
content-based tags only, that contained 8500 tags, i.e. of equal size
to context-based and subjective tags.

6.5. Categorisation results

In this section, we present and discuss the results obtained by
the categorisation of the social tags existing in the Flickr dataset
described in Sections 6.1 and 6.2.

Table 5 shows the percentage of tags assigned to each purposeoriented category before and after translating non-English tags. By

17 One for each tag category, plus another being a subset of the whole tag space.

Fig. 5. Social graph S and the comprising sub-matrices.

for a specific user, extracted directly by the tag cloud in the profile
of each user from the Flickr website. Finally, the TgTgall sub-matrix
is the item-based co-occurrence of tags, calculated using Eq. (2):
TgTgall = f ((ITg)T  (ITg)),
where
f (ai,j) =

(2)

ai,j

if
if

i /= j
i = j

with ai,j being the element of TgTgall at the ith and jth position.

6.3. Evaluation protocol

We evaluated the tag categorisation technique under study
using the RWR method in order to perform item recommendation,
with either the whole tag space or parts of it, as will be clarified in
the following section. In every experiment, we follow the same per
user evaluation protocol adopted by [17] which we describe here
briefly.

For each individual user in the dataset, we randomly select a
list of 20% of the items he or she is only a fan of, and set zeros to
the corresponding elements of UI and UIT sub-matrices. It should
be noted, that it is important not to include owned items, since we
do not want them to be recommended back to each user. What is
more, as stated earlier it is the case in Flickr that only the owners
can assign tags to their owned items. As a consequence, if we merely
remove links in the UI sub-matrix then the recommendation would
still be biased towards the owners items unless we also remove the
links in the UTg sub-matrix. However, this is no longer necessary
because we are only including the items that each user is a fan of
and thus there are no left links in the UTg sub-matrix.
We then create a query vector q so that qi = 1 if Sua,i > 0, and
qua = 1, where i = [1, . . ., N], Su,i is the i-th element of S corresponding to the u-th user, ua is the current user under evaluation, and N
is the total number of columns of S. Next, we normalise q so that
||q||1 = 1.

Then, we perform a Random Walk on S which returns the stationary probability vector corresponding to ua of all the items in
the dataset. From this vector, we remove the remaining 80% of
items user ua was a fan of, so as to avoid recommending back items
which were used while performing the RWR. We then re-order the
remaining items in descending order, with the first element having
been assigned the highest probability, denoting higher preference.
This vector is pruned to contain the top 1000 items.

Table 5
Percentages of social tags assigned to each purpose-oriented category (before and
after non-English term translations). Unknown gathers those social tags that were
not assigned to any category.

Without translation

With translation

Content-based
Context-based
Subjective
Organisational
Unknown

translating and categorising these tags, we considerably reduced
the set of tags that are not categorised from 40.8% to 32.4%. It is
very important to highlight that the relative proportions of tags in
each category are quite similar to those given in [7], where a nonnoisy manual tag categorisation is carried out. This fact gives first
insights about the validity of our proposal.

Going into more detail, Table 6 shows the percentage of tags

assigned to each semantic subcategory.

The entity subcategory gathers those tags that were found in
YAGO but were not classified in one of the content- and contextbased subcategories. We realised that there are concepts that do
have the entity concept as direct ancestor, so our approach could
not categorise them correctly. Note that the real percentage of
physical entities is 62.9% since artefact, living entity, animal, person
and plant are subclasses of physical entity. An analogous situation
happens with living entities, which represent the 22.1% of contentbased tags. The small size of time subcategory is due to the fact
that we discarded those tags containing numeric dates. Finally, we
also notice that non-physical entities should have more subcate-
gories. Organisation subcategory only represents the 4% of the total
number of content-based tags.

Aiming to evaluate the accuracy of the proposed social tag
categorisation mechanism, and provide preliminary quantitative
insights about the influence of ambiguity on such mechanism, we
conducted an empirical study based on manual evaluations of a significant number of tag assignments (categorisations). Specifically,
30 subjects, PhD students and research staff from our depart-
ment, were recruited to evaluate the correctness of 3915 randomly
selected tag assignments. This set of tag assignments represented
9.4% of the total number of tag assignments available in our dataset,
and was built according to the categorisation percentages reported
in Table 5. Each tag assignment was evaluated by 3 subjects, and

Table 6
Percentages of social tags assigned to each semantic subcategory (with
respect to the total number of tags in the corresponding purpose-based
category).

Content-based

Context-based

Physical entity

Artefact

Living entity

Animal

Person

Plant

Non-physical entity

Organisation

Entity

Location

Time

Subjective

Opinion

Quality

Organisational

Self-reference

Task

Action

was considered as correct if at least 2 of its evaluators judged it
as correct. In general, there was a substantial agreement among
subjects. Fleiss Kappa coefficient [12] measuring evaluators agreement was  = 0.78 (a value  = 1 means complete agreement). For
each tag assignment evaluation, a subject was requested to state
whether the tag was correctly assigned to (1) the corresponding
subcategory, (2) to the ancestor category of such subcategory, or
(3) at least to the main purposed-based category. To make such
decisions, the evaluators were presented with the set of tags annotating the photo of each tag assignment to evaluate, so they were
able to identify the semantic context (meaning) of the tag. Obtained
accuracy results are shown in Table 7. In the following, we discuss
these results for each subcategory.

Analysing wrong tag assignments to entity subcategory, we
found out that there were many concepts in YAGO ontology that
are directly linked to the generic WordNet entity class. Thus,
for such concepts, our approach was not able to correctly infer
their purpose-based categories, either from content- or contextbased subcategories. This justifies the poor accuracy value (57.5%)
obtained for that subcategory. A similar situation occurred for physical entity and artefact categories. We identified that many of the
wrong tag assignments to these categories were due to the fact
that YAGO ontology directly links specific concepts to the generic
WordNet physical entity and artefact reference classes. In these
cases, however, we saw that there were less wrong assignments
between content- and context-based subcategories. Instead, there
were many tags assigned to physical entity and artefact categories
that should be categorised in one of their content-based subcate-
gories. Hence, accuracy values for these subcategories were around
75%, much better than for entity subcategory. Moreover, we also
found that most of the miscategorised physical entities corresponded to ambiguous tags whose categories may be difficult to
discern between non-abstract and abstract classes: e.g., nature,
sky and beauty. In many of these cases, evaluators stated that
such tags were entity or non-physical instances. Our approach, on
the contrary, identified different types of artefacts for those tags:
books and magazines (e.g., nature), music bands, artists and songs
(e.g., sky), and movies (e.g., beauty), to name a few.

Regarding social tags incorrectly categorised as living entities,
evaluators highlighted two curious and unexpected issues. They
discovered that some tags, such as alabama, bomber, and ontario
were linked in some contexts to living entity class because these
tags correspond to well known computer viruses, while other tags
were assumed to correspond to famous fictional characters: alex
(the comic character), sam (the Olympic mascot), and tails (the
video game character), among others. An accuracy of 67.8% was
obtained for living entity subcategory. The accuracy values achieved
for its descendant reference classes were diverse: 55.0% for animals,
75.0% for people, and 86.7% for plants. For animal subcategory, most
of incorrect tag assignments were due to proper nouns of animals,
e.g., bubbles (the chimpanzee), liberty (the dog), and socks (the
cat). For person subcategory, we saw that there were many locations
mapped to surnames. For example, gorsky is a popular Polish sur-
name, but also corresponds to the name of several rural localities in
Russia. Similarly, shibuya is a Japanese place name and surname.
For plant subcategory, our approach was highly accurate. Nonethe-
less, it could not deal successfully with ambiguous tags such as
force (wheat flake cereal vs. Physical quantity), linden (Tilia tree
vs. place), and victoria (water lily flower vs. place).

Similarly to previous subcategories, the accuracy of non-physical
entities (close to 80.0%) was affected by the ambiguity issue. For
example, in some cases, life was categorised as organisation
instead of living entity because of the pro-life organisation with that
name; and apartment and hole were classified as non-physical
entities because of the music bands with those names, instead of
being categorised respectively as location and physical entity.

I. Cantador et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 115

Table 7
Average accuracy results of the proposed social tag categorisation strategy.

Main category

Subcategory

Category

#evaluated
assignments

Accuracy
(subcategory)

Accuracy
(category)

Accuracy (main
category)

Content-based

Context-based

Subjective

Organisational

Physical entity
Artefact
Living entity
Animal
Person
Plant
Non-physical entity
Organisation
Entity

Location
Time

Opinion
Quality

Self-reference
Task
Action


Physical entity
Physical entity
Living entity
Living entity
Living entity

Non-physical entity

55.0%
70.0%
67.8%
55.0%
75.0%
86.7%
63.1%
85.0%
57.5%

75.6%
90.0%

70.0%
82.5%

85.7%
60.0%
75.0%

72.1%


72.5%
75.0%
55.0%
75.0%
88.4%

95.0%


76.8%

77.5%
72.5%
82.1%
65.0%
83.3%
96.0%
84.4%
96.5%
57.5%

75.6%
90.0%

97.5%
82.5%

91.4%
66.7%
75.0%

80.8%

With respect to the assignments of location entities (accuracy
of 75.6%), in general, the problem was clear. In many cases, location names correspond to nouns or adjectives, and depending on
the context, they may be categorised incorrectly. Some examples
are black (Alabama, USA), white (Georgia, USA), sunset (Utah,
USA), and wood (Winsconsin, USA). Time entities, on the other hand,
were easy to categorise, obtaining a very high accuracy (90.0%).
In general, wrong time entities were associated to tags difficult
to categorise depending on the context: e.g., old, sunrise, and
window.

For subjective entities, we found out additional problems, which
have to be addressed in the future. In our set of opinion tags (accu-
racy of 70.0%), we had a significant number of objective adjectives
that do not necessarily express opinions of the taggers. Examples of these tags are: long, wide, foggy, icy, rural, and urban.
Something similar happened for quality tags (accuracy of 82.5%).
In certain contexts, there were adjectives that do not describe
qualities of the corresponding nouns: e.g., new year, good morn-
ing, pacific coast, and master photo. Although we obtained
an average categorisation accuracy of 90.0% for subjective tags, we
plan to exploit SentiWordNet,18 a well known lexical resource for
opinion mining, and investigate related works in Opinion Mining
and Sentiment Analysis fields [27], to better identify the above tags,
improve their categorisation, and evaluate their influence on item
recommendation.

Regarding organisational entities, we encountered the following limitations. Self-reference tags were categorised correctly with
a high accuracy of 85.7%. Nonetheless, evaluators found some interesting cases, such as The Curious Case of Benjamin Button
Get It (related to the drama movie), and The World Around Us
(related to the documentary television series), which are not self-
references, and may be useful in a recommendation application. A
number of task tags were categorised incorrectly because of certain
prepositions, e.g., Dog at Play, Festival of Lights, Places
to Relax, and Playing with Zoom. It can be seen that some of
these tags are not tasks but actions, which could explain why the
categorisation accuracy of task tags increases from 60.0% to 76.7%
for the organisational main purpose-based category. Finally, action
tags (accuracy of 75.0%) showed a more difficult problem to deal
with. In some cases, there were nouns that were identified as verbs,

18 SentiWordNet, http://sentiwordnet.isti.cnr.it.

and thus they were incorrectly categorised: e.g., comment, doodle,
dress, email, gyp, ruffle, and scrawl.

In summary, based on our empirical study, our social tag categorisation approach seems to work quite well, achieving an average
accuracy of 80.8%. However, it has to be improved by addressing the
ambiguity of the tags, and by dealing with other semantic aspects
described above. Potential research lines in these directions are
depicted in Section 8.

6.6. Recommendation results

Next, we discuss the results of the evaluation of our social
tag categorisation technique using folksonomy-based recommen-
dation. The baseline upon which all comparisons are made was
considered the performance of the recommender using only the UI
sub-matrix.

As explained in Section 6.4, the purpose of the first set of experiments was to determine whether or not to include friendships in
the social graph. As shown in Table 8, the incorporation of UU or
parts of it did not actually add to the performance of the system; in
fact it scored lower precision in higher ranks than the baseline. This
is an interesting and quite surprising finding since friendship might
help collaborative filtering in finding neighbours of the active user.
We believe friendships could be more useful for recommendation
in other types of social systems, such as Facebook, which is oriented
to manage social contacts. Flickr, in contrast, is focused on photo
sharing. This may be the reason of our results.

The second set of experiments validated our hypothesis that
there exist certain categories of tags that work better in the context of item recommendation. In Fig. 6, it is clearly shown that both
organisational and subjective tags are statistically significantly outperformed by content- and context-based tags. What is more,
organisational tags exhibit a performance equivalent to the base-
line, strengthening our idea that they are particularly noisy. Using
either content- or context-based tags, it can be seen in Table 8 that
they achieve MAP and number of relevant retrieved items equivalently as in the case of using the whole tag space. There is even
a significant trend in the case of content-based tags to outperform
the case of using the whole tag space.

It can of course be argued that the aforementioned results are a
consequence of matrix density, since organisational tags are fewer
than context-based and subjective tags, and considerably fewer
than content-based tags. Fig. 7 however shows that the picture is on

Table 8
Results of the experiments. The 4K tag sets are compared to UIT org. Bold typeset indicates statistical significance at p < 0.001 compared to the baseline UI model. Italic typeset
indicates statistical significance at p < 0.05 compared to the baseline UIT org model. * and  indicate statistical significance at p < 0.001 and p < 0.05 respectively between
consecutive experiments. In all cases, a two-sample, two-tailed t-test was used.

#relevant

#relevant

UIT subj 4K

UIT org

11,793*

UIT subj

0.0745*
12,062*

UIT conx

UIT cont

0.0833*
12,391*

UIT conx 4K

UIT cont 4K

0.0720*

UIT all 4K

0.0738*

UIT cont 8K

UIF uni

UIT all

UIF bi

average the same even if we use the same amount of 4K tags in each
category. The sparsity naturally plays a role, in the sense that MAP
has globally decreased, nevertheless content- and context-based
tags are still superior to the rest two categories and have an equivalent performance to using the whole tag space. Another argument
to explain the obtained performance results may be the fact that
controlling the tag frequencies does not take into account the number of items evaluated for each tag category. This is not the case in
our experiment, since the number of relevant items retrieved is
almost the same for each 4K tag set, as shown in Table 8. By computing precision for different recall cut-off values we assure that
the obtained performance differences are valid.

Finally, there is an inconsistency with content-based tags,
compared to context-based and the whole tag space, between
Figs. 6 and 7. The reason is that we effectively remove a large subset
of useful tags when going from the original tag space to the reduced
4K. This is validated when increasing the amount of content-based
tags to 8500 (of same size to context-based and subjective), where
the overall performance is increased (Table 8).

7. Discussion

Social tags not only describe content and context information of
the annotated items, but also subjective and organisational aspects
of the users. Based on this fact, we hypothesised that not all tags are
useful for folksonomy-based recommendation, and claimed that a
categorisation of tags based on the users tagging purposes can help
to discard non-relevant tags, and thus improve content retrieval
processes. Aiming to validate the above hypothesis, we addressed
three research questions.

First, in order to categorise social tags, their underlying concepts have to be understood. Is it possible to identify such concepts
in a simple and generic way? We present an automatic mapping
between social tags and semantic entities described in YAGO [34],
an ontology that links WordNet and Wikipedia. We thus cover
multiple domains as is the case of Flickr system, and cope with
new vocabulary appearing in our daily lives. With the proposed
technique, we were able to categorise 67.6% of the collected tags,
which represents a considerable proportion of significant tags if we
take into consideration the noisy and multi-linguistic nature of the
dataset.

Second, once the social tags are mapped to semantic concepts, is
it possible to assign these concepts to purpose-oriented categories?
We propose an automatic mechanism that exploits the semantic
concept relations given by YAGO to transform the tag concepts into
semantic entities, which can uniquely be assigned to content- and
context-based categories. For a representative dataset from Flickr
system, the proportion of tags assigned to those categories (32.9%
and 13.0% respectively, as shown in Table 5) is similar to those given
in [7], where a non-noisy manual tag categorisation is presented.
This supports the correctness of our automatic tag categorisation
approach.

Fig. 6. Interpolated RecallPrecision curves for experiments using either the whole
or part of the tag space.

Fig. 7. Interpolated RecallPrecision curves for experiments using the reduced 4K
tag space.

I. Cantador et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 115

Third and finally, does the obtained categorisation really
improve folksonomy-based recommendation? The analysis of the
results show that the incorporation of content- and context-based
tags instead of subjective and organisational improved the performance of the system. This can be accounted to the fact that the latter
tend to be more susceptible to noise than the former. Essentially,
tags in these categories may help users for self-organisation pur-
poses, especially in the case of hundreds of items in ones account,
or may express very personal opinions that do not apply to the rest
users. As a result, it is expected that they might not be of help as
in our case of collaborative recommendation; tags characterising
individuality simply cannot extrapolate in the multi-user community scenario. On the other hand, content- and context-based tags
could be considered as of more global usage than the rest and consequently of additional re-usability by more than one users. Adding to
this their similar performance compared to the usage of the whole
tag space, it can be argued that their use alone in the social graph
can serve the purposes of folksonomy-based recommendation suf-
ficiently.

Another interesting point to raise is the fact that content- and
context-based tags are actually the most popular in our data col-
lection. Therefore, this study actually shows that even performing
a stemming of the long tail of the tag distribution which follows a
power law may actually perform equivalently to using the whole
tag space. In other words, keeping the most frequent tags, disregarding their semantic content, can be justified since their majority
shall contain content- and context-based tags.

Of course it can be argued that tag categorisation could have
been exploited more, i.e. we could have integrated this idea directly
into the social graph. An idea would be to apply edges to tags
belonging to the same category in the TgTgall (instead of calculating
co-occurrence), and thus be taken into account by the RWR during
the recommendation process. Even though this idea could provide
with a useful outcome, still our approach aims and proves that we
can effectively reduce the tag space in a similar to filtering process,
using either the content- or context-based tags in isolation, which
has the additional benefit of efficiency.

8. Conclusions and future work

In this paper, we presented an approach to automatically
categorise social tags based on the users
intentions, namely
content-based, context-based, subjective and organisational. This
technique maps tags to semantic concepts existing in the multidomain YAGO ontology [34], which is a Semantic Web knowledge
base with structured information extracted from WordNet and
Wikipedia, and uniquely assigns them to content- and contextbased categories. The identification of subjective and organisational
tags is based on NLP and regular expression heuristics.

Our main goal was to study whether the distinction of tags in
these categories is of benefit to folksonomy-based recommender
systems. We executed a RWR recommendation algorithm [17]
using sets of tags from different categories, and were able to show
that content- and context-based tags are superior to subjective
and organisational tags, achieving equivalent performance to that
obtained using the whole tag space.

As a proof of concept of our tag categorization framework, we
decided to use YAGO ontology as the KB whose semantic concepts are linked to multi-domain social tags. Since this KB covers
WordNet and, more importantly, a significant part of DBpedia
(Wikipedia), using it, we are able to map proper nouns (e.g., people,
locations, organizations, events, etc.) and contemporary terms.
Nonetheless, the utilization of a larger number of external knowledge bases would help missing less tag-concept mappings, and
could be exploited for disambiguation purposes.

Semantic ambiguity of tags would be a consideration to deal
with in the future. Recent works have addressed this problem. Au
Yeung et al. [6] propose to cluster the items tagged by the users.
Based on the obtained clusters, the authors find relations between
tags, potentially useful for disambiguation purposes. Weinberger
et al. [40] compute the KullbackLeibler divergence [18] to measure the ambiguity between pairs of tags. In this work, we have not
addressed this issue when categorising social tags based on their
intention. We plan to study disambiguation strategies that take into
account the context of a social tag within a user or item profile
[21,31]. For example, let us assume that we retrieve the tag java
from a user/item profile, and we have to decide whether it refers to
the well known programming language or to the Indonesian island.
Let us also assume that profile contains tags such as computer,
technology, etc. Since java co-occurs with these tags when it
refers to the programming language much more frequently than
when it refers to the Indonesian island, we could state with a certain confidence that, in this case, the tag meaning correspond to the
programming language.

Analysing our categorisation results, we found that, in most
of the cases, ambiguities occurred with social tags classified into
both content and context categories, especially in those cases
where the social tags corresponded to locations. Thus, although it
would be convenient to correctly disambiguate and classify such
tags, the results obtained with our recommendation model are
still valid as its most accurate recommendations were obtained
exploiting content- and context-based tags. Ambiguities in subjective and organisational tags may occur but their influence in the
recommendations is relatively much lower. Nonetheless, for recommendation purposes, we find very interesting the possibility of
exploring sentiment analysis approaches to enhance our subjective and organisational tag categorisation strategy based on regular
expressions. As discussed in the paper, there may exist incorrect tag
assignments to subjective subcategories. For example, the tag bad
hotel is categorised by our approach as a quality tag as it satisfies the [*<adjective><noun>*] regular expression, whereas it
should be categorised as an opinion tag.

In a folksonomy-based item recommender system, a potential future research line is the incorporation and exploitation of
relations between social tags that go beyond co-occurrence based
similarities. The transformation of tags into ontology concepts
allows us to infer and use semantic relations between these concepts for recommendation purposes. Synonym (e.g., android and
humanoid, funicular and cable railway) and morphological
similarities (e.g., blog, blogs, blogging) between concepts could
be very useful to better identify related annotated items. Preliminary work in this direction has already been done [9].

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the European Commission
(SALERO, FP6-027122), by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Education (RIM3, TIN2008-06566-C04-02), and by the Spanish Ministry
of Industry (i3media, CENIT-2007-1012).
