Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 316324

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

NCBO Resource Index: Ontology-based search and mining of biomedical resources
Clement Jonquet a,b,
, Paea LePendu a, Sean Falconer a, Adrien Coulet a,c, Natalya F. Noy a, Mark A. Musen a,
Nigam H. Shah a,

a Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford University, 251 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305-5479, USA
b Laboratory of Informatics, Robotics, and Microelectronics of Montpellier (LIRMM), University of Montpellier, 161 Rue Ada, 34095 Montpellier, Cedex 5, France
c Lorraine Informatics Research and Applications Laboratory (LORIA), INRIA Nancy, Grand-Est, Campus Scientifique  BP 239, 54506 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy Cedex, France

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 4 February 2011
Received in revised form 16 June 2011
Accepted 17 June 2011
Available online 29 June 2011

Keywords:
Ontology-based indexing
Semantic annotation
Information mining
Information retrieval
Biomedical data
Biomedical ontologies

The volume of publicly available data in biomedicine is constantly increasing. However, these data are
stored in different formats and on different platforms. Integrating these data will enable us to facilitate
the pace of medical discoveries by providing scientists with a unified view of this diverse information.
Under the auspices of the National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO), we have developed the
Resource Index  a growing, large-scale ontology-based index of more than twenty heterogeneous biomedical resources. The resources come from a variety of repositories maintained by organizations from
around the world. We use a set of over 200 publicly available ontologies contributed by researchers in
various domains to annotate the elements in these resources. We use the semantics that the ontologies
encode, such as different properties of classes, the class hierarchies, and the mappings between ontolo-
gies, in order to improve the search experience for the Resource Index user. Our user interface enables
scientists to search the multiple resources quickly and efficiently using domain terms, without even
being aware that there is semantics under the hood.

O 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Researchers in biomedicine produce and publish enormous
amounts of data describing everything from genomic information
and pathways to drug descriptions, clinical trials, and diseases.
These data are stored on many different databases accessible
through Web sites, using idiosyncratic schemas and access mech-
anisms. Our goal is to enable a researcher to browse and analyze
the information stored in these diverse resources. Then, for in-
stance, a researcher studying allelic variations in a gene can find
all the pathways that the gene affects, the drug effects that these
variations modulate, any disease that could be caused by the gene,
and the clinical trials that involve the drug or diseases related to
that specific gene. The information that we need to answer such
questions is available in public biomedical resources; the problem
is finding that information.

The research community agrees that terminologies and ontologies are essential for data integration and translational discoveries
to occur [13]. However, the metadata that describe the information in data resources are usually unstructured, often come in the
form of free-text descriptions, and are rarely labelled or tagged

 Corresponding authors. Tel.: +1 650 725 6236; fax: +1 650 725 7944.

E-mail addresses:

jonquet@lirmm.fr (C.

Jonquet), nigam@stanford.edu (N.H.

Shah).

1570-8268/$ - see front matter O 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2011.06.005

using terms from ontologies that are available for the domains.
Users often prefer labels from ontologies because they provide a
clear point of reference during their search and mining tasks [4
6]. For example, researchers and curators widely use the Gene
Ontology to describe the molecular functions, cellular location,
and biological processes of gene products. These annotations enable the integration of the descriptions of gene products across
several model organism databases [7].

However, besides these examples, semantic annotation of biomedical resources is still minimal and is often restricted to a few
resources and a few ontologies [8]. Usually, the textual content
of these online resources is indexed (e.g., using Lucene) to enable
querying the resources with keywords. However, there are obvious
limits to keyword-based indexing, such as the use of synonyms,
polysemy, lack of domain knowledge. Furthermore, having to perform keyword searches at each Web site individually makes the
navigation and aggregation of the available information extremely
cumbersome,
like Entrez
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez), facilitate search across several re-
sources, but they do not currently use as many of the available and
relevant biomedical ontologies.

impractical. Search engines,

if not

The National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO) Resource Index addresses these two problems by (1) providing a unified index
of and access to multiple heterogeneous biomedical resources; and
(2) using ontologies and the semantic representation that they

encode to enhance the search experience for the user. The NCBO
BioPortal  an open library of more than 200 ontologies in biomedicine [9]  serves as the source of ontologies for the Resource Index.
We use the terms from these ontologies to annotate, or tag, the
textual descriptions of the data that reside in biomedical resources
and we collect these annotations in a searchable and scalable index
(Fig. 1). The key contributions to the field are (i) to build the search
system for such an important number of ontologies and resources
and (ii) to use the semantics that the ontologies encode.

In the context of our research, we call data element any identifiable
entity or record (e.g., document, article, experimentation report)
which belongs to a biomedical data resource (e.g., database of articles,
experiments, trials). Usually, an element has an identifier and can be
linked by a URL. For instance, the trial NCT00924001 is an element of
the ClinicalTrials.gov data resource that can be accessed with:
http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00924001. We
call annotation  a central component  a link from an ontology term
to a data element, indicating that the data element refers to the term
either explicitly or not [10,11]. We then use these annotations to
bring together the data elements.

We currently index 22% resources, which are maintained by a
variety of different institutions, with terms from more than 200
ontologies included in BioPortal (Appendix A). As of January 2011,
our 1.5 Tb MySQL database, which stores the annotations in the Resource Index, contains 11 Billion annotations, 3.3 Million ontology
concepts, and 3.2 Million data elements. The user interface is available at http://bioportal.bioontology.org/resources.

A preliminary version of the system was presented in [12]. In
this paper, we illustrate use case scenarios (Section 2), describe
the system implementation (Section 3) and the details of the
indexing workflow (Section 3.3), and the different means to access
the Resource Index (Section 3.4). We demonstrate how semantic
technologies enable information retrieval and mining scenarios
that were not possible otherwise (Section 4).

2. Use case scenarios

We will describe the functionality of the Resource Index

through three use case scenarios.

Scenario 1: Multiple-term search across resources. The user is
interested in the role of tumor protein p53 in breast cancer. He can
search the Resource Index for Tumor Protein p53 AND Breast
Carcinoma as defined in the NCI Thesaurus (Fig. 2). The search
results summarize the number of elements per resources anno-

Fig. 2. Resource Index user interface. The search for resources that contain both
Tumor Protein p53 AND Breast Carcinoma.

tated with both terms. The user can see there is relevant data linking p53 to breast cancer in such resources as ArrayExpress,
ClinicalTrials.org, Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), Stanford
Microarray Database (SMD) and others. He can access the data elements within each resource quickly and navigate between
resources.

Scenario 2: Exploratory search across resources. A researcher studying the causes and treatments for stroke in humans is
interested in learning more about the genetic basis of the response to related conditions by searching the literature. She
already knows that some related conditions such as stroke, tran-

Fig. 1. NCBO Resource Index overview. We process each biomedical resource using the ontology-based indexing workflow. We store the resulting annotations in a database
and make them available in several formats via REST Web services. BioPortal provides userfriendly interfaces to search and navigate the Resource Index.

C. Jonquet et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 316324

sient ischemic attack, and cerebral bleeding fall under the general category of cerebrovascular accidents (Fig. 3). Therefore,
she starts by typing cerebr and immediately gets feedback in
the form of suggested terms from various ontologies. She selects
and initiates a search for Cerebrovascular Accident from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Thesaurus. She notices a number
of hits from several resources and drills down to read more
about the data elements from both the GEO and Database of
Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGAP) resources. She focuses on
GEO: the tag cloud emphasizes other terms that are ranked
highly in these 31 elements. Thus, she can get an idea of what
these elements are about. She selects Stroke in the tag cloud,
then Treatment, and gets to the 12 elements that are annotated with the three previous terms. A similar series of steps
on dbGAP leads her to two elements annotated with Cerebrovascular Accident,
Stroke, and Physiology. As a result of
her search, she has quickly located gene-expression data (from
rats) that is connected to genotype-phenotype data (from hu-
mans). In rats, researchers studied the gene-expression level response to both stroke and to drugs used to treat stroke.
In
humans, researchers studied genotypes that predispose humans
to stroke and affect the physiology of the outcome.

Scenario 3: Semantically enriched search across resources.
The user wants to search gene expression data about retroperitoneal neoplasms. A direct keyword search with retroperitoneal
neoplasm on the GEO Web site will return no results. However,
there are several datasets in GEO about pheochromocytoma and
renal cell cancer both of which are retroperitoneal neoplasms
and thus relevant to the previous search. When our user queries
the Resource Index with retroperitoneal neoplasm, he will get
the results that use the hierarchy represented in the BioPortal

ontologies. Specifically, the NCI Thesaurus defines pheochromocytoma as a subclass of retroperitoneal neoplasm. Thus, the user
will get all data elements that are annotated with pheochromocytoma as a response to the query on retroperitoneal neoplasm,
including the relevant resources in GEO. Furthermore, he also gets
results from ArrayExpress and SMD, which are other repositories
of gene expression data also indexed in the Resource Index.

In the next section, we describe the implementation of the Re-

source Index, which enables these use cases.

3. The NCBO Resource Index

To create the Resource Index, we process metadata describing
data elements in a variety of heterogeneous resources to create
semantic annotations of these metadata. We use the publicly available biomedical ontologies in BioPortal as a source of terms, their
synonyms, and the relations between terms (Section 3.1). We use
resource-specific access tools to process metadata that describe
data elements in different resources (Section 3.2). We use an off-
the-shelf concept-recognition tool to identify terms from BioPortal
ontologies within the textual metadata and annotate, or tag, the
corresponding element with the recognized terms. We expand
these annotations using available ontology knowledge (Sec-
tion 3.3). Finally, the Web services and user interface provide users
with fast and scalable access to this index and support different use
cases such as information retrieval and mining (Section 3.4).

3.1. Ontologies in the NCBO BioPortal

BioPortal, an open library of biomedical ontologies [9], provides
uniform access to the largest collection of publicly available bio-

Fig. 3. Searching the Resource Index in BioPortal. The user searches for resources on cerebrovascular accidents and finds gene-expression data that are relevant to different
types of cerebrovascular accidents, such as stroke.

medical ontologies. At the time of this writing, there are 245
ontologies in this collection. BioPortal users can browse, search,
visualize, and comment on ontologies both interactively, through
a Web interface, and programmatically, via Web services. The
majority of BioPortal ontologies were contributed by their developers directly to BioPortal. A number of ontologies come from Open
Biomedical Ontologies (OBC) Foundry [13], a collaborative effort
to develop a set of interoperable ontologies for biomedicine. BioPortal also includes publicly available terminologies from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), a set of terminologies
which are manually integrated and distributed by the United
States National Library of Medicine [14]. BioPortal includes ontologies that are developed in a variety of formats, including OWL,
RDF(S), OBO (which is popular with many developers of biomedical
ontologies), and RRF (which is used to distribute UMLS terminolo-
gies). BioPortal provides a uniform set of REST Web services to access basic lexical and structural
information in ontologies
represented in these heterogeneous formats.

We use the BioPortal REST services to traverse the ontologies
and to create a dictionary of terms to use for direct annotations
of data elements in biomedical resources. We use preferred name
and synonym properties of classes for this dictionary. Some ontology formats have preferred name and synonym properties as part
of the format (e.g., OBO and RRF). For OWL, ontology developers
can either use the relevant SKOS properties to represent this infor-
mation, or specify in the ontology metadata which are the properties that they use for preferred names (e.g., rdfs:label) and
synonyms. Currently, our dictionary contains 6,835,997% terms,
derived from the 3,349,338% concepts from 206% ontologies (the
subset of BioPortal ontologies that are usable for annotation). We
identify each concept by a URI defined in the original ontology or
provided by NCBO.

3.2. Accessing biomedical resources

In addition to the ontology terms, the data elements from the
biomedical resources are another major source of information for
the Resource Index (Fig. 1). As of January 2011, we have indexed
22% public biomedical resources of different sizes (up to 3.2 Million elements and 1.4 Gb of data). We provide a list of sample resources in Appendix A. Data resources provide their data in
idiosyncratic formats (often XML) and offer different means of access (often Web services). To access the information in the re-
sources, we build a custom wrapper for each resource. The
wrapper extracts the fields describing the data elements within a
resource as illustrated in step 1 of Fig. 4. In developing each wrap-
per, we work with a subject matter expert to determine which textual metadata fields (later called contexts) we must process (e.g.,
title, description). We also assign each context a weight [0,1] representing the importance of the field. We later use this weight to
score annotations.1 For example, we may give annotations appearing in the title a higher weight based on the experts recommendation for that resource.
In some cases, resources already tag
elements with ontology terms, so the wrapper directly extracts the
curated annotations and applies an appropriate weight. We call
these annotations reported annotations. For example, the description
of gene-expression data in GEO contains an organism field where a
domain expert manually puts a term from the National Center for
Biotechnology Information taxonomy, which refers to the relevant
organism.

Our resource-specific wrappers access the data elements incre-
mentally, enabling us to process only the data elements that were

1 Researchers have previously demonstrated the influence and importance of the

original context in which a term appears on information retrieval [4].

Fig. 4. Example of annotations generated for a GEO element. Direct annotations are
generated from textual metadata and already existing ontology references of the
data element. Then, expanded annotations are created using the ontology is_a
hierarchy. Finally, all the annotations are aggregated and scored taking into
consideration their frequency and context.

C. Jonquet et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 316324

added to the resource since the last time that we processed the
resource.

3.3. Ontology-based annotation

After we access the data elements describing the resource, we
perform the following steps to create annotations for the data elements in the resource: (a) direct annotation with ontology terms;
(b) semantic expansion of annotations; (c) aggregation and scoring
of annotations (Fig. 4).

(a) Creation of direct annotations. We process each textual
metadata using a concept-recognition tool that detects the presence
of concepts in text. Our workflow accepts different concept recognizers ranging from simple string matching techniques to advanced natural language processing algorithms. We currently use
Mgrep [15,16] which enables fast and efficient exact matching
against a very large set of input strings (however without any advanced natural language processing (e.g., stemming, permutation,
morphology)). Concept recognizers usually use a dictionary. The
dictionary (or lexicon) is a list of strings that correspond to preferred names and synonyms of ontology concepts. At this step,
Mgrep uses the 6.8 Million terms dictionary built before. In the
example in Fig. 4, the recognizer identifies the terms melanoma,
melanocyte, and cell and creates a set of direct annotations with
the corresponding concepts in the Human Disease, Cell type, and
BIRNLex ontologies. We preserve the identified term, the context
in which it appears, and its character position as provenance information about the annotation.

(b) Semantic expansion of annotations. After direct annotations step, several semantic-expansion components leverage the
knowledge in the ontologies to create expanded annotations from
the direct annotations.

First, the is_a transitive closure component traverses an ontology
subclasssuperclass hierarchy using a customized algorithm to
create new annotations with superclasses of the classes that appear in direct annotations. We used the subclass transitive relation
as defined by the original ontology e.g., is_a (OBO), rdfs:subClassOf
(OWL) and abstracted by BioPortal to compute the transitive closure on the whole ontology graph. For instance, we will expand a
direct annotation of a data element with the concept melanoma
from NCI Thesaurus, to annotations with melanocytic neoplasm,
cancer, and cellular proliferation disease because NCI
Thesaurus defines melanoma as a subclass of melanocytic neo-
plasm, which in turn is a subclass of cellular proliferation
disease (Fig. 4). We preserve the shortest ancestor level (direct
parent, grandparent, etc.) as provenance information to use for
scoring annotations. Naturally, the farther away the ancestor term
is from the term in the direct annotation, the less relevant the corresponding expanded annotation is.

Second, the ontology-mapping component creates new annotations based on existing mappings between ontologies. BioPortal
provides point-to-point mappings between terms in different
ontologies. Some of these mappings were defined manually and
some were created automatically using various mapping algorithms [17].2 We use the mappings that BioPortal stores and provides to expand our annotations and we do not follow them
transitively. For instance, if a text is directly annotated with the concept treatment in Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), the mapping
component will generate a new annotation with the concept therapeutic procedure from Systematized Nomenclature of MedicineClinical Terms (SNOMED-CT) because there is a mapping between
these two terms in BioPortal. We preserve the type of mapping as

provenance information to use for scoring annotations. It allows to
score those expanded annotations proportionally to the mapping
confidence (e.g., owl:sameAs, skos:exactMatch, skos:close-
Match, manually curated or automatically generated).

(c) Annotation aggregation and scoring. We use the provenance information that we collect in creating direct and expanded
annotations to assign each annotation a weight from 0 to 10 representing its relevance. For example, a match based on a preferred label gets a weight of 10 versus a synonym, which gets
an 8; a match originating from a mapping gets a weight of 7
whereas one from an is_a relationship get a diminishing weight
based on ancestor level. Because several annotations with the
same concept but with different provenance and context can
co-exist we aggregate all those annotations of an element to a unique pair [concept-element], called aggregated annotation,
to
which a score is assigned. Those are the annotations used for
searches. The scoring algorithm takes into account frequency,
provenance and context of the annotation by doing the sum of
the weights assigned to each annotation normalized by the
weights of the original contexts.

At each step, the annotation workflow populates several relational tables and stores the detailed (direct & expanded) and
aggregated annotations. Because both ontologies and resources
are changing often, we need to automatically update the Resource
Index tables regularly. The workflow handles (i) resource updates
(i.e., incremental processing of new elements added to resources)
using wrappers that pull only the data elements that have not
been processed yet and (ii) ontology updates (i.e., incremental processing of new ontologies and new ontology versions) because
BioPortal provides version specific identifiers for ontologies. For
simplicity, when a new ontology version is added to BioPortal,
the previous annotations associated with the ontology are removed from the Resource Index and new ones are added. The
indexing workflow has been specifically optimized for this to occur rapidly [18]. We run these two different updates respectively
weekly and monthly.

3.4. Accessing the NCBO Resource Index

The annotation and the scores that we described in the previous
section constitute the Resource Index. The index contains 3 Billion
aggregated annotations and 11 Billion detailed annotations (10%
direct 90% expanded) as illustrated by Fig. 5. We provide both a
Web service access to the index and a special-purpose easy-to-
use graphical user interface, which enables domain experts to explore and analyze the information in the Resource Index.

The main Resource Index user interface, illustrated in Figs. 2
and 3, is a search-based interface geared towards biomedical
end-users. Users do not even need to be aware that semantic technologies are driving the user interface, and can use it through a
simple search-box mechanism. As the user types in terms that
she is interested in, she gets a list of auto-complete suggestions
for the search terms and the source ontologies for these terms.
Users can search data elements using AND and OR constructs.3
She is presented with a list of search results (as snippets) as well
as a tag cloud of related terms (selected in the top 10 results) to help
refine her search further. For each identified element, a user can see
the details of the annotations highlighted in the original text and link
back to the URLs of the original data elements.

Users can retrieve the content of the Resource Index programmatically by calling a Web service and specifying either ontology
concepts or specific data elements that they are looking for. Specif-
ically, we provide the following services:

2 In this work we assume mappings between ontologies already exists, the creation

3 The OR construct is currently available only through Web service; it is not

of biomedical mappings is discussed in numerous other papers.

available through the graphical user interface.

Fig. 5. Number and types of annotations in the Resource Index.

1. For a given concept, obtain the set of elements in one or several
resources annotated with this concept (e.g., GEO and ArrayExpress elements annotated with concept DOID:1909).

2. For several concepts, obtain the union or intersection of the set
of elements annotated with these concepts (e.g., GEO and
ArrayExpress elements annotated with both DOID:1909 and
CL:0000148).

3. For a given data element, obtain the set of concepts in one or
several ontologies annotating this element (e.g., NCI Thesaurus
concepts annotating the GEO dataset GDS1965).

The first two information-retrieval services offer a unique endpoint
to query several heterogeneous data resources and facilitate data
integration (defined as view integration in Goble & Stevens [3]).
The third service supports the type of exploration that the original
resource may have never supported. This use case enables users to
gather more information about a data element that they have already identified.

When retrieving annotations for a given element, users can filter out annotations using several mechanisms, such as limiting results to annotations with specific UMLS semantic types, using only
results that match the whole word in the query, disabling the results obtained by matching synonyms, or selecting the type of
mapping used for expanding annotations. Users can retrieve annotations in several formats (text, tab delimited, XML, RDF and OWL).
The results are ordered by the scores assigned during the indexing
phase.

4. Discussion and related work

The Resource Index provides semantically-enabled uniform access to a large set of heterogeneous biomedical resources. It leverages the semantics expressed in the ontologies in several different
ways:

Preferred names and synonyms: Many biomedical ontologies
specify, as class properties, not only labels (preferred names) but
also synonyms for the class names, which we use during annota-
tion. For example, a keyword search of caNanoLab resource with
adriamycin would normally obtain no results. However, because
the ontologies that we use have defined doxorubicin as a synonym for adriamycin, the Resource Index retrieves all caNanoLab
elements annotated with the term doxorubicin.

Auto-complete: As users type a term into the search box, they
receive immediate feedback giving both preferred names and synonyms for matching classes from different ontologies.

Hierarchies: We use subclass relations to traverse ontology
hierarchies to create expanded annotations, therefore improving
the recall of search on general terms. For example, a search with
retroperitoneal neoplasm, will retrieve data annotated with
pheochromocytoma (Section 2). Notice that subclass relationships are present in all ontologies thus enable to provide the same
feature for all ontologies. Specific ontology relationships are not
considered, although we acknowledge there are often useful on a
per-ontology approach.

Mappings: We use BioPortal mappings to expand the set of
annotations. For example, a search with the concept treatment
from MeSH retrieves the elements annotated with therapeutic

procedure in SNOMED-CT because there is a mapping between
these two concepts in BioPortal.4

The use of ontologies significantly enhances recall of searches
(i.e., more relevant data elements are retrieved) without affecting
precision of the top results. Our aggregation and scoring addresses
the issue of precision by ranking relevant results for the user e.g.,
the algorithm ranks the direct matches higher over the ones obtained via semantic expansion. Semantic disambiguation is not
handled yet e.g., someone searching elements for Cell in NCI Thesaurus will obtain the elements mentioning the word cell as the
abbreviation of cell phone. However, given the characteristics of
the resources indexed (biomedical databases as opposed to general
Web sites) the issue has not come up in practice.

Because the goal of the Resource Index is to improve runtime
information retrieval and data-mining tasks, we decided to precompute inferences with ontologies (i.e., is_a and mapping expan-
sion) rather than to implement semantic query-expansion algorithms [19] that would have computed inferences dynamically
but would have required longer response time. Our technical decisions in terms of design and architecture were often driven by
benchmarking analysis and metrics [18]. The indexing workflow
execution times range from a couple of minutes for the small resources to more than a week for the biggest one. Because it is
impossible to include in the Resource Index all possible biomedical
resources, NCBO provides the ontology-based annotation workflow
as a Web service [8], the NCBO Annotator, which allows researchers
to annotate their text data automatically and get the annotations
back. They can use this service to develop their own semanticsearch applications. Researchers at the Medical College of Wisconsin have already created one such application for mining associations between gene expression levels and phenotypic annotations
for microarray data from GEO (cf. http://gminer.mcw.edu).

Semantic annotation is an important research topic in the
Semantic Web community [10]. Tools vary along with the types
of documents that they annotate (e.g., image annotation [20]).
For an overview and comparison of semantic annotation tools
the reader may refer to the study by Uren and colleagues [11].

As we have mentioned earlier, our annotation workflow can be
configured to use any concept-recognition tool. A number of publicly available concept recognizers identify entities from ontologies
or terminologies in text. These recognizers include IndexFinder
[21], SAPHIRE [22], CONANN [23], and the University of Michigans
Mgrep [15]. The National Library of Medicine (NLM)s MetaMap
[24], which identifies UMLS Metathesaurus concepts in text, is generally used as the gold standard for evaluating tools in the biomedical domain. Many of these tools are not under active development
and are restricted to a particular ontology or the UMLS.

Related tools in the biomedical domain include Terminizer [25],
which is an annotation service similar to the NCBO Annotator. Terminizer recognizes concept names and synonyms and their possible permutations but only for OBO ontologies. Terminizer does not
allow any automatic semantic expansion of the annotations but allows refining annotations using broader or narrower terms in the
user interface. Whatizit [26], which is a set of text mining Web

4 Notice there is no composition of the semantic expansion components e.g.,

mapping ancestors are not used for annotations.

C. Jonquet et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 316324

services that can recognize several types of entities such as protein
and drug names, diseases, and gene products. Reflect [27], which
highlights gene, protein, and small-molecule names and can perform the recognition in HTML as well as PDF and MS Word docu-
ments. The originality of Reflect, when used in a Web browser, is
that the tool links the identified terms to corresponding entries
in biomedical resources e.g., UniProt, DrugBank. However, the tool
is not driven by ontologies and does not execute any semantic
expansion.

We have conducted a comparative evaluation of two concept
recognizers used in the biomedical domain  Mgrep and MetaMap  and found that Mgrep has clear advantages in large-scale
service oriented applications, specifically addressing flexibility,
speed and scalability [8]. The precision of concept recognition
varies depending on the text in each resource and type of entity
being recognized: from 93% for recognition biological processes
in descriptions of gene expression experiments to 60% in clinical
trials, or from 88% for recognizing disease terms in descriptions
of gene expression experiments to 23% for PubMed abstract [8].
Other studies reported similar results [28,29]. The average precision is approximately 73%, average recall is 78%.

Most of the other annotation tools do not perform any semantic expansion, which gives the Resource Index and the Annotator
a significant advantage. There are however other tools in the biomedical domain that use semantics internally including MedicoPort [30], which uses UMLS semantics to expand user queries;
the work of Moskovitch and colleagues [4], who use ontologies
for annotation (concept based search) and demonstrate the
importance of the context (context-sensitive search) when annotating structured documents. HealthCyberMap [31] uses ontologies and semantic distances for visualizing biomedical resources
information. Essie [32] shows that a judicious combination of
exploiting document structure, phrase searching, and concept
based query expansion is useful for domain optimized information retrieval. Finally, other studies such as Khelif and colleagues
[33] illustrate the annotation of a specific resource with specific
ontologies (the GeneRIF resource annotated with UMLS and Galen
in this case).

Currently, we create annotations based only on textual fields.
However, we can extend our approach to other kinds of documents
(i.e., images, sounds) by changing the tool that we use for concept
recognition. We currently process only text meta-data in English.
However, as BioPortal now contains ontologies in multiple lan-
guages, we can start using concept recognizers for other languages
in the future.

5. Challenges and future plans

We are currently working on expanding the Resource Index to
include more resources. Our goal is to index up to 100 public re-
sources, including PubMed, which provides access to all research
articles in biomedicine (approximately 20 Million elements). We
have analyzed the metrics on ontologies in order to re-structure
the database backend for the Resource Index. This restructuring
has enabled us to reduce the processing time for one of our larger
datasets from one week to one hour [18]. With this type of optimi-
zations, we can now annotate extremely large datasets such as
PubMed. We have already indexed the last five years of it (20%).
We note that since 2010, changes in MetaMap allow it to be deployed with ontologies outside of UMLS. We are investigating the
possibility of including MetaMap as an alternative concept recognizer in the annotation workflow.

One limiting factor in increasing the number of resources that
we index is the need to develop custom access tools for most re-
sources. However, most resource access tools follow the same prin-
ciples, so we have built templates that enable our collaborators to
build them easily and quickly to process their own datasets and to
include them in the Resource Index.

Our next challenge is to evaluate the user interface and to
understand what works best for domain experts. We have performed small-scale formative evaluations, but will need to work
on larger scale evaluation, with different groups of users.

6. Conclusions

We have presented an ontology-based workflow to annotate
biomedical resources automatically as well as an index constructed
using this workflow. Ontology-based indexing is not new in bio-
medicine, however it is usually restricted to indexing a specific resource with a specific ontology (vertical approach). We adopt a
horizontal approach, accessing annotations for many important resources using a large number of ontologies. This approach follows
the translational bioinformatics and Semantic Web vision to discover new knowledge by recombining already existing knowledge
(i.e., resources and ontologies) in a manner that the knowledge
providers have not previously envisaged.

The Resource Index enables domain experts to search heteroge-
neous, independently developed resources. While we use ontologies and semantics under the hood to improve the quality of
the results and to simplify the user interaction, the users are not
aware of this complexity. They use a simple search-box interface

Table 1
A sample of ontologies included in the Resource Index. Please refer to http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologiesurlhttp://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies for a
complete listing.

Ontology

NCI Thesaurus (NCIt)

Maintained By

National Cancer Institute

Medical Subject Headings (MSH)

National Library of Medicine

Gene Ontology (GO)

GO Consortium

Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine-Clinical Terms
(SNOMEDCT)
Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MDR)

International Health Terminology Standards Development
Organisation
Maintenance and Support Services Organization

Format

# Classes

80 K

223 K

33 K

391 K

69 K

RadLex (RID)

Radiological Society of North America

PROTEGE

30 K

International Clasification of Diseases(ICD10)

World Health Organization

NCBI organismal clasification (NCBITaxon)

National Center for Biotechnology Information

Mouse adult gross anatomy (MA)

The Jackson Laboratory

12 K

513 K

3 K

Table 2
A sample of resources included in the Resource Index. Please refer to http://rest.bioontology.org/resource_index/resources/list/urlhttp://rest.bioontology.org/
resource_index/resources/list/ for a complete listing.

Resource/contexts indexed

Maintained By

Elements

Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
gene expression and molecular abundance repository
/title, summary, organism
ArrayExpress (AE)
microarray data and geneindexed expression profiles
/name, description, species, experiment_type
caNanoLab (CaNano)
biomedical nanotechnology research results
/Composition, Association, Method, etc.
Adverse Event Reporting System Data (AERS)
adverse events reported to FDA by doctors and other professionals
/Drug_char, Drug_names, Drug_admin_route
Clinical Trials (CT)
reports on clinical research in human volunteers
/title, description, condition, intervention
Research Crossroads (RXRD)
medical funding data
/title
UniProt KB (UPKB)
protein sequence and functional information
/genesymbol, goAnnotationList, proteinName

National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)

23,287 (21 Mb)

European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI)

16,444 (23.4 Mb)

National Cancer Institutes cancer Nanotechnology
Lab

890 (19.1 Mb)

AersData.org

1,172,881
(278.4 Mb)

ClinicalTrials.gov

101,606 (187.3 Mb)

ResearchCrossroads.org

1,033,651 (89.6 Mb)

UniProt.org

18,461 (4.2 Mb)

and can drill down on the specific resources that contain their
terms of interest or any other relevant terms.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by the National Center for Biomedical Ontology, under roadmap-initiative Grant U54 HG004028
from the National Institutes of Health. The NCBO Resource Index
won the First prize in the Semantic Web Challenge 2010
(http://challenge.semanticweb.org/).

Appendix A. Lists of ontologies and resources

see Tables 1 and 2.
