Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 245246

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the

World Wide Web

Editorial
Semantic Web dynamics

Recent years have witnessed the arrival of more and more
semantically annotated data and related ontologies in the Semantic Web. For example, the Linked Open Data initiative has been
very successful in making ontologically annotated datasets available online, with a constantly evolving set of interconnected RDF
graphs. While existing semantic tools and reasoning engines are
getting better in dealing with time invariant ontological knowl-
edge, supporting rapidly changing information has not until now
attracted sufficient attention. However, with the deluge of dynamic
data now being created  from sensor data streams, to geospatial
information and imagery, financial transactions, news feeds, 3D
models, engineering data, information for policy intelligence 
the issues of evolving, maintaining, updating and managing data
and knowledge on the Web over time are becoming critical.

The ontologies as the basis of the Semantic Web need to be up-
dated: changes could be initiated because of a change in the world
being modelled; or by a change in the users needs which would require a different conceptualization; or by the acquisition of knowledge previously unknown, unclassified or otherwise unavailable;
or by the noticing of a design flaw in the original conceptualization.
In all these cases, the representation of knowledge in the ontology
should be modified so as to form a more accurate or adequate conceptualization of the domain.

At the data level, semantic data on the Web, especially linked
data, suffers from the same issues. Conceptual structures at the basis of the representation of the data need to be maintained, access
methods to the data need to take into account the evolution of the
data, and links between different pieces of data need might require
specific mechanisms where such pieces of data evolve over time.
In a nutshell, the general issue of Semantic Web dynamics includes difficulties from both practical and theoretical points of
view, raising a variety of research questions and development chal-
lenges, such as how to support the ontology and data publishers in
maintaining up-to-date, adequate representations; how to detect
the need for evolution and changes; how to facilitate the integration of new, dynamic sources in existing datasets and ontologies;
how to validate and evaluate the impact of the changes on semantic information; how to handle changes triggered from multiple
sources and collaborative updates; and how to keep track of (pos-
sibly concurrent) versions of and ensure the delivery of up-to-date
and valid knowledge.

In this special issue, we collect original, high quality articles
that together answer some of these questions, focusing on the
challenges raised by dynamic data and knowledge on the Semantic
Web. In Concept drift and how to identify it, the authors consider
the complex notion of concept drift on the Semantic Web, i.e., of

1570-8268/$ - see front matter O 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2011.06.008

the changes in the meaning of identified concepts over time. The
authors use four concrete case studies in different, more or less
open domains, and different formats. The practical result presented
in this paper is a method to identify concept drift in Web
ontologies.

DSNotify  A Solution For Event Detection And Link Maintenance in Dynamic Datasets tackles the complex problem of link
maintenance in dynamic datasets. Indeed, the distributed and
uncoordinated evolution of linked datasets can lead to broken or
incorrect links. DSNotify provides a simple solution based on
detecting and notifying data publishers of the changes happening
in the dataset they link to. DSNotify is based on an event detection
mechanism that represent changes in an EventSet vocabulary and
taking a resource-centric perspective on data changes, therefore
making it particularly suited to the tasks of maintaining links in
Web data.

In Using Provenance to Debug Changing Ontologies, the
authors consider scenarios in which ontologies are updated and
evolved in a collaborative fashion, possibly leading to conflicts
and inconsistencies. They propose a mechanism to reason with
the provenance of ontology statements, based on the notion of pin-
pointing. In doing so, critical questions in debugging ontologies
such as When has an inconsistency been introduced and who
has made this change? or Can I trust this inference? can be
answered.

Also considering the scenario of collaborative development and
maintenance of ontologies, the article A Holistic Approach to Collaborative Ontology Development Based on Change Management
presents an environment, both as tool-support and methodological
guidelines,
for realising, monitoring and managing ontology
changes from multiple sources. This environment is based both
on the formalisation of the ontology editing workflow, and on a
specific representation of ontology changes. This conceptual
framework forms the basis of the distributed change management
environment, which also includes mechanisms for ontology synchronisation and change propagation.

While representing only a small sample of all the research
realised on the issues related to Semantic Web dynamics, these
four articles demonstrate how critical and broad the challenges
in this area are: from the maintenance of the meaning of concepts on the Web, to the resolution of inconsistencies in collaboratively built ontologies; and from the management of events
and links between linked datasets to the propagation of changes
in distributed ontology editing workflows. We expect that more
high quality articles on Semantic Web dynamics will appear in
the future.

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 245246

Grigoris Antoniou
Institute of Computer Science, FO.R.T.H. Vassilika Vouton,
P.O. Box 1385, GR 71110 Heraklion,
Greece
E-mail address: Antoniou@ics.forth.gr

Mathieu dAquin
Knowledge Media Institute, the Open University Walton Hall,
Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA,

E-mail address: m.daquin@open.ac.uk

Jeff Z. Pan
Department of Computing Science,
University of Aberdeen  Aberdeen,

E-mail address: jeff.z.pan@abdn.ac.uk

