Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 16 (2012) 32

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial
The Semantic Web Challenge, 2011

The goal of the Semantic Web Challenge1 is to provide researchers and industry with a forum to showcase the best Semantic Web applications, to demonstrate practical progress towards
achieving the vision of the Semantic Web, as well as to show the
value of Semantic Web technologies within various application do-
mains. The Semantic Web Challenge has been organized annually
since 2003.

The Semantic Web Challenge 2011 took place at the 10th
International Semantic Web Conference held in Bonn, Germany,
from 2327 October 2011. The challenge consisted of two tracks:
the Open Track and the Billion Triples Track. The Open Track
requires that applications are designed to operate in an open Web
environment and that they utilize the semantics of the data which
they process, whilst the Billion Triples Track focuses on dealing
with very large amounts of RDF data, which has been crawled from
the public Web and thus exhibits characteristics such as vocabulary
heterogeneity and varying data quality. For the 2011 challenge,
we provided the participants of the Billion Triples Track with an
RDF data set consisting of approximately 2 billion triples. The data
set was crawled by Andreas Harth from the Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology, to whom we are very grateful for the enormous effort
that he put into compiling this data set.

The Semantic Web Challenge 2011 received 15 submissions (10
for the Open Track and 5 for the Billion Triples Track). All submissions were evaluated rigorously by a jury composed of leading scientists and experts from industry in a 3-round knockout
competition, according to a comprehensive set of challenge re-
quirements. In the second round, the seven best submissions were
chosen based on their presentation as a poster and demonstration.
In the final round, the winners were picked after oral presentations
and further live demonstrations.

In this special issue, we present articles about the awardwinning systems: the winner in the Open Track and the winner
of the Billion Triples Track, as well as the system receiving an
honourable mention in the Open Track.

The winner of the Open Track was BOTTARI, an augmented
reality mobile application to deliver personalized and locationbased recommendations by the continuous analysis of social media
streams. The application was developed by the multidisciplinary
team of Irene Celino, Daniele DellAglio, Emanuele Della Valle,
Marco Balduini, Yi Huang, Tony Lee, Seon-Ho Kim, and Volker Tresp
from Politecnico of Milano, Italy, SIEMENS Corporate Technology
in Munich, Germany and the Korean Saltlux. The application
combines local views with emotive analysis of live streaming
twitter and blog posts to give the end user a novel augmented
reality of the local Korean dining scene.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2012.09.004

The winner of the Billion Triples challenge was SchemEX 
Efficient Construction of a Data Catalogue by Stream-based Indexing
of Linked Data developed by Thomas Gottron, Mathias Konrath,
Ansgar Scherp, and Steffen Staab of the Institute for Web Science
and Technologies (WeST) at the University of Koblenz-Landau in
Germany. They were awarded the prize for the design of a realtime index generation algorithm which they successfully applied
to build a concise lookup index for the Billion Triples data set.

For their foreshadowing of the upcoming internet of things, the
judges gave an additional honourable mention to A Middleware
Framework for Scalable Management of Linked Streams by Danh
Le-Phuoc, Hoan Nguyen Mau Quoc, Josiane Xavier Parreira, and
Manfred Hauswirth of the Digital Enterprise Research Institute
(DERI) at the National University Ireland Galway. The middleware
framework maps a very large number of streaming real world
sensor data into a dynamic RDF model and provides an integrated
live view on the data.

These three papers demonstrate the diversity of ways in which
Semantic Web data can be used, and represent some of the best
applications developed in the research community, combining a
wide range of technologies with clear use cases and well-designed
interfaces.

We would like to thank all the members of the jury for their detailed judgment of the strengths and weaknesses of the submitted
applications. The jury this year consisted of:
 Hideaki Takeda (National Institute of Informatics, Japan)
 Ivan Herman (W3C, Netherlands)
 Mark Greaves (Vulcan, Inc., USA)
 Peter Mika (Yahoo!, Spain)
 Sweitze Roffel (Elsevier, USA)
 Tim Finin (University of Maryland, USA)
 Tom Heath (Talis, UK)
Special thanks also go to the sponsor of the Semantic Web

ChallengeElsevierfor their long-standing support.

Christian Bizer
Freie Universitat Berlin, Berlin, Germany
E-mail address: chris@bizer.de.
Diana Maynard
University of Sheffield, UK
Available online 3 October 2012
 Correspondence to: Garystrasse 21, 14195 Berlin, Germany. Tel.:
