Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 147148

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Editorial
Using provenance in the Semantic Web

The Web is a decentralized system full of information provided
by diverse open sources of varying quality. For any given question
there will be a multitude of answers offered, raising the need for
assessing their relative value and for making decisions about
what sources to trust. In order to make effective use of the
Web, we routinely evaluate the information we get by checking
the sources that provided it and the processes that produced it.
A trust layer was always present in the Web architecture, and
Berners-Lee envisioned an oh-yeah? button in the browser to
check the sources of an assertion. The Semantic Web raises these
questions in the context of automated applications (e.g. reasoners,
aggregators, or agents), whether trying to answer questions with
the Linked Data cloud, using a mashup appropriately, or determining trust on a social network. Therefore, provenance is an
important aspect of the Web that becomes crucial in Semantic
Web research.

Provenance has been addressed in a variety of areas in computer science targeting specific contexts, such as databases, scientific workflows, and Semantic Web. Provenance is important in a
variety of contexts, including open science, open government,
and intellectual property and copyright. Provenance requirements
must be understood for specific kinds of Web resources, such as
documents, services, ontologies, workflows, and datasets.

This special

issue on Using Provenance in the Semantic
Web of the Journal of Web Semantics collects a series of contributions representing the state-of-the art in handling provenance
while using and reasoning about information and resources on
the Web.

DBpedia is one of the central hubs on the Web of Data. It
provides a Linked Data view of Wikipedia.
Modelling Provenance of DBpedia Resources Using Wikipedia Contributions
(by Orlandi and Passant) presents an approach for adding provenance information about the statements in DBpedia by connecting these statements to the Wikipedia edits they are
derived from. This provenance information is subsequently exposed as Linked Data using several existing provenance ontolo-
gies. It is estimated that the entire provenance of Wikipedia
would be 7 billion triples.

Provenance provides new information for reasoning. Robust
and Scalable Linked Data Reasoning Incorporating Provenance
and Trust Annotations (by Bonatti, Hogan, Polleres, and Sauro) describes a reasoning system that uses several forms of provenance
to help deal with ontologies from the open web. The reasoning
makes use of four forms of provenance: a black list of known faulty
sources, a notion of an authoritative provider for an ontology (that
is, the definition of a term from a namespace should be given
priority over a redefinition of it in another namespace); and the
use a centrality metric to approximate trust. Provenance is used
to perform authoritative rule-based (OWL2 Rules/RDF) reasoning

1570-8268/$ - see front matter O 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2011.05.005

on a large corpus of over a billion triples. With this approach,
inconsistency detection is also shown.

One key use of provenance is to enable reproducibility of pro-
cesses. Provenance-Based Reproducibility in the Semantic Web
(by Moreau) presents a reproducibility semantics for the commu-
nity-developed Open Provenance Model. It describes many interpretations of reproducibility and the challenges they pose in
terms of provenance research. A reproducibility service based on
Semantic Web technologies is described that reflects this seman-
tics. Importantly, the reproduction of a workflow is demonstrated
using multiple underlying execution engines. This demonstrates
how an ontology-based approach can enable an execution technology independent representation of provenance while still allowing
for reproducibility. An interesting result of the paper is that no one
Semantic Web technology can be used to implement the described
semantics. Provenance requires many elements (e.g. recursive que-
ries, inference of individuals and n-ary relations) that push the current state of the art.

Enhancing Workflows with a Semantic Description of Scientific Intent (by Pignotti, Edwards, Gotts, Polhill) investigates capturing the intent of a scientist when running a computational
simulation the biodiversity domain. Here, the aim is not only to
capture the execution of a scientific experiment but the motiva-
tion, goals and constraints the scientist has for that experiment.
For example, a scientist may only be interested in simulation results that obtain a particular score. The intent is captured by an
ontology that extends the Open Provenance Model and allows intent to be captured by SWRL rules. By capturing this information,
better documentation about an experiment can be produced. In
addition, it is possible to check that the experiment complies with
the intent.

A common thread through these papers is the use of already
existing provenance ontologies. As the community comes to an
increasing agreement on the commonalities of provenance representations through efforts such as the W3C Provenance Working
Group, this will further enable new research on the use of prove-
nance. This continues the fruitful interaction between standardization and research that is one of the hallmarks of the Semantic Web.
Overall, this set of papers demonstrates the latest approaches to
enabling a Web that provides rich descriptions of how, when,
where and why Web resources are produced and shows the sorts
of reasoning and applications that these provenance descriptions
make possible.

Editors
Yolanda Gil
Information Sciences Institute,
University of Southern California (USC),
4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 1001,

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 147148

Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695, USA
Tel.: +1 310 448 8794
E-mail address: gil@isi.edu

Paul Groth
Dept. of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
De Boelelaan 1081A, Suite 1001,
Amsterdam, 1081 HV,

The Netherlands
E-mail address: p.t.groth@vu.nl

