Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 235240

A short study on the success of the Gene Ontology

Michael Bada a,

, Robert Stevens a, Carole Goble a, Yolanda Gil b, Michael Ashburner c,

Judith A. Blake d, J. Michael Cherry e, Midori Harris f, Suzanna Lewis g
a Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Kilburn Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK

b Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, 4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 1001, Marina del Rey, CA 90292, USA

c Department of Genetics, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EH, UK

d The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA

e Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-5120, USA

f EBI-Hinxton, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK

g Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California-Berkeley,

Received 3 December 2003; received in revised form 7 December 2003; accepted 10 December 2003

Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA

Abstract

While most ontologies have been used only by the groups who created them and for their initially defined purposes, the Gene
Ontology (GO), an evolving structured controlled vocabulary of nearly 16,000 terms in the domain of biological functionality,
has been widely used for annotation of biological-database entries and in biomedical research. As a set of learned lessons offered
to other ontology developers, we list and briefly discuss the characteristics of GO that we believe are most responsible for its
success: community involvement; clear goals; limited scope; simple, intuitive structure; continuous evolution; active curation;
and early use.
 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Gene Ontology; Ontology development; Biological database; Annotation

1. Introduction

As part of the evolution toward a Semantic Web,
Web resources will have to be annotated with sig-


Corresponding author. Tel.: +44-161-275-6160;

fax: +44-161-275-6236.

E-mail addresses: mbada@cs.man.ac.uk (M. Bada),

rstevens@cs.man.ac.uk (R. Stevens), carole@cs.man.ac.uk
(C. Goble), gil@isi.edu (Y. Gil), ma11@gen.cam.ac.uk
(M. Ashburner), jblake@informatics.jax.org (J.A. Blake),
cherry@stanford.edu (J.M. Cherry), midori@ebi.ac.uk (M. Harris),
suzi@fruitfly.org (S. Lewis).

nificant amounts of markup that can be reliably processed by computational agents. Many believe that
this markup will largely consist of terms from on-
tologies, in which conceptualizations of domains have
been specified in the form of hierarchically structured
sets of uniquely named and defined terms and their in-
terrelationships. To this end, a number of ontologies in
a variety of domains have been constructed. However,
most of them remain used only by the groups who
created them and for their initially defined purposes.
An exception to this trend is the Gene Ontology
(GO; http://www.geneontology.org) [2,3], a structured

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2003.12.003

M. Bada et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 235240

controlled vocabulary in the domain of biological
functionality. GO initially consisted of a few thousand
terms describing the genetic workings of three organisms and was constructed for the express purpose of
database interoperability; it has since grown to a terminology of nearly 16,000 terms and is becoming a
de facto standard for describing functional aspects of
biological entities in all types of organisms. Further-
more, in addition to (and because of) its wide use as a
terminological source for database-entry annotation,
GO has been used in a wide variety of biomedical
research, including analyses of experimental data [1]
and predictions of experimental results [4]. In light
of this success, we have sought to distill GOs noteworthy characteristics, and to draw conclusions from
them, for consideration by other groups developing
ontologies.

2. The Gene Ontology

It is clear that organisms across the spectrum of
life, to varying degrees, possess large numbers of gene
products with similar sequences and roles. Knowledge about a given gene product (i.e., a biologically
active molecule that is the deciphered end product of
the code stored in a gene) can often be determined
experimentally or inferred from its similarity to gene
products in other organisms. Research into different
biological systems uses different organisms that are
chosen because they are amenable to advancing these
investigations. For example, the rat is a good model
for the study of human heart disease, and the fly is a
good model to study cellular differentiation. For each
of these model systems, there is a database employing
curators who collect and store the body of biological
knowledge for that organism. This enormous amount
of data can potentially add insight to related molecules
found in other organisms. A reliable wet-lab biological experiment performed in one organism can be used
to deduce attributes of an analogous (or related) gene
product in another organism, thereby reducing the
need to reproduce experiments in each individual organism (which would be expensive, time-consuming,
and,
technically impossible).
However, querying these heterogeneous, independent
databases in order to draw these inferences is diffi-
cult: The different organism database projects may

in many organisms,

use different terms to refer to the same concept and
the same terms to refer to different concepts. Further-
more, these terms are typically not formally linked
with each other in any way. GO seeks to reveal these
underlying biological functionalities by providing a
structured controlled vocabulary that can be used
to describe gene products, and shared between biological databases. This facilitates querying for gene
products that share biologically meaningful attributes,
whether from separate databases or within the same
database.

GO was begun as an effort between the FlyBase
project (which catalogs information about Drosophila
melanogaster, a species of fruitfly; http://flybase.
bio.indiana.edu/),
the Mouse Genome Informatics
project (which integrates information about the laboratory mouse; http://www.informatics.jax.org/), and
the Saccharomyces Genome Database project (which
concentrates on the budding yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae; http://www.yeastgenome.org/). Prior
to
collaboration, each database had an existing controlled vocabulary for internal use in the annotation
of gene products. For example, in FlyBase, the precursor to GO was a controlled vocabulary of approximately 1,000 terms detailing functions of Drosophila
gene products, which were stored in a simple flat list
and used to annotate several thousand gene products
within FlyBase. In 1998, representatives from the
three database groups established the GO Consortium
to develop a common vocabulary that would describe
biological functions shared by these organisms and,
ideally, any function found in any organism.

GO chose the simplest data structure sufficient for
the initial taska directed acyclic graph; the structure
of GO is described in more detail below. The terminology of GO is used to annotate gene products with
respect to three attributes: the specific molecular functions that these products possess, the higher-level biological processes in which they participate, and the
cellular components in which they can be found. GO
currently has been used to annotate more than one
million gene products within the various participating
databases. A fragment of GO can be seen in Fig. 1.

GO was started as an unfunded project, although
all of the founding groups had grant funding for their
own databases. AstraZeneca (a major pharmaceutical company) gave a pump-priming grant early in
1999 and, in 2000, the project was awarded a grant

Fig. 1. A screenshot of a portion of GO in DAG-Edit (http://www.geneontology.org/dagedit userguide/dagedit.html#dagedit), a tool for
editing controlled vocabularies that are represented as directed acyclic graphs. The left pane displays the GO hierarchies, from which
toxin binding activity has been selected. The lower center and right panes show information for this term, including its natural-language
definition, synonym, external-database reference, and all of its ancestor terms. A term related to its parent via an is-a relationship is shown
with a circled i to the left of the term, and a term related to its parent via a part-of relationship is shown with a squared p to the left
of the term.

by the US National Institutes of Health; this has
recently been renewed for a further three years. In
addition, there is funding to the Consortium, or its
members, for the implementation of GO from the UK
Medical Research Council and from the European
Commission.

3. Characteristics of GO

Here we present and briefly discuss the primary
characteristics of GO that we believe to be responsible
for its widespread use.

3.1. Community involvement

One of the factors that account for GOs success is
that it originated from within the biological community rather than being created and subsequently imposed by external knowledge engineers. Terms were
created by those who had expertise in the domain,
thus avoiding the huge effort that would have been required for a computer scientist to learn and organize
large amounts of biological functional information.
This also led to general acceptance of the terminology
and its organization within the community. This is not
to say that there have been no disagreements among

M. Bada et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 235240

biologists over the conceptualization, and there is of
course a protocol for arriving at a consensus when
there is such a disagreement. However, a model of a
domain is more likely to conform to the shared view
of a community if the modelers are within or at least
consult to a large degree with members of that com-
munity.

The Consortium emphasized that GO was not
a dictated standard. Rather, it was envisioned that
groups would join the project because they understood its value and believed it would be in their interest to commit to the ontology. Participation through
submission of terminology for new areas and challenging current representation of functionality was
encouraged.

3.2. Clear goals

for

The GO project had a clear goal from the start: to
provide a common vocabulary for describing genes
products, in terms of the three aforementioned at-
tributes,
the primary purpose of consistently
annotating entries in biological databases. (The Consortium also noted that some databases would initially annotate at the level of genes rather than gene
products, as many lacked separate database objects
to represent the different products that a given gene
may encode.) The Consortium also called for tools
to query and edit the terminology and to aid users
in assigning terms to gene products. They made it
clear that annotation with GO terms is not a complete
methodology to unify biological databases, although
it is a necessary part of this process. Furthermore, the
team made a deliberate decision that GO terms and
relationships should not attempt to reflect the structure of gene products or indicate whether they are
related to one another in an evolutionary sense.

3.3. Limited scope

It was decided to limit the scope of GO (at least ini-
tially) by defining only those terms needed to describe
relatively specific molecular functions, more general
biological processes, and cellular components. Obvi-
ously, many other areas might have been included, but
it was felt that these three categories can be applied to
all gene products across all organisms and thus made
a good place to start.

3.4. Simple, intuitive structure

Since GO is represented as a directed acyclic
graph, it is more complex than a simple hierarchy in
that a term can have more than one parent. However,
the structure is still relatively simple: Each node in
the graph is a natural-language term with a corresponding unique seven-digit numeric identifier and,
for the majority of terms, a natural-language defi-
nition, while each edge is either an is-a or part-of
relationship. GO is subdivided into three hierarchies
corresponding to the three biological attributes within
its scope, and each of these hierarchies is constructed
from a mixture of taxonomy and partonomy (i.e.,
each term can be related to each of its parents via is-a
or part-of). This dichotomy has been criticized by
many from the computer-science community, as most
agree that the hierarchies of formal ontologies should
be built exclusively from is-a links between terms.
GOs taxonomic/partonomic hierarchical structure is
not intrinsic to the domain, as the same knowledge
could be identically represented as a strict is-a hierarchy with additional part-of relationships between the
terms. However, the GO Consortium felt that their
directed acyclic graph was a representation encoding
the desired knowledge that was also relatively clear
to the intended audience, and indeed, most biologically oriented users find the hierarchical organization
intuitive. In addition, it was agreed that the three hierarchies would be independent of each other (i.e., that
there be no links between terms from separate hierar-
chies) so that a given attribute of a given biological
entity could be assigned a term without the risk of
implying additional (possibly erroneous) information
about the entity. Additional complexity was to be
considered in the future.

3.5. Continuous evolution

GO is constantly evolving through the addition of
new terms and refinement of the existing ontology.
Taking this dynamic approach to content was a conscious decision that served dual purposes. First, there
was an imperative to provide a practical resource of
immediate utility. In addition, biological research (or
any research for that matter) is by definition a domain that is continuously expanding, and GO must
be able to continuously adapt to refined biological

knowledge. Thus, it was unrealistic to wait until GO
was finished; rather, it approaches completeness
by being put to use: deficiencies are noted, and GO is
edited to address as many of these deficiencies as pos-
sible. Without this inherent iterative evolution, developing the rich, complex model of functional biology in
GO would be impossible. The Consortium uses a central CVS repository to manage this ongoing process.

3.6. Active curation

While community involvement is essential for refining particular subdomains within GO, it was also
realized that there was an equally compelling need to
retain a central team of dedicated curators who would
provide cohesion and monitor the overall integrity of
GO. There are currently four full-time editors who
work in the Consortiums editorial office and nearly
forty more researchers situated at the sites of the participating databases who also have permission to write
to the CVS repository. GO team members alert each
other (as well as users) of changes, be they restructurings of subtrees of the ontology or simpler additions of terms, via e-mail and at a site on Sourceforge
(http://geneontology.sourceforge.net/). They also meet
face to face three or four times a year.

Curators must obviously make changes carefully,
especially when altering relationships between child
and parent terms, as these could affect the direct and
implied semantics of annotations that have been made
using the terms. The natural-language term itself can
be edited relatively easily, although any change in
the terms conceptual content (i.e., a change in its
definition) requires a new corresponding unique iden-
tifier. Terms may be reclassified as obsolete but are
never actually deleted; this is done so that existing
annotations do not reference null values during the
time lag between the term being made obsolete and
the reannotation of the entity. In order to distinguish
the lexically identical terms that separate organism
communities have historically used with different
connotations, the terms are denoted as being in the
sense of (using the qualifier sensu) to indicate the
appropriate context for understanding the term.

3.7. Early use

Initial success was documented in the Consortiums
paper on the earliest GO implementation (in 2000),

where it was stated that the terminology had already
been used to describe over 15,000 gene products in the
original three member databases [2]. Specific examples of gene-product annotations with GO terms and
explanations of their semantics were also included so
that this was not an abstract exercise. Applications of
GO in wider contexts were given, including the use
of annotations to analyze gene-expression data (the
results from an important type of biological experi-
ment). Additional momentum was gained when two
more major biological databases (one focusing on the
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana and the other on
the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans) joined in
2000, confirming the expectation that other organism
databases would commit to GO [3]. This acceptance
of GO by these major community databases granted
it a certain early legitimacy.

4. Conclusions

We have endeavored to compile a set of lessons
learned from the experience of the GO Consortium
for the benefit of other groups constructing ontolo-
gies. Among those that stand out is the importance of
community involvement: The ontology must have the
approval of the community for which it is being built,
and for that to happen, a representative subset should
participate in, if not lead, the initial conceptualiza-
tion. The tasks for which the ontology is suitable (and
those for which it is not suitable) should be clearly
defined. At a finer granularity, this should include a
set of its competency questions (which for GO essentially amounts to being able to retrieve the taxonomic
and partonomic relatives of the terms). Concrete examples of use should be shown, and proof of benefits
from use will encourage others in the community to
commit to the ontology.

The scope of an ontology of course does not have
to be narrow, but it is important to keep in mind
that development becomes increasingly labor- and
time-intensive as richness and complexity grow. The
community therefore must also be provided with intuitive software tools for ontology construction and
editing and for browsing and querying its use in disparate databases. A community outside the realm of
formal computer science is more likely to accept a resource with a relatively simple structure; if a complex

M. Bada et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 235240

ontology is constructed,
the accompanying tools
should be able to hide some of this complexity from
members of the community attempting to work with
it. Whatever the degree of complexity with which an
ontology is initially built, it should be able to evolve
to satisfy the requirements of those interested in using it. At the simpler end, this evolution can consist
mostly of relatively inexpensive additions of concepts
to the ontology, as is the case with GO. Such an
effort should be coordinated by a team of dedicated
curators.

Using these methods, the development of GO has
been sustainable thus far, although more sophisticated
representations and methodologies may be required in
the future as its size further increases. One such example under consideration is Gene Ontology Next Generation (GONG), in which GO has been expressed as
a Description Logic (specifically, DAML+OIL), thus
enabling formal definition of concepts as well as the
ability to reason over and automatically classify these
term definitions [5]. Furthermore, the Open Biological
Ontologies Consortium (http://obo.sourceforge.net/),
of which GO is a member, has recently proposed that
DAML+OILs successor, OWL, be adopted as one
of their ontology exchange languages.

The growth of GO over the last 5 years has been
impressive. We are not implying that an ontology must
have all of the previously described characteristics of
GO to be successful, but rather imparting what we
believe has contributed to its success with the hope that
it may be of use to ontology projects in other domains.
With the use of a host of successful ontologies such as
GO, many more resources, on the Web and elsewhere,
could be more readily and reliably exploited.
