Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 2 (2004) 99103

Bibstera semantics-based bibliographic Peer-to-Peer system

Peter Haasea,
, Bj orn Schnizlera, Jeen Broekstrab, Marc Ehriga, Frank van Harmelenb,
Maarten Menkenb, Peter Mikab, Michal Plechawskic, Pawel Pyszlakc, Ronny Siebesb,

Steffen Staaba, Christoph Tempicha

a Institute AIFB, University of Karlsruhe, D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany

b Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands

c Empolis, Warsaw, Poland

Received 7 July 2004; received in revised form 7 September 2004; accepted 29 September 2004

Abstract

This paper describes Bibster, a Peer-to-Peer system for exchanging bibliographic metadata among researchers. We show how
Bibster exploits ontologies in data-representation, query formulation, query routing, and query result presentation. The Bibster
system is freely available and is used by researchers across multiple organizations.
 2004 Published by Elsevier B.V.

Keywords: Peer-to-peer; Semantic web ontologies; Knowledge management

1. Introduction

In this paper, we describe the Bibster system1, an
application of the use of semantics in Peer-to-Peer sys-
tems. Bibster is aimed at researchers that share bib-


Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 721 6083705; fax: +49 721

693717.

E-mail addresses: haase@aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de (P. Haase),
schnizler@iw.uka.de (B. Schnizler), jbroeks@cs.vu.nl (J. Broek-
stra), ehrig@aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de (M. Ehrig), frankh@cs.vu.nl (F.
van Harmelen), mrmenken@cs.vu.nl (M. Menken), pmika@cs.vu.nl
(P. Mika), mpl@empolis.pl (M. Plechawski), pap@empolis.pl (P.
Pyszlak), ronny@cs.vu.nl (R. Siebes), staab@aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de
(S. Staab), tempich@aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de (C. Tempich).

1 Bibster is freely available for download under http://bibster.

semanticweb.org/.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2004 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2004.09.006

liographic metadata. Currently, many researchers in
computer science keep lists of bibliographic metadata
in BibTeX format that they must laboriously maintain
manually, for which they do not have an easy overview,
and that has greatly varying quality. At the same time,
many researchers are willing to share these resources,
provided they do not have to invest work in doing
so. The following characteristics make this scenario
an interesting use case for a semantics-based Peer-to-
Peer system. First, a centralized solution does not exist
and cannot exist, because of the multitude of informal workshops that researchers refer to, but that do not
show up in centralized resources, such as DBLP2. Sec-

2 http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/ley/db/.

P. Haase et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 2 (2004) 99103

Fig. 1. Screenshot of the Bibster system.

ond, the use of Semantic Web technology is crucial in
this setting. Although a small common-core ontology
of bibliographic information exists (title, author/editor,
etc.), but much of this information is very volatile and
users define arbitrary add-ons, like including URLs.

Ontologies are crucial throughout the usage of Bib-
ster, viz., for importing data, formulating and routing
queries, and processing answers. Fig. 1 shows how
these steps are realized in the user interface of Bib-
ster. The Scope widget allows for defining the targeted
peers, the Search and Search Details widgets allow for
keyword and semantic search; Results Table and BibTeXView widgets allow for browsing and re-using query
results. In the following, we will describe the use of semantic methods in each of these steps. A detailed presentation of the architecture and methods of the Bibster
system can be found in [1,2].

2. Bibster architecture and modules

The Bibster system has been implemented as an instance of the SWAP System architecture as introduced
in [1]. Fig. 2 shows a high-level design of the archi-

tecture of a single node in the Peer-to-Peer system. We
will now briefly present the individual components as
instantiated for the Bibster system.

The Communication Adapter is responsible for the
network communication between peers. It serves as a
transport layer for other parts of the system, for sending
and forwarding queries. It hides and encapsulates all
low-level communication details from the rest of the
system. In the specific implementation of the Bibster
system we use JXTA as the communication platform.
The Knowledge Sources in the Bibster system are
sources of bibliographic metadata, such as BibTeX files
stored locally in the file system of the user. The Knowledge Source Integrator is responsible for the extraction and integration of internal and external knowledge
sources into the Local Node Repository. The Local
Node Repository provides the following functionality:
(1) It serves as storage for and provides views on the
available knowledge, (2) it supports query formulation
and processing, (3) it serves as a registry of peer descriptions as the basis for peer selection.

The task of the Informer is to proactively advertise
the available knowledge of a peer in the Peer-to-Peer
network and to discover peers with knowledge that may

Fig. 2. SWAP system architecture.

be relevant for answering the users queries. This is realized by sending advertisements about the expertise of
a peer. In the Bibster system, these expertise descriptions contain a set of topics that the peer is an expert in.
The Query Replier is the coordinating component controling the process of distributing queries. It receives
queries from the user interface or from other peers. It
initiates the processing of the queries locally and may
decide to forward them to other peers, according to
the peer selection model. The User Interface allows
the user to import, create and edit and export bibliographic metadata as well as to easily formulate queries,
as shown in Fig. 1.

3. Semantic methods in Bibster

3.1. Import and semantic representation of
bibliographic metadata

Many researchers have accumulated extensive collections of BibTeX files for their bibliographic refer-
ences. The Bibster system allows users to import their
own bibliographic metadata into a local RDF reposi-
tory. Bibliographic entries made available to Bibster by
a user are automatically aligned to two common ontolo-
gies: The first ontologythe Semantic Web Research

Community Ontology (SWRC3)describes different
generic aspects of bibliographic metadata, such as pub-
lications, persons, organizations, etc. and the relations
between them. The second ontologythe ACM Topic
Hierarchy4describes specific categories of literature
for the Computer Science domain. The bibliographic
entries are classified automatically during import, but
can be reclassified manually in the user interface of
Bibster via drag and drop.

3.2. Semantic querying using SeRQL

Queries are formulated in terms of the two ontolo-
gies: queries may concern fields like author, publication
type, etc. (using terms from the SWRC ontology) or
queries may concern specific Computer Science terms
(using the ACM Topic Hierarchy). We use SeRQL5 to
query the RDF repository.

When querying the bibliographic metadata, we
make use of the following characteristics of SeRQL: (1)
It is a functional and compositional language, meaning

3 http://www.semanticweb.org/ontologies/swrc-onto-2001-12-

11.daml.

4 http://www.acm.org/class/1998/.
5 Sesame RDF Query Language, http://www.openrdf.org/doc/

SeRQLmanual.html.

P. Haase et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 2 (2004) 99103

that each query returns an RDF graph, which may be
shipped between peers, integrated into the local repos-
itory, or queried again. (2) It allows to formulate path
expressions for navigating the RDF graph, i.e. the combination of SWRC and ACM topic hierarchy. (3) It is
aware of the schema, allowing us to query against the
concept hierarchy of the used ontologies. (4) It is able
to deal with optional values. This is important as BibTeX entries may be incomplete, e.g. a publisher field
may be given or not.

3.3. Expertise-based peer selection

In the Bibster system, the user can specify the scope
of a query: He can either query the local knowledge,
direct the query to a selected set of peers, or can query
the entire peer network. For the latter option, the scalability of the Peer-to-Peer network is essentially determined by the way how the queries are propagated in
the network. Peer-to-Peer networks that broadcast all
queries to all peers do not scaleintelligent query routing and network topologies are required to be able to
route queries to a relevant subset of peers that are able
to answer the queries. In the Bibster system, we apply
the model of expertise-based peer selection as proposed
in [3]. Based on this model, peers advertise semantic
descriptions of their expertise specified in terms of the
ACM topic hierarchy. The knowledge about the expertise of other peers forms a semantic topology, in which
peers with a similar expertise are clustered. To determine an appropriate set of peers to forward a query to, a
matching function determines how closely the semantic content of a query that references an ACM topic
matches the expertise of a peer.

3.4. Semantic duplicate detection

Due to the distributed nature and potentially large
size of the Peer-to-Peer network, the returned result
set for a query might be large and contain duplicate
answers. Furthermore, because of the heterogeneous
and possibly even contradicting representation, such
duplicates are often not exactly identical copies. Here,
ontologies help to measure the semantic similarity between the different answers and to remove apparent duplicates as identified by the similarity function. Bibster
uses specific similarity functions that operate on various properties of the publications and on different lev-

els of similarity. For example, to determine the similarity of two publications we calculate the syntactic similarity of the titles using the Levenshtein similarity mea-
sure. At the graph level, we determine how resources
are interlinked, e.g. to compare publications based on
their co-authorship. On the ontology level, we apply a
hierarchical similarity function to determine the taxonomic similarity of the classifications of publications
according to the ACM topic hierarchy. Finally, we apply background knowledge about the bibliographic domain that considers, for example, that publication types
are often provided as Misc, if their type is unknown.

From the variety of individual similarity functions,
an overall value is obtained with an aggregated similarity function by means of a weighted average. As
duplicates we consider those pairs of resources whose
similarity is larger than a defined threshold. Instead of
presenting all individual resources of the query result,
the duplicates are then visualized as one merged resource that represents the combined knowledge about
the publication.

4. Evaluation and conclusion

The Bibster system is currently being evaluated by
means of a public field experiment. The user actions
and system events are continuously logged and analyzed to evaluate the user behavior and system perfor-
mance. We have analyzed the results for a period of 1
month (June 2004) and we have obtained the following
interesting results: 53 peers used the Bibster system and
shared more than 33,000 bibliographic entries. Eight
peers shared more than 1000 items each. The users
performed a total of 700 queries. The SWRC ontology
was used for about an half of all queries. Most searches
concerned queries for authors (144). In 101 queries, the
users asked for topics of the ACM topic hierarchy. With
respect to query routing, with the expertise-based peer
selection we were able to reduce the number of messages by about 50%, while retaining the same recall
of documents compared with a naive broadcasting ap-
proach.

With our case study, we have shown that for Bibster and similar applications the usage of Semantic
Web technologies and ontologies provide an added
valuein fact, it is almost a strict requirement given
its semi-structured, volatile data structures. Semantic

structures serve important user concerns like high quality duplicate detection or comprehensive searching ca-
pabilities.

Acknowledgments

Research reported in this paper has been partially
financed by the EU in the IST Project SWAP (IST-
2001-34103).
