Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 207228

Optimizing taxonomic semantic web queries using

labeling schemes

V. Christophides a,

, G. Karvounarakis a, D. Plexousakis a,

Michel Scholl b, Sotirios Tourtounis c

a Institute of Computer Science, FORTH, Vassilika Vouton, P.O. Box 1385, GR 711 10, Heraklion, Crete, Greece

b CEDRIC/CNAM, 292 Rue St. Martin, 75141 Paris, Cedex 03, France

c Department of Computer Science, University of Crete, GR 71409 Heraklion, Greece

Received 23 June 2003; received in revised form 1 October 2003; accepted 19 November 2003

Abstract

This paper focuses on the optimization of the navigation through voluminous subsumption hierarchies of topics employed by
portal catalogs like Netscape Open Directory (ODP). We advocate for the use of labeling schemes for modeling these hierarchies in
order to efficiently answer queries such as subsumption check, descendants, ancestors or nearest common ancestor, which usually
require costly transitive closure computations. We first give a qualitative comparison of three main families of schemes, namely bit
vector, prefix and interval based schemes. We then show that two labeling schemes are good candidates for an efficient implementation of label querying using standard relational DBMS, namely the Dewey prefix scheme and an interval scheme by Agrawal
et al. We compare their storage and query evaluation performance for the 16 ODP hierarchies using the PostgreSQL engine.
 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Taxonomic semantic web queries; Resource description framework; ODP

1. Introduction

Semantic web applications such as e-commerce,
e-learning, or e-science portals and sites require advanced tools for managing metadata, i.e., descriptions
about
the meaning, usage, accessibility or quality

 An earlier version of this paper appears in the proceedings


Corresponding author. Tel.: +30-2810-39-16-28;

of WWW2003.
fax: +30-2810-39-16-01.

E-mail addresses: christop@ics.forth.gr

(V. Christophides),

gregkar@ics.forth.gr (G. Karvounarakis), dp@ics.forth.gr
(D. Plexousakis), scholl@cnam.fr (M. Scholl),
tourtoun@csd.uch.gr (S. Tourtounis).

of information resources (e.g., data, documents, ser-
vices) found on corporate intranets or the Internet.
To describe resources, various structured vocabularies (i.e., thesauri) or thematic taxonomies (i.e., conceptual schemas) are widely employed by different
user communities. Such descriptive schemas represent nowadays an important part of the hierarchical
data available on the web [18]. In this context, the
resource description framework (RDF) [4,16] is increasingly gaining acceptance for metadata creation
and exchange by providing: (i) a standard representation language for descriptions based on directed
labeled graphs; (ii) a schema definition language
(RDFS) [4] for modeling user thesauri or taxonomies

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2003.11.001

V. Christophides et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 207228

as class/property subsumption hierarchies (i.e., trees
or DAGs); and (iii) an XML syntax for both schemas
and resource descriptions. For instance, web portals
such as Netscape Dmoz or Chefmoz, MusicBrain,
CNET, XMLTree1 export their catalogs in RDF/S. In
this paper, we are interested in labeling schemes for
such hierarchical data exported by portals, in order to
optimize complex queries on their catalogs.

A portal catalogcreated according to one or more
topic hierarchies (schemas)is actually published
on the web as a set of statically interlinked Html
pages:2 each page contains the information resources
(objects) classified under a specific topic (class), as
well as various kinds of relationships between top-
ics. In particular, the subtopic relationship represents
subsumption (isA) between classes. Then, a portal
schema forms a tree (single isA links) or a DAG
(multiple isA links) of classes (at best semi-lattices),
and assists end-user navigation: for each topic one
can navigate to its subtopics (i.e., subclasses) and
eventually discover the resources which are directly
classified under them. In [3,14,20], we have studied
how declarative query languages for RDF/S can support dynamic browsing interfaces and personalization
of both portal schemas and resource descriptions.
This paper is a first step toward the general optimization of query languages for RDF/S. We focus on the
optimization of a large class of queries, central to semantic web applications, namely the queries on class
hierarchies. Basically, we optimize such queries by
avoiding costly transitive closure computations over
voluminous class hierarchies.3 More precisely, we are
interested in labeling schemes for RDF/S class (or
property) hierarchies allowing us to efficiently evaluate descendant/ancestor, adjacent/sibling queries, as
well as, finding nearest common ancestors (nca) by
using only the generated labels. Compared to the transitive closure evaluation reported in our previous work
[14], the performance gains for these queries are of
34 orders of magnitude when using adequate label-

1 See http://www.dmoz.org, http://www.chefmoz.org, http://
http://www.

http://www.home.cnet.com,

www.musicbrain.orb,
xmltree.com, respectively.

2 Note that RDF is used as an export format for bulk catalog

loading.

3 For example, the catalog of the Open Directory Portal/Dmoz

comprises around 200 M of Topics exported in RDF files.

ing schemes! Then, starting from a topic somewhere
in the taxonomy, a user can easily and efficiently access not only its parent/children (as in existing portals)
but also the leaf topics underneath where most of the
web resources are classified, discover sibling topics
(where related web resources may be found) or even
continue navigation from the nca of two topics in the
hierarchy. It is worth noting that we focus in this paper on intentional queries (i.e., schema queries), since
they represent a novel requirement for semantic web
applications. However, our optimization techniques
can be easily applied to extensional queries (i.e., data
queries) involving complex data paths as in the case
of RDF resource descriptions or XML documents.

Several labeling schemes for tree or graph-shaped
data have been proposed for network routing [12],
object programming [2,5,15,10,11,24], knowledge
representation systems [1] and recently XML search
engines [9,26,17,13,8,7,21]. However, choosing a
labeling scheme for efficiently supporting the functionality required by web portals is still an open issue
because:
 Portals isA hierarchies of classes, may range from
simple trees to complex DAGs [18] while the ordering of subclasses is not important (compared to
XML search engines); therefore we need a labeling
scheme for trees that can be easily extended for
DAGs with a reasonable extra storage and querying
cost.
 Querying/browsing portal schemas heavily relies on
bulk class retrieval using complex filtering conditions on subsumption relationships (unlike network
routing, object programming or knowledge representation systems treating two nodes/classes at a
time); thus we need a labeling scheme generating
class labels which can be efficiently processed by a
database back-end using standard index structures
(i.e., B-trees).

We are interested in the tradeoff between storage
and query requirements of different labeling schemes
for both trees and DAGs of RDF/S classes (or prop-
erties). Our contribution, guided by the efficient implementation of label querying using standard DBMS
technology, is three-fold.
 Section 2 briefly recalls the RDF/S modeling primitives used to represent the ODP catalog and presents

statistics about the size and the morphology of the
ODP class semi-lattices that are used for our performance evaluation of existing labeling schemes.
 Section 3 provides a qualitative analysis of
bit-vector, prefix, and interval based labeling
schemes for tree or graph-based data exported by
portals like ODP. We pay particular attention to the
expression of the core query functionality (i.e., de-
scendant/ancestor/leaf, adjacent/sibling, nca) with
each labeling scheme.
 Section 4 compares the performance of two representative labeling schemes, namely the Unicode
Dewey prefix scheme [6] and the extended postorder
interval scheme by Agrawal et al. [1], in terms of
storage requirements and query execution time on
top of an ORDBMS (PostgreSQL). We focus on the
efficient translation of the different types of queries
over class trees (single isA) into SQL, as well as,
the extra cost required for DAGs (multiple isA).

2. Motivating example: ODP

Portals aggregate and classify various information
resources for diverse target audiences (e.g., enterprise,
professional, trading). A portal catalog includes descriptive information about resources found on corporate intranets or the Internet. The complexity of the
semantic descriptions, using thesauri, taxonomies or
more sophisticated ontologies depends on the scope of
the community domain knowledge as well as the nature of the available resources (sites, documents, etc.).
In most web portals, resources are classified under
large hierarchies of topics that can be represented and
exchanged using RDF/S. Fig. 1 depicts a part of the
RDFS schema employed by Netscape Open Directory
(or Dmoz) Portal (ODP) identified by the namespace
ns1:4 nodes denote class names/topics (e.g., Museum)
and solid edges denote subsumption relationships between them (e.g., ArtMuseum  Museum). Note that
the roots of all topic hierarchies (e.g., Arts, Regional,
Reference) specialize the core RDF/S class Resource.
These hierarchies are class semi-lattices and in the

administrative metadata

For
as

4 http://www/dmoz.org/schema.rdfs.
such

simplicity, we
omit
titles, mime-types,
modification-dates, of web resources represented in ODP by an
OCLC Dublin-Core like schema [23].

simplest case take the form of trees.5 From an application viewpoint, they play the role of facets, which
can be combined in order to describe and retrieve web
resources.

Using faceted classification, a resource is described
(classified) using one or more topics from each facet.
For example, in Fig. 1, the web site of Rodin museum in Paris is classified under both Reference/
Museum/Art&Entertainment/Art-Museum/European/
lrencn and Regional/Europe/France/Regions/Ile-de-
France/Paris/Museums where the dashed edges stand
for RDF/S instantiation relationships. We can observe
that topic names are composed of different descriptive terms (e.g., Museum, France). The ODP schema
designers partially replicate these terms in the various
topic hierarchies in order to denote all the valid combinations of terms (from different facets). In our ex-
ample, cultural and geographical terms (e.g., Museum
and France) appear in both Reference and Regional
hierarchies, while the complete path from the root
of these hierarchies is used as a prefix to distinguish
topic names. For simplicity, we hereforth omit the
schema namespaces as well as the prefix paths.

Table 1 lists the complete statistics of 16 ODP hierarchies (version of 01/16/2001) comprising 253,214
topics under which 1,688,037 web resources are classified (fan-in stands for the fan-in degree of the tree,
i.e., the number of direct subclasses of a given class).
Note that the total number of distinct terms used by
all topics is 80,795 while 14,355 of them (17.77%)
are replicated in more than one topic name. Under
these topics, a total number of 1,715,225 resources
are classified with 118,925 (6.93%) of them multiply
classified under more than one topic. Moreover, due to
the partial replication of terms, ODP topic hierarchies
are relatively deep (the average depth is 7.83 and the
maximum is 13) with a varying fan-in at each level
(the maximum fan-in degree is 314 while the average is only 0.9999). Table 1 also illustrates the depth
of classes with the maximum fan-in degree for each
hierarchy. ODP subclass trees are far from complete
and the largest percentage of the classes appears in
the upper half of the respective trees. In addition, the

5 It is worth noticing that the effect of multiple isA is partially
captured by terms replication in several hierarchies as well as other
link types defined between topics such as symbolic and related.

V. Christophides et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 207228

rdfs: http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf schema#
rdf: http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22 rdf syntax ns#

Class

ns1: http://www.dmoz.org/schema.rdfs#

Resource

Property

TypeOf(instance)
SubClassOf(isA)

Arts

Regional
