Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 3 (2005) 209210

Editorial

Semantic Web Challenge 2004

Dear reader,

Once again the Semantic Web Challenge attracted
scientists from Universities and Research Labs as well
as software developers working in companies. The
organizers are content with the 80% increase of submissions compared to the year before. This can be considered as a big success giving the fact that the challenge
hasnt been around for long. Also, the incorporation of
the awarding ceremony and the online demonstration
of the best Semantic Web Application in a plenary session during ISWC 2004 can be considered positively.
This underlines the tendency that the challenge gets
more attention regarding the Semantic Web community worldwide. A description of the most sophisticated
applications will be included in the ISWC proceedings
for the 2005-edition of the challenge.

The applications that were submitted in 2004 are
very diverse in the functionality that they provide and
the domain they work on. There are semantically structured portal sites, e.g. the Madeira portal of Nesstar
Ltd./University of Essex, which provides access to
social sciences datasets, the International Affairs portal of the Spanish political institute Elcano, developed
by iSOCO, and MuseumFinland, the runner-up in this
years competition which provides a semantic portal
that contains metadata from the collection databases
of the several Finish museums. There are some knowledge management applications, such as the KMP by
INRIA Sophia Antipolis, which maintains interests and
needs of actors in the Telecom Valley of Sophia, and
NASAs Semantic Organizer, a semantically structured
collaborative knowledge management system which
has been used inside NASA, to support the evidence

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2005.05.007

The Semantic Web Challenge is a yearly competition that aims at exhibiting the potentials of
the Semantic Web by creating applications that
use this technology. The challenge is defined by
a number of minimal criteria for Semantic Web
applications and a yearly updated goal.
The challenge started in 2003 with 10 appli-
cations,
in 2004 the number of submissions
increased to 18. The submissions came from
several countries, i.e. Finland, France, Germany,
Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, the United States of
America and the United Kingdom. Each application has been evaluated three times by experts
with a background in knowledge representation,
machine learning working at Universities, large
research organizations or in industry. The submissions are ranked based on the minimal criteria and
additional desired properties.
The Semantic Web Challenge is organized in
cooperation with the International Semantic Web
Conference (ISWC). The winner of the challenge
is announced during this conference and the submitted applications are demonstrated at the con-
ference. More information about the challenge can
be found at: http://challenge.semanticweb.org.

organizing needs of the Space Shuttle Columbia acci-
dent. In addition, there are applications about music
recommendation (MusiDB, Vrije Universiteit of Ams-
terdam), dynamic linking in the biomedical domain
(GOHSE, Manchester University), research communities and bibliographic data (Flink, Vrije Universiteit

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 3 (2005) 209210

of Amsterdam, and Bibster, University of Karlsruhe),
shared bookmarks (Annotea, W3C), Semantic Webbased accessibility (SWAP, UB Access) and others.

Besides the above mentioned applications, there
were also a number of submissions of what can be
described as infrastructure applications. These are
applications that provide support for creating Semantic Web applications but do not provide direct end-user
functionality. For example, pOWL from the University
of Leipzig delivers a web-based ontology development
platform and Swoogle (University of Maryland) is a
search engine for Semantic Web documents, i.e. RDF
and OWL documents. Such applications are very useful
for Semantic Web developers and are also a prerequisite for the Semantic Web to become more widespread.
However, they are less suited to the general aim of the
challenge: illustrate the possibilities of Semantic Web
technology to the general public.

One observation of previous years challenge was
that most of the applications used simple and shallow ontologies, mostly taxonomies. We argued in a
provocative way that this could be the future for ontologies on the Semantic Web. In response to this observa-
tion, we formulated as special task for the challenge
in 2004 to show the benefits of the inference capabilities of the Semantic Web languages used within
the application. Compared to the 2004 edition of the
challenge, there is indeed an increase in the use of
reasoning in applications. The top three applications
all exploit some reasoning. However, also this year
the majority of the applications did not use advanced
inference capabilities, such as automatic classification and satisfiability checks. Does this mean that we
will only see light-weight ontologies on the Web?
We think that this would be too easy to state since
there exist already more sophisticated ontologies (such
as the cancer ontology from the US national cancer institute). However, it is quite possible that the

majority of future applications will only need shallow ontologies and simple inference mechanisms. We
will monitor the development of this issue in the next
challenges.

Some of the applications that took part in the competition will be published in this journal during the
next couple of issues. In this issue, we start with the
winner of last years challenge, an application from
the Vrije Universiteit of Amsterdam called Flink and
the runner-up, an application from the University of
Helsinki and the Helsinki Institute for Information
Technology (HIIT) called MuseumFinland. In addition to the written description of the applications in
this journal, there is also an online walkthrough of
each application available at the website of the jour-
nal, http://www.semanticwebjournal.org. This combination of printed and semi-permanent on-line content
gives the readers the possibility to read and view the
applications, both now and in the future.

Online demonstrations of some of the other participants of the Semantic Web Challenge 2004 and
information about this years challenge can be found at
http://challenge.semanticweb.org. And now, have fun
reading the descriptions of the two best Semantic Web
Applications of 2004.

Michel Klein
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Division of
Mathmatics and Computer Science, De Boelelaan
1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands


Ubbo Visser
Universit at Bremen, Germany
Corresponding author
E-mail addresses: michel.klein@cs.vu.nl
(M. Klein)
visser@tzi.de
