Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 415419

Walking through CS AKTive Space: a demonstration of an

integrated Semantic Web application


Nigel R. Shadbolt

, Nicholas Gibbins, Hugh Glaser,

Stephen Harris, m.c. schraefel

School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton SO171BJ, UK

Received 5 December 2003; received in revised form 4 June 2004; accepted 16 June 2004

Abstract

We describe CS AKTive Space, an integrated semantic web application and winner of the 2003 Semantic Web Challenge
[http://www.challenge.semanticweb.org/]. A demonstration of the application is available at http://cs.aktivespace.org/. CS AKTive Space represents and integrates a wide range of heterogenous resources representing the computer science domain in
the UK; it supports the exploration of patterns and implications inherent in the content and exploits a variety of services,
visualisations and multidimensional representations to support questions like who is working with whom, where are there geographical concentrations in funding or research area, who are the most significant researchers in an area. We briefly show how
this demonstration illustrates a number of substantial challenges for the Semantic Web. These include problems of referential
integrity, tractable inference and interaction support. We review our approaches to these issues and discuss relevant related
work.
 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: CS AKTive Space;Semantic Web application; Computer Science

1. Introduction

In this paper, we step through a demonstration of CS
AKTive Space, a Semantic Web application that lets
users investigate the domain of UK University-based


Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 23 8059 7682;

fax: +44 23 8059 3313.

E-mail addresses: nrs@ecs.soton.ac.uk (N.R. Shadbolt),

nmg@ecs.soton.ac.uk (N. Gibbins), hg@ecs.soton.ac.uk
(H. Glaser), swh@ecs.soton.ac.uk (S. Harris),
mc@ecs.soton.ac.uk (m.c. schraefel).

research in computer science. The application exploits
a wide range of semantically heterogeneous and distributed content relating to computer science research
in the UK. It provides services such as methods to explore research areas and institutions for researchers; it
can show the geographic range and extent of where a
topic is researched; it provides an estimation of top
researchers in a topic and by geographic region, and it
is able to calculate a researchers community of prac-
tice. A longer description of CS AKTive Space is given
in [1].

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2004.06.001

N.R. Shadbolt et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 415419

2. Interaction design

CS AKTive Space presents a light-weight UI for exploring an ontology-modelled domain. By leveraging
the semantic affordances of the domain as spatially presented visual queries, it disguises the complexity of the
sources, services and queries running real-time beneath
the interface. Hiding the complexity of the processes
beneath a clear UI lets users explore both the relations
and details of computer science research in the UK. If
they wish, at any point, they can go beneath the hood
to browse the sources and their provenance for any entity of interest presented in the UI. Thus, we provide
multiple ways for users to engage the space to build
up actionable knowledge. In order to contextualize the
above interaction description, we present a brief walkthrough of the interaction pictured in Fig. 1.

In the state pictured, the user has re-sorted the column views from the default arrangement of < Research
Area | Region | Researcher > to < Region | Research
Area | Researcher >. The Region column shows that a
200 mile reticule has been selected in the map view, and
the reticule has been dragged over part of the map representing southern England. From the list of research
areas that shows up in the Research Area column, artificial intelligence has been selected. With the constraints
on Researcher set as Top 5, determined by Grant Total,
the list of five people in AI with the greatest grant totals are represented. One of the researcher names has
then been selected. The Detail View shows that that
researcher is the current selection: it is populated with
information about the researcher, including full name,
contact information, URL and list of significant papers
on the left two-thirds of the view. In the right remaining

Fig. 1. CS AKTive Space UI featuring multicolumn queries and geographical visualizer and constraint controller.

third, the list of the researchers community of practice
is generated automatically by the CoP service described
in Section 4. Finally, at the bottom of the window the
user can invoke the Armadillo service by the Run Armadillo service button. As described in Section 4, Armadillo will search for additional information about
this researcher to supplement the information already
present in the triplestore. Browsing the source data for
the selected researcher will give the provenance of that
data.

The final state of the UI shows both the context of
discovery for the current selected information, as well
as a view of the detailed information available about
the researcher. The formal model underlying this interaction is described in [2].

3. Knowledge acquisition and maintenance

Even in a distributed environment such as the
Semantic Web, the physical distribution of data is
much less important than the semantic distribution of
data brought about by the use of disparate ontologies
for the same application domain. For the purposes of
this application we use a single common ontology to
express the data which drives the CS AKTive Space.
We use this common ontology, the AKT Reference
Ontology [3], to mediate and guide the integration
of the different data sources. When expressed in
terms of our ontology, the RDF data obtained from
these sources is made publicly available through the
hyphen.info web site (hyphen being the name for the
knowledge acquisition effort) and cached in an RDF
triplestore [4] which provides the necessary query
and inferential capabilities on which CS AKTive
Space is built. The hyphen metadata gathered by
these mediators consists of 430MB of RDF/XML files
containing around 15 million RDF triples describing
800,000 instances of people, places, publications and
other items of interest to the academic community.

Due to the wide variety of the data sources that we
use, we have found it necessary to invest a degree of
effort in developing individual mediators for each of
our data sources that recast these sources in terms of
our ontology. These mediators range from specialized
database export scripts to XML transformation tools [5]
that have been trained to extract the required content
from semi-structured web pages. While the bulk trans-

lation of instance data by such a mediator is straight-
forward, our use of these mediators has shown that
the mapping of existing structured and semi-structured
data at the schema/ontology level is not a task that can
be effectively automated in all cases; the investment of
effort in building mediators for our common ontology
is reflected in the consequent perceived value of the
knowledge base to which they contribute.

The CS AKTive Space application requires that a
range of content be available for use by the system.
As it stands, some of this content already exists in suitable structured forms, while other content does not. We
adopt a pragmatic attitude that reflects the fact that although the content that we are gathering is the prime
mover that drives the interface, we should also be tolerant of inconsistencies in that content. We adopt a
pragmatic approach in which we make the immediate
best use of the available data sources, perhaps in an imperfect fashion, while anticipating that we will be able
to make better use of them in future.

We employ both push and pull models of knowledge acquisition, where push and pull refer primarily
to whether the publisher or consumer are responsible
for translating the data into a form which is suitable for
the consumer. We use the pull model predominantly for
large, comparatively static data sources (for example,
the list of countries and administrative regions given
by ISO3166), and as an interim solution for high-value
data sources that are of general interest to the community as a means to pump-prime the system with
sufficient data to encourage other members of the community to participate.

The current development of knowledge services on
the Semantic Web raises a number of issues which
are not commonly encountered in existing knowledge
based systems, and which pertain to the distribution of
knowledge and the difficulty of obtaining agreement on
a conceptualisation in a distributed environment when
there is no ultimate authority. One such issue is that of
coreference, which arises when more than one uniform
resource identifier is used to refer to a given resource,
and which causes particular problems when statements
from different knowledge bases are to be combined. We
have three complementary approaches to this problem
for CS AKTive Space. Firstly we support the simple social solution, where we allow the emerging knowledge
base to be used as a gazetteer or name authority, so that
new knowledge can be asserted with a common agree-

N.R. Shadbolt et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 415419

ment on URIs. Secondly we have heuristic methods that
conservatively coalesce appropriate entities [6] (using
owl: saraeAs assertions). Thirdly we have developed a
coreference editor that builds on the second heuristic
approach, but allows user intervention.

4. Key services

The core of the CS AKTive Space system is a set
of (mostly HTTP) services that collaborate to provide
the knowledge capabilities required by the user inter-
face. Currently, the services that comprise CS AKTive
Space are manually composed a priori; we intend to
migrate to a system in which the services are bound
dynamically using service discovery techniques, to reduce brittleness and allow opportunistic service use.
The current service portfolio is as follows.

4.1. 3store

This application needs to be able to evaluate queries
over a large volume of RDF data; to meet this require-
ment, we developed the scalable RDF(S) triple-store,
3store [4].

4.2. Geographic visualizer

This service provides a graphical representation of
the geospatial information within the ontology (the locations of institutions of interest) and permits the user
to directly specify geographical constraints.

4.3. Armadillo

Armadillo [7] is a service for on-the-fly, user-
determined, directed knowledge acquisition from web
pages, which can be used to opportunistically expand
the knowledge base. Pre-existing knowledge is used
to inform natural language searches (over a variety of
web sources) that extract further knowledge and assert
it back into the triplestore.

4.4. Ontocopi

Ontocopi is a community of practice [8] analysis
service that identifies the implicit communities that exist within a knowledge base. Ontocopi uses Ontologi-

cal Network Analysis to discover connections between
the objects that the ontology only implicitly represents.
For example, the tool can discover that two people have
similar patterns of interaction, work with similar peo-
ple, go to the same conferences, or publish in the same
journals.

5. Conclusions and future work

We have a strong proof of concept for an integrated
Semantic Web application, but for CS AKTive Space
to become a significant community resource, we need
the content that we cannot get without participation.
We need individuals and/or organizations to publish
RDF content either directly against our ontology or
else against an ontology we can translate. Participation cannot usually be enforced. Users have to see very
strong benefits for the effort of publishing their content
against our ontology.

We have started to see that happen within the UK
CS community, and more recently, the eScience com-
munity. Interestingly, it is not simply the power of the
back end tools that has provoked these enquiries and
requests to apply CS AKTive Space to other domains;
it has also been the user interaction. There is an immediate appeal to the fact that patterns and gestalts,
particular and general content exploration can be so
rapidly effected.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Advanced Knowledge Technologies (AKT) Interdisciplinary Research
Collaboration. AKT is sponsored by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
under grant number GR/N 15764/01 and comprises
the Universities of Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Sheffield,
Southampton and the Open University.
