Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 139140

Editorial

WWW conference special issue

Collected in this conference special issue are revised and extended versions of five of the best papers
from the Semantic Web track at the Twelfth International World Wide Web Conference, which took place
in Budapest, Hungary between the 20th and 24th
of May 2003. The conference was a great success,
gathering together over 700 participants from more
than 20 different countries. The conference included
12 refereed paper tracks covering the very broad
range of interests that makes up todays Web research
community. Over 600 papers were submitted to these
tracks, and with an acceptance rate of only 12.8% (77
papers), this was the most competative World Wide
Web Conference to date.

The Semantic Web track was particularly successfulit attracted 98 submissions, making it the second
largest track at the conference. Of these, only 12 papers
could be accepted for presentation at the conference
(in line with the overall acceptance rate), and consequently only papers of the very highest quality were
selected. One of these, SemTag and Seeker: Bootstrapping the Semantic Web via Automated Semantic
Annotation by Dill et al., was a worthy (joint) winner
of the Best Paper Award, and a revised and extended
version of this paper appeared in the first issue of this
Journal.

The Semantic Web sessions at the conference were
very well attended, with rooms often being packed
to capacity, or even beyond. This produced a real
hothouse atmosphere (in more senses than one),
with standing room only at many of the talks, and set
the scene for some very lively question and answer
sessions after the presentations.

Unfortunately, the very low accepance rate meant
that many good quality papers were rejected, and as
Program Commitee Vice Chair for the Semantic Web

track, I would like to take this oportunity to commiserate again with those authors whose papers, in
spite of recieving very possitive reviews, were still not
acceptedit simply would not have been possible to
accept all of these papers without the Semantic Web
track taking over the whole conference (an interesting
idea, but one that would no doubt be resisted by the
other Vice Chairs).

The papers collected here reflect the diversity of
Semantic Web research, with topics including web
services, data management and integration, network
routing and clustering strategies, annotating the hidden web (i.e., content stored in databases), and
efficient labelling schemes for large hierarchies.

In Agent Based Semantic Web Services, Gibbins
et al. address the issue of communication amongst
agents that need to discover and use semantic web
services described using semantically enriched terms
whose meaning is defined by an ontology. They argue that the brittleness of message passing systems is
reduced by separating the domain specific content of
messages (e.g., weather information) from their communicative intention (e.g., a directive or a request). In
support of this argument, they describe their experience of building an agent-based Web Services system
in which this separation is achieved by using by using
(extensions of) the process and profile components of
the DAML Services ontology to describe the intension
and content (respectievely) of a message.

In Piazza: Mediation and Integration Infrastructure for Semantic Web Data, Ives et al. argue that the
Semanitic Web cannot succeed if it requires existing
resources to be completely rebuilt; instead, it must be
able to exploit existing structured data and applica-
tions. They present Piazza, a system that can integrate
and query over multiple XML data sources with dif-

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2003.12.001

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2004) 139140

ferent document structures, including those with an
XML/RDF structure. They suggest that the Piazza architecture provides a useful mediation mechanism for
heterogeniously structured data, and that it makes it
much easier to integrate new data sources.

In Super-Peer-Based Routing Strategies

for
RDF-Based Peer-to-Peer Networks, Nejdl et al. discuss a new type of peer-to-peer networkone based
on RDF schemasand describe the use of super-peer
based topologies for such networks. They claim that
super-peer based networks offer many advantages
over broadcast based networks, providing better scal-
ability, supporting sophisticated routing and distribution stategies, and supporting networks where the
metadata of the peers can be based on heterogeneous
schemas. This last point will be particularly important
in the context of the Semantic Web where it cannot
be assumed that all peers will use the same metadata
schema.

In Unveiling the hidden Bride by Annotating the
Deep Web, Handschuh et al. study the problem of
adding (semantic) annotations to web content that is
generated from databases, either directly by annotating
the database schema, or indirectly by annotating content generated from the database. The effect of adding
such annotations is to make database generated content available for use in the Sementic Web. They argue that this will be crucial to the realisation of the
Semantic Web given that the number of web pages
generated from databases now outnumber satic web
pages. Moreover, they show that this mode of annotation can provide an intuitive way to create semantic

data from a database, and that it allows the data to
remain in databases where it can be more efficiently
handled and more easily queried.

Finally, in Optimizing Semantic Web Queries using
Labeling Schemes, Christophides et al. focus on the
problem of optimizing navigation through very large
subsumption hierarchies of the kind that might be used
by portal catalogs such as the Netscape Open Direc-
tory. They advocate the use of labelling schemes that
provide for efficiently answering queries relating to
the subsumption partial ordering of the the classes in
the hierarchy, such as subsumption or least common
subsumer queries. Three different kinds of labelling
scheme are subjectively compared, and the storage and
query evaluation performance of the two most promising schemes is tested using Netscape Open Directory
hierarchies.

As well as the stringent conference selection criteria
mentioned above, these revised and extended papers
have also been subjected to the journals own rigorous
reviewing procedure. I would like to thank both the
authors and the reviewers for pulling out all the stops
in order to complete the revision and reviewing process
in time for the papers to appear in this issue.

Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science
University of Manchester, Kilburn Building
Manchester M13 9PL, UK
Tel.: +44-161-275-6133; fax: +44-161-275-6204
E-mail address: horrocks@cs.man.ac.uk
