DC Proposal: PRISSMA, Towards Mobile
Adaptive Presentation of the Web of Data

Luca Costabello

INRIA Edelweiss Team, Sophia Antipolis, France

luca.costabello@inria.fr

Abstract. The Mobile Web is evolving fast and mobile access to the
Web of Data is gaining momentum. Interlinked RDF resources consumed
from portable devices need proper adaptation to the context in which
the action is performed. This paper introduces PRISSMA (Presentation
of Resources for Interoperable Semantic and Shareable Mobile Adapt-
ability), a domain-independent vocabulary for displaying Web of Data
resources in mobile environments. The vocabulary is the first step towards a declarative framework aimed at sharing and re-using presentation information for context-adaptable user interfaces over RDF data.

Keywords: Mobile Web of Data, RDF Presentation, Adaptive UI.

1 Introduction

The Mobile Web and the Web of Data are strong trends for the next evolution of
the web. Ubiquitous access is growing fast, as a result of heterogeneous factors
such as new generation access networks, increasing device capabilities, novel
interaction paradigms and enhanced user interfaces1. At the same time, the
Linked Data Initiative2 contributes to the growing popularity of the world of
interlinked, structured and open data on the web. Soon mobile applications will
offer novel ways of consuming and contributing to the Web of Data, both with the
adoption of novel interaction modalities (e.g. enhanced Mobile Web applications,
voice interaction with the web, augmented reality, etc.) and, on the other hand,
with a deeper awareness of the surrounding physical environment.

Mobile Web of Data consumption faces the same general issues of classic Web-
of-Data-savvy applications, such as access strategy choice, vocabulary mapping,
identity resolution, provenance and data quality assessment [10]. Another wellknown problem affecting Web of Data applications consists in delivering effective
user interfaces for RDF resources. When dealing with mobile devices, the issue
of adaptation arises: classic Mobile Web experience suggests that the same information is not meant to be represented in the same way on all devices. Moreover,
context-awareness research underlines the influence of the surrounding environment on data representation [4,8,12,13]. The same principles and best practices

http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Smartphones.aspx
http://linkeddata.org/

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 7032, pp. 269276, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

L. Costabello

apply to RDF resource representation in mobile environments, as shown in the
following foaf:Person-related scenario.

Alice loves shopping. Today is at the shopping mall, looking for a birthday
present for Bob. She needs an idea, so she opens Bobs FOAF profile looking
for inspiration. Alices smartphone is aware of being at the mall, and therefore
displays Bobs interests while hiding other properties such as his email or geographical position. As she exits the mall and walks down the street, her smartphone visualizes Bobs profile as a foaf:Depiction on a map. In the meanwhile,
Bob is jogging. The mobile in his pocket updates him on the status of his FOAF
contacts using speech synthesis. Each contacts latest social status update is read
out loud. Bob listens the audio reproduction of Alices last tweet, and decides to
reply. As he stops running and takes the device into hands, the smartphone deactivates the audio representation and adopts a visual paradigm listing Alices
phone number, email and social network accounts.

RDF consumption in mobile environments needs contextual resource adaptation and heterogeneous dimensions must be involved (e.g. the mobile user
profile, the device features and the surrounding physical environment). Representation paradigm independence has to be provided, thus supporting multi-modality.
Moreover, tools designed for RDF resource adaptation on mobile devices must not
rely on ad-hoc solutions. Re-use must be favoured and encouraged, thus enabling
the exchange of context-based knowledge across heterogeneous applications. This
paper sets the basis for a Web of Data mobile presentation framework, and it focuses on the PRISSMA lightweight vocabulary3, an early stage contribution providing classes and properties to model core mobile context concepts useful for
dynamic adaptation of user interfaces for RDF data.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a state
of the art overview. Section 3 describes with further details the issue of mobile
adaptive RDF representation and presents the research plan. Section 4 describes
the PRISSMA vocabulary, an early contribution. In Section 5 a discussion of the
approach is provided, along with the most relevant perspectives.

2 Related Work

Related work includes proposals from heterogeneous research domains, such as
RDF presentation, content adaptation in mobile classic web and context-aware
data representation.

Fresnel [14] is a vocabulary modelling core presentation-level concepts for
RDF visualization. The assumption is that data and its related schema do not
carry sufficient information for representation: further presentation knowledge
has to be provided. This information is expressed in RDF as well, in order to
ensure homogeneity and favour presentation knowledge sharing among different
applications. In Fresnel, Lens components select and filter information while
Formats define how to present data. Designed for static environments, Fresnel
leaves contextual adaptation of RDF data to the application logic. Sharing and

http://ns.inria.fr/prissma
?

?

?
re-using contextual conditions for RDF presentation is therefore not possible.
More recent proposals targeting RDF user interfaces have been provided, both
of them being RDF template systems [1,2]. In LESS, the authors propose an end-
to-end approach to consume linked data based on the Smarty template engine
[1]. Dadzie et al. suggest a template-based RDF visualization approach aimed at
facilitating Web of Data consumption [2]. Although they move in the direction
of easing the development of Web of Data applications, these approaches do not
address the specific needs of mobile environments, e.g. context adaptability.

Initiatives such as the now discontinued W3C Model-Based User Interface
Incubator Group deal with classic Mobile Web content adaptation (i.e. RDF
consumption-related presentations issues are not considered) [6]. The declared
goal is to evaluate research on model-based user interface design for the authoring of web applications. The authors propose the Delivery Context Ontology, a
modular, fine-grained vocabulary to model mobile platforms [7].

CAMB is a mobile context-aware HTML browser that adapts web pages according to a predetermined set of environmental situations [8]. Other proposals
have been made in this direction, e.g. [4,12,13]. None of these address a Web-of-
Data-specific scenario.

The approach proposed in the remainder of the paper adapts and extends
to the mobile world (static) Web of Data representation best practices, such as
those described in Fresnel [14].

3 Towards Mobile Adaptive RDF Representation

Classic web content needs ad-hoc adaptation when displayed on portable devices
and its visualization is influenced by the surrounding mobile context as well [8].
Web of Data access is no exception: whenever an RDF-fuelled mobile application
needs to display some resources, adaptation (e.g., to the surrounding context)
must be performed to deliver better user experience.

A widely-accepted formalization of context can be found in [3] and inspires
the proposal in [6]. The authors of the latter describe the mobile context as an
encompassing term, an information space defined as the sum of three different
dimensions: the mobile User model, the Device features and the Environment in
which the action is performed. This proposal is adopted as operative definition
by the present work.

Dealing with Web of Data resources adaptation inside the application logic
prevents the sharing of context-related presentation knowledge and intrinsically
ties to a fixed representation paradigm. A common and shareable presentationlevel solution provides common ground for building mobile adaptive user inter-
faces, avoids re-inventing the wheel and favours the exchange of context-related
presentation knowledge between mobile applications. The need for sharing and
reuse contextual presentation is not compatible with hardwired, programmatic
approaches: a declarative proposition must be adopted to favour presentation
data reuse (the latter point being the main Fresnel objective [14]).

As mentioned in Section 1, mobile devices provide heterogeneous representation paradigms (not necessarily visual, e.g. voice). A presentation-level approach

L. Costabello

is independent from the representation paradigm chosen by the application, and
it is therefore suitable for mobile applications that need to change their RDF
representation paradigm dynamically (e.g. contextually switching from a nested
boxes layout `a la HTML to a timeline or voice output).

In terms of research plan, achieving contextual content adaptation on mobile

devices includes the following steps:

Contextual Presentation-Level Model Definition. The overall approach
relies on the PRISSMA vocabulary, used to specify in which context a given
representation must be activated. PRISSMA is designed as an extension of Fresnel [14] and it is described as an early contribution in Section 4.

Comparison between Declared and Real Context. Every time a Web
of Data resource is requested, PRISSMA-based applications need to compare
declared activation contexts and real situations to select the proper visualiza-
tion. Implementing a rendering solution based on PRISSMA introduces therefore a graph matching problem. On the front-end, this issue can be modeled
as a SPARQL ASK query performed against a set of PRISSMA declarations,
having the goal of looking for a match between the real, detected context and
a declared item in the set (both real context and the declared ones included
in the set are modelled with PRISSMA). The intrinsic nature of contextual
data and PRISSMA lightweight approach determine the need for an approximate matching solution. In other words, the comparison must take into account
the discrepancies between the declared context and the actual situation. The
proposed strategy must rely on a compound notion of distance: heterogeneous
dimensions need to be considered (e.g. location, time, terminological heterogene-
ity), therefore different metrics must be chosen, along with a proper composition
function. The algorithm needs to be unsupervised and one-pass, in order to enable responsive mobile applications.

Specificity Computation Rules. Conflicts might occur in case more than
one representation is suitable for the current situation: a specificity computation
mechanism has to be provided. This could be implemented giving higher priority
to the most detailed and specific PRISSMA declarations.

Presentation Knowledge Distribution. PRISSMA declarations can be published as linked data. A discovery mechanism is needed to enable mobile applications that rely on PRISSMA to potentially adopt representations shared on
the web.

4 PRISSMA Vocabulary Overview

The PRISSMA vocabulary provides classes and properties to model core mobile context concepts useful for dynamic adaptation of user interfaces for RDF
?

?

?
Fig. 1. The PRISSMA vocabulary at a glance. Grey boxes represent core classes.

data. Designed to work in conjunction with the Fresnel presentation vocabu-
lary, PRISSMA4 specifies when (i.e. in which context) Fresnel Lenses and Formats must be activated. The original Fresnel core vocabulary includes the class
fresnel:Purpose and the property fresnel:purpose, used to choose between
lenses in conflicting situations, i.e. when more than one lens applies. Predefined instances of fresnel:Purpose are provided, e.g. defaultLens, labelLens.
The extended Fresnel vocabulary provides instances such as screen, print and
projection, in order to support a basic media-based presentation. PRISSMA
re-uses fresnel:Purpose to model a contextual situation in which an associated
Fresnel lens and format must be activated.

PRISSMA is based on the definition of context provided in Section 3: it is
not meant to provide yet another mobile contextual model, therefore well-known
vocabularies are reused. Moreover, it does not provide an exhaustive set of properties for resource adaptation: (extensions are free to add further functionalities).
Fresnel Lenses and Formats are showed according to the following dimensions:

4 From latin prisma. In optics, a Fresnel lens can be considered as a series of prisms.

L. Costabello

:personInterestLens rdf:type fresnel:Lens;


	 

	
fresnel:classLensDomain foaf:Person;
fresnel:showProperties (foaf:name

foaf:depiction
foaf:interest).


	 a fresnel:Purpose;
		 			
	

	
 



			 a prissma:User;

foaf:interest <http://dbpedia.org/resource/Compulsive_shopping>.



 a prissma:Environment;

prissma:currentPOI [

prissma:poiCategory <http://dbpedia.org/resource/Shopping_mall>;

];
ao:activity <http://dbpedia.org/resource/Shopping>.

Fig. 2. A Fresnel Lens associated to a mobile context using PRISSMA

User. Represents the target mobile user associated to a fresnel:Purpose and
consists in a foaf:Person sub-class. To provide more flexibility, the class can
be used to model both user stereotypes and specific users.

Device. Represents the mobile device on which Web of Data resource consumption takes place, enabling device-specific data representation. The class inherits
from W3C Delivery Context Ontology [7] dcn:Device that provides an extensible and fine-grained model for mobile device features.

Environment. Models the physical context in which the Web of Data resource
consumption takes place, therefore enabling customized resource representation
according to specific situations. Different dimensions are involved in modelling
the surrounding environment. As anticipated in Section 3, PRISSMA does not
provide a comprehensive, fine grained model. The approach is to delegate refinements and extensions to domain specialists.

Location is modelled with the notion of Point of Interest (POI). The prissma:
POI class consists in a simplified, RDFized version of W3C Point of Interest
Core specifications [15]. POIs are defined as entities that describe information
about locations such as name, category, unique identifier, or civic address. Each
prissma:POI consists in a geo:SpatialThing and can be associated to a given
geo:Point coupled with a physical radius via the prissma:extension property.
The properties prissma:poiCategory and prissma:poiLabel are used to assign
a category (e.g. http://dbpedia.org/resource/Shopping_mall) and a label
(e.g. http://dbpedia.org/page/Harrods). Address details can be provided as
well, using the vCard ontology class v:Address [9].
?

?

?
Temporal dimension is modelled extending the time:TemporalEntity class
[11]. The prissma:descriptivePeriod property associates a description to each
Time entity (e.g. http://dbpedia.org/resource/Afternoon).

Other dimensions are considered: the motion property associates any given
high-level representation of motion to an Environment. The environmental proximity of a generic object can trigger different resource representations: nearby objects are associated to the Environment with the prissma:nearbyEntity prop-
erty. The prissma:Activity class consists in a placemark aimed at connecting
third-party solutions focused on inferring high-level representations of user actions
(e.g.running, driving, working, shopping, etc.). The Association Ontologys
ao:activity [5] is used to associate this class to the rest of the model.

Figure 2 provides an example related to the scenario presented in Section 1:
personInterestLens is a Fresnel lens that shows the interests of a foaf:Person.
The lens is activated by the purpose shoppingPurpose, which is defined by the
prissma:User compulsive buyer and by the prissma:Environment shopping
in a mall.

The original Fresnel proposition does not specify the representation paradigm
that the user agent should adopt (e.g. web page-based box model, voice output,
etc). Fresnel implementations output a paradigm-independent abstract box model
that is rendered appropriately by the application. Being able to address this aspect in a declarative way is important in a context-aware environment, where the
representation paradigm might vary dynamically. The class prissma:Paradigm
models therefore a Fresnel box model customized for a given representation
paradigm. The property prissma:usedParadigm allows the association to a
fresnel:Purpose.

5 Discussion and Perspectives

This paper presents an approach towards contextual adaptation of Web of Data
resources on mobile devices and describes the PRISSMA vocabulary used as
foundation.

Relying on a presentation-level approach guarantees independence from the
chosen Web of Data access strategy: PRISSMA operates after this step, and is
therefore compatible with the follow-your-nose approach, SPARQL endpoints
querying and indexing services APIs. PRISSMA relies on Fresnel, and complies therefore to the well-known presentation vocabulary, thus adding context
adaptability as a new scenario of use. A Fresnel-based approach favours the
sharing and reuse of contextual presentation knowledge across mobile applications consuming the Web of Data. The adoption of RDF formalism guarantees
homogeneity within presentation knowledge, i.e. context-related information are
expressed in RDF and no other formalism is needed. An extensible vocabulary
provides support to further contextual information.

On the other hand, it must not be underestimated that a context-savvy mobile
presentation layer based on an RDF vocabulary introduces intrinsic complexity
that has to be taken into account while developing context-adapting, RDF-based
applications.

L. Costabello

The PRISSMA vocabulary and the algorithms solving the research steps described in Section 3 need to undergo a proper evaluation. A mobile Web of Data
browser implementing the proposal described in this paper is to be provided as
a test bench. The prototype is meant to contextually adapt the representation
of requested instances, enabling therefore a testing campaign to compare the
resulting adaptation of Web of Data resources to user expectations.
