DC Proposal: Knowledge Based Access Control

Policy Specification and Enforcement

Sabrina Kirrane

Digital Enterprise Research Institute,
National University of Ireland, Galway

sabrina.kirrane@deri.org

http://www.deri.ie

Abstract. The explosion of digital content and the heterogeneity of
enterprise content sources have resulted in a pressing need for advanced
tools and technologies, to support enterprise content search and analysis.
Semantic technology and linked data may be the long term solution to
this growing problem. Our research explores the application of access
control to a knowledge discovery platform. In order to ensure integrated
information is only accessible to authorised individuals, existing access
control policies need to be associated with the data. Through in-depth
analysis we aim to propose an access control model and enforcement
framework which can be used to represent and enforce various access
models both inside and outside the enterprise. Furthermore, through
experimentation we plan to develop a methodology which can be used as
a guideline for the lifting of distributed access control policies from the
individual data sources to a linked data network.

Keywords: Policy, Access Control, Reasoning, Information Analysis,
Knowledge Discovery, Linked Data.

1 Introduction

The Internet is growing exponentially, fuelling research into the next generation of Internet technologies. Over the past two decades much research has gone
into the use of semantic technology and linked data for data integration, search
and information analysis. This exponential expansion of data and many of the
challenges that come with it are mirrored within the enterprise. Our use case
examines how such techniques can be used to build an integrated data network
for enterprise content analysis and knowledge discovery. Furthermore, we investigate how subsets of interconnected enterprise data can be shared with partner
companies or exposed on the Internet.

When we integrate data from multiple line of business (LOB) applications and
document repositories and share a subset of this information externally we need
to ensure that we dont expose sensitive data to unauthorised individuals. For
example, an application could be developed to extract and link data from both
a document management system (DMS) and a human resource (HR) applica-
tion. If several documents were written by the management team over the past

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 7032, pp. 293300, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

S. Kirrane

month, discussing future plans for the company, terms such as takeover, ac-
quisition, redundancy, office closure, pay cuts and lay-offs may feature
prominently in a list of last months frequent phrases. Worse still, by integrating
the data from both systems it might be possible to determine the offices that
are scheduled to be closed and the individual employees that will be laid off.
Much of the information within the enterprise is highly sensitive and as such the
access policies of the underlying data source applications need to be extracted,
represented and enforced in the linked data network.

In recent years, there has been a great deal of research into the use of policies
for access control [1], [2] and [3]. The term policy, in this context, is used
to refer to the access control model which describes the blueprint, the policy
language which defines both the syntax and the semantics of the rules and the
framework which is a combination of the access control model, the language and
the enforcement mechanism. Natural language, programming languages, XML
based languages and ontologies can all be used to express policies. XML and ontologies are two popular choices for representing policy languages as they benefit
from flexibility, extensibility and runtime adaptability. However, ontologies are
better suited to modelling the semantic relationship between entities. In ad-
dition, the common framework and vocabulary used by ontologies, to represent
data structures and schemas, provides greater interpretability and interoperabil-
ity. Regardless of the language chosen, a logic based underlying formalisation is
crucial for automatic reasoning in a linked data network. To date, very little
research has been done on the elevation and the representation of policies in the
linked data network. Many of the proposed access control models lack a formal
enforcement framework.

In this paper, we identify the need for a policy language which can represent
multiple access control models and a framework which will allow enterprises
to abstract information from existing content sources and publish subsets of
this data to the linked open data (LOD) cloud. With a view to addressing the
aforementioned issues our research focuses on the:

 Examination of existing enterprise content and access control models, with

a view to proposing an integrated model

 Analysis of the expressivity of existing policy languages and their ability to

represent multiple access control models

 Identification of a reasoning and enforcement framework taking into consid-

eration flexibility, interoperability, scalability and usability

 Development of a methodology for the automatic lifting of policies from the

individual data source to the linked data network

 Implementation of a prototype in order to evaluate the overall effectiveness

of the access control framework

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In section 2, we detail
our approach, the chosen research methodology and our evaluation strategy. In
section 3, we describe the shape of the literature with respect to related access
control models, languages and enforcement frameworks. Finally, we conclude and
give the direction of our future work in section 4.
?

?

?
2 Research Objectives and Plan

2.1 Approach

In this section we detail our strategy for the conceptualisation and realisation of
a linked data access control model, policy language and enforcement framework.

Access Control Model. Our initial objective is to examine existing access control models and to generate an integrated model which can be used to represent
the access control policies of a linked data network either inside or outside the
enterprise. Our analysis will consider heterogeneous access policies from existing
enterprise content sources. It will be designed to be flexible enough to cater for
both authenticated and non authenticated users. In addition, the model will take
into account existing standards such as the initiative by the OASIS Integrated
Collaboration Object Model (ICOM)1 and the Distributed Management Task
Force (DMTF) Common Information Model (CIM)2.

Policy Language. Once we have produced the integrated access control model
we will analyse existing policy languages to determine their suitability for representing the authorisations, obligations and rules in a linked data network and
their degree of support for our integrated access control features. In order to
facilitate reasoning over policies in the linked data network, the policy language
will need to have underlying formal semantics. The language must also provide
support for propagation based on the semantic relationship between all entities and both positive and negative authorisations and obligations. Our analysis
will also take into account non functional requirements such as flexibility, exten-
sibility, runtime adaptability and interoperability. We will examine the level of
support without need for change, the adaptability of the policy language and the
scope of the changes required. Depending on the results of our analysis we will
choose the policy language that most closely meets our needs or, if appropriate,
we will integrate and extend components from one or more languages.

Enforcement Framework. We will examine each of the reasoning and enforcement frameworks based on functional requirements identified in the literature
as important for the representation and enforcement of access control policies.
These are namely: propagation and inference [1] [2] [3] [4], conflict management
[1] [2] [3] [4], distributivity [2] [3], exception handling [1] [2] and support for
standards [5]. Given our use case investigates the lifting and representation of
data from existing distributed content sources we will add provenance, policy
lifting and policy merging to the list of criteria. In addition, we will consider
non functional requirements such as flexibility, interoperability, scalability and
usability. Our objective is to propose a new framework which builds on existing
work and addresses any shortcomings.

http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/icom/
http://www.dmtf.org/standards/cim

S. Kirrane

In order to examine the effectiveness of the model, language, lifting methodology and framework we plan to implement a prototype. Figure 1, provides a
high level overview of the components that make up the proposed information
analysis and knowledge discovery platform. Domain data and relationships will
be modelled as ontologies in the abstraction layer. The LOD cloud will be used
to enrich the semantics of both the enterprise and access control models. Instance data will be abstracted from enterprise content repositories and LOB
applications, stored in the enterprise data integration layer and appropriate indexes will be generated. The enforcement framework in turn will be composed
of several interfaces, a rules engine, a query engine and local storage for both
ontologies and access control rules. The policy integration interface will facilitate
the retrieval of existing data access policies. Data from existing content sources
will be obtained through the data integration interface. The policy specification
interface will provide authenticated access to the policies and the data governed
by the relevant policies. All data access queries will be intercepted by the query
reasoning engine which will grant or deny access to data based on a combination
of rules and inference.

Fig. 1. Information analysis and knowledge discovery platform

We will investigate the applicability of existing standard technologies for conceptualization as they offer many well known benefits such as interoperability,
extensibility, scalability and re-usability. We will utilise a number of methods
in order to determine the best way to extract access constraints from the LOB
?

?

?
applications. Through experimentation we aim to development a methodology
which can be used to as a guideline for the lifting of access control policies from
the individual data sources to the abstraction layer. Many researchers are currently investigating the representation and enforcement of privacy on the web
in general and in semantically aware environments in particular. Although we
do not plan to specifically address this problem our prototype will take into
consideration current work in this area.

2.2 Methodology

We have chosen two complimentary methodologies, the Design Science Research
(DSR) methodology proposed by Peffers et al [6] and Action Research (AR) as
defined in [7], to guide our research. DSR involves the identification of the research problem and the motivation behind the research, the specification of the
objectives and the development of a research artefact to meet these objectives.
The artefact is subsequently evaluated and the problem, process, outcomes etc
are communicated to academics and practitioners alike. AR is an iterative process which involves the identification of a problem, the taking of action and the
examination of the outcomes of the action. If the examination determines that
the problem has not been solved, the researcher takes what they have learned and
further refines the problem and takes further action in an attempt to resolve the
problem. This process continues until the researcher is satisfied that they have
solved the problem or concludes that the problem cant be solved. The relationship between AR and DSR is multifaceted e.g. AR can be wrapped around DSR,
DSR can be wrapped around AR or a number of AR iterations could form part
of one or more individual DSR steps. In our research project we have adopted
the DSR methodology to guide the overall research from conception through to
conclusion. The AR methodology will in turn be used in the design and development step of the DSR methodology to enable the refinement of both the access
control framework and the lifting methodology through iterative reflection.

2.3 Evaluation

A number of evaluation methods will be used throughout the research project,
both artificial and naturalistic. The access control model, language, enforcement
framework and the lifting methodology will be constructed and evaluated in an
iterative manner as part of the AR methodology. The model and the policy
language will be evaluated using qualitative means, such as interviews and desk
studies, to confirm that they are flexible enough to support both authenticated
and non authenticated users and a variety of access control models. The lifting
methodology will be evaluated using precision and recall metrics to determine
the effectiveness of the methodology. Finally the enforcement framework will
be evaluated in our real world use case scenario through the implementation of
a prototype to ensure that it addresses both the functional and non functional
requirements highlighted in our approach as important for a knowledge discovery
platform. A combination of experiments and interviews will be used to evaluate

S. Kirrane

the expressivity of the policy language and scalability, performance and usability
of our prototype.

3 Related Work

Access Control Models. Role-based access control (RBAC), task-based authorisation control (TBAC) and attribute-based access control (ABAC) are three
of the most common approaches proposed for restricting access to information
systems. In RBAC a number of roles are defined, users are assigned to appropriate roles and access to resources is granted to one or more roles [8]. RBAC policies
have been the de facto authorisation mechanism used in enterprises for many
years. The TBAC model proposed by [9] facilitates task oriented access controls
required for workflow and agent based distributed systems. Essentially, TBAC
models access controls from a task-oriented as opposed to a subject-orientated
perspective. ABAC [10], which was also designed for distributed systems, provides an alternative means of access control where the requester is unknown
prior to the submission of the request. ABAC grants or denies access to re-
sources, based on attributes of the requester and/or the resource. Early work
on semantic access control policies by [11] was based on RBAC. However, most
of the recent work in this area is based on ABAC [4], [1], [2]. We propose an
integrated approach which will include a number of access control models and
will be flexible enough to represent access control both inside the enterprise and
on the web.

Policy Language. Policy languages can be categorised as general or specific. In
the former the syntax caters for a diverse range of functional requirements (e.g.
access control, query answering, service discovery, negotiation etc...), whereas
in contrast the latter focuses on just one functional requirement. Two of the
most well-known access control languages, KAos [12] and Rei [13], are in fact
general policy languages. A major drawback of both KAos [12] and Rei [13]
is they have little or no support for policy propagation. Although Kolovski et
al [14] propose a description logics formalisation for XACML it also does not
consider policy propagation based on the semantic relationship between entities.
Concept-level access control (CLAC) [4], semantic-based access control (SBAC)
[1] and the semantic network access control model proposed by [2] all focus on
the policy specification and reasoning in the conceptual layer of the semantic
aware environment. Qin et al [4] allow propagation of access controls based on
the semantic relationships among concepts. [1], [2] and [3] enhance the semantic
relations by allowing propagation based on the semantic relationships between
the subjects, objects, and permissions. The framework proposed in Amini et al
[3] enables the specification of policy rules in both conceptual and ground levels.
However [3] specifically states that access controls should be based on attributes
as opposed to identity. In open distributed environments such as the web ABAC
is the ideal choice however, in an enterprise setting we cant ignore the RBAC
that already exist in the underlying data sources. None of the authors consider
either TBAC or a combination of access control models.
?

?

?
Enforcement Framework. A framework is made up of the syntax of the policy language, the semantics of the language and the execution model. In addition
to providing a mechanism to represent and enforce the criteria specified by the
policy constructs, features such as distributivity, propagation and inference, policy merging, conflict management, exception handling and provenance need to
be catered for by the framework. At first glance it may appear as if well known
access control frameworks such as KAos [12], Rein [13] and PROTUNE [5] support many of the aforementioned features. However, as their underlying policy
languages do not consider semantic relations between all of the policy entities the
frameworks themselves can not fully exploit propagation and inference based on
subject, objects and actions. The primary issues with (CLAC) [4] are the lack
of both an underlying formalism and an enforcement mechanism. The policy
language proposed by [1] is not based on well defined semantics and their solution does not scale well due to their centralised approach. Although [3] caters
for many of the features listed above it does not support exception policies and
more importantly their policy language is not based on standards and as such
raises questions with respect to usability and interoperability. The framework
detailed in [2] is the closest match for our requirements. However, they do not
take existing policy representation and provenance into consideration and it is
not clear the extent of their use of existing standard based technologies. [1] and
[3] propose access control models and enforcement frameworks for linked data
networks. However they both dismissed RBAC stating that is it not suitable
for semantically aware environments. We argue that linked data network access
control framework must cater for various access models e.g. RBAC, TBAC and
ABAC. In addition, in an enterprise setting it makes sense to populate the linked
data network based on data stored in content repositories and LOB applications.
None of the authors have provided any guidance with respect to the automatic
population of the linked data network in general and the access controls in par-
ticular, both of which we plan to address in our research.

4 Conclusions and Future Work

Our research explores the application of access control to a linked data network.
We identify the need for a policy language which can represent multiple access control models and highlight the importance of representing existing access
control policies in the linked data network. The research problem, motivation,
objectives and the approach have been described in this paper. The next step
is to analyse existing access control models, languages, frameworks and standards in detail and to generate a detailed design based on both the requirements
and the results of our in depth analysis. The prototype will subsequently be
developed based on the design. Once we have completed the development of the
prototype we will investigate if the artefact meets the objectives or if further
iterations of design, development and reflection are required.

S. Kirrane

Acknowledgements. This work is supported in part by the Science Foundation
Ireland under Grant No. SFI/08/CE/I1380 (Lion-2), the Irish Research Council
for Science, Engineering and Technology Enterprise Partnership Scheme and
Storm Technology Ltd.
