The MetaLex Document Server

Legal Documents as Versioned Linked Data

Rinke Hoekstra1,2

1 Leibniz Center for Law, Faculty of Law, University of Amsterdam

2 Computer Science Department, VU University Amsterdam

hoekstra@uva.nl

r.j.hoekstra@vu.nl

http://www.rinkehoekstra.nl

Abstract. This paper introduces the MetaLex Document Server (MDS),
an ongoing project to improve access to legal sources (regulations, court
rulings) by means of a generic legal XML syntax (CEN MetaLex) and
Linked Data. The MDS defines a generic conversion mechanism from
legacy legal XML syntaxes to CEN MetaLex, RDF and Pajek network
files, and discloses content by means of HTTP-based content negotiation,
a SPARQL endpoint and a basic search interface. MDS combines a transparent (versioned) and opaque (content-based) naming scheme for URIs
of parts of legal texts, allowing for tracking of version information at
the URI-level, as well as reverse engineering of versioned metadata from
sources that provide only partial information, such as many web-based
legal content services. The MDS hosts all 28k national regulations of the
Netherlands available since May 2011, comprising some 100M triples.

Keywords: metalex, rdf,
government.

legal xml,

law,

linked open data, open

1 Introduction

Where open government data is concerned, the rules and regulations a government imposes on its citizens are arguably close to the top of the list of every
open data enthusiast. Law is the oldest form of open government information in
existence. For it to be effective, the adage holds that every citizen is expected
to know the law  knowing in the sense of having access to. Legislation and
court rulings grow in importance. Policy makers are increasingly inclined to gov-
ern by regulation1, EU directives form an ever more complex legal framework
that shapes national policies and regulations, giving citizens easier access to
supra-national legislatures such as the European court. Businesses are subject
to highly detailed regulations concerning e.g. financial reporting, safety and secu-
rity. Gartner estimates that the cost of meeting regulatory compliance needs will

1 A recent example in The Netherlands was the threat of the Minister of the Interior
to draft legislation that would force municipalities to accept a budget cut and carry
out tasks previously belonging to national government.

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 7032, pp. 128143, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011
?

?

?
pose severe problems for smaller banks by 2013.2 Compliance affects businesses
and government agencies alike: how to ensure the minimally required alignment
of internal business processes with (external) regulations?

Regulations are at the heart of modern society, they affect every aspect of our
lives, from public safety, to education, health, environment, food, civil disputes,
traffic, privacy and democracy itself. It is therefore not surprising that many
national governments have been publishing legislation and court rulings on the
web for quite some time now. The National Archives Legislation.gov.uk was at
the forefront of the linked open government data wave that hit shore in 2009.3
It set the standard for what governments should do to provide 5-star access to
legal documents.4.

In the Netherlands, the wetten.nl5 portal was launched in 2003 with all legislation published since 2002. In the following years, earlier legislation, treaties
and other types of regulations were made available through the portal as well. In
several respects, the features of the wetten.nl portal are symptomatic for the way
in which the Dutch government communicates information to its citizens in the
Netherlands: it looks fancy and costs a tonne, but is not flexible. Although current versions of regulations are available in XML, they are stripped of essential
information, such as the version date of the document. Wetten.nl presents regulations as books with hyperlinks; the position of an article within the running
text of a regulation is the only context provided. Given the highly networked
structure of legislation, this traditional restricted presentation is suboptimal: potential alternative ways of serialising one or more regulation texts (e.g. by topic)
are discarded. This is not only a potential problem for businesses and citizens
trying to understand the norms applying to their case, it is problematic for the
civil servants and government organisations that have to apply these norms as
well.

This paper describes our efforts to publish the contents of wetten.nl as 5-
star open data: i.e. to extract, aggregate, reconstruct and enrich the datasource
underlying the wetten.nl portal using publicly accessible webservices, and publish
it both as CEN MetaLex6, as Linked Data, and in a format suitable for social
network analysis. By design, this conversion is independent of the language and
XML format in which regulations are published. This conversion is the first large
scale effort to transform an existing legacy legislative XML format to MetaLex.
Section 2 describes the requirements and use cases for the information that will
be published through the MetaLex Document Server (MDS). Section 3 describes
the current situation in the Netherlands in more detail. Section 4 introduces

2 See http://bit.ly/aND1Rj
3 See http://www.legislation.gov.uk and http://bit.ly/cV2MRu for a discussion

of its features.

4 See http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
5 Literally legislation.nl, see http://wetten.overheid.nl
6 CEN MetaLex is published as CEN Workshop Agreement, CWA 15710, see

ftp://ftp.cen.eu/CEN/Sectors/List/ICT/CWAs/CWA15710-2010-MetaLex2.pdf

R. Hoekstra

MetaLex, and is followed by a description of our methodology in section 5.
Section 6 describes the results, followed by a discussion.

2 Use Cases and Requirements

We identify four stakeholders when it concerns the interpretation of legal texts:
citizens, businesses, legal professionals and government bodies. Citizens are expected to know the law. Governments have a duty to make the law known
to their citizens. Even though citizens may not be interested or able to understand legal language [6,5], they must at least be offered the opportunity to know
their rights and duties. Businesses have a vested interest in complying to regulations as the (financial) risks of not complying are high, and governments have
the means to check for compliance through audits and obligatory reports. They
therefore need to be kept up-to-date with respect to new or changed regulations
they are subject to.

Legal professionals not only need to be kept up-to-date, but they frequently
require access to non-current versions of regulations when dealing with cases
that emerged prior to the latest change (retroactive enactment is quite seldom).
Even for legal professionals, the texts of regulations are not self explanatory, and
they consult a wide variety of additional sources to interpret the law. Examples
are the official motivation of the legislator, case law, notes provided by other
experts, journals, and reports of parliamentary hearings.

Government bodies enact, enforce, implement and execute regulations. Law is
a large interconnected, and therefore interdependent network of norms. Understanding and guiding the effects of new proposed legislation is one of the primary
concerns of the legislator. Currently, legislative drafting largely depends on the
expertise of civil servants, their access to books and legal search engines. In
the Netherlands and Switzerland, no specific editing environment is currently
available: Laws are drafted by editing and sending regular Word documents
around. Secondly, executive agencies have internal business processes that need
to align with all potentially applicable versions of the law. Lastly, government
organisations are increasingly required to share information amongst themselves.
However, organisations form different and sometimes incompatible speech com-
munities. The term income means something different for determining social
benefits as it does for taxation. Legislation (and in particular its structure) forms
the ideal coat rack for knowledge management and interchange between government bodies.7

2.1 Use Cases

Each of our stakeholders has benefited from the increased transparency offered
by web-based search engines. However, their interests and needs go beyond simple search. Businesses are increasingly aware of the importance of streamlining

7 With thanks to Hans Overbeek of ICTU for the metaphor.
?

?

?
their internal operations. The market of business process management suites is
expected to grow to $3.4 billion globally by 2014.8 This provides opportunities
for more fine grained regulatory compliance management: business processes that
are potentially affected by regulations can be identified by explicitly linking them
to applicable norms. Legal professionals working at businesses and government
bodies need to annotate parts of legal texts with interpretations and guidelines,
and share them with their colleagues. Provenance information is essential for
determining the motivation of a legislation: what parliamentary hearings and
led to the current version of an article? Annotation and provenance are a key
requirement in the current modernisation of the legislative drafting system of
the Swiss Federal Chancellery [10].

Regulations are not integrated, different types of law are issued by different
government bodies. National government issues legislation, judges produce case
law, and municipalities issue local regulations. Regulations are published on
different websites, a situation that misrepresents the dependencies between them.
It is hard to consistently interpret the meaning of concepts. Regulations contain both hyperlink style references to parts of text, as well as imports that
import the meaning of a term from another regulation. Furthermore, the meaning
of a term can be scoped to a particular part of the regulation, such as a chapter or article [12]. To complicate matters, regulations contain so-called deeming
provisions that, within a specified scope, assign the label of one concept to another concept. For instance, the provision for the purposes of this chapter, a
house boat is deemed to be a house allows the legislative drafter to use the term
house to refer both to houses and house boats. Although legislative drafters are
very careful to be specific about their choice of words, not all concepts used are
properly introduced.

Not all parts of a regulation are equally important. That is, it is often the
case that a small number of articles hold for the majority of cases regulated by
a law, while the rest deal with more specific cases and exceptions. Furthermore,
although related articles are often grouped within a chapter, this grouping does
not cross the borders of a single law. Even though articles in distinct laws may be
more closely related. The Dutch Immigration and Naturalisation Service (IND)
has to deal with highly dynamic legislation. Knowing what parts of a law matter
most to them, as well as the dependency between articles and their internal
business processes (cf. regulatory compliance) is key in their ability to advice
the ministry on the possibilities and difficulties in amending existing immigration
laws.

The IND has a hard time dealing with all different versions of legislation,
caused by dynamic legislation and lengthy procedures. Legislation follows an
intricate versioning scheme [3,4,7,11]: enactment, efficacy, publication and repeal
dates all interact. This information may even be part of other regulations, e.g.
in the Netherlands efficacy of regulations is typically described by Royal Decree.
Legislation is frequently modified at the sentence level: e.g. a modifying law will

8 Gartner Inc.: Forecast: Enterprise Software Markets, Worldwide, 2009-2014, 4Q10

Update, December 2010.

R. Hoekstra

replace the second sentence of article X. Finally, references between legal texts
can point to a specific version of a regulation, as well as to the current version.
Key in these use cases is the ability to refer to parts of legal texts. It requires
persistent identifiers for every element of a legal text. These identifiers should
be dereferencable to the element they describe, or a description of the elements
metadata. It is furthermore a feature if these identifiers are transparent and
follow a prescribed naming convention. This allows third parties to construct
valid identifiers without having to first query a name service.

To support versioning of legal texts, references, and metadata, requires identifiers that reflect its different versions. The various parts of a text should be
versioned independently, allowing for transitory regimes. Furthermore, the versioning mechanism should distinguish between a regulation text as it exists at a
particular time, and the regulation as such. A likely solution is the adoption of
the distinctions made by the IFLA FRBR [15]:9 the work as a distinguishable
intellectual or artistic creation (e.g. the constitution);the expression as the in-
tellectual or artistic form that a work takes each time it is realised (e.g. The
Constitution of July 15th, 2008); the manifestation as the physical embodiment of an expression of a work (e.g. a PDF version of The Constitution of
July 15th, 2008); and the item as a single exemplar of a manifestation (e.g.
the PDF version of The Constitution of July 15th, 2008 residing on my USB
stick).

Metadata and annotations should be traceable to the most detailed part of
a text, as well as to its version, when needed. The same requirement holds for
references between texts, allowing for fine-grained analysis of interdependencies
between texts. Current regulation search portals are developed from the perspective of the issuing government body, and are jurisdiction specific. The document
server should provide a publishing platform that is independent of language,
region and jurisdiction.

3 Wetten.nl and the Basiswettenbestand

Wetten.nl is part of a larger Overheid.nl (government.nl) website that provides
access to a wide range of government information, both legal (national regula-
tions, local regulations, permits, and publications, official national publications
and disciplinary rulings) and general information such as information about the
structure of goverment, addresses of government bodies, and a link to the Dutch
open data catalog.10 Amongst these, the wetten.nl portal is one of the oldest.

Users can perform a full text search through the titles and text of all regulations of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. They can search for a specific article,

9 IFLA: International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions. FRBR:

Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records.
See http://archive.ifla.org/VII/s13/frbr/frbr1.htm for the exact definitions.
10 See http://data.overheid.nl, a CKAN installation currently containing 40

datasets.
?

?

?
as well as for the version of a text holding at a specified date. Wetten.nl also
supports deeplinks, but is not very consistent about it. For instance, both:

http://wetten.overheid.nl/cgi-bin/deeplink/law1/bwbid=BWBR0005416/article=6/date=2005-01-14
and

http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0005416/TitelII698946/HoofdstukII/Artikel16/

geldigheidsdatum 14-01-2005
point to article 6 of the Municipal law, as it was valid on January 14th, 2005.11
These deeplinks can be considered to be permanent URIs of work level (without
date) or expression level (with date) identifiers. Unfortunately, they are not
always predictable (cf. the 698946 in the second URI), nor stable, nor part of
a government standard.

The string BWBR0005416 is the opaque BWB identifier (BWB-ID) of the
regulation. The Basiswettenbestand (BWB) is the content management system
for all Dutch regulations that underlies the Wetten.nl portal. An R following
BWB indicates that the document is a regulation, a V indicates a treaty (ver-
drag). The 7-digit number does not carry a specific meaning. The opaqueness of
the BWB identifier is unfortunate, but hard to avoid, as the title of a regulation
may change over time and cannot be used. An index of all BWB identifiers, with
basic attributes such as official and abbreviated titles, enactment and publication
dates, retroactivity, etc. is available as a zipped XML dump.12 Alternatively, a
SOAP service allows retrieval of the same information for individual regulations.
Unfortunately, the date of the latest change to a regulation is not really the date
of the latest modification, but of the latest update of the regulation in the CMS.
The two dates often coincide, but not all civil servants work weekends.

The BWB uses its own XML format for storing regulations. BWB XML provides elements for structure as well as annotation elements for capturing version history. It does not separate structural elements (e.g. article or chapter),
presentation-type elements (e.g. emphasis, paragraph) and content-type elements (e.g. law, treaty). The text of regulations is contained within meaningless presentation-type elements (al for alinea) rather than as separate sentences.
The schema does not allow for intermixing with any third-party elements or at-
tributes, ruling out obvious extensions such as RDFa.13 Finally, the REST web
service for obtaining the BWB XML representation of regulations only provides
the latest version of an entire regulation.14 The XML document returned is
stripped of all version history, and does not even contain the version date of the
text itself.

11 Note that geldigheidsdatum is the validity date.
12 See http://www.overheid.nl/help/wr/deeplinks
13 RDFa: RDF attributes for use in XHTML,

see http://www.w3.org/TR/rdfa-syntax/. RDF is the Resource Description Frame-
work, see http://www.w3.org/standards/techs/rdf

14 See http://bit.ly/kdTniY and e.g. http://bit.ly/mQTWwo for a BWB XML ver-

sion of the Municipal law.

R. Hoekstra

The BWB-ID forms the basis of the Juriconnect standard for referring to parts
of regulations.15 The standard describes a procedure for constructing unique
identifiers from the structure of BWB XML documents. BWB XML documents
use these identifiers to specify citations between regulations. For instance, the
Juriconnect identifier of article 16 of the Municipal law, valid on January 14,
2005 is:

1.0:c:BWBR0005416&artikel=16&g=2005-01-14

Juriconnect does not prescribe a method by which the identifier should be used
inside the XML of regulations or referring text: BWB XML elements do not carry
Juriconnect identifiers. Neither does the standard specify whether an expressionlevel reference without validity date points to the latest, or current version, nor
does it specify what should be returned for a work-level reference. Furthermore,
the standard does not describe a method for dereferencing an identifier to the
actual text of (part of) a regulation.

The wetten.nl portal meets most, if not all requirements of the pre open-data
day and age. However, more demanding use of the content underlying the portal
is not straightforward. The content service is crippled by incomplete information
(the version date of retrieved documents, version history), limited functionality
(no time travel) and identifiers in a non-standard format. The following section
introduces the CEN MetaLex format for representing the text of legal resources,
after which section 5 describes our method for republishing the regulations of
wetten.nl as MetaLex and Linked Data.

4 CEN MetaLex

CEN MetaLex16 is a jurisdiction independent XML standard for representing,
publishing and interchanging the structure of legal resources. It is the result of a
10 year standardisation project in which multiple European government organ-
isations, publishers and academic partners participated. MetaLex was initially
designed by [1] as a syntactic grounding for building elaborate knowledge-based
services.17 At the time, the BWB XML was a proprietary format, and the Dutch
government was still in negotiation with legal publishers about freely distributing its self-created content on the web. CEN MetaLex combines the original
MetaLex with (primarily) insights from the Italian Norme in Rete project,18,
the Akoma Ntoso legal XML standard of African parliaments19, the Austrian
government and LexDania.20 Amongst others, adopting CEN MetaLex allows
15 Juriconnect is a consortium of government bodies, legal publishers and academia,

see http://www.juriconnect.nl
16 See http://www.metalex.eu and
17 See legacy.metalex.eu for more information.
18 Norme in Rete: laws online portal for the Italian government. The portal itself is no

longer available.

19 See http://www.akomantoso.org/.
20 LexDania is the XML format behind the Danish ministerial regulations portal, see

http://www.ministerialtidende.dk/
?

?

?
the use of generic legislative drafting tools, rather than only jurisdiction (and
often vendor) specific solutions.

MetaLex elements are purely structural. Syntactic elements (structure) are
strictly distinct from the meaning of elements by specifying for each element its
name and its content model [16]. What this essentially does, is paving the way
for a purely semantic description of the types of content of elements in an XML
document.

The standard prescribes the existence of a naming convention for minting
URI-based identifiers for all structural elements of a legal document [2]. Names
should be guessable from identifying features (attributes, context) of elements,
described in the metadata. Names must exist for each of the FRBR levels, and a
standard GRDDL21 transformation for producing an RDF graph of the identifying metadata. MetaLex explicitly encourages the use of RDFa attributes on its
elements, and provides special metadata-elements for serialising additional RDF
triples that cannot be expressed on structural elements themselves. MetaLex
includes an ontology, which defines the different FRBR levels in the context of
legislation, and an event model for legislative modifications.22

Elements defined by the MetaLex schema can be refined via XML Schema
to the jurisdiction specific elements of legacy legal XML formats such as BWB
XML, LexDania and CHLexML.23 These generic elements are: root as the root
of every MetaLex document; hcontainer and container for titled and untitled
parts of a text; block elements for textual content, and inline for elements that
occur in running texts. The htitle block element is used to specify the title
of a hcontainer, the cite inline element carries a reference to another element;
milestone elements for fixed-position, but content-less inline elements such as
page breaks; mcontainer and meta elements for listing additional RDFa metadata
inside the body of hcontainer and mcontainer elements. MetaLex is agnostic
to non-conflicting third-party XML elements and attributes in block and inline
elements, such as HTML markup for rendering tables.

Although most of its predecessors were implemented at enterprise scale, the
MetaLex language itself has never been applied to a realistically large corpus.
Although the language holds the promise of flexible interchange of legal texts,
government institutions are slow movers. This is part of the challenge; does MetaLex live up to its promise as generic schema for legal texts, and does its commitment to Semantic Web standards provide substantial added value to government
goals? The following section describes the methodology and vocabularies used
for transforming legacy XML to MetaLex, and producing metadata descriptions
in RDF. Section 6 discusses the results.

21 GRDDL: Gleaning Resource Descriptions from Dialiects of Languages,

see http://www.w3.org/TR/grddl/

22 See http://www.metalex.eu. The legislation.co.uk portal has adopted the MetaLex
event model for representing modifications, but uses the standard FRBR ontology
for indicating levels.

23 CHLexML was designed as an XML standard for the representation of Swiss legal

texts, see http://www.svri.ch/CHLexML/CHLexML_Reference_1.0.pdf

R. Hoekstra

5 Conversion and Publication

The transformation of legacy XML to MetaLex and RDF is implemented in
the MetaLex converter, an open source Python script available from GitHub.24
Conversion occurs in four stages: mapping legacy elements to MetaLex elements,
minting identifiers for newly created elements, producing metadata for these ele-
ments, and serialising to appropriate formats. In this section, we briefly discuss
how each of these is implemented in the MetaLex converter.

For the transformation of BWB XML files, the converter is sequentially fed
with all BWB XML files and identifiers listed in the BWB ID index. Version in-
formation, citation titles and other medatada is retrieved through via a custom
build scraper of the information pages on the wetten.nl website.25 The information pages provide more elaborate and reliable information about regulations
than can be obtained through the web service, such as the entire version history
and types of modification of each law.

5.1 Mapping Legacy Elements to CEN MetaLex

The MetaLex schema is designed to be independent of jurisdiction, which means
that it should be possible to map each legacy XML element to a MetaLex element in an unambiguous fashion. For the BWB to MetaLex translation, element
mappings were obtained semi-automatically from the BWB DTD. Elements allowed to contain #PCDATA are mapped onto block or inline elements, where
inline elements only occur inside the definition of blocks. All hcontainer elements
allow a title-element, while container elements are only allowed to contain the
block elements identified earlier.

Based on a mapping table, the converter traverses the DOM26 tree of the
source document, and synchronously builds a DOM tree for the target document.
There are three special cases for which the converter has to make additional
repairs. Sometimes obvious candidates for the MetaLex hcontainer element do
not fit the MetaLex schema as the source schema allows them to contain text,
e.g. the artikel element in BWB XML. Secondly, footnotes are typically present as
block or container-type and occur inside other blocks. The converter moves these
to the parent container element of the containing block. On some occasions, inlinetype source elements appear directly underneath container-type elements. Their
target elements are wrapped inside an extra block element to ensure MetaLex
compliance.

Attributes on source elements are passed to the identifier and metadata gen-
erators. Target elements receive five standard attributes: name, with the value
of the target element name (for MetaLex compliance), class, with the value of

24 See http://github.com/RinkeHoekstra/metalex-converter
25 See e.g. http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0005416/

geldigheidsdatum 14-01-2005/informatie

26 DOM: XML Document Object Model,

see http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-DOM-Level-1/
?

?

?
the source element name (for custom CSS rendering), xml:lang, a language tag
(if specified on the source element, or one of its parents), id, with an itemlevel identifier, relative to the xml:base of the document, and about, with an
expression-level identifier.

5.2 Minting Identifiers

For every element in the document we create transparent URL-like URIs for the
work, expression and manifestation level, and two opaque URIs for the expression
and item level in the FRBR specification.

We use a naming scheme that is based on the URIs used at legislation.gov.uk,
with slight adaptations to allow for the Dutch situation.27 Juriconnect references
in the source BWB XML are automatically translated to this naming scheme:

{API-URL}/{document-identifier}

[(/{hcontainer-class}/{index}]*[/{block-class}/{block-id}]*

[/{authority}][/{extent}][/{lang}][/{version}])|
(/{opaque-version-hash})]

[/{repr}]

resolver

resides. Examples

The API URL is the first part of all URIs, and the URL at which the

are http://legislation.gov.uk and
http://doc.metalex.eu, for obvious reasons we use the latter. This part is followed by a document identifier, a work-level identifier of the entire legal text. Different countries may have different forms for this identifier, e.g. the Dutch portal
uses opaque BWB identifiers, while the UK portal uses {type}/{year}/{number}
as document identifier. These two components are followed either by a transparent reflection of the hierarchical structure of the XML document or an opaque
hash of the contents of the element.

Hierarchical work URIs consist of a path from root node to current element.
For hcontainer elements we use its class, i.e. the source elements name, combined with its official index.28 For block elements, we use its class combined
with a generated index based on the position of the element amongst all children of its parent. The third part of the hierarchical URI consists of an optional
indication of the authority (issuer) and extent (jurisdiction) of the text. Several
European member states, such as the UK, have lower governments that can alter
or implement specific parts of national regulations. For expression-level identi-
fication, the work URI is followed by an optional language tag, and the version
identifier: the date at which this version became official. Manifestation URIs follow the same conventions as those of document URIs in the legislation.gov.uk
portal. Item level identifiers are required by the MetaLex standard, but cannot
be generated in any meaningful way. We have therefore chosen to use randomly
generated character strings as item identifiers, combined with an empty xml:base.

27 See http://www.legislation.gov.uk/developer/uris
28 Note that a single combination of class and index already provides a locally unique
identifier within the legislation, i.e. the relative identifier chapter/1/article/1 is
identical to article/1. This does not hold for elements below the article level [1].

R. Hoekstra

s1

s2

frbr:realizes

frbr:realizes

s1t1

s1t2

s1t3

s2t1

s2t2

s2t3

...

owl:sameAs

owl:sameAs

owl:sameAs

owl:sameAs

AE6

B9C

3F5

Fig. 1. The benefit of opaque URIs for versioning legal texts

The opaque version URI is needed to distinguish different versions of a text.
The current webservice does not provide access to all versions of regulations (only
to the latest), let alone at a level of granularity lower than entire regulations. We
therefore need some way of constructing a version history by regularly checking
for new versions, and comparing them to those we looked at before. By including
a unique SHA1 hash of the textual content of an XML element in the opaque URI,
and simultaneously maintaining a link between the opaque URI and the transparent identifier, different expressions of a work can be automatically distinguished
through time. This is needed to work around issues with identifiers based on num-
bers: the insertion of a new element can change the position (and therefore the
identifier) of other elements without a change in the content of the elements. How
to find out how the new identifiers correspond to the old ones?

Consider two sentences with work-level URIs s1 and s2 (see Figure 1). At time
t1, these sentences are respectively realised by the transparent expression-level
URIs s1t1 and s2t1, and by the opaque version URIs AE6 and 3F5. The two
identifier-types hold for the same XML element, and are therefore considered to
be semantically equivalent, hence the owl:sameAs relation. At t2 the sentences
undergo no changes, sentences s1 and s2 are realised respectively by s1t2 and
s2t2, and again by AE6 and 3F5. At t3, however, a new text is inserted as
sentence before the old version of the first sentence: s1 is now realised by s1t3
and B9C. Consequently s2 is now realised by s2t3 of which the hash is the same
as that of s1t2 : AE6.

By this method, globally persistent URIs of every element in a legal text can
be consistently generated for both current and future versions of the text. By
simultaneously generating an opaque and a transparent expression level URI,
identification of these text versions does not have to rely on numbering.

5.3 Producing Metadata

The MetaLex converter produces three types of metadata. First, legacy metadata
from attributes in the source XML is directly translated to RDF triples with an
expression URI as subject, the literal attribute value as object, and an RDF property with the source attributes name as predicate. Second, metadata describing the structural and identity relations between elements. This includes typing
?

?

?
The date at which the expression was created

"2009-10-23"^^xsd:date

rdf:value

time:Instant

ml:Date

sem:Time

sem:hasTimeStamp

rdf:type

time:inXSDDateTime

rdf:type

sem:timeType

rdf:type

opmv:Process

http://doc.metalex.eu/id/date/2009-10-23

sem:Event

ml:LegislativeModification

rdf:type

time:hasEnd

sem:hasTime

rdf:type

rdf:type

ml:date

sem:eventType

The creation event of the regulation

http://doc.metalex.eu/id/process/BWBR0017869/2009-10-23

http://doc.metalex.eu/id/event/BWBR0017869/2009-10-23

opmv:Artifact

The process that generated the expression

opmv:wasGeneratedAt

opmv:wasGeneratedBy

ml:resultOf

rdf:type

ml:BibliographicExpression

http://doc.metalex.eu/id/BWBR0017869/2009-10-23

rdf:type

The expression (version) URI of a regulation

Fig. 2. Event model of the MDS

resources according to the MetaLex ontology, e.g. as ml:BibliographicExpression,
creating ml:realizes relations between expressions and works, owl:sameAs relations
between opaque and transparent expression URIs, ml:cites relations between citing and cited resources, and ml:partOf relations between expressions and parent elements in the XML. For each expression, we generate additional links to
manifestations in RDF, XML and HTML, using rdfs:isDefinedBy, foaf:page and
foaf:homePage properties, respectively. The official title, abbreviation and publication date of regulations are respectively represented using the dcterms:title,
dcterms:alternative and dct:valid properties.

Events and Processes. Event information plays a central role in determining
what version of a regulation was valid when. Processes capture essential provenance information needed for the interpretation of regulations. Traditional methods for assigning validity intervals to parts of regulations use multiple attributes
to indicate e.g. enactment, publication, and efficacy dates [4]. Making explicit
which events and modifying processes contributed to an expression of a regulation provides for a more flexible and extensible model. Especially since multiple different timestamps for the same element can be grouped together via the
opaque URIs described in the preceding section.

The MDS uses the MetaLex ontology for legislative modification events, the
Simple Event Model (SEM) of [8] (used in the eCulture domain) and the W3C
Time Ontology [9] for an abstract description of events and event types, and the
Open Provenance Model Vocabulary (OPMV) of [14] for describing processes
and provenance information.29 As depicted in Figure 2, these vocabularies can
be combined in a compatible fashion, allowing for maximal reuse of event and
process descriptions by third parties that may not necessarily commit to the
MetaLex ontology.

29 See http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time and http://openprovenance.org

R. Hoekstra

5.4 Serialization

The MetaLex converter supports three formats for serialising a legal text to
a manifestation. First of all, it can produce the MetaLex format itself. The
converter does not produce HTML since this can be easily obtained from the
XML version. MetaLex can be viewed in a browser by linking a CSS stylesheet.30
Secondly, generated RDF metadata can be serialised as inline RDFa attributes
on meta tags. This is a very verbose format similar to N-triples (one element
per triple), and it is often preferable to serialise the RDF as separate files using
Turtle syntax,31 unless the use case requires the representation of a legal text to
be self contained. If required, the converter can automatically upload RDF to a
triple store through either the Sesame API, or SPARQL updates.32

During conversion, citations are stored in a separate graph, linking citing
resources at the level of articles (rather than at the level of inline elements
carrying the reference) to cited resources. This graph can be exported to a .net
network file, for further analysis in social network software tools such as Pajek
and Gephi.33 The MetaLex converter script optionally generates a network file
containing citations of all regulations converted in the same batch.

5.5 Publication

The result of this procedure can be published through the MetaLex Document
Server (MDS).34 The MDS is essentially a Python wrapper for a SPARQL endpoint for RDF metadata, and a file-based store for MetaLex documents and network files. It follows the Cool URIs specification,35 and implements HTTP-based
redirects for work- and expression level URIs to corresponding manifestations
based on the HTTP accept header. Requests for an HTML mime-type are redirected to a the Marbles36 HTML rendering of a Symmetric Concise Bounded
Description (CBD) of the RDF resource.37 Similarly, requests for RDF content
return the SCBD itself; supported formats are RDF/XML and N3/Turtle. A
request for XML will return the MetaLex of an XML snippet corresponding to
the requested element. For work level identifiers MDS will only return RDF.

The MDS provides two convenience methods for retrieving manifestations of
a regulation. Appending /latest to a work URI will redirect to the latest expression present in the triple store. Appending an arbitrary ISO date will return
the last expression published before that date if no direct match is available.

30 See http://www.w3.org/Style/CSS/ and

http://doc.metalex.eu/static/css/metalex.css

31 See http://www.w3.org/TR/turtle/
32 See http://openrdf.org and http://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-update/
33 See http://pajek.imfm.si/doku.php and http://gephi.org respectively.
34 See http://doc.metalex.eu for the server, and

http://github.com/RinkeHoekstra/metalex-web-converter for the sources.

35 See http://www.w3.org/TR/cooluris/
36 See http://marbles.sourceforge.net/
37 See http://www.w3.org/Submission/CBD/
?

?

?
Table 1. Conversion performance for 300 randomly selected regulations

Substitutions40
container
hcontainer
htitle
block
inline
Total

Number %

Number %

Corrections
?

?

?
29 % artikel
5 % divisie
5 % colspec
44 % illustratie
17 % others
Total

Total no. of regulations
Revoked regulations
Correction %
?

?

?
72 %
15 %
8 %
2 %
3 %

30 %
4 %

Lastly, the MDS offers a simple search interface for finding regulations based on
the title and version date.

6 Conclusion and Results

We ran the MetaLex conversion script on all regulations available through the
wetten.nl portal in May 2011, resulting in a total of 27.687 versions of regulations being converted, roughly 1 GB in size for BWB XML, and 2.27 GB as
MetaLex.38 The size increase is primarily due to the length and number of identifiers in MetaLex, which arent present in BWB XML. The generated Turtle
files comprise 9.9 GB, and contain 87.9 million triples. At this moment, the MDS
runs on a 32GB Dell PowerEdge and a 4Store triple store.39 New and modified
regulations are published almost every other day, which means that the number of regulation versions accumulates with time: currently 28.752 versions and
100M triples (August 2011).

We evaluated the ability of MetaLex to map onto the BWB XML by running
the converter on 300 randomly selected BWB identifiers; results are presented in
Table 1. The artikel element accounts for 72% of all corrections, and corresponds
to 68% of all htitle substitutions (5 % of total). This means that only a very
small part of BWB XML does not directly fit onto the MetaLex schema. We
have conducted a similar exercise on a single example of a CHLexML document
and results were comparable; the main cause for incompatibility is the restriction
in MetaLex that hcontainer elements are not allowed to contain block elements.

6.1 Meeting Requirements

Publishing identifiers and metadata of regulations in RDF meets the minimal
requirements for facilitating regulatory compliance and annotation. Third parties
can freely and transparently annotate regulations with specialised vocabularies
and business rules. Our versioning scheme allows these annotations to be finegrained and stable through time. For instance, annotating an opaque expression

38 The actual number of regulations available at a single time is typically a bit lower.
The conversion was done in several batches, and several modified regulations were
published in the meantime.

39 See http://4store.org

R. Hoekstra

URI ensures that the annotation remains valid until the text of the expression
changes, rather than when the official version changes. Versioning and time
travel is possible through the combination of SEM and the MetaLex ontology on
the one hand, and opaque and transparent expression URIs on the other. Adoption of the OPMV vocabulary for expressing provenance, allows the construction
of elaborate provenance trails, potentially referring even to pre-publication processes in the legislative drafting workflow.

Together with the Dutch Finance Ministry we started a pilot, based on [12], to
detect both the definitions and scope of concepts as well as implicitly introduced
concepts (nouns and noun phrases) in the domain of inheritance tax. All concepts
are linked to both to the Cornetto Wordnet thesaurus in RDF and the relevant
elements in law.41 Although the scope of concepts can be made explicit by using
namespaces or suffixes, ensuring concept consistency by resolving the scope to a
set of elements internal and external to the law is an open issue. Furthermore,
the inheritance tax law alone contains 1255 concepts in 72k triples, which will
put a further strain on our hardware if concept extraction is let loose on other
regulations.

Although we have shown that ingestion of a large corpus of legacy XML is fea-
sible, other regulatory datasets need to be investigated to ensure the genericness
of the approach. In particular, the transformation of different types of regula-
tions, such as municipal regulations and EU directives, will contribute to the
integration of regulations about similar topics. Conceptual annotation of legal
sources will certainly improve the integration of these sources across the borders
of government organisations.

Social network analysis of reference structures in legal texts allows us to determine certain properties of articles, such as the number of incoming citations
(in degree), and the role of an article in connecting other articles (betweenness
centrality). We conducted a small experiment at the immigration service (IND)
to determine whether these measures corresponded to their intuitions of which
articles are most important in immigration law: the in degree proved to be an almost perfect match to the most important articles, while betweenness centrality
corresponded to articles in regulations that translated legislation to guidelines
and procedures for civil servants at IND. Network analysis tools such as Gephi
also provide nice visualisations of these reference networks, where closely related
articles are grouped together, indicating themes in legislation. Gephi can even
simulate how citations change through time. Indeed, all this is not new technol-
ogy, but until now it has been beyond the grasp of civil servants in agencies such
as the IND.

The MetaLex Document Server is an important step in opening up Dutch
regulations for advanced analysis and semantic annotation. We described a procedure for incrementally rebuilding metadata and version information not made
available by publicly accessible regulatory content services. Although the MDS
and conversion script has not yet been used for converting other types of reg-
ulations, it was designed to be generically applicable to a wide range of legal

41 See http://ckan.net/package/cornetto
?

?

?
XML formats by adopting the CEN MetaLex standard. We have furthermore
gathered evidence that MetaLex is indeed able to represent and augment legal
resources expressed in legacy XML. Perhaps most importantly, we have made a
couple of people at the IND and the Dutch Ministry of Finance rather enthusiastic about the combination of legal information, network analysis, and Semantic
Web technology.
