 

A Semantic Portal for Next Generation Monitoring 

Systems 

Ping Wang1, Jin Guang Zheng1, Linyun Fu1, Evan W. Patton1, Timothy Lebo1,  

Li Ding1, Qing Liu2, Joanne S. Luciano1, and Deborah L. McGuinness1 

1 Tetherless World Constellation, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA 

2 Tasmanian ICT Centre, CSIRO, Australia  

{wangp5,zhengj3,ful2,pattoe,lebot,dingl,jluciano,dlm}@rpi.edu, 

Q.Liu@csiro.au 

Abstract.  We  present  a  semantic  technology-based  approach  to  emerging 
monitoring systems based on our linked data approach in the Tetherless World 
Constellation  Semantic  Ecology  and  Environment  Portal  (SemantEco).  Our 
integration  scheme  uses  an  upper  level  monitoring  ontology  and  mid-level 
monitoring-relevant domain ontologies. The initial domain ontologies focus on 
water  and  air  quality.  We  then  integrate  domain  data  from  different 
authoritative  sources  and  multiple  regulation  ontologies  (capturing  federal  as 
well  as  state  guidelines)  to  enable  pollution  detection  and  monitoring.  An 
OWL-based reasoning scheme identifies pollution events relative to user chosen 
regulations.  Our  approach  captures  and  leverages  provenance  to  enable 
transparency. 
facet 
generation,  query  answering,  and  validation  over  the  integrated  data  via 
SPARQL.  We  introduce  the  general  SemantEco  approach,  describe  the 
implementation  which  has  been  built  out  substantially  in  the  water  domain 
creating the SemantAqua portal, and highlight some of the potential impacts for 
the future of semantically-enabled monitoring systems.  

features  provenance-based 

In  addition,  SemantEco 

Keywords:  Environmental  Portal,  Provenance-Aware  Search,  Water  Quality 
Monitoring, Pragmatic Considerations for Semantic Environmental Monitoring. 

1   Introduction 

Concerns  over  ecological  and  environmental  issues  such  as  biodiversity  loss  [1], 
water  problems  [14],  atmospheric  pollution  [8],  and  sustainable  development  [10] 
have  highlighted the  need for reliable information systems to support monitoring of 
ecological and environmental trends, support scientific research and inform citizens. 
In  particular,  semantic  technologies  have  been  used  in  environmental  monitoring 
information  systems  to  facilitate  domain  knowledge  integration  across  multiple 
sources and support collaborative scientific workflows [17]. Meanwhile, demand has 
increased  for  direct  and  transparent  access  to  ecological  and  environmental 
information.  For  example,  after  a  recent  water  quality  episode  in  Bristol  County, 
Rhode Island where E. coli was reported in the water, residents requested information 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 7032, pp. 253268, 2011. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011 

P. Wang et al. 

concerning when the contamination began, how it happened, and what measures were 
being taken to monitor and prevent future occurrences.1  

In this paper, we describe a semantic technology-based approach to ecological and 
environmental  monitoring.  We  deployed  the  approach  in  the  Tetherless  World 
Constellations Semantic Ecology and Environment Portal (SemantEco). SemantEco 
is an exemplar next generation monitoring portal that provides investigation support 
for  lay  people  as  well  as  experts  while  also  providing  a  real  world  ecological  and 
environmental evaluation testbed for our linked data approach. The portal integrates 
environmental  monitoring  and  regulation  data  from  multiple  sources  following 
Linked Data principles, captures the semantics of domain knowledge using a family 
of  modular  simple  OWL2  [7]  ontologies,  preserves  provenance  metadata  using  the 
Proof Markup Language (PML) [11], and infers environment pollution events using 
OWL2  inference.  The  web  portal  delivers  environmental  information  and  reasoning 
results to citizens via a faceted browsing map interface2.  

The  contributions  of  this  work  are  multi-faceted.  The  overall  design  provides  an 
operational  specification  model  that  may  be  used  for  creating  ecological  and 
environmental  monitoring  portals.  It  includes  a  simple  upper  ontology  and  initial 
domain  ontologies  for  water  and  air.  We  have  used  this  design  to  develop  a  water 
quality  portal  (SemantAqua)  that  allows  anyone,  including  those  lacking  in-depth 
knowledge  of  water  pollution  regulations  or  water  data  sources,  to  explore  and 
monitor  water  quality  in  the  United  States.  It  is  being  tested  by  being  used  to  do  a 
redesign of our air quality portal3. It also exposes potential directions for monitoring 
systems  as  they  may  empower  citizen  scientists  and  enable  dialogue  between 
concerned  citizens  and  professionals.  These  systems,  for  example,  may  be  used  to 
integrate data generated by citizen scientists as potential indicators that professional 
collection  and  evaluation  may  be  needed  in  particular  areas.  Additionally  subject 
matter professionals can use this system to conduct provenance-aware analysis, such 
as  explaining  the  cause  of  a  water  problem  and  cross-validating  water  quality  data 
from different data sources with similar contextual provenance parameters (e.g. time 
and location). 

In  this  paper,  section  2  reviews  selected  challenges  in  the  implementation  of  the 
SemantEco design in the SemantAqua portal on real-world data. Section 3 elaborates 
how  semantic  web  technologies  have  been  used  in  the  portal,  including  ontologybased  domain  knowledge  modeling,  real-world  water  quality  data  integration,  and 
provenance-aware computing. Section 4 describes implementation details and section 
5 discusses impacts and several highlights. Related work is reviewed in section 6 and 
section 7 describes future directions.  

2   Ecological and Environmental Information Systems Challenges 

SemantEco provides an extensible upper ontology for monitoring with an initial focus 
on supporting environmental pollution monitoring with connections to health impacts. 
                                                           
1  Morgan, T. J. 2009. Bristol, Warren, Barrington residents told to boil water Providence 

Journal, September 8, 2009. http://newsblog.projo.com/2009/09/residents-of-3.html 

2  http://was.tw.rpi.edu/swqp/map.html 
3  http://logd.tw.rpi.edu/demo/clean_air_status_and_trends_-_ozone 

 
?

?

?
Our initial domain area for an in depth dive was water quality. The resulting portal is 
a  publicly  accessible  semantically-enabled  water  information  system  that  facilitates 
discovery  of  polluted  water,  polluting  facilities,  specific  contaminants,  and  health 
impacts. We are in the process of extending it to include air quality data as  well as 
industrial  connections  to  the  operating  entities  of  polluting  facilities.  We  faced  a 
number of challenges during implementation, which we will now discuss. 

2.1   Modeling Domain Knowledge for Environmental Monitoring 

Environmental  monitoring  systems  must  model  at  least  three  types  of  domain 
knowledge: background environmental knowledge (e.g., water-relevant contaminants, 
bodies  of  water),  observational  data  items  (e.g.,  the  amount  of  arsenic  in  water) 
collected  by  sensors  and  humans,  and  (preferably  authoritative)  environmental 
regulations  (e.g.,  safe  drinking  water 
levels  for  known  contaminants).  An 
interoperable  model  is  needed  to  represent  the  diverse  collection  of  regulations, 
observational data, and environmental knowledge from various sources. 

Observational data include measurements of environmental characteristics together 
with  corresponding  metadata,  e.g.  the  type  and  unit  of  the  data  item,  as  well  as 
provenance metadata such as sensor locations, observation times, and optionally test 
methods  and  devices  used  to  generate  the  observation.  A  light-weight  extensible 
domain  ontology  is  ideal  to  enable  reasoning  on  observational  data  while  limiting 
ontology development and understanding costs.  

A  number  of  ontologies  have  been  developed  for  modeling  environmental 
domains.  Raskin  et  al.  [13]  propose  the  SWEET  ontology  family  for  Earth  system 
science. Chen et al. [5] models relationships among water quality datasets. Chau et al. 
[4] models a specific aspect of water quality. While these ontologies provide support 
to  encode  the  first  two  types  of  domain  knowledge,  they  do  not  support  modeling 
environmental regulations. 

Environmental  regulations  describe  contaminants  and  their  allowable  thresholds, 
e.g. the Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) for Arsenic is 0.01 mg/L according to 
the National Primary  Drinking Water Regulations (NPDWRs)4 stipulated by the US 
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA).  Water  regulations  are  established  both  at 
the  federal  level  and  by  different  state  agencies.  For  instance,  the  threshold  for 
Antimony 
the  Rhode  Island  Department  of 
Environmental  Managements  Water  Quality  Regulations 5 while  the  threshold  for 
Antimony is 0.006 mg/L according to the Drinking Water Protection Program6 from 
the  New  York  Department  of  Health.  To  capture  the  diversity  of  the  water 
regulations,  we  generated  a  comparison  table 7 (including  provenance)  of  different 
contaminant thresholds at federal and state levels.  

is  0.0056  mg/L  according 

to 

                                                           
4 http://water.epa.gov/drink/contaminants/index.cfm 
5 http://www.dem.ri.gov/pubs/regs/regs/water/h20q09.pdf 
6 http://www.health.ny.gov/environmental/water/drinking/part5/tables.htm 
7 http://tw.rpi.edu/web/project/TWC-SWQP/compare_five_regulation 

P. Wang et al. 

2.2   Collecting Environmental Data 

Environmental  information  systems  need  to  integrate  data  from  distributed  data 
sources  to  enrich  the  source  data  and  provide  data  validation.  For  water  quality 
monitoring,  two  major  U.S.  government  agencies  publish  water  quality  data:  the 
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)  and  US  Geological  Survey  (USGS).  Both 
release observational data based on their own independent  water quality  monitoring 
systems.  Permit  compliance  and  enforcement  status  of  facilities  is  regulated  by  the 
National  Pollutant  Discharge  Elimination  System  (NPDES8)  under  the  Clean  Water 
Act  (CWA).  The  NPDES  datasets  contain  descriptions  of  the  facilities  (e.g.  name, 
permit number, and location) and measurements of water contaminants discharged by 
the  facilities  for  up  to  five  test  types  per  contaminant.  USGS  publishes  data  about 
water  monitoring  sites  and  measurements  from  water  samples  through  the  National 
Water Information System (NWIS)9.  

Although environmental datasets are often organized as data tables, it is not easy to 
integrate  them  due  to  syntactic  and  semantic  differences.  In  particular,  we  observe 
multiple needs for linking data: (i) the same concept may be named differently, e.g., 
the notion  name of contaminant is represented by  CharacteristicName in USGS 
datasets  and  Name  in  EPA  datasets,  (ii)  some  popular  concepts,  e.g.  name  of 
chemical, may be used in domains other than water quality monitoring, so it would be 
useful  to  link  to  other  accepted  models,  e.g.  the  ChemML  chemical  element 
descriptions and (iii) most observational data are complex data objects. For example, 
Table 1 shows a fragment from EPAs measurement dataset, where four table cells in 
the first two columns together yield a complex data object: C1 refers to one type of 
water  contamination  test,  C1_VALUE  and  C1_UNIT  indicate  two  different 
attributes for interpreting the cells under them respectively, and the data object reads 
the measured concentration of fecal coliform is 34.07 MPN/100mL under test option 
C1.  Effective  mechanisms  are  needed  to  allow  connection  of  relevant  data  objects 
(e.g., the density observations of fecal coliform observed in EPA and USGS datasets) 
to enable cross-dataset comparisons.  

Table  1.  For  the  facility  with  permit  RI0100005,  the  469th  row  for  Coliform_fecal_general 
measurements on 09/30/2010 contains 2 tests 

C1_VALUE 
34.07 

C1_UNIT 
MPN/100ML 

C2_VALUE 
53.83 

C2_UNIT 
MPN/100ML 

2.3   Provenance Tracking and Provenance-Aware Computing 

In  order  to  enable  transparency  and  encourage  community  participation,  a  public 
information  system  should  track  provenance  metadata  during  data  processing  and 
leverage  provenance  metadata 
its  computational  services.  Similarly,  an 

in 

                                                           
8 http://www.epa-echo.gov/echo/compliance_report_water_icp.htm 
9 http://waterdata.usgs.gov/nwis 

 
?

?

?
environmental  monitoring  system  that  combines  data  from  different  sources  should 
maintain and expose data sources on demand. This enables data curators to get credit 
for their contributions and also allows users to choose data from trusted sources. The 
data sources are automatically refreshed from the corresponding provenance metadata 
when the system ingests new data. 

Provenance  metadata  can  maintain  context  information  (e.g.  when  and  where  an 
observation was collected), which can be used to determine whether two data objects 
are  comparable.  For  example,  when  pH  measurements  from  EPA  and  USGS  are 
validated, the measurement provenance should be checked: the latitude and longitude 
of the EPA and USGS sites where the pH values are measured should be very close, 
the measurement time should be in the same year and month, etc. 

3   Semantic Web Approach 

We  believe  that  a  semantic  web  approach  is  well  suited  to  the  general  problem  of 
monitoring, and explore this approach with a water quality monitoring portal at scale.  

3.1   Domain Knowledge Modeling and Reasoning 

We  use  an  ontology-based  approach  to  model  domain  knowledge  in  environmental 
information systems. An upper ontology10 defines the basic terms for environmental 
monitoring. Domain ontologies extend the upper ontology to model domain specific 
terms.  We  also  develop  regulation  ontologies 11  that  include  terms  required  for 
describing  compliance  and  pollution  levels.  These  ontologies  leverage  OWL 
inference to reason about the compliance of observations with regulations. 

Upper Ontology Design 
Existing  ontologies  do  not  completely  cover  all  the  necessary  domain  concepts  as 
mentioned  in  section  2.1.  We  provide  an  upper  ontology  that  reuses  and  is 
complementary  to  existing  ontologies  (e.g.  SWEET,  FOAF).  The  ontology  models 
domain  objects  (e.g.  polluted  sites)  as  classes  and  their  relationships  (e.g.  has 
Measurement, hasCharacteristic12) as properties. A subset of the ontology is illustrated in 
Figure 1. A polluted site is modeled as something that is both a measurement site and 
polluted  thing,  which  is  something  that  has  at  least  one  measurement  that  violates  a 
regulation.  

This  ontology  can  be  extended  to  different  domains  by  adding  domain-specific 
classes. For example, water measurement is a subclass of measurement, and water site 
is the intersection of body of water, measurement site and something that has at least 
one water measurement13. Our water quality extension is also shown in Figure 1. 

                                                           
10  http://escience.rpi.edu/ontology/semanteco/2/0/pollution.owl# 
11  e.g., http://purl.org/twc/ontology/swqp/region/ny; others are listed at 

http://purl.org/twc/ontology/swqp/region/ 

12  Our ontology uses characteristic instead of contaminant based on the consideration that some 

characteristics measured like pH and temperature are not contaminants. 

13  http://escience.rpi.edu/ontology/2/0/water.owl# 

P. Wang et al. 

Fig. 1. Portion of the TWC Environment Monitoring Ontology 

 

Fig. 2. Portion of the EPA Regulation Ontology 

 

Regulation Ontology Design 
Each  domain  must  define  its  own  regulation  ontology  that  maps  the  rules  in 
regulations to OWL classes. For water quality monitoring, we developed a regulation 
ontology  in  which  the  allowable  ranges  of  regulated  characteristics  are  encoded  via 
numeric  range  restrictions  on  datatype  properties.  The  rule-compliance  results  are 
reflected by whether an observational data item is a member of the class mapped from 
the  rule.  Figure  2  illustrates  the  OWL  representation  of  one  rule  from  EPAs 
NPDWRs, i.e. drinking water is polluted if the concentration of Arsenic is more than 
0.01 mg/L. In the regulation ontology, ArsenicDrinkingWaterRegulationViolation is a 
water  measurement  with  value  greater  than  or  equal  to  0.01  mg/L  of  the  Arsenic 
characteristic. Regulations in other environment domains can be similarly mapped to 
OWL2 restrictions if they represent violations as ranges of measured characteristics. 

Reasoning Domain Data with Regulations 
Combining  observational  data  items  collected  at  water-monitoring  sites  and  the 
domain  and  regulation  ontologies,  an  OWL2  reasoner  can  decide  if  any  sites  are 

 
?

?

?
polluted. This design provides several benefits. First, the upper ontology is small and 
easy  to  maintain;  it  consists  of  only  7  classes,  4  object  properties,  and  10  data 
properties.  Secondly,  the  ontology  design  is  extensible.  The  upper  ontology  can  be 
extended to other domains, e.g. air quality monitoring14. Regulation ontologies can be 
extended to incorporate more regulations  as needed. We wrote converters to extract 
federal  and  four  states  regulation  data  from  web  pages  and  translated  them  into 
OWL2 [7] constraints that align with the upper ontology. The same workflow can be 
used to obtain the remaining state regulations using either our existing converters or 
potentially  new  converters  if  the  data  are  in  different  forms.  The  design  leads  to 
flexible  querying  and  reasoning:  the  user  can  select  the  regulations  to  apply  to  the 
data  and  the  reasoner  will  classify  using  only  the  ontology  for  the  selected 
regulations. For example, when Rhode Island regulations are applied to water quality 
data for zip code 02888 (Warwick, RI), the portal detects 2 polluted water sites and 7 
polluting  facilities.  If  the  user  chooses  to  apply  California  regulations  to  the  same 
region,  the  portal  identifies  15  polluted  water  sites,  including  the  2  detected  with 
Rhode Island regulations, and the same 7 polluting facilities. One conclusion is that 
California regulations are stricter than Rhode Islands (and many other states), and the 
difference could be of interest to environmental researchers and local residents. 

3.2   Data Integration 

When  integrating  real  world  data  from  multiple  sources,  monitoring  systems  can 
benefit from adopting the data conversion and organization capabilities enabled by the 
TWC-LOGD  portal  [6]. The open  source  tool  csv2rdf4lod15 can  be  used  to  convert 
datasets from heterogeneous sources into Linked Data [9].  

Linking  to  ontological  terms:  Datasets  from  different  sources  can  be  linked  if  they 
reuse common ontological terms, i.e. classes and properties. For instance, we map the 
property CharacteristicName in the USGS dataset and the property Name in the 
EPA dataset to a common property water:hasCharacteristic. Similarly, we map spatial 
location to an external ontology, i.e. wgs8416:lat and wgs84:long.  

Aligning  instance  references:  We  promote  references  to  characteristic  names  from 
literal  to  URI,  e.g.  Arsenic  is  promoted  to  water:Arsenic,  which  then  can  be 
linked to external resources like dbpedia:Arsenic using owl:sameAs. This design is 
based  on  the  observation  that  not  all  instance  names  can  be  directly  mapped  to 
DBpedia  URIs  (e.g.,  Nitrate/Nitrite  from  the  Massachusetts  water  regulations 17 
maps two DBpedia URIs), and some instances may not be defined in DBpedia (e.g., 
C5-C8 from the Massachusetts water regulations). By linking to DBpedia URIs, we 
reserve the opportunity to connect to other knowledge base, e.g. disease database.  

                                                           
14 http://escience.rpi.edu/ontology/2/0/air.owl# 
15 http://purl.org/twc/id/software/csv2rdf4lod 
16 http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos 
17 The 2011 Standards & Guidelines for Contaminants in Massachusetts Drinking Water at  

 http://www.mass.gov/dep/water/drinking/standards/dwstand.htm 

P. Wang et al. 

Converting complex objects: As discussed in section 2.2, we often need to compose a 
complex data object from multiple cells in a table. We use the cell-based conversion 
capability provided by csv2rdf4lod to enhance EPA data by marking each cell value 
as a subject in a triple and bundling the related cell values with the marked subject. 
The details can be found in [18].  

3.3   Provenance Tracking and Provenance-Aware Computing 

SemantEco  provenance  data  come  from  two  sources:  (i)  provenance  metadata 
embedded in the original datasets, e.g. measurement location and time; (ii) metadata 
that describe the derivation history of the data. We automatically capture provenance 
data  during  the  data  integration  stages  and  encode  them  in  PML  2  [11]  due  to  the 
provenance support from csv2rdf4lod. At the retrieval stage, we capture provenance, 
e.g. data source URL, time, method, and protocol used in data retrieval. We maintain 
provenance at the conversion stage, e.g. engine performing the conversion, antecedent 
data, and roles played by those data. At the publication stage, we capture provenance, 
e.g. agent, time, and context for triple store loads and updates. When we convert the 
regulations,  we  capture  their  provenance  programmatically.  We  reveal  these 
provenance  data  via  pop  up  dialogs  when  the  user  selects  a  measurement  site  or 
facility,  and  utilize  them  to  enable  new  applications  like  dynamic  data  source  (DS) 
listings and provenance-aware cross validation. 

Data Source as Provenance 
We utilize data source provenance to support dynamic data source listing as follows: 

1. Newly gathered water quality data are loaded into the system as RDF graphs. 
2. When  new  graphs  come,  the  system  generates  an  RDF  graph,  namely  the  DS 
graph, to record the metadata of all the RDF graphs in the system. The DS graph 
contains  information  such  as  the  URI,  classification  and  ranking  of  each  RDF 
graph. 

3. The system tells the user what data sources are currently available by executing a 

SPARQL query on the DS graph to select distinct data source URIs. 

4. With the presentation of the data sources on the interface, the user is allowed to 
select the data sources he/she trusts (see Figure 4). The system would then only 
return results within the selected sources.  

Provenance information can allow the user to customize his/her data retrieval request, 
e.g.  some  users  may  be  only  interested  in  data  published  within  a  particular  time 
period. The SPARQL queries used in each step are available at [18]. 

Provenance-Aware Cross-Validation over EPA and USGS Data 
Provenance  enables  our  system  to  compare  and  cross-validate  water  quality  data 
originating  from  different  source  agencies.  Figure  3  shows  pH  measurements 
collected  at  an  EPA  facility  (at  41:59:37N,  71:34:27W)  and  a  USGS  site  (at 
41:59:47N,  71:33:45W)  that  are  less  than  1km  apart.  Note  that  the  pH  values 
measured by USGS fell below the minimum value from EPA often and went above 

 
?

?

?
the  maximum  value  from  EPA  once.  We  found  two  nearby  locations  using  a 
SPARQL filter:  

FILTER ( ?facLat < (?siteLat+"+delta+")  
&& ?facLat > (?siteLat-"+delta+")  
&& ?facLong < (?siteLong+"+delta+")  
&& ?facLong > (?siteLong-"+delta+")) 

Fig. 3. Data Validation Example 

 

4   SemantAqua: Semantic Water Quality Portal  

4.1   System Implementation 

Figure 4 shows one example where the semantic water quality portal supports water 
pollution identification. The user specifies a geographic region of interest by entering 
a  zip  code  (mark  1).  Users  can  customize  queries  from  multiple  facets:  data  source 
(mark 3), water regulations (mark 4), water characteristic (mark 6) and health concern 
(mark 7). After the portal generates the results, it visualizes the results on a Google 
map using different icons to distinguish between clean and polluted water sources and 
facilities  (mark  5).  The  user  can  access  more  details  about  a  site  by  clicking  on  its 
icon.  The  information  provided  in  the  pop  up  window  (mark  2)  include:  names  of 
contaminants, measured values, limit values, and time of measurement. The window 
also provides a link that displays the water quality data as a time series. 

The portal retrieves water quality datasets from EPA and USGS and converts the 
heterogeneous datasets into RDF using csv2rdf4lod. The converted water quality data 
are  loaded  into  OpenLink  Virtuoso  6  open-source  edition 18  and  retrieved  via 
SPARQL queries. The portal utilizes the Pellet OWL Reasoner [16] together with the 
Jena Semantic Web Framework [2] to reason over the  water quality data and  water 
ontologies in order to identify water pollution events.  

The portal models the effective dates of the regulations, but only at the granularity 
of  a  set  of  regulations  rather  than  per  contaminant.  We  use  provenance  data  to 
generate and maintain the data source facet (mark 3), enabling the user to choose data 
sources he/she trusts.  

                                                           
18 http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/dataspace/dav/wiki/Main/ 

P. Wang et al. 

Fig. 4. Water Quality Portal In Action 

 

Fig. 5. Triple numbers for our initial four states with average computation 

 

4.2   Scaling Issues 

We wanted to test our approach in a realistic setting so we gathered data for an initial 
set of states to determine scaling issues. We have generated 89.58 million triples for 
the USGS datasets and 105.99 million triples for the EPA datasets for 4 states, which 
implies that water data for all 50 states would generate at least a few billion triples. 
The sizes of the available datasets are summarized in Figure 5. Such size suggests that 
a triple store cluster should be deployed to host the water data.19  

Table 2 includes class counts for our initial four state regulations. Our programmed 
conversion provides a quick and low cost approach for encoding regulations. It took 
us about 2 person-days to encode hundreds of rules. 

                                                           
19 We  have  recently  obtained  the  data  for  the  remaining  46  states  and  are  working  on  the  

 completed US portal. 

 
?

?

?
Table 2. Number of classes converted from regulations 
?

?

?
5   Discussion 

5.1   Linking to a Health Domain  

Polluted drinking water can cause acute diseases, such as diarrhea, and chronic health 
effects  such  as  cancer,  liver  and  kidney  damage.  For  example,  water  pollution  cooccurring with new types of natural gas extraction in Bradford County, Pennsylvania 
has  been  reported  to  generate  numerous  problems20, 21.  People  reported  symptoms 
ranging from rashes to numbness, tingling, and chemical burn sensations, escalating 
to more severe symptoms including racing heart and muscle tremors.  

In  order  to  help  citizens  investigate  health  impacts  of  water  pollution,  we  are 
extending  our  ontologies  to  include  potential  health  impacts  of  overexposure  to 
contaminants. These relationships are quite diverse since potential health impacts vary 
widely. For example, according to NPDWRs, excessive exposure to lead may cause 
kidney problems and high blood pressure in adults whereas infants and children may 
experience delays in physical or mental development.  

Similar  to  modeling  water  regulations,  we  programmatically  extracted  the 
relationships  between  contaminants  and  health  impacts  from  a  web  page 22  and 
encoded  them  into  OWL  classes.  We  used  the  object  property  hasSymptom  to 
connect the classes with their symptoms, e.g. health:high_blood_pressure. The classes 
of  health  effects  are  related  to  the  classes  of  violations,  e.g.  LeadDrinkingWater 
RegulationViolation,  with  the  object  property  hasCause.  We  can  query  symptombased measurements using this SPARQL query fragment: 
 
?healthEffect water:hasSymptom health:high_blood_pressure. 
?healthEffect rdf:type water:HealthEffect.  
?healthEffect water:hasCause ?cause.  
?cause owl:intersectionOf ?restrictions. 
?restrictions list:member ?restriction.  
?restriction owl:onProperty water:hasCharacteristic. 
?restriction owl:hasValue ?characteristic. 
?measurement water:hasCharacteristic ?characteristic. 
 
Based  on  this  modeling,  the  portal  has  been  extended  to  begin  to  address  health 
concerns:  (1)  the  user  can  specify  his/her  health  concern  and  the  portal  will  detect 
only the water pollution that has been correlated the particular health concern; (2) the 
user can query the possible health effects of each contaminant detected at a polluted 

                                                           
20 http://protectingourwaters.wordpress.com/2011/06/16/black-water-and-brazenness-gas-

drilling-disrupts-lives-endangers-health-in-bradford-county-pa/ 

21 http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/amall/one_familys_life_in_the_gas_pa.html 
22 As obtained from the NPDWRs at http://water.epa.gov/drink/contaminants/index.cfm   

P. Wang et al. 

site,  which  is  useful  for  identifying  potential  effects  of  water  pollution  and  for 
identifying appropriate responses (e.g., boiling water to kill germs, using water only 
for bathing but not for drinking, etc.) 

5.2   Time as Provenance 

Temporal  considerations  were  non-trivial  in  regulation  modeling.  The  thresholds 
defined  in  both  the  NPDWRs  MCLs  and  state  water  quality  regulations  became 
effective nationally at different times for different contaminants23. For example, in the 
2011 Standards & Guidelines for Contaminants in Massachusetts Drinking Water, 
the date that the threshold of each contaminant was developed or last updated can be 
accessed by clicking on the contaminants name on the list. The effective time of the 
regulations has semantic implications: if the collection time of the water measurement 
is not in the effective time range of the constraint, then the constraint should not be 
applied  to  the  measurement.  In  principle,  we  can  use  OWL2  RangeRestriction  to 
model time interval constraints as we did on threshold.  

5.3   Regulation Mapping and Comparison 

The  majority  of  the  portal  domain  knowledge  stems  from  water  regulations  that 
stipulate  contaminants,  pollution  thresholds,  and  contaminant  test  options.  Besides 
using  semantics  to  clarify  the  meaning  of  water  regulations  and  support  regulation 
reasoning,  we  can  also  perform  analysis  on  regulations.  For  example,  we  compared 
regulations from five different sources and shows substantial variation.  

By modeling regulations as OWL classes, we may also leverage OWL subsumption 
inference  to  detect  the  correlations  between  thresholds  across  different  regulatory 
bodies and this knowledge could be further used to speed up reasoning. For example, 
the  California  regulations  are  stricter  than 
the  EPA  regulations  concerning 
Methoxychlor so we can derive two rules: 1) with respect to Methoxychlor, if a water 
site is identified as polluted according to the EPA regulations, it is polluted according 
to  the  California  regulations;  and  2)  with  respect  to  Methoxychlor,  if  the  available 
data supports no threshold violation according to the California regulations, it will not 
exceed thresholds according to the EPA regulations. Since regulations such as these 
can be subclassed, reasoning efficiencies may be realized when multiple regulations 
are used to evaluate pollution.  

5.4   Scalability  

The  large  number  of  triples  generated  during  the  conversion  phase  prohibits 
classifying  the  entire  dataset  in  real  time.  We  have  tried  several  approaches  to 
improve  reasoning  speed:  organize  observation  data  by  state,  filter  relevant  data  by 
zip code (we can derive county using zip code), and reasoning over the relevant data 
on one (or a small number of) selected regulation(s).  

The portal assigns one graph per state to store the integrated data. The triple count 
at the state level is still quite large: we currently host 29.45 million triples from EPA 
                                                           
23  Personal  communication  with  the    Office  of  Research  and  Standards,  Massachusetts 

Department of Environmental Protection. 

 
?

?

?
and 68.03 million triples from USGS for California water quality data. Therefore, we 
refine the granularity to county level using a CONSTRUCT query (see below). This 
operation reduces the number of relevant triples to a manageable 10K to 100K size. 
 
CONSTRUCT {  
  ?s rdf:type water:MeasurementSite.  
  ?s water:hasMeasurement ?measurement.   
  ?s water:hasStateCode ?state.  
  ?s wgs84:lat ?lat.      ?s wgs84:long ?long.  
  ?measurement water:hasCharacteristic ?characteristic.  
  ?measurement water:hasValue ?value.  
  ?measurement water:hasUnit ?unit.  
  ?measurement time:inXSDDateTime ?time.  
  ?s water:hasCountyCode 085. } 
WHERE { GRAPH <http://sparql.tw.rpi.edu/source/usgs-
gov/dataset/national-water-information-system-nwis-
measurements/06> 
{ ?s rdf:type water:MeasurementSite.  
  ?s water:hasUSGSSiteId ?id.  
  ?s water:hasStateCode ?state.      
  ?s wgs84:lat ?lat.      ?s wgs84:long ?long. 
  ?measurement water:hasUSGSSiteId ?id. 
  ?measurement water:hasCharacteristic ?characteristic. 
  ?measurement water:hasValue ?value.  
  ?measurement water:hasUnit ?unit.  
  ?measurement time:inXSDDateTime ?time.  
  ?s water:hasCountyCode 085. }}  

5.5   Maintenance Costs for Data Service Provider 

Although government agencies typically publish environmental data on the web and 
allow citizens to browse and download the data, not all of their information systems 
are designed to support bulk  data queries. In our case, our programmatic queries of 
the  EPA  dataset  were  blocked.  From  a  personal  communication  with  the  EPA,  we 
were surprised to find that our previous continuous data queries were impacting their 
operations budget since they are charged for queries. Consequently, we filed an online 
form requesting a bulk data transfer from the EPA which has recently been processed. 
In  contrast,  the  USGS  provides  web  services  to  facilitate  periodic  acquisition  and 
processing of their water data via automated means. 

5.6   System Evaluation 

We  provide  an  online  questionnaire 24  to  collect  feedback  from  users.  In  the 
questionnaire, we ask the users to identify themselves as experts or lay users, then ask 
them  to  rate  the  data  quality,  responsiveness,  and  user  interface  of  the  portal.  The 
questionnaire also solicits free text comments from users. We will report preliminary 
results of this ongoing user study at the conference. 
                                                           
24 http://was.tw.rpi.edu/swqp/questionnaire/portal_questionnaire.php 

P. Wang et al. 

6   Related Work 

Three  areas  of  work  are  considered  most  relevant  to  this  work,  namely  knowledge 
modeling, data integration, and provenance tracking of environmental data. 

Knowledge-based approaches have begun in environmental informatics. Chen et al. 
[5]  proposed  a  prototype  system  that  integrates  water  quality  data  from  multiple 
sources and retrieves data using semantic relationships among data. Chau [4] presented 
an  ontology-based  knowledge  management  system  (KMS)  to  enable  novice  users  to 
find numerical flow and water quality models given a set of constraints. OntoWEDSS 
[3]  is  an  environmental  decision-support  system  for  wastewater  management  that 
combines  classic  rule-based  and  case-based  reasoning  with  a  domain  ontology. 
Scholten et al. [14] developed the MoST system to facilitate the modeling process in 
the  domain  of  water  management.  The  Registry  of  EPA  Applications,  Models  and 
Databases  (READ)25 supports  management  of  information  resources.  It  collects  life 
cycle  phase  information,  how  the  resource  supports  environmental  statutes,  and 
whether 
information  resources.  A 
comprehensive  review  of  environmental  modeling  approaches  can  be  found  in  [17]. 
SemantEco and SemantAqua differ from these projects since they support provenancebased  query  and  data  visualization.  Moreover,  SemantAqua  is  built  upon  standard 
semantic technologies (e.g. OWL, SPARQL, Pellet, Virtuoso) and thus can be easily 
replicated or expanded.  

interfaces  with  other  EPA 

the  resource 

Data  integration  across  providers  has  been  studied  for  decades  by  database 
researchers. In the area of ecological and environmental research, shallow integration 
approaches  are  taken  to  store  and  index  metadata  of  data  sources  in  a  centralized 
database to aid search and discoverability. This approach is applied in systems such as 
KNB26 and SEEK27. Our integration scheme combines a limited, albeit extensible, set 
of  data  sources  under  a  common  ontology  family.  This  supports  reasoning  over  the 
integrated data set and allows for ingest of future data sources. 

There  also  has  been  a  considerable  amount  of  research  efforts  in  semantic 
provenance,  especially  in  the  field  of  eScience.  myGrid  [19]  proposes  the  COHSE 
open hypermedia system that generates, annotates and links provenance data in order 
to  build  a  web  of  provenance  documents,  data,  services,  and  workflows  for 
experiments  in  biology.  The  Multi-Scale  Chemical  Science  [12]  (CMCS)  project 
develops a general-purpose infrastructure for collaboration across many disciplines. It 
also  contains  a  provenance  subsystem  for  tracking,  viewing  and  using  data 
provenance.  A  review  of  provenance  techniques  used  in  eScience  projects  is 
presented  in  [15].  While  these  eScience  projects  design  their  own  schemes  for 
modeling  provenance,  the  SemantAqua  portal  encodes  provenance  with  PML  2, 
which is a general purpose interlingua for sharing explanations generated by various 
automated systems. These eScience projects keep provenance for uses like improving 
data  quality,  facilitating  audits,  and  data  replicability.  Our  portal  demonstrates  that 
provenance also can be used  for developing and customizing  web applications (e.g. 
generating the data source facet). 
                                                           
25 http://iaspub.epa.gov/sor_internet/registry/systmreg/home/overview/home.do 
26 Knowledge Network for Biocomplexity Project. http://knb.ecoinformatics.org/index.jsp 
27 The Science Environment for Ecological Knowledge. http://seek.ecoinformatics.org 

 
?

?

?
7   Conclusions and Future Work 

We presented a semantic technology-based approach to ecological and environmental 
monitoring  and  described  our  work  using  this  approach  in  the  Tetherless  World 
Constellation SemantEco approach and the SemantAqua Portal. SemantAqua supports 
both  non-expert  and  expert  users  in  water  quality  monitoring.  We  described  the 
overall  design  and  highlighted  some  benefits  from  utilizing  semantic  technologies, 
including:  the  design  of  the  ontologies,  the  methodology  used  to  perform  data 
integration, and the encoding and usage of provenance information generated during 
data aggregation. The SemantAqua portal demonstrates some benefits and potential of 
applying semantic web technologies to environmental information systems. 

A  number  of  extensions  to  this  portal  are  in  process.  First,  only  four  states' 
regulations have been encoded. We intend to encode the regulations for the remaining 
states whose regulations differ from the federal regulations. Second, data from other 
sources,  e.g.  weather,  may  yield  new  ways  of  identifying  pollution  events.  For 
example,  a  contaminant  control  strategy  may  fail  if  heavy  rainfall  causes  flooding, 
carrying  contaminants  outside  of  a  prescribed  area.  It  would  be  possible  with  realtime sensor data to observe how these weather events impact the portability of water 
sources in the immediate area. We are also applying this approach to other monitoring 
topics, e.g. air quality, food safety, and health impacts.  
