Modelling and Analysis of User Behaviour in

Online Communities

Sofia Angeletou, Matthew Rowe, and Harith Alani

Knowledge Media institute, Open University, UK
{s.angeletou,m.c.rowe,h.alani}@open.ac.uk

Abstract. Understanding and forecasting the health of an online community is of great value to its owners and managers who have vested
interests in its longevity and success. Nevertheless, the association between community evolution and the behavioural patterns and trends
of its members is not clearly understood, which hinders our ability of
making accurate predictions of whether a community is flourishing or
diminishing. In this paper we use statistical analysis, combined with a
semantic model and rules for representing and computing behaviour in
online communities. We apply this model on a number of forum communities from Boards.ie to categorise behaviour of community members
over time, and report on how different behaviour compositions correlate
with positive and negative community growth in these forums.

1 Introduction

Online communities form a fundamental part of the web today where a large
portion of the Internets traffic is driven by and through them [16]. These communities are where the majority of web users share content, seek support, and
socialise. On the one hand, for companies and businesses, such online communities tend to yield much value in terms of idea generation, customer support,
problem solving, etc. [15]. On the other hand, managing and hosting these communities can be very costly and time consuming, and hence their owners and
managers have a great vested interest in ensuring that these communities continue to flourish, and that their members remain active and productive.

One of the main metrics often used by community managers to measure community health is the number of members and posts. These numbers give a good
indication of community popularity. However, for deeper assessment and fore-
casting, other more complex qualitative and behavioural parameters need to be
considered [6, 13]. For example, behavioural analytics complement other community assessment tools and increase the value of the data [8].

Health of online communities is a relatively new and complex concept that is
codependent on the emergence and evolution of user behaviour in those commu-
nities. Domination of any type of behaviour, whether positive or negative, could
encourage others to change their behaviour or even abandon the community [10].
Therefore, monitoring and analysis of behaviour and its evolution over time, in
addition to straightforward metrics such as post and user counts, can provide
valuable information on how healthy an online community currently is or will

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2011, Part I, LNCS 7031, pp. 3550, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

S. Angeletou, M. Rowe, and H. Alani

be in the near future. Behaviour in online communities is usually associated
with various social and technical parameters which influence the roles users hold
in different settings [11]. Associating users with behavioural categories involves
identifying and applying constraints, expectations and frameworks to categorise
and follow user behaviour in the community [4].

To support community owners and managers in observing and maintaining
the good health of their communities, we first need to (a) model, capture and
monitor the activities of community members, (b) analyse emergent behaviours
and their change over time, (c) understand the correlation of certain types of
behaviour with community evolution, and (d) learn how and when to intervene
to influence the interactions and behaviour of community members. In this work
we focus on the first three tasks; the first task is concerned with producing a
semantic model for representing user activities in online communities and the
attention they generate in those communities. The second task focuses on comparing the emergence and change in patterns of behaviour with the evolution
of those communities. And the third task explores how community composi-
tion, i.e. a macro-analysis of the community, is correlated with the health of the
community. By monitoring activities in online communities we will be able to
better understand and predict their evolution directions; i.e. whether they are
flourishing (positive evolution) or diminishing (negative evolution). The main
contributions in this paper are as follows:
1. Method to infer user roles in online communities: We employ semantic rules
to label community users with their role and utilise dynamic feature binning
to account for the dynamic nature of communities and their propensity to
evolve.

2. Ontology to model behavioural features and support community role inference:
Allowing user features to be captured in a common machine-readable format
across communities and platforms.

3. Analysis of community health through role composition: We demonstrate the
utility of our approach by analysing three communities over a 3 year period,
showing the effects of behaviour composition changes on community health
and compositions that are key signifiers of healthy or unhealthy communities.
In the following section we report on various related works in the area of behaviour and community analysis. In section 3 we present our methodology for
user behaviour analysis and how we utilise Semantic Web technologies to infer the role that a user has within an online community. Section 4 describes our
analysis of community health in the three sample forums, followed by discussions
and future plans in section 5, and finishes with conclusions in section 6.

2 Related Work

In this section we report on existing works on analyses of behaviour patterns
and roles in online communities. The identification of behaviour is often based
on features which reflect the intensity, persistence, focus, reciprocity and polarity
of user activities.
?

?

?
For instance, users who contribute with high intensity, reciprocity and per-
sistence, positive polarity and are focused on supporting and contributing to
the community are characterised as moderators, mediators [10], captains and
pillars [14]. When such users are able to set the standard for community inter-
actions, they get labelled as celebrities [4]. Popular initiator, popular participant
and joining conversationalist [3] are three roles very similar to the celebrity type
since their intensity, persistence and reciprocity are also quite high. Another type
of prolific, but not as widely popular, user is the elitist, who demonstrates high
values for the above dimensions but communicates with a smaller group of users.
On the lower end of the activity scale the lurker is the most frequently observed
role and is defined as a participant who consumes but does not contribute and
usually has a strong personal focus [4, 10, 14]. Similarly described roles are those
of content consumers [9], grunts and taciturns [3] who do contribute but with
low intensity. The polarity of the user contribution has also been used to distinguish the negative roles of troll and flamer who exhibit disruptive behaviour
similar to the ranter. Like celebrities, ranters also demonstrate high intensity
and persistence yet their primary goal is to raise discussions on the topic of their
interest for some personal goals, same as over-riders and generators [14].

Although there is no commonly agreed set of behaviour patterns and labels,
the social and technical features considered by the above works when categorising behaviour do share some characteristics, albeit sometimes tailored to suit the
online communities under investigation. The approaches followed in the above
references are normally based on correlating a set of features taken from a specified snapshot of a community, then labelling users with behaviour roles that fits
the results from that snapshot.

Our analysis extends these approaches by introducing a framework for repre-
senting, computing, and monitoring users behaviour over time. We extend the
state of the art by demonstrating how various features can be modelled and
articulated into semantic rules to automate the detection and categorisation of
users with specific types of behaviour.

Furthermore, is it often the case that fixed ranges of feature-values are calculated when associating them with behaviour types, so if the feature value for a
given user falls within that range, then that user will be labelled with the corresponding behaviour. However, it is often the case that such value ranges seize to
apply if the time window or community changes. Here we present a framework
that enables a more dynamic association of features to roles (Section 3.2) and
allows for on-the-fly value threshold assignment that takes context into account.
Community health indicators are normally dependent on the goals and characteristics of the community [11]. Straightforward measures such as number and
frequency of posting are often used as an index of community health. For exam-
ple, it has been shown that the activity of a group can be maintained in high
levels by long term members, who help keep the group together [1, 10]. On the
other hand, it has been found that having lurkers in a community does not necessarily have a negative influence [12]. Our framework allows us to investigate
the influence that various user behaviours and interactions have on the overall

S. Angeletou, M. Rowe, and H. Alani

health of communities over time. This helps in understanding what the optimum
compositions of behaviour should be for a given community, and in forecasting
community evolution. We analyse the influence and predictability of a wide set
of behaviours on community health.

3 Methodology for Behaviour Analysis

In this section we describe our approach for labelling users in online communities
with the roles they hold in the context of these communities and in a specified
timeframe. To perform such labelling we first need to capture the activity of
users in online communities, define what sort of behaviour is associated with
particular roles and compare it to a users activity. For capturing users activities
we define an ontology (Section 3.1) that represents all involved entities and their
interactions. We also define rule skeletons (Section 3.2) which provides highlevel descriptions of how certain features are associated with various behaviour
roles. Our community analysis then fleshes out these rules with dynamic and
automatically computed value-ranges that will eventually determine which users
will be categorised with which behaviours. Finally we apply these rules on all
community members to infer their behaviour types (Section 3.3).

3.1 Ontology

Capturing a users activity in online communities is a primary step to analysing
his behaviour. Fig. 1 presents a portion of our Behaviour Ontology1 which represents online community users and their interactions. The ontology extends SIOC
[2] to refine the representation of low level user activities and interactions. It also
extends the Social Reality [5] ontology which provides an abstract representation of social roles and their contexts. The main concepts and properties of the
ontology are:

 sioc:UserAccount is a SIOC class to represent online community users.
 oubo:Post represents users main activities; writing and replying to posts.
 oubo:PostImpact summarises a posts replies, comments, forwards, etc.
 oubo:UserImpact encodes the user impact (behaviour)
 oubo:TimeFrame is the temporal context during which the analysis is

carried out and the association of a user to a role holds.

 social-reality:C represents context, such as time period (oubo:TimeFrame)

and a forum (sioc:Forum).

 oubo:Role represents the roles we derive for users based on their activities

in the community.

 oubo:belongsToContext links context-related concepts, such as oubo:

TimeFrame, sioc:Forum, and social-reality:C.

 social-reality:counts as associates a user with a oubo:Role.
 social-reality:context associates a user role with its context.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. Behaviour Ontology

The ontology also defines the rules for the population of features and classification of the users in different roles using dynamically populated feature weights
(Fig. 3). This is discussed in Section 3.3.

3.2 Behaviour Roles

To derive the behaviour roles of community users, their activity patterns need to
be compared against the behavioural characteristics of each role type. In the lit-
erature, the features (e.g. number of posts and replies, in/out degrees) associated
with behaviour are often given static value ranges (i.e. min and max values for
corresponding behaviours) which are calculated based on the community snapshot under analysis (e.g. [3, 9, 17]). However, a common characteristic of online
communities is their propensity to evolve and develop as new users participate
and the dynamic of the community changes. An effect of such dynamism is that
should we learn a static value for the maximum and minimum values for each
roles features then applying such values at a later point in time will lead to
users being omitted from the labelling process.

To counteract such effects we use the notion of skeleton rules, where each rule
contains a mapping between a given feature and the level that the value of the
feature should take to indicate a certain type of behaviour: low, medium or high.
In using this method we can shift the bounds that constitute such levels as the
dynamics of the community changes, thereby allowing more users to be labelled
with behaviour roles.

Many different behaviours and associated features have been proposed in the
literature (section 2). Our framework for modelling and computing behaviour is
not tied to any specific community or behaviour types or feature compositions.
To demonstrate our framework, we selected the behaviour roles defined in [3],
which covers a range of common activity and participation roles. In [3], Chan
and Hayes performed clustering over users within Boards.ie community forums
and then carried out manual analysis to derive the behaviour labels for each
cluster. They clustered the users using a list of key features that covered (a)

http://purl.org/net/oubo/0.3

S. Angeletou, M. Rowe, and H. Alani

the structural network properties of a user within the community, (b) the users
popularity amongst the community, (c) their propensity to initialise discussions,
and (d) their persistence in discussions. These features are:
 In-degree Ratio: The proportion of users U that reply to user i, thus

indicating the concentration of users that reply to i.

 Posts Replied Ratio: Proportion of posts by user i that yield a reply,

used to gauge the popularity of the users content based on replies.

 Thread Initiation Ratio: Proportion of threads that have been started
by i. This feature captures the propensity of a user to instigate discussions
and generate fresh content for the community.

 Bi-directional Threads Ratio: Proportion of threads where user i replies

to a user and receives a reply, thus forming a reciprocal communication.

 Bi-directional Neighbours Ratio: The proportion of neighbours where
a reciprocal interaction has taken place - e.g. i replied to j and j replied
to i. This can be thought of as the intersection between the set of repliers
and recipients. This measure allows the reciprocal characteristics of the user
to be captured and their participation with users in the community, where
higher values demonstrate a tendency to interact.

 Average Posts per Thread: The average number of posts made in every
thread that user i has participated in. Allows the level of discussion that
the user participates in to be gauged.

 Standard Deviation of Posts per Thread: The standard deviation of
the number of posts in every thread that user i has participated in. This
gauges the distribution of the discussion lengths, for example, one would
expect that a user who often discusses at length with other users would have
a high Average Posts per Thread and a low Standard Deviation of Posts
per Thread, while someone who varies their participation will have a higher
Standard Deviation of Posts per Thread.

Based on the feature-behaviour compositions in [3] and in other literature, we
deduce a mapping of these common feature to value ranges for each behaviour
role (Table 1).

3.3 Constructing and Applying Behaviour Rules
Our approach for constructing and applying rules is shown in Fig. 2 and is
composed of four stages that function in a cyclical manner: First, we construct
features for all users who participated in the given community at a specific point
in time. Second, we derive bins for features in the community, thus providing
the bounds for the low, medium or high levels of each feature. Third, the rule
base is constructed using the skeleton rule base and the levels from the bin-
ning. Fourth we apply the rules to each member of the community and derive a
role label, this provides the role composition of the community at a given time
snapshot. As Fig. 2 shows, the process is repeatable over time, thereby allowing
the composition of a given community to be monitored by inferring the role of
each community user at a given point in time. We now explain the four steps in
greater detail.
?

?

?
Table 1. Roles and the feature-to-level mappings

Role
Elitist

Grunt

Joining Conversationalist

Popular Initiator

Popular Participants

Supporter

Taciturn

Ignored

Feature
In-Degree Ratio
Bi-directional Threads Ratio
Bi-directional Neighbours Ratio
Bi-directional Threads Ratio
Bi-directional Neighbours Ratio
Average Posts per Thread
STD of Posts per Thread
Thread Initiation Ratio
Average Posts per Thread
STD of Posts per Thread
In-Degree Ratio
Thread Initiation Ratio
In-Degree Ratio
Thread Initiation Ratio
Average Posts per Thread
STD of Posts per Thread
In-Degree Ratio
Bi-directional Threads Ratio
Bi-directional Neighbours Ratio
Bi-directional Threads Ratio
Bi-directional Neighbours Ratio
Average Posts per Thread
STD of Posts per Thread
Posts Replied Ratio

Level
low
high
low
med
med
low
low
low
high
high
high
high
high
low
med
med
med
med
med
low
low
low
low
low

Fig. 2. Overview of the approach to analyse user behaviour, label users with behaviour
roles and derive the community composition

Step 1: Constructing Features. The previously defined statistical features
are constructed for each user at a given point in time. For our experiments,
as we describe in the following section, we use a window function to extract
all posts made within a given community during that time period. Using the
reply-to structure of the posts, we then compile the above features and create
an instance of oubo:UserImpact that contains the features for the given user
measured at a given point in time.

Step 2: Deriving Bins. Our skeleton rule base contains mappings of features-
to-levels, allowing the bounds of the levels to be altered depending on the
dynamics of the community. We set the bounds through binning, a process
that discretizes continuous feature values into three bins (low, medium or high)

S. Angeletou, M. Rowe, and H. Alani

using Wekas2 discretization filter together with equal frequency binning. Using a
naive binning approach - e.g. splitting a feature range into thirds - can result in a
large frequency skew within a single bin, equal frequency binning avoids this and
provides a distribution-dependent notion of levels. The process of deriving the
bins is performed when we analyse the community at a different point in time,
in doing so our intuition is that we will reduce the number of unclassified users
and account for changes in the communitys dynamics - we show this empirically
in the following section.

Step 3: Compiling the Rule Base. The association of users to roles is inferred by analysing the captured data for each user against features that each role
embodies. To perform such inferences our approach employs the SPARQL Inference Notation (SPIN)3 framework, allowing the encoding of rules as SPARQL
queries. The benefits of such an approach is that the rules are embedded in an
ontological model and can, therefore, be shared and executed across platforms
that support SPARQL Extensions and Jena.

To compile the rule base we create a rule for each behaviour role within the
community. For each role a new instance of the oubo:RoleClassifier Class is
created and associated with a set of features as shown in Fig. 3. Each feature
has a minimum and maximum value which specify the range of feature values a
user should have for this feature in order to be assigned to this role. We use the
skeleton rule of the role to provide the rules syntax and then replace the levels
with the necessary bounds produced by our binning procedure. In the majority
of cases a combination of features is required for the association of a user to a
role. In these cases, all the feature values of the user should belong to the ranges
specified by each feature belonging to the relative RoleClassifier instance.

Fig. 3. Association of Roles with Features

Step 4: Applying Rules. The produced rules are SPARQL Construct
queries that exploit the power of SPIN Functions by testing each instance of
sioc:UserAccount against each instance of oubo:RoleClassifier, and then assigning the user to the role whose associated classifier is matched. Fig. 4 presents
an example of one such query that is encoded as a spin:rule for the class
sioc:UserAccount. For each instance of sioc:UserAccount (represented by the
variable ?this) a set of triples are inferred representing the association of the
user with a new instance of a specific role ?role. The ?role is an instance

http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/
http://spinrdf.org
?

?

?
of a subclass of oubo:Role, ?t depending on the classification of the user as
described in Fig. 4. The spin function oubo:fn getRoleType executes the process described above and returns the appropriate classifier. Then using the
smf:buildURI SPARQL Motion function ?t is built so that it is associated to the
correct subclass of oubo:Role. Finally, the ?context is created and connected to
the particular ?role via the relation social-reality:hasContext, and is also
associated to the temporal and forum relevant contexts in which it makes sense
that the user holds this particular role - i.e. a given user can have multiple roles
within different communities and time periods.

CONSTRUCT {

?role a ?t .
?this social-reality:count_as ?role .
?context a social-reality:C .
?role social-reality:content ?context .
?temp a oubo:TemporalContext .
?forum a sioc:Forum .
?forum oubo:belongsToContext ?context .
?temp oubo:belongsToContent ?context

} WHERE {

BIND (oubo:fn_getRoleType(?this) AS ?type) .
BIND(smf:buildURI("oubo:Role{?type}") AS ?t) .
.....

}

Fig. 4. SPARQL CONSTRUCT encoded as a spin:rule in the class sioc:UserAccount

4 Analysis of Community Health

Healthy communities provide users with the resources from which information
can be sought, interactions made and discussions participated in. In this section
we explore the relation between the composition of a community, i.e. the various
roles that users have within a community and the proportion to which such
roles make up the community (e.g. 20% elitists, 10% taciturns, etc.), and the
activity in the community. Through experiments and analysis of the subsequent
results, we seek to identify key community compositions that are associated
with both an increase and decrease in community activity. In doing so, we are
provided with an understanding of how certain behaviour types are correlated
with community evolution and what compositions are signifiers of healthy and
unhealthy communities. We here consider the level of activity as a proxy of
community health, but other parameters (e.g. reciprocity, sentiment) could also
be considered.

4.1 Experimental Setup
For our experiments we used a dataset collected from the Irish community discussion forums, Boards.ie. We extracted all posts from the beginning of 2004
through to the end of 2006 for our analysis - thereby capturing a 3 year period
over which we could perform our analyses. Rather than analysing the entire site,
we selected 3 forums that showed a variance in activity throughout the analysed
period - the plots of post activity are shown in Fig. 6.

S. Angeletou, M. Rowe, and H. Alani

 Forum 246 (Commuting and Transport): Demonstrates a clear increase in

activity over time.

 Forum 388 (Rugby): Exhibits periodic increase and decrease in activity and

hence it provides good examples of healthy/unhealthy evolutions.

 Forum 411 (Mobile Phones and PDAs): Increase in activity over time with

some fluctuation - i.e. reduction and increase over various time windows.

In order to compile a dataset for each forum we used the following process:
beginning on 1st January 2004 we used a window from 13 weeks prior to this
date up until the date as our feature window. Within this window we extracted
all the posts made within the forum, and used the posts to compile the statistics
for each unique user who had made a post within that window. Once we had
finished building the statistics for each user at that collection date, we then rolled
the date forward 84 days, leaving a 12 week gap between our last collection date.
The window was compiled once again: going 13 weeks back, returning all posts
within the window, and then building the user features for each unique user
within the window. We repeated this process until the end of 2006. To provide
a coarse measurement of the communitys health we also counted the number of
posts made in the forum during that window - allowing the activity at one point
in time to be contrasted against earlier activity.

Following the compilation of our user statistics at the incremental time steps
(13 time steps in total) and the instantiation of oubo:UserImpact, we categorised
each user using our previously described rules. In doing so we were able to
measure the composition of the community over time as differing percentages of
users that have taken on such roles within the community. We then correlated
this composition with the health of the community at that point in time, seeking
patterns that describe a healthy and unhealthy community in terms of either
an increase or decrease in activity, e.g. having many users of a certain role type
reduces community activity. We also report on how our approach greatly reduces
the percentage of users that could not be classified by the current behaviour rules.

4.2 Results

Fig. 5 shows the correlograms from the individual forums. The upper panel shows
the extent to which a correlation exists between two features and the polarity of
the correlation (i.e. positive or negative). The greater the portion of the circle
that is filled then the greater the correlation. The colour indicates the polarity:
blue indicates a positive correlation and red indicates a negative correlation.

For forum 246 (Commuting and Transport), shown in Fig 5(a), a positive
correlation exists between the post count and both the number of elitists and
popular participants (partic in the chart), indicating that as more users assume
such roles within the community then activity increases. This is due to the popular participants driving discussions and joining in with the community to make
it more vibrant. Meanwhile, elitists communicate a lot with their own group
and thus drive its activity. In forum 246 we also observe a negative correlation
between the post count and the proportion of taciturns within the community,
indicating that users who communicate very little with others can reduce the
?

?

?
overall interactions and dynamic of the community. Fig 5(a) also shows that an
increased number of ignored users has a negative effect on community activity,
which follows intuition. As forum 246 concerns transport discussion, many users
post questions regarding travel situations and modes of transport, and hence
if a large portion of those users are ignored then activity in this community
diminishes as questions remain unanswered.

(a) Forum 246

(b) Forum 388

(c) Forum 411

Fig. 5. Correlation between the various features within each forum

Similarly to forum 246, in forum 388 (Rugby) we also find a positive correlation between post counts and number of elitists and popular participants (Fig.
5(b)). There is also a slight correlation between post count and the proportion
of conversationalists within the community, which demonstrates the value of
conversations and debates in driving this community. There is also a negative
correlation between the post count and the number of taciturns and ignored
within the community.

For forum 411, (Mobile Phones and PDAs), the correlogram in Fig. 5(c)
demonstrates similar patterns to the previous two forums in terms of positive
correlations. Once again, we find that the post count has a positive correlation
with the proportion of elitists and popular participants. We also find that the
post count has a negative correlation with the proportion of taciturns and, in this
individual forum, with the proportion of supporters. Supporters have a mid-level
range of Bi-directional Threads Ratio, indicating that conversation is one of the
drivers behind this role. However in forum 411, debate between users appears to
be limited, as users require information regarding support and are less inclined
to chat with other users repeatedly. This is also supported by the lack of positive
correlation between the post count and the proportion of conversationalists in
this forum.

Within Fig. 6 we show the composition changes in each of the analysed forums
over time, plotted together with the post count within each forum. For all forums
we find that activity increases where the proportion of ignored users decreases.
For forum 246 we see that as the proportion of joining conversationalists and
popular initiators increases so does activity. The same applies to forums 388 and

S. Angeletou, M. Rowe, and H. Alani

(a) Forum 246

(b) Forum 388

(c) Forum 411

Fig. 6. Changes in composition over time plotted with forum post counts

411, although for the latter the number of popular initiators was more important,
confirming our earlier correlation analysis for that forum where conversations are
not driving activity in this forum.

An interesting factor in each forum is the effect of composition stability on
community activity. In the case of forum 246 and forum 411 we find that the
composition converges on relatively stable proportions (i.e. with no extreme fluctuations in role types) and leads to a large rise in activity over time. Conversely
for forum 388, Fig. 6(b) shows that the lack of stability in the communitys composition leads to fluctuations in activity. This suggests that although limiting
the number of ignored users and taciturns in the community would be beneficial,
a stable mix of user types actually improves community health.

Unclassified Users. Our rule-based approach for inferring the role of a given
user at a given point in time utilises dynamic binning to update the low, mid and
high bounds for each rules features. In utilising dynamic binning our intuition
was that our approach could adapt to the changing dynamics of the community
as it evolves over time, i.e. the low bound for a feature during one year will
differ from a year later. Therefore to demonstrate the utility of our approach we
measured the proportion of users that are unclassified in each forum. We contrast
this against the proportion of users who are unclassified when the feature bounds
are not updated at each time step (40.05% unclassified users for forum 246,
37.92% for forum 388 and 39.84% for forum 411). Results show that our method
of dynamically updating the bins for feature bounds enables a greater coverage
of the users (29.06% unclassified users for 246, 28.06% for 388 and 28.68% for
411), and therefore enables, on average, a greater proportion of users to be
labelled with a given role. Additional behaviour rules can be added to increase
the percentage of classified users even more.

Predicting Community Health. Thus far we have concentrated on identifying correlations between the post count within single forums and the proportion
of roles within such communities. An important aspect of undertaking such analysis is the ability to forecast community health should the composition of the
community change. To demonstrate the utility of such an approach we performed a binary classification task to identify, based on the composition of the
?

?

?
community, whether the activity had either increased or decreased since the
previous time window. We built a dataset for each forum and constructed an
instance for each of the 13 time windows. Each instance contained the features
describing the 7 behaviour roles in the community together with the percentage of users allocated with such roles and a class label denoting the activity in
the forum as having either increased (pos) or decreased (neg) since the previous
time window. For our classification task we used the J48 decision tree classifier
in a 10-fold cross validation setting (due to the limited size of the datasets) by:
first, identifying increases and decreases in each of the forums, and secondly,
identifying activity changes across communities, by combining forum datasets
together into a single dataset. To report on the performance of our approach we
used precision, recall, f-measure (setting  = 1) and the area under the Receiver
Operator Characteristic Curve (ROC).

Table 2. Results from detecting changes in activity using community composition

Forum
?

?

?
All

0.799
0.603
0.765
0.583

0.769
0.615
0.692
0.667

F1

0.780
0.605
0.714
0.607

0.800
0.775
0.617
0.466

Table 2 presents the results from our classification experiments. For forum 246
we achieve the highest F1 value due to the activity in the forum steadily increasing over time and the precision value indicating that in this forum the composition patterns account for fluctuations in activity. For forum 388 we return the
lowest F1 value, indicating that the variance in activity renders the prediction
of activity increase difficult within this forum, this could possibly be due to the
seasonal fluctuations in interest surrounding the rugby season. For forum 411 we
achieve high precision, indicating that activity can be precisely detected based
on the composition in this forum. When performing cross-community health
predictions we achieve lower F1 values than those for forums 246 and 411 and
the lowest ROC value. This indicates that cross-community patterns are not as
reliable as individual community analysis, where patterns in compositions for
single forums account for the idiosyncratic behaviour.

For our next task we induced Linear Regression models by regressing the
post count on the community composition, using each of the role proportions as
our predictor variables, seeking a relationship between the change in the overall
composition of the community and the health of the forum. We now report on
the model learnt for forum 388 (Commuting and Transport), given that this
model achieved the highest coefficient of determination while forums 246 and
411 achieved R2 values of 0.649 and 0.793 respectively.

Table 3 shows the results from the induced model.4 The model indicates that
should a community increase in its proportion of popular initiators and popular

4 We found no multicolinearity between variables in the model when testing using the
Variance Inflation Factor, suggesting that the roles are distinct in this forum and
there are no clear dependencies between them.

S. Angeletou, M. Rowe, and H. Alani

participants while decreasing in the proportion of supporters and ignored then
the communitys activity will increase. However, an increase in ignored and supporters will yield a reduction in the post count and therefore a reduction in the
health of the community. Such patterns can be used to alert a community
manager of the current state of their community and its projected evolution.
Managers could then use this information to decide what action to take to influence the evolution of their community in a positive way.

Our analysis of community forums has explored the correlation between community composition and health, and how predictions can be performed. Through
this analysis we have identified four key take-home messages:

1. Healthy communities contain more elitists and popular participants.
2. Unhealthy communities contain many taciturns and ignored users.
3. Communities exhibit idiosyncratic compositions, thus reflecting the differing

dynamics that are required/exhibited by individual communities.

4. A stable composition, with a mix of roles, increases community health.

Table 3. Linear regression model induced from the forum composition of f388

Role

Est Coefficient Standard Error t-Value P(x >t)
0.1751

Joining Conversationalist

Popular Initiators

Taciturns
Supporters

69.20
173.41
-135.97
-266.53
-105.19
372.44
-75.69

Summary: Res. St Err: 311.5, Adj R

Popular Participants

Elitists

Ignored

1.579
3.169 0.0248 **
-1.334
0.2397
-2.432 0.0592 *
-1.882
0.1185
3.608 0.0154 **
-2.267 0.0727 *
: 0.8514, F7,5: 10.82, p-value: 0.0092

43.82
54.72
101.91
109.60
55.88
103.24
33.39

Signif. codes: p-value < 0.001 *** 0.01 ** 0.05 * 0.1 . 1

5 Discussion and Future Work

The communities we chose to analyse in this paper were forums from Boards.ie.
It is possible of course that different behavioural patterns could emerge when
analysing different communities. However, there is no reason to assume that our
current behaviour types would not apply, since the basic statistics that underpin
them are not specific to any community. As for the features we chose to measure
users value, we have already started comparing them with results from Twitter
and highlighting variations in their influence from Boards.ie.

Churn - i.e. the loss of community members - is a risk posed to online communities and one that community operators wish to avoid. Churn is normally
affected by various community features [7]. By analysing the community composition that is correlated with a healthy community that evolves into an unhealthy
community, we will be able to learn patterns that could then be used to preempt such changes, and thus warn community managers of the possibility of
such decline. Our future work will also seek to identify key users within online
communities and monitor their behaviour to predict their churn which would
have a detrimental effect on the community. The combination of such micro and
macro-level analysis would enable community managers to identify which users
to pay more attention to in order to maintain a healthy community.
?

?

?
The emergence and evolution of certain types of behaviour could be dependent
on the rise and fall of other behavioural types. Such possible correlations need
further investigation and can support prediction of community evolution. On
the other hand, negative user behaviour could badly influence health of the
community, and an unhealthy community could foster negative behaviour. Many
studies have shown that certain features (e.g. sentiment, time, user popularity)
influence the spread of some types of behaviour, or increase response to posts.
Some of these findings differ from one online community to another. The ideal
mix and spread of behavioural types that boosts health in communities is still
unknown, and it is likely to be dependent on the characteristics and goals of the
communities in question.

Our approach for inferring user roles accounts for the dynamic nature of communities by utilising the repeated binning of feature values and using skeleton
rules that map features to value levels. In doing so we have shown the ability
of this approach to reduce the proportion of unclassified users when compared
with an approach that does not utilise such updating. However, on average our
approach still misses 29% of users and is unable to associate those users with
behaviour types. Our future work will explore methods to reduce this percentage
by exploring the use of clustering and outlier detection techniques to account for
new emerging roles within the community.

6 Conclusions

In this paper we have presented an approach to label the users of online communities with their role based on the behaviour they exhibit. We presented an
ontology to capture the behavioural characteristics of users as numeric attributes
and explained how semantic rules can be employed to infer the role that a given
user has. There is currently no standard or agreed list of behaviour types for describing activities of users in online communities. Behaviour categories suggested
in the literature are sometimes based on different observations and conceptions.
In this paper our aim was not to identify the ultimate list of behavioural types,
but rather to demonstrate a semantic model for representing and inferring behaviour of online community members.

A key contribution of this paper is the analysis of community composition
over time and the correlation of such compositions with the health of communi-
ties, characterised by the number of posts made within a given community. Our
empirical analysis of such correlations identified patterns in community composition that lead to both healthy and unhealthy communities, where a greater
proportion of elitists and popular participants lead to an increase in activity,
while a greater proportion of taciturns and ignored users lead to a decrease in
activity. We also found that a stable community composition of role proportions lead to an increase in activity within the community, suggesting that wide
fluctuations in role types could reduce community health.

Acknowledgment. This work was supported by the EU-FP7 projects WeGov (grant
248512) and Robust (grant 257859). Also many thanks to Boards.ie for providing data.

S. Angeletou, M. Rowe, and H. Alani
