Using Semantic Web Technologies to Build a

Community-Driven Knowledge Curation

Platform for the Skeletal Dysplasia Domain

Tudor Groza1, Andreas Zankl2,3, Yuan-Fang Li4, and Jane Hunter1

1 School of ITEE, The University of Queensland, Australia

tudor.groza@uq.edu.au, jane@itee.uq.edu.au

2 Bone Dysplasia Research Group

UQ Centre for Clinical Research (UQCCR)

The University of Queensland, Australia

3 Genetic Health Queensland,

Royal Brisbane and Womens Hospital, Herston, Australia

a.zankl@uq.edu.au

4 Monash University, Melbourne, Australia

yuanfang.li@monash.edu

Abstract. In this paper we report on our on-going efforts in building
SKELETOME  a community-driven knowledge curation platform for
the skeletal dysplasia domain. SKELETOME introduces an ontologydriven knowledge engineering cycle that supports the continuous evolution of the domain knowledge. Newly submitted, undiagnosed patient
cases undergo a collaborative diagnosis process that transforms them into
well-structured case studies, classified, linked and discoverable based on
their likely diagnosis(es). The paper presents the community requirements driving the design of the platform, the underlying implementation
details and the results of a preliminary usability study. Because SKELETOME is built on Drupal 7, we discuss the limitations of some of its
embedded Semantic Web components and describe a set of new mod-
ules, developed to handle these limitations (which will soon be released
as open source to the community).

1 Introduction

Skeletal dysplasias are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders affecting human skeletal development. Currently, there are over 440 recognized types, categorized into 40 groups. Patients with skeletal dysplasias have complex medical
issues, such as short stature, degenerative joint disease, scoliosis or neurological
complications. Since most skeletal dysplasias are very rare (<1:10,000 births),
data on clinical presentation, natural history and best management is sparse.
The lack of data makes existing patient cases a precious resource for biomedical
research because they enable scientists to study, among other things, the effects
of single genes on human bone and cartilage development and function. The resulting insights may lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis of more
common connective tissue disorders, such as arthritis or osteoporosis.

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 7032, pp. 8196, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

T. Groza et al.

Unfortunately, due to the intrinsic complexity of dysplasias, correct diagnosis
is often difficult. At the same time, only a few centres worldwide have the necessary expertise in diagnosis and management of these disorders. On the other
hand, the identification of many skeletal dysplasia-causing genes and subsequent
studies of their functions and interactions have led to an explosion in the knowledge of bone and cartilage biology. The biomedical literature now contains a
large amount of information about individual genes and gene interactions, but it
is often difficult to grasp how these interactions work together in a broader context (such as skeletal dysplasias). In turn, the focus on specific patient cases or
genes makes it difficult to identify etiological relationships between skeletal dys-
plasias, or to recognise clinical or radiological characteristics that are indicative
of defects within a specific molecular pathway.

The International Skeletal Dysplasia Society (ISDS)1 has attempted to address some of these problems with its Nosology of Genetic Skeletal Disorders [1].
Since 1972, the ISDS Nosology lists all recognised skeletal dysplasias and tries
to group them by common clinical-radiographic characteristics and/or molecular
disease mechanisms. The ISDS Nosology is revised every 4 years by an expert
committee and the updated version is published in a medical journal, being
widely accepted as the official nomenclature for skeletal dysplasias within the
biomedical community. While the content is invaluable, the format of the Nosology has several short-comings, including: (i) an inflexible classification scheme
 each disorder being listed in one group based either on its clinical radiographic appearance or on its underlying molecular genetic mechanism; (ii) limited amount of cross-referenced information  each entry contains only the Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) number [2], the chromosome locus and
the gene name, without being linked to widely used semantic data repositories,
like the Gene Ontology [3] or UniProt [4], which would allow users to study
further up-to-date relevant information; and most importantly, (iii) the lack of
a shorter publishing cycle  the content quickly becomes outdated, as genes or
disorders discovered after the publication date can no longer be included until
the next revision (4 years later).

In addition to the above-mentioned Nosology issues, collaboration among experts is also adversely affected by a lack of an appropriate tool support. Cur-
rently, the community uses the ESDN (European Skeletal Dysplasia Network)
Case manager2 and Google mailing lists to share information and to exchange
and discuss patient cases. Neither of these provides an ideal collaboration envi-
ronment. While ESDN provides a structured (form-based) discussion forum to
support the diagnosis process, mailing lists are merely long threads of free text.
Leaving aside the complete lack of any formal representation or semantics, a
major issue is the inability to transfer knowledge or provide links between the
rich pool of patient reports and the ISDS Nosology.

In this paper we report on the efforts of the SKELETOME project3, which
aims to develop a community-driven knowledge curation platform for the

http://www.isds.ch/
https://cm.esdn.org/
http://itee.uq.edu.au/~eresearch/projects/skeletome/index.html
?

?

?
skeletal dysplasia domain. The SKELETOME platform4 introduces an ontologydriven knowledge engineering cycle that supports the continuous evolution of
the knowledge captured in the ISDS Nosology from existing patient studies,
thus transforming into a living knowledge base. Concurrently, this knowledge informs the collaborative decision making process associated with newly arriving
cases. Moreover, the underlying SKELETOME ontologies represent a foundational building block for linking to external resources and a mechanism for facilitating knowledge extraction and reasoning. SKELETOME is being developed
by extending Drupal 75 with additional Semantic Web components to enable
seamless and semantic-aware collaborative input, sharing and re-use of data and
information among the experts in the field. The knowledge engineering cycle,
together with the set of new Semantic Web Drupal modules (and some lessons
learned from the existing ones) represent the main contributions of this paper.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the
representational and functional requirements supporting the SKELETOME plat-
form. Section 3 provides a detailed overview of the SKELETOME components
and information flow. In Section 4 we discuss the preliminary evaluation, and
before concluding in Section 6, we analyze some of the existing related efforts in
Section 5.

2 Requirements

Since genetic disorders are typically quite rare, a global network of patients,
clinicians and researchers is necessary to accumulate the critical mass of data and
knowledge needed to address some of the greatest challenges in medical genetics,
i.e., the development of evidence-based clinical management guidelines, the study
of genotype-phenotype6 correlations and the identification of disease modifier
genes. Skeletal dysplasias are an ideal topic for a global medical collaboration
network as the number of medical conditions is relatively small and well defined
and there is an existing, tightly-knit and motivated community of clinicians and
scientists willing to contribute, share and exchange case studies, data, diagnoses
and clinical information.

Recognition of this opportunity, led to the establishment of the SKELETOME project  a collaboration between information scientists, Semantic Web
researchers and clinical geneticists, led by the University of Queensland. In addition to a Web-based framework for enabling and encouraging the international
skeletal dysplasia community (researchers, experts, clinicians) to contribute con-
tent, the most important requirements for the project (which emerged from direct discussions with the community) are the following:
Common Terminology. The diagnosis and management of skeletal dysplasias
depends on highly specialised domain knowledge across a number of disciplines

http://skeletome.metadata.net/skeletome
http://drupal.org/drupal-7.0

6 Genotype refers to the genetic information of an individual, while phenotype describes
the actual observed properties of an individual, such as morphology or development.

T. Groza et al.

(radiography, genetics, orthopaedics), which is not easily comprehensible to individual communities or hospitals. In order to enable the exchange of knowledge
between experts (across languages and disciplines), a common terminology is
required, hence leading to a shared conceptualisation of the domain.
Data Integration. Large datasets containing rich information on molecules
(genes, proteins) already exist and the information relevant to skeletal dysplasias
needs to be extracted and cross-referenced with the clinical data and knowledge
produced by SKELETOME. The data cross-reference requires integration both
at conceptual level, as well as, at actual data and instance level.
Privacy and Access Control. Actual patient studies and reports need to be
visible only to the experts participating in the decision making process. More-
over, sensitive patient data (e.g., name, address, relatives) should only be accessible to the case initiator.
Knowledge Transfer and Sustainable Knowledge Evolution. The knowledge collectively acquired from the anonymized pool of patients represents a
valuable asset from the conceptual perspective of the domain (materialized in the
ISDS Nosology). Consequently, a seamless transfer of this knowledge is required
to enable the dynamic and continuous evolution of the conceptual domain.
Capturing Provenance and Expertise. The contributed content may take
several forms, ranging from personal observations to scientific publications. Independently of the form, SKELETOME requires a mechanism to keep track of
the provenance of the data and knowledge, in order to ensure proper privacy and
access control. It also needs to provide a measure of certainty of derived data
and to leverage expertise from the content and to streamline the delivery of the
most relevant information to the most appropriate person.

In order to support the above requirements, the SKELETOME platform provides the following services: (i) a collaboration environment for experts to exchange knowledge and patient cases and to build a repository of patient case
studies linked to related evidence and Web resources (e.g., publications, radiographic data, gene databases, etc); (ii) a set of ontologies that capture the domain knowledge and underpin the platform; (iii) semantically enhanced content
annotation and integration services; (iv) ontology-driven text processing of publications leading to rich semantic annotations; (v) enhanced image search and
retrieval via ontology-based annotation; (vi) reasoning on anonymised patient
data for semi-automated decision making.

3 The SKELETOME Platform

The innovative aspect of the SKELETOME platform is the ontology-driven
knowledge engineering cycle, introduced to bridge the current knowledge about
the domain (partly captured in the ISDS Nosology) to the continuously growing
pool of patient cases. The engineering cycle consists of two concurrent phases:
(1) semantic annotation of patient instance data, and (2) ontology learning from
patient instance data.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. The high level architecture of the SKELETOME platform

We developed the Bone Dysplasia ontology7 to overcome the short-comings of
the ISDS Nosology and to describe the relations between bone dysplasias and the
genotype and phenotype characteristics. The ontology is used to semanticallyenrich patient reports and the associated X-Ray imagery. Additionally, in conjunction to two auxiliary ontologies (the Patient8 and Context9 ontologies),
which capture patient and provenance information, we use the Bone Dysplasia
ontology to enhance the collaborative diagnosis process. The resulting (RDF) instance data is then used in the reasoning process to propose novel genotype and
phenotype characteristics to be associated to bone dysplasias, and hence support the collaborative knowledge curation and the evolution of the conceptual
knowledge of the domain.

Fig. 1 depicts a high level overview on the SKELETOME architecture. The
upper part of the architecture, including also the front-end, is developed using
Drupal 7 and contains two main components (implemented via several Drupal
modules): (i) the collaborative knowledge curation component, responsible for
generating Drupal pages associated to ontology concepts, in addition to generating tagging vocabularies from the underlying ontologies, and (ii) the collaborative diagnosis component, responsible for capturing the information exchanged
by the experts in the diagnosis process (i.e., diagnosis creation and rating or
open discussions on diagnoses). The lower part of the architecture consists of
the ontology-driven services, developed via a set of servlets hosted in Tomcat
and using OpenRDF Sesame as RDF triple store. The Integration service bridges
the Drupal world to the RDF back-end by managing several Drupal hooks on

http://purl.org/skeletome/bonedysplasia
http://purl.org/skeletome/patient
http://purl.org/skeletome/context

T. Groza et al.

NCI:

Mutation

Abnormality

mutation_type

Gene

Mutation

suffers

Gene

Phenotypic

Characteristic

has_quality

PATO:
Quality

unit_of

UO:
Unit

Bone

Dysplasia

y
b
_
d
e
s

i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
_
s

i

characteristic_type

REAMS:

Abnormality

NCI:

Finding

HP:

Phenotypic
Abnormality

Fig. 2. A snippet of the Bone Dysplasia Ontology. The upper part of the ontology
describes the genotypic information of bone dysplasias. The lower part relates bone
dysplasias to phenotypic characteristics.

certain content types (or pages), e.g., Bone Dysplasia or Patient. Its role is to
keep the RDF triple store in sync with the Drupal data, in addition to ensuring
that no sensitive patient data is stored in the back-end. The other two services,
i.e., Ontology-based entity extraction and Reasoning, have self-explanatory roles.
In the following sections we describe the underlying mechanisms used to develop the knowledge engineering cycle by means of the requirements introduced
in the previous section. From a technical perspective we also identify some of
the short-comings of the current Drupal 7 RDF support.

3.1 Common Terminology and Data Integration

As mentioned in Section 1 the ISDS Nosology has a rigid structure and only
partially covers the genotype information of the domain. More concretely, it
merely lists the skeletal dysplasias, the genes responsible for the diseases and
their locus, which leads to a poor description of the domain. Elements such as the
gene mutation information and the radiographic or phenotypic characteristics
are unfortunately ignored. For example, if we consider the Stickler syndrome,
the ISDS Nosology only lists COL2A1 as the responsible gene, and it does not
mention that it might be caused by a Missense mutation in the gene (leading
to a Glycine substitution with Arginine on position 219), or that some of the
phenotypic characteristics are Myopia and Cleft palate, or that radiographically
it can be characterized by Dolichocephaly.

To overcome these issues, and to extend the existing common terminology
used by the community, we developed the Bone Dysplasia ontology (that defines
more than 1200 concepts) to capture all the relevant knowledge by integrating
and re-using well known ontologies, such as NCI Thesaurus [5], Human Phenotype Ontology (HP) [6] or the REAMS ontology10  describing radiographic
features. Fig. 2 depicts a snippet of the ontology, showing the relation between

http://d-reams.org/?page_id=84
?

?

?
Bone

Dysplasia

has

Patient

shows

Diagnosis

Investigation

asserts

t s

e x h i b i

exhibits

asserts

Observation

Gene

Mutation

Phenotypic

Characteristic

Fig. 3. A snippet of the Patient Ontology. The direct relations between Patient and
the other three concepts are reified in order to capture the context in which their are
materialized.

the root Bone Dysplasia class (further sub-classed by 40 bone dysplasia groups
and then by specific skeletal dysplasias) and the Gene Mutation and Phenotypic Characteristic classes. As opposed to the ISDS Nosology, our Gene
Mutation class provides the ground for encoding richer information about the
characteristics of the mutation, e.g., type, position, original and mutated con-
tent. Similarly, the Gene class is linked (via annotation properties) to OMIM,
MesH, UMLS and UniProt. These are only two examples where the ontology accommodates extended domain knowledge when compared to the ISDS Nosology.
In addition to the Bone Dysplasia ontology we have also developed a Patient ontology and a Context ontology. The Patient ontology captures knowledge
about specific patient reports, hence describing instances of genotypic, phenotypic and radiographic characteristics of bone dysplasias in particular patients.
As can be observed in Fig. 3 a Patient may exhibit diverse Gene Mutations
or Phenotypic Characteristics which are asserted by Investigations or Ob-
servations. Similarly a Diagnosis shows that a Patient may have a particular
Bone Dysplasia. The Context ontology is used to model the provenance of the
patient information, including, for example, who suggested an Investigation
or made an Observation, who and where a Diagnosis is documented, or even
when a Patient exhibited certain Phenotypic Characteristics.

3.2 Knowledge Transfer and Sustainable Knowledge Evolution

The knowledge engineering cycle briefly introduced in the beginning of Section 3 was specifically designed to support this requirement. The first phase of
the cycle uses the above-described ontologies to enrich the content created by
the experts and to support the collective diagnosis process. This phase has, in
reality, two sub-phases: (1) a sub-phase dealing with the evolution of the generic
domain knowledge, i.e., classification of bone dysplasias and their descriptions,

T. Groza et al.

and (2) a second sub-phase covering the actual use of ontologies for semantic annotation. The second sub-phase processes the patient instance data (i.e.,
semantically-annotated reports and diagnoses) to propose novel findings about
bone dysplasias.
(1) Domain knowledge maintenance and evolution
From a functional perspective the experts need to keep the domain knowledge
up-to-date. SKELETOME publishes all the bone dysplasias and associated information (e.g., Genes) as Web pages (via specific Drupal content types). Hence
each bone dysplasia has its own publicly available Web page, similar to the way in
which Wiki systems work (see, for example, http://skeletome.metadata.net/
skeletome/bonedysplasia/achondroplasia). The Bone Dysplasia ontology
acts as a backbone for this set of pages, as they are automatically generated
from (and are in sync with) the concepts defined in the ontology. The page generation is realized via a Drupal module that we have developed, in conjunction
with the Integration service from the RDF backend. This module will be released
as open source and may be useful to anyone who wants to build and maintain
an ontology-driven content management site, starting from an existing ontology.
Currently, the Drupal RDF extensions allow one to map existing content types
to ontological concepts and/or properties. Creating pages of those content types
will result in Drupal creating the associated concept instances (via rdf:type).
We were, unfortunately, unable to use this support for two reasons. Firstly,
while the generic Bone Dysplasia content type could have been mapped to the
corresponding ontological class, we required all its instance pages to represent
classes themselves, and not instances (i.e., via rdfs:subClassOf). For example,
the Web page about the Stickler syndrome should be mapped to the Stickler
syndrome class in the ontology, and not to an instance of the Bone Dysplasia
class. At the same time, mapping manually over 1000 concepts, currently present
in the ontology, is neither feasible, not sustainable. Secondly, Bone Dysplasias
are related to Genes, also modelled as content type instances. Instantiating
node reference property values between custom content types is currently not
supported by the RDF extensions. The need to provide reasoning support, which
intrinsically requires explicit relations between instances, forced us to maintain
all the RDF in the RDF back-end and develop specific Drupal hooks to keep the
store constantly updated, via the Integration service.

In order to support maintenance and evolution of the knowledge base, SKELETOME provides support for adding, renaming or removing dysplasia groups
(which are direct subclasses of the Bone Dysplasia class), moving bone dysplasias (which are direct subclasses of the groups) between groups, adding newly
discovered gene mutations or phenotypic characteristics, hence manipulating the
structure and content of the Bone Dysplasia ontology, without the experts being
aware of it. Hiding the underlying ontological concepts and details was an easy
decision, because the vast majority of the experts are simple computer users.

To ensure quality control over the content of the Bone Dysplasia pages, we
have imposed an editorial process. Each bone dysplasia has an associated ed-
itor, responsible for keeping the explicit information and related knowledge
?

?

?
Fig. 4. [A] Semantic annotation of clinical summaries using a mixture of terms from
Clinical Summary Vocabulary describing phenotypic characteristics; [B] X-Ray imagery
tagging using terms from the X-Ray Vocabulary describing radiographic characteristics.

up-to-date, by reviewing input from the community. In addition to scientific
publications, this community input takes the form of statements asserted about
the disease on its page, which can then be discussed and commented on by the
entire community (thus enabling a wisdom of the crowds approach). On a
periodic basis, the editor will incorporate in the main disease description those
statements that were accepted by the community, and have reasonable support
though scientific evidence.

In practice, the statements (or micro-contributions) carry a dual role: (i) they
enable the transfer of knowledge from patient cases to the conceptual domain
knowledge, as typically they would report on novel findings about the dysplasia
from a particular pool of patients, and (ii) they allow us to create and maintain
an expertise profile of the authors, which will lead to an authorship reputation
system, similar to the one in WikiGenes [7]. The reputation of an author-expert
is calculated based on the acceptance of her statements by the community, and
hence the extent to which her contribution impacts on and advances the field.
(2) Semantic annotation of patient cases
The Bone Dysplasia ontology provides not only the backbone for the evolution of the domain knowledge, but also the means for enriching patient cases
with semantic annotations. Our goal is to provide experts with the mechanism for annotating both clinical summaries, as well as X-Ray imagery with
domain concepts. In order to realize the annotation, we implemented a Drupal module that transforms a given ontology into a Drupal taxonomy (i.e., vo-
cabulary) that enables tagging. The vocabulary import may be invoked from
particular root concepts and can traverse the ontology up to a specified level
or the leaf nodes. The actual tags are created by looking at the literal values of specified properties. For example, one may choose to create tags from

T. Groza et al.

rdfs:label, but also from skos:altLabel. One significant aspect of this module is that
the generated tags retain a relation to the URI of the originating concept. Hence,
when an expert tags an X-Ray with a particular tag, s/he actually annotates the
image with the ontological concept supporting the tag. This module will also be
released as open source later this year.

Within the context of SKELETOME, this module is used to generate two vo-
cabularies, as depicted in Fig. 1: a vocabulary for annotating clinical summaries
(from the Bone Dysplasia ontology, HP, NCI and PATO, Phenotype and Trait
Ontology [8], ontologies) and a vocabulary for annotating X-Ray imagery (from
the HP and the REAMS ontologies). This distinction was specifically requested
by the community in order to support their current terminological practice. The
annotation of clinical summaries can be done manually or semi-automatically.
The semi-automatic annotation is implemented by integrating the NCBO annotator [9] for entity extraction (via the Ontology-based entity extraction component of the backend).

The annotation of patient resources is transformed in the backend, via Drupal hooks, into relations between the patient instance and the corresponding
concept instances. For example, consider the annotation depicted in Fig. 4: the
patient instance being examined would be related via the exhibits relation to
HP:cranyosynostosis and to REAMS:coxa-valga.

The collaborative diagnosis process works in a similar manner as the annotation of clinical summaries. By adding a diagnosis to a patient, in reality, the
expert annotates the patient case with the corresponding Bone Dysplasia con-
cept. In the backend, this translates into a reification of the relation between the
patient instance and a particular Bone Dysplasia instance (see Fig. 3), which is
then related to a freshly created Diagnosis instance that has context information attached to it. This context information is generated from the discussion
among experts and includes the votes cast on the diagnosis.

Reasoning and Searching on Patient Data
Semantically annotated patient cases create a wealth of knowledge that represents a perfect application for reasoning. Leaving aside the access control aspects
(detailed in the next part of the section), our goal is to close the knowledge engineering cycle by supporting both the evolution of the conceptual domain, as well
as the collective decision making process in two ways. Firstly, we want to apply
reasoning across current cases to propose diagnoses on newly published cases.
Secondly, we want to infer novel findings on the conceptual domain, by focusing
on the similarities between phenotypic, radiographic and genotypic characteristics in patient cases sharing the same diagnosis. With respect to this latter
goal, we want to avoid discovering the obvious, e.g., that all patients diagnosed
with Achondroplasia have a mutation in the FGFR3 gene  this information is
already in the domain knowledge.

The complexity of the two tasks requires a thorough investigation of the most
suitable mechanisms to support them. Initially we considered reasoning across
the instance data using SWRL rules for both tasks, however, we quickly realized
that the rigidity of rule-based inferencing will not help us in fulfilling our goals.
?

?

?
The SWRL rules had especially negative consequences on our second goal 
the identification of features that are not present in the vast majority of cases
(features that you would expect to be inferred via reasoning). Both diagnoses
and the presence of phenotypic characteristics cannot be stated with a 100%
certainty. As a result, the collaborative voting mechanism currently featured
in SKELETOME does not record a simple Yes/No, but uses a 5-star rating,
hence allowing the experts to associate a level of uncertainty with their opinion.
This rating cannot be converted into rigid/strict rules. Consequently, we are
currently investigating ways of encoding the diagnosis information using fuzzy
rules, in addition to using uncertainty and/or statistical reasoning techniques.
Besides reasoning (currently under investigation), the use of ontologies enables SKELETOME to provide semantic search functionality, dynamically related items and faceted browsing. This last aspect is particularly important for
expert users as it allows them to quickly filter search results based on criteria,
such as: patient ids, phenotypic or genotypic characteristics. Additionally, for
an even richer browsing experience, we have integrated dynamic links to related
knowledge items in some of the views (e.g., the dysplasia descriptions and patient clinical summaries). For example, a bone dysplasia description might have
suggested links to patients diagnosed with this dysplasia or to related phenotypic characteristics. From a technical perspective, this is realized by following
the relations in the ontology for the instance under scrutiny, and secondly, by analyzing the textual content (where possible) and extracting and linking domain
concepts present in the knowledge base.

3.3 Privacy and Access Control
The information captured in SKELETOME is accessible via four layers of privacy
and access control policies. The generic conceptual knowledge of the domain (i.e.,
the bone dysplasia pages and associated resources) are publicly available. The
rest of the knowledge is private and accessible via group and individual-based
access controls. Different groups of experts are registered within the platform
and act as sub-communities within the greater community. The reason behind
this group division is the need to share patient information only with a specific
set of experts. Experts can, nevertheless, be members of multiple groups, and
hence share their information and knowledge across all of them.

Sensitive patient information, such as name or address, is accessible only to
the case initiator (individual-based access control). The purpose of exchanging
patient cases is to foster advances in the field and to take advantage of the
community-driven diagnosis process. However, sensitive patient information is
not relevant for the diagnosis process, and hence is maintained only for provenance purposes. In reality, the so-called participation of the patients in these
community exercises is acknowledged by the patients via written consents (also
maintained within the platform, and included within the patient information).
As described in the previous sections, each patients semantically annotated
clinical data (including annotated X-Ray imagery) is stored and processed in
the RDF backend. In order to enforce the individual-based access control over
sensitive information, yet take advantage of the wealth of knowledge present in

T. Groza et al.

the entire pool of patient cases across all groups, we followed the principle of
separation of concerns [10] (the fourth layer of access control). Drupal hooks were
implemented on the patient content type to filter the fields that are transformed
into RDF instance data via the Patient and Context ontologies, and then stored
via the Integration backend service. As a result, the RDF triples will model
strictly phenotypic, radiographic or genotypic information, while the rest of the
information (including the sensitive data) remains stored only in the Drupal
database, and is subject to the three access restrictions described above. This
allows us to perform reasoning on the entire set of patient clinical data, hence
taking advantage of both the quantity and quality of the knowledge created by
experts  whilst still restricting access to sensitive data.

3.4 Capturing Provenance and Expertise

The previous sub-sections have already provided an insight into the mechanisms
implemented by SKELETOME to capture provenance and expertise. The Context ontology is used to capture provenance information, ranging from the author names and dates of assertions to timestamps on diagnoses or phenotypic
characteristics. This information is then used to generate expertise profiles from
asserted statements, forum discussions and collaborative diagnoses.

Currently, our expertise modeling is based on the mining of micro-contributions,
based on a bag-of-concepts approach by aggregating concepts extracted via the
NCBO annotator from any micro-contributions. Following this approach leads to
several issues, especially when dealing with qualities of the phenotypic character-
istics. For the future, our plan is to filter the output of the annotated entities by
organizing them into tensors expressing quality  phenotypic characteristic associations and then use the tensors to compute the weights of the domain concepts in
the context of both local and global contributions of particular individuals. More-
over, we also plan to take into account the processes that the micro-contributions
undergo during their lifespan, e.g., how many times they were altered, the extent of alteration and whether or not they were incorporated in the main disease
description.

4 Preliminary Evaluation

We performed a preliminary usability study of the SKELETOME platform with
a small group of eight experts from the community. The goal of the study was
to compare the usability of SKELETOME against the two other systems currently used by the community, i.e., ESDN and Google mailing lists. At the same
time we also wanted to understand how easy it is for the experts to adapt to
using SKELETOME.

The evaluation consisted of two parts, with no training provided: (1) performing a series of operations on both SKELETOME and ESDN or Google mailing
lists, and (2) completing a questionnaire about the usability of SKELETOME.
The tasks required to be performed for the first part were the following:
(1) Search & Browse: search for a particular patient based on a given set
?

?

?
Table 1. System usability questionnaire

Question

I found SKELETOME easy to use
I found SKELETOME to be unnecessarily complex
I think I require technical support to be able to use SKELETOME
I found the various features of SKELETOME to be well integrated
I think most colleagues would learn SKELETOME quickly
I felt very confident using SKELETOME
I needed to learn a lot about SKELETOME before I could effectively use it

of phenotypic characteristics; (2) Patient case manipulation: upload and annotate a new patient case (i.e., clinical summary + 5 X-Ray reports); (3) Collaborative diagnosis: participate in the collaborative diagnosis process on a
given patient; (4) Domain knowledge manipulation: modify the description
of a bone dysplasia and add statements about it. This operation had to be performed only on SKELETOME (as the other systems do not have support for it).
The experts were asked to pick one system in each category and motivate the
choice by highlighting (via free text input) both the positive and the negative
aspects.

The questionnaire required for the second part contained seven questions (see
Table 1) with answers on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from Strongly disagree
to Strongly agree. These questions were adapted from the evaluation of the
iCAT system [11] and from the System Usability Scale (SUS) [12].

The results of the evaluation were very positive. In the first part (choosing
the best system), SKELETOME outperformed its opponents. In the Search
& Browse task, the dynamically related items and the ontology-based faceted
browsing and filtering of the search results were found to be very useful by all
experts, and judged as critical missing aspects from the other systems. The Patient case manipulation task was the highlight of the evaluation, as all eight
experts were particularly impressed by the possibility of annotating X-Rays and
clinical summaries with domain concepts, and by the dragndrop functionality
for uploading X-Rays. The third and last common task was found to be very
similar to the ESDN functionality (50% voted for ESDN and 50% for SKELE-
TOME), although the 5-star rating system was regarded as a positive addition
by six out of eight experts. Finally, the fourth task (with no competition) was
regarded as extremely useful to support their collaborative effort of maintaining
and evolving the domain knowledge.

The questionnaire results were also positive. SKELETOME was found to be
easy to use and well integrated by 87% of experts (7 out of 8), although 75%
of experts did fell that they would require some time to learn to use it effec-
tively. Functionalities, such as dragndrop or related items, made all the experts
confident in using the platform. Some technical support was required with some
users (37% of experts), however, it was only at the very beginning and did not
influence the positive results of the questionnaire.

T. Groza et al.

Overall, SKELETOME performed as we have expected, and indicated that
Semantic Web technologies have the potential to make a real positive difference when applied in the right context and seamlessly built into familiar user
interaction components.

5 Related Work

The SKELETOME platform is built on the work performed by the initiators
and developers of the Drupal RDF extensions (described initially for Drupal
6 in [13]). Their continuous efforts, that resulted in support for RDF in core
Drupal 7, are highly appreciated. However, as discussed earlier in the paper
(see Sect. 3.2), in order to support a dynamically evolving skeletal dysplasia
knowledge base, we required a different approach than the current top-down
RDF mappings. Hence, we used the Drupal RDF core support, but developed
our own set of modules, to be openly released to the community later this year.
The literature contains numerous descriptions of related systems, many using
Wikis as their backbone. Semantic MediaWiki [14] was a pioneer in the area, being one of the first Wikis to embed semantic capabilities, packaged as extensions
of MediaWiki. This led to its wide-spread adoption and application in many
diverse domains. [15] is one example that adopted and applied the principles of
Semantic MediaWiki. IkeWiki [16] on the other hand, is a stand-alone Semantic Wiki, providing similar functionality to Semantic MediaWiki and developed
entirely in Java and AJAX.

Focusing on the biomedical domain, we identified BOWiki [17] and ConceptWiki11 [18] as the most relevant with respect to our platform. BOWiki is a
Semantic Wiki, designed for expert database curation, providing users with automated reasoning capabilities to verify the consistency of continuously added
content to the knowledge base. ConceptWiki, or more concretely the WikiProteins part of it, is based on MediaWiki and enables experts to collaboratively
curate knowledge about proteins. It incorporates several large knowledge bases,
such as Gene Ontology, UMLS or Swissprot [19], to be used for the annotation
and definition of terms, however, without providing a strict formalization of the
knowledge or any reasoning support. The skeletal dysplasia curation aspect of
the SKELETOME platform is reasonably similar to these approaches. However,
while the generic goal of such Wikis is ontology engineering and population,
SKELETOME extends this goal via the knowledge engineering cycle to learn
new knowledge both from the growing pool of patient studies, as well as from
the collaborative decision making process.

Another system of particular relevance is WikiGenes [7]. As opposed to typical Wikis, WikiGenes shifts the focus from creating knowledge to capturing the
context of the knowledge via scientific artefacts (e.g., hypotheses or claims), in
addition to fine-grained provenance. WikiGenes is special because it supports
a reputation system for authors of the scientific artefacts based on their contributions to the field and their rating from other researchers. We adopted this

http://conceptwiki.org/
?

?

?
concept and implemented it via the statements that can be added in conjunction
to Bone Dysplasia concepts. However, in our case, these are more than mere con-
jectures, as they are (usually) supported by evidence emerging from the patient
studies thus enabling one to track their evolution from the original patient data
to the hypothesis at the generic conceptual level.

Outside of Wikis, the most notable and recent related effort is the custom
WebProt eg e [20] system built by the Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics
Research to help develop the 11th revision of the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD-11) [11]. As with all the other tools in the Prot eg e suite, this system is specifically tailored towards efficient collaborative ontology engineering.
As a result, in this respect it provides superior functionalities when compared
to the Bone Dysplasia engineering aspect of SKELETOME. Nevertheless, we
dont regard this as a negative point since it represents only one of the steps in
the platforms knowledge engineering cycle. Additionally, in its current shape,
SKELETOME serves its purpose of hiding the actual ontology evolution from
the experts yet providing the mechanisms for keeping the knowledge up-to-date
and enabling a shorter publishing cycle for the ISDS Nosology.

6 Conclusions

This paper describes the results to-date of our on-going effort in building a
community-driven knowledge curation platform for the skeletal dysplasia do-
main. SKELETOME deploys an ontology-driven knowledge engineering cycle,
aimed to support the evolution of the domain knowledge through the semantic
enrichment of patient cases and via reasoning support that enables faster discovery of new knowledge and relationships. As the evaluation has shown, SKELETOME generates many benefits to the community and improves collaboration
and knowledge exchange among the experts in the field. From a technical per-
spective, we believe that one of SKELETOMEs main contributions is advancing
the work started by Corlosquet et al. [13] in integrating Semantic Web technologies in the widely adopted Drupal CMS.

Future work on the platform will focus on developing novel mechanisms to
support expertise modeling from micro-contributions and reasoning using fuzzy
statements. From a functional perspective, we intend to integrate a notification
mechanism, with personalized triggers on user-defined actions (e.g., notify me
if anyone uploads a patient case that has these clinical attributes). In addition,
to enhance the extent and ease of user interaction with the system, we plan
to develop an email-based and iPhone app that enables the upload of clinical
summaries and X-Ray reports.

Acknowledgments. The work presented in this paper is supported by the
Australian Research Council (ARC) under the Linkage grant SKELETOME 
LP100100156. The authors would like to thank Hasti Ziamatin and Razan Paul
for their implementation support. Special thanks go to Tania Tudorache for her
comprehensive and useful feed-back.

T. Groza et al.
