Generating Resource Profiles by

Exploiting the Context of Social Annotations

Ricardo Kawase1, George Papadakis1,2, and Fabian Abel3

1 L3S Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany

2 ICCS, National Technical University of Athens, Greece

kawase@L3S.de

3 Web Information Systems, TU Delft, The Netherlands

gpapadis@mail.ntua.gr

f.abel@tudelft.nl

Abstract. Typical tagging systems merely capture that part of the tagging interactions that enrich the semantics of tag assignments according
to the systems purposes. The common practice is to build tag-based resource or user profiles on the basis of statistics about tags, disregarding
the additional evidence that pertain to the resource, the user or the tag
assignment itself. Thus, the main bulk of this valuable information is
ignored when generating user or resource profiles.

In this work, we formalize the notion of tag-based and context-based
resource profiles and introduce a generic strategy for building such profiles by incorporating available context information from all parts involved in a tag assignment. Our method takes into account not only
the contextual information attached to the tag, the user and the re-
source, but also the metadata attached to the tag assignment itself. We
demonstrate and evaluate our approach on two different social tagging
systems and analyze the impact of several context-based resource modeling strategies within the scope of tag recommendations. The outcomes of
our study suggest a significant improvement over other methods typically
employed for this task.

1 Introduction

One of the most popular innovations conveyed by Web 2.0 technologies is the
introduction of tagging, a novel method of annotating resources with relevant
keywords or terms in order to describe and enrich them with useful metadata.
In resource sharing systems like Flickr1, users mainly attach tags to their own
resources, while social tagging systems like Delicious2 enable users to create
tag assignments 3 for any resource shared with the community (i.e., free-for-all
tagging [12]). Hence, there are two categories of tags: the personalized and the

1 See http://www.flickr.com
2 See http://www.delicious.com
3 A tag assignment is a user-tag-resource triple that describes which user assigned

which tag to which resource.

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2011, Part I, LNCS 7031, pp. 289304, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

R. Kawase, G. Papadakis, and F. Abel

collective ones [8]. Similarly, the benefits for the users are twofold: tags of the
former category facilitate the organization and management of the resources,
making search and retrieval more effective [11,20]; collective tags, on the other
hand, enhance the visibility of community content, associating relevant items
with the same annotation(s) [8,3].

Tag assignments are typically marked with subjectivity: different authors can
interpret the same tag in different ways. Although this conveys significant benefits in the case of personalized tags, it also poses significant obstacles to the
usefulness of the collective ones: the purpose of a tag assignment is not always
clear to users other than its creator. For example, a tag associated with an image may describe it with respect to different aspects: the place and the persons
depicted, the owner, an opinion or even its usage context (i.e., associated task).
Thus, tags can be valid solely from a user-specific point of view [7]. This also
explains why not all tags are suitable for search [4]; even those tags that mainly
aim at describing the content of an item might characterize just a small part of
the resource, without being representative of the entire resource. Some systems
like LabelMe [17] and TagMe!4 [1] offer solutions to this problem by providing
tags of finer granularity to their users.

In addition, tag assignments suffer from the ambiguity, inherent in any natural language: multiple meanings can be associated with the same tag (poly-
semy), while a specific tag can have multiple interpretations (synonymy). To
disambiguate the meaning of tags for specific tag assignments, frameworks like
MOAT [16] enable their users to associate each assignment with a URI specifying its meaning. This procedure is also incorporated in Faviki5, which uses
Wikipedia as the source for URIs that clarify the meaning of an annotation
(i.e., semantic tagging). A more flexible social tagging model is maintained in
TagMe!, where users can enrich tag assignments with additional facets: semantic categories, URIs and spatial information. These facets represent contextual
information that contribute to the disambiguation of the tag assignments, thus
facilitating the search and the recommendation of tags or resources to a great
extent.

In this paper, we argue that the aforementioned shortcomings of social annotations can be ameliorated by considering their context. In a previous work, we
have already demonstrated the benefits of context for recommendation strategies [2]. However, the methods presented there were tailored to a particular
system and, thus, were not generalizable to other social tagging systems. In-
stead, this work introduces a general, versatile modeling approach that builds
comprehensive resource profiles, easily adapted to any folksonomy. It exploits
the contextual information that is available in tagging systems rich in metadata,
which are usually neglected.

At the core of our approach lies the idea of encapsulating not only the information that exclusively pertain to tags, but also additional contextual facets that
refer to the other components of a tag assignment: the user, the resource and the

4 See http://tagme.groupme.org
5 See http://faviki.com.
?

?

?
tag assignment itself. Merging these facets appropriately, we can derive weighted
tag lists that form comprehensive contextual profiles, which are compatible and
easily combined with typical tag-based profiles. These profiles can be employed
in a diversity of common tasks that rely on tags, such as personalization, search
and tag recommendation. We further describe how context-based profiles can be
transformed into semantic URI-based profiles. We also put our generic resource
modeling approaches into practice, demonstrating its applicability in two different social tagging systems: TagMe! and BibSonomy6. In both cases, we evaluate
the impact of context-based profiles on the task of tag recommendations. The
outcomes of our experimental study verify our premise that contextual profiles
convey significant improvements in the performance of a social tagging system.
On the whole, the main contributions of our paper can be summarized as

follows:

 we introduce the notion of tag-based and context-based resource profiles and

present a generic context model for social tagging systems,

 we propose a generic strategy for exploiting context information embodied
in social annotations, exemplifying it with a variety of resource modeling
strategies, and

 we evaluate our strategies in two different tagging systems, verifying that the
incorporation of contextual information clearly outperforms typical methods
for generating resource profiles.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, we first elaborate on traditional folksonomies and recommenders proposed in the literature
and then introduce our generic modeling strategy. Section 3 analyzes the potential benefits of exploiting context to model resources and describes the methodology of our experiments. In Section 4 we present and discuss the results of our
evaluation, while in Section 5 we conclude the paper together with plans for
future work.

2 Generating Resource Profiles

In the following, we elaborate on existing and novel strategies for generating
generic resource profiles, which rely not only on the social annotations, but also
on their context.

2.1 Modeling Social Annotations and Context

The structure that emerges from social annotations is called folksonomy [13];
it basically constitutes a set of user-tag-resource bindings, optionally coupled
with the time each of them was performed [19]. In the context of our work, we
consider the folksonomy model that was formally defined by Hotho et al. in [11].
6 See http://www.bibsonomy.org.

R. Kawase, G. Papadakis, and F. Abel

context

context

context

tag

user

resource

tag assignment

context

Fig. 1. Contextual information of social annotations can refer to the user that performed the tag assignment, to the tag that was designated by the user, to the resource
that was annotated, or to the entire tag assignment itself.

Definition 1 (Folksonomy). A folksonomy is a quadruple F := (U, T, R, Y ),
where U, T , R are finite sets of instances of users, tags, and resources, respec-
tively. Y defines the tag assignment, which is a relation between these sets (i.e.,
Y  U  T  R) that is potentially enriched with a timestamp indicating when
it was performed.

The above definition abstracts from the tagging activities and does not incorporate contextual information. The latter refers either to the entities involved
in a tag assignment (i.e., the user, the tag, and the resource), or to the tag
assignment itself. This is clearly illustrated in Figure 1.

In the following, we consider all possible dimensions of contextual information:
the meta-data attached to the tags, to the resources and to the users, as well
as the usage context attached to tag assignments, as a whole. To cover the
last case, we need to accommodate the attachment of any kind of context to
a tag assignment. We employ an extension of Definition 1, namely the context
folksonomy model [1].
Definition 2 (Context Folksonomy). A context folksonomy is a tuple F :=
(U, T, R, Y, C, Z), where:

 U, T , R, C are finite sets of instances of users, tags, resources, and context

 Y defines the tag assignment, which is a relation between U, T , and R (i.e.,

information, respectively,
Y  U  T  R), and
Z  Y  C).

 Z defines the context assignment, which is a relation between Y and C (i.e.,

2.2 Tag-Based Profiles

At the core of this work lies the notion of folksonomy structures from the perspective of resources. Similar to a personomy (i.e., the user-specific part of a
folksonomy, coined by Hotho et al. in [11]), we formally define the resourcespecific fraction of a context folksonomy, called personomy of a resource from
now on, as follows:
?

?

?
Definition 3 (Resource Personomy). Personomy Pr = (Ur, Tr, Yr, Cr, Zr)
of a given resource r  R is the restriction of F to r, where Ur and Tr are
the finite sets of users and tags, respectively, that are referenced from the tag
assignments Yr that are attached to r. Cr comprises the contextual information
that are associated with the tag assignments in Yr, and Zr are the corresponding
context assignments.

In essence, a resource personomy encompasses the tag assignments that refer
to a specific item along with their context. In a more abstract level, the tag-based
resource profile P (r) represents a resource as a set of weighted tags.

Definition 4 (Tag-based Resource Profile). The tag-based profile P (r) of
a resource r  R is a set of weighted tags, where the weight of a tag t is computed
by a certain strategy w with respect to the given resource r:

P (r) = {(t, w(r, t))|t  T, r  R},

(1)

where w(r, t) is the weight that is associated with tag t for a given resource r.

P (r)@k denotes the subset of a tag-based profile P (r) that contains the k
tag-weight pairs with the highest weights.  P (r) represents a tag-based profile
whose weights are normalized, so that their sum is equal to 1, while |P (r)|
expresses the number of distinct tags contained in P (r). It is worth clarifying at
this point that the tags contained in P (r) are not restricted to the tags that are
explicitly associated with r (i.e., the tags included in the resources personomy
Pr). Instead, P (r) may also specify the weight for a tag ti that is associated to
the resource r indirectly, through another element of its context. We illustrate
this situation in Section 2.4 and Section 2.5 where we present our strategies for
weighting tags.
In line with Definition 4, tag-based profiles can be built for a given user
u  U and for a particular context c  C, as well. For instance, tag-based
user profiles (i.e., P (u)) have been studied by Firan et al. [6] and Michlmayr and
Cayzer [14]. A straightforward approach to create a tag-based context profile
P (c) is to consider the tag assignments that pertain to c and to weight each of
them according to the number of annotations that are contextualized with c
and mention it. More formally: w(c, t) = |{(u, t, r)  Y : (c, (u, t, r)  Z)}| (cf.
Definition 2). In Section 2.5, we introduce more advanced strategies that exploit
the characteristics of the respective type of context and show how these context
profiles can be employed to enhance tag-based resource profiles.

2.3 Baseline Strategies for Tag-Based Resource Profiles

The main challenge in generating tag-based profiles for resources is the definition
of a strategy w that appropriately assigns weights to the involved tags. In the
following, we present two weighting approaches that are typically used in the
literature, but do not exploit all aspects of the context of tag assignments.

R. Kawase, G. Papadakis, and F. Abel

Tag Frequency. The rationale behind this approach is the assumption that the
more users annotate a resource r with a tag t, the more salient is t for the
description of r. Given the personomy of a resource Pr, the corresponding
tag-based resource profile P (r) can be formed by counting the number of
distinct users that assigned at least one tag t  Tr to the resource r. Hence,
the weight w(r, t) attached to a specific tag t in P (r) is equal to: w(r, t) =
|{u  Ur : (u, t, r)  Yr}|. This approach was essentially employed by Cai
and Li in [5] with the aim of improving tag-based personalized search.

Tag-based Co-Occurrence. In tagging systems like Flickr, resources are typically annotated with a limited number of distinct tags [18]. For this reason,
Sigurbj ornsson and Zwol suggested in [18] to enrich the profile of a resource
r with those tags that frequently co-occur with the tags assigned to r (i.e.,
Tr). The weight of those additional tags is equal to the frequency of their
co-occurrence in the folksonomy:

w(r, t) = |{(u, ti, rj)  Y : ti  Tr  t  Trj}|.

The second method is typically employed in the context of tag recommendation
techniques, which rely on association rules to capture the co-occurrence patterns
(see, for instance, a recent, state-of-the-art method, introduced by Heymann et
al. in [9]). For this reason, we employ it as the baseline method in our experimental study that examines the applicability of our algorithms in the tag
recommendation task.

2.4 Generic Strategy for Generating Context-Based Resource

Profiles

Context-based resource profiling strategies rely on the contextual information
available in folksonomies, and in resource personomies in particular: they build
the profile of a resource r by merging (some of) the tag-based context profiles
P (c) associated with r. Moreover, one can also consider contextual information
attached to the tag assignments referring to r (cf. Figure 1). The process of
generating context-based resource profiles is outlined in the form of a generic
approach in Definition 5.

Definition 5 (Context-based Resource Profile). Given a tag-based profile
P (r) of a resource r and the set of tag-based context profiles P (c1),..., P (cn),
where c1, .., cn  Cr form the context information available in the resource personomy Pr, the context-based resource profile Pc(r) is computed by aggregating
the tag-weight pairs (tj, wj) of the given profiles according to the following al-
gorithm. Note that the parameter i allows for (de-)emphasizing the weights
originating from profile P (ci).
Input:
P (r), ContextP rof iles = {(P (c1), 1), ..., (P (cn), n)}
Initialize: Pc(r) = P (r)
?

?

?
for (P (ci), i)  ContextP rof iles:
P (ci) =  P (ci)
for (tj, wj)  P (ci):

if (tj, wPc(r))  Pc(r):

replace (tj, wPc(r)) in Pc(r) with (tj, wPc(r) + i  wj)
add (tj, i  wj) to Pc(r)

else:

end

end

end
Output:  Pc(r)

The above algorithm is independent from the type of context information
that is exploited to construct the context-based profiles and is, thus, generalizable to any tagging system. The construction of context-based resource profiles
Pc(r) depends, however, on the type of context that is considered. In the follow-
ing, we present several weighting strategies for building them in systems rich in
metadata, like TagMe! and BibSonomy.

2.5 Domain- and Application-Specific Strategies for Generating

Context-Based Resource Profiles

TagMe!. We begin with describing the strategies used to build contexts for
resources in TagMe!. This system offers spatial tag assignments, enabling users
to draw a rectangle that specifies the part of the image that is relevant to the
corresponding tag. The resulting rectangular areas carry implicit information,
which add more value to a tag assignment. Consider, for instance, the size and the
distance of the tags area from the center of the resource; the former represents
the portion of the visual space that is covered by the tag, with larger areas
denoting tags that are more representative of the whole resource (i.e., tags with
small area pertain to a particular object depicted in the picture, whereas large
areas correspond to tags describing the picture in its entirety) [1]. Similarly, the
latter expresses the relevance of tag assignments to the resource: tags closer to its
center might be more important than tags placed at the margin of a resource [1].
In addition to this spatial facet, TagMe! provides two additional dimensions
that are suitable for building context-based resource profiles: the categories and
the semantic-meaning of tags. Categories can be freely entered by users via the
tagging interface, in order to provide a more general description that disambiguates and describes tags more clearly. For instance, the tag Brandenburger
Tor can be assigned to the category Building. In addition, TagMe! automatically enriches tags and categories assignments with DBpedia URIs to further
disambiguate the meaning of a tag. In the following, we introduce strategies for
building context-based profiles with the help of the tagging facets of TagMe!. Although the choice of these facets may seem rather intuitive, they have all been
empirically evaluated in [1].

R. Kawase, G. Papadakis, and F. Abel

User-based Co-occurrence. The rationale behind this weighting method is
that an individual typically annotates similar resources, thus employing
relevant tags in her tag assignments. This strategy considers, therefore, all
users that assigned a tag to a given resource r and aggregates all the tags
that they used (even for annotating other resources) into the context-based
resource profile P (r). The weight w(r, t) is calculated by accumulating the
frequencies of the tags available in the tag-based profiles of these users:
w(r, t) =

|{rk  R : (u, t, rk)  Y, rk = r}|.
?

?

?
uUr

Semantic Category Frequency. This strategy considers as evidence for the
significance of a tag, the popularity of the category(ies) associated with
the respective tag assignment(s). The premise here is that a tag associated
with a category is more important than a tag without a category and,
thus, more relevant to the annotated resource. In fact, the more frequent
its category is, the more relevant it is. Thus, the weight of each tag is equal
to the frequency of its category. In case a tag is associated with multiple
categories, its weight amounts to the sum of the respective frequencies:
w(r, t) =

|{(ci, (uj, tk, rl))  Z : (ci, (u, t, r))  Zr}|.
?

?

?
i

Co-occurring Semantic Category Frequency. The incentive for this strategy is the idea that tags described by the same categories are semantically relevant to each other. Consequently, when one of them is assigned
to a particular resource r, the rest are also representative of r. Given a
resource r, this weighting method retrieves all categories associated with r
and places all tags associated with them (even through another resource)
in the profile of r, P (r). In line with the previous strategy, the value of each
tag is set equal to the (sum of) frequency(ies) of the related category(ies):
w(r, t) =

|{(ci, (ui, tj, rk))  Z : ci  Cr  (ci, (u, t, r))  Zr}|.
?

?

?
i

Semantic Meaning. The rationale behind this approach is the assumption
that semantically annotated tags constitute the more carefully selected annotations of a resource, thus being more representative of it and the basis
for a more comprehensive description. Depending on whether a tag has been
linked to a URI that uniquely identifies its meaning, this strategy defines
two levels of importance. In other words, it assigns a binary value to each
tag, with those tags that satisfy this condition receiving the value of 1, while
the rest take the value of 0. More formally:
w(r, t) = 1 if (U RI, (u, r, t))  Zr.

Co-occurring Semantic Meaning. At the core of this strategy lies the idea
that tags that are semantically equal to, but more popular than the tags directly associated with r, are more representative of its content. Thus, given
a resource r, this strategy aggregates all the URIs involved in the tag assignments of r and builds the resource profile P (r) by aggregating all tags that
were associated with these URIs, independently of the respective resource.
Tags are weighted according to the frequency(ies) of the URI(s) assigned
|{(U RIi, (uj, rk, tl))  Z : (U RIi, (u, r, t)) 
to them: w(r, t) =
Zr}|.

URIiCr
?

?

?
Area Size. The intuition behind this method is that the importance of tags is
proportional to their size: the larger the area occupied by a tag, the more
relevant the tag is to the annotated resource. On the other hand, tags that
have been associated with a particular part of a resource, are considered
more specific, and thus less significant. Thus, this strategy assigns to each
tag a weight proportional to its area. More formally: w(r, t) = |x1x2||y1
y2|, where (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are the Cartesian coordinates of the lower
left and the upper right edge of the tags rectangle (x1, x2, y1, y2  [0, 1]).
Distance From Center. This strategy is based on the assumption that the
closer a tag is to the center of a resource (e.g., image), the more relevant it is.
Hence, it weights tags according to their distance from the resources central
point, with smaller distances corresponding to higher values. Expressed

mathematically, we have: w(r, t) =
(xtcxrc )2+(ytcyrc )2 , where (xrc , yrc)
and (xtc , ytc) are the coordinates of the center of the resource and the center
of the tag, respectively (xrc , xtc , yrc, ytc  [0, 1]). Note that, with respect to
the annotations of the above strategy, we have xtc = x1+x2
.
and ytc = y1+y2

It should be stressed at this point that the above strategies rely on different
facets of the context folksonomy of TagMe!. Thus, instead of being competitive
to each other, they are complementary and can be arbitrarily combined. In total,
we can have (27  1 =)127 distinct strategies, either atomic (i.e., composed of a
single weighting method) or composite ones (i.e., derived from the combination
of multiple weighting techniques).
BibSonomy. We now further demonstrate the adaptability and generality of our
approach by proposing concrete context modeling strategies for the folksonomy
of BibSonomy.

Co-occurring Journal Frequency. BibSonomy resources (i.e., publications)
are typically associated with the journals or conferences, where they were
published. This strategy exploits these metadata information, assuming
that each specific journal is focused on a particular subject that represents the aggregation of similar resources. Thus, its publications are highly
relevant to each other, and the tags assigned to one of them are probably
applicable to the rest, as well. Given a resource r, this weighting method
retrieves the Journal metadata associated with r and aggregates in P (r)
the tags of all the resources that were published by the same journal. The
value of each tag is equal to its frequency:
w(r, t) = |{(cj, (uj, t, rl))  Z : (cj, (u, t, r))  Zr}|, where cj stands for the
journal metadata of the given resource r.

Co-occurring Journal-Year Frequency. The rationale behind this strategy
is the assumption that the topics of the papers published in a specific journal drift with the passage of time. As a result, the papers published in the
same journal in a particular year are more relevant in with each other than
with the papers published at a different point in time. In this context, this

R. Kawase, G. Papadakis, and F. Abel

weighting method retrieves for every resource r the Journal and Year metadata associated with it; then, it generates a list of the tags of all resources
that were also published within the same journal in the same year. Tag
weights are set equal to the frequency of the tags:
w(r, t) = |{(cj,y, (uj, t, rl))  Z : (cj,y, (u, t, r))  Zr}|, where cj,y stands
for the journal and year metadata of the given resource r.

2.6 Transforming Tag-Based and Context-Based Profiles into

Semantic Profiles

The aforementioned context-based modeling strategies form the basis for the
creation of semantic profiles; these are profiles that explicitly specify the
semantics of a tag by means of URIs. For social tagging systems that assign
meaningful URIs to tag assignments (e.g., TagMe!) or systems that make use of
the MOAT framework [16] (e.g., LODr [15]), we propose the transformation of
tag-based profiles into semantic profiles that, instead of a list of tags, consist of
a weighted list of URIs.

It is worth noting at this point that the semantic meaning of tags depends on
the context of their use. For example, the tag paris most likely refers to the city,
but for some tag assignments it could also refer to a person. It is not possible,
therefore, to have a global mapping of tags to URIs. Instead, it is necessary to
map each individual tag assignment to a particular URI. Thus, we propose to
transform the personomy Pr (see Definition 3) and its tag assignments as follows:

Definition 6 (URI-based Resource Personomy). Given the tag-based personomy Pr = (Ur, Tr, Yr, Cr, Zr) of a specific resource r and its URI assignments
Zr,uri  Y  Curi  Zr, where Curi is the set of URIs, the URI-based resource
personomy, Pr,uri = (Ur, Tr,uri, Yr,uri, Cr, Zr), can be constructed by iterating
over the tag assignments and replacing the tags with URIs of the corresponding
URI assignments according to the following algorithm:
Tr,uri = Tr  Curi
Yr,uri = {}
for (u, t, r)  Yr:
for ((u, t, r), uri)  Zr,uri:
Yr,uri = Yr,uri  (u, uri, r)

end

end
Pr,uri = (Ur, Tr,uri, Yr,uri, Cr, Zr)

Given the URI-based Resource Personomy and a URI-based Context Folksonomy
(which can be constructed in a similar manner as the semantic personomy), we
can apply the resource modeling strategies presented in Sections 2.3 and 2.5 in
order to generate semantic resource profiles. In this way, the resource modeling
framework presented above supports tag-based tasks in both the social tagging
and the Semantic Web systems.
?

?

?
Generating Resource Profiles

1,288
Tag Assignments (TAs)
TAs with Spatial Information

TAs with Category Information 917
1,050
TAs with URI Information
TAs with all information

3 Experimental Setup

To measure the quality of the above, context-based resource modeling strategies,
we apply them to the tag recommendation task: given a set of resources annotated
with tags and metadata, the goal is to predict other tags that are also relevant
to a specific resource, but have not yet been assigned to it. In the subsequent
paragraphs, we describe the setup of the thorough, experimental evaluation we
conducted in this context.

3.1 Social Tagging Data Sets

In the course of our experiments, we employed two real-world data sets that stem
from the aforementioned social tagging applications: TagMe! and BibSonomy. A
detailed description of the technical characteristics of the data sets is presented
below.

TagMe! This web application constitutes a multifaceted social tagging system
that allows users to associate their annotations with a variety of (optional) meta-
data, which are suitable for building context-based resource profiles. The data
we collected comprise the whole activity of the first three weeks after the launch
of the system in June, 2009. In total, its user base comprises 30 users; half of
them had a Flickr account and, thus, were able to tag their own pictures, while
the rest assigned tags to random pictures and pictures of their own interest. A
summary of the technical characteristics of this data set is presented in Table 1.

BibSonomy. BibSonomy [10] is a social bookmarking and publication-sharing
system that has been running for over four years. The resources in Bibsonomy
are publications, stored in BibTeX format. Each resource has several additional
metadata, such as the corresponding journal, volume, year, as well as the author
names. We employed Bibsonomys public data set that is available on-line from
the 1st July 2010. It consists of 566,939 resources, described and annotated by
6,569 users. In total, there are 2,622,423 tag assignments and 189,664 unique
tags. For our experimental study, we considered those resources that had the
journal information and were tagged with at least five distinct tags. We randomly
selected 500 of those resources and derived their context-based profiles from the
entire data set.

R. Kawase, G. Papadakis, and F. Abel

3.2 Leave-one-out Cross-Validation

To evaluate the effect of context-based resource profiles on tag recommendations,
we employed the leave-one-out cross-validation methodology in the following
way: at each step, we hid one of the tag assignments and, then, we built the
profile of the corresponding resource according to the selected strategy, based
on the remaining assignments. The resulting profile encompasses a ranked list
of tags, whose value is estimated according to the facets of the folksonomy that
the current strategy considers. The goal is to predict the hidden tag by placing
it in the top positions of the ranking.

To estimate the performance of the algorithms, we considered the following

metrics:

Success Rate at 1 (S@1) denotes the percentage of tag predictions that had
the missing tag at the first position of the ranking. It takes values in the
interval [0, 1], with higher values corresponding to higher performance.

Success Rate at 10 (S@10) stands for the percentage of tag predictions that
had the missing tag in one of the top 10 positions of the ranking. Similar
to S@1, it takes values in the interval [0, 1], and the higher the value, the
better the performance of the corresponding method.

As baseline strategies, we consider the approaches described in Section 2.3, which
exclusively rely on the information encapsulated in tag assignments (i.e., user,
tag, and resource). Note that the tag frequency strategy adds to a resource profile
P (r) only tags that have already been assigned to the resource. Consequently,
it cannot be applied to the tag prediction problem without any further exten-
sion. Thus, we employ tag-based co-occurrence as the main baseline strategy and
compare it to the context-based strategies of Section 2.5. These strategies enrich
the traditional tag frequency with context-based profiles, following the process
described in Definition 5.

4 Results
4.1 TagMe!

As mentioned above, the large number of facets of the TagMe! data leads to
a total of 127 distinct context-based strategies. For the sake of readability and
due to space limitations, we provide the results only for the atomic ones (see
Definition 5) together with the best performing composite methods. It is worth
noting at this point that our methods are employed as extensions to the baseline
one, merging them with a weight  as described in Definition 5.

A summary of the performance of the baseline method and the atomic weighting strategies is presented in Table 2. It is evident that all context-based methods improve over the baseline, to a varying, but statistically significant extent
(p < 0.01). The Semantic Description brings about a minor increase in S@1
of 2.6%, whereas the Spatial Annotation Distance and the Category-based CoOccurrence account for an improvement well above 30%. Equally significant is
?

?

?
the baseline in TagMe! data set

Generating Resource Profiles

Context

Context

S@1 S@10 Context
Weight
?

?

?
User-based Co-Ocurrence

Spatial Annotation Size

Baseline

Spatial Annotation Distance

0.076 0.331
0.087 0.407
0.089 0.408
0.094 0.377
0.085 0.352
Categorized Tag Frequency
Category-based Co-Occurrence 0.102 0.401
0.078 0.407
Semantic Description
Semantic-based Co-Ocurrence 0.083 0.406

-
0.8
0.4
0.9
0.5
0.7
0.8
0.1

the improvement with respect to the S@10 metric that varies from 6.3% for Categorized Tag Frequency context up to 23.3% for Spatial Annotation Distance.
The latter indicates that annotations attached closer to the center of a resource
are more valuable than those tags assigned to the margin (cf. Section 2.5).

The fourth column of Table 2 contains the optimal value of the weight used
to merge the corresponding individual strategy with the baseline method. This
value was determined through an exhaustive search of all values in the interval
[0,2] with a step of 0.1. The actual effect of this parameter is demonstrated in
Figure 2, where the performance for weight 1 (i.e., merging the baseline and the
contextual strategy on an equal basis) is compared with the best performing
weight. With the exception of the Semantic Description, we can notice that the
calibration of this parameter conveys significant improvement, ranging from 2%
for User-based Co-Occurrence to 12% for Categorized Tag Frequency.

Fig. 2. S@1 improvement (in percentage) of each context over the baseline in the
TagMe! data set. Gray bars show the results when the Context-Weight is set to 1, while
black bars correspond to the performance of the best performing Context-Weight of
each context.

R. Kawase, G. Papadakis, and F. Abel

Table 3. S@1 results for the composite context-based methods that have the optimal
performance on the TagMe! data set. ContextIDs refer to the methods of Table 2.

ContextID (Context-Weight) S@1 Improvement(%)
0.106
2(0.4) & 5(0.7) & 7(0.1)
2(0.4) & 3(0.1) & 5(0.7) & 7(0.1) 0.105
0.105
2(0.4) & 5(0.7)
5(0.7) & 7(0.1)
0.104

38.8
37.7
37.7
36.7

Table 4. S@1 and S@10 results for the baseline and the contextualized strategies
(strategy-weight one to one) on the Bibsonomy data set

Context

S@1 Improvement(%)

0.00712
Baseline
Co-occurring Journal Frequency
0.00991
Co-occurring Journal-Year Frequency 0.01425

-

39.02
100.00

Context

-

S@10 Improvement(%)
0.0701
Baseline
Co-occurring Journal Frequency
0.0770
Co-occurring Journal-Year Frequency 0.1045

10.42
49.13

Additionally, we experimented with all possible composite strategies (i.e.,
combinations of the atomic ones), employing again a variety of context-weights
for each of them (i.e., wi  [0, 2] for each method i). The best performing ones are
presented in Table 3, along with the respective weight and the improvement they
convey with respect to S@1. We can see that all of them perform significantly
better than the individual methods comprising them. Note, though, that they all
involve the atomic strategy with the highest value for S@1 (i.e., Category-based
Co-Occurrence) and assign to it the highest weight. However, they improve its
performance by just 2%. This clearly means that merging different contexts does
not result in a cumulative improvement, because their combination leads to noise
in the form of contradictory evidence: a tag rated high by a specific weighting
strategy can be rated lower by another one.

In summary, we can conclude that contextualized strategies that rely on the
spatial features, the categories and the semantics produce the best results in
the case of TagMe!. They perform individually well enough and can be slightly
improved when combined with the appropriate weights. Our semantic resource
profiling strategies can be applied to any other semantic tagging system, thus
being reusable and appropriate for other applications, as well.

4.2 BibSonomy

The use case of BibSonomy demonstrates how our model of context-based resource profiles can be beneficially applied to any folksonomy, and how we can
derive contextual information from the relations between the tag assignments.
The outcomes of our evaluation are summarized in Table 4. We can see that
?

?

?
both context-based methods substantially improve over the baseline, with the
Co-occurring Journal-Year Frequency doubling its precision. Nevertheless, the
overall success rate remains very low ( 1%) in all cases. Note that the combination of the contextual weighting strategies with the baseline was done on an
equal basis (Context  W eight = 1).

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we proposed novel approaches to generating and enriching resource
profiles that exploit the multiple types of contextual information, available in
most social tagging systems. We demonstrated that context can be derived from
almost any metadata of the components of a tag assignment (i.e., user, tag,
and resource) as well as from the tag assignment as a whole. We formalized the
approach for modeling context-based profiles and described various, versatile
strategies for combining them.

To verify the benefits of context-based resource profiles, we considered the
task of tag recommendation, which typically relies on naive resource profiles
that are derived from tag co-occurrences. We applied our strategies on two realworld datasets, with the outcomes indicating a considerable improvement over
the baseline recommendation method. This verifies our premise that items sharing similar metadata (with respect to the same part of their tag assignments)
are highly likely to be annotated with the same tags. We also demonstrated that
contextual information pertaining to entire tag assignments provide significant
evidence for modeling the resource profiles. This was proven to be particularly
true for the cases where tag assignments are categorized, and spatially or semantically annotated.

Finally, we validated that merging different contexts does not result in a
cumulative gain, since their arbitrary combination may lead to contradictory
results. This issue actually lies at the core of our future work: we intend to
develop techniques that identify complementary contexts, distinguishing them
from the competitive ones. So far, there is no relevant work on this field, although
techniques that optimally combine context models are expected to enhance the
performance of many other tasks, as well, like personalization.
