Extracting Semantic User Networks from

Informal Communication Exchanges

Anna Lisa Gentile, Vitaveska Lanfranchi, Suvodeep Mazumdar,

and Fabio Ciravegna

Department of Computer Science

University of Sheffield

{a.l.gentile,v.lanfranchi,s.mazumdar,f.ciravegna}@dcs.shef.ac.uk

Sheffield, United Kingdom

Abstract. Nowadays communication exchanges are an integral and
time consuming part of peoples job, especially for the so called knowledge workers. Contents discussed during meetings, instant messaging
exchanges, email exchanges therefore constitute a potential source of
knowledge within an organisation, which is only shared with those
immediately involved in the particular communication act. This poses
a knowledge management issue, as this kind of contents become buried
knowledge. This work uses semantic technologies to extract buried knowl-
edge, enabling expertise finding and topic trends spotting. Specifically we
claim it is possible to automatically model peoples expertise by monitoring informal communication exchanges (email) and semantically annotating their content to derive dynamic user profiles. Profiles are then used
to calculate similarity between people and plot semantic knowledge-based
networks. The major contribution and novelty of this work is the exploitation of semantic concepts captured from informal content to build
a semantic network which reflects people expertise rather than capturing social interactions. We validate the approach using contents from a
research group internal mailing list, using email exchanges within the
group collected over a ten months period.

1 Introduction

Email is a common tool for quick exchange of information between individuals
and within groups, especially in formal organisations [10], via the use of official
or unofficial mailing lists. Mailing lists exchanges are often used to reach a wider
audience that includes both the initiators personal networks and other individuals with shared interests [31] and who may be potential sources of expertise. This
poses a knowledge management issue, as the emails knowledge content is not
shared with the whole organisation but only with those included in the recipient
list, thus implicitly creating and/or reinforcing the existence of dynamic communtities inside organisations. Whilst this is positive as it increases flexibility
and innovation, the drawback is that knowledge remains implicit or not shared
with the rest of the organisation, becoming buried knowledge [32]. Moreover
as recognised by [25] the lines between inter-communication on professional and

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2011, Part I, LNCS 7031, pp. 209224, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

A.L. Gentile et al.

social levels are increasingly blurred: people tend to share more aspects of their
social life with co-workers and these exchanges often lead to establishing professional coooperations or sharing topics of interests. Extracting information from
emails could prove useful in a knowledge management perspective, as it would
provide means to build social networks, determine experts and communities of
practice, taking into account not only professional content but also social and
emerging topics, that may highlight emerging cooperations, interests etc. As
proved by [14] email traffic can be analysed and used to identify COINS (Col-
laborative Innovation Networks), groups of individuals inside organisations that
are self-motivated and work together on a new idea. In this paper we propose an
approach to automatically model peoples expertise and dynamic communities
interests by monitoring informal communication exchanges. The content of communication exchanges is semantically annotated and used to derive user profiles.
Profiles are then used to calculate similarity between people and plot semantic
knowledge-based networks, highlighting groups of users with shared knowledge
or with complementary knowledge. The main novelty concerns the profile gener-
ation; with respect to the state of the art in the Social Network Analysis, where
profiles are mostly based (i) on information declared by users in their static
profiles, (ii) on rates of communication exchanges between users and (iii) on the
morphology of the social graph, our work proposes a profile generation which is
based on semantic concepts extracted from user generated content; these profiles
have the advantage of being both dynamic, as they are created from user generated content and semantic, in the sense that unique and meaningful concepts are
extracted. To confirm its quality and validity we experimented the proposed approach on a dataset consisting of a research group internal mailing list exchanges
(as in [13]), extracting profiles with different degrees of semantics. The similarity
between users has then been calculated for every type of profile and compared
against users subjective similarity judgements, to understand if increasing the
level of semantics in the user profiles increases the accuracy of similarity, therefore increasing the potential for exploiting the technique for different tasks, such
as expert finding, knowledge sharing or replicated expertise detection within
an organisation. To demonstrate the usefulness of the approach, this has been
integrated into a knowledge management system aimed at capturing and sharing knowledge exchanged during informal communication exchanges (meetings,
chats, etc.): this has provided clear scenarios of usage that will be evaluated in
the coming months to understand whether semantic dynamic user profiling is
beneficial to increase efficiency and efficacy in knowledge management.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the state
of the art in knowledge capture from informal communication exchanges, on
semantic user profiling and on measures for user similarity. Section 3 describes
the proposed approach to automatically model peoples expertise profiles and
calculate similarity between them. Section 4 presents the experiments used to
extract and evaluate user profiles and similarities, whilst section 5 introduces the
applications of the approach and possible scenarios of use. Section 6 discusses
the results and the next stages of our research.
?

?

?
2 State of the Art

2.1 Knowledge Capture from Informal Communication Exchanges

Capturing, representing and sharing knowledge from informal communication
exchanges has been a topic of research in the knowledge management and in
the information seeking behaviour communities for many years, as this type of
knowledge is tacit, often very specilized and precise and is not shared with anyone else than the immediate recipient of the informal communication exchange.
Previous researches on knowledge workers information seeking behaviours proved
how engineers spend 40-66% of their time sharing information [18,30]. Different
types of communication exchange can be recognised at different levels of formal-
ity, with structured planning meetings or corporate mailing lists at one side of
the spectrum and informal chats at the coffee machine or chats over internet
messaging programs at the other. Independently from the degree of formality
all these communication exchanges contain invaluable knowledge that is often
buried [32]. Different techniques have been explored in previous works to extract,
represent and share this buried knowledge, often focusing on one specific type of
communication exchange, such as emails, meeting recordings etc. In this work
we focus on email exchanges. Email content, and addressee and recipient, often
provide clues about the interests and expertise of participants [5] and they are
used as a source for automatic expertise identification and knowledge elicitation
[7,31]. The main techniques adopted to extract information and build social networks from emails are usually quantitative data analysis, such as frequency of
exchanges between individuals, and data mining over the email content.

Exchange Frequency. In the panorama of work on extracting social networks
from email, the frequency of email exchange has been widely used as the main
indicator of relevance of a connection. In some cases the effort is on determining
frequency thresholds [33,11,3,9], while in others time-dependent threshold conditions are defined to detect dynamic networks [6,19]. Diesner et al. [10] construct
a social network via weighted edges over a classical dataset, the Enron corpus1,
a large set of email messages made public during the legal investigation of the
Enron corporation. They reported the emergence of communication sub-groups
with unusually high email exchange in the period prior to the company becoming
insolvent in 2001, when email was a key tool for obtaining information especially
across formal, inter-organisational boundaries. Diesner et al. [10] also observed
that variations in patterns of email usage were influenced by knowledge about
and reputation of, in addition to, formal roles within the organisation. Our approach differs from the above cited works as we choose to not take into account
the frequency of individual communication exchanges but to perform contentbased analysis of mailing list archives, where the emphasis is not on individual
recipients of an email but on reaching a wider base of colleagues to find experts
that could answer very specific questions.

http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~enron

A.L. Gentile et al.

Content-Based Analysis. Email content analysis has been used for different
purposes: determining expertise [31], analysing the relations between content and
people involved in email exchanges [5,17,25,39], or simply extracting useful information about names, addresses, phone numbers [21]. Our approach takes inspiration from Schwartz et al. [31] in trying to derive expertise and common interests
within communities from email exchange but moves on from the keyword-based
extraction approach, to consider McCallum et al. [25] contribution in applying
Machine Learning (ML) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to retrieve the
rich knowledge content of the information exchanged in automatically gathered
social networks, and better interpret the attributes of nodes and the types of
relationships between them.

Laclav k et al. [21] observe that enterprise users largely exploit emails to com-
municate, collaborate and carry out business tasks. They also adopt a cont-based
approach and exploit pattern-based Information Extraction techniques to analyse enterprise email communications, and exploit the data obtained to create social networks. The test sets (one in English containing 28 emails, and a second in
Spanish with 50 emails) consist of mainly formal emails exchanged between different enterprises. The results obtained indicate that emails are a valid means for
obtaining information across formal, inter-organisational boundaries. Lin et al.
[24,23]propose a framework for social-oriented Knowledge Management within
an organization. They exploit the content of emails for corporate search and for
providing expert finding and social network facilities. The focus of these work
is rather on the framework description in terms of provided functionalities than
on the description of how the content is processed and how the user profiles
are generated. The work we present in this paper, on the other hand, makes
use of a test set containing informal email exchanges from an internal mailing
list for an academic research group, for a pilot, exploratory set of experiments.
We adopt multiple approaches for extracting information at different levels of
semantic granularity to aid the understanding of the content of the conversations carried out via email, and depict the variety of topics discussed using this
communication medium and ultimately derive effective user profiles.

2.2 Semantic User Profiles

Using semantic technologies to derive user profiles has been a topic of research
in recent years within different communities, especially in the field of Information Retrieval, with the objective of providing customized search results and
in the Recommender Systems community, with the aim of generating effective
customized suggestions to the users. In the IR community the focus is on building a user profile which reflects the user interests more than the user expertise,
to customize search results. Daoud et al. [8] represent semantic user profiles as
graphs of concepts derived from a pre-defined ontology and represent documents
as vector of concepts of the same ontology. Then profiles are exploited to determine the personalized result ranking, using a graph-based document ranking
model. In the field of Recommender Systems the goal is improving the accuracy
?

?

?
recommendations. Abel et al. [1] build semantic user profiles for news recom-
mendations: they enrich users Twitter activities with semantics extracted from
news articles and then use these profiles to suggest users articles to read.

The input for the semantic user profile generation can be gathered in different
ways: Kramar [20] e.g. proposes to monitor user activities on the web end extracting metadata (tags, keywords, named entities) from the visited documents.
Another direction is the usage of user generated content to extract interests and
knowledge levels of users. The most similar work to ours in this direction is the
one proposed by Abel et al. [2] who use Twitter posts to generate User Models.
Semantic user profiles are extracted from the messages people post on Twitter;
in particular they generate three types of profiles: hashtag-based, topic-based
or entity-based profiles. The main focus of their work is how to extract semantic from short text like tweets rather than extensively comparing the different
types profiles. Our work also propose to generate three types of profiles, with
increasing level of semantics (keyword, named entities and concepts), but we
also investigate how increasing the levels of semantic in the user profile improves
the quality of the profile for a certain task; specifically we show how a more
semantic profile better reflects the user perceived similarity with other users in
the community.

2.3 Measures for User Similarity

Calculating similarity between user is a key research question in many fields. In
Social Networks the similarity between two users is usually a binary function,
indicating the friendship of two users who are either connected or not. Nonbinary similarities have also been proposed [35]. The relationship between two
users can be explicit, as stated by the two users, or predicted by means of
automatic techniques. Typical features which are used to infer the similarity
are attributes from the users profile like geographic location, age, interests [27].
Social connections already present in the graph are also used as features to
predict new possible connections. Other commonly used features (for example in
Facebook) are interaction-counters top-friend, and picture graphs. Also spatiotemporal data pertaining to an individuals trajectories has been exploited to
geographically mine the similarity between users based on their location histories
[22,37].

In our study we take inspiration from the way content-based recommender
systems create user profiles as vectors of defining keywords [4,28]; we build user
profiles by exploiting the content of emails belonging to each user and we represent them as vectors. The novelty of our technique is using semantic concepts as
feature representation rather than keywords. With respect to existing techniques
for user similarities in Social Networks, the novelty of our technique is exploiting
user generated content to build the feature space, rather than exploiting static
features from user profiles. We calculate similarity between users within a network but we use dynamic and semantic features rather that static user-defined
ones. The main advantage is that we capture the dynamicity and evolutionary
nature of the user interaction.

A.L. Gentile et al.

3 Semantic Network Extraction from Informal Mail

Exchanges

The proposed approach models peoples expertise and dynamic communities interests by analysing informal communication exchanges. The approach performs
the generation of content-based user profiles by analysing user generated con-
tents. User profiles are then used to derive similarity between users. The value of
similarity can then be exploited to plot semantic network between users, which
will reflect the similarity on the basis of shared knowledge. The following sections
will discuss the profile generation and similarity derivation in details.

3.1 Building User Profiles

User profiles are built by extracting information from email content using three
techniques, with varying degrees of semantics. This is done to ascertain the quality of user profiles and their suitability to model peoples interests and expertise.
Keyword-based profile. Each email ei in the collection E is reduced to a Bag
of Keywords representation, such as ei = {k1, . . . , kn}. Each user keyword-based
profile consists of Bag of Keywords, extracted from their sent emails.
Entity-based profile. Each email ei in the collection E is reduced to a Bag
of Entities representation, such as ei = {ne1, . . . , nek}. Entities are elements in
text which are recognized as belonging to a set of predefined categories (classical
categories are persons, locations, organizations, but more fine grained classification is typically used). Each user entity-based profile consists of Bag of Entities,
extracted from their sent emails.
Concept-based profile. Each email ei in the collection E is reduced to a Bag
of Concepts representation, such as ei = {c1, . . . , cn}. Concepts are elements in
text which are identified as unique objects and linked to an entry in a reference Knowledge Base (Wikipedia in this case). Each user concept-based profile
consists of Bag of Concepts, extracted from their sent emails.

Implementation details. The keyword extraction process has been performed
using Java Automatic Term Recognition Toolkit (JATR v1.02). JATR implements a voting mechanism to combine the results from different methods for
terminology recognition (dealing with single- and multi-word term recognition)
into an integrated output, improving results of integrated methods taken separately [38].

The Named Entity extraction has been performed using the Open Calais
web service3. Open Calais is an ontology-based service which returns extraction
results in RDF. Together with named entity recognition, the service performs instance recognition (concept identification) and facts extraction. For the purposes
of this work we only exploited the Named Entities returned by OpenCalais.

http://staffwww.dcs.shef.ac.uk/people/Z.Zhang/resources/
tools/jatr v1.0.zip
http://www.opencalais.com/
?

?

?
The Concept extraction process has been performed using the Wikify web
service [26]. Wikify uses a machine-learning approach to annotate Wikipedia
concepts within unstructured text. The disambiguation procedure uses three
features: a priori probability of each Wikipedia concept, weighted context terms
in the target text and a measure of the goodness of the context. The context
terms weights are calculated by using the average semantic relatedness with all
other context terms. The measure of goodness of the context reflects its homogeneity and it is used to dynamically balance a priori probability and context
term weights, instead of using a fixed heuristic. The candidate terms are generated by gathering all n-grams in the text and discarding those below a low
threshold (to discard non-sense phrases and stopwords). Experiments show that
the method perform as well on non-Wikipedia texts as on Wikipedia ones, with
an F-measure of 75% on non-Wikipedia texts.

3.2 Deriving People Similarity

The obtained user profiles are then used to calculate the similarity strength
between users, measured on a [0,1] range. Similarity values reflect the amount
of knowledge shared between two users. When used to plot a network of users
similarity values can be useful to identify central users, small communities with
shared knowledge (users with higher values of similarity among each other).

Following [15] similarity score is calculated using Jaccards index. The Jaccard
similarity coefficient measures similarity between sample sets, and is defined
as the size of the intersection divided by the size of the union of the sample
sets. Sample sets for our user similarity are concepts (or keywords or Named
Entities respectively) in each user profile. Moreover the similarity calculated
over semantic user profiles is compared with the same measure calculated over
the keyword based profiles and the named entity based profiles, to prove that
increasing the semantic value of a profile increases its quality and suitability for
modelling peoples expertise. The semantic profiles amongst the others, better
mimic the users perceived similarities between each other. Results for similarities
calculated over the three different types of profiles are shown in section 4.

4 Experiments

The aim of the experiments was to validate the hypothesis that increasing the
level of semantic in the user profile generation improves the quality of profiles.
For such purpose we used the task of inferring similarities between users and
assessed the correlation with human judgment. The corpus used for analysis and
knowledge content extraction is an internal mailing list of the OAK Group in the
Computer Science Department of the University of Sheffield4. The mailing list
is used for quick exchange of information within the group on both professional
and social topics. We use the same corpus as [13], but with a broader period

http://oak.dcs.shef.ac.uk

A.L. Gentile et al.

coverage: we selected all emails sent to the mailing list in the ten month period
from July 2010 to May 2011, totalling 1001 emails. We will refer to this corpus
as mlDataset. For each email we extracted the subject and the email body.
The number of users in the mailing list is 40; 25 of them are active users (users
sending email to mailing list). The average message length is 420 characters. The
average message length per user is shown in table 1, together with number of
concepts in each user profile. Table 1 reports statistic about all 25 active users,
even if only 15 of those 25 participated to the evaluation exercise.

Table 1. Corpus statistics for mlDataset. Column ID contains an anonymous identifier
for the users. Column AvgMsg contains the average message length for that user,
expressed in number of characters. Column Conc contains the number of concepts in
the user profile.

ID AvgMsg n. sent email Conc ID AvgMsg n. sent email Conc
?

?

?
We compared user similarity obtained with the three different profile types
(section 3) against the users perceived similarity. Pearson correlation has been
calculated for user judgments compared against the automatic generated similarities using Keyword based profiles, Named Entity based profiles and Concepts
based profiles.

The evaluation was conducted as a paper-based exercise in which the participants were asked to fill in a table containing a list of people within the working
group and rate their perceived similarity on a scale from 1 to 10, with 1 = not
similar at all and 10 = absolutely similar. If the user was not known they were
instructed to leave the rating blank. The participants were asked to score the
similarity in terms of topics or interest shared with the other person, both from a
professional and social point of view (e.g. hobbies or other things which emerge
within the working time) to concentrate the user thoughts towards general
similarity without thinking about what specific type of similarity they share.
The exercise was repeated twice for a small subset of users, with the second one
seven days after the first one. The inter-annotator agreement was calculated by
comparing for each user his/her perceived similarities about other participants
?

?

?
and similarities perceived by all the rest of participants for that particular user.
Inter-annotator agreement is shown in the last column of table 2.

A total of 15 users took part in the evaluation exercise, all providing valid

questionnaires.

Table 2. Correlation (C) of similarity with user judgment at (S) significance level,
obtained using Keyword based profiles (K), Named Entity based profile (NEs), Concept
based profiles (Conc). Column (Agr) reports Inter-annotator agreement for each user
at significance < 0.001.

NEs

C S C

Conc Agr
?

?

?
0.91
14 0.55 0 0.41 0.04 0.68
0.87
7 0.48 0.02 0.39 0.06 0.58
0.89
28 0.5 0.01 0.41 0.04 0.57
10 0.47 0.02 0.39 0.05 0.57
0.94
27 0.32 0.11 0.29 0.16 0.48 0.02 0.92
21 0.34 0.11 0.42 0.04 0.42 0.04 0.91
1 0.35 0.02 0.32 0.11 0.42 0.04 0.94
3 0.3 0.14 0.31 0.14 0.38 0.06 0.86
9 0.28 0.18 0.36 0.07 0.38 0.06 0.9
18 0.5 0.01 0.5 0.01 0.36 0.07 0.87
8 0.17 0.53 0.19 0.48 0.35 0.18 0.82
11 0.59 0 0.42 0.04 0.34 0.1 0.83
25 0.25 0.22 0.33 0.11 0.3 0.14 0.73
23 0.21 0.32 0.33 0.1 0.19 0.36 0.86

Table 2 shows the Pearson correlation between automatically generated similarity with user judgment. For the three types of user profiles, Keyword based
profiles (K), Named Entity based profile (NEs) and Concept based profiles
(Conc), the table shows the correlation value (C) and the respective significance
level (S). The inter-annotator agreement for each user reported in column Agr,
has been calculated with Pearson correlation at significance < 0.001. Results are
presented in descending order of correlation for similarities over concept based
profiles. Figures show that the correlation almost always improves by the usage
of Concept based profiles over Keyword based profiles, except for three users
(18, 11, 23). Moreover the significance level for the correlation on concept based
similarity is lower than the one on keyword based similarity (except for user
23). For the three users not confirming the trend, the inter-annotator agreement
average (0.83) is lower than the general average (0.88).

5 Applications and Scenarios of Usage

The approach presented in this paper allows to automatically extract content
and user similarity from an email corpus to build networks which reflects people
expertise rather than capturing users social interactions. This approach could

A.L. Gentile et al.

prove particularly useful for knowledge management, in particular for tasks such
as expertise finding, trend spotting and identification of dynamic communities
inside an organisation. In order to prove its usefulness for knowledge management the approach has been integrated into a knowledge management system
aimed at capturing and sharing knowledge exchanged during informal communication exchanges (meetings, chats, etc.): this has provided clear scenarios of
usage, which will be helpful to understand whether semantic dynamic user profiling increases efficiency and efficacy in expert finding and trend spotting tasks.
The knowledge management framework adopts semantic user profiling to capture content from numerous informal communication exchanges such as emails,
meeting recordings and minutes etc.; these are then visualised using SimNET
(Similarity and Network Exploration Tool), a tool for exploring and searching
over socio-centric content, that interactively displays content and users networks
as part of the searching and browsing capabilities provided by the knowledge
management system. Section 5.1 introduces SimNET, whilst section 5.2 introduces two scenarios of usage of the knowledge management system within a large
organisation. The scenarios are presented to highlight the capabilities and usefulness of the approach; an evaluation of the expert finding and trend analysis
tasks is scheduled for the coming months.

5.1 Semantic Network Visualisation

SimNET is a dynamic and real-time filtering interface that offers multiple visualisations for knowledge extracted from user generated content, using classical
techniques such as node-Link diagrams [12,29], force-directed layouts [16],[34],
radial layouts [36] (as shown in Figure 1) and tag clouds (detail of a tag cloud
in Figure 3). SimNET has been built as a flexible visualisation tool to explore
socio-centric content using the most suitable visualisation for the undertaken
task. Radial visualization is provided to focus on the interactions between users,
while force-directed layout is provided to support by-topic knowledge exploration
and trends observation. SimNET has two main interaction paradigms - email visualisation and similarity visualisation. The users are initially presented with
an interface that visualises email interactions and a tag cloud describing all the
concepts. The users can then choose between a radial or a force-directed layout
according to the task and can use filtering and searching widgets to focus the
exploration of the dataset. For example, when clicking on concepts in the tag
cloud relevant emails are highlighted in the radial layout and vice versa. Users
can also select to visualise similarities by clicking on Plot Similarity. The radial
graph is updated to show the similarities as edges between nodes. These edges
are colour coded to signify the similarity among the connecting nodes. The interface provides the users with a similarity slider, which can be dragged to set a
similarity threshold for showing edges and a date range selection bar, to explore
the network evolution over time.

Providing visualisation capabilities is critical for making sense of user profiles,

topics and similarities as it allows users to access and manipulate knowledge.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. SimNET, Similarity and Network Exploration Tool

5.2 Scenarios of Use

Expertise Finding. Our system supports the task of finding an expert for a
given topic in multiple ways. For example a user may browse the tag cloud or perform a specific query. The system will then plot the results using a force-directed
or a radial layout and the user will be able to interact with the visualisation to
explore it and highlight users that are experts on that specific topic. This is
very important as it addresses the long tail of information, allowing to discover
expertise for topics that are not well known or for which not many people are
knowledgeable. It is even more important when applied to large and dynamic
organisation where the number of users is very high and it is very likely that they
do not know each other and they are not aware of who are the current experts
on certain topics, who are similar users to involve in a certain activity. Having
a system that highlights the long-tail of information allows sharing knowledge
in a more efficient manner; for example if a user working in a big organization
is looking for information of a common and well-known topic within her/his department almost everyone in her/his group will be able to answer her request,
whilst if looking for more obscure information that is interdisciplinary, people
in the same department may not know the answer. In such a case a system that
allows to discover expertise tailoring the short and long tail of information is
invaluable as it quickly highlights people in the organisations for quick help.

Expertise Trend Analysis. When wanting to understand the expertise of a
group of people or emerging topic trends inside a dynamic organisation it could
be helpful to plot all the topics accordingly to their relevance. Figure 2 refers
to the 25 users of the experiment shown in section 4. It shows a number of
topics discussed within the research group (as extracted from mlDataset). The
concepts closer to the central node Oak are the ones shared by the majority of
users, while nodes on the outer circle (randomly picked) are concepts shared by

A.L. Gentile et al.

Fig. 2. A force-directed layout to highlight the expertise of the group

Fig. 3. Tag clouds generated over two different period of time in the mlDataset

a small number of people (2 or 3). For example, Figure 2 clearly highlights the
emerging topics in the group as {Semantics, Wiki, Emoticon, Technology, User
(computing), Week, Semantic Web, Server (computing), HTML, Google}, but
also allows to identify topics that are emerging or have less wide-spread and more
specific expertise such as {Industry, Semantics, Semantic similarity, Javascript,
Debate, Vegetarianism, Marie Curie, resource Description Framework, Wireless,
Shoe, Chocolate}.

By using temporal filtering on the data it is also possible to study the trends
evolution over time and the hot topics during a certain period. Figure 3 shows
the topics discussed in July 2010 and in March 2011 (from mlDataset); the data
?

?

?
tag cloud visualisation helps discovering that in one period there were discussions
e.g. about Augmented Reality and about Facebook on the other.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

This paper proposed an approach to automatically and dynamically model user
expertise from informal communication exchanges. The main novelty of our
approach consists of generating semantic user profiles from emails (and more
generally from any textual user generated content) guaranteeing flexibility, dynamicity and providing ways to connect these data with Linked Open Data
(LOD). Whilst linked data have not been exploited in the current work, future
work will consider semantic concept expansions, enriching user profiles by exploring the LOD cloud starting from concepts within the profiles. Indeed, the
actual concepts in each profile are dbpedia5 objects, therefore already highly
connected to the LOD cloud6.

Extracting information from informal communication exchanges could be
hugely beneficial for knowledge management inside an organisation, as it offers
means to recover buried knowledge without any additional effort from the individuals and respecting their natural communication patterns. In order to prove
and evaluate the possible benefits for knowledge management the approach has
been integrated in a knowledge management system aimed at capturing and
sharing knowledge gathered from informal communication exchanges (meetings,
chats, etc.) that dynamically builds user networks, determines experts and communities of practice and identifies emerging topics, mirroring the natural evolution of the organisational communities and displays it in an interactive interface
that provides means to access and manipulate knowledge. Further evaluations of
the approach will be conducted shortly with users to test whether the approach
provides advantages over standard knowledge management practices. During this
evaluation, attention will be given as whether the approach increases efficiency
and efficacy for a given task by presenting in a visual way trends and topics of
expertise and providing means to search for experts inside the organisation.

Acknowledgments. A.L Gentile and V. Lanfranchi are funded by SILOET
(Strategic Investment in Low Carbon Engine Technology), a TSB-funded project.
S. Mazumdar is funded by Samulet (Strategic Affordable Manufacturing in the
UK through Leading Environmental Technologies), a project partially supported
by TSB and from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council.
