 

DC Proposal: Decision Support Methods in  

Community-Driven Knowledge Curation Platforms 

Razan Paul 

School of ITEE, The University of Queensland, 

St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia 
razan.paul@uq.edu.au 

Abstract. Skeletal dysplasias comprise a group of genetic diseases characterized 
by  highly  complex,  heterogeneous  and  sparse  data.  Performing  efficient  and 
automated knowledge discovery in this domain poses serious challenges, one of 
the  main  issues  being  the  lack  of  a  proper  formalization.  Semantic  Web 
technologies  can,  however,  provide  the  appropriate  means  for  encoding  the 
knowledge and hence enabling complex forms of reasoning. We aim to develop 
decision  support  methods  in  the  skeletal  dysplasia  domain  by  applying 
uncertainty  reasoning  over  Semantic  Web  data.  More  specifically,  we  devise 
techniques  for  semi-automated  diagnosis  and  key  disease  feature  inferencing 
from  an  existing  pool  of  patient  cases    that  are  shared  and  discussed  in  the 
SKELETOME community-driven knowledge curation platform. The outcome of 
our research will enable clinicians and researchers to acquire a critical mass of 
structured  knowledge  that  will  sustain  a  better  understanding  of  these  genetic 
diseases and foster advances in the field. 

Keywords: Decision Support Methods, Semantic Web, Skeletal Dysplasias. 

1   Background and Problem Statement 

Skeletal dysplasias are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders affecting skeletal 
development. Currently, there are over 450 recognized bone dysplasias, structured in 
40  groups.  Patients  with  skeletal  dysplasias  have  complex  medical  issues  including 
short stature, bowed legs, a larger than average head and neurological complications. 
However,  since  most  skeletal  dysplasias  are  very  rare  (<1:10,000  births),  data  on 
clinical presentation, natural history and best management practices is sparse. Another 
reason for data sparseness is the small number of phenotypic characteristics typically 
exhibited  by  patients  from  the  large  range  of  possible  phenotypic  and  radiographic 
characteristics  usually  associated  with  these  diseases.  Due  to  the  rarity  of  these 
conditions and the lack of mature domain knowledge, correct diagnosis is often very 
difficult.  In  addition,  only  a  few  centers  worldwide  have  expertise  in  the  diagnosis 
and management of these disorders. As there are no defined guidelines, the diagnosis 
of new cases relies strictly on parallels to past case studies.  

Medical decision support systems can assist clinicians and researchers both in the 
research of skeletal dysplasias, as well as in the decision making process. However, 
the  absence  of  mature  domain  knowledge  and  a  lack  of  well  documented,  well 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 7032, pp. 333340, 2011. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011 

R. Paul 

structured  past  cases  has  hindered  the  development  of  decision  support  methods. 
Additionally, the general sparseness and disperse nature of skeletal dysplasia data has 
limited  the  development  and  availability  of  authoritative  databases  via  the  leading 
clinical and research centres. To make diagnoses, improve understanding and identify 
best  treatments,  clinicians  need  to  analyze  historical  dysplasia  patient  data,  verify 
known  facts  and  relationships  and  discover  new  and  previously  unknown  facts  and 
relationships  among  the  phenotypic,  radiographic  and  genetic  attributes  associated 
with existing and new cases. In order to do this, they currently need to query many 
heterogeneous data sources and to effectively aggregate diverse types of data relating 
to phenotypic, radiographic and genetic observations. This integration step represents 
a significant challenge due to the extreme heterogeneity of the data models, metadata 
schemas  and  vocabularies,  data  formats  and  inconsistencies  in  naming  and 
identification conventions. 

The  above-mentioned  issues  also  limit  the  potential  of  successfully  applying 
existing or traditional knowledge representation and decision support methods, such 
as Rule Based Systems [1], Neural networks [2], Fuzzy cognitive maps (FCMs) [3], 
Fuzzy Rule based classification [4] or Clustering algorithms [4], to the bone dysplasia 
domain. Creating a decision support model (e.g., a rule base) requires a set of wellestablished  data  models,  data  acquisition  guidelines  and  mature  domain  knowledge. 
In this domain, clinicians have to diagnose patients with little or no similarity to past 
cases  this requires the generation of  new evidence by combining existing evidence. 
This  scenario  combined  with  the  general  data  scarcity  issue  has  determined  that 
distributed ontology reasoning [5] is a necessity within the skeletal dysplasia domain. 
Finally, because the study and understanding of  skeletal dysplasias is still relatively 
immature,  the  justifications  underpinning  the  decisions  and  the  decision  support 
methods,  also  need  to  be  documented.  All  these  elements  make  the  knowledge 
representation  and  decision  support  methods  in  the  bone  dysplasia  domain  a  very 
exciting and potentially productive area of research. 

2   Aim and Objectives 

Our  hypothesis  is  that  representing  both  the  knowledge  and  the  data  via  Semantic 
Web formalisms, together  with the application of inductive and statistical reasoning 
on  the  resulting  knowledge  base,  can  support  the  development  of  efficient  decision 
support methods in the skeletal dysplasia domain. More specifically, such approaches 
will enable the inferencing of key disease features from an existing pool of patients 
and the semi-automated diagnosis of the specific disease affecting new patients. This 
hypothesis can be further decomposed into the following research questions: 

1.  How  can  the  generalized  evidential  statements  (evidences),  including  their 
probabilistic  uncertainties,  be  induced  from  existing  patient  cases  stored  in  a 
Semantic Web knowledge base? 

2.  How  can  we  efficiently  build  a  comprehensive  ontology  that  is  capable  of 

capturing the induced generalized evidences? 

3.  How can the probabilistic uncertainty of an evidential statement be incorporated 
to improve the precision of both the evidence learning (inductive reasoning) and 
the statistical reasoning? 

 
?

?

?
4.  How can the diagnosis of an undiagnosed skeletal dysplasia patient and the key 
features  of  a  particular  dysplasia  be  determined  using  the  induced  generalized 
evidential statements (including the associated justification)? 

5.  What  is  the  optimum  approach  for  combining  existing  skeletal  dysplasia 

evidential statements to form new evidence? 

In  order  to  answer  these  research  questions,  this  thesis  will  aim  to  achieve  the 
following objectives: 

a)  The  development  of  an  ontology  to  store  generalized  evidential  statements 

b) 

(evidences) that lay the foundation for further reasoning tasks. 
Inducing  the  generalized knowledge (evidences)  from the  existing patient cases 
and encoding this knowledge in an interoperable manner. 

c)  Reasoning with this induced generalized knowledge to develop decision support 
methods.  Instead  of  relying  on  a  mature  domain  knowledge,  or  approach  is  to 
determine solutions directly from similar past examples. Our reasoning approach 
will  utilize  the  generalized  and  inductive  knowledge  of  past  cases,  concrete 
problem  situations  (new  cases)  and  combine  the  learned  knowledge  from  past 
cases to form new knowledge that will assist in solving specific problems. 

3   Related Work 

Existing online knowledge bases, such as the European Skeletal Dysplasia Network 
(ESDN)  (www.esdn.org)  and  the  Queensland  Bone  Dysplasia  Registry  (QBDR) 
(http://qbdc.org/bone-dysplasia-registry/)  are 
ideal  approaches  for  encouraging 
community-driven content exchange and curation. However, the underlying content is 
static,  lacks  formally  defined  semantics,  and  lacks  decision  support  methods,  thus 
making it difficult for the content to be reused, reasoned across and recombined for 
different purposes. 

Most  prior  work  in  representing  generalized  knowledge  for  medical  decision 
support  methods  [1-4,  6]  use  some  non-standard  formalisms  or  proprietary  formats 
which hinder integration, interoperability and efficient knowledge reasoning. They also 
lead to unjustified results by fusing all generalized knowledge into a black box system 
or assume a mature established domain knowledge. Moreover, some of these previous 
methods  cannot  evolve  over  time,  due  to  their  shallow  knowledge  representation 
formalisms.  Case-based  reasoning  [6],  on  the  other  hand,  cannot  combine  past 
evidences to form a new evidence for a given problem where no past similar evidence 
exists.  This  scenario  is  typical  for  rare  diseases  like  skeletal  dysplasias.  It  also  uses 
non-generalized evidences, which does not guarantee correctness. 

Rule based systems [1] and fuzzy rule-based classification [4] use exact matching 
on rules built on mature and established domain knowledge - which is inapplicable in 
a domain that suffers from data sparseness. The neural network approach [2], cannot 
provide justification for the resulting knowledge because it fuses all the evidence into 
the  internal  weights,  whereas  in  the  skeletal  dysplasia  domain,  justification  is  very 
important  to  both  clinicians  and  researchers  in  order  to  understand  the  underlying 
causal elements.  

It  is  widely  accepted  that  uncertainty  is  an  indispensable  aspect  of  medical  data. 
Bayesian  reasoning  [7],  a  widely  used  probability  formalism,  presents  issues  when 

R. Paul 

applied in this domain due to the estimation of the prior and conditional probabilities.  
Fuzzy  sets are commonly used models to  manage  vagueness and imprecision in the 
medical  domain  [8].  Dempster-Shafer  theory  [9]  is  an  alternative  to  representing 
probabilistic uncertainty mathematically. This is a potentially valuable tool to be used 
in the decision making process when precise knowledge is missing [9]. An important 
aspect of this theory is the combination of evidence obtained from  multiple sources 
with  the  computation  of  a  degree  of  belief  that  takes  into  account  all  the  available 
evidence.  Finally,  as  opposed  to  Bayesian  reasoning,  Dempster-Shafer  theory  does 
not require an estimation of the prior and conditional probabilities of  the individual 
constituents of the set. 

Todays decision support systems require the automatic integration of knowledge 
from multiple sources. However, the lack of interoperability and standard formalisms 
impede  these  systems  to  take  advantage  of  the  connectivity  provided  by  the  Web.   
Decision  support  systems  [10,  11]    using  Semantic  Web  standards  are  being 
developed to overcome the above challenges. Semantic Web rule-based reasoning has 
been used for domain specific decision support methods, for example, in the Ambient 
Intelligence domain [12]. However, such approaches cannot make use of underlying 
trends  in  instance  data  that  have  not  been  encoded  as  ontological  background 
knowledge  and  cannot  handle  probabilistic  uncertainties  within  the  knowledge. 
Moreover,  they  cannot  form  new  evidence  by  combining  existing  evidence  via 
reasoning, where there exist no prior examples. 

A  recent  related  effort  [11]  presents  a  novel  fuzzy  expert  system  for  a  diabetes 
decision support application using a 5-layer fuzzy ontology and a semantic decision 
support agent. However, as with its predecessors, this system also depends on mature 
and established domain knowledge, and uses fuzzy rule-based reasoning [13], which 
follows an exact matching approach. 

Medical decision support systems have emerged from the co-evolution of research 
in decision support systems and medical informatics. In [14], a Semantic Web based 
Clinical  Decision  Support  System 
to  provide  evidence-guided 
recommendations for follow-up after treatment for Breast Cancer. ControlSem [15], a 
medical  decision  support  system  using  Semantic  Web  technologies,  was  developed 
with the goal of controlling medical procedures. Similarly, in [16], the authors present 
a medical expert system for heart failure. These expert systems use general purpose 
rule  base  reasoning  (deductive  reasoning)  [13]  because  the  underlying  domain  has 
well-defined rules and a mature background knowledge. 

is  presented 

4   Research Plan 

We  aim  to  develop  decision  support  methods  via  an  ontology-based  interoperable 
framework  tailored  towards  the  skeletal  dysplasia  domain.  This  research  combines 
ontological techniques with inductive and statistical reasoning techniques, and will be 
integrated within the SKELETOME1 community-driven knowledge curation platform. 
Figure 1 presents the high level building blocks of the framework. The SKELETOME 
ontology2, developed to capture the essential knowledge of skeletal dysplasia domain, 
                                                           
1  http://itee.uq.edu.au/~eresearch/projects/skeletome/ 
2  http://purl.org/skeletome/bonedysplasia 

 
?

?

?
is  a  foundational  prerequisite  of  our  framework.  While  the  SKELETOME  ontology 
stores  past  and  newly  emerging  patient  cases,  the  Evidence  ontology  stores 
generalized evidences. Taking into account the lack of mature domain knowledge, the 
evidence  extraction  process  induces  generalized  evidences  from  the  existing  patient 
cases and encodes the resulting knowledge in the Evidence ontology.  Reasoning over 
the  induced  generalized  evidences  enables  the  development  of  the  targeted  decision 
support methods, i.e., automated diagnosis and identification of key disease features. 

Fig. 1. Research methodology  building blocks 

 

SKELETOME  Ontology:  The  main  role  of  the  SKELETOME  Ontology  is  to 
improve the highly static and rigid format of the ISDS Nosology [17], by enabling a 
more  flexible  classification  of  the  disorders  and  integration  with  existing  Web 
resources, such as the Gene Ontology, the Human Phenotype Ontology and the NCI 
Thesaurus.  This  ontology  captures  the  complex  relations  between  the  phenotypic, 
radiographic and genetic elements that characterize all skeletal dysplasias. 
 
Evidence  Ontology:  The  Evidence  Ontology  models  uncertainty  (both  fuzzy  / 
vagueness  and  probabilistic  uncertainty)  by  re-using  concepts  from  Fuzzy  Theory, 
such  as  fuzzy  value,  fuzzy  variable,  fuzzy  set,  membership  value,  fuzzy  term  and 
probabilistic  uncertainty.  It  enables  the  representation  of  uncertain  generalized 
evidences and helps to simplify uncertain knowledge representation in OWL.  OWL 
cannot  encode  Fuzzy  and  probabilistic  uncertainty  semantics.  The  crisp  syntax  of 
OWL DL will be used with the Evidence ontology to enable the encoding of Fuzzy 
and probabilistic uncertainty semantics. 

Evidence  Extraction  Process:  Generalized  evidence  extraction  from  past  patient 
cases  stored  in  the  SKELETOME  ontology  is  a  crucial  prerequisite  for  the 
implementation  of  the  automated  diagnosis  and  key  feature  inference  capabilities. 
Without  the  extracted  evidence,  uncertainty  reasoning  cannot  be  performed.  The 
actual  extraction  process  will  use  Machine  Learning 
techniques,  and  more 
specifically, a level wise search algorithm [18] that is able to infer evidences from the 
instances of the SKELETOME ontology concepts, made available by domain experts. 
The effectiveness of the method will be evaluated empirically. An updating module 
will be developed to ensure the continuous synchronization of the Evidence ontology 
instance base with the current patient repository. 

Automated  Diagnosis  Reasoning:  Clinicians  can  determine,  to  a  level  of 
approximation, possible diseases based on the medical symptoms that the patient 
presents.  The  vagueness  (fuzziness)  of  medical  symptoms  is  modelled  by  the 

R. Paul 

fuzzy  set  concept  in  the  Evidence  ontology.  The  probabilistic  uncertainty  of  the 
medical  fact  is  modelled by  attaching  a confidence/conditional  probability  value 
to each evidence. The automated diagnosis will infer a possible skeletal dysplasia 
based  on  a  set of  symptoms  using  DempsterShafer  theory  and  fuzzy  set  theory 
(see Fig. 2). Generalized evidences are represented using the Evidence ontology, 
stored in the SKELETOME knowledge base and include probabilistic uncertainty 
values  based  on  existing  phenotype,  radiographic  and  genetic  information.  The 
candidate hypothesis for an undiagnosed patient will be computed via reasoning. 
DempsterShafer  theory  will  then  be  applied  to  the  set  of  patient  symptoms  to 
determine the diagnosis based on the evidence stored in Evidence. In our case, the 
DempsterShafer  calculation  will  only  consider  fuzzy  terms,  linguistic  variables 
and probabilistic uncertainty, excluding the membership value of each fuzzy term.  

 

Fig. 2. Automated diagnosis reasoning based on a set of symptoms 

Key Feature Reasoning: A key feature is a feature that is deemed highly characteristic 
of  a  specific  skeletal  dysplasia  (for  example,  short  fingers  are  a  characteristic  of 
Platyspondylic  Lethal  skeletal  dysplasia).  Inferring  the  key  feature  of  a  skeletal 
dysplasia from diverse phenotypic or genetic information is critical for the diagnosis of 
new patients. To determine such key features, our algorithm (depicted in Fig. 3) firstly 
determines  the  candidate  hypotheses  from  the  evidence  stored  in  the  Evidence 
Ontology.  Then  it  applies  domain-oriented  ranking  functions  on  the  candidate 
hypotheses and presents the top K to the clinician using the system. 

Fig. 3. Finding the Key Feature of a Dysplasia 

 

5   Evaluation 

The results of our research will be evaluated empirically. The patient cases used for 
evaluation will be collected from the ESDN and the QBDR - 90% of the cases will be 
used to construct our knowledge base, while the rest will act as test cases.  
Evaluating the Decision Support Methods: The decision support  methods  will be 
evaluated  on  the  basis  of  following  criteria:  (1)  Decision-Making  Effectiveness;  (2) 

 
?

?

?
Performance; (3) Ease of use and understating; (4) Scalability. Effectiveness will be 
measured using experimental methods combined with a usability study. Three metrics 
will  be  used  to  assess  effectiveness:  Accuracy,  Precision  and  Recall.  For  the 
automated diagnosis aspect: Accuracy is the overall percentage of correctly diagnosed 
cases;  Precision is the percentage of the correct diagnoses of a particular dysplasia; 
and  Recall  is  the  percentage  of  cases  of  a  particular  dysplasia  that  were  correctly 
identified. For the key feature reasoning aspect: Accuracy is the overall percentage of 
correctly  extracted  features;  Precision  is  the  percentage  of  correctly  selected  key 
features  and  Recall  is  the  percentage  of  dysplasias  associated  with  a  particular  key 
feature  that  were  correctly  identified.  To  measure  the  performance  of  the  decision 
methods,  the  following  metrics  will  be  used:  Run  time,  Load  time,  Memory  usage 
(main memory), and Memory usage (disk storage). The ease of use and understanding 
will be determined via a questionnaire with Likert-scale answers. We will define the 
testing environment and set of tasks to be performed by the participants. Observation 
data  will  also  be  collected  from  the  usability  study  and  used  to  complement  to 
questionnaire.  Scalability  will  measure  how  the  methods  scale  as  the  number  of 
patients  in  the  KB  increases.  We  will  test  our  decision  support  methods  against  a 
number of different sized instance datasets and observe the changes in response times. 
Evaluating  the  Evidence  Ontology:  Task-based  evaluations  [19]  will  be  used  to 
measure the generalized uncertain evidence representation capability of the Evidence 
ontology. A set of use-cases, formulated as parameterized test questions and answer 
keys  will  be  leveraged  to  characterize  the  ontology  in  terms  of  accuracy,  insertion 
errors, deletion errors and substitution errors. 
Evaluation of the Evidence Extraction Process: To quantitatively assess the quality 
of the evidence extraction process, we will measure the evidence retrievability (recall) 
[20] and the evidence spuriousness (precision) [20]. Evidence retrievability measures 
how  well  the  underlying  trends  in  past  data  have  been  discovered.  Although 
retrievability provides a good estimate of the fraction of detected patterns in the data, 
it does not provide an estimate of the quality of the found patterns. The quality of a 
pattern will be measured using spuriousness, which quantifies the number of items in 
the pattern that are not associated with the matching base pattern. 

 

 

6   Conclusions 

No  prior  research  has  investigated  knowledge  integration  and  decision  support 
methods  for  the  skeletal  dysplasia  domain  -  although  it  suffers  from  two  important 
problems:  (1)  existing  data  is  represented  in  a  heterogeneous  and  non-interoperable 
manner,  and  (2)  there  are  no  mechanisms  for  building  a  consolidated  and  evolving 
knowledge base to support the decision making process. Our proposed research aims 
to address these problems by (1) using Semantic Web standards to formalize both the 
knowledge and data in the domain; (2) developing decision support methods based on 
past  patient  case  studies,  combined  evidence  and  aggregated  knowledge  discovery. 
We  believe  that  this  research  will  advance  the  knowledge  of  the  skeletal  dysplasia 
community and expedite their understanding and diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias. 

Acknowledgments. The work presented in this paper is supported by the Australian 
Research Council (ARC) under the Linkage grant SKELETOME - LP100100156. 

R. Paul 
