Geographical Linked Data: a Spanish Use Case

Alexander de Leon

OEG-DIA

Facultad de Informatica

aleon@fi.upm.es

Boris Villazon-Terrazas

OEG-DIA

Facultad de Informatica

Victor Saquicela

OEG-DIA

Facultad de Informatica

vsaquicela@fi.upm.es
Freddy Priyatna

OEG-DIA

Facultad de Informatica

Luis M. Vilches

OEG-DIA

Facultad de Informatica

lmvilches@fi.upm.es

Oscar Corcho

OEG-DIA

Facultad de Informatica

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid

bvillazon@fi.upm.es

fpriyatna@fi.upm.es

ocorcho@fi.upm.es

ABSTRACT
We present the process that has been followed for the development of an application that makes use of several heterogeneous Spanish public datasets that are related to adminis-
trative, hydrographic, and statistical domains. Our application aims at analysing existing relations between the Spanish coastal area and different statistical variables such as
unemployment, population, dwelling, industry, and building
trade. Moreover, we provide an important innovation with
respect to other similar processes followed in other initiatives
by dealing with the geometrical information of features.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Miscellaneous;
E.2 [Data storage representations]: Linked Representa-
tions

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
linked data, linked government data
1.

INTRODUCTION

The rise of the Open Data Movement has contributed significantly to the growth of the Web of Data in the last years.
This Web has started to span data sources form a wide range
of domains such as people, companies, music, scientific pub-
lications, etc. Technically, Linked Data is about employing the RDF language and the HTTP protocol to publish
structured data on the Web and to effectively connect data
between different data sources through deferenceable URIs
[3]. Data published this way is machine-readable and its

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS Triplification Challenge 2010 Graz, Austria
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09 ...$10.00.

semantics is explicitly defined [2]. The transformation and
publication of the OpenStreetMap [1] and Ordnance Survey
[6] data according to the Linked Data principles have added
a new dimension to the Web of Data. However, none of them
deal with complex geospatial information, they just manage
every resource as a point (represented by a coordinate of
latitude and longitude), while we deal with these coordinate
types and more complex geometry (LineString).

GeoLinked Data1 is an open initiative whose aim is to enrich the Web of Data with Spanish geospatial data. This
initiative has started off by publishing diverse information
sources belonging to the National Geographic Institute of
Spain2 (IGN-E), and the National Statistic Institute in Spain3
(INE). Such resources are made available as RDF knowledge
bases according to the Linked Data principles.

This paper describes the process that has been followed
for the development of an application that combines these
diverse Spanish public datasets so that relationships can be
inferred amongst these data. The goal of the application is
to analyze existing possible relations in the Spanish coastal
area and different statistical variables such as unemploy-
ment, population, dwelling, industry, and building trade.
By this way, Open Government Data should help us to know
how seasonal employment changes in these places of Spain,
a country where tourism is a very important sector for the
economy. Additionally, the application deals with the geometrical information of features, so that spatial data can be
extrapolated to the development of similar applications.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
explains the process we followed for the generation of linked
data, and Section 3 presents the conclusions and future
work.
2. A PROCESS FOR PUBLISHING LINKED

GOVERNMENT DATA

In this section we present the process that we have followed for generating and publishing linked data from open
government datasets. The process consists of (1) identification of the data sources, (2) generation of the ontology
model, (3) generation of the RDF data, (4) alignment of the
datasets, and (5) visualization the data. Next, we describe
briefly each one of them.

http://geo.linkeddata.es/

http://www.ign.es

htpp://www.ine.es


We have searched for open government information at the
two institutions that we have referred to in the introduc-
tion: INE and IGN-E. Both INE and IGN-E are providers
of Spanish official statistical and geographical information,
respectively. Table 2.1 depicts the datasets that we have chosen for this application, together with the format in which
they are available. All the datasets correspond to Spain, so
their content is available in Spanish or in any of the other
official languages in Spain (Basque, Catalan and Galician).

Table 1: Datasets

Data

Provenance

Format

Population

Dwelling

Industry

Building Trade

Spreadsheet

Spreadsheet

Spreadsheet

Spreadsheet

Hydrography

IGN-E

Relational database

(rivers, lake, etc)

(Oracle)

Beaches

IGN-E

Relational database

(MySQL)

Administrative

IGN-E

Relational database

boundaries

(MySQL)

2.2 Ontology modelling

Our chosen datasets contain information such as time, administrative boundaries, unemployment, etc. For modelling
of the information contained in the datasets we have created
an ontology network [7]. This network has been developed
following the NeOn Methodology [11], by reusing existing
ontologies and vocabularies. Next, we describe briefly each
one the ontologies that compose this network.

For describing complex statistics, we chose the Statistical Core Vocabulary (SCOVO) [8], which provides an
expressive modelling framework for statistical information.
This vocabulary4 is currently defined in RDF(S) and terms
and labels are provided in English. Regarding geospatial
vocabulary we chose diverse ontologies.

 The FAO Geopolitical Ontology5. This OWL ontology includes information about continents, coun-
tries, and so on, in the English language. We have
extended it to cover the main characteristics of the
Spanish administrative division.

 Regarding the hydrographical phenomena (rivers, lakes,
etc.) we chose hydrOntology [4], an OWL ontology
that attempts to cover most of the concepts of the hydrographical domain.

 With respect to geometrical representation and positioning we reuse the GML Ontology6 and the WSG84
Vocabulary7.

Regarding the time information we chose the Time Ontol-
ogy8, an ontology for temporal concepts.

Taking into account that the SCOVO and the FAO Geopolitical ontologies were available in the English language, we

http://purl.org/NET/scovo

http://www.fao.org/countryprofiles/geoinfo.asp?lang=en

http://loki.cae.drexel.edu/~wbs/ontology/2004/09/ogc-gml.owl

http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos

http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/

have used the LabelTranslator system [5] to carry out the
task of ontology localization. We use LabelTranslator for
translating classes and properties of these ontologies to Span-
ish.
2.3 Generation of the RDF data

Given the different formats in which the selected datasets
were available, we used two different systems for the conversion of data into RDF. Next we describe some details of
both of them.

The generation of RDF from spreadsheets was performed
using the NOR2O [12] software library. This library performs an Extract, Transform, and Load (ETL) process of
the legacy data sources, transforming these non-ontological
resources (NORs) [12] into ontology instances.

The transformation of the relational database content into
RDF was done using the integrated framework R2O+ and
ODEMapster+ [10], which is available as a NeOn Toolkit
plugin9. This framework allows the formal specification,
evaluation, verification and exploitation of semantic mappings between ontologies and relational databases.
2.4 Creation of RDF from geometrical infor-

mation

Next we describe our approach for transforming geomet-

rical information into RDF (see Figure 1).

We rely on Oracle STO UTIL package for transforming
the geometrical data stored in the original databases into
GML10.

The next step is to convert the generated GML into RDF.
For this purpose we have developed a software library, GE-
OMETRYtoRDF, which defines a set of RDF triples for geometrical information. The GML generated in the previous
steps is manipulated with GeoTools11, an open source Java
Library that provides tools for geospatial data. Finally, we
use Jena12 to generate the final geospatial RDF.

Figure 1: Transformation of the geospatial information into

The RDF generated is compliant with the WSG84 vocabulary and the GML contology. Figure 2 illustrates the
resource that describes the Ebro river, together with its related geometrical information.
2.5 Alignment of the datasets

The process of aligning the datasets relied on the correct
identification of owl:sameAs relationships between administrative units and statistical information. This process is

http://www.neon-toolkit.org
Geography Markup Language

http://www.opengeospatial.org/

standards/gml

http://www.geotools.org/

http://jena.sourceforge.net/


other knowledge bases belonging to the Linking Open Initia-
tive, mainly DBpedia and GeoNames. Moreover, we will also
continue publishing GeoLinked Data on the Web for other
domains and providers, and improve our faceted browser.
Finally, we plan to cover complex geometrical information,
i.e. not only Point and LineString-like data; but also polygons and other geometrical representation types.
4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported by the R&D project Espa na
Virtual, funded by Centro Nacional de Informaci on Geogr a-
fica and CDTI under the R&D programme Ingenio 2010, as
well as by an R+D grant from the UPM. We would like to
kindly thanks Miguel Angel Garc a and Ra ul Alc azar.
5. ADDITIONAL AUTHORS

Additional authors: Carlos Buil (OEG-DIA, F.I., U.P.M.,

email: cbuil@fi.upm.es), Jos e Mora (OEG-DIA, F.I., U.P.M.,
email: jmora@fi.upm.es) and Jean Paul Calbimonte (OEG-
