SESAME Demonstrator: Ontologies, Services and Policies 

for Energy Efficiency 

Slobodanka Tomic  
FTW Telecommunications  
Research Center Vienna 

0043 1 505 2830 54 

tomic@ftw.at 

Donau-City Strasse 1, A-1220 Vienna 

 Donau-City Strasse 1, A-1220 Vienna 

Anna Fensel 

FTW Telecommunications  
Research Center Vienna 

0043 1 505 2830 45 
fensel@ftw.at  

Tassilo Pellegrini 

Semantic Web Company 
Lerchenfeldergurtel 43 

A-1160 Vienna 
0043 1 8974122 

t.pellegrini@semantic-web.at 

ABSTRACT 
The  project  SESAME  uses  semantic  modeling  and  reasoning  to 
support home owners and building managers in saving energy and 
in optimizing their energy costs while maintaining their preferred 
quality  of  living.  We  design  a  semantic  layer  for  a  technical 
solution  that  integrates  smart  metering,  building  automation  and 
policy-based  reasoning  in  order  to  offer  an  energy-optimization 
capability for the energy consumer and provider. Semantics plays 
a crucial role in binding information coming from the automation 
domain,  energy  management  domain  and  in  modeling  user 
preferences  and rules.  Proposed concepts are implemented  in an 
extensible  demonstrator  platform  which  provides  a  proof-of-
concept for an innovative technical solution. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.4.4 [Information Systems]: Information Systems Application.  
General Terms 
Semantics.  
Keywords 
Smart Metering, Building Automation, Energy Efficiency, Sensor 
Networks,  Ontologies,  Policy  Based  Reasoning,  Knowledge 
Capture, Knowledge Management. 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
       Systems  for  home  and  building  automation  can  offer 
significant  contribution 
to  energy  conservation  -  currently 
potential savings are estimated to 35%1 - while also providing for 
an  intrusion  detection,  pollution  reduction  and  environment 
protection. The energy and cost saving potential of such systems 
could  be  further  improved  if  automation  actions  could  be  made 
energy-aware, that is, aware of information such as consumption 
habits,  power  load,  energy  tariffs,  etc.  The  smart  (advanced) 
metering concept2 (AMI) which is based on the new infrastructure 

1 ICT EC Report, Impacts of ICT on Energy Efficiency, 2008, 

http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/sustainable-
growth/studies_en.html.  

2 Smart Metering Industry Group, www.esmig.eu/smart-metering. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS 2010, September 1-3, 2010 Graz, Austria Copyright  
ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09... $10.00 

of ubiquitously deployed energy meters, and devices that collect 
and process metering information, provides the basis for energy-
awareness.  In  order  to  integrate  a  smart  metering  system  with  a 
building automation system, the requirements from two different 
domains  need to  be understood: (i)  the customer domain, which 
hosts  all  the  home  appliances  and  devices  and  should  be 
responsive  to  user  needs  and  preferences,  and  (ii)  the  energy 
domain  which  is  responsible  to  supply  power  to  the  user  and 
define differing tariff models. According to the current practices 
the  energy  domain  also  includes  the  advanced  energy  meters 
which  are  under  exclusive  control  of  an  external  AMI  operator. 
These two domains - the user domain and the energy domain - can 
interact  in  different  ways.  For  example,  the  building  automation 
system  could  receive  metering  data  by  subscribing  to  a  remote 
AMI  information  provider  (publisher),  e.g.,  through  a  Web 
service.  In  the  future,  the  energy  suppliers  may  also  offer 
dynamically  changing  energy-related  information,  such  as  tariff, 
to  govern  energy  use.  It  can  also  be  expected  that  a  building 
automation  system  could  in  the  future  take  over  the  reading  of 
potentially  multiple  meters  embedded  within  the  house,  hence 
becoming the source of metering information for the external use. 
Characteristic for all these scenarios is that we are dealing with an 
open  system  in  which  new  devices  and  new  information 
publishers/subscribers should be able to enter and integrate within 
the  system.  The  requirement  to  realize  a  flexible  open  system 
motivates  the  SESAME  project3,  which  uses  semantic  web 
technology, in particular ontology-based and rule-based modeling, 
combined with the multi-objective reasoning and service-oriented 
design to capture and realize functionality of future energy-aware 
home management systems.  
This paper describes the concepts which are implemented within 
the  SESAME  demonstrator.  The  paper  is  structured  as  follows: 
Section 2  describes  related work on semantic research  for smart 
homes;  Section  3  presents  the  components  of  the  SESAME 
approach  the system and service architecture, ontology and rule 
modeling; Section 4 concludes the paper also with an outlook on 
future work. 
2.  RELATED WORK 
        In the past years, research on modeling and implementation 
of  pervasive  environments  and  in  particular  smart  homes  has 
made  significant  advances.  Some  of  the  well  researched  topics 
include  (i) the  design of a  context-aware,  adaptable and  flexible 
middleware,  (ii)  the  service-oriented  functional  modeling,  (iii) 
agent  technology  for  implementing  interactions  in  environments 

3 SESAME project, sesame.ftw.at 


context-awareness  and  (v)  an  automated,  policy-based  decision 
making. A smart home is a heterogeneous dynamic system open 
for  easy  integration  of  many  different  devices  offering  different 
services  to  a  variety  of  users.  As  users  are  often  non-technical 
people, context aware or seamless operation on behalf of users is a 
critical usability requirement [1][2].  
Two  essential  requirements  for  building  context-aware  systems 
are a suitable context model and a middleware level support. The 
middleware  shall  deal  with  acquiring  context  form  physical 
sensors, databases and agents; and with context interpretation and 
timely  dissemination,  as  well  as  orchestration  of  more  complex 
context-aware services. The most prominent middleware platform 
in the smart home research is OSGI4 [3][4]. The ontology-based 
modeling,  as  a  central  concept  of  the  Semantic  Web,  has  been 
established as a technology of choice for context-aware and smart 
home  applications  [5],  due  to  its  benefits  including  knowledge 
sharing, logic inference of a high-level, conceptual context from 
low-level, raw context, and existing domain knowledge reuse. At 
present, Web Ontology Language (OWL) [6] is often preferred for 
specification  of  ontologies  because  of  its  expressiveness,  its 
capability 
to  support  semantic  interoperability  and  context 
knowledge  sharing,  as  well  as  because  it  enables  automated 
reasoning.  Protege5  and  Jena6  are  tools  well  established  for 
creation and processing of ontologies.  
Efficient context modeling in the smart home requires separation 
between general information, focused on users, tasks and higherlayer situations, and specific information from the devices that can 
support  these  tasks.  A  frequent  approach  is  to  have  a  common 
core  ontology  to  capture  general  context  knowledge,  while  the 
lower level ontologies plug in depending on the used devices and 
the environment. Accordingly, the semantic context representation 
in  the  smart  home  commonly  includes  the  basic  concepts  of 
person,  location,  computational  entity,  activity  or  function,  and 
the  properties  and 
these  concepts. 
[5][9][10]. Direct context is acquired from sensors or information 
servers or users. The higher-level context can be inferred from the 
lower-layer  context  by  using  inference  rules.  Therefore,  the 
support  for  reasoning,  in  particular  creation  and  management  of 
user specified policies is of a central interest, as also supported by 
general  studies  on  the  policy-aware  web  approach  [11][12]. 
Semantic  Web  Rule  Language  (SWRL)  is  increasingly  gaining 
attention in the smart home research community, as it acts as an 
inference enabler for services that adapt to the needs of the home 
inhabitants, through its back chain and forward chain rules [13]. 
At  present,  for  reasoning  with  policies  the  general  purpose 
reasoning engines based on Euler7, Pychinko8 or Pellet9 reasoners, 
can be used. 
Integrated  within  the  Service-Oriented  Architecture  (SOA),  the 
use  of  ontologies  facilitates  intelligent  service  discovery  and 
composition  [7][8].  The  concepts  of  SOA  support  dynamic 
discovery of available functions and their invocation in a loosely 
coupled  manner.  Several  SOA  approaches  emerged  for  the 

4 OSGi Service Platform, www.osgi.org. 
5 protege.stanford.edu 
6 jena.sourceforge.net/ 
7 eulersharp.sourceforge.net 
8 www.mindswap.org/~katz/pychinko 
9 clarkparsia.com/pellet 

relationships  between 

embedded  and automation domain including Universal Plug and 
Play (UPnP)10, Devices Profile for Web Services (DPWS)11, OPC 
Foundation12,  or  Service-Oriented  Architecture  for  Devices 
(SOA4D)13.  
3.  SESAME APPROACH  
        The SESAME project extends the existing research focusing 
on the ontology-based modeling and rule-based reasoning for the 
smart home controlled by the user, by addressing new challenges 
coming  from  the  required  interactions  between  the  user  domain 
and other stakeholders in the energy market. Recently integration 
of these domains has also been addressed by the EU FP7 Projects 
Intelligent  Self-describing  Technical 
and  Environmental 
Networks  (S-TEN)14  and  SmartHouse/SmartGrid  (SHSG)15.  To 
realize energy-efficient smart home that has the ability to interact 
with  the  external  information  and  control  systems  of  energy 
suppliers, AMI information providers, etc., SESAME approach is 
strongly  based  on  ontology  modeling,  rule-based  reasoning,  and 
service-oriented  interactions.  In  this  context  our  goal  is  also  to 
leverage  on  the  semantic  data  for  the  energy  domain  within  the 
Linked Open Data Initiative16. This Section describes system and 
service architecture, ontology, rules and user access. 
3.1 System Architecture  
The architecture of the system is illustrated in Figure 1. The core 
of the home system is a universal control box, or a home gateway 
on which the SESAME knowledgebase and service framework is 
deployed.  This  system 
integrates  home  devices,  sensors, 
appliances,  or  display  devices, 
through  wireless  or  wired 
interfaces.  The  smart  meter  deployed  in  the  home  is  controlled/ 
read through the Internet by the smart metering service provider 
that publishes metering information through a secure Web service. 

Smart 
meter

Gateway and

Universal Control  

Box

Smart Metering 

and 

Energy  Services

Home  Automation
and  Energy Services

Figure 1. SESAME System Architecture 

The  SESAME  approach  assumes  that  the  so-called  energy 
information  service  interface  will  be  established  between  the 
SESAME system and an energy suppliers systems. This interface 
offers access to relevant dynamically changing information such 
as tariff and updating of the knowledgebase. Changes in relevant 

10 www.upnp.org. 
11 www.ws4d.org 
12 www.opcfoundation.org. 
13 forge.soa4d.org 
14 www.s-ten.eu 
15 www.smarthouse-smartgrid.eu. 
16 en.openei.org/wiki/Main_Page 


to  guaranty 

information trigger automatic reasoning and automation actions at 
the user side. At present, to get benefit of such information users 
must actively search for it through a web browser interface, and 
act  on  it  by  configuring  their  home  devices  or  changing  their 
behavior according to offered tariffs. The SESAME system takes 
the burden form the users by defining service-based machine-to-
machine  interfaces  for  a  practical  realization  of  a  machineoptimized  access  to  information  of  different  providers.  We  also 
identify the need for the energy optimization services that should 
enable  the  users  and  energy  suppliers  to  make  joint  control 
decisions. For example, a control action such as switching on/off 
of a device can be triggered from the remote suppliers side. On 
the user side these actions may be constrained by a special set of 
user-defined  preferences 
that  user 
expectations are met.  
3.2 Service Architecture  
       Service orientation is a central design principle in realization 
of  the  SESAME  system.  The  SESAME  service  architecture  is 
based  on  the  OSGI  Knopflerfish  platform17.  Services  within  the 
framework provide different functionality at different interfaces as 
illustrated  in  Figure  2.  For  example,  the  smart-meter  data  is 
published  by  the  smart  metering  provider  through  an  external 
SOAP-based Web service. On the SESAME system side the Web 
service client invokes this service and updates the knowledgebase. 
Sensors, appliances and displays are also implemented as servicebased information publishers and consumers with published OSGI 
service interfaces. As a home automation system is inherently an 
event-based  system  each  service  interface  implements  also  a 
notification  passing  capability.  This  is  true  also  for  the  servicebased  interaction  between  the  user  and  the  energy  providers  or 
grid operators.  
The ontology is the core of the knowledgebase, which is an RDF 
store that hosts the instances of the model, and is populated with 
real  data  from  different  information  sources,  e.g.,  sensors, 
appliances,  the  user  profile,  energy  supplier  profile,  etc.  For  the 
implementation  of 
the  Jena 
framework. The ontology is also the basis for the creation of rules. 
To implement the rule-based reasoning we integrated Pellet as a 
reasoning engine within the OSGI framework and SWRL and N3 
format for specification of rules.  

the  knowledgebase  we  used 

Devices

User

Home

Automation 
Services

Home
Energy
Services

Knowledge

Base

Utility
Energy
Service

Metering
Service

Figure 2. SESAME Service Architecture 

3.3 Ontology 
       SESAME  uses  an  ontology-based  modeling  approach  to 
describe an energy-aware home and the relationships between the 
objects  and  actors  within  the  control  scenario.  The  SESAME 

17 www.knopflerfish.org 

this  purpose  Configuration 

ontologies are specified in OWL and N3 and provide a hierarchy 
of  concepts  to  model  the  automation  domain  and  the  energy 
domain. The ontology includes a number of general concepts such 
as  resident,  location,  and  concepts  in  the  automation  and  in  the 
energy  domain,  such  as  Device,  Tariff,  energy  usage  Profile, 
Account.  The  Device  class  is  further  specified  to  model  an 
Appliance,  Sensor,  or  UI  device.  New  properties  in  the  device 
model  are  consumption  per  hour,  peek  power,  the  switch  on/off 
status but also the required state to be switched on/off. For an 
Appliance  we  also  introduce  the  property  canBeStarted  which 
models the state of the devices which activation can be scheduled, 
e.g., a filled washing machine. The central function-level concept 
in  the  SESAME  ontology  it  the  Configuration  class,  which  has 
two subclasses: Activity (automation activity) and EnergyPolicy. 
A Configuration connects Appliance, Sensor and UI Device into a 
joint task.  The Configuration can provide  regulation of  different 
types,  e.g.  regulation  on  time,  occupancy  of  location,  threshold 
value.  For 
includes  properties 
including thresholds and scheduled times. 
3.4 System-level Rules 
       System-level  rules  complement  the  definition  of  automation 
activities  and  energy  policies  in  the  ontology.  System-level  rule 
define situation and related actions. The situation is specified as a 
set of conditions on existence of specific triplets in the RDF store, 
the action defines consequent creation of new RDF triplets which 
potentially shall replace some of the existing data. A system-level 
rule  which  co-defines  an  activity  that  regulates  on  a  Sensor 
reading and defined threshold values is used for illustration. The 
rule defines that the status of the Appliance is to change to to be 
switched  on  if  the  sensor  reading  of  the  sensor  is  less  than  or 
equal to the threshold value specified for switching on is defined 
as follows.  
     Activity(?a), Sensor(?s), regulatesOnThreshold(?a,?s),  
     usesAppliance(?a,?d), hasReading(?s,?r), isSwitchedOn(?d,false), 
     hasThresholdSwitchOn(?a,?t), lessThanOrEqual(?r,?t) ->  
     IsToBeSwitchedOn(?d, true) 
A  complementing  rule  for  switching  off  can  be  defined  in  a 
similar  way.  An  Activity  that  regulates  on  occupancy  of  the 
specific  location  can  be  customized  by  a  specific  rule,  which 
states that if a location is occupied the appliance is to be switched 
on. An instance of the Activity that regulates on time is coupled 
with  the  rule  that  defines  that  during  the  specified  period  the 
Appliance should be switched off. 
As described system-level rules specify how the information from 
the  knowledgebase  is  used  to  reason  about  the  changes  on  the 
appliances  state.  Energy  management  rules  are  executed  after 
automation  rules  to  verify  the  automation  decision  based  on 
energy constraints. For example, after the automation rule set the 
status  on  is  to  be  switched  on  the  energy  management  rule, 
which  acts  on  the  Tariff  information  can  set  up  the  activation 
parameter to switch on. System-level rules would be created by 
a power user well acquainted with the model of the devices and 
activities. System vendors can also create such rules in which case 
they  automatically  come  when  the  devices  are  installed  in  the 
environment.  In  the  SESAME  project  for  the  creation  of  such 
rules  we  integrated  a  general  domain  tool  [12].  Normal  users 
are to use interfaces which we describe in the next Section. 


       User-friendliness  is  a  critical  requirement  for  the  SESAME 
system,  but  the  simplicity  is  difficult  to  achieve  without 
constraining the functionality of the system. As already described, 
the functioning of the SESAME system, specifically in terms of 
energy  saving,  critically  depends  on  the  quality  of  the  installed 
rules; however creation of rules may overwhelm an ordinary user. 
Therefore, in the SESAME system, the creation of rules is a twostage  process:  (1)  system-level  rules  are  automatically  created 
based on the current ontology and the knowledgebase, keeping the 
system flexible and open for changes, (2) through a user-friendly 
graphical interface the user is offered just-enough information so 
that he/she can specify his/her policies/preferences regarding the 
energy-aware  environmental  control;  these  preferences  integrate 
system-level  rules.  More  precisely,  through  a  user-friendly 
interface a home owner can configure his/her home environment 
by setting specific properties of devices, e.g., the threshold values, 
working  periods,  etc.,  and  select  a  subset  of  system-level  rules 
creating a specific user policy. By being offered to just select from 
the  set  of  recommended  rules,  the  user  is  guarded  from 
unintentional errors or wrong decisions. On the other hand, within 
the  policy  the  user  can  customize,  combine  and  weight  system 
rules  to  achieve  own  personal  objectives, sometimes  prioritizing 
the quality of living to the energy saving, or sometimes vice versa.  
As users select and  customize existing system-level rules  within 
their user-policies, it is easy to add monitoring of how the rules 
are  used,  e.g.,  how  often  they  trigger  some  actions,  are 
contradictory  to  the  users  behavior,  refer  to  non-responding 
devices,  etc.  Together  with  the  time-stamped  information  about 
the  energy  use  (as  obtained  through  the  smart  meter),  and 
environmental  parameters  (acquired  through  the  environmental 
sensors) this monitoring function provides enough information for 
an  internal  recommendation  component  to  identify  which  rules 
proved as energy effective, and to adaptively recommend them to 
the user. Further, complemented with mood tracking gadgets the 
system could also identify the best mood rules or policies. 
4.  CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
       SESAME  project  advances  the  concepts  of  energy-aware 
smart  home  by  applying  the  ontology-based  modeling  and  the 
service-oriented  design,  semantically  intertwining  the  home 
automation  and  smart  metering  infrastructure.  Such  semantic 
gluing  is  not  trivial  task  and  it  requires  understanding  of  a 
number of specific issues in the energy and automation domains. 
With  such  system  in  place  we  expect  better  energy  saving  and 
convenience of living than todays home automation systems can 
offer through manual or scheduled activation of home appliances. 
Currently, the approaches similar to ours are not broadly explored, 
partially because of the proprietary developments in metering and 
automation data processing.  
SESAMEs  semantic  description  of  an  energy-aware  home 
includes  models  of  devices,  models  of  automation  tasks  and 
system-level  automation  rules,  models  of  energy  policies    and 
system-level energy rules, and user preferences which customize 
the  use  of  system-level  rules.  The  SESAME  demonstrator  is  a 
proof-of-concept  implementation  that  integrates  several  relevant 
physical  and  virtual  devices  presenting  a  setup  on  which  user 
interactions can be studied.  
In the context of customer-provider interaction the issues related 
to the privacy and dependability of information, accountability for 

committed  changes  and  actions,  as  well  as  the  life-cycle 
management  of  ontologies  and  services  are  of  high  importance. 
Our  future  work  will  therefore  address  these  problems  and  deal 
with possibly conflicting requirements and constraints of different 
stakeholders in the energy market.  
5.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The  work  is  supported  by  the  FFG  COIN  funding  line,  within 
SESAME  project.  The  Telecommunications  Research  Center 
Vienna (FTW) is supported by the Austrian government and the 
City  of  Vienna  within  the competence  center  program  COMET. 
The  authors  thank  SESAME  project  partners:  E-Smart  Systems 
d.o.o.  Belgrade  (Serbia),  eSYS  Informationssysteme  GmbH 
(Attnang-Puchheim,  Austria)  and  The  Experimental  Factory  of 
