Conversations in Context: A Twitter Case for Social Media 

Systems Design 

Aldo de Moor 
CommunitySense 
Cavaleriestraat 2 
5017 ET Tilburg 
The Netherlands 

ademoor@communitysense.nl 

ABSTRACT 
Conversations  are  the  lifeblood  of  collaborative  communities. 
Social media like microblogging tool Twitter have great potential 
for  supporting  these  conversations.  However,  just  studying  the 
role of these media  from a  tool  perspective is  not sufficient. To 
fully  unlock  their  power,  they  need  to  examined  from  a  sociotechnical  perspective.  We  introduce  a  socio-technical  context 
framework  which  can  be used to analyze the role of systems  of 
tools  supporting  goal-oriented  conversations.    Central  to  this 
framework  is  the  communicative  workflow  loop,  which  is 
grounded  in  the  Language/Action  Perspective.  We  show  how 
socio-technical  conversation  contexts  can  be  used  to  match  the 
communicative  requirements  of  collaborative  communities  with 
enabling  tool  functionalities.  This  social  media  systems  design 
process is illustrated with a case on Twitter. 

[Design]:  Methodologies, 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
[Software 
D.2.10 
D.2.11 
Architectures]:  Patterns,  H.5.3  [Group  and  Organization 
Interfaces]: 
work, 
organizational design, Web-based interaction 

Computer-supported 

cooperative 

General Terms 
Management, Design, Human Factors. 

Keywords 
Social media, collaborative communities, socio-technical systems, 
design 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS 2010, September 13, 2010, Graz, Austria. 
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09... $10.00. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Collaboration is ever more distributed across time, space, and 
organizations. Old organizational hierarchies and stable ways of 
working are disappearing. Instead, collaborative communities of 
many different kinds and flavours are forming to make things 
work. An example in the business domain are innovation 
communities, in which the ultimate goal is to have consortia 
develop that both conceive of innovative ideas and realize their 
implementation. In the educational domain, collaborative 
communities can, for instance, take the form of learning 
communities, where lecturers take a facilitating role in having 
students co-construct their learning process.  

Key to communities are strong and lasting communicative 
interactions that bind community members and take place in a 
common space. Collaborative communities are communities in 
which there are not only shared practices, but also common goals 
[15]. Such communication typically takes place in interrelated 
webs of conversations, where we take a conversation to be a 
series of interrelated communicative acts aimed at defining and 
reaching a goal [5].  

Communities need technologies as media to support their 
interactions. Technologies put to proper use can become real tools 
for effective communication [17]. Some of the first such tools 
were probably chats around the fireplace. The media mix has 
evolved ever since, now containing a bulging chest of often 
glittering communication tools. In this ever-expanding set of 
communication functionalities, newer technologies often do not 
fully replace, but complement, refine and reimplement existing 
communication concepts. A telling example is the (current) 
Internet, which in a way itself is re-implementation of the initial 
Victorian Internet prototype: the telegraph [26]. Still, this trend 
of expansion and refinement also contributes to a fragmentation 
of functionalities, which is an important complicating factor in 
community systems design.  

Social media are the youngest branch of communication 
technologies, and are becoming a cornerstone of the community 
systems. Social media are tools (often hosted in The Cloud) 
which facilitate the discovery, creation, and sharing of content. 
Their essence is that they are about dialog and conversation, twoway discussions that bring people together to discover and share 
information [25].  There are many classes of social media tools, 
offering a broad range of often overlapping functionalities. 
Examples are social network sites like Facebook, MySpace and 


social bookmarking sites like Delicious, and microblogging sites 
like Twitter. Applications of social media in communities 
comprise content co-creation, personalisation, and the facilitation 
of communication and collaboration.  

Twitter  is a very popular microblogging tool. These  tools 
support light-weight, easy forms of communication that enable 
users to broadcast and share information about their activities, 
opinions, and status [9]. As we will see, it is a social medium with 
significant potential for supporting the core process of 
communities, conversation. In the practitioners literature, much 
has already been written about how to effectively use it for 
business purposes (e.g.[4]). The scientific literature is catching 
up. Initially, it focused on empirical analyses of Twitter users and 
usage patterns (e.g. [9,11]), but now it is also starting to explore 
which genres of communication it can best support, such as 
informal communication at work or news media [30,12].  

Although these investigations are necessary, they are not 
sufficient for the design of effective support for collaborative 
communities. These studies stay within the context of the tool, 
assuming generic user/usage patterns, not the highly situated and 
socio-technically distributed context in which collaboration takes 
place in practice. The fundamental problem is that both the 
collaboration processes and the functionalities that enable them 
are increasingly fragmented, which leads to loss of focus, halting 
of communication, and lack of activation of work processes in 
collaborative communities [15].  These are  examples of 
pragmatic errors, leading to the breakdown of the social and 
contextual components of a discourse [10]. In the current social 
media-supported distributed collaboration process landscape, such 
errors are bound to increase in type and frequency exponentially. 

Analyzing and resolving such problems is what the Pragmatic 
Web perspective is about, as it examines how communicative 
actions with a pragmatic context are performed via Web media 
and illuminates how mutual understanding and commitments to 
actions can evolve in conversations.1  More precisely, we will 
address the question how social (and other) media can be best put 
to use in the goal-driven, distributed conversation context typical 
of professional communities.  

To answer this question, we examine the conversational context 
from a socio-technical perspective. To close the gap between 
what the community wants and what the technology does, we 
need to design the architecture of social interaction to support 
social goals [28].To this purpose, we define a conceptual model of 
socio-technical conversation contexts in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3, we 
examine the communicative affordances and constraints of 
Twitter in more detail. Sect. 4 explores how we should start 
thinking more in terms of social media systems design instead of 
from the current intra-tool perspective. We end the paper with a 
discussion and conclusions.  

1 http://www.pragmaticweb.info/ 

2.  SOCIO-TECHNICAL CONVERSATION 
CONTEXTS 
From a conversation-based perspective, the development of the 
Internet broadly seems to have had three stages. Initially, it was 
all about conversation. The Internet in its embryonic stage started 
out with e-mail and mailing lists in the 1960/70s. In the 1980s, 
new conversation technologies like bulletin board systems and 
Usenet newgroups became very popular. Usenet was/is not a 
specific bulletin board system, but a network-scale computer 
conferencing system that manages multiple public conversations 
about specific topics [22]. It is good to keep in mind that both 
mailing lists and newsgroups already had many qualities of what 
are now claimed to be revolutionary social media. Social media 
without the permanence of hyperlinked content and all the current 
multimedia bells and whistles, but still, the seeds were there.  
However, with the advent of the World Wide Web, in the 1990s, 
the focus seemed to shift from conversation to content: the 
development of HTML, CSS, web browsers, creating websites 
about everything and everyone took up a lot of the available 
attention and resources. Now, with the Web 2.0 and social media, 
conversations are back with a vengeance. The key difference with 
the initial stage of the Internet, however, is that conversation is 
now intricately interlinked with content, providing many new 
communicative affordances. Now, how to put these affordance to 
good use in collaborative communities? 

Communities are formed by conversations building common 
ground between their members. All collective actions are built on 
common ground, which is accumulated in a process called 
grounding, the collective process by which participants try to 
reach mutual beliefs, essential for coordination. Grounding can 
consist of many conversations over time and  is shaped by 
purpose (what is to be accomplished in the communication) and 
the medium (the techniques available for accomplishing the 
purpose [3]).   

Key to efficient grounding is the principle of least collaborative 
effort  which  says 
their 
collaborative work in the sense of the work that they both need to 
do  from  the  initiation  of  each  contribution  to  its  mutual 
acceptance.  This  minimum  collaborative  effort  depends  on  both 
the purpose and the (costs of using the) medium [3]. A purpose of 
developing a plan of action would require a medium that allows 
for  convergence  in  communication,  so  that  agreements  and 
commitments  can  be  made  explicit.  On  the  other  hand,  in  a 
community  formation  stage,  getting-to-know  and  brainstorming 
conversations may be better served with a much more open-ended 
medium like an informal social networking site2.  

that  participants 

try 

to  minimize 

2 Note that not all social networking sites are equal in this respect. 
For  example,  a  professional  social  medium  like  LinkedIn 
often  has  quite  focused  conversations,  aimed  at  answering 
specific  requests  for  help  (and  showing  off  expertise). 
Facebook,  on  the  other  hand,  is  much  more  a  social  social 
medium  where  people  often  comment  on  rich  content  for 
bonding and relaxation purposes.  


conversation  context,  which  will  be  explained  in  the  following 
subsections. 
2.1  The  Communicative Workflow Loop 
We have seen that in the emerging social media landscape 
combined with new ways of working and organization, 
conversations become ever more fragmented across content, tools, 
people, and organizations. We next present a socio-technical 
conversation context model which can be used to model the larger 
context of conversations in collaborative communities, from both 
a purpose and a medium perspective. This model can be used for 
analytical purposes, such as the diagnosis of breakdowns in work, 
but also for design and configuration purposes of the tool systems 
supporting complex forms of collaboration. The model is a 
combination and extension of earlier strands of research. The 
reader is referred to [18,20,14,16] for their origin and motivation.  

Figure 1 The Socio-Technical Conversation Context 

Our view on conversations is grounded in the Language/Action 
Perspective (LAP), as exemplified in Austin and Searles speech 
act theory, Habermass theory of communicative action, and 
Winograd and Floress work on LAP-based IS design [2,23,8,29]. 
We consider a conversation to be a self-contained unit of 
communication for accomplishing certain purposes (see Sect. 2.3 
for a typology). A conversation can be seen as a set of 
communicative acts grounded in social relationships and focused 
on organizational coordination. A conversation is only partially 
structured in the sense that its main process and contextual 
entities are known, but that as many degrees of freedom as 
possible are given. This as collaborative communities operate in a 
situated way, where some structure helps focus collaborative 
interactions, while too much can stifle the communitys emergent 
and creative ways of working.  

The basic communicative workflow loop is conceptually quite 
simple, although the devil is in the implementation detail. Each 
workflow loop is carried out by three conversational roles:  the 

initiator (I), executor (X), and evaluator (E) of the workflow.  
Each of these conversational roles can be played by one or more 
domain roles, these could for instance be members or facilitators, 
and all kinds of stakeholders in the community. Each workflow 
loop itself consists of four subsequent communicative acts, with in 
the middle one production act: (1) the initiator requests the 
exector to do something, (2) the executor promises to do so, (3) 
the executor produces the requested result, (4) the executor 
reports to the evaluator that the result has been produced, and (5) 
the evaluator evaluates the result and, if satisfied, approves it.  

Although this basic workflow model is a good starting point, it is 
not sufficient for addressing the complexities of real-world 
collaboration. We defined a Transaction Process Model model 
which presents all the possible conversational moves by actors 
playing a range of roles in a business communication process 
[18]. This model, based on [27], distinguishes not only a success 
layer where the complete workflow loop is performed in one go 
according the four stages outlined above. It also has a discussion 
and discourse layer, in case communication breaks down. In [20], 
we presented an extended workflow loop taking into account the 
service and delegation relationships necessary for delegating 
responsibilities. We will not delve into these complications here, 
nor expand on other complexities such as the analysis of 
embedded workflow loops, where one communicative act can 
spawn one or more new workflow loops.Instead, we will let the 
basic framework guide us in the analysis of social media systems 
design.  
2.2  The Socio-Technical Context 
Each  workflow  loop  is  surrounded  by  a  socio-technical  context. 
The social system produces a set of collaborative requirements. A 
set  of  goals  (the  purpose  in  [3])  both  drives  community 
members in their roles and is translated in a set of (intermediate) 
results.  For  example,  a  goal  could  be  to  produce  a  report  at  a 
certain  date, aimed at a specific audience, and satisfying certain 
quality criteria like cost, readability, etc. This goal would on the 
one  hand  serve  as  a  compass  for  the  community  members  to 
assess  to  what  extent  their  mission  has  been  accomplished,  and 
whether,  for  instance,  corrective  action  is  needed.  On  the  other 
hand,  these  goals  will  need  to  be  operationalized  into  concrete 
results, from the complex end results very close to the goals to all 
the  intermediate  results  needed  to  accomplish  the  goals.  Each 
workflow  can  both  use  one  or  more  intermediate  results  and 
produce one or more end results.  
To enable the workflows (the medium in [3]), there is not one, 
customized  information  system,  like  many  large  corporate 
transaction processing systems. These are often made-to-order in 
very  complex  and  expensive  information  systems  development 
projects.  Rather,  collaborative  communities  are  generally 
supported by systems of tools, many of them hosted.  A mistake 
often made  is that  community managers  and facilitators want to 
have  a  single,  silver  bullet  piece  of  communityware.  Some 
platforms claiming to be such systems exist, but in practice they 
mostly turn out to be too constraining and in no time community 
members start using additional tools, such as their own Gmail and 
Google Docs accounts to write project reports instead of the often 
arcane,  very  user-unfriendly  and  limited-size  corporate  e-mail 
systems. Rather than trying to prevent this, community managers 
should  welcome  the  idea  of  having  an  ecosystem  of  tools, 
which can evolve and adapt to the exact  momentary  needs of 


strive  for  technical  interoperability  between  these  tools.  This 
often  very  hard,  expensive,  or  even  impossible.  Rather,  sociotechnical interoperability often suffices where through the clever 
use  of  APIs,  mashups,  permanent  urls,  and  simple  checklists  or 
procedures  a  feasible  interoperability  can  be  realized.  For 
example,  collaborators  could  tag  their  contributions  on  a  social 
networking  site  with  work-related  topics  from  a  growing  list.  A 
tag cloud within that site would show (by the size of the tag in 
the  cloud)    which  emerging  topics  are  used  as  tags  most 
frequently.  A  procedure  could  be  agreed  upon  that  if  a  tag  gets 
used  more  than  a  certain  threshold  number  the  community 
member  with  the  most  expertise  on  that  topic  becomes  a  topic 
steward and starts maintaining a content page on that topic on a 
wiki, which is part of the tool system of the community. On the 
home page of that wiki, the tag cloud from the social networking 
site can be embedded through a mashup.  
The  tools  themselves  sometimes  only  need  to  be    considered 
black boxes from a functionality point of view.  For example, it is 
often sufficient to know that an e-mail tool should be used for 
person-to-person  push  communication,  as  this  tool  is  so  widely  
known and comes in so many different implementations. On the 
other  hand,  many  tools  have  very  complex,  nested  levels  of 
functionality,  often  containing  modules  of  logically  grouped 
functions, which are the atomic units of functionality. Often, it 
is necessary to indicate which particular module of a tool to use in 
a  conversation,  sometimes  this  even  needs  to  be  defined  at  the 
function level. For example, Skype has three very different main 
modules:  a  Chat  module  supporting  text-based  synchronous 
chatting between two or more users, an (audio) Call module, and 
a  Video  Call  module.  Depending  on  the  purpose,  each  of  these 
modules  will  be  more  or  less  suitable.  Finally,  a  good  example 
where  the  function  level  is  relevant  is  Twitter,  as  we  will  see. 
Twitter is extremely simple in its basic functionality, and each of 
its functions has very different applications, so the function level 
is relevant here.    
2.3  Conversation Purposes 
In the preceding subsections we have looked at the structure of 
the communicative workflow loop as well as its context. We have 
not yet explored the different purposes these conversations can be 
used for, however. This is important in order to better match 
requirements with functionalities.  

LAP takes the view that language not only describes the world by 
exchanging information, but is also used to create and coordinate 
actions in the world. In doing so, the interests of both the speaker 
and the hearer need to be taken into account.  

However, information exchange and coordination is not all that 
conversations are about. In [18], we defined conversations for 
action as the conversations in which the actual work (i.e. 
information exchange, coordination) gets done in a community.  
Conversations for specification, on the other hand, are the core 
process for generating legitimate and acceptable changes in the 
socio-technical system of communities. They make explicit some 
of the key choices to be made by the community for their 
collaboration to be productive. Such collaborative sensemaking 
should take seriously the diverse perspectives and the processes of 
communal meaning negotiation [24]. In other words, such (meta)-

level conversations are about the collaborative sensemaking by 
the community of its context: why are we collaborating (goals), 
what needs to come out of it (results), who should be involved 
(roles) and how should the conversations for action be defined 
(workflows) and supported (tools)? 

What we have not yet sufficiently taken into account in previous 
work is the role that conversations play in relationship and 
community building. Over time, conversations between 
community members help develop common ground, trust, and 
motivations for participation that are indispensable for 
communities to operate, grow, and become productive [3,28,21]. 
Summing up, we distinguish four different types of conversation 
purposes in collaborative communities: 

 

Information exchange 

  Coordination of (inter)actions 

  Collaborative sensemaking 

  Relationship building 

All of these types need to be supported in any collaborative 
community, however, to what extent depends on the purpose and 
media used. Also, some conversations within a community can 
focus on only a subset of these objectives.  

3.  TWITTER: A CONVERSATIONAL 
SWISS ARMY KNIFE? 
3.1  Twitter Functionalities 
Twitter is a microblogging service that enables its users to send 
and read tweets, which are text-based posts of up to 140 
characters that are displayed on the authors profile page and 
delivered to the authors subscribers, who are known as followers.  
Tweets can visible only to a specified circle of friends, or, by 
default, be visible to everybody. Twitter can be accessed through 
many different interfaces, and is easy to access from mobile 
devices. Although the Twitter features themselves are 
exceedingly simple, it provides a wide range of add onfunctionalities through externally developed services that access 
its API.  

We describe some core functions of Twitter, all of them different 
versions of posting a tweet, but with very different uses.   

 

 

 

Posting a self-contained tweet: this contains a general 
statement without external reference.  

Replying to another tweet: by adding the username of 
another user, preceded by @, this other user will see 
the update in her Tweets mentioning @user list. 

Linking to external resources: tweets can contain links, 
often abbreviated through services like tinyurl.com and 
bit.ly, to other resources, such as a web page or blog 
post.  


term with a hashtag #, users can contribute to a 
conversation about a topic by searching on this term. 
Twitter then shows all contributions by users from the 
total Twitter user base that use this term. Provided the 
term is specific enough, it is one of Twitters most 
powerful features, as this allows users to tap into a giant 
expertise the moment it is needed.  

 

Twitter lists provide a way to group together Twitter 
users, for example those sharing a similar interest. Each 
list then shows the tweets from its combined members. 

3.2  Conversational Twitter Practices 
Microblogs like Twitter are a special case of weblogs. Compared 
to ordinary blogs, microblogging allows for faster communication 
and more frequent updates [9]. Twitter is used for many different 
purposes, such as information sharing, information seeking and 
maintaining friendship-wise relationship [9]. Another perspective 
is that people use Twitter for keeping in touch with friends and 
colleagues, raising visibility of interesting things, gathering useful 
information, seeking help and opinions, and releasing emotional 
stress [30].  

Based on their usage patterns, different types of Twitter users can 
be distinguished. One classification is  broadcasters, 
acquaintances, and miscreants/evangelists [11]. Broadcasters are 
users who have a much larger number of followers than they are 
following themselves. Acquaintances show reciprocity in their 
relationships. Miscreants/evangelists follow many more than that 
they have followers themselves, often acting as spammers. 
Another distinction is between information sources, friends, and 
information seekers [9]. An information source is a hub with a 
large number of followers. Friends have various kinds of more or 
less reciprocal relations. Information seekers post rarely, but 
follow other users regularly. 

What is clear from the previous is that Twitter provides a very 
rich conversational medium, that generates a wide range of usage 
behaviors, most still only partially understood. In [7], we did a 
socio-technical analysis of conversational blogging practices, 
which we use to inform our initial Twitter analysis. We found that 
open-ended conversations mediated by blogs result in a number of 
technical problems: (1) the distributed and fragmented nature of 
blog conversations, (2) the lack of bi-directional links, and (3) the 
lack of tracking technologies. These problems are not encountered 
in, say, conversations mediated by mailing lists, where the 
community membership is better defined through mailing list 
subscription and  messages are actively delivered to the members 
and presented to them via their inbox, instead of the initiative 
having to come from the readers themselves.  

In Twitter, these problems are partially remedied: (1) 
conversations are still widely fragmented and distributed. 
However, in the general blogosphere, many different blogs are 
used, whereas Twitter is centrally hosted. This makes searching 
for related tweets, such as replies and topic conversations, much 
easier and faster. (2) Bidirectional links are still cumbersome, but 
in a different way. Whereas a comment in a blog very clearly 

belongs to a specific post, it is up to the Twitter user to find out 
which particular tweet another tweet is a reply to3. On the other 
hand, whereas blogs require complex and error-prone 
trackbacks to find out which other blog posts comment on a 
source post, through, for instance, the Twitter reply function it is 
very easy to find out which replies have been generated on a user. 
(3) Tracking the tweets involved in conversations is relatively 
easy through searching on both replies and hash tagged-topics. 
However, the resulting linear list of contributions is sometimes 
difficult to interpret due to the immediacy, sheer number, and lack 
of thread structure. 

Typical conversational practices have developed around blogs 
which at least partially address their technical problems [7]: (1) an 
abundant use of linking to previous posts and comments as 
conversational glue, (2) the emergence of tangential 
conversations (conversations that touch, but move in a different 
direction), and (3) conversation with self (organizing ones own 
thinking) versus conversation with others (leading to discussion).  

Around Twitter, similar conversational practices have developed. 
(1) Replies and topic hashtags are used abundantly to weave 
sometimes very complex discussion webs. One very powerful 
feature of Twitter, compared to for example closed social network 
sites like Facebook, is that it is very easy to join a conversation 
with complete strangers purely based on interest, instead of being 
limited to talking to people currently in ones circle of friends. As 
the effort of reading and replying is minimal, over time a deep 
conversation web with strands to a large group of relevant people 
can develop, both on an ad hoc basis (joining conversations based 
on a search) and permanently (by being their followers and 
joining in when an interesting topic passes by). (2) Tangential 
conversations are almost a necessity in Twitter, much more so 
than in blogs. As each tweet contains an essential thought or piece 
of information, not a full story like a blog, new ideas get triggered 
and expressed all the time. (3) Although both ordinary and 
microblogs enable conversations with both self and others, 
Twitter due to its strong conversational properties may be more 
geared towards conversations with others than blogs, which are 
often used by their authors to draft ideas they are exploring more 
or less by themselves. 
3.3  How (not) to Use Twitter 
Given the previous characterization of Twitter, how to position it 
in the socio-technical conversation context framework? For 
supporting a wide range of conversational functions, Twitter 
looks like a generic, Swiss army knife-like functionality box. 
Twitter seems especially strong in the request and report stages of 
the communicative workflow loop. The cost of both posting and 
replying is minimal. The audience that sees the request is 
potentially huge, and given the low cost at least some part of the 
audience is likely to respond. However, this strength is also a 
weakness, as its support for the promise and evaluate stages are 
rather weak. In Twitterverse, ties are often much weaker  than in 
other social networking sites in which there is a mutual friendship 
relation of sorts. In Twitter, there is no obligation for anybody to 

3  Although  theoretically  one  does  not  know  to  which  particular 
tweet this reply refers, in practice this is mostly easy to find out 
due to the semantically matching content of the tweets. 


audience. From the perspective of the conversation purposes 
listed, Twitter therefore seems especially good for information 
exchange and relationship building (for example, by over time 
really getting to know the ways of thinking and working of 
collaborators). Twitter is also  important for collaborative 
sensemaking, in that it helps to make explicit the issues that 
matter through the webs of conversation between collaborators 
over time. It can also be used for brainstorming about the why, 
what, who, and how of the community. However, for making the 
decisions about where the community should go, and especially 
for the coordination of tasks it may be less suited, at least when 
used in isolation. Decision making and coordination requires 
making commitments and evaluating work performed, something 
not really promoted by the fleeting, semi-anonymous, and 
commitment-less nature of Twitter. Still, these relative 
weaknesses can be overcome or addressed  by other tools, such as 
e-mail, provided a proper social media systems design view is 
taken into account. 

4.  TOWARDS SOCIAL MEDIA SYSTEMS 
DESIGN 

Collaborative  communities  being  such  diverse,  ever-evolving 
socio-technical  systems,  how  to  go  about  developing  their  tool 
systems  effectively  and  efficiently?  What  is  the  role  of  social 
media like Twitter in these systems? 

Social media systems design in collaborative communities is a 
process of collaborative sensemaking with and by the community. 
We follow the design interpretation of [1] who, from the 
Pragmatic Web perspective, sees technologies as hypotheses 
about solving interactional problems that are built on assumptions 
about how interaction works and ought to work.  These 
intentional interventions aim to enable new or alternative forms of 
interaction, which are captured in ontologies for interaction. 
Such ontologies describe how particular technologies applied to a 
particular purpose ground a preferred form of interaction. Our 
socio-technical conversation context model provides an upper 
ontology of interaction as it were that can be  extended and 
refined in the direction of both the social and the technical 
system. Although in this paper we explore elements to include in 
such an ontology of interaction, it is too early to provide a full 
ontology of social media systems. Rather, we will illustrate the 
general idea with a  hypothetical  scenario of a realistic case.  

4.1  Twitter within a Social Media System: a 
Scenario 

Climate change is one of the greatest challenges facing humanity. 
Addressing 
the  concerted  effort  of  scientists, 
governments,  businesses,  non-governmental  organizations,  and 
citizens  from  all  across  the  globe.  The  Intergovernmental  Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) has as its mission to provide the world 
with a clear scientific view on the current state of climate change 
and 
socio-economic 
consequences. 

environmental 

it  requires 

its 

potential 

and 

One  of  the  main  results  of  the  IPCC  are  its  assessment  reports. 
Producing these reports is a massive undertaking. To get an idea, 
for the fifth report (AR5), 831 highly qualified researchers have 
been selected to contribute4. Given  the complexity of the theme 
and the numerous, often opposing points of view, the production 
process of these reports is extremely difficult and the results are 
often controversial, as is illustrated by the InterAcademy Council, 
a  multinational  organization  of  the  worlds  science  academies 
having  been  requested  to  conduct  an  independent  review  of  the 
IPCC processes and procedures5. 
The goal is clear: doing an independent review of the procedures. 
Essential for the review to be trusted is to get enough and timely 
input from stakeholders from all over the world. However, how to 
do this given the very limited resources available?  
To do so, the review committee decides to create a wiki with for 
each  review  topic  a  separate  page.  The  page  is  visible  to  the 
whole world. Still, it can only be edited by the review committee 
members.  Each  topic and page gets  at least one topic steward 
assigned.  Each  page  gets  its  own,  unique  tag,  like  IPCC_T11 
designating topic #11 of the list of review topics.  
The  review  report  is  written  in  several  iterations.  For  its  own 
coordination  purposes,  the  review  committee  uses  a  private, 
archived  mailing  list.  However,  this  tool  is  not  suitable  for 
soliciting input from the world, as such communication does not 
scale. A wiki scales much better [13], as revision histories ensure 
that there is no meta-communications needed about who changed 
what and changes can always be rolled back. However, these wiki 
editing  rights  cannot  be  given  to  the  general  public,  given  the 
strict report focus, the quality required, and fear of vandalism.   
The  committee  considers  Twitter  a  useful  way  to  gather  many 
relevant  inputs  without  succumbing  to  their  sheer  number.  An 
@ipcc_review  user  account  is  created.  Any  topic  steward  can 
use  this  account  to  request  comments,  find  relevant  experts, 
announce  new  updates  of  the  wiki  page  etc.  To  ensure  that 
interested  people get only  the  Twitter updates of the pages they 
are  interested  in,  each  tweet  includes  a  hashtag  with  the  proper 
topic. Such a tweet could look like this:  
#ipcc_t11 Needed: expert on polar ice cap melting. 
Now,  some  topics  may  attract  thousands  of  replies.  There  is  no 
need for the topic steward to get involved in a discussion of each 
reply or tweet containing the topic hashtag, as plenty of followers 
will discuss amongst themselves. To ensure that the steward sees 
all  the  replies  of  those  people  most  relevant,  she  can  create  an 
ipcc_t11-list  with  a  selection  of  Twitter  users.  This  list  could 
consist,  for  example,  of  the  Twitter  users  who  are  her  official 
collaborators  plus  those  users  whose  replies  over  time  she  finds 
most insightful. 

4 http://www.ipcc.ch, accessed June 29, 2010. 
5 http://www.interacademycouncil.net/?id=12852 


interaction  patterns. 

is fully dependent on the underlying levels of the HCI, software, 
and  hardware  systems  [28].  Our  focus,  however,  was  the  sociotechnical  systems  level  itself.  At  that  level,  entities  should 
describe only in a broad way  at the application domain level  
the complex nature of the interdependent socio-technical systems 
[6].  In  this  paper,  we  only  very  informally  outlined  some  toolmediated 
[16],  we  showed  how 
collaboration  patterns  can  be  used  to  much  more  precisely 
describe  the  ontologies  of  interaction  [1]  needed  for  adequate 
socio-technical systems design for the community. Such patterns 
could be used in (formal) meaning negotiation processes between  
collaborative  partners  from  different  organizations  and  cultures, 
to establish common ground more efficiently [19]. 
Throughout  the  paper,  we  have  advocated  the  socio-technical 
systems  perspective.  The  approach  proposed  is  much  more  of  a 
perspective  than  a  fixed  methodology.  Instead  it  should  be 
considered as a kind of pragmatic bus, which can connect many 
different existing conceptualizations, techniques, approaches, and 
methodologies.  For  instance,  we  use  the  anchoring  concepts  of 
goals, partially operationalized as results. Work done on intention 
broadcasting  along  the  lines  of  [3]  could  be  used  to  further 
investigate how these purposes mediated by technologies could be 
better  achieved. 
  Communication  design  and  hypermedia 
discourse  perspectives  on  sensemaking  like  proposed  in  [1,24] 
could  refine  the  processes  of  eliciting  and  analyzing  the  sociotechnical requirements of the community.  
Once  more  tool  systems-in-their-context  of  use  get  modelled  it 
will become possible to answer the question of whether there is a 
core  set  of  tools  together  covering  a  wide  range  of  required 
collaborative  functionalities.  There  are  so  many  (social  media) 
tools  out  there,  with  which  ones  should  the  average    or  a 
particular  community get started? If we are to take the reuse of 
design solutions seriously, it is important that we get a core initial 
set  of  tools  covering  most  collaborative  requirements.  More 
exotic tools can always be added later, but it is very important not 
to overwhelm communities with too many tools in the beginning, 
as learning curves are often steep and this can overly fragment the 
necessary communal focus  and lead to social media overload and 
unnecessarily frustrated community members.7  Work is currently 
underway on a tool, called CommunitySensor, to develop sociotechnical  quickscans  of  communities  so  that  this  kind  of 
pragmatic  diagnosis  in  professional  communities  can  be  more 
effectively and efficiently done. 

Never before has there been such a communicative potential 
available to humanity. Social media are the newest kid on this 
block. However, they come with a paradox: although they enable 
more potential interactions in terms of people and content than 
ever before, at the same time their abundance and unruliness may 
mean a loss of collaborative focus, which may make getting 
complex things done together actually become more difficult. A 
social media systems design perspective  may help communities 
to make the best use of this great(ly underused) potential. 

7 There is still little attention for this in the literature, but social 
media  overload  is  starting  to  become  a  serious  topic  of 
discussion,  as  is  exemplified  by  the  mounting  support  for  the 
Slow Media Manifesto http://en.slow-media.net/manifesto 

#ipcc_t11  Needed: 

Figure 2 A Focused Conversation Widget 

To  further  connect  the  ongoing  conversation  with  the  emerging 
results in the review topic page, she decides to embed a widget in 
the  wiki  that  shows  the  last  10  tweets  containing  the  #ipcc_t11 
topic hashtag. Such a widget contains a snippet of code that can 
be  inserted  into  the  HTML  code  of  the  embedding  page6  This 
powerful  feature  could  be  used  in  much  more  refined  ways, 
however,  by  combining  multiple  search  terms.  For  example,  a 
separate widget could be included showing only the tweets within 
the scope of topic 11 that show the requests for help, by using the 
combined 
search  keywords  when 
constructing the widget.  
Fig.2 gives an idea of the power of such a widget as key focused 
conversation  element of a tool system. The widget searches on 
the permanent Twitter #climate channel for all the tweets that 
contain the terms melting and ice, in whichever order. If there 
were  a wiki topic  page on melting ice, this widget at the top of 
that page would immediately give the collaborators a sense of the 
current buzz around this highly specific topic, plus an immediate 
way  to  contact  the  relevant  individuals  or  organizations.  In  this 
way, professional conversations can be made both more relevant 
and  timely,  and  thus  contribute  to  addressing  the  collaborative 
fragmentation problem mentioned throughout the paper.     

5.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Conversations are literally what make collaborative communities 
work.  Social  media  like  microblogging  tool  Twitter  have  great 
potential  for  supporting  these  conversations.  However,  just 
studying  the  role  of  these  media  from  a  tool  perspective  is  not 
sufficient. We introduced a socio-technical context framework to 
analyze  the  role  of  systems  of  social  media  supporting  goal-
  Central  to  this  framework  is  the 
oriented  conversations. 
communicative  workflow 
in  the 
Language/Action  Perspective.  We  showed  how  socio-technical 
conversation  contexts  can  be  used  to  match  the  communicative 
requirements  of  collaborative  communities  with  enabling  tool 
functionalities.  This  social  media  systems  design  process  was 
illustrated with a case on Twitter. 
We  gave  only  a  high-altitude  tour  of  this  vast  systems  design 
territory. It is extremely complex, not only by itself, but also as it 

6 http://www.twitstat.us/ is one service that generates such search 

loop,  which 

is  grounded 

widgets. 


[1]  Aakhus,  M.  2006.  Pragmatic  Web  as  Communication 
Design Practice. Proc. of the 1st International Conference 
on 
the  Pragmatic  Web,  Stuttgart,  Germany,  21-23 
September, 2006 (2006), 9-21. 

[2]  Austin, J. 1962. How to Do Things with Words? Clarendon 

[3] 

[4] 

Press. 
Clark,  H.H.  and  Brennan,  S.E.  1991.  Grounding  in 
communication. Perspectives on socially shared cognition. 
13, (1991), 127149. 
Comm,  J.  2009.  Twitter  Power:  How  to  Dominate  Your 
Market One Tweet at a Time. Wiley. 

[5]  Dietz,  J.  1994.  Modelling  Business  Processes  for  the 
Purpose  of  Redesign.  Business  Process  Re-Engineering: 
Information  Systems  Opportunities.  North-Holland.  233-
242. 

[6]  Dixon,  D.  2009.  Pattern  Languages  for  CMC  Design. 
Handbook  of  Research  on  Socio-Technical  Design  and 
Social Networking Systems. B. Whitworth and A. de Moor, 
eds. Information Science Reference. 402-415. 
Efimova,  L.  and  de  Moor,  A.  2005.  Beyond  Personal 
Webpublishing:  An  Exploratory  Study  of  Conversational 
Blogging Practices. Proc. of the 38th Hawaii International 
Conference  on  System  Sciences  (HICSS-38),  Hawaii, 
January 2005 (2005). 

[8]  Habermas, J. 1984. The Theory of Communicative Action - 

[7] 

[9] 

Vol. 1. Heineman. 
Java,  A.,  Song,  X.  et  al.  2007.  Why  we 
twitter: 
understanding  microblogging  usage  and  communities. 
Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 
workshop on Web mining and social network analysis (San 
Jose, California, 2007), 56-65. 

[10]  Kreuz, R. and Roberts, R. 1993. When Collaboration Fails: 
in  Conversation. 

Consequences  of  Pragmatic  Errors 
Journal of Pragmatics. 19, (1993), 239-252. 

[11]  Krishnamurthy, B., Gill, P. et al. 2008. A few chirps about 
twitter. Proceedings of the first workshop on Online social 
networks (Seattle, WA, USA, 2008), 19-24. 

[12]  Kwak,  H.,  Lee,  C.  et  al.  2010.  What  is  Twitter,  a  social 
network  or  a  news  media?  Proceedings  of  the  19th 
international  conference  on  World  wide  web  (Raleigh, 
North Carolina, USA, 2010), 591-600. 
[13]  Mader, S. 2007. Wikipatterns. Wiley. 
[14]  de  Moor,  A.  2007.  The  Pragmatic  Evaluation  of  Tool 
System Interoperability. Proc. of the 2nd ICCS Conceptual 
Structures Tool Interoperability Workshop (CS-TIW 2007), 
Sheffield, UK, July 22, 2007 (2007), 1-19. 

[15]  de  Moor,  A.  2008.  Activating  Online  Collaborative 
Communities. Proc. of the 5th International Conference on 

Action  in  Language,  Organisations,  and  Information 
Systems  (ALOIS  2008),  Venice,  Italy,  May  5-6,  2008. 
University of Trento (2008), 97-108. 

[16]  de  Moor,  A.  2009.  Collaboration  Patterns  as  Building 
Blocks for Community Informatics. Proc. of the 6th Prato 
Community  Informatics  Research  Network  Conference, 
Prato, Italy, November 4-6, 2009 (2009). 

[17]  de  Moor,  A.  and  Aakhus,  M.  2006.  Argumentation 
Support: From Technologies to Tools. Communications of 
the ACM. 49, 3 (2006), 93-98. 

[18]  de  Moor,  A.  and  Weigand,  H.  2007.  Formalizing  the 
Evolution  of  Virtual  Communities.  Information  Systems. 
32, 2 (2007), 223-247. 

[19]  de  Moor,  A.  2005.  Patterns  for  the  Pragmatic  Web. 
Conceptual  Structures:  Common  Semantics  for  Sharing 
Knowledge. 1-18. 

[20]  Moor, A. and Weigand, H. 2005. Legitimacy Checking in 
Communicative  Workflow  Design.  Formal  Modelling  in 
Electronic Commerce. 79-99. 

[21]  Preece,  J.  and  Shneiderman,  B.  2009.  The  Reader-to-
Leader  Framework:  Motivating  Technology-Mediated 
Social  Participation.  AIS  Transactions  on  HumanComputer Interaction. 1, 1 (2009), 13-32. 

[22]  Rheingold,  H.  1993.  The  Virtual  Community 

Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier. Addison-Wesley 
Pub. Co. 

[23]  Searle, J. 1969. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of 

Language. Cambridge University Press. 

[24]  Shum,  B.  2006.  Sensemaking  on  the  Pragmatic  Web:  a 
Hypermedia  Discourse  Perspective.  Proc.  of  the  1st 
International Conference on the Pragmatic Web, Stuttgart. 
Germany, 21-23 September, 2006 (2006), 22-37. 

[25]  Solis,  B.  2008.  The  Essential  Guide  to  Social  Media.  PR 

[26]  Standage,  T.  1998.  The  Victorian 

Internet:  The 
Remarkable  Story  of  the  Telegraph  and  the  Nineteenth 
Century's on-Line Pioneers. Walker and Co. 

[27]  Van  Reijswoud,  V.E.,  Dietz,  J.L.  et  al.  The  structure  of 
business communication : Theory, model and application. 
[28]  Whitworth,  B.  The  Social  Requirements  of  Technical 
Systems.  Handbook  of  Research  on  Socio-Technical 
Design and Social Networking Systems. B. Whitworth and 
A. de Moor, eds. IGI. 2-22. 

[29]  Winograd,  T.  and  Flores,  F.  1986.  Understanding 
Computers and Cognition : a New Foundation for Design. 
Ablex Pub. Corp. 

[30]  Zhao,  D.  and  Rosson,  M.B.  2009.  How  and  why  people 
Twitter:  the  role  that  micro-blogging  plays  in  informal 
communication  at  work.  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  2009 
international  conference  on  Supporting  group  work 
(Sanibel Island, Florida, USA, 2009), 243-252. 

