Speech acts meet tagging: NiceTag ontology 

Alexandre Monnin 

Philosophies contemporaines, ExeCO, 

Univ. Paris I Pantheon-Sorbonne 

17, rue de la Sorbonne 

75005, Paris                          

Freddy Limpens, 
Fabien Gandon 

Edelweiss, INRIA Sophia-Antipolis 
2004, route des Lucioles BP 93 
06902 Sophia Antipolis Cedex 

David Laniado 

DEI, Politecnico di Milano 

Piazza L. da vinci, 32 

20133 Milano 

Alexandre.Monnin@malix.univ-

paris1.fr 

Freddy.Limpens@sophia.inria.fr 
Fabien.Gandon@sophia.inria.fr 

david.laniado@elet.polimi.it  

ABSTRACT 
Current  tag  models  do  not  fully  take  into  account  the  rich  and 
diverse  nature  of  tags.  Each  model  makes  different  partial 
assumptions  as  to  the  definition  and  attributes  a  tag  should 
receive.  In  this  paper  we  propose  an  ontology,  NiceTag,  whose 
primitives  are  tag  actions  modeled  with  RDF  named  graphs. 
This  mechanism  allows  us  to  type,  describe  and  thus  ensure  the 
traceability  of  each  single  act  of  tagging.  Our  named  graphs 
contain  at  least  a  resource  linked  to  a  sign,  which  can  be  any 
resource  reachable  on  the  Web  (an  ontology  concept,  an  image, 
etc.).  The  resource,  the  sign  and  the  link  between  them  are  the 
three components of the acts of tagging that we want to explicitly 
represent as social actions, akin to speech acts. The purpose of our 
model is threefold. First, to be able to describe acts of tagging in a 
very  precise  and  general  manner,  consistent  with  the  principles 
behind  the  architecture  of  the  Web.  To  reconcile  and  bridge 
existing  tag  models  (Newman  ontology,  Tagont,  ES,  SCOT, 
SIOC,  CommonTag,  MOAT,  NAO).  And  finally,  to  propose  a 
viable  way  to  reify  and  represent  the  intention  behind  an  act  of 
tagging and leverage its semantics.   

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.3  [Information  systems]:  Group  and  organization  interfaces 
  Collaborative  computing.  H.1.1.  [Information  systems]: 
Systems  and  information  theory    Information  theory.  I.2.4 
[Computing  methodologies]:  Knowledge 
representation 
Formalisms and Methods. 

General Terms 
Documentation, Human Factors, Standardization, Languages. 

Keywords 
Tagging,  resources,  social  acts,  speech  acts,  meaning,  sense-
making, pragmatic, identity crisis, annotation, named graphs. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Tags in current tag ontologies are almost always modeled so as to 
associate  a  tag,  a  user  and  a  resource.  Unfortunately  these 
primitives  have  barely  been  theorized  in  academic  discussions 
related to tagging. Though seemingly unchallenged and despite it 
being  implemented  in  many  systems,  a  close  look  at  each 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part  of this  work for 

personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 

not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 

copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 

otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

I-SEMANTICS 2010,  September 1-3, 2010, Graz, Austria. Copyright   
ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09... $10.00. 

component  of  the  aforementioned  tripartite  tag/user/resource 
model  reveals  a  lot  of  unnoticed  difficulties  thus  calling  for  dire 
improvements. 

For that reason, our main purpose will be to provide a model that 
answers one  apparently - simple question What exactly is being 
tagged ?. On the Web, according to the guiding principles behind 
its  architecture,  the answer  must  always  be:  a resource.  To  get a 
clear  idea  of  this  rich  notion  it  is  necessary  to  go  back  to  the 
specifications  and  debates  where  it  was  fleshed  out,  especially 
those debates that surrounded the Identity Crisis1 of the Semantic 
Web  as  their  outcome  was  a  precise  characterization  of  this 
notion.  

In what follows we rely heavily on these works to answer our own 
question.  Hence,  a  lot  of  space  will  be  devoted  to  the  task  of 
underlining the relevance of the lessons learned from the Identity 
Crisis  resolution  to  tagging.  By  doing  so,  we  also  voluntarily 
anchor  tagging  in  the  specific  environment  where  it  thrived:  the 
Web.  There  is  no  doubt  tagging  is  but  one  form  of  annotation 
among  many.  Yet,  the  need  to  be  more  specific  is  felt  since  the 
answer to our first question is determined by the requirements of a 
very  specific  architecture  that  will  henceforth  constitute  our 
operational framework. 

are  many  graph-based  knowledge 

There 
representation 
formalisms  from  Conceptual  graphs,  which  are  historical 
descendants of semantic networks, to Entity-Relationship models, 
UML, Topic Maps or RDF that share the threefold structure of the 
tag/user/resource model. This similarity has led to many attempts 
to  bridge  the  gap  between  social  tagging  and  Semantic  Web 
technologies.  An  effort  we  clearly  take  up  by  relying  on  named 
graphs,  an  extension  of  RDF.  Yet,  the  contribution  of  this article 
is not to propose yet another graph-oriented formalism. Rather our 
intention  is  to  devise  a  conceptual  framework  able  to  represent 
tags or rather actions of tagging. This is achieved by relying on an 
existing formalism (RDF) plus an extension (named graph model 
and  syntax)  and  a  schema  (an  OWL  upper  ontology)  in  order  to 
make it possible to capture and type tags, their structure and uses.  

Replacing the primitive of our ontology with tag actions instead 
of tags ensures that our model is a meta-model of tagging, able to 
bridge  the  gap  between  existing  ontologies.  More  importantly 
maybe  from  a  theoretic  point  of  view,  actions  of  tagging  are 
hereafter  acknowledged  and  modeled  as  social  acts  or  speech 
acts.  Not  unlike  language,  tagging  should  not  be  restricted  to 

1  This  expression  refers  to  the  difficulties  met  by  the  Semantic 
Web  community  when  the  transition  between  a  Web  of 
documents  and  a  Web  of  non-information  resources  (or 
things  in  the  world),  as  advocated  through  the  Linked  Data 
initiative, became a pressing and concrete issue. See [1].  


the hope to better capture their semantics.  

This  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  In  section  two  we  propose  a 
variety of scenarios to analyze the entire process of tagging and its 
many  facets  in  an  attempt  to  answer  the  question  what  do  we 
tag?  In  the  third  section,  we  introduce  the  main  feature  of  the 
NiceTag ontology, the use of named graphs to model tag actions, 
before  we  give,  in  section  four,  more  details  on  the  relations 
between  a  tag  and  a  tagged  resource.  Section  five  discusses  the 
current  implementation  of  tagging  in  existing  platforms  such  as 
delicious.com  and  the  identity  of  tags.  Section  six  works  as  a 
practical guide to NiceTag by presenting a variety of potential and 
existing uses-cases. Section seven concludes this article. 

2.  THE ANATOMY OF TAGGING 
2.1  In the beginning were resources: 
The  advent  of  the  Linked  Open  Data  (LOD)  paradigm  was 
instrumental  in  revealing  the  intricacies  behind  Web  addresses. 
For those who have no idea of how the Web is built, only URLs, 
links  to  documents  conceived  as  HTML  files,  exist.  This  is 
roughly  the  laymans  point  of  view.  However,  the  Webs 
architecture  wasnt  conceived  that  way.  URIs  do  not  only  give 
access 
identify  resources, 
information objects - that which a Web page represents.  

to  Web  pages, 

they  primarily 

Resources,  as  defined  by  the  now  outdated  but  still  relevant  for 
that matter RFC 2396, can be just about anything as long as they 
are  identified  by  URIs.  A  resource  is  thus  created  by  the  person 
who  publishes  its  corresponding  URI.  Each  URI  identifies  no 
more  than  one  resource.  This  is  the  dictum that  best  summarizes 
the  architecture  of  the  Web2.  Such  a  relation  of  identification  is 
functional in the mathematical sense of the word. These resources 
are  the  responsibility  of  the  person  who  published  the  URI  that 
identifies  them.  Hence,  according  to  many  informal  documents, 
some of them authored by Tim Berners-Lee himself, the authority 
of  the  publisher  is  what  really  determines  the  reference/meaning 
of a URI (i.e.: the resource). 

Both  relations  of  access  and  identification  are  governed  by 
specifications  and  protocols  alike.  By  contrast,  the  linguistic 
relation  of  reference,  common  in  the  philosophy  of  language, 
breaks away from the technical shackles imposed by technology3. 
For  instance,  nothing  prevents  two  persons  from  referring  to 
different  things  with  a  single  URI.  This  conceptual  framework, 
characteristic  of  the  LOD  initiative,  opened  up  the  possibility  to 
handle things  resources  that are not Web accessible  not just 
documents or information objects.  The question How then are 
we  to  distinguish  URIs  from  Linked  Data  URIs?  ensued  as  a 
consequence and led to what became known as the Identity Crisis 
of the Semantic Web.  

While  the  Technical  Architecture  Groups  (TAG)  own  solution 
became known as the HTTP range14 decision, we will here focus 
on  the  work  of  clarification  accomplished  by  H.Halpin  and 

2 "The relations between a URI and resource (...) is functional as 
the  W3C  states  one  should  "assign  distinct  URIs  to  distinct 
resources [2]". 

3 A point that was made by P. Hayes: "the architecture of the Web 
determines access, but has no direct influence on reference" [1]. 

V.Presutti [2]4 for it offers decisive insights which may eventually 
lead  to  an  answer  to  our  own  question:  What  exactly  is  being 
tagged?.  

Halpin  and  Presutti  distinguish  two  main  types  of  resources 
according to their various states:  

a) 

Information resources  

a.  Web resources 
b.  Web representations 

b)  Non-information resources 

Tags,  contrary  to  URIs,  are  not  necessarily  what  we  call  "Web 
signs", signs whose functioning is largely determined by technical 
rules and specifications. That's why they can easily violate one of 
the main axioms of the Web: that a URI should never be allowed 
to identify more than one resource.  

The  publisher  of  a  URI,  being  granted  with  the  power  to  state 
which  resource  it  identifies,  undoubtedly  holds  a  privileged 
position  according  to  the  W3C  specifications.  This  is  precisely 
why these identifiers have been dubbed "Web proper names" [3]. 
Some  philosophical  accounts  of  logical  proper  names  similarly 
insist  on  the  original  dubbing  ceremony  through  which  a  proper 
name  is  directly  assigned  a  reference,  which  is  henceforth 
transmitted to other speakers of a language through causal chains 
[4]5. 

Direct  reference  is  a  position  shared  by  almost  all  the 
participants  in the  debate  surrounding  the  Identity  Crises.  Yet,  it 
fostered at least two conflicting positions. The first, that insists on 
the  functional  relation  implied  with  direct  reference  and  the 
authority  of  the  publisher,  is  consistent  with  the  idea  that  both  a 
URI and a logical proper name (the name of a person, a common 
noun  of  kind  like  water,  etc.),  once  the  dubbing  ceremony  is 
accomplished,  can  refer  to  only  one  thing.  This  aspect  was 
formalized  in  the  IRW  ontology  proposed  by  H.Halpin  and 
V.Presutti [2] with the property irw:identifies. 

The  other  position  was  advocated  by  Patrick  Hayes.  It  contrasts 
with  the  great  emphasis  Semantic  Web  specifications  put  on  the 
owner  of  a  URI  considered  as  the  sole  person  habilitated  to 
specify  its  reference/meaning.  Separating  issues  pertaining  to 
language from technical ones, it holds that proper names can refer 
to  whatever  people  like  (a  la  Humpty  Dumpty).  Hence,  if  URIs 
are  real  proper names,  linguistic  signs  (i.e.  not Web signs6),  they 
should  work  similarly.  This  was  captured  with  the  property 
irw:refersTo.  

Both  positions  assume  that  reference  is  best  stated  in  private 
ceremonies,  either  by  one  specific  person  or  by  anyone.  The 
actual  situation  involved  in  tagging  may  well  have  more  in 

4 This was anticipated by previous works by Presutti and Gangemi 
drawing  on  the  DOLCE+DnS  Ultra  Lite  ontology,  see  [5],  [6], 
[7]  and  [8].  The  OKKAM  project  deals  with  the  same  issues, 
especially [10]. The W3C keeps working on this question inside 
the  Architecture  of  the  World  Wide  Semantic  Web  Task 
Force (AWWSW), http://esw.w3.org/AwwswHome. 
5 See also [10] for an account of direct reference theories.  
6  Judging  from  his  keynote  speech  at  ISWC  2009  entitled 
Blogic,  such  a  position  may  longer  be  the  one  advocated  by 
Hayes.  


tagging is not bound by all the rules of the semantic Web since, by 
all  odds,  she is  not  the  publisher  of  the  URI.  Hence,  she  will  be 
essentially concerned with the URI understood as a linguistic sign 
or  as  an  address  since  on  the  Web  one  is  granted  access  to  the 
representation  of  the  resource  and  from  this  representation  may 
infer what the resource is from her own point of view (with results 
that  may  well  vary  from  person  to  person,  the  same  URI  will 
hence refer to a picture of a landscape, that landscape, an image, a 
digital object, the place where one was born, a picture of the place 
where  one  was  born,  etc.   a  feature  that  goes  against  functional 
identification). Furthermore,  the  act  of  tagging  itself  will involve 
all kinds of signs, not just directly referring proper names. 

Web Resource 

Label 

is annotated  by 

2.2.2  Lexical meaning and direct reference:  
But this is only one aspect of tagging. A tag may be attached to a 
resource without either the least referring to this resource. If  one 
decides to tag an image of ones parents with the label "parents", 
the  word  "parents"  has  some  specific  lexical  meaning.  By 
contrast,  my  parents"  should  refer  to  a  pair  of  human  beings 
while  proper  names  like  "John"  and  "Johann"  may  each  have  a 
FOAF profile, identified by a Linked Data URI that could be used 
to specifically identify and designate both of them.  

As  a  consequence,  the  potential  shift  of  referent  from  one  act  of 
tagging  to  another  one,  when  both  are  prompted  by  the  same 
accessed  irw:WebResource, is  a  great  cause  of  ambiguity,  very 
much reminiscent of the symptoms surrounding the identity crisis. 
IRW  ontology  allows  for  a  fine-grained  rendering  of  these 
subtleties  by  accounting  very  precisely  for  the  possibility  that 
users  would  refer  to  something  else  than  what  a  URI  either 
identifies  or  grants  access  to  (a  possibility  integral  to  tagging). 
That  is  why  we  make  use  of  an  equivalent  of  the  class 
irw:Resource 
(:Tagged 
Resource)  and  offer  a  different  class  to  model  annotated 
resources.  The  specific  trait  of  nt:annotatedResource(s)  is 
that they are browsable resources, in other words, web-accessible 
representations  of  resources 
(an  equivalent  of  irw:Web 
Representation). 

to  model 

the 

tagged 

resource 

2.2  Tags and resources: 

2.2.1  Annotation: 
One may ask whether the very notion of tags is misleading. After 
all, annotation precedes tagging by far. In a sense, it might be seen 
as a way to simply annotate shared resources on the Web. Theres 
no doubt annotation is a defining feature of tagging. Muxway, the 
first  tagging  Web  service,  resulted  from  an  attempt  to  add 
annotations to personal bookmarks online. Tags, as J. Schachter 
dubbed these annotations, were only "blank spaces" where various 
labels could be inscribed and attached to a bookmarked URL.   

The  architecture  of  the  Web  largely  determines  what  can  be 
tagged  in  this  context:  instead  of  either  objects  or  documents,  on 
the  Web  one  is  dealing  (at  least  under  current  constraints)  with 
resources. Various characterizations of resources have been given 
since the beginnings of the Web. The first HTTP RFC stated that 
resources  were  a  network  data  object  or  service  identified  by  a 
URI.  

Just  like  material  tags  are  attached  to  material  objects,  so  are 
annotations  attached  to  resources  on  an  information  network.  In 
both cases, however, the inscription (what we call the label of a 
tag  or,  more  generally,  of  an  annotation)  while  attached  to  an 
object  on  the  network,  may  apply  to  just  about  anything:  the 
constraints of meaning arent those of annotation  only resources 
accessible  on  the  Web  via  the  HTTP  protocol,  browsable 
resources 
for  annotation. 
Consequently, all that is required for annotation on the Web is to 
attach  tags  to  an  HTTP  resource  (one  that  is  identified  by  a 
single  URI  and  accessed  through  the  set  of  its  representations). 
Tags,  on  the  other  hand,  need  not  refer  or  apply  to  resources 
identified by URIs nor take their meaning solely from them. 

in  other  words,  are  available 

tagged  by 

specified  by 

Resource 

Label 

Linke data URI 

Compared  to  our  previous  schema,  this  relation  starts  from  the 
label. The reason here is quite simple: if the label happens to be a 
word, it may very well already have a meaning of its own, or if it 
is a proper name for example, it may refer to some precise entity. 

Existing  tag  ontologies  have  almost  exclusively  focused  their 
efforts  on  harnessing  the  meaning  of  tags  -  essentially  conceived 
as  signs.  This  explains  why  issues  of  synonymy,  spelling 
variations  and  plain  misspellings  are  regularly  brought  back 
against tagging.  

A  seemingly  indisputable  proof  of  taggings  serious  lack  of 
accuracy is that they were among the first issues to be tackled in 
Newmans  ontology7  and  SCOT8.  Likewise,  by  allowing  anyone 
to link a tag to a well defined meaning, as do MOAT or Common 
Tag,  a relationship is  created  which  helps  to  face  the  problem  of 
the different acceptations a term can receive in different contexts 
and for different communities [11].  

Still, where a tool like MOAT best achieves its purpose is when it 
is  applied  to  disambiguate  the  use  of  a  directly  referring  proper 
name, be it that of a celebrity "Paris" (Hilton), or of a town "Paris" 
(France) (as bespeaks the fact that the examples given by Passant 
[3] are almost all of that kind).  

However,  an  application  that  facilitates  the  identification  of 
distinct  referents  of  two  otherwise  identical  proper  names 
(homonymy  due  to  homographs)  does  not  provide  a  solution  to 
the  problem  of  polysemy  (the  multiple  meanings  of  a  sign).  This 
is evidenced  by  the  choice  of Wikipedia,  an  encyclopedia, as  the 
knowledge  base  from  which  the  "meanings"  attached  to labels  in 
MOAT  are  extracted  in  [3].  Contrary  to  dictionaries  or  thesauri, 
encyclopedias  would  simply  be  unsuited  to  this  task,  being 
catalogs of entities rather than words senses9.  

2.2.3  Ostensive definitions and demonstratives: 
This 
is  especially  useful  with  ostensive  definitions  and 
demonstratives. On a photo-sharing service for instance, someone 
may  choose  to  refer  directly  to  the  person  depicted  on  a  picture 
rather than to the picture itself.  

7 http://www.holygoat.co.uk/projects/tags/ 
8 http://scot-project.org/  
9 Of course, one possible answer would be to treat words senses as 
things and to refer to these entities with proper names (a serious 
stretch to common sense).  


Tim Berners-Lee 

Resource 

Hes great 

As  a  matter  of  fact, homonymy,  polysemy,  synonymy,  variations 
of  spelling  and  utter  misspellings  are  not  the  only  sources  of 
ambiguity  encountered  with  tagging.  A  user  may  either  want  to 
say,  somehow  lacking  precision  as  befits  human  communication 
(making  it  possible),  that  this  is  T.  B.-L.,  or  that  this  picture 
represents  T.  B.-L.  Similarly,  other  tags  may  either  describe  the 
qualities of the man or the picture. 

From  the  TAGs  (Technical  Architecture  Group)  definition 
(anything  which  might  be  identified  by  a  URI)  to  Tim  Berners-
Lees,  a  slight  shift  can  be  observed.  For  Berners-Lee,  indeed,  a 
resource is anything that has an identity. Conversely, for anything 
to have identity, to exist in a tractable fashion on the Web means 
that  it  is  ipso  facto  a  resource  identified  by  a  URI.  Hence,  W. 
Quines famous dictum no entity without identity, is still true on 
the  Web  provided  it  is  clear  that,  as  a  technical  system  and 
mediator,  the  Web  only  knows  resources  as  entities.  To  put  it 
another way, the ontology of the Web is an ontology of resources; 
objects once mediated by the Web are qualified as resources. 

People  (as  modeled  by  the  FOAF  vocabulary),  countries  (as 
modeled by geonames), genes (by the gene ontology), species (by 
geospecies),  concepts  and  abstract  entities, in  other  words, Webinaccessible things in general, when subjected to identification on 
the Web according  to  the  very  principles  behind the  Linked  data 
initiative  all  fall  under  the  non-information resources  category10. 
Therefore,  on  the  Web,  the  space  of  qualities  and  the  space  of 
objects  is  altogether  replaced  by  the  hierarchy  of  resources 
described in the IRW ontology.  

Thus,  when  tags  are  used  in  ostensive  definitions  or  as 
demonstratives,  the  resources  theyre  referring  to  are  no  longer 
restricted  to  Web  resources  and  may  be  outside  the  scope  of 
annotation  as  weve  defined  it.  Yet  tags  are  not  sufficient  to 
functionally  identify  these  resources  since  the  link  between  a  tag 
and  a  resource  is  much  less  formal  than  the  link  between  a  URI 
and  a  resource.  Only  URIs  will  make  it  possible  to  state  the 
identity  of  resources  on  the  Web.  This  is  precisely  what  an 
ontology like MOAT does. If the label of a tag is used to refer to a 
non-information resource already identified by a linked data URI, 
a relation is available in MOAT which will let users link that URI 
to the label of the said tag. 

2.2.4  Relations and reference shifting: 
Of course, what's equally important is the way labels are related to 
resources  and  how  we  are  manipulating  them,  whence  the 
paramount  importance  of  the  meaning  of  relations  established 
between  the  resource  and  the  tag.  Still,  no  known  effort  was 
undertaken  to  type  the  relations  between  those  signs  and 
resources. This task is left entirely up to triple and/or machine tags 
were  predicates  are  stated,  though  it  is  not  accomplished 
according  to  any  Semantic  Web  standards  (explaining  why  they 
were  dubbed  "the  poor  man's  RDF"  from  the  inception).  The 
situation  is  officially  acknowledged  as  the  main  source  of 
ambiguity of tagging by the W3C itself11. 

10 This is a moot point in the case of books, either treated as texts, 
information  resource,  or  as  physical  objects,  -  their  material 
realizations.  This  example  (in  particular  Moby  Dick)  played  a 
paradigmatic role in discussions belonging to the Identity Crisis. 
It  is  also  central  in  debates  at  the  crossroads  of  philosophy, 
ontology and linguistic on systematic polysemy.  

11  See:  http://weblog.scifihifi.com/2005/08/05/meta-

tags-the-poor-mans-rdf/ 

Non-information Resource 

Tim Berners-Lee 

    is 

Information  Resource 

Tim Berners-Lee 

     represents 

2.2.5  Same resource, different relation and different 
assertions:  
Other uses-cases, outside of reference-shifting, call for an explicit 
integration  of  relations  in  tagging  ontologies.  Far  from  being 
benign,  the  simple  fact  that  a  document  is  about  a  thesis  or  is 
relevant for a thesis, and that we are left with the choice to assert 
the  first  relation,  the  second  or  both,  is  of  utmost  importance. 
Current  bookmarking  systems  do  not  allow  for  a  sign  to  be used 
more  than  once  to  annotate  a  given  Web  resource.  Such 
limitations stem from leaving implicit the relation between labels 
and  resources  and  consequently  assuming  that  it  is  always  a 
descriptive  one.  Tags,  accordingly,  are  often  believed  to  be 
tantamount  to  topics.  Yet, should  relations  in their  diversity  be 
made  explicit,  nothing  would  no  longer  prevent  considering  the 
following example as valid:  

Web Resource (review of a thesis) 
online review on my thesis 

Web Resource (review of a thesis) 
online review on my thesis 

         is about 

         is relevant for 

mythesis 

mythesis 

Stating  these  relations  also  presents  one  more  advantage  since 
some  of  them,  to  hold  meaningfully,  necessarily  coerce  their 
relata  (this  is  accomplished  in  RDF  through  rdfs:range  and 
domain).  In  other  words,  when  something  is  declared  to  be 
"written by" someone, this statement embodies information about 
both sides of the relation (namely,  that which can be written and 
that  whom  can  write).  Hence,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  tagged 
resources  vary,  as  well  as  the  meaning  of  tags,  according  to  the 
relation linking both.  

Of  course,  what  triggers  the  act  of  tagging  (the  annotated 
resource) still remains a browsable Web resource, identified by a 
dereferenceable URI. Yet, what users are referring to depends on 
how  they  envision  the  nature  of  the  relations  between  tags  and 
their resources. The complexity of resources and the ambiguity it 
creates  lie  in  their  being  conceivable  from  different  angles.  The 
inherent  "aboutness"  they  share  with  documents  ensures  that 
either themselves or what they represent can be tagged.          

2.2.6  Different resources, different relations, 
different assertions 
Sometimes,  depending  on  the  chosen  relations,  it  is  possible  to 
distinguish  between  the  two  aspects.  Let  us  take  a  bookseller's 
webpage about a book, Weaving the Web by Tim Berners-Lee for 
example.  It  could  equally  be  tagged  with  a  relation  expressing 
what the webpage is about (and Berners-Lee certainly qualifies as 


that  the  book  Weaving  the  Web  was  written  by  Berners-Lee,  or 
even  with  a  relation  expressing  feelings  towards  him  ("great 
man"). 

Information Resource (Book) 

Web Resource (web page) 

Non-information Resource 

(Book) 

 written by               

Tim Berners-Lee 

 (dc :author) 

    is about               

Tim Berners-Lee 

 (dc :author) 

 is judged               

Great man 

 (dc :author) 

2.2.7  Assertions and other Tag Actions :  
In  spite  of  all  their  differences,  the  previous  use  cases  share  one 
trait in common: the meaning of each act of tagging is function of 
the  assertion  performed.  Of  course,  this  treatment  of  tags  is 
strongly  reminiscent  of  "speech  acts".  Just  as  language  can  be 
used  to  perform  actions  and  not  simply  in  a  purely  descriptive 
fashion despite the variety of possible assertions, tags also acquire 
a  meaning in  context  once it  becomes  obvious  which action they 
help  to  perform.  More  details  on  Tag  Actions  are  offered  in 
section 4. Let us now turn our attention to the mechanism that is 
used to model the previous use cases in NiceTag.  

3.  NICETAG12 AND RDF NAMED GRAPHS 
3.1  Modeling and Typing Tag Actions  
Carroll  et  al.  [12]  remarked  that  RDF  does  not  provide  any 
operational  means,  apart  from  reification,  for  making  statements 
about  graphs  and  relations  between  graphs.  As  a  solution  to  this 
problem they proposed Named Graphs in RDF to allow publishers 
to  communicate  assertional  intent  and  sign  their  assertions.  The 
need  they  expressed  to  embody  social  acts  with  some  record 
clearly resonates with scenarios of social tagging.  

To  model  tag  actions  we  defined  a  subclass  of  named  graphs 
(modeled as rdfg:Graph, see [12]) called nt:TagAction which 
embodies one single act of tagging (see fig. 1 below). The triples 
contained in the named graph represent the link, modeled with the 
property  nt:isRelatedTo,  between  an  instance  of  the  class 
irw:Resource  and  a  sign  (modeled  as  an 
instance  of 
rdfs:Resource).  Starting  from  this  point,  NiceTag  is  able  to 
serve  as  a  pivot-model  as  the  signs  used  to  tag  can  be  modeled 
with all the other currently available models of tags.  

irw:Resource 

rdfs :Resource 

nt:isRelatedTo 

nt:TagAction 

Fig.  1.  A  Tag  Action  as  a  named  graph  (nt  stands  for  nicetag 
namespace) 

More  importantly,  our  paradigm  opens  up  new  perspectives  on 
modeling tags by providing for three degrees of freedom. (1) The 
model  of  the  tagged  resource  can  be  extended  to  contribute  to  a 
solution to the identity crisis of the Semantic Web akin to the one 
proposed by [2]. (2) The modeling choice of the sign used to tag is 
let free (thanks to the use of  rdf:value, cf. infra 5.1.1). (3) The 

12  The  complete  schema  of  the  NiceTag  ontology  is  available 

here: http://ns.inria.fr/nicetag/2009/09/25/voc#  

relation  between  the  tagged  resource  and  the  sign  allows  for  a 
fine-grained account of the semiotics of tagging. The possibilities 
to  capture  the  nature  of  this  relation  are  twofold:  (a)  the 
nt:isRelatedTo relation can be declined to faithfully model all 
the  possible uses of tags  already  described in academic  literature 
and their possible evolution and (b) tag actions can be typed and  
specified with extra subclasses to capture other dimensions of the 
tag including context and other pragmatic dimensions.  

tags 

are 

expressed. 

in  which 

from  manual 

(nt:AutoTagAction) 

These  subclasses  can  help  distinguish,  for  instance,  automatic 
tagging 
tagging 
(nt:ManualTagAction).  They  can  also  help  in  accounting  for 
the  way 
The 
nt:WebConceptTagAction  would  be  used  when  signs  are 
computer  processable  by  design,  like  URIs  in  MOAT  and 
CommonTag.  We  intentionally  add  "by  design"  because  a  URI 
acting as a MOAT "meaning" would be a Web concept, whose 
meaning  is  sometimes  construable  by  a  human  (a  DBpedia  URI) 
sometimes not (a geoname one). nt:SyntacticTagAction suits 
tagging  involving  complex  signs  like  machine  tags,  that  is,  tags 
decomposed  in a  plurality  of  elements  (machine  tags  can thus  be 
seen as a kind of triple tags), that sometimes have the particularity 
of following a specific syntax in order to be processable by APIs. 
The  name  machine  tags  was  chosen  by  Flickr  engineers  to 
mimic  in  an  unconstrained  fashion  the  structure  of  RDF    triples. 
Hence,  the  namespace:predicate=value  (a  very  simple  and 
unspecified way to represent things thanks to strings of characters 
whose  components  are  ordered  like  classical  EAV  models) 
became  officially  supported  as a  means  to  browse  in  a  facet-like 
fashion Flickrs collections 

Finally,  the  nt:TagAction  class  is  declared  as  a  subclass  of 
sioc:Item  in  order  to  account  for  the  shareable  nature  of  tags, 
which  can  be  seen  as  some  sort  of  post.  This,  in  turn,  makes  it 
possible to describe the place where tag actions are stored with the 
property  sioc:has_container,  and 
(sioc: 
UserAccount)  of  the  user  (foaf:Person)  of  the  tag  with 
sioc:has_creator.  All  these  elements  could  easily  be  added 
automatically, unbeknownst to users. 

the  account 

3.2  RDF/XML Source declaration 
In  SPARQL  when  querying  a  collection  of  graphs,  the  GRAPH 
keyword  is  used  to  match  patterns  against  named  graphs. 
However, the RDF data model focuses on expressing triples with 
a  subject,  predicate  and  object  and  neither  it  nor  its  RDF/XML 
syntax  do  provide  a  mechanism  to  specify  the  source  of  each 
triple.  

A means to palliate such a lack was proposed in the W3C Member 
Submission  RDF/XML  Source  Declaration  [13]  as  an  XML 
syntax  associating  to  the  triples  encoded  in  RDF/XML  a  URI 
specifying  their  origin.  It  makes  use  of  a  single  attribute  to 
specify,  for  triples  represented  in  RDF/XML,  the  source  they 
should be attached to. The URI of the source of a triple is then: (1) 
the source  URI  specified  by  a  cos:graph  attribute  on  the  XML 
element  encoding  this  triple,  if  one  exists,  otherwise,  (2)  the 
source  URI  of  the  element's  parent  element  (obtained  following 
recursively  the  same  rules),  otherwise,  (3)  the  base  URI  of  the 
document.  

The  scope  of  a  source  declaration  extends  from  the  beginning  of 
the  start-element  in  which  it  appears  to  the  end  of  the 
corresponding  end-element  -  excluding  the  scope  of  any  inner 
source declarations. Such a declaration applies to all elements and 


the RDF/XML document is treated as the default source. Only one 
source can be declared as attribute of a single element.  

1.<nt:TaggedResource rdf:about="twitpic.com/l4boe" 
2. cos:graph="http://delicious.com/url/7f3e344f4abbbcc3a35c243
2d2ad5bec#fabien_gandon_:-)"> 
3. <nt:emotionalReaction>:)</nt:emotionalReaction> 
4.</nt:TaggedResource> 
5.<nt:ManualTagAction 
rdf:about="http://delicious.com/url/7f3e344f4abbbcc3a35c2432d2a
d5bec#fabien_gandon_:-)"> 
6. <sioc:has_creator rdf:resource="http://deliciou
s.com/fabien_gandon"/> 
7. <sioc:has_container rdf:resource="http://delici
ous.com/"/> 
8. </nt:ManualTagAction>    
Listing 1.  A tag as a named graph using RDF/XML 

1. SELECT ?t ?a ?g WHERE { 
2.  GRAPH ?tag { ?t ?a ?g } 
3.  ?tag rdf:type nt:ManualTagAction }  
Listing 2. SPARQL query to retrieve tags as named graphs. 

The example in listing 1 shows how this applies to declare a tag as 
a  named  graph.  Lines  1  to  4  declare  the  tag  as  a  graph  named 
http://delicious.com/url/7f3e344f4abbbcc3a35c2432d
2ad5bec#fabien_gandon_:-).  Lines 5  to  8  reuse  the  name  of 
the  graph  to  qualify  the  tag  as  a  tag  created  manually  by  user 
"fabien_gandon".  Loading  this  RDF  in  a  compliant  triple  store 
one can then run SPARQL queries like the one in listing 2 where 
line 2 searches for named graphs and the triples they contain, and 
line 3 enforces these graphs to be manually generated tags.  

the  one 

that 

identifies  and  gives  access 

Note that the URI of the nt:AnnotatedResource in this schema 
is 
the 
irw:WebRepresentation (the representation of a resource after 
content negotiation) which prompts the act of tagging. Tagging is 
made  possible  on  the  Web  in  this  context.  Neither  shall  it  be 
conflated  with  the  URI  of  the  tag  action,  which  is  another  URI, 
nor with the  nt:TaggedResource being referred to, which is in 
no way bound by the constraints found in technical specifications. 

to 

While  RDF  does  provide  constructs  to  write  reification  quads, 
asserting  the  reification  in  RDF  is  not  the  same  as  asserting  the 
original  statement    and  neither  implies  the  other.  Moreover, 
reification  expands  the  initial  triple  into  a  total  of  five  triples  (a 
triple plus a reification quad) and the link between the initial triple 
and its reification quad is not maintained. 

The  attribute  rdf:ID  can  be  used  in  a  property  element  to 
produce  a  reification  of  the  triple  that  the  property  element 
generates and assert it at the same time. However, this mechanism 
remains at the level of triples and there is nothing in the resulting 
triples that explicitly identifies the original triple and links it to the 
reification quad. RDF provides no way to associate the subject of 
the reification triples with an individual triple.  

Associating URIrefs with specific statements has to be done using 
mechanisms  outside  RDF  and  is  one  of  the  motivations  behind 
RDF 2.013. Likewise, statements can be made using the URI of a 
document  as  commonly  done  by  annotations  in  OWL.  In  an  ad 
hoc  application-dependent  understanding,  those  statements  could 
be  interpreted  as  if  they  were  to  be  distributed  over  all  the 
statements  in  the  document.  But there again  we  are  outside  RDF 

13 http://www.w3.org/2009/12/rdf-ws/  

and  OWL  and  relying  on  likening  the  document  to  its  asserted 
content does not sound like a good practice. 

4.  TAG ACTIONS AND RELATIONS 
4.1  TagActions as Social Acts 
Tag actions are irresistibly reminiscent of speech  acts. In fact our 
main  inspiration  here  was  drawn  from  Adolf  Reinachs  work  on 
Civil  right,  Die  apriorischen  Grundlagen  des  burgerlichen 
Rechtes  (Reinach  [14]).  Reinach  is  best  known  as  one  of  the 
brightest  students  of  Edmund  Husserl,  the  founding  figure  of 
phenomenology. Reinach himself is often described as the modern 
father  of  speech  act  theory,  long  before  J.L.  Austin  or  J.  Searle. 
Whereas  Reinach  found  posterity  as  a  realist  phenomenologist, 
what  is  most  remarkable  for  us  is  the  subtlety  with  which  he 
analyses the mediation between the ontological and the normative 
levels  of  civil  law.  Granted,  in  the  end,  he  defends  a  view  that 
tightly articulates what he calls social actions (the equivalent of 
speech  acts) and legal  norms  -  law  being  incapable  of  producing 
any  concepts  a  philosophical  foundation  is  called  for.  Reinachs 
theory  may  be  fruitfully  construed  as  a  theory  of  mediation 
between  social  acts  (and  their  a  priori,  ontological  foundation) 
and  civil  right.  A  norm,  says  Reinach,  gives  existence  to  what  is 
not  and  does  as  if  what  exists  did  not.  In  other  words,  it  is  not 
restricted to reality as we know it. Hence, social acts are modified 
once  embedded  in  legal  norms  (a  legal  act  of  promising  for 
example can satisfy different criteria to hold compared to a simple 
act of promising). 

Similarly,  some  tag  actions  are  social  acts  mediated  through  a 
technological  system  that is  no  less  than  the Web  itself. While  a 
number of tag actions are fairly equivalent to existing speech acts 
(categories  like  asserting  or  expressing  emotions),  others  are 
modified  once  mediated  in  a  digital  environment  like  the  Web. 
Sharing,  for  example,  is  a  social  action  that  must  meet  precise 
criteria (that that which is shared with someone be publicly known 
from  the  two  parties,  etc.).  The  nt:Share  Tag  Action,  by 
contrast,  is  accomplished  by  sending  a  resource  to  someone 
(this  is  done  on  delicious  with  for:username  tags  and  with 
@username  tags  on  Twitter).  A  username  does  not  guarantee 
that a person, a human being, someone, is behind that account. 
This is the very reason behind the choice that was recently made 
on the SIOC discussion list14 to replace the  sioc:User class by 
the more agnostic sioc:UserAccount class (the owner of a user 
account  might  indeed  be  a  robot,  a  person,  an  institution,  etc). 
Hence,  while  sharing  normally  involves  at  least  two  conditions: 
(a) something is shared between at least two persons, and (b) both 
persons  have  to  acknowledge  that  something  is  being  shared,  on 
social tagging Web services, both of these conditions are violated, 
sharing  is  thus  closer  to  indicating  and  sending  information  to 
contacts. 

The last category of tag action concerns those conceivable only in 
this  context,  depending  as  they  do  on  the  technical  possibilities 
opened  by  the Web.  On  YouTube  users  now  have  the  possibility 
to  isolate  media  fragments  of  videos  at  will,  in  order  to 
contextualize  their  comments  by  pointing  (nt:PointsAt)  at  a 
specific part of a resource. This mechanism could be reused along 
the  same  lines  with  tagging  so  that  it  would  become  possible  to 
tag  specific  parts  of  a  media.  This  is  especially  useful  when 

14 The final decision was made the day this paper was submitted: 

http://sioc-project.org/node/341 


with codices, impose their unfolding order and raise the need for 
new  forms  of  bookmarking.  The need  to  fragment resources  is 
also felt with traditional Web pages. One may for example want to 
tag a specific comment of an article. XPointer was thought to be a 
good  candidate  to  fulfill  this  scenario.  Unfortunately,  arbitrary 
lack  of 
technical 
advancement  and  the  project  was  abandoned.  Other  proposals 
include  defining  access  roles  through  tagging  (allowing  ones 
parents to  access  a  picture simply  by  using  the tag  parents  and 
the  Tag  Action  nt:GrantAccessRightsTo    an  idea  currently 
examined by various research teams16).  

limitations15  were 

the 

responsible 

for 

Status 

nt:TagAction 

nt:isRelatedTo 

New 

New 

New 

Existing 

(modified) 

Existing 

(modified) 

Existing 

Existing 

Existing 

nt:PointAt 

nt:hasPart 

nt:GrantAccessRights

nt:canBeReadBy 

To 

(etc.) 

nt:Aggregate 

nt:hasCommunityTag 

nt:Share 

nt:sentTo 

nt:Assert 

nt:isAbout 

nt:isRelevant 

nt:isRelevantToSo,  

nt:isRelevantToSt,  

nt:Evaluate 

nt:isWorth 

nt:SetTask 

nt:elicitsAction 

nt:ExpressEmotion 

nt:makesMeFeel 

Existing 

nt:Ask 

nt:raisesQuestionAbo

ut 

Fig.  2.  nt:TagAction  subclasses  and  nt:isRelatedTo  sub 
properties in NiceTag (existing, modified and new refer to 
the  status  of  speech  acts  :  those  that  existed  before  being 
translated  on  the  Web,  those  that  were  modified  and  those  that 
essentially depend on the Web to be performed). 

4.2  isRelatedTo 
Inspired  by  previous  studies,  in  particular  the  seminal  work  of 
Golder & Huberman [15], we modeled the different possible uses 
of  tags  with  sub-properties  of  the  nt:isRelatedTo  property. 
Two  of  our  broadest  classes,  factual  and  personal,  were  already 
proposed  in  Sen  et  al.  [16].  nt:Assert  (used  to  express  factual 
knowledge  about  the  resource  being  tagged)  is  associated  to  the 
relation  that  appears  to  be  the  most  widespread  of  all  properties, 
employed  when  the  sign  used  to  tag  describes  the  topic  of  a 
resource: nt:isAbout. Lots of models of tagging take for granted 

15  Limitations  exceeded  by  the  W3C  Media  Fragment  Working 
Group (MFWG) who discussed the need for various new HTTP 
headers  in  order  to  process  URI  +  fragment  requests  (an  issue 
raised by fragment parameters being stripped off from URIs by 
Web browsers and the issue of caching Web proxies). 

16  [17].  We  express  our  sincere  thanks  to  Michel  Buffa  and 
Catherine Faron for calling our attention to this matter. See also 
[18] where similar ideas are presented.  

that  this  is the relation  by  default.  There  seems,  consequently,  to 
be  no  pressing  need  whatsoever  to  implement it.  It  is  not true  as 
evidenced  by  two  properties  that  are  on  the  same  level: 
nt:isAbout and nt:isAKindOf. nt:isAKindOf is intended for 
all  cases  in  which  a  tag  is  used  to  distinguish  between  types  of 
nt:WebResource  (e.g.:  forum,  video,  blog,  picture,  etc.). While 
nt:isAbout is perceived to be broad enough to justify its special 
status, it is certainly superseded in this regard by the  nt:Assert 
Tag  Action,  a  proxy  for  all  the  state-of-affairs  RDF  relations 
available in existing vocabularies that may be asserted between a 
given resource and the things a sign refers to (written by, bought 
by,  composed  of,  caused  by, 
theorem  of,  etc.).  Another 
wholesome property whose virtue is to limit the inadequate use of 
nt:isAbout  is  nt:relevant  (to  someone  or  something).  A 
resource  might  indeed  be  said  to  be  relevant  to  a  thesis,  some 
studies,  etc.  without  being  even  remotely  about  any  of  these 
elements. Accuracy dictates that aboutness and relevance be thus 
unmistakably  distinguished  from  one  another.  nt:express 
Emotion  associates  a  resource  with  an  adjective  or  any  kind  of 
sign  expressing  a  quality  or  emotion  stirred  up  by  a  resource; 
typical  examples  are  interjections  and  smileys  (e.g.:  "wow!", 
"<:o)").  nt:isWorth is  meant  whenever a resource is  evaluated, 
ranked,  etc.  (e.g.:  "nice",  ****    Tag  Action:  Evaluate). 
nt:makesMeFeel (Tag  Action  :ExpressEmotion) is fit for use 
with  signs  expressing  emotions.  Another  sub  property  of 
nt:isRelatedTo covers uses of tags intended to make sense first 
and  foremost  to  the  applier.  This  includes  Golder  &  Huberman's 
class  task  organizing  (tag  action  nt:SetTask  and  relation 
nt:elicitsAction  used  with  "todo"  tags).  Similarly,  we 
introduce  the  property  nt:hasCommunitySign  for  collectively 
approved  signs  designed 
to  (Tag  Action)  nt:Aggregate 
resources  revolving  around  a  shared  event,  goal  or  entity  known 
by  all  the  members  of  a  community/audience.  For  example,  we 
used  the  tag  "#vocampnice2009"  to  gather  and  share  resources 
across multiple social Web applications about the VoCamp where 
the NiceTag framework was conceived.  

5.  TAG IDENTITY 
5.1  From tagging to folksonomies 

5.1.1  The identity of tags in NiceTag 
We  would  like  in  this  paragraph  to  examine  the  relationships 
between tagging models, uses and implementations by contrasting 
one model, at the core of the NiceTag ontology (proposed by [19] 
and [20]), and the results of the analysis of the data extracted from 
delicious.com  (the  choice  of  this  website  is  motivated  in 
recognition  of  the  fact  that  it  has  set  so  many  standards  that  the 
way it handles tagging has become almost proverbial). The former 
provides a vocabulary to harness the semantics of individual tag 
actions  between  one  resource  and  one  sign.  Websites  like 
delicious.com, in turn, offer no faithful equivalent of such a model 
because they represent tags according to much looser criteria. By 
distinguishing  representations  of  tags  on  the  Web  from  their 
models,  it  becomes  clear  that  every  single  act  of  tagging  can  be 
decomposed in a set of basic elements, some of which are lost in 
most, if not all, current implementations. This is especially true of 
relations  -  sub  properties  of  nt:isRelatedTo  -  generally  left 
implicit. Through source declarations and named graphs, each tag 
action  is  given  a  LOD  URI  corresponding  to  the  various 
dimensions  implied  every  time  a  user  (or  a  machine,  in  the 
eventuality  of  automatic  tagging)  tags  a  resource.  Hence,  tags, 


group  of  words  embedded  in  a  hyperlink,  might  be  better 
understood  as  non-information  resources.  Tags  are  sometimes 
taken to be no different from any HTML  <a> element except for 
the fact that a tag may receive additional markup (the rel="tag" 
microformat in particular17, to indicate that the link is a tag).18  

While  the  tagged  resource  in  NiceTag  basic  schema  (fig.1) 
espouses the many distinctions drawn in IRW ontology, it remains 
clear, however, that this is in no way tantamount to loosening the 
identity criteria of tag actions. Tag  Actions in NiceTag, generally 
called  "tags"  elsewhere,  consist  in  at  least  one  resource,  one 
relation and one sign. A set containing all these elements is being 
typed  with  additional  information  thanks  to  the  mechanisms 
described in  sections  3  and  4.  This  definition  rests  on  very  strict 
identity criteria for Tag Actions. As their name betokens, these are 
individuated so as to reflect all the  data that derive from a single 
act of tagging. Yet, functional identification and access, relations 
that  characteristically  link  URIs  and  resources,  are  absent  from 
this  schema.  Of  course,  if  our  model  was  to  be  represented,  this 
could  be  accomplished  through  a  "traditional"  tag,  one  that  is 
embedded  in  some  hyperlink.  It  could  even,  thanks  to  the 
information encapsulated in the named graph, grant access to the 
one  nt:WebResource  which  prompted  the  tag  action  (a  feature 
yet  unseen)  and  would  at the same time  assess:  (a)  what  kind  of 
resource  a  user  is  referring  to;  (b)  how  exactly  it  is  related  to  a 
chosen label; and (c) what this label means and what it refers to.  

This is achieved by adding specific range and domain constraints 
on each sub property of nt:isRelatedTo (for instance, the range 
of  nt:relevantToSb  could  be  foaf:Agent,  while  that  of 
nt:sentTo  could  be  sioc:UserAccount).  That  way  relations 
aptly  shed  some  light  on  both  the  referent  of  the  sign  and  the 
status  of  the  nt:TaggedResource  (either  a  irw:WebResource 
just as the  one that initiates  the act  of  tagging,  the representation 
of this irw:WebResource subject to many informational hazards, 
the information object that the irw:WebResource is a realization 

17 http://microformats.org/wiki/Rel-Tag.  
18  Moreover,  this  definition,  summarized  by  Tantek Celik  on 
microformat.org raises other problems: By adding rel="tag" to 
a hyperlink, a page indicates that the destination of that hyperlink 
is an author-designated "tag" (or keyword/subject) for the current 
page.  Note  that  a  tag  may  just  refer  to  a  major  portion  of  the 
current page (i.e. a blog post). e.g. by placing this link on a page, 
<a  href=http://technorati.com/tag/tech  rel="tag"> 
tech</a> the author indicates that the page (or some portion of 
the page) has the tag "tech". The linked page SHOULD exist, and 
it is the linked page, rather than the link text, that defines the tag. 
The last path component of the URL is the text of the tag, so  <a 
href=http://technorati.com/tag/tech rel="tag">fish 
</a> would  indicate  the tag  "tech"  rather  than  "fish.  From  this 
definition  it  appears  that  tagging  is  choosing  a  URI  instead  of  a 
label  which  seems  to  contradict  just  about  everything  we  know 
about  tagging.  Consequently  we  depart  from  [21]s  Upper  Tag 
Ontology  (UTO)  since  it rests  on  similar  assumptions:  Tags  are 
nothing  more  special  than  a  typed  hyperlink.  We  can  use  rel 
attribute to type hyperlinks. Actually, tags do exist without being 
embedded  in  hyperlink  like  most  machine  tags  on  Flickr  do,  as 
was the case with hash tags on Twitter at first.  

of, a non-information resource like a thing  or an abstract concept 
that the irw:WebResource aims to represent, etc.).  

It  would  frankly  be  unrealistic  to  expect  users  to  tag  resources 
with  only  other  resources.  At  the  same  time,  we  do  not  wish  to 
simply  shift  to  literals  because  that  would  make  it  impossible  to 
add  range  constraints  other  than  rdfs:Resource.  To  cope  with 
this  difficulty,  and  give  users  the  liberty  to  chose  whatever  label 
they  see  fit,  we  split  the  triple  into  two  triples,  one  with  a  blank 
node (bnode) as its value instead of a literal, to keep the range of 
the  resource  that  corresponds  to  the  label.  The  other  triple  links 
that bnode with a literal thanks to rdf:value as follows19: 

Listing 3 Modeling property ranges with bnodes and rdf:value 
1. nt:sentTo rdfs:range sioc:UserAccount . 
2. nt:TaggedResource nt:sentTo _:v . 
3. _:v rdf:value "aamonnz".   
This increased  expressivity  comes  with a  high  price to  pay  since 
SPARQL queries get more complicated. From:  
< Select ?x ?y { ?x nt:sentTo ?y} 
we now have to ask, to get the same answer: 
Listing 4 SPARQL query with range and proxy value: 
1. Select ?x ?y where { 
2. { 
3.  ?x net:sentTo ?y . 
4.    FILTER (isURI(?y)) 
5. } 
6. UNION 
7. { 
8.  ?x nt:sentTo ?z 
9.    ?z rdf:value ?y. 
10. FILTER (isBlank(?z)) 
11. } 
12.} 
Further  work is  thus  needed to  determine  whether  expressivity  is 
to be favored over simplicity of use.  

5.1.2  The identity of tags in delicious 

it  gives  access 

to 

Examples  of  tagging  on  delicious.com,  for  example,  do  not 
appear  to  follow  the  same  criteria  to  define  what  a  tag  is.  These 
are indeed  considerably  loosened.  On  delicious  a  community  tag 
identifies  a  resource  as  much  as 
its 
representation,  the  latter  being  constantly  evolving  over  time  (a 
collection  of  bookmarks  and  tags  is  bound  to  grow).  It  might  be 
added, thus departing slightly from the interpretations given in the 
W3C  document  entitled  Architecture  of  the  World  Wide  Web, 
Volume One20, that while a URI identifies an information resource 
in  a  functional  way,  such  as a  periodically  updated  report  on  the 
weather in the State of Oaxaca, which can be represented online in 
such and such a way, it may also refer (irw:refersTo) to a noninformation resource  that  corresponds  to  the  current  (real-world) 
weather 
like 
http://delicious.com/fabien_gandon/web  in  delicious. 
com, would (a) identify an information resource (a document that 
consists  in  a  list  of  resources  picked  up  by  the  community  users 
and assembled thanks to their sharing a common label), (b) grant 
access  (irw:accesses)  to  a  constantly  changing  representation 
of  this  irw:WebResource  (as  users  add  new  bookmarks  falling 
under a given label), and (c) refer to a community tag, understood 
as  a  non-information resource (a  collective social  act,  considered 
in  all  its  dimensions)  (cf.  Figure  3).  The  aforementioned  URI, 

19 For clarity purpose we temporarily shift to the Turtle notation. 
20 http://www.w3.org/TR/webarch/  

this  part  of  Mexico.  Similarly,  a  URI 

in 


only to a Web representation of several tag actions, in other words 
a  web  page  listing  all  the  bookmarks  of  user  fabien_gandon 
tagged  with  the  sign  web.  We  can  see  that  URIs  given  on 
delicious.com do not allow for a fine-grained individuation of tags 
at the level of tag actions. 

                                                                        Access  

                                                                        Identification   

                                                                        Reference 

                     Label                                  

       Action              relation to the      Resource 

Figure  3  Abstract  representation  of  the  interplay  between 
                      Label 
URIs, resources and tags (labels).  
One  of  the  aim  of  the  NiceTag  model  is  to  account  for  the 
                                                        Resource 
continuum between individual tag actions and tags in their current 
Action performed          relation to the 
implementations  (nt:CollectiveTagActions).  Thanks  to  its 

fine-grained  model  that  individuates  each  tag  action  thoroughly, 
one  can  end  ambiguity  when  two  tags  have  the  same  sign  by 
specifying  the  relation  that  links  this  sign  to  the  tagged  resource 
using the panel of subproperties of nt:isRelatedTo. On the one 
hand,  when  the  choice  does  not  exist,  this  is  clearly  a  limitation 
for  a  given  act  of  tagging  prompted  by  a  irw:WebResource  X 
where a  sign  Y  attached  to  a  tagged  resource  may  express  many 
different  things  depending  on  the  relation  holding  between  the 
two.  On  the  other  hand,  similarity  of  signs  is  a  good  source  of 
serendipity  because  two  tag  actions  with  similar signs,  prompted 
by  the  same  irw:WebResource,  may  in  fact  express  different 
things or different aspects of the same thing. In any case, delicious 
never intended to  represent  such relations  explaining  why  once  a 
sign has been applied in relation to a given  irw:WebResource it 
cannot be reused in the same context.  
Suffices  to  get  rid  of  the  typed  relations  (sub  properties  of 
nt:isRelatedTo),  the  cardinality  constraints  that  limit  the 
number of resource assigned to a Tag Action and then the burden 
of  identity  necessarily  rests  on  the  sign  (and  possibly  the  sioc: 
Item value). Then, with SCOT property  nt:spellingVariant, 
signs  themselves  need  not  be  strictly  identical  to  be  considered 
equivalent  (e.g.  "Paris",  "paris",  two  different  words  in  French). 
tagging  to  folksonomies 
This  explains  the  transition  from 
(personal  or  collective),  from  single  well-individuated  Tag 
Actions  to  Tag  Actions  which  associate  for  undisclosed  reasons 
(i.e., the missing relations) a variety  of resources to a sign which 
admits  a  plurality  of  variants.  This  is  how  serendipity  is 
accidentally  fostered.  Within  the  NiceTag  framework  we  aim  to 
make  this  feature  an  intentional  one  whose  parameters    the 
criteria of identity that hold for tags  can be specified at will. 

6.  SCENARIOS & USES-CASES 
A model would not be complete if no indication was provided of 
its  potential  and  actual  uses.  We  can  distinguish  at  least  three 
potential scenarios involving NiceTag.  

labels and sticking to the nt:Assert tag action, and no additional 
complexity will be added to what exists. The use of named graphs 
and  a  theoretically  robust  model  will  simply  makes  things  less 
quirky an act in favor of a unifying model of tagging. 

The second scenario involves one or more typed tag actions with 
additional  relations.  Such  relations  (especially  the  factual  ones, 
consistent with nt:Assert) are for the greatest part found outside 
of  NiceTag.  They  are  relevant in  direct  proportion  with the  main 
topic  of  the  Web  service  they  are  a  part  of:  social  bookmarking 
website with an emphasis on books, like LibraryThing, would be 
well-inspired  to  tap  into  book-related  properties  and  ontologies 
while  their  picture-orientated  equivalents  (such  as  Flickr)  could 
reuse  Hayes  and  Warrens  work  on  images21.  NiceTag,  being 
entirely  open  as 
relations  subsumed  under 
nt:relatedTo,  was  design  to  adapt  to  as  many  contexts  as 
possible.  Other  websites,  where  communication  between  users  is 
an important feature and where tagging is a success, could decide 
to implement tag actions like nt:Share to benefit from the union 
of  both  dynamics,  communicating  and  tagging  (the  aim  and  the 
method).  Actions like sharing or sending a message do no depend 
on  tagging  and  this  does  not  necessarily  represent  the  most 
efficient  way  to  accomplish  them.  Yet,  people  may  favor  a 
method  that  has  proven  successful  in  the  past  (plus  those 
communication  acts  realized  through  tagging  may  at  the  same 
time play the role of metadata used for indexing).  

regards 

the 

Finally,  the  last  scenario  involves  the  entire  model.  A  legitimate 
question  to  ask  is  whether  interfaces  will  make  it  easy  to  shift 
from  a  paradigm  where  users type  their  own  tags,  to  a  paradigm 
where  users  benefit  more  and  more  from  the  work  of  algorithms 
that  present  automatic  recommendations.  A  similar  evolution  has 
already  been  witnessed  in the past in the  field  of  video  games  (a 
domain where the lack of sound interfaces is a no-go). In the first 
adventures  games  of  the  80s,  actions  were  performed  by  typing 
keywords  and  matching  them  against  a  pre-defined  vocabulary. 
Then,  when  the  SCUMM  (Script  Creation  Utility  for  Maniac 
Mansion)  scripting 
line 
disappeared and instead the player had to choose between a set of 
actions,  differing  from  games  to  games.  Now  that  the  interplay 
between  serious  games  and  tagging  has  become  a  matter  of 
academic  study22  with  wild  appeal,  the  lessons  learned  in  other  
fields, could help us overcome the envisioned difficulties.  

language  appeared, 

the  command 

7.  CONCLUSION 
Though  the  success  of  tagging  systems  is  due  to  their  extreme 
simplicity  and  immediacy  of  use,  the  limitation  of  dealing  with 
unstructured content appears straightforward, and users have been 
shown to long for more efficient and creative way of using tags to 
perform a wild variety of actions (a process reminiscent of what is 
sometimes  called  function  creep).  Likewise, 
the  "killer 
application"  of  semantic  tagging  could  very  well  actually  be 
tagging  itself, but  tagging  as  fully  implemented  for  the  first time 
thanks  to  a  comprehensive  model  accounting  for  its  versatility  in 
forms and social uses. We believe that this project, already partly 
undertaken  by  current  models  of  tagging,  will  strongly  benefit 

21  http://www.slideshare.net/carmapro/warren-hayes-

ai-symposium 

The first is consistent with current implementations of tagging and 
requires  no  further addition.  Suffice  to  lower  the  identity  criteria 
of  a  tag  by  dropping  the  relations  between  tagged  resources  and 

22  It  should  never  be  forgotten  that  Flickr  emerged  over  the 
remains  of  Game  Neverending,  a  Passive  Multiplayer  Online 
Role Playing Game as noted in [22]. 

   from  a  shift  of  focus  on  the  manifold  relations  between a  tagged 
resource and a tag. This is what NiceTag is targeted at: to be able 
to  express  the  various  uses  and  forms  of  tagging  by  maximizing 
both  the  structure  of  data  and  freedom  of  users.  Our  proposal  to 
harness  the  Semantic  Web  technologies  to  tagging  interfaces 
comes  as  a  complement  to  other  approaches  (such  as  SCOT, 
SIOC,  CT  or  MOAT,  see  [11],  [23]  and  [24])  which tend  to rely 
on  the  user's  will  to  specify  the  meaning  of  their  tags.  The 
NiceTag  framework  aims  at  introducing  little  steps  of  semantics 
in  existing  interfaces,  according  to  the  taggers'  needs,  thus 
enriching  current  tagging  systems  and  keeping  their  essential 
simplicity. Tools such as Twitter offer new and exciting use cases 
and  call  for  a  thorough  analysis  to  enrich  the  list  of  tag  actions 
presented here. NiceTag will move on to reflect and leverage the 
creativity  displayed  every  day  by  users  in  concrete  situations,  a 
program currently being implemented in the ISICIL project23. 

8.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
Alexandre  Monnin  would  like  to  thank  INRIA  Sophia  Antipolis 
and the  Edelweiss team.  This  work  was  funded in  part  through  a 
visiting  scholarship  that  took  place  between  March  and  April 
2010.  
