CAM in the Semantic Web World

Pedro J. Munoz-Merino, Abelardo Pardo,

Martin Wolpers, Katja Niemann, Martin

Fraunhofer-Institute for Applied Information

Friedrich

Technology  FIT

Schloss Birlinghoven

Carlos Delgado Kloos, Mario

Munoz-Organero

Department of Telematic Engineering

Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
E-28911 Leganes (Madrid), Spain

{pedmume, abel, cdk,
munozm}@it.uc3m.es

53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany

{martin.wolpers, katja.niemann,
martin.friedrich}@fit.fraunhofer.de

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we introduce a graph representation of the
main elements of our defined RDF binding for contextualized attention metadata (CAM). In addition, we give a brief
overview of two applications that we have implemented using the CAM semantic web format. The Zeitgeist and a
find similar users applications illustrate our approach.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H4.0 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous
; H3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: General
; E.0 [Data]: General

General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Standardization, Languages, The-
ory

Keywords
Contextualized attention metadata, RDF, user relationships

1.

INTRODUCTION

Our approach deals with observations about the actions
that a user performs on resources in different computer applications (on their desktop or via Web), as well as retrieving
their specific context. This information is called contextualized attention metadata (CAM). The analysis of CAM yields
a wide spectrum of verifiable information on user behavior,
for example the detection of patterns, filtering of information
depending on the user context, or personalizing it depending on the user needs. In [7], a solution for monitoring user
behavior using the CAM schema with an XML binding is
presented.

Nowadays, several approaches take advantage of semantic
web technologies, for example for Intelligent Tutoring Systems [1]. Therefore, in this paper we present a graph repre-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
iSemantics 2010 September 1-3, 2010 Graz, Austria
Copyright 2010 ACM ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09 ...$10.00.

sentation of the main elements of our proposed RDF binding
for CAM to enable the integration of CAM into RDF-based
learning systems. Based on the list of the presented differences in [4] and applied to the specific case of CAM, we
aim to create a binding superior to the current CAM-XML
binding.

In addition, the CAM-RDF binding supports analyzing
the observations in a more convenient way using e.g. graph
algorithms. We use the graph analogy of RDF here because
a graph emphasizes the elements relationships rather than
an XML tree, so that the discovery of relationship between
two users that have been using some objects in a specific
context, or between two learning resources based on the actions performed over them [5] is simplified.

2. RDF-BINDING FOR CAM

Our work bases on the XML binding of CAM as described
in [7] in detail. By adding new semantics to the CAM rep-
resentation, CAM is able to better reflect the relationships
among captured information. The transition from XML to
RDF therefore entails the following changes and extensions:
setting a criterion for URIs and namespaces, the reallocation
of elements from the XML binding according to their se-
mantics, and the addition of new elements. Please note that
we do not change the original definition of CAM elements
but only extend the CAM definition where deemed necessary or appropriate. The CAM-RDF binding is available at
http://www.fit.fraunhofer.de/ wolpers/ontologies/cam/
cam.owl.

Figure 1 shows a graphical representation of part of the defined model for the RDF binding, which includes the classes,
properties, and their relationships. In this diagram, property reification and string values have been removed because
of space limitations. The boxes represent classes, while the
arrows denote uni-directional properties that relate different
classes.

3. APPLYING THE RDF-CAM BINDING
3.1 RDF-based Zeitgeist for MACE

The European project MACE (Metadata for Architectural
Contents in Europe, [6]) provides advanced graphical access
to large amounts of architectural learning resources stored
in various repositories that are distributed all over Europe.
All interactions with the MACE portal are monitored and
stored as CAM data using the XML binding.


We have implemented an application that generates statistics over the CAM-RDF binding of the MACE data. The
approach is similar to the one presented in the XML-CAM
binding based MACE Zeitgeist application [5]. The statistics include the number of different types of events of the
MACE system that have occurred during certain time intervals (a day, a month, or an arbitrary time interval), as
well as an ordered classification of the resources that were
accessed the most for each type of event with the number of
occurrences.

First, we wanted to know if the RDF-CAM binding is able
to replace the XML-CAM binding. As a proof of concept, we
re-implemented these statistics using the RDF-CAM representation and compared the results with those of the XMLCAM binding. They are equal. We conclude that our approach is valid, thus the defined RDF-CAM binding allows
the creation of Zeitgeist statistics. The presented statistics
do not involve a lot of semantics, are based on a fixed data
model, and do not extend from other vocabularies. This
means that, even though the RDF-CAM binding is over-
doingit, its use would still generate appropriate and sufficient statistical results.
3.2 Relating users based on their activities

To illustrate some of the advantages of the integration of
CAM of the MACE system into the semantic web, we show
a basic application for relating users based on the actions
they perform over different resources.

In this example, we measure the relationship between two
users taking into account two aspects: balance between active and passive actions and balance of number of similar
actions over the same resources. Both will be briefly explained in the following paragraphs.
3.2.1 User activity measure
We need a measure for the activity of users. We therefore consider passive and active actions of users with the
MACE system. A passive action is an activity in which a
user receives (for example something to read) a resource or

Figure 2: Graphical representation for similar actions of two users

information while an active action is an activity in which a
user takes part by modifying or updating the resource.

We want to know if a user performs active or passive actions within the MACE system during a certain period of
time. We define the measure of the balance between active and passive actions for a user by dividing the number
of active actions by the total number of passive plus active
actions. This produces a number in a scale from 0 to 1.
Once the classification between active and passive actions
has been included in the ontology, the number of active actions during a certain period can be retrieved.

This measure is relevant because it allows us to identify resources of interest to the user. If a user modifies a resource,
she clearly spends attention on the resource, consequently
identifying the resource as a relevant one to the user, possibly even more relevant that none-modified resources.
3.2.2 User similarity measure
An action is considered similar between two users when


5091, pages 540550, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
Springer-Verlag.

[2] P. J. Mu noz-Merino and C. Delgado Kloos. A software

player for providing hints in problem based learning
according to a new specification. Computer Applications
in Engineering Education, 17 (3):272284, 2009.
[3] P. J. Mu noz-Merino, M. Wolpers, M. Friedrich,
C. Delgado Kloos, and M. Mu noz-Organero. An
approach for the personalization of exercises based on
contextualized attention metadata and semantic web
technologies. In Proceedings IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies
(ICALT), 2010.

[4] M. Nilsson, M. Palmer, and J. Brase. The lom rdf

binding - principles and implementation. In 3rd Annual
Ariadne Conference, 2003.

[5] H.-C. Schmitz, M. Scheffel, M. Friedrich, M. Jahn,

K. Niemann, and M. Wolpers. CAMera for PLE. In
U. Cress, V. Dimitrova, and M. Specht, editors,
EC-TEL 2009, volume 231396, pages 507520, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2009. Springer-Verlag.

[6] M. Stefaner, E. D. Vecchia, M. Condotta, M. Wolpers,

M. Specht, S. Apelt, and E. Duval. Mace - enriching
architectural learning objects for experience
multiplication. In E. Duval, R. Klamma, and
M. Wolpers, editors, EC-TEL, volume 4753 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 322336. Springer,
2007.

[7] M. Wolpers, J. Najjar, K. Verbert, and E. Duval.

Tracking actual usage: the attention metadata
approach. International Journal Educational
Technology and Society, 10(3), 2007.

both execute the same type of action over the same resource.
In order to measure the proximity between two users during
a certain period, another parameter is the balance between
the numbers of similar actions that users perform over the
same resources. In this way, we can divide the number of
similar actions between two users by the total number of actions executed by them. This again would return a number
in a scale from 0 to 1.

We therefore define an action as a similar event between
two users if and only if the same type of action is executed
and over the same resource. Figure 2 shows a graphical representation for a similar action between two users. In fact,
figure 2 also shows an instance of the CAM-RDF binding by
modelling the activity (as Ev1 and Ev2 ) of the same type
(== same activity) and on the same resource (as Ev1 and
Ev2 occursin Resource). Furthermore, the figure also exampliefies how users are related to events and resources via the
connection and session relations.

Using the similarity measure, we are able to recomend the
user with resources that might be of interest to him based
on the reading list of the similar user. This Amazon-style
recommendation (read what other users similar to you have
read) helps students of architecture to find resource related
to their current interest.

4. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we describe a graph representation of the
main elements of a CAM-RDF binding, so that all the advantages of the semantic web can be applied to CAM, e.g.
for analysis purposes or more convenient searches based on
graph algorithms. The corresponding part of RDF binding
is expressed as ontology defined in OWL.

We have illustrated our RDF binding with the implementation of a framework that includes CAM data from the
MACE system, and with two basic applications: the first
simply creates some Zeitgeist statistics and the second calculates the relationship between two users based on the events
performed in the MACE system annotated in RDF.

Further work focuses on validating the applied measures
through real-world experiments. We aim to integrate our
approach into the .LRN system (http://dotlrn.org/) as well
as an in the hinting module extension [2] of the XTutor
system (http://icampus.mit.edu/xtutor/). First steps for
the integration of CAM into the hinting module extension
of the XTutor system will be published in [3].

The given ontology will be published on the web, presume-

able at http://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-vocab-pub/

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Communitys Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no 231396
(ROLE project). In addition, the research leading to these
results has received funding by the Learn3 project TIN2008-
05163/ TSI within the Spanish Plan Nacional de I+D+I,
and the Madrid regional community project eMadrid S2009/
TIC-1650.
