Value Network Analysis for the Pragmatic Web  a case of 

logistic innovation

Hans Weigand 
Tilburg University 
P.O.Box 90153  

5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands 

+31 13 4662806 

H.Weigand@uvt.nl 

Jeewanie Jayasinghe Arachchige 

Tilburg University 
P.O.Box 90153  

5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands 

+31 13 4662806 

J.JayasingheArachchig@uvt.nl

ABSTRACT 
A  Pragmatic  Web  perspective  is  focused  on  in  the  effects  of  the 
use of Internet in certain contexts. As such, it  is interested in the 
relationship  between  communication  (information  system)  and 
value (economic system). This paper describes the Value Analysis 
Model (VAM) that integrates several analysis techniques for value 
network models and demonstrates its applicability in a case study. 
For  value  network  models,  we  use  e3-value  extended  with  the 
notion  of  value  encounter.  The  case  study  is  about  innovative 
government services in the logistic domain. It is shown that value 
encounter  analysis  using  VAM  is  useful  for  getting  a  holistic 
understanding of how value is co-created in networks. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H1 
[Computer Applications]: Social and Behavioral Sciences 

[Information  Systems]:  Models  and  principles,  J.4 

General Terms 
Design, Economics 

Keywords 
e-government, logistics, value networks, pragmatic web 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

The  Pragmatic  Web  [1]  can  be  defined  as:  the  Internet,  not  as  a 
technical  infrastructure  for  data  sharing  but  as  a  platform  of 
contextualized human  communication  and  coordination [2].  How 
does the Internet effectively support coordination?  To answer this 
question  we  need  to  go  beyond  a  data  exchange  view  of 
communication.  What  do  people  try  to  achieve  when  they  send 
messages,  call  a  web  service  or  write  notes  in  a  shared 
workspace?  In  order  to  model,  analyze,  and,  in  the  end,  support 
these  interactions  effectively,  we  need  modeling  methods  that 
consider  both  the  goals  (some  form  of  coordination)  and  the 
means  of  communication  (information  exchanges  in  social 
interaction)  and  how  the  two  are  related.  Fig.  1  shows  the 
conceptual  framework  that  we  adopt  to  connect  the  Internet 
technology, 
the  real-world 
processes  coordinated  and  their  economic  meaning  as  value 
____________________________________ 

the  coordination  it 

implements, 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS 2010, September 1-3, 2010 Graz, Austria Copyright  
ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09... $10.00 

networks.  Currently  available  modeling  methods  include  e3value 
network  analysis  (economic  system,  see  below)  and 
the 
commitment-based business metamodel (social system) [3].  

We can distinguish two levels of use for these modeling methods: 
first,  they  can  be  used  off-line  in  thinking  about  the  design  of 
certain  interactions,  e.g.  the  analysis  of  the  interactions  in  an 
innovative  new  business  model.  Web  services  are  an  important 
instrument  in  realizing  an  Internet  of  Services  [4];  the  intended 
analysis methods can be used by service engineers and/or business 
analysts  involved  as  web  service  analysis  methods  that  precede 
the  web  service  design.  Secondly,  these  models,  if  sufficiently 
formalized,  could be  used by  automated  tools  to  support  humans 
in  their  interactions,  similar  to  the  way  workflow  management 
tools  support  business  processes  within  an  organization.  This 
paper  is  restricted  to  the  first  level  and  investigates  the  use  of 
value  network  analysis,  a  technique  that  does  abstract  from 
process  details  and  focuses  on  the  (economic)  value  that  is 
exchanged. The paper builds on [5] that first defined the notion of 
value  encounter  (and  contained  some  initial  ideas  about  value 
analysis)  and  [6]  that  introduced  and  illustrated  value  network 
modeling for the Pragmatic Web, focusing on social interactions. 

Figure 1 Value Networks and the Pragmatic Web 

The  objective  of  this  paper  is  to  extend  the  e3value  network 
modeling method (section 2) in such a way that it is better suited 
to analyze co-creation of value in the Pragmatic Web. In [6] Value 
network  modeling  was  applied  to  the  Facebook  case,  but  at  the 
end  of  the  day,  modeling  without  analysis  has  limited  practical 
value.  The  contribution  of  this  paper  is  that  it  develops  a 
comprehensive  Value  Analysis  Model  (VAM)  and  a  structured 
value  encounter  analysis  process  (section  3)  and  demonstrates  is 
applicability  in  a  case  study  that  is  based  on  the  literature  and  is 
concerned  with  innovative  logistic  solutions  and  e-government 
(section 4). 


With growing complexity in the globalized business world of the 
21st  century  companies  increasingly  have  to  depend  on  temporal 
or  more  stable  networks  of  business  partners,  called  by  names 
such  as  Virtual  Organizations,  Value  Constellations  or 
Collaborative Business Networks (CN). New technologies such as 
web  services  are  being  developed  as  solutions  for  the  support  of 
such  networks  [7].  However,  for  the  proper  development  and 
deployment  of  those  technologies,  a  structured  understanding  of 
the basic principles and mechanisms of business collaborations is 
needed. 

The  e3-value  modeling  approach  provides  a  tool  for  modeling 
value  analysis,  helping  to  determine  the  value  flows  for  each  of 
the  actors  [8].  The  core  elements  of  e3-value  models  are  value 
exchanges,  which  show  the  potential  transfers  of  exchanges 
between collaborating entities in a CN and for profitability  value 
objects  from  one  actor  to  another  (Fig.2).  A  value  object  is  of 
some  (economic)  value  for  at  least  one  of  the  actors.  Typical 
examples for value objects are products, payments and services. 

Figure 2.   Basic e3-value constructs 

In recent years, [9,10,11] and others, have introduced the concept 
of  service-dominant  (S-D)  logic,  which  focuses  on  service 
provision, in contrast to goods production (G-D logic). S-D logic 
can be seen as an attempt to view services not as a particular kind 
of (intangible) good that should be produced and marketed in the 
same  way  as  traditional  goods.  Service  provisioning  is  doing 
something before and with another party. In this perspective, what 
the  company  provides  is  not  an  output,  but  an  input  for  a 
continuing value-creation process in which the customer takes the 
lead.  The  shift  from  G-D  to  S-D  logic  is  one  from  a  value 
proposition  consisting  of  operand  (passive)  resources  to  one 
consisting  of  operant  (active)  resources.  Instead  of  seeing  value 
being  created  within  companies  that  exchange  the  means  for  this 
value creation from one to another, it sees the value being created 
between companies (or companies and consumers). In its focus on 
co-creation  of  value,  it  builds  forth  on  the  pioneering  work  of 
[12],  and  resonates  with  developments  in  the  management  [13] 
and marketing literature  [14]. The notion of S-D logic still needs 
to be worked out further and gain more empirical validation [15], 
but  in  this  article,  we  take  it  as  a  starting-point,  and  address  the 
question  how  to  support  this  logic  using  current  value  modeling 
and business ontology approaches [16]. 

Current  value  modeling  approaches  can  deal  well  with  services 
and  have  provided  several  conceptual  tools  to  support  service 
design (e.g. [2,17,18]). However, they fall short at the moment in 
supporting  an  S-D  analysis  of  value  creation.  In  particular,  when 
focusing on e3-value, we note the following limitations: 

  To  assess  the  sustainable  value  of  network  collaboration,  the 
transactions.  The 
analysis  must 
dynamics  of  intangible  benefits,  in  particular  the  effects  on 
knowledge  development  and  the  social  network,  need  to  be 
taken into account as well. 

look  beyond  economic 

  Collaborations  often  involve  more  than  two  actors.  Although 
an  e3-value  analysis  helps  to  clarify  the  value  that  each  actor 
draws from other parties in terms of value that they receive, the 
model  does  not  identify  the  value  that  the  stakeholders  draw 
from  the  collaboration  as  such.  The  same  holds  for  the 
resources that they bring in. The e3-value model breaks up the 
collaboration  into  binary  value  exchanges.  This  approach  is 
fitting  from  an  economic  perspective,  as  contracts  are  most 
often  made  between  two  parties,  but  it  can  obstruct  a  holistic 
understanding of the collaboration and the value that it creates. 
  No  value  network  is  an  island.  It  is  embedded  in  the  global 
Pragmatic  Web  in  two  ways.  First,  the  value  network  can  be 
seen  as  an  aspect  model  of  the  Pragmatic  Web,  a  model  that 
focuses  on  the  value  aspect,  rather  than  the  communication 
aspect,  for  example.  Secondly,  a  particular  value  network  is 
always  connected  through  its  actors  to  other  networks.  From 
this larger perspective, the network can function as a bridge. It 
may  act  as  a  composite  actor  that  stands  in  a  value  exchange 
relationship with other actors. 

These  limitations  are  addressed  in  this  paper  by  introducing  the 
notion of value encounter and an extensive analysis method.  

3.  VALUE ENCOUNTER PRINCIPLES 
When  addressing  a  certain  CN,  the  value  encounter  analysis 
postpones the question of who is exchanging value to whom, but 
focuses  on  the  value  encounters  first.  A  value  encounter  is  an 
interaction space between multiple actors where each actor brings 
in certain resources; these resources are combined then in such a 
way  that  value  is  created  to  all  of  them.  It  is  assumed  that  each 
value encounter has at least one core process cycle in order to be 
sustainable.  This  core  process  can  be  a  certain  service 
provisioning,  or  e.g.  a  production  process.  Value  encounters  can 
be  connected  by  means  of  a  causal  relationship  (+),  when 
activity  in  one  encounter  reinforces  the  activity  in  another 
encounter.  In  this  section,  we  will  describe  the  value  encounter 
principles  by  referring  to  the  TPL  logistic  domain.  The  value 
encounter  approach  starts  with  modeling  the  CN,  followed  by  a 
decomposition  step  in  which  the  shared  value  activities  are 
modelled.  The  third  step  is  an  analysis  step  from  four  different 
perspectives. 

Figure 3.  Value encounters for TPL logistic service 


Value  encounter  modeling  can  be  applied  to  a  specific  or  a 
generic CN. In this case, functionalities of TPL logistic companies 
were identified based on the literature and the TPL case studies in 
([19,20,21])  in  order  to  define  a  generic  CN.  However,  as  Hertz 
and  Alfredsson  [20]  make  clear,  TPL  providers  can  be  classified 
in  different  types,  depending  on  their  strategic  choices.  In  this 
case, we focus on the standard TPL provider. 

In  the  simplified  model  of  figure.  3  we  distinguish  four  actors:  
TPL Company, Shipper, Carrier and Government. Between these 
actors,  we  distinguished  three  value  encounters  denoted  by  light 
yellow  color  dotted  rectangles.  Each  of  these  value  encounters 
creates  value  independently,  however  they  reinforce  each  other. 
The  value  encounters  correspond  to  the  three  major  stages 
identified  in  the  e-logistics  survey  of  [20]:  build-up  stage  (i.e., 
arrangement), 
and 
(i.e., 
institutionalization (bonding processes) stage. 

execution 

stage 

shipping) 

In the value encounter between the shipper and the TPL company 
labeled  relationship,  the  shipper  commits  to  the  TPL  company 
and  in  return  it  gets  rights  on  shipping  service  from  the  TPL 
company. The TPL company commits to provide secure shipping 
services to the shipper on the other hand it gets rights on shipping 
products.  This  may  be  in  the  form  of  a  frame  contract.  As  all 
value encounters, the value encounter does not simply stop when 
a shipping arrangement starts, but is of continuing relevance. The 
central process cycle consists of the repetitive building, evaluation 
and rebuilding of the relationship and the institutions based on it. 

second  value  encounter  distinguished 

is  shipping 
The 
arrangement.  The  TPL  company  facilitates  carrier  selection  in 
the  shipping  arrangement  interaction  which  creates  value  to  the 
shipper. The shipper brings in a shipping need. The TPL company 
brings in a shipping arrangement and his experience to this value 
encounter.  Carrier  brings  the  shipping  schedule  and  the  capacity 
details.  All  parties  obtain  value  from  the  arrangement  if  indeed 
they reach  an agreement.  The core process cycle is the repetitive 
processing of incoming shipping needs. Note that the model does 
show  that  these  needs  come  from  the  shipper,  but  does  not 
account  for  its  repetitive  nature,  which  can  only  be  understood 
when the shippers other value encounters are included. 

The  third  value  encounter  is  the  shipping  where  the  actual 
shipping  takes  place.  This  value  encounter  contains  economic 
transaction,  money  distribution  to  the  carrier,  TPL  company  and 
the  government.  The  core  process  is  the  repetitive  processing  of 
shipping  transactions  produced  by  the  previous  value  encounter. 
We start with the shipper to explain this value encounter. Shipper 
provides  the  shipping  products  and  he  pays  for  the  shipping 
process.  Carrier  actively  supports  to  this  value  encounter  by 
providing  carrier  service  as  well  as  giving  the  shipping  status 
information. The value he gets is money in return. TPL company 
contributes  to  the  value  encounter  by  providing  transportation 
management. The value of this interaction to the TPL company is 
a  certain  fee.  Another  value  object  he  gets  is  the  shipping  status 
needed for effective transportation management. The fourth actor 
who  is  involved  is  the  government.  The  government  commits  to 
the  value  encounter  by  carrying  out  inspection  checking  of 
shipping  products.  For  the  government,  the  value  it  gets  is  the 
inspection charges. Note that the inspection is modeled inside the 
shipping value encounter as a co-creation. This can be motivated 
by the observation that this kind of inspection cannot be achieved 

without  the  active  cooperation  of  the  other  parties.  At  the  same 
time,  viewing  it  as  a  co-creation  also  raises  the  interesting 
question  how  to  divide  the  work.  As  we  will  see  in  section  3, 
another  division  of  work  may  yield  more  efficient  and  effective 
performance. Note that shipping usually also involves much more, 
such  as  product  marking,  labeling,  packaging,  warehousing  etc. 
([19,22]) but these have been omitted for lack of space. 

Comparing the value encounter model with a traditional e3-value 
model, we note the following 

  The  value encounter  model tends to take a broader scope, not 
only  focusing  on  the  economic  transaction  (the  transport 
service  as  such)  but  also  on  supporting  exchanges.  Modeling 
the  latter  in  e3-value  would  be  possible,  but  the  method  does 
not  encourage  so.  The  breadth  of  the  value  encounter  model 
does not only refer to range of exchange processes, but also to 
the  kind  of  value  exchanged.  Still  remaining  at  the  business 
model  level  and  without  bringing  in  operational  (process) 
details,  the  value  encounter  model  tends  to  more  complete  in 
this way.  

  The value encounter model provides a grouping mechanism for 
the  value  exchanges  not  present  in  e3-value.  This  is  of 
particular importance when the model becomes more complex. 
  Whereas  the  e3-value  model  views  value  objects  as  being 
exchanged, the value encounter model views them as being co-
created.  This  shift  has  certain  consequences.  For  each  of  the 
actors,  the  question  is  not  anymore  what  value  objects  it  can 
create  for  another  party,  drawing  on  internal  value  activities, 
but how it can contribute to a value-creating process, drawing 
on  internal  resources.  The  value  interface  becomes  the 
interface  with  the  co-creation  process  and  the  designer  is 
forced  to  be  quite  specific  about  the  actors  contribution    as 
well as the derived value.  

Figure 4. Value activity modeling for value encounter 

shipping 

3.2  Value activity modeling 
The value activity modeling focuses on identifying value activities 
within  the  value  encounters  which  helps  to  explore  how  value  is 
created. The identified value activities within the value encounter 
are connected to the value in and out ports of the value encounter.  
On  the  one  hand,  the  value  activities  identified  this  way  are  a 
starting-point for process design. One the other hand, the activity 
model  provides  a  useful  cross-check  on  the  consistency  and 
completeness  of  the  value  encounter  model.  It  is  also  needed  for 
the next phase of value encounter analysis. 


A  certain  value  may  emerge  from  the  value  encounter  without 
being  brought  in  as  such by  any  actor    for  example,  knowledge 
gained from the encounter experience (note that such an emerging 
value is hard to model in traditional e3-value). Still, the rule is that 
every  output  value  must  be  produced  by  a  certain  value  activity 
and  every  input  value  must  be  consumed  by  a  certain  value 
activity.  For  the  rest,  the  value  activities  are  coarse-grained  and 
should not be split up beyond the necessary. 

We  have  distinguished  four  value  activities  within  the  shipping 
value  encounter.  As  shown  in  the  figure  4,  shipping,  inspection, 
money  distribution  and  monitoring  activities,  the  latter  being  fed 
by  previous  one  accordingly.    The  use  of  the  term  money 
distribution  rather  than  fee  is  intentional.  It  is  clear  that  the 
Shipper brings in money, and the other parties derive money, but 
how  it  is  channelled  (e.g.,  everything  going  via  the  TPL)  may 
change over time.  

3.3  Value Encounter Analysis  
The  result  of  the  modelling  phase  is  an  initial  value  encounter 
model  that  serves  as  basis  for  analysis.  Analysis  always  focuses 
on one aspect at a time. Figure 5, depicts the four aspects that we 
have identified and the main questions related to each aspect. The 
analysis  aims  at  broadening  the  focus  that  e3-value  is  paying 
traditionally on financial value only. It is inspired by the Balanced 
financial,  customer/external 
Score  Card 
relations, 
learning  perspectives  [23]. 
However,  there  are  differences  as  well.  BSC  is  a  performance 
management  framework  supporting  strategic  management.  It 
provides  a  way  of  organizing,  as  well  as  linking  [24],  various 
performance  metrics.  Our  aim  is  an  analysis  framework  that 
provides  a  way  of  positioning  and  exploring  various  analysis 
techniques. 

that  distinguishes 
internal  business  and 

Which  aspects  are  most  relevant  differs  from  case  to  case,  but 
assumingly  all  need  to  be  attended.  The  model  is  explained  now 
by applying it to the TPL case. 

is  broken  up 

Financial Management 
Financial management includes profitability analysis and contract 
management.  A  value  encounter  model  does  not  show  how  the 
money is distributed exactly. This depends on the way the multiparty  collaboration 
into  bilateral  contracts.  
Following  the  theory  of  social  equity,  fairness  ([25])  is  an 
important  variable  in  sustainable  value  networks.  Once  a  certain 
distribution  (one  or  more  alternatives)  has  been  designed,  the 
profitability analysis can calculate the Net Present Value for each 
actor [8]. 

Operational Management 
For  the  value  encounter  to  be  competitive,  it  must  be  run 
efficiently for all participants. The question is how to optimize the 
efficiency of the value encounter (lead time, inventory costs, etc). 
Operational  management  in  the  logistic  domain  has  been  the 
subject  of  extensive  research  in  the  field  of  OR,  on  which  the 
value encounter analysis should draw in this case.  

From an optimization point of view, it is required to know which 
party  is  monitoring  the overall  process  and  is  responsible  for  the 
efficiency.  In  the  example  above  it  is  the  TPL  company.  If  no 
single actor is responsible for the monitoring, the resulting process 
may  be  suboptimal  or  become  suboptimal  when  the  environment 
evolves.  

Knowledge Management 
From  the  knowledge  management  perspective,  it  is  assumed  that 
for the actors to survive in the long-run their core competency is 
knowledge [26]. For knowledge management to be successful, its 
value  creation  capabilities  should  be  assessed  [27],  e.g.  in  the 
form of value network analysis [28].  

this  helps 

the  shipper 

to  focus  on 

  If  the  shipper  and  the  TPL  company  develop  a  joint  logistic 
solution 
its  core 
competencies  whereas  the  TPL  company  gets  the  experience 
that  it  could  use  in  future  projects.  In  fact,  both  parties  can 
learn  from  each  other.  [29]  give  two  empirical  examples,  one 
being  a  case  of  learning 
the  counterpartys 
knowledge  and  experience  and  one  being  competence 
development through joint learning.  

through 

  TPL  company  brings  its  knowledge  and  experience  to  the 
shipping arrangement interaction. Whereas shipper and carrier 
have  other  material  resources,  for  the  TPL  knowledge  is  its 
main  resource.  In  such  a  case,  the  imperative  question  is how 
this  knowledge  resource  is  maintained  and  developed.  As 
pointed out by [20], TPL providers may have to make a choice 
between  developing  the  general  ability  of  problem  solving  or 
increasing customer intimacy.  

VALUE ANALYSIS MODEL 

FINANCIAL 

How is the money 
distributed over the 
partners? 

-  What is the expected 

profitability for each actor 
(short-term, long-term)? 
-  What institutional form is 

taken to distribute the 
money? 

KNOWLEDGE 

Is knowledge gained from 
available data? 
Are core competencies 
systematically maintained? 
Is knowledge acquired also 
explored? 
Is there a healthy mix of 
explicit and implicit 
knowledge? 
Is there an optimal use of 
standards? 

OPERATIONAL 

How is the value activity to 
be characterized (pattern)? 
How is the value activity 
supported (technology)? 

-  What are the goals and 

metrics? 
How is the optimization 
ensured? 
How are responsibilities 
assigned? 

SOCIAL 

Is the social network 
actively developed? 
Are social networks 
maintained systematically? 
How is the social network 
explored? 
Is there a healthy mix of 
formal and informal 
contacts? 

-  What is the contribution of 
the network to social capital 
of the environment? 

Figure 5: The Value Analysis Model 

Social Network Management  
Relationships are long term and once established they are not only 
a  fruitful  basis  for  collaboration  ([30])  but  also  tend  to  increase 
the  level  of  integration.  Another  reason  for  analyzing  value 
encounters  from  a  social  network  perspective  is  that  changes  in 
the  business  network  structure,  such  as  a  new  network,  have  an 
impact  on  the  power  relationships.  Some  actors  may  gain  in 


provided  a  lens  to  analyze  the  dynamics  of  buyer-supplier 
relationships  at  the  micro-level  [32].  At  a  macro-level,  several 
techniques can be employed, often based on graph theory [33]. A 
social capital perspective is also useful, both for the network itself 
and  for  its  contribution  to  the  social  environment,  e.g.  when  the 
network  has  a  bridging  function  [34].  It  should  be  noted  that  a 
value encounter network as such is more rich than a social graph 
that typically focuses on binary relationships between actors only. 

  In  the  logistic  example,  the  social  network  aspect  is  most 
crucial for the TPL provider. Because of its orchestrator role, it 
needs  to  maintain  good  relationships  with  a  wide  range  of 
parties. At the same time, it should be careful not to integrate 
too much with a few parties, not only to avoid lock-in but also 
to  keep  its  neutrality  [20].  As  the  latter  state:  The  way  the 
TPL  providers  manage  the  relationship  to  its  customers  and 
handle  effects  on  the  total  network  of  relationships  will  be  of 
basic importance for their strategic edge on the market.  

3.4  Preliminary assessment of the value 
analysis model 
The  four  aspects  distinguished  in  the  value  encounter  analysis 
provide  a  comprehensive  method.  Considering  the  research 
literature  in  the  logistic  and  e-logistic  domain  referred  to  above, 
each of the aspects is highly relevant, while we did not identify so 
far  any  major  aspect  missing.  However,  it  is  also  clear  that  the 
questions of the Value Analysis Model only provide a start. More 
specific techniques are needed for a deepening of the analysis. In 
some  cases,  these  techniques  are  readily  available,  e.g.  the  OR 
techniques  that  can  be  used  in  operational  management,  whereas 
in other cases, these techniques are less established yet, as in the 
social network management.  

Value  modelling  and  analysis  can  be  instrumental  to  the 
exploration  of  innovative  business  solutions.  In  the  next  section, 
we  will  apply  the  method  to  a  specific  kind  of  innovation  in  the 
logistic domain that relates to new developments in e-government. 

4.  CASE STUDY: INNOVATION IN THE 
LOGISTIC DOMAIN 
Cultural developments in society as  well as economic necessities 
have  caused  a  rethinking  of  the  vertical  relationship  between 
government and society. Since a few years, the Dutch tax office is 
promoting  the  concept  of  horizontal  supervision  that  aims  at 
transforming  this  relationship  into  one  of  collaboration  with  a 
common  goal  of  both  efficiency  and  legal  compliance.  The 
collaboration is based on trust rather than distrust, where trust is 
not  implicit  but  built  on  objective  measures  such  as  past 
performance.  Horizontal  supervision  may  bring  about  significant 
savings  and  has 
the  EU  as  well.  The 
administrative  burden  of  international  trade  and  transport  is  still 
not  harmonized  across  countries  and  government  organizations. 
Harmonization  is  yet  to  be  achieved  at  national,  EU  and  global 
level.  This lack of harmonization leads to administrative burdens 
for international logistic service providers and their customers and 
thus  extra  costs.  To  reduce  this  burden,  EU  customs  authorities 
have  developed  the  concept  of  Authorised  Economic  Operator 
(AEO)  as  a  form  of  horizontal  supervision.  To  receive  the  status 
of  AEO,  the  company  must  have  prepared  and  implemented  a 
security  and  monitoring  plan  and  take  initiative  in  reporting 
irregularities. In return, the customs authority  will stop or reduce 

the  attention  of 

number of audits of the administrative systems themselves. In the 
ideal case, the exporting AEO is provided with a green lane.  

Figure 6:   Value encounter for innovative government services in 

the logistic domain 

An  example  of  the  application  of  horizontal  supervision  is  the 
living  lab  BeerCo  described  in  [35]  dealing  with  the  export  of 
beer  and  excise  payment.  Excise  fraud  for  alcohol  in  the  EU 
amounts to EURO 1.5 billion yearly (approximately 8%), so there 
is  an  evident  need  for  maintaining  or  increasing  the  level  of 
control. At the same time, the Dutch customs wants to simplify its 
data collection processes. According to authors of [35], a way out 
of  the  dilemma  started  with  the  recognition  that  for  BeerCo  the 
internal  control  of  its  supply  chain  is  very  important  as  well  (to 
avoid theft and tampering), so a rigid control procedure is already 
in  place.  Rather  than  duplicating  the  efforts,  the  Dutch  customs 
can also draw on the already existing procedure. In the envisioned 
scenario in this living lab, the customs will no longer require any 
declaration  in  paper  or  digital  format.  Instead,  BeerCo  makes  its 
commercial  data  available  through  an  EPCIS  database  such  that 
the  customs  can  check  it  if  it  wishes  so.  BeerCo  is  audited 
periodically  only.  In  addition,  containers  are  assigned  a  TREC 
(Tamper-Resistant  Embedded  Controller)  device  based  on  RFID. 
In  this  way,  the  physical  location  of  the  container  can  be 
monitored  along  the  transportation  path,  and  this  information  is 
passed to (or made available to) the customs as well. 

The  authors  of  [35]  have  used  value  modeling  to  model  and 
analyze  the  new  situation.  Following  e3-value,  the  paper  models 
the value provided by BeerCo to the customs, by TREC provider 
to  carrier  etc.  The  focus  is  on  designing  control  mechanisms, 
which is certainly very important in this context. What the model 
does not make sufficiently clear, in our opinion, is the co-creation 
aspect.  The  new  situation  is  a  situation  in  which  multiple  parties 
work  together  intensively.  Each  party  brings  in  certain  resources 
that contribute to the overall success of the solution, rather than to 
the benefit of just one other actor. Fig. 6 illustrates our point. We 
have  abstracted  from  the  specific  case  so  that  it  applies  to  any 
exporting firm (shipper).  

4.1  Value activity modeling  
In figure 6, the value encounter was a black box.  The next step is 
model the value activities which allow observing inside the value 
encounter. As depicted in the figure 7, we have distinguished four 


encounter,  namely  information  recording/monitoring,  shipping, 
money distribution and inspection activities.  

In this value activity model, activities are connected to the inputs 
and  outputs  of  the  value  encounter.  Apart  from  the  simple  value 
transfers, there are newly created value transfers among the value 
activities.  For  example  the  arrow  from  the  information  recording 
& monitoring activity to inspection activity represents the tallying 
of  data  when  inspection  takes  place.  Between  information 
recording  &  monitoring  activity  and  the  shipping  activity,  there 
are two value transfers from both sides. The arrow that starts from 
the information recording & monitoring activity refers to the data 
that  are  scheduling  data  used  in  the  shipping.  The  arrow  which 
starts  from  shipping  activity  stands  for  the  raw  data  read  from 
containers  through  TREC  technology  on  which  the  monitoring 
depends. 

Figure 7:  Value activity analysis for an innovative transport 

process 

4.2  Value Encounter Analysis 

Financial Management 
The value encounter model doesnt demonstrate how the money is 
distributed  exactly  among 
involved  (including 
technology  providers).  At  some  point,  the  distribution  must  be 
settled,  which  is  not  easy  in  this  case  as  there  are  many  parties 
involved.  We  conjecture  that  uncertainty  about  the  money 
distribution  and  a  suspicion  of  unfairness  may  obstruct 
innovations like this to be realized. 

the  parties 

Operational Management  
The  prime  goal  of  the  operational  management  is  optimizing  the 
efficiency of the value encounter.   

in 

the 

the  value  encounters.  As 

  The innovative transport process saves cost for all of the actors 
innovative 
engaging 
transportation process reduces administrative burdens and lots 
of  paper  work,  the  shipper  can  save  time  and  cost  [35].  The 
administration  gains  as  it  gets  the  real  amount  of  excise 
charges  because  the  new  environment  prevents  billions  of 
excise frauds. For the shipper the RFID technology may lower 
the risk of stolen containers because he can trace the shipping 
route & products. For a more detailed analysis of the impact of 
RFID on supply chain costs, we refer to [36]. 

and 

container  data.  EPC  global 

  Accurate  shipping  information  is  timely  available  in  the  new 
environment, as a result of tracking and tracing shipping route, 
location 
facilitates 
collaboration across the industries independent of geographical 
location with these data [37]. The shipper can benefit from this 
information and make his production and sales more efficient, 
and also the shippers customers may be affected. Considering 
the  carriers  point  of  view,  the  innovation  helps  to  improve 
resource management. 

Knowledge Management 
The  knowledge  management  is  the  next  aspect  which  opens  up 
new  insight  to  intangible  value  transferring  within  involving 
parties  which  doesnt  represent  in  previous  value  modeling 
notations.   

  The EPCIS database with TREC technology provides detailed 
transportation  information.  This  new  situation  allows  the 
administration (customs) to improve their risk analysis e.g. by 
the use of machine learning techniques.  

  Knowledge  is  explored.  EPC  global  works  with  hardware, 
software,  and  integration  solutions  providers  to  create  and 
share intellectual property that will benefit the entire subscriber 
base.  Hence  TREC 
their 
technology to the users of the world through the EPC global IP 
protection.  

technology  providers  explore 

  Authors  of  [38]  argued  for  a  healthy  mix  of  explicit  and 
implicit knowledge transfer at the inter-organizational level. In 
this  respect,  it  is  important  to  consider  the  role  of  standards. 
EPC global has an important role in developing standards that 
stimulate technology providers to develop innovative solutions. 
However,  new  standards  are  a  two-edged  sword.  The  old 
standard  typically  incorporates  a  substantive  investment  of 
implicit  knowledge.  That  explains  why  Henningsson  and 
Henriksen [39] found in their empirical study that moving to a 
new  standard  tends  to  lower  the  performance  on  a  short  term 
even if it raises the performance in the long term. 

  In the new environment, the shipper has more timely available 
transportation  information  than  earlier  [35],  which  he  can  use 
to  forecast  sales  using  business  intelligence  techniques.  For 
example, to estimate actual arrival time of goods. 

Social Network Management 
According  to  [30],  social  capital  facilitates  value  creation  in 
companies.    We  see  this  reflected  in  the  case  in  the  form  of  the 
standards promoted by EPC global. Value is created when trading 
parties are able to share product data more effectively. 

  In the above case study the shipper, the customs and the carrier 
are using and contributing to maintain the same specifications 
in the transportation process. This is an example of facilitating 
value creation by developing the social network [40]. 

  For EPC global who intends to create a global network of EPC 
providers  and  users 
is  critical. 
Governmental  support  can  help  in  strengthening  its  position. 
This may be an extra motivation for EPC global to participate 
in this innovation project. 

the  political  aspect 

  Referring to the questions mentioned under social aspect in the 
Value  Analysis  Model  (figure  3),  we  can  answer  the  question 
What is the contribution of the network to social capital of the 
environment  on  various  levels.  The  new  solution  decreases 


social  capital  in  the  sense  of  trust  (cf.  [41]).  It  causes  also  an 
increase in connectivity between government and industry that 
may  be  a  vehicle  itself  for  relationship  building  and  future 
innovations.  On  a  macro-level,  it  functions  as  a  (early  and 
successful)  application  of  the  horizontal  supervision  pattern 
that will trigger more applications by imitation. 

the  domain  of  TPL 

5.  DISCUSSION 
This paper introduced value encounter analysis as an extension to 
current  value  modeling  approaches.  We  have  applied  it  to  a  case 
in 
logistic  services  and  Goverment 
administration. The case shows the value of the method as a quite 
comprehensive analysis tool. It also provides a nice illustration of 
the  innovative  capabilities  of  co-creation  of  value.  Nowadays,  a 
value encounter is usually not a physical but a virtual environment 
where  many  geographically  disparate  parties  collaborate.  As  a 
consequence,  many  processes  that  are  implicit  in  a  physical 
environment are to be made explicit. Value Network Analysis can 
be helpful in that respect.  

A simplified generic model of the logistic domain is provided and 
analyzed  in  section  two.  The  model  of  the  case  study  in  section 
three  basically  builds  on  top  of  the  first.  For  one  thing,  this 
illustrates that value encounters are not only interesting to analyze 
as such, but also in relationship with each other. The potential of a 
value  encounter  to  provide  a  context  for  other  (new)  value 
encounters can be of long term strategic importance. On the other 
hand,  when  new  value  encounters  have  to  destroy  (part  of) 
existing ones, this can obstruct innovation.  

In  section  2,  we  identified  3  kinds  of  limitations  of  traditional 
e3value.  To  what  extent  does  Value  Network  Analysis  solve 
these?  Clearly,  it  goes  beyond  an  economic  profitability  analysis 
and  the  cases  examined  in  this paper  show  that  the  other  aspects 
are indeed relevant. Secondly, the use of value encounter models 
supports  the  analysis  of  co-creation  of  value.  The  TREC 
technology  is  clearly  supporting  the  business  model  as  a  whole, 
and  all  parties  benefit  from  it,  rather  than  one  actor  (as  it  is 
suggested  when traditional e3value is used). The  fair distribution 
of  the  costs  is  indeed  a  problem.  The  third  limitation  was  about 
the  larger  context  of  value  networks.  In  this  respect,  the  links 
between  value  encounters 
identifies  are 
instrumental. However, this is only a partial answer. What is still 
needed,  we  think,  is  a  method  that  does  not  view  the  value 
network in isolation but as a transformation of one context into a 
new  one.  To  include  a  dynamic  (temporal)  dimension  fits  well 
with a pragmatic perspective, although the actions (introduction of 
a  new  collaboration)  are  at  a  higher  level  than  what  the  speech 
acts  (e.g.  ordering)  that  have  received  so  much  attention  in 
traditional pragmatics and the Language/Action Perspective. This 
is one topic for future research. 

that  our  method 

From  the  case  study  we  identified  three  value  encounter  types: 
relationship,  arrangement  and  execution.  Another  question  for 
further  research  is  how  general  these  types  are.  If  there  is  only  a 
small  set  of  actual  types,  this  can  simplify  design.  The 
relationships between the types are interesting as well. Evidently, 
there  can  be  no  execution  value  encounter  without  arrangement 
value encounter.  The identification of core process cycles in each 
sustainable  value  encounter  may  also  be  a  means  for  identifying 
relationships with other value encounters.  

Another research topic we want to explore in the future is how to 
use the results of value encounter modeling for (service-oriented) 
system  design.  In  a  co-design  approach,  IS  design  and  value 
encounter modeling can be pursued in parallel [42].  
