Self-Service Linked Government Data

with dcat and Gridworks

Richard Cyganiak

Digital Enterprise
Research Institute,
NUI Galway, Ireland
richard@cyganiak.de

Fadi Maali

Digital Enterprise
Research Institute,
NUI Galway, Ireland
fadi.maali@deri.org

Vassilios Peristeras

Digital Enterprise Research
Institute, NUI Galway, Ireland.

vassilios.peristeras@deri.org

Greek National Center for
Public Administration and

Decentralization

ABSTRACT
Open Government Data initiatives in the US, UK and elsewhere have made large amounts of raw data available to the
public on the Web. There is enormous potential in applying
Linked Data principles to these datasets. This potential currently remains largely untapped because governments lack
the resources required to convert from raw data to highquality Linked Data on a large scale. We present a selfservice approach to this problem: By connecting a powerful Gridworks-based data workbench application directly
to data catalogs, via a standard Data Catalog Vocabulary,
data professionals outside of government can contribute to
the Linked Data conversion process, thus obtaining data for
their own needs and benefiting the larger Linked Government Data effort.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous

General Terms
Semantics

Keywords
dcat, Government Catalog, Linked Data, Gridworks, RDF

1.

INTRODUCTION

Open Government is a recent movement towards more
openness and transparency in government. Open data is
an important part of this movement. Governments produce
huge amounts of information as part of their daily opera-
tions, ranging from statistics used in policy-making to internal financial auditing records. Opening up this information
whose creation has ultimately been paid by the taxpayer
increases transparency and accountability, provides businesses

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2010, September 1-3, 2010 Graz, Austria
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09 ...$10.00.

and citizens with valuable information, enables third parties
to provision new services based on government data, and removes intra-government red tape. Open government is becoming an official policy in several jurisdictions, especially
in the US, UK, and Australia.
It will increasingly spread
throughout the European Union as EC directives get translated into local law.
1.1 Data catalogs

One cornerstone of an open government policy is the data

catalog, exemplified by the US data.gov and the UKs data.gov.uk
websites. They serve as central one-stop portals where interested publics can find data published by government bod-
ies, and are important for giving visibility to the process of
translating policy into reality. More than 40 government
data catalogs are now in operation, listing national (US,
UK, Australia, New Zealand), regional (e.g., Kent County,
Basque Country), local (e.g., London, New York, Vancou-
ver), or thematic (e.g., geospatial, statistical) datasets.
1.2 Linked Government Data (LGD)

Data catalogs support discovery of available information,
but working with this information can still be a challenge.
Often it is provided in a haphazard way, driven by practicalities within the producing government agency, and not
by the needs of the information user. Formats are often
inconvenient, (e.g., numerical tables as PDFs), there is little consistency across datasets, and documentation is often
poor.

Linked Government Data is a promising technique to lessen
these challenges. The benefits of applying Linked principles
to government data are (i) simpler access through a unified
data model; (ii) good support for documenting data seman-
tics; (iii) re-use of vocabularies; (iv) allows fine-grained referencing of information through the use of URIs; (v) allows interlinking of related information, making it possible to automatically pull together all information about a school, ward,
or other entity.

But realizing this potential is costly. The pioneering Linked
Government Data efforts in the US and UK have shown that
creating high-quality Linked Data from raw data files requires considerable investment into reverse-engineering, documenting data elements, data cleanup, schema mapping,
and instance matching. At data.gov, large numbers of datasets
were converted to RDF using a simple automatic algorithm,
without much curation effort, which limits the practical value
of the resulting RDF. In the UK, RDF datasets published


ity, but due to limited availability of budget and trained
staff, only selected high-value datasets have been subjected
to the Linked Data treatment, while most data remains in
raw form.
1.3 Self-service LGD

We present a contribution towards solving this cost problem of Linked Government Data: the self-service approach.
It shifts the burden of Linked Data conversion towards the
data consumer. This has several advantages: (i) There are
more of them; (ii) they are reasonably likely to have both
the necessary skills and the motivation for performing conversion and cleanup; (iii) they know which datasets they
need, and dont have to rely on the governments data team
to convert the right datasets. To achieve this self-service
approach, we have created three components:

1. A standard RDF Schema vocabulary for expressing a

data catalog as Linked Data.

2. A Linked Data site and SPARQL endpoint that republishes the contents of four major government data
catalogs using this vocabulary.

3. A desktop application that allows users to connect to
data catalogs, browse the catalog, open tabular datasets
(such as CSV and Excel files), perform cleanup and
consolidation, map them to arbitrary RDF vocabular-
ies, and export them as RDF. This desktop application
is an extension of Freebase Gridworks.

A fourth component is still missing at this time: a mechanism for contributing the results of cleanup and conversion
back to a central place, where other potential users of the
same dataset can find it without having to repeat the conversion effort. Currently, users would have to rely on out-
of-band solutions, such as the ckan.net website or dedicated
Linked Government Data mailing lists, along with their own
web hosting, to share and announce their conversion results.
2. THE DATA CATALOG VOCABULARY

Data catalogs are websites. Users access them through
their web browsers and use the site functionality that the
catalog operator has put into place. This model is limiting.
Automated processing that goes beyond whats provided by
the catalog operator is only possible if the catalogs contents
are also available in a machine-readable form. Examples include advanced querying and filtering, bulk format conver-
sion, or aggregation of several catalogs into a super-catalog,
such as the Guardians World Government Data site or the
Sunlight Foundations National Data Catalog.

Currently, only a few catalogs provide their contents in
machine-readable form. Those who do, have adopted different formats (CSV, Atom, RDFa) and schemas.

To overcome this problem, we have proposed a standard
RDF Schema vocabulary for data catalogs, called dcat. We
developed dcat based on a survey of the metadata schemas
of seven different data catalogs. The resulting vocabulary
re-uses existing vocabularies, such as Dublin Core, SKOS
and FOAF, where possible. To involve a larger number of
stakeholders, we have recently moved dcat development to a
Task Force within the W3Cs eGovernment Interest Group.
More information is available at http://www.w3.org/egov/
wiki/Data_Catalog_Vocabulary.

Figure 1: Connecting to a dcat-enabled catalog

3. BRINGING DATA CATALOGS INTO THE

WEB OF LINKED DATA

To put data catalog interoperability into practice, we selected four data catalogs (the national catalogs of the US
and Australia; and the local catalogs of London and San
Francisco) and published their contents as Linked Data in
dcat format.

Depending on the catalog, the raw data was obtained
by CSV download, (non-dcat) RDFa extraction, or screen-
scraping. We stored the catalog contents in a relational
database, mapped the metadata model of each catalog to
the dcat vocabulary, and published as Linked Data and as a
SPARQL endpoint using D2R Server. This effort has made
descriptions of 4,500 public sector information datasets, with
a total of 60,000 triples, available as Linked Data using a uniform vocabulary. The data can be accessed at http://lab.
linkeddata.deri.ie/govcat, and more information including example queries is available at http://vocab.deri.ie/
dcat-overview.

Our ultimate goal is to get catalog operators to publish
dcat directly on their catalog websites. We are working with
several of them towards this goal in the context of the W3C
eGovernment IG. The data.gov.uk team has begun deploying
dcat as embedded RDFa markup on their website.

4. EXTENDING FREEBASE GRIDWORKS
Freebase Gridworks is an open-source desktop application
for exploring, manipulating and converting tabular datasets,
originally developed by Metaweb. Data is presented in a
tabular grid. For any column, facets and value distribution diagrams can be created, in order to filter and explore
the data. Various functions oriented towards cleanup and
value consolidation can be applied to columns, including
the powerful Gridworks Expression Language (GEL). The
dataset can be mapped to the Freebase schema, and exported into Freebase, a CSV file, or Excel file. More information about Gridworks, including screencasts, can be found
at http://code.google.com/p/freebase-gridworks/.

We have extended Gridworks in various ways. First, we
have added the ability to connect to dcat-enabled data catalogs (Fig. 1). Once connected, the dataset list can be
browsed via a faceted interface and text search over the
dataset metadata (Fig. 2). Any datasets in tabular formats
(CSV, Excel) can be opened in the standard Gridworks UI.
We note that the functionality described up to here has
clear benefits to non-Linked Data users: They can quickly
connect to and browse the contents of data catalogs, find


relevant raw datasets, clean them up, and export them to
Excel or CSV for further processing using Gridworks preexisting export features.

However to achieve high-quality RDF export, we have
added an RDF Schema mapping facility to Gridworks. It
is based on the Freebase schema mapper. The user defines a
tree-shaped pattern and annotates each edge with an RDF
property. For each node, he or she specifies how it ought to
be created from a cell value, and whether a blank node, URI
or literal ought to be created. Optionally, an RDF class can
be specified as well. Selection of classes and properties is
assisted by autocompletion. A list of popular vocabularies
from prefix.cc is preloaded; additional terms can be added.
RDF is generated by instantiating the tree pattern for each
row in the table (Fig. 3).

For downloads and documentation, please refer to the

project website http://lab.linkeddata.deri.ie/2010/dcat.

5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We have shown an application that allows users to browse
government data catalogs, open tabular datasets listed in the
catalogs, explore and clean up and structure the datasets using Gridworks powerful user interface, and map the result to
existing RDF vocabularies for RDF export. This empowers
Linked Data users to contribute to the process of engineering raw government data into high-quality Linked Data. We
envision that users should be able to contribute the cleanup
steps, RDF mappings, and resulting triples back to a central
place, for example by connecting to a SPARQL UPDATE
supporting endpoint, but this is not yet implemented.

Figure 3: Mapping a table to an RDF schema

Datasets can be interlinked either by manually adding
URIs to the dataset, or by using the Gridworks Expression
Language to express rules for generating URIs from existing
cell data. Gridworks also contains a sophisticated reconciliation engine that can link cells to Freebase topics; a similar
mechanism should be available for linking to existing Linked
Datasets and government-defined URI sets.

We have just addressed tabular data. Other types of data,
such as geospatial information, event feeds, and complex statistical data, require similar solutions with specialized user
interfaces geared towards the type of data.
Imagine connecting to a dcat-enabled data catalog from within Google
