Incorporating Semantic Bridges into Information Flow of 

Cross-Organizational Business Process Models 
 Adrian Paschke 
Nils Barnickel 
Freie Universitat Berlin 

Johannes Bottcher 
Freie Universitat Berlin 

Fraunhofer Institute for Open 

Communication Systems (FOKUS) 

Department of Computer Science 

Department of Computer Science 

Kaiserin-Augusta-Allee 31,           

Takustr. 9,                                  

Takustr. 9,                                   

10589 Berlin, Germany 

14195 Berlin, Germany  

nils.barnickel@fokus.fraunhofer.de 

     johannes.bottcher@gmx.de 

14195 Berlin, Germany 
      paschke@inf.fu-berlin.de 

corporate 

information 

Independent 

flow  design 

ABSTRACT 
In  this  paper  we  propose  an  approach  for incorporating semantic 
bridges  into  cross-organizational  business  process  models  to 
across  heterogeneous 
facilitate 
conceptualizations. 
ontology-based 
information  models  are  exploited  for  explicit  semantic  modeling 
of  information  flow  within  each  organization.  Furthermore, 
description  logic  rule-based  semantic  bridges  are  applied  in  the 
design  phase  to  enable  an  automated  mediation  between  the 
different  corporate  conceptualizations.  This  allows  for  seamless 
information  flow design across organizational borders, as well as 
for  mediation  between  the  abstract  business  perspective  and  the 
underlying  IT  perspective.  We  prototyped  the  approach  as  a 
functional  extension  to  an  existing  BPMN  modeling  editor  and 
perform  an  experts-driven  evaluation  based  on  a  crossorganizational e-business scenario. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
F.3.2 [Logics  and  Meanings  of  Programs]:  Semantics  of  Programming 
Languages 
[Software 
Engineering]: Interoperability  -  data  mapping,  Software  Architectures  - 
data  abstraction,  H.4.1 [Information  Systems  Applications]:  Office 
Automation  -    workflow  management,  J.1  [Computer  Applications]: 
Administrative Data Processing - business. 

models, 

D.2.11 

process 

General Terms 
Management, Design, Languages 

Keywords 
Semantic  Business  Process  Management,  Semantic  Mediation, 
Loosely-coupled 
Information  Models,  Ontology  Mapping, 
Business-IT Alignment 

1.  Introduction 
Cross-organizational  business  processes  models  typically  span 
multiple  domains  and  consists  of  shared  cross-organizational 
processes  which  interoperate  with  the  business  partners  public 
and  (internal)  private  business  process  models.  The  information 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS 2010, September 1-3, 2010 Graz, Austria Copyright  
ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09... $10.00 

models  and  business  vocabularies  used  in  each  of  these  models 
are  heterogeneous  and  domain-specific.  This raises the important 
research  problem  of  modeling  cross-organizational  business 
processes  together  with  semantic  mediations  (semantic  bridges) 
between the applied business process models and their respective 
heterogeneous information flow models and domain vocabularies. 

in 

process 

business 

technologies 

standard  with 

While  in  previous  works  we  have  addressed  the  application  of 
semantic 
execution 
[2,4,17,19,20], our new contributions in this paper focuses on the 
semantic  business  process  modeling  layer.  In  contrast  to  existing 
works on semantic business process management (SBPM), which 
aim  at  improving  BPM  within  one  organizational  context  (see 
related work), in this paper we broaden the scope and address the 
semantic modeling of cross-organizational business processes and 
their  information  flows  between  domain  boundaries.  We  are 
contributing  a  SBPM  solution  which  semantically  enhances  the 
OMG  BPMN 
additional  ontology-based 
information  models  for  representing  the  cross-organizational 
information  flow  and  introduce  rule-based  semantic  bridges  for 
the  automated  mediation  between  the  different  domains.  As  a 
proof-of-concept we implemented our approach as an extension of 
the  Web-based  BPMN  modeling  tool  Oryx  and  evaluated  it  with 
an industrial use case scenario. 

The  further  paper  is  structured as follows: Section 2 presents the 
general idea of mediated business process modeling and discusses 
the  relevance  of  the  approach.  Then  Section  3  compares  it  to 
related  work  and  alternative  approaches.  In  Section  4  a 
prototypical  instantiation  of  the  so  called  mediated  business 
process modeler is presented and then evaluated by applying it to 
a  cross-organizational  purchase-order  mediation  scenario  in 
Section 5. Finally, Section 6 provides a summary and conclusion 
and discusses possible future work. 

2.  Semantic Cross Organizational Business 
Processes 

Cross  organizational  business  process  models  describe  the 
coordination  (choreography)  and/or  control (orchestration) of the 
business  process  flow  between  one  or  more  partners  on  an 
abstract level, separated from the general IT application logic that 
actually  performs  the  work.  Examples  are  e.g.  business-to-
business  (B2B)  interoperations  implemented  as  service  oriented 
architectures  which  bring  about  possibilities  for  novel  agile  ondemand business scenarios.  Figure 1 shows a typical e-commerce 


this service.  

Figure 1. Cross-Organizational Business Process 

is 

the  modeling  of 

for  designers  of 

Modeling  such  a  cross-organizational  process  imposes  the  need 
for  a  distinction  between  public  process  models  and  private 
process models in order to address privacy and information hiding 
concerns  on  each  side.  While  the  underlying  business  execution 
processes might not be revealed to the B2B partner and hence are 
described  in  the  private  process  models,  the  public  business 
process  models  contain  the  steps  of  the  e-commerce  process 
which  are  visible  to  the  partner,  e.g.,  login,  service  selection, 
service booking, payment, consumption. The cross-organizational 
business  process  model  represents  the  shared  interoperation 
processes between the partners public business processes so that 
the interoperation may be analyzed, reused and improved.  

such  crossThe  particular  challenge 
the 
organizational  business  processes 
information flow between the partners, which is based on different 
heterogeneous  information  models  used  by  each  of  the  actors  on 
both  sides  of  the  organizations.  Simple  syntactic  descriptions  of 
information  entities  attached  as  natural  language  annotations  to 
the  graphical  BPM  notations  as  in  OMGs  BPMN  in  order  to 
define  the  general  information  flow  in  a  business  process  model 
hinders  the  sound  design  of  information  flows  across  the 
organizational borders. A precise formal semantic meaning needs 
to  be  given  so  that  semantically  equivalent  information  entities 
from  both  business  processes  can  be  automatically  mapped  into 
the  shared  representation  in  the  cross-organizational  model  and 
vice versa. Moreover, semantics is need for linking the used terms 
of the abstract business process models (cross-organizational and 
public) to the already existing information and data models of the 
underlying  private  business  processes  and  their  concrete  IT 
implementations.  This  vertical  semantic  mapping  helps  to  close 
the  so  called  business-IT  alignment  gap  [1]  between  the  abstract 
business  process  and  the  concrete  IT  infrastructure  used  for 
executing  the  processes.  By  inheriting  the  semantic  mappings, 
which  are  defined  in  the  cross-organizational  business  process 
model,  down  to  the  private  business  process  models  it  becomes 
possible  to  execute  cross-organizational  information  flows  which 
require  a  horizontal  semantic  translation  of  an  information  / data 
object 
the 
semantically  equivalent  but  syntactically  different  information  / 
data  object  of  the  partners  private  business  process.  We  call  the 

from  one  organizations  private  process 

into 

design of such vertical and horizontal semantic mappings in crossorganizational  business  processes  as  mediated  business  process 
modeling. 

2.1  Mediated Business Process Modeling 
The  basic  idea  of  mediated  business  process  modeling  is  to 
exploit ontology-based domain information models for the sound 
design  of  information  flow  in  cross-organizational  business 
process models. The idea is that during business process modeling 
corporate  or  domain  ontology  concepts,  representing  a  business 
vocabulary,  are  used  to  define  the  information  flow  on  a  nontechnical  conceptual  level  suitable  for  business  process  experts. 
Moreover, due to the formal nature of ontology-based information 
models a consistent link between the business or conceptual level 
and  the  underlying  technical  information  or  data  models  can  be 
derived. 

Having  the  formal  domain  information  models at hand facilitates 
the semantic mediation between heterogeneous conceptualizations 
used by different organizations or domains in terms of applying so 
called semantic bridges. Previous work has presented one possible 
approach  for  realizing  semantic  bridges  exploiting  production 
rule-based  ontology  mappings  [2],  which  can  be  reused  in  the 
business  process  modeling  context.    Thus,  the  business  process 
expert  is  enabled  to  seamlessly  design  the  cross-organizational 
information flow whereas semantic heterogeneities can be handled 
transparently based on semantic technology-based tool support.  

Moreover,  taking  into  account  as  well  the  perspective  of  agile 
development  and  continuous  maintenance,  domain  information 
models and correspondingly semantic bridges between them need 
to  evolve  over  time.  According  to  process-orientation  this 
evolution should be driven by requirements derived from business 
processes.  Consequently,  mediated  business  process  modeling 
does  not  only  include  the  exploitation  of  domain  ontologies  and 
semantic  bridges  as  described  above  but  also  should  provide 
specific features for their requirement engineering during business 
process  modeling.  This  demand-driven  evolution  includes  for 
example  the  possibility  for  the  process  expert  to  specify 
information  entities  which  are  not  already  reflected  within  the 
ontology-based domain information model and as well to identify 
missing  semantic  mapping  rules  between  information  entities  of 
different domain information models not reflected in the available 
set of semantic bridges. 

The goals and major tasks of mediated business process modeling 
can be summarized as follows: 
 Provide  functionality  for  the  design  of  information  flow  in 
business process models on a non-technical conceptual level in 
terms  of  ontology-based  information  models  suitable  for 
business process experts. 

 Ensure  a  consistent  link  between  the  business  or  conceptual 
level  (ontology-based  information  models)  and  the  underlying 
technical information or data models and thus provide improved 
Business-IT alignment. 

 Integrate  an  existing  semantic  mediation  mechanism  based  on 
to  enable  seamless  design  of  crosssemantic  bridges 
organizational 
semantic 
heterogeneities  are  handled  transparently  for  business  process 
experts. 

flow,  whereas 

information 


extension  of  existing  ontology-based  information  models  and 
semantic bridges.  

The  following  Figure  2  illustrates  the  relation between the major 
tasks  for  the  business  process  expert  during  mediated  business 
process modeling:  

landscapes  has  been  presented  in  [4].  In  the  business  modeling 
context  semantic  mediation  based  on  semantic  bridges  can  be 
exploited to suggest matching information entities in process parts 
of  different  organizations  and  thus  enable  seamless  information 
flow  design  keeping 
information  representation  differences 
transparent for the process expert.   

The  third  and  last  task  focuses  on  the  process-oriented 
evolution  of  information  models  and  semantic  bridges. 
Missing 
information  entities  and  semantic  bridges 
required for the information flow in the concrete business 
process  not  already  reflected  in  the  existing  domain 
information models can be specified by the process expert. 
Then  in  a  further  external  step  they  can  be  defined  by 
domain  information  model  experts  in  terms  of  iterative 
and  demand  driven  development.  Consequently,  these 
evolutionary developed concepts and semantic bridges can 
be  further  utilized  for  semantic  annotation  and  mediation 
of  the  information  flow  and  thus  closes  the  so  to  say 
micro-life-cycle of mediated business process modeling.  

2.2  Relevance of the Presented 
Approach 
Even  though  several  approaches  for  integrating  semantic 
technologies  into  business  process  modeling  exist,  their 
is  rather  different  focusing  on  ontology-based 
aim 
annotation  of  process  steps,  in  order  to  improve  process 
management  and  search  in  process  repositories  (cp.  Section  3). 
Therefore,  the  presented  approach  for  mediated  business  process 
modeling  focusing  on  cross-organizational  information  flow 
design  requires  a  dedicated  solution  that  supports  semantic 
mediation  between  heterogeneous  conceptualizations.  However, 
taking into account that the field of business process modeling is 
well  covered  by  mature  industry  tools  and  products  the  targeted 
tool-based  realization  of  mediated  business  process  modeling 
should  reflect  existing  work.  Therefore,  after  discussing  related 
work  and  alternative  approaches  in  Section  3  the  subsequent 
Section 4 discusses a possible system architecture of a tool as an 
extension of a state-of-the-art business process modeling tool with 
integrated  features  for  semantic  mediation  during  information 
flow  design.  Furthermore,  a  concrete 
this 
functionality is described and a scenario is performed to evaluate 
the approach. 

realization  of 

3.  Related Work and Alternative Approaches 
Current BPM languages such as the adopted standards BPMN 2.0 
for  modeling  and  WS-BPEL  2.0  for  execution  are  pure  syntactic 
languages without any explicit declarative semantics for objects / 
data, agents, processes, events and activities.  

Semantic  Web  Services  (SWS)  as  a  combination  of  ontologies, 
rules,  and  Web  services  have  been  extensively  studied  in  several 
projects 
the  Semantic  Web  community  and  different 
approaches  exist  such  as  RBSLA  [17],  OWL-S  (former  DAML-
S),  WSDL-S,  SAWSDL,  SWWS  /  WSMF,  WSMO  /  WSML, 
Meteor-S,  SWSI  .  They  are  all  aiming  at semantically describing 
the interfaces of Web services, their functional and non-functional 
properties, and policies such as SLAs.  

in 

Figure 2. Mediated Business Process Modeling 

The first task deals with semantic annotation of information flow 
within  cross-organizational  business  processes.  The  business 
process expert defines a business-oriented information flow on the 
conceptual  level  using  concepts  from  corporate  or  domain 
ontologies to annotate the non-formalized information entities and 
thus  shifts  them  onto  the  higher  semantically  explicit  level.  This 
task  requires  a  generic  extension  of  the  used  business  process 
modeling  notation  (BPMN)  to  visualize  the  higher  expression 
level  in  terms  of  a  semantic  sub-graph  of  information  entities  in 
contrast  to  flat  representations  provided  in  current  modeling 
notations.  The  following  Figure  3  illustrates  this  required 
semantic extension:  

Figure 3. Semantic Extension of Information Entities in 

Business Process Modeling Notation. 

information  entities, 

In  the  second  task  semantic  bridges  are  applied  to  the  ontologybased 
to  obtain  polymorph 
information  entities  and  thus  overcome  semantic  heterogeneities. 
The  underlying  concept  of  loosely-coupled  information  models 
improving 
large-scale  SOA 

in  order 

semantic 

interoperability 

in 


for 

the 

and 

the  semantics  solves 

the  SWS  descriptions 

choreography  workflows 

Several  extensions  to  WS-BPEL  using  SWS  approaches  have 
been proposed. These works mainly address the execution layer of 
business  processes,  where 
technical 
integration,  mediation  and  expressiveness  (e.g.  business  rules) 
problems,  but  also  semantic  mapping  problems  between  the 
business oriented modeling and management of processes, e.g. in 
BPMN,  and  the  translation  into  an  execution  syntax  such  as 
BPEL.  Homogenous  SWS-BPEL  approaches,  such  as  SUPER 
[18],  represent  BPEL  and 
in  one 
homogenous  ontology 
language.  Heterogeneous  approaches 
separate the process execution description in BPEL or some other 
execution language such as BPML, XLANG, WSCI, WSFL from 
the  semantic  knowledge 
representation  of  used  business 
vocabularies and business rules. In [19,20] an ontologically-typed 
rule-based 
executable  business  processes 
descriptions  in  BPEL+  is  proposed  which  allows  semantically 
(BPEL)  orchestration  models  with  expressive 
combining 
(business) 
rule 
(business) 
ontologies.  There are also works such as [22] which specifically 
address  the  semantics  of  interactions  between  the  autonomous 
parties  of  cross-organizational  business  processes  such  as,  that  a 
buyer  upon  sending  a  purchase  order  is  somehow  committed  (or 
not) to paying for the goods. Formally representing the pragmatic 
and  semiotic  context  of  business  interaction  relations  requires 
higher 
levels  of  semantic  expressiveness.  While  we  have 
addressed  this  aspect  in  previous  works  [19]  on  the  business 
process  execution  level  with  a  rule-based  solution,  we 
have  not  addressed  it  in  this  paper  which  focuses  on  the 
semantic  modelling 
interchanged 
information objects. 

SBPM  approaches  on  the  modeling  and  management 
level  take  similar  approaches  by  either  heterogeneously 
combining  rules  +  ontology  languages  with  a  BPM 
modeling  language  such  as  BPMN,  as  e.g.  done  by 
SemTalk  [21],  or  by  providing  an  expressive  enough 
homogenous  modeling  language  which  supports  both 
modeling the processes and representing the semantics of 
the domain in terms of an ontology and the logic in terms 
of  rules.  While  BPDM,  which  provides  an  underpinning 
formal FOL semantic for its process specification, has not 
been adopted at OMG in the favor of the graphical BPMN 
notation,  there  are  efforts  for  adding  semantics  to  BPMN  via 
integrating of other standardization efforts aiming at representing 
business  rules  and  business  vocabularies  (SBVR),  representing 
(production) rule meta models (PRR), rule interchange languages 
(RuleML  and  W3C  RIF)  or  UML/OCL  rule  models,  defining 
ontology  meta  models  (ODM)  and  mappings  between  ontology 
languages  such  as  W3C  RDFS,  W3C  OWL,  ISO  CL  and  ISO 
Topic maps and OMG UML (class) models1. 

Although  these  approaches  are  related  to  our  work  their  focus  is 
on  ontology-based  annotation  of  process  steps,  in  order  to 
improve process management and search in process repositories in 
a  homogenous  ontology  environment.  In  contrast  our  research, 
presented  in  this  paper,  aims  at  mediating  between  different 
information  models  in  cross-organizational  design  of  BPM 

in  BPMN  of 

1 see OMG BMI.org, http://www.bpmi.org/, ruleml.org, and W3C 

Semantic Web 

information  flow  and  thus  focuses  on  heterogeneous  ontology 
environments.  

the  requirements  engineering 

4.  The Mediated Business Process Modeler 
In  this  section  the  proof-of-concept  implementation  of  the 
mediated business process modeling tool is discussed. As the tool 
should  be  realized  as  an  extension  of  a  state-of-the-art  business 
process  modeling  tool,  the  architecture  has  to  incorporate  an 
abstraction  of  it,  in  order  to  remain  independent  of  any  concrete 
tool or product. According to the goals and tasks described in the 
previous  section  a  systematic  use  case  analysis  was  performed. 
Along  with 
the  prototypical 
implementation of the tool was carried out according to the Agile 
Unified  Process  (AUP),  which  methodology  is  based  on  the 
Rational  Unified  Process  (RUP)  framework  enhanced  with  agile 
aspects  [5],  i.e.,  the  development  process  is  composed  of  several 
iterations,  where  each  one  has  few  distinguished  phases.  After 
each  iteration  a  set  of  artifacts  is  collected  in  order  to 
systematically present the progress of the development. Critical in 
terms  of  most  difficult  to  implement  and  core  components  have 
been designed first and then prototypically realized before further 
components have been addressed.   

Based  on  these  iterations  the  following  system  architecture  has 
been  developed  which  provides  an  overview  of  the  main 
functional components and how they interact with each other:  

Figure  4.  System  Architecture  of  Extended  Business  Process 
Modeling Tool 

The  general  architecture  style  is  client-server  based  as  this  suits 
best  the  goal  for  distributed  collaboration  between  multiple 
business process experts and domain information model experts in 
the  targeted  cross-organizational  context.  The  tool  is  based  on 
state-of-the-art  functionality  for  business  process  modeling.  On 
top  of  this  bottom  layer  two  more  layers  are  added  which  are 
enabled by means of Semantic Web technologies provided by the 
vertically  shown  Semantic  Web  framework.  The  first  additional 
layer  provides  the  means  for  semantic  annotation  of  information 
entities within the business process information flow. The second 
additional  layer  then  contributes  the  functionality  for  semantic 
mediation  based on polymorph information entities to facilitate a 
sound  design  of  cross-organizational  information  flow.  A  further 
vertical  layer  named  semantic  pool  provides  complementary 
functionality 
terms  of 
management support for utilized ontologies and semantic bridges. 

the  before  presented 

layers 

in 

to 


more detail. 

4.1  Business Process Modeling 
The  underlying  layer  is  instantiated  by  the  open-source  based 
Oryx editor for the basic business process modeling functionality 
including a visual editor for modeling domains, actors, events and 
information  flow,  whereas  multiple  modeling  notations  such  as 
BPMN  or  EPC2  are  supported.  The  Oryx  editor has been chosen 
among  a  set  of  candidates 
in  a  systematic  criteria-based 
evaluation,  which  has  been  carried  out  in  [6].  The  main  criteria 
have  been  extensibility,  support  of  standardized business process 
modeling  notations  such  as  BPMN,  usability  and  an  active 
developer  community  with  support  provision.  The  Oryx 
architecture 
an  Ajax-JavaScript  Web-frontend 
combined  with  a  Java-Servlet  based  backend 
including  a 
Hibernate  persistence  layer.    The  open  approach  combined  with 
its  clearly  structured  and  defined  plug-in  mechanism  provides  a 
solid  foundation  for  the  realization  of  the  upper  layers.  A 
comprehensive  technical  description  about  the  Oryx  project  can 
be found in [7].  

comprises 

According  to  the  client-server  architecture  and  the  extension 
mechanism  of  the  Oryx  editor  the  upper  layers  are  realized  as 
plug-ins.  Its  functional  components  contain  each  a  client-side 
Web frontend for the GUI including lightweight application logic 
and a server-side backend for more sophisticated processing. The 
backend includes in particular the functionality for the additional 
semantic layers using the Protege API that provides the semantic 
technology  stack.  Furthermore,  the  backend  provides  the 
Oryx-based  persistence  handling  of  extended  business 
process  models  with  semantic  artifacts  such  as  domain 
ontologies  for  annotation  of 
information  entities  and 
semantic bridges. 

feature  of  defining  how  often  an  element  may  occur  within  a 
complex type definition by minOccurs and maxOccurs, which are 
not  restricted  to  0  or  1.  Therefore,  the  language  level  OWL-DL 
has  been  regarded  as  most  useful  for  the  developed  prototypes 
including  the  fact  that  most  OWL  reasoners  focus  as  well  on 
OWL-DL. 

By  selecting  a  concept  from  a  tree-based  representation  of  the 
OWL-DL  domain  ontology  graph 
the  adequate  semantic 
annotation  for  the  business  process  information  entity  can  be 
identified  according  to  the  domain  ontology  context  and  the 
properties  describing  the  particular  concept.  The  concept-tree 
representation  focuses  on  the  following  OWL-DL  ontology 
features: 

 

 

 

the concept and its sub-concepts 

the concept and its properties 

the properties and their domain and range 

Further more sophisticated ontology features e.g. the qualification 
of  a  property  as  functional  etc.  are  not  represented,  in  order  to 
focus  on  a  high-level  non-technical  visualization  for  business 
experts  without  too  much  complexity.  Therefore,  the  OWL-DL 
ontology is processed on the server-side using the Protege-API. In 
order 
the  ontology  structure  an  XML  object 
representation  is  utilized  to  serialize  ontology  representations  to 
the client-side.  

to  display 

The  information  flow  is  represented  in  BPMN  by  means  of 
linking annotated information entities to multiple activities  

to 

levels  OWL-DL  has  been  chosen  for 

4.2  Semantic Annotation 
The  semantic  annotation  plug-in  extends  the  Oryx  BPMN 
modeling  functionality  by  means  of  semantically  enriched 
expression of information entities and information flow. The 
Oryx editor supports multiple notations for business process 
models.  However,  BPMN  was  chosen  due 
its 
standardization  and  wide  industry  adoption.  The  developed 
extension  allows  to  link  BPMN  information  entities  to 
concrete  concepts  of  a  corporate  or  domain  ontology 
described  in  OWL-DL.  Among  the  three  available  OWL 
languages 
the 
following  reasons:  OWL-DL  imposes  some  restrictions  on 
the  underlying  RDF  graphs  in  comparison  to  OWL-Full,  which 
does not. Therefore, based on limitations in expressiveness OWLDL  is  decidable  and  reasonably  computable  compared  to  OWL-
Full. Moreover, OWL-DL enables arbitrary values for cardinality 
restrictions  of  properties,  where  OWL-Lite  only  allows 
distinguishing  between  0  and  1  for  minCardinality,  etc.  In  this 
context  it  has  to  be  kept  in  mind  that  providing  further  tool 
support in the SOA lifecycle requires that OWL concepts need to 
be  mapped  to  XML  Schema  types  taken  into  account  path 
dependency  of  Web  service  technologies.  The  OWL-DL  features 
for  cardinality  restrictions  allow  covering  the  XML  Schema 

2 Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) and Event-driven 

Process Chains (EPC) 

Figure 5. GUI of Mediated Business Process Modeling Tool 

between  information  entities  are  passed.  Besides  this  annotation 
visualization  taking  into  account  the  whole  domain  information 
model  additionally  a  directly  into  BPMN  integrated  semantic 
extension  of  the  information  entity  representation  is  provided. 
According  to  the  approach  presented  in  Figure  3  each  annotated 
information entity is visualized in the business process model with 
the  corresponding  concept  properties  as  cascading  sub-shapes. 
Figure  5  below  illustrates  the  two  perspectives  of  the  semantic 
annotation in a screenshot of the Web-based GUI of the extended 
business process modeling tool. 

The  BPMN  extension  of  the  annotated  information  entity  is 
shown  on  the  left  hand  side  and  the  domain  ontology  browser 
including  the  concept  tree  on  the  right  hand  side.  In  the center a 


information  entities  PurchaseOrder  and  Order  in  different 
domains  is  highlighted,  which  will  be  further  explained  in  the 
next section 

Moreover, the mentioned dynamics of business requires adequate 
mechanisms  for  the  maintenance  and  evolution  of  the  utilized 
ontology-based  information  models.  Therefore,  the  functionality 
to  advance  the  domain  ontology  or  particular  concepts  is 
integrated  in  the  tree-based  representation  of  the  OWL-DL 
domain  ontology  graph.  Basic  extension  features such as adding, 
changing or deleting a concept or a property of a concept can be 
directly  performed  in  the  provided  ontology  browser  through 
specific  buttons  and  context  menus  highlighted  as  a  toolbar  in 
Figure 
sophisticated 
advancements  of  the  ontology  can  be 
specified in terms of textual comments 
by process experts and then have to be 
externally 
the 
corporate  or  domain  ontology  by 
domain 
information  model  experts 
using  separate  more  comprehensive 
ontology  development  tools  such  as 
Protege.  

incorporated 

5.  More 

into 

to  match 

cross-organizational 

semantic  mediation 

Figure 6. Semantic  
Mediation Mechanism 

4.3  Semantic Mediation 
The 
plug-in 
applies  preloaded  semantic  bridges  in 
order 
semantically 
corresponding  information  entities  in 
the 
business 
process  model.  As  the  application  of  semantic  bridges  represents 
the  core  part  of  the  actual  semantic  mediation  mechanism  its 
realization  is  discussed  in  more  detail  in  this  section.  The 
semantic bridges are realized in terms of SWRL forward-chaining 
rules  combined  with  the  facet  classification  semantics  of  OWL. 
By applying the semantic bridge rules, an instance of concept A is 
furnished with additional properties defined in concept B to which 
concept  A  has  been  identified  as  semantically  equal  [2].  Having 
the class definitions on hand, a reasoner is now able to classify the 
instance  as  polymorph,  since  all  required  properties  defined  in 
concept  A  and  B  are  present.  Thereby,  the  notion  of  so  called 
defined  classes  [3]    is  exploited  that  have  at  least  one  necessary 
and sufficient condition describing exactly the properties defining 
a  particular  concept.  Consequently,  instances  which  fulfill  the 
conditions  can  be  classified  by  an  OWL  reasoner  as  members  of 
such  a  defined  class.    Different  third-party  reasoners  and  rule 
engines have been examined in order to interpret and execute the 
SWRL rules and perform the required classification. 

At first, KAON2 [8] was investigated, since it supports reasoning 
over  OWL  and  SWRL.  However,  KAON2  implements  a  pure 
backward-chaining  algorithm,  which  is  designed  for  query 
answering;  i.e.  only  facts  necessary  for  answering  one  specific 
question  are  generated.  It  does  not  support  the  calculation  of  all 
facts  based  on  a  given  knowledge  base.  That  means  it  is  not 
possible  to  trigger  a  forward-chaining  reasoning,  determining  all 
facts  that  can  be  inferred  from  the  given  knowledge  base  [8]. 
However,  this  is  necessary  to  generate  polymorph  instances 
containing  all  properties  of  each  concept  definition  from  the 
domain ontologies between the semantic bridge is applied. 

Furthermore,  the  SWRL  support  of  the  Pellet  reasoner  [9]  has 
been  evaluated,  which  however  at  time  of  investigation  did  not 
include required built-ins [10], such as the makeOWLThing-built-
in  [11].  However,  this  built-in  is  necessary  e.g.  if  a  Semantic 
Bridge  defines  a  mapping  between  concepts,  where  the  target 
concept  is  defined  on  a  finer  granularity  level  then  the  source 
concept. In this case new  OWL individuals have to be created to 
accommodate the additional level of structure. Due to the lack of 
support of such specific built-ins, the Pellet SWRL support is not 
sufficient. 

A  third  and  finally  adopted  approach  is  the  use  of  the  ProtegeOWL  Framework  [12]  in  combination  with  Pellet  and  the  Jess 
Rule  Engine  [13].  Protege  is  an  open  source  tool  for  managing 
and  manipulating  OWL.  It  provides  a  direct  connection  to  Pellet 
for  performing  OWL-DL 
facet 
classification.  Since  Pellet  does  not  support  all  the  SWRL-built-
in-libraries as discussed above, the Jess rule engine is used for this 
purpose. The right hand Figure 5 illustrates the realization of the 
semantic mediation mechanism. 

reasoning 

applied 

for 

Protege is utilized as the top-layer framework that coordinates the 
communication  between  the  other  frameworks.  It  is  responsible 
for  reading,  importing  and  managing  all  ontological  facts.  While 
Pellet is directly integrated into the Protege framework, Jess is an 
independent  component  by  itself.  Therefore,  all  the  facts that are 
necessary for executing the SWRL-rules have to be transferred to 
the  rule  engine  via  the  SWRL-JessBridge  [14].  The  available 
methods and the syntax for handling the rules is explained in [15]. 
Since  rules  operate  on  individuals  exclusively,  proxy  OWL 
individuals have to be created for all ontology concepts involved 
in the semantic bridge. The proxy individuals simulate  the actual 
instances  of  information  entities  that  will  be  provided  during 
process  execution.  After  the  semantic  bride  is  executed,  the  now 
polymorph proxy individuals can be visualized in the concept tree 
of the ontology browser and as well directly in the BPMN model 
as illustrated in Figure 7 below: 

Figure 7. Polymorph Information Entities embedded in BPMN 

Moreover,  based  on  the  polymorph  proxy  individuals  the 
matching  of  semantically  corresponding  information  entities 
across  business  domains  can  be  performed.  Iterating  over  the 
involved information entities in the process model by taking into 
account  recursively  sub-elements,  the  concept  types  can  be 
directly compared.  Matching information entities are highlighted 
and  presented  to  the  process  expert.  Furthermore,  in  an  analog 
manner  to  the  evolution  of  information  models  the  tool  provides 
advancement  functionalities  for  the  evolution  of  rule-based 
semantic  bridges.  Requirements  for  missing  mapping  rules 
between  two  concepts  or  as  well  for  semantic  bridges  missing  at 
all  can  be  specified  and  are  stored  as  textual  comments  to  be 


visualization  and  advancement  functionalities  for  semantic 
bridges  are  similarly  realized  as  for  the  semantic  annotations  as 
described above. 
4.4  Semantic Pool 
On  the  one  hand  the  semantic pool plug-in provides a repository 
to  handle  and  manage  domain  ontologies 
to  be  used  during 
annotation  of 
information  flow.  On  the  other  hand  the 
analog functionality is provided to manage 
the  used  semantic  bridges 
including 
dialogs  for  import,  export,  create  and 
the 
versioning  operations  required  for 
advancement 
discussed 
above.  After  importing  a  corporate  or 
domain  ontology  its  URL  is  parsed  on 
server-side 
tree-based 
representation  for  the  client-side  ontology 
browser  is  generated  and  stored.  Thereby, 
the  realization  takes  into  account  that  the 
used  ontologies  and  semantic  bridges  are 
persistently  integrated  into  the  data  set  of 
the business process model to restore them 
consistently  when  the  business  process  is 
reloaded. 

functionality 

and 

the 

4.5  Semantic Web 
Framework 
The  Semantic  Web  framework  has  been  chosen  and  utilized  as 
discussed  above  in  context  of  the  realization  of  the  semantic 
mediation  mechanism.  It  includes  the  Protege  API  framework 
combined  with  the  Pellet  OWL-DL  reasoner  and  the  Jess SWRL 
rule engine. 

5.  Designing Information Flow in the 
Purchase-Order Mediation Scenario 
This  section  covers  the  validation  and  verification  of  the 
developed  prototype  for  mediated  business  process  modeling. 
Based on a briefly outlined scenario a subsection about validation 
analyses  how  the  developed  prototype  meets  the  objectives 
defined  in  the  Section  2  and  evaluates  its  usability,  whereas  a 
further  subsection  about  verification  deals  with  the  question 
whether  the  prototype  performs  the  mediated  business  modeling 
tasks correctly.  

The performed scenario is based on the purchase order mediation 
scenario,  which  has  been  issued  by  the  international  Semantic 
Web  Service  Challenge  (SWSC)  [16].  For  the  purpose  of  this 
paper the focus is set on the modeling of the cross-organizational 
business  process  including  the  design  of  information  flow  across 
heterogeneously  defined  information  representations.  The  basic 
idea  of  the  scenario  is  that  a  customer  Blue  wants  to  purchase 
goods  from  the  manufacturer  Moon.  However,  the  systems 
responsible for issuing a purchase order on the Blue side and for 

processing  the  order  on  the  Moon  side  differ  in  terms  of 
information  representation  and  in  terms  of  interaction  patterns. 
I.e.  the  granularity  and  denotation  of  the  data  elements  used  on 
both sides varies, as does the order and granularity of operations, 
necessary  to  complete  the  processing  of  an  order.  The  following 
Figure 8 illustrates the scenario: 

Figure 8. Purchase Order Mediation Scenario Overview [16] 

and 

The  purchase  order  sent  by  the  Blue  system  is  based  on  the 
information  model  specified  in  the  RosettaNet  XML  Schemas 
standard,  while  the  Moon  system  defines  its  own  information 
model with a proprietary XML Schema format. Consequently, the 
challenge  is  to  implement  a  mediator  that  should  bridge  the 
heterogeneities  regarding  the  different  information  models  and 
interaction  patterns  of  the  two  systems.  The  business  process 
between  the  two  companies  was  modeled  with  the  developed 
prototype.  Furthermore,  the  conceptual  information  flow  was 
designed  based  on  for  the  scenario  developed  domain  ontologies 
Blue 
different 
conceptualizations  of  the  information  models  on  an  ontology 
level.  Thereby,  additionally  developed  semantic  bridges  between 
the Blue and the Moon domain ontology were applied, in order to 
provide  a 
the 
heterogeneous information models to the business process expert. 
Furthermore,  the  advancement  functionality  for  information 
models  and  semantic  bridges  of  the  mediated  business  process 
modeling  tool  was  used  to  complete  the  Blue  and  Moon  domain 
ontologies  and  corresponding  semantic  bridges  to  fit  adequately 
for the business process. Figure 9 below shows how the purchase 
order mediation scenario was mapped to a business process model 
designed with the realized prototype: 

semantic  mediation  between 

Moon  which 

transparent 

capture 

the 


of steps, dependency with level of experience etc.), and about the 
capabilities  (tool  performance  such  as  response 
time  for 
operations, display of answers/results/errors, reliability, correction 
of  mistakes,    etc.)  and  the  features  (semantic  pool,  semantic 
annotator, embedded ontology editor, etc.). The results in general 
showed  that  the  feasibility  of  successfully  designing  semantic 
cross-organizational business process is high and that the number 
of required steps to fulfil tasks is quickly increasing with the level 
of  experience,  demonstrating  the  ease  of  learnability  of  the  toolsupported  approach.  However    not  surprisingly  for  a  proof-of-
concept prototype  the usability in terms of capabilities, GUI etc. 
was considered as improvable.  
5.2  Verification 
Guided  by  the  scenario  several  tests  were  run  to  ensure  that  the 
prototype  mainly  performs  correctly  and  stable  in  the  expected 
behavior.    In  particular,  a  set  of  defined  use  cases  covering  the 
main  functionalities  have  been  performed.  The  tested  use  cases 
include:  manage  ontologies and semantic bridges in the semantic 
pool, create new ontology, define requirements for a new semantic 
bridge,  annotate  information  entity  with  a  concept,  display 
annotated  information  entity,  edit  annotated  information  entity, 
link  corresponding  information  entities  with  a  semantic  bridge, 
suggest  semantically  matching 
information  entities,  display 
semantic  bridge  and  finally  edit  semantic  bridge.  Additionally, 
during  the  development  of  the  prototype  several  unit  tests  have 
been  run  to  check  the  correct  implementation  of  the  various 
methods.  Thus,  it  can  be  stated  that  the  prototype  generally 
performs correctly.  

taken 

into  account  as  well 

Consequently, 
the  validation 
discussion,  it  can  be  stated  that  the  developed  prototype  for 
mediated business process modeling meets the defined objectives 
and provides a valid proof-of-concept implementation. 

6.  Conclusion and Outlook 
In  this  paper  we  have  contributed  an  approach  for  mediated 
semantic  business  process  modeling  which  addresses 
the 
challenge to design cross-organizational information flows which 
bridge  borders  of  heterogeneous  business  process  models  and 
their  business  vocabularies.  Semantic 
representation  of 
information  models  as  OWL  ontologies  are  used  to  enhance  the 
purely  syntactic  information  entities  in  BPMN  in  order  to 
explicitly  design  the  semantics  of business processes information 
flows  across  domain  boundaries.  This  improves  the  alignment  of 
business  and  IT  perspectives  as  ontology-based  information 
models  can  be  consistently  reused  during  implementation  of 
private and public processes. Even more important, it enables the 
process expert to address the semantic integration problem on the 
higher  abstract  conceptual  level  of  cross-organizational  business 
process  models.  Rule-based  semantic  bridges  are  used  for  the 
automated mediation between different domain vocabularies used 
in the interlinked organizations' process models.  

We have presented a prototypical implementation of the proposed 
approach as an extension of an existing BPMN modeling tool. As 
a  proof-of-concept  we  have  evaluated  and  demonstrated  the 
developed tool on the basis of an e-commerce use case. 

Future work will consider the integration of the mediated business 
process  modeling  approach  with  previous  work  where  the  rulebased  semantic  bridges  have  been  applied  during  service 

Figure 9. Scenario Performed with Mediated Business Process 

Modeler 

5.1  Validation  
The required functionality for the design of information flow on a 
non-technical conceptual level could be successfully provided: On 
the  one  hand  by  means  of  the  ontology  browser  presenting  the 
information  model  as  a  concept  tree  and  on  the  other  hand  by 
extending  the  plain  BPMN  representation  of  information  entities 
with  concept  annotations  from  a  corporate  or  domain  ontology. 
Furthermore,  based  on  the  underlying  OWL-DL  ontologies 
utilized  for  the  expression  of  corporate  or  domain  information 
models,  the  link  to  their  processing in  the further SOA life-cycle 
could  be  ensured.  I.e.  the  OWL-DL  domain  ontologies  can  be 
reused  in  order  build  the  additional  semantic  layer  for  Web 
service  enrichment  and  Web  service  composition,  which  can  be 
mapped 
infrastructures  and  hence 
contribute  to    improved  Business-IT  alignment.  The  semantic 
mediation  mechanism  was  realized  by  means  of  SWRL-based 
forward-chaining  rules  and  the  facet  analysis  classification 
semantics  of  an  OWL-DL  reasoner.  Once  loaded  to  the semantic 
pool and accordingly applied with the matching functionality, the 
semantic bridges enable a seamless design of cross-organizational 
information  flow,  whereas  semantic  heterogeneities  are  kept 
transparently  in  the  background.  Finally,  the  functionality  for 
business process-driven evolution of existing information models 
was  realized  within  the  ontology  browser  and  dialogs  for  the 
extension or completion of semantic bridges were integrated. 

to  existing  XML-based 

In  order  to  evaluate  the  usability  of  the  new  semantic  modelling 
approach we have conduced a usability inspection technique [23] 
based on performing  modelling experiments  with evaluators with 
knowledge  about  BPMN.  The  expert  users  were  provided  with 
(existing)  private  and  public  business  processes  and 
the 
organizations  domain  vocabularies  which  where  represented  as 
OWL  ontologies.  The  evaluators  were  asked  to  design  the  crossorganizational  business  process  models  for  these  processes 
together  with  the  semantic  information  flows  and  semantic 
bridges  by  using  our  semantic  Oryx  plug-in.  The  evaluation  via 
questionnaires then asked for  overall reaction on the usability of 
the  tool,  about  the  views  of  the  GUI  (readability,  organization  of 
views,  understand  ability  of  menus  and  wizards,  etc.),  about  the 
learnability  (operating 
the  system,  exploration  of  features, 


rules  have  be  used  to  declaratively  represent  expressive  decision 
and  behavioral  logic  in  semantic  business  process  executions 
including  the  pragmatic  interaction  context  [19,20].  Exploiting 
the ontology-based information flow and semantic bridges directly 
for the mapping to service orchestrations provides the potential to 
further improve Business-IT alignment. 

Moreover, the cross-organizational perspective will be addressed. 
Somehow  it  has  to  be  ensured  that  all  stakeholders  in  business 
process  modeling  covering  multiple  organizations  and  domains 
have  access  to  the  required  assets  including  process  models, 
information  models  and  corresponding  semantic  bridges. 
Therefore,  an  organizational  framework  and  clearinghouse  is 
required to guide the stakeholders in the process of providing and 
sharing the process assets. Such a clearinghouse should include a 
repository to publish the various business process models, domain 
vocabularies  and  semantic  bridges,  to  categorize  them  with 
expressive  semantics  and  provide  methods  for  versioning  and 
quality assurance to ensure the sound evolution. 

In  the  long  run  these  activities  should  contribute to the vision of 
performing cross-organizational process integration purely on the 
conceptual  business  level  by  exploiting  powerful  tool  support 
based on semantic business process management.   
