Linking Events with Media

Raphael Troncy

EURECOM

Sophia Antipolis, France

raphael.troncy@eurecom.fr

Bartosz Malocha

EURECOM

Sophia Antipolis, France

bartosz.malocha@eurecom.fr



Andre T. S. Fialho
CWI Amsterdam
The Netherlands

andre.fialho@cwi.nl

ABSTRACT
We present a large dataset composed of events descriptions
together with media descriptions associated with these events
and interlinked with the larger Linked Open Data cloud.
We are constructing a web-based environment that allows
users to explore and select events, to inspect associated me-
dia, and to discover meaningful, surprising or entertaining
connections between events, media and people participating
in events. The dataset is obtained from three large public event directories (last.fm, eventful and upcoming) represented with the LODE ontology and from large media directories (flickr, youtube) represented with the Media Ontology.
We describe how the data has been converted, interlinked
and published following the best practices of the Semantic
Web community.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.1 [Multimedia Information System]: Audio, Video
and Hypertext Interactive Systems; I.7.2 [Document Prepa-
ration]: Languages and systems, Markup languages, Multi/
mixed media, Standards

General Terms
Languages, Hyperlinks, Web, URI, HTTP

Keywords
Events, LODE, Media Ontology, dataset

1.

INTRODUCTION

Events are a natural way for referring to any observable
occurrence grouping persons, places, times and activities
that can be described [7, 5, 1]. Events are also observable
experiences that are often documented by people through
different media (e.g. videos and photos). We explore this

Andr e Fialho is also affiliated with Delft University of Tech-

nology in Delft, The Netherlands.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2010 September 1-3, 2010, Graz, Austria
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09 ...$10.00.

intrinsic connection between media and experiences so that
people can search and browse through content using a familiar event perspective. In the context of the Petamedia1
Network of Excellence, we are designing an application that
takes into account the triple synergy of users and their social networks, user-created content and metadata attached
to this content in an application for supporting users in interacting with events.

While wishing to support such functionality, we are aware
that websites already exist that provide interfaces to such
functionality, e.g. eventful.com, upcoming.org, last.fm/events,
and facebook.com/events to name a few. These services
have sometimes overlap in terms of coverage of upcoming
events and provide social networks features to support users
in sharing and deciding upon attending events. However,
the information about the events, the social connections
and the representative media are all spread and locked in
amongst these services providing limited event coverage and
no interoperability of the description [1]. Our goal is to
aggregate these heterogeneous sources of information using
linked data, so that we can explore the information with the
flexibility and depth afforded by semantic web technologies.
Furthermore, we will investigate the underlying connections
between events to allow users to discover meaningful, entertaining or surprising relationships amongst them. We
also use these connections as means of providing information and illustrations about future events, thus enhancing
decision support.

In this paper, we present how we intend to represent description of events using the LODE ontology which ensures
interoperability among various event ontologies (Section 2).
We describe the data scraping and interlinking process as
well as a large SKOS taxonomy of event categories (Sec-
tion 3). We provide interface mockups to illustrate the types
of task support and expected functionality we will be providing in the coming weeks based on this dataset (Section 4).
Finally, we give our conclusions and outline future work in
Section 5.

2. THE LODE ONTOLOGY

The LODE ontology2 is a minimal model that encapsulates the most useful properties for describing events [5].
The goal of this ontology is to enable interoperable modeling of the factual aspects of events, where these can be
characterized in terms of the four Ws: What happened,

http://www.petamedia.eu

http://linkedevents.org/ontology/


involved. Factual relations within and among events are
intended to represent intersubjective consensus reality and
thus are not necessarily associated with a particular perspective or interpretation. This model thus allows us to
express characteristics about which a stable consensus has
been reached, whether these are considered to be empirically
given or rhetorically produced will depend on ones epistemological stance. We enhance the LODE descriptions with
properties for categorizing events and for relating them to
other events through parthood or causal relations using the
Descriptions and Situations approach of the Event-Model-
F [4].

The Figure 1 depicts the metadata attached to the event
identified by 1380633 on last.fm according to the LODE on-
tology. More precisely, it indicates that an event of type
Concert has been given on the 24th of January 2010 at
20:00 PM in the Henry Fonda Theater featuring the Radiohead rock band.

Figure 1: The Radiohead Haiti Relief Concert described with LODE

LODE is not yet another event ontology per se. It has
been designed as an interlingua model that solves an interoperability problem by providing a set of axioms expressing mappings between existing event ontologies. Hence, the
ontology contains numerous OWL axioms stating classes
and properties equivalence between models such as MO [3],
CIDOC-CRM, DOLCE, SEM [6] to name a few. Therefore,
an OWL-aware agent would infer that the resource identified by dbpedia:Radiohead is a dul:Agent as described in
the Dolce Ultra Lite ontology.

3. DATA SCRAPING AND INTERLINKING
In this section, we detail how the data from events and
media directories is scraped and interlinked. Furthermore,
we describe how we build a large SKOS thesaurus of event
categories.
3.1 Event Directories

We first explore the overlap in metadata between four
popular web sites, namely Flickr as a hosting web site for
photos and videos and Last.fm, Eventful and Upcoming as
a documentation of past and upcoming events. Explicit relationships between events and photos exist using machine
tags such as lastfm:event=XXX. Hence, we have been able
to convert the description of more than 1.7 million photos
which are indexed by nearly 140.000 events.

We use the Last.fm, Eventful and Upcoming APIs to convert each event description into the LODE ontology (Sec-
tion 2). We mint new URIs into our own namespace for

events (http://data.linkedevents.org/event/), agents (http://data.
linkedevents.org/agent/) and locations (http://data.linkedevents.
org/location/). A graph representing an event is composed
of the type of the event, a full text description, the agents
(e.g. artists) involved, a date (instant or interval represented
with OWL Time [2]), a location in terms of both geographical coordinates and a URI denoting the venue and users
participation. A graph representing an agent or a location
is composed of a label and a description (e.g. the artists
biography).

Event directories have overlap in their coverage. We interlink these events descriptions when they involve the same
agents at the same date or when they happen at the same
venue at the same date. We invoke additional semantic web
lookup services such as dbpedia, geonames and freebase in
order to enrich the descriptions of the agents and the loca-
tions. Hence, the agent URI which has for label Radiohead
is interlinked with the dbpedia URI (http://dbpedia.org/page/
Radiohead) which provides additional information about the
band such as its complete discography. This URI is declared
to be owl:sameAs another identifier from the New York
Times (http://data.nytimes.com/N12964944623934882292) which provides information about the 38 associated articles from this
newspaper to this band. The venue has also been converted
into a dbpedia URI (http://dbpedia.org/page/The_Henry_Fonda_
Theater) but has been augmented with geo-coordinates from
last.fm which was not originally present in dbpedia thus increasing the amount of information available in the LOD
cloud for the benefit of all semantic web applications. We
observe that a few venues have been interlinked with the
LOD cloud. We are now investigating further linkage with
Foursquare which has a much broader coverage of event
venues. The linked data journey can be rich and long. One
of the challenges we want to address is how to visualize these
enriched interconnected datasets while still supporting simple user tasks such as searching and browsing enriched media
collections.
3.2 Media Directories

The Ontology for Media Resource currently developed by
W3C is a core vocabulary which covers basic metadata properties to describe media resources3. It also contains a formal
set of axioms defining mapping between different metadata
formats for multimedia. We use this ontology together with
properties from SIOC, FOAF and Dublin Core to convert
into RDF the Flickr photo descriptions (Figure 2). The link
between the media and the event is realized through the
lode:illustrate property, while more information about
the sioc:UserAccount can be attached to his URI. In the
Figure 1, we see that the video hosted on YouTube has for
ma:creator the user aghorrorag.

The Ontology for Media Resource can then be used to attach different types of metadata to the media, such as the
duration, the target audience, the copyright, the genre, the
rating. Media Fragments can also be defined in order to
have a smaller granularity and attach keywords or formal
annotations to parts of the video. We use the patterns defined in the Event-Model-F to represent the actual role of
various users for a given media: the uploader of the video,
the user who has tagged, or commented the video, etc. In
summary, using these patterns, we can extend the LODE
and Media ontologies with provenance information, making

http://www.w3.org/TR/mediaont-10/


lief Concert described with the Media Ontology

the distinction between the creator of some media or event
and the creator of the association between events and media,
and even between the participants of this event.
3.3 Event Categories

Events are generally categorized in lightweight taxonomies
that provide facets when browsing event directories. We
have manually analyzed the taxonomy used in various sites,
namely facebook, eventful, upcoming, zevents, linkedin, eventbrite and ticketmaster, and used card sorting techniques in
order to build a rich SKOS thesaurus of event categories.
This SKOS thesaurus contains axioms expressing mappings
relationships with these taxonomies while the terms are defined in our own namespace (http://data.linkedevents.org/category/).
The top level categories are Sports, Music, Food, Arts, Movies,
Family, Social Gathering, Community and Professional but
alignment with other classification such as the IPTC News
Codes for sports of the last.fm genres for music is also pro-
vided.

Last.fm
Eventful
Upcoming

Event Agent Location Media
1,393,039


User


Table 1: Number of event/agent/location and me-
dia/user descriptions in the dataset

Overall, the dataset collected contains more than 30 million triples. A dump is available at (http://www.eurecom.fr/
~troncy/ldtc2010/) while a temporary SPARQL endpoint is
available at (http://data.linkedevents.org/sparql).

4. APPLICATION

In this section, we briefly illustrate initial interface possibilities derived from a user study described in [1]. Unsurpris-
ingly, the sketches below correspond to the basic properties
defined in the LODE ontology.

What - One prospective view is media centered and allows to quickly illustrate the event through associated me-
dia. In this view we display events through a representative
images and convey different event characteristics (e.g. rele-
vance, rating, popularity, etc) with one and/or more of the
image properties, i.e., size and transparency. This approach
has been used in other applications4 to represent clustered
result sets or convey sorting by size on different contexts
(Figure 3a).
4See for example http://www.jinni.com or http://www.ted.com/
talks.

Figure 3: Interface views illustrating a set of events
under: (A) media centric perspective; (B) a chronological perspective; and (C) location centric perspec-
tive

When - Ordering can also be used to represent chronological event occurrence. In fact, the time centric view can
be interpreted as the sorting of events chronologically (Fig-
ure 3b).

Where - A location centric view can be used to represent
where the events occur geographically to orient the user and
convey distance. The use of maps is commonly used to visualize such information (Figure 3c).

Who - Events are intrinsically bound to a social compo-
nent. Users want to know who will be attending to an event
when deciding to attend to it.
In this context, a people
centric view would be relevant to explore the relationships
between users and events. Alternatively we can combine attendance information to other views such as location, allowing users to browse for friends on a map and identify their
It could also be used to provide means
attended events.
of visualizing event popularity ,e.g.
identify the cities hotspots on a map, indicate visual cues of popularity according
to number of attendees.

When representing an event instance, we show all information needed to support the decision making process (e.g.
Figure 4). Since experiences are centered around media con-
tent, we wish to explore different media that better illustrate
the event to end-users. Some information that can support
decision making are the following.

 background information (e.g. performers, topic, genre,

price, attendance list, etc)

 subjective or computed attributes (e.g.

reputation,

fun, atmosphere, audience)

 user opinions, comments and ratings (strangers and

friends)

 representative media (ads, media from past related


events, media from the audience, etc.)

Apart from the inspection of the event instance, other conceptual classes (e.g. users, venues, performers, media) should
also have accessible views, so that the user can obtain more
information about these instances and explore events related
to them. In future work, we will also identify what are the
relevant associated information and how to represent navigation from and to these nodes.

5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we have shown how linked data technologies can be used for integrating information contained in
event and media directories. We used the LODE and Media
Ontology respectively for expressing linked data description
of events and photos. Ultimately, we aim at providing an
event-based environment for users to explore, annotate and
share media and we present some sketches of user interfaces
that we will develop in the coming weeks.

We are currently consolidating and cleaning our dataset
with more sources (e.g. YouTube videos) and more linkage
(e.g. description of recurring event, artist and venue from
hubs such as freebase or dbpedia). We intend to provide
soon user participation at events from public Foursquare
check-in or live Tweets. Our priority is also to express the
right licensing and attribution information to the data that
has been rdf-ized. Finally, we will release soon a voiD description of the complete dataset. We truly believe that
multimedia will then be finally added back to the Semantic
Web.

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank Lynda Hardman (CWI),
Carsten Saathoff (WeST Institute), Ansgar Scherp (WeST
Institute) and Ryan Shaw (Berkeley University) for fruit-

ful discussions on the infrastructure and the design of the
EventMedia interfaces. The research leading to this paper
was supported by the European Commission under contract
FP7-216444, Petamedia Peer-to-peer Tagged Media.
