A Multi-Responsive Communication Architecture  

for Web Service Description and Discovery 

Adrian Benfell 

IRC, University of Reading,  

Ground Floor, Building 42, Whiteknights, 
Reading. RG6 6WB. United Kingdom.  

a.j.benfell@reading.ac.uk 

Action 

Perspective, 

ABSTRACT 
The discovery  of  suitable web services  is a demanding challenge 
for  organisations  that  plan  to  benefit  from  this  technology.  
Markedly even more so when strategic  objectives,  organisational 
structures,  business  processes  and  technology  are  situated  in  a 
climate  of  constant  change;  such  dynamic  conditions  have  an 
impact  upon  the  normative  behavioural  patterns  of  people 
working  in  organisations.    Based  upon  the  principles  of  the 
Pragmatic  Web,  this  paper  reveals  a  mechanism  that  captures 
behavioural patterns as affordances and norms that when merged 
form a multi-responsive  communication architecture.  Enhancing 
the  traditional  two-role  conversational  model  found  within  the 
Language 
the  multi-responsive 
communication  architecture  placates  web  service  discovery  in 
settings  where  diverse  and  unpredictable  organisational  contexts 
coupled  with  the  need  to  consider  the  actions  of  all  participants 
that influence the selection of web services are accounted for.   
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
D.2.1  [Requirements  Specification]:  Reusable  Software    web 
services.  
General Terms 
Semiotics. 
Keywords 
Pragmatic Web, Semiotics, Speech Acts, Norms, Web Services. 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
The  Pragmatic  Web  will  in  the  future  provide  the  means  to 
identify  and  consume  contextually  relevant  web  services.  
However, the challenge to achieve this aim requires competencies 
that  move  beyond  the  current  boundaries  of  syntactic  and 
semantic  web  technology,  particularly  when  organisations  are 
predisposed  to  an  assortment  of  dynamic  conditions  that  web 
technology  presents.    Dynamic  conditions  encompass  strategic 
objectives,  organisational  structures,  business  processes,  and 
technology  [6, 8, 33]  that when  situated  in  a climate  of  constant 
change  impact  the  normative  behavioural  patterns  (norms)  of 
people working in organisations.   

Permission to  make digital or  hard copies of all or part  of this work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS  2010,  September  1-3,  2010  Graz,  Austria 
Copyright  ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09... $10.00 

[48]  whilst 

and  bindings 

1.1  Research Problem 
Conventional  syntactic  web  service  description,  based  upon  the 
Web Service Description Language (WSDL 1.1) standard is used 
to  list  definitions  for  data  types,  message  types,  port  types 
(operations) 
focusing  upon 
communication  protocols  that  enable  packets  of  data  as  Simple 
Object  Access  Protocol  (SOAP)  messages  to  traverse  network 
architectures  [42].    Conventionally,  a  web  service  provider 
publishes  a  web  service(s)  in  a  registry  [15,  36].    The  registry 
provides the references to the web services available and links to 
description files.  The bind details of the web service enable a web 
service  provider  and  consumer  to have some  kind  of  interaction 
based upon the SOAP protocol [23, 25].  Semantic Web Services 
(SWS)  illustrate  syntactic  web  services with  additional  semantic 
mark-up  that  exemplifies  ontological  descriptions  of  data  and 
processes.   Cardoso [11] describes  ontology  linked  to SWS  as  a 
strong  form  of  semantics,  where  relationships,  constraints,  and 
rules governing the use of use of data are present.  WSMO [50], 
WSDL-S 
[34]  are  prime  examples.  
Occasionally  some  semantic  annotations  [34,  49,  50]  surface 
when searching for web services, but in practice these are a rarity 
[9, 27, 35, 41].    Furthermore,  as  WSDL  is  the  current  standard, 
such  ontology  languages  are  often  implemented  with  WSDL  as 
the starting point.   

An aim of the Pragmatic Web is to enhance human collaboration 
with 
for  ontology  negotiations  and  pragmatic 
ontology-building efforts in communities  of practice [40].  This 
aim  requires  the  creation  and  exchange  of  all  types  of  signs 
present  in  syntactic  and  semantic  descriptions  between  web 
service  providers  and  consumers  [30,  41].    Identifying  web 
services  that are  contextually  relevant  highlights  four  challenges 
that should be considered if the ideas of the Pragmatic Web are to 
be executed:    

1.  The  syntactic  representations  in  a  WSDL  1.1  file  must  be 
made available in a shared vocabulary that is both accessible 
and modifiable by web service providers and consumers.   

[49]  and  OWL-S 

techniques 

2.  Strong  semantic  descriptions  may  prohibit  identifying  web 
services that contextually fit an organisation.  For example, a 
shared  vocabulary  arranged  in  a  taxonomic  scheme  that 
facilitates  the  active  creation  and  sharing  of  signs  between 
web  service  and  providers  may  be  more  appropriate  when 
considering the dynamic conditions of organisations.   

3.  Hinged upon the creation and exchange of all types of signs 
that  either  point  to  existent  things  within  a  web  service  or 
symbolic  signs  conveying  a  law  like  interpretation  of 
syntactic and semantic descriptions, authors such as [16, 28, 
29] that have used semiotics to understand web services have 


associated process of semiosis.  

4.  Communication  in  syntactic  and  semantic  web  service 
discovery  contexts  typically  start  after  the  publication  of  a 
web  service,  leaving  a  service  consumer  to  speculate  about 
the appropriateness of a web service.  Dialogue is insufficient 
when  the  dynamic  conditions  related  to  organisations  must 
be shared across organisational boundaries.   

1.2  Proposed Solution 
To  achieve  the  first  three  challenges  listed  above,  Peircean 
semiotic  theory  takes  a  favourable  position.    Peirces  particular 
semiotic theory of  signs  is  applicable to  web  service  description 
and discovery due to  its triadic  grounding.   According to  [2, 12, 
13, 18, 37] Peirces version of semiotics is general (it accounts for 
the emotional, practical and intellectual experience of sign users), 
triadic  (owing  to  the  three  foundational  philosophical  categories 
that  Peirce  created  namely,  firstness,  secondness  and  thirdness), 
and  pragmatic  (in  that  it  takes  into  consideration  the  dynamic 
context in which signs are produced and consumed in).   Semiotic 
theory is used to assess the availability of syntactic and semantic 
web  service  description,  first  in  a  Pragmatic  Web  context,  and 
second,  according  to  the  sign  classifications  in  a  process  of 
semiosis.    Joint  action  to  facilitate  the  sharing  of  a  vocabulary 
between web service  providers  and consumers  is also  defined  in 
accord  with  semiosis.    To  address  that  last  challenge,  a  multiresponsive  communication  architecture,  Benfell  and  Liu  [5],  is 
built  upon  to  further  enhance  the  dialogue  component  of  web 
service description and discovery.  It draws upon communication 
loop theory found in work by [17, 32, 39, 47] but circumvents its 
limitations in relation to the capture of trans-situational grounds 
[21].  Such grounds are social phenomena brought into the current 
conversational  situation  that  affect  speech  act  composition;  they 
are  the  representation  of  the  dynamic  conditions  that  affect 
organisations that must be sought when opting to use a particular 
web service.   

2.  SEMIOTIC THEORY  
In  developing  a  theory  of  signs,  Peirce  [37]  said  that  a  sign  is 
anything that stands for  something (the object) to somebody (the 
interpretant).    Peirces  unique  semiotic  theory  of  signs  is 
applicable  to  characterising  the  signs  exchanged  between  web 
service providers and consumers: 

Firstness 
Qualisign 
(A quality) 

Secondness 
Sinsign 
(An existent thing) A WSDL 
file, an OWL-S file 

Icon 
(A similarity) 

Rheme 
(Quality only  
a common 
noun) Class 
names.  
Data type 
variables: age 
for example. 

Index 
(Causal connection) A web 
service. An actual operation.  
An actual data type. Proper 
noun  an object. 
Dicent 
(An sign of actual existence  a 
sentence) The web service used 
for a general task, an actual 
operation invoked for a sub 
task and trans-situational 
grounds forming dynamic 
conditions. 

Thirdness 
Legisign 
(A convention or law) Description 
file syntax containing: operation, 
data type etc 
Symbol 
(Refers to its object by convention 
or law) Operation naming 
convention. Data type 
conventions. 
Argument 
(An inference from dicent signs in 
context) Trans-situational grounds 
representing norms embedded 
inside an affordance.  Deontic 
actions inferred from dynamic 
conditions based upon transsituational grounds. 

Table 1. A Semiotic Analysis of Web Services 

typically 

found 

Owing  to three  foundational  philosophical  categories that  Peirce 
created namely, firstness, secondness and thirdness, it also draws 
together three terms that constitute a sign: representamen; object; 
and  interpretant.    Peirce  generated  various  semiotic  accounts 
specifically,  early,  interim  and  final  and  in  each  case 
semiotic  theory  becomes  more  developed.    The  following  texts 
describing  Peircean  semiotic  theory  [2,  12,  13,  18,  37]  places 
syntactic  and  semantic  web  service  technology  into  the semiotic 
framework in table 1 derived from [4]. 

2.1  Shared Semiosis and Joint Actions 
Based  upon  the  findings  in  Table  1,  a  unifying  paradigm  that 
draws web service providers and consumers into joint actions [10, 
24] is defined next.  To achieve this objective, Stampers work on 
ontology  and  affordance  is  used.    Stamper  [43,  44]  recognises 
three different  types  of  ontology,  whereby  the first relates to the 
in  any  standard 
recognition  of  symbols 
presentation format, and the second identifies distinct objects and 
object type classification.  The second type  of ontology typically 
denotes 
indexical-legisigns  and  symbolic-
legisigns.    It  suggests  a  taxonomic  scheme  of  web  service 
elements, as opposed to strong semantic descriptions, being more 
applicable  to  third  type  of  ontology  acknowledged  by  Stamper 
[43,  44].   The  third  type  of  ontology,  affordance,  is  particularly 
relevant to web service description and discovery  in a Pragmatic 
Web setting as it is based upon the view that the world known to a 
person consists of  only the actions a person can carry out  in that 
environment [19].   The  purpose  of  identifying affordance  is  to 
provide  the  contextual  setting  for  web  service  description  and 
discovery  for  all  interpretant  signs.    At  an  abstract  level  an 
affordance  shares similarities with business  capability modelling, 
Ulrich  [45].    Web  services  are  deployed  in  activity  orientated 
situations, and people carry out activities commensurate with their 
expected  duties,  defined  here  as  multi-responsive  actions.    The 
formalised  structure  of  shared  semiosis  in  table  2,  based  upon 
[31], 
the  multi-responsive 
communication architecture.   

indexical-sinsigns, 

configuration 

sets 

the 

of 

Semiotic 
branch 
Syntactic 
Encoding. 
(Denotative) 

Semantic 
Encoding. 
(Denotative) 

Pragmatic 
All interpretant 
signs. 
(Connotative) 

Intent and Real World Effect  Shared Semiosis 

Capture through existing texts 
the elements to form codes that 
structure the syntactic and 
taxonomic features of a web 
service description file. 
Comprehension by consensus 
(dynamic objects) the web 
service elements symbolised as 
codes in relation to their 
functions and capabilities that 
belong to an affordance. 
Linking the interpretations of 
the codes with potential 
contexts and effects on all 
participants and specifying a 
meaning of all codes congruent 
with all participants. 

Representamen  intertextuality 
and encoding. Source code, 
analysis and design specifications 
 narrative and diagrammatic 
models.   
Dynamic object  negotiated 
code and reading. Taxonomic 
descriptions linked to 
contextualised interpretation by 
all participants. 

Final interpretant  (argument-
symbol-legisigns) Linked to the 
dynamic conditions of an 
organisation captured in 
affordances and structured using 
norms amplified using modal 
operators to indicate the 
appropriateness of a web service. 

Table 2. Shared Semiosis 

The  syntactic  encoding  (representamen)  of  a  web  service 
description  file  must  first  be  agreed  between  web  service 
providers  and  consumers  (sinsigns  and  legisigns).      Stampers 


indexical-sinsigns, indexical-legisigns and symbolic-legisigns as a 
taxonomic scheme.  Rhemes classify  instances  of operations  and 
data  and identify the data types used.  Dicent signs complete the 
taxonomic  scheme  by  cataloguing  the  functionality  of  a  web 
service  linked  to  each  entry  in  the shared  vocabulary.   Not until 
argument-symbol-legisigns  are 
inferred  as  multi-responsive 
actions,  and  embedded  into  an  affordance,  can  web  service 
discovery  be  fully  achieved. 
is  therefore 
complete  when  syntactic,  semantic  and  pragmatic  descriptions 
are  present  relating  to  a  web  service.    However,  the  dynamic 
conditions  linked  to  an  organisation  may  invoke  changes  in  an 
affordance, so any changes are  recorded in a chronological order 
related  to  new  trans-situational  grounds  and  the  revised  multiresponsive actions that follow.  Final interpretant signs (argument-
symbol-legisigns)  are  the  fusion  of  dicent  signs,  dynamic 
conditions (collectively known as  legal and social norms that are 
captured  as  trans-situational  grounds)  and  the  resultant  actions 
that can be taken when inferred from dynamic conditions.   

  An  affordance 

3.  DEONTIC REPRESENTATION OF 
TRANS-SITUATIONAL GROUNDS 
Trans-situational  grounds  (dicent  signs)  are  social  phenomena 
brought into the current conversational situation that affect speech 
act  composition  [1,  38];  they  represent  the  dynamic  conditions 
affecting organisations that must be sought when opting to use a 
particular  web  service.    Endorsed  in  this  paper  is  the  view  that 
communication agents (responsible for describing or selecting a 
web  service)  engaging  in  dialogue  must  know  of  any  transsituational  grounds  for  web  service  utilisation  to  be  a  success.  
Goldkuhl  [21]  refers to  this notion as  memory  traces  and cites 
[20].    Capturing  trans-situational  grounds  classifies  web  service 
providers  and  consumers  as  multi-participants  in  joint  actions.  
Trans-situational  grounds  collectively  represent  legal  norms  [7, 
26]  that  are  owned  by  an  organisation,  which  by  nature  are 
independent of any participant.  They may also be documented as 
textual  entities  which  according  to  [14]  can  exhibit  agency.  
Trans-situational  grounds  may  also  be  captured  as  social  norms 
[46] that may not be documented but are known jointly by people 
in  multi-participant  settings.    Legal  and  social  norms  that 
constitute trans-situational grounds must be made available when 
considering  web  services 
in  a  dialogue  framework,  either 
represented in a norm-base in a textual format to expose agency or 
communicated  in  speech  acts.    As  trans-situational  grounds  are 
situations that are brought into a current conversational context, a 
multi-responsive action is a response by a communication agent to 
earlier  actions  made  by  other  people.   A  multi-responsive  action 
(argument-symbol-legisign) 
is  a  regulated  action,  such  as 
obligation,  permission,  forbidden  or  release  from  obligation 
inferred  from  trans-situational  grounds  immediately  present  in  a 
conversational context. 

3.1  Applying deontic logic 
Deontic Mental Model (DMM) theory by Beller [3] is based upon 
the  premise  that  people  behave  according  to  known  social 
restrictions  on  actions.    DMM  theory  suggests  that  peoples 
understanding  of  norms  follow 
that 
interpretation of the  deontic actions forbidden and  obligation are 
closed-world: facts supporting a deontic action must be integrated, 
and  in  combination  must  be  exhaustive,  and  second  they  are 
equivalent:  if  facts  are met (or  not met)  a  deontic  action  can be 

two  principles,  first 

inferred.  A person can deduce from a set of facts a deontic action 
to  be  taken,  and  in  reverse  the  implied  facts  are  derived  from  a 
specific  deontic  action.    In  the  multi-responsive  communication 
architecture,  a  communication  agent  would  solicit  the  dynamic 
conditions as trans-situational grounds (facts) and infer from them 
the deontic action to be taken, thus a deontic regulated action is a 
multi-responsive  action.    DMM  theory  is  also  based  upon  the 
assumption  that  people  relate  each  relevant  action  (normative 
behaviour) with all the dynamic conditions (facts).  Three models 
must  be  present  to  satisfy  the  multi-responsive  communication 
architecture:  conditions  that  describe  the  expected  functionality 
(F)  of  a  web  service,  dynamic  conditions  (trans-situational 
grounds)  as  legal  norms  (L)  or  social  norms  (S)  and  Deontic 
Regulated  (DR)  actions  that  represent  multi-responsive  actions.  
For instance, before a service consumer agent chooses to select a 
web  service  according  to  a  DR  action,  a  communication  agent 
accesses the shared vocabulary to determine compliance of a web 
service  with a  functional  specification  (F),  for  example, that for 
successful selection of a web service it must calculate UK tax:    

UK tax only: 

For permission to use a web 
service, UK tax only....... 

Calculates UK tax only 
Not UK tax only 
Reformulation  (as  a  deontic  action 
argument-symbol-legisigns) 

UK  Tax only   permission (to use the 
web service)  
Sufficient  and  necessary  to  fulfil  an 
affordance 
Inference: 
yes 
no 
Permission: 
If 
permission to use web service. 
Obligation: 
If  calculates  not  UK  tax  only,  then 
obligation not to use web service. 

calculates  UK 

tax  only, 

then 

Table 3. Functional Specification 

The communication agent seeks a response related to all dynamic 
conditions belonging to a web service from all participants before 
making  a  decision,  and  obtains  as  a  dynamic  condition  (trans-
situational  ground)  a  legal  norm  that  states:  web  services  must 
only be used from trading partner X: 

UK tax only and Trading partner X: 

For permission to use a web 
service, UK tax only....... 

Trading partner X 
Not Trading partner X 
Reformulation  (as  a  deontic  action 
argument-symbol-legisigns) 

(UK  Tax  only  and  Trading  partner)   
permission (to use the web service)  
Not sufficient but necessary to fulfil an 
affordance 
Inference: 
yes 
no 
Permission: 
If  UK tax  only and trading  partner, then 
permission to use web service. 
Obligation: 
If not UK tax only or not trading partner, 
then obligation not to use web service. 

Table 4. Legal Norms 

The  service  consumer agent  also  obtains through  a  speech  act  a 
dynamic condition (trans-situational ground) as a social norm that 
states: web services may be used  from trading partner X or from 
an alternative reputable service provider: 


For permission to use a web 
service, UK tax only....... 

Reputation satisfactory 
Reputation not satisfactory 
Reformulation  (as  a  deontic  action 
argument-symbol-legisigns) 

reputation)   

(UK  Tax  only  and 
permission (to use the web service) 
Not sufficient but necessary to fulfil an 
affordance 
Inference: 
yes 
no 
Permission: 
If UK tax only or reputation satisfactory, 
then permission to use web service. 
Obligation: 
If  not  UK  tax  only  or  reputation  not 
satisfactory,  then  obligation  not  to  use 
web service. 

Table 5. Social Norms 

  For  example, 

Independent  dicent  signs  are  sufficient  and  necessary  (F),  but 
when  coupled  with  legal  (L)  or  social  norms  (S)  dicent  signs 
become  insufficient, as legal and social norms become necessary 
to fulfilling an affordance.  Hence each condition (in tables 4 and 
5) must be combined as a conjunction for DR actions to be taken 
 closed world.  A communication agent would infer if the action 
is  obligatory,  permissible,  forbidden  or 
is  a  release  from 
obligation. 
if  a  trans-situational  ground  is 
represented as the web service provider must have a satisfactory 
reputation (dependent upon the provenance of such statement see 
Grice [22]) determines that a conjunction must be present between 
the  atomic  conditions  in  the  closed  world  principle.    Forbidden 
and  permission,  and  obligation  and  release  from  obligation  are 
pairs  of  contradictories.  Based  upon  this  premise,  if  a  person  is 
obliged  to  commit  an  action  (obligation),  they  are  forbidden  to 
omit the action (forbidden), and if a person is allowed to commit 
an  action  (permission),  it  is  not  necessary  to  omit  the  action 
(release from obligation) Beller [3]. 

4.  CONCLUSION 
Proposed  in this  paper is an approach to web  service description 
and discovery using semiotics and shared semiosis in joint actions 
to  coordinate  the  interaction  of  all  participants  engaging  with  a 
web  service.    It  promotes  the  idea  of  affordance  as  a  route  to 
achieve the description and therefore discovery of web services in 
accord  with  the  dynamical  conditions  of  different  organisations.  
The  Peircean  classification  of  signs  makes  up  the  semantic 
taxonomic  scheme  whilst  communication  agents  query,  send 
requests  or  updates  participants  or  a  norm-base  that  contains 
trans-situational  grounds.    Finally,  web  service  description  and 
discovery  would  include  a  set  of  affordances  that  describe  the 
appropriateness of a collection of web services under a multitude 
of dynamic conditions as trans-situational grounds.  The following 
observations are made: 

1.  Multi-responsiveness  is  a  DR  action  in  response  to  several 
different  initiatives  as  memory-traces  represented  as  transsituational grounds; 

2.  Trans-situational  grounds  for  a  deontic  action  are  brought 
into  the  current  situation  by  a  person  as  justification  for 
taking action regarding the selection of a web service; 

3.  Trans-situational  grounds  (as  dynamic  conditions)  are  ruleconstituting [21], which in the case for web service discovery 
legal  and  social  norms  are  conjunctions  to  functional 
specifications.    Returning  to  dicent  signs  as  signs  of  actual 
existence for specific tasks enforces the notion that semantic 
descriptions should  contain a taxonomic scheme as  opposed 

to  stronger  semantic  descriptions  made  available  with 
ontology languages such as OWL-S; 

4.  A  multi-responsive  (deontic)  action  is  a  compound of  rules 
(dynamic conditions) that represent dicent signs, legal norms 
and  social  norms  contained  within  an  affordance.    The 
normalised form of arguments that make up an affordance is: 

Argument = ((Fdicent  (Ldicent  Sdicent))   
DRMulti-responsive action 

The conditional side of the argument can include any number 
functional  requirements,  legal  norms  and  social  norms  to 
fulfil the DMM principles exhaustive and equivalence whilst 
the DR side refers to one action only. 

International  Conference  on 
