Augmenting Europeana Content with Linked Data

Resources

Bernhard Haslhofer

University of Vienna

Dept. of Distributed and

Multimedia Systems

Vienna, Austria

Elaheh Momeni
University of Vienna

Dept. of Distributed and

Multimedia Systems

Vienna, Austria

haslhofer@cs.univie.ac.at

momeni@cs.univie.ac.at

Manuel Gay

Austrian Institute of

Technology

Vienna, Austria

manuel.gay@ait.ac.at

Rainer Simon
Austrian Institute of

Technology

Vienna, Austria

rainer.simon@ait.ac.at

ABSTRACT
Annotations allow end users to augment digital items with
information, which can then be exploited for search and re-
trieval. We are currently extending Europeana, a platform
which links to millions of digital items in European institu-
tions, with an annotation mechanism that exposes annotations as linked data and enriches newly created annotations
with links to contextually relevant resources on the Web.
In two demos we showcase how we integrated that kind of
content augmentation into two clients that allow users to
annotate videos and historic maps.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4.m [Information Systems]: Miscellaneous

General Terms
Design, Human Factors, Languages

Keywords
Linked Data, Annotations, Semantic Web

1.

INTRODUCTION

Many cultural institutions are currently investigating how
to integrate the end users knowledge with existing digital
curation processes. Annotations are an obvious and wellunderstood solution (cf. [3]) for that. Therefore, they will
also play a major role in the future development of Europeana (http://www.europeana.eu) a platform that links to
millions of digital items (texts, images, videos, sounds) in

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2010, September 1-3, 2010 Graz, Austria
Copyright c ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09 ...$10.00.

cultural organizations all over Europe. Web-based annotation clients will allow users to extend existing bibliographic
information about digital items by means of textual notes
and comments. The underlying indexing infrastructure can
exploit that information for search and retrieval.

Our goal is to link Europeana digital items with other
resources on the Web. In a first prototype, we already integrated our LEMO multimedia annotation framework [2]
with the existing Europeana infrastructure. All annotation
resources managed by this framework have URIs assigned,
are exposed as dereferencable resources on the Web, and
deliver RDF when they are resolved. For representing annotation data, we developed the LEMO vocabulary (http://
lemo.mminf.univie.ac.at/annotation-core#).
It reuses
and refines terms from the Annotea [4] vocabulary and defines several media-specific extension (e.g., images, video,
audio). Demos of the various clients developed on-top-of
LEMO are available at: http://dme.arcs.ac.at/annotat-
ion/annotation-showcase.html

Now we are investigating how to integrate resource linkage with the process of annotating digital items in order to
augment Europeana content with contextually relevant in-
formation. We expect to retrieve links with high accuracy
because we have human end-users interacting with annotation systems. The users know the semantics of the annotated resources and understand the meaning of the created
annotation content within the context of their annotations.
Automated linkage frameworks can hardly do better.

We implemented two demos that showcase our ideas how
we can augment Europeana content with Linked Data resources by means of annotations: the first demo allows users
to annotate videos. The systems proposes relevant links to
DBpedia [1] resources and prompts the user to adjudicate
their validity. The information behind those linked resources
enables contextual and multilingual search for videos. In the
second demo, users can annotate historic maps. The system also suggests contextually relevant links, which the user
can confirm or decline interactively.
In addition, the tool
provides functionality for map geo-referencing. The system
can exploit the geo-referencing information to (1) enable geographical search and retrieval of annotations, and (2) provide spatial context to arbitrary searches.


2.2 Technical Details

Figure 2: Map annotation client.

2. VIDEO ANNOTATION

2.1 Goal and User Benefit

The video annotation tool we are currently building for
Europeana showcases how users can augment existing online videos with related resources on the Web. This augmentation happens on-the-fly while the users are writing
their annotations.
It relies on user-feedback to verify the
semantic validity of a link before it becomes part of the an-
notation. The goal is to exploit linked resource descriptions
in the underlying search and retrieval infrastructure.

In Figure 1, we see an example annotation on a video sequence that shows the Austrian parliament in Vienna. A
user has entered a simple note The Parliament of Austria
located at the Ring and the system proposes a ranked list
of potentially relevant DBpedia resources. Before an annotation is saved, the proposed resource can be marked as
relevant or non-relevant.

In the context of Europeana, the augmentation of content with links to external Linked Data resources brings two
main benefits for the end user. First, a large portion of
Europeana contents, especially multimedia contents such as
video and audio, have insufficient metadata assigned. Often this is because institutions do not have the capacities to
manually catalogue the vast amount of digital resources they
are hosting. With user-contributed annotations we widen
that pool of metadata. By including links in annotations,
we enable the underlying indexing infrastructure to answer
queries based on contextually relevant information. From
DBpedia, for instance, we can include the short descriptions
(abstracts) of the resources that are related to the entities
(Austria, Ring) in the annotation text. Second, by including translations of resource descriptions in the index, we
enable a basic form of multilingual retrieval for multimedia
resources. By linking to DBpedia we can resort to 91 different translations for all concepts that are currently described
in the Wikipedia. If both concepts in the above annotation
example are linked to the right DBpedia resources, users can
find the video in their search results if they use a German
query, such as   Osterreich or Ringstrae.

For enriching textual annotations with links to relevant
resources, the video client makes use of our Semantic Enrichment Service, which is a separate component that can
be reused in any other annotation client. It provides a simple HTTP interface that accepts plain annotation text and
returns a ranked list of potentially relevant resources.

The service consists of two main components:
 NEREngine: an interface to different, configurable implementations of Named Entity Recognition engines
such as Gate1 or OpenCalais2.
It takes an annotation string as input and returns the recognized named
entities sorted by their type (e.g., Place).

 LODIndex : a component that periodically indexes resources of a configured type (e.g., dbpedia-owl:Place)
from the SPARQL interface of a given data source
(e.g., http://dbpedia.org/sparql). By default it considers for each resource the values of all rdfs:label
properties in all available languages. Thus, no matter
what the input language of a passed named entity is,
the service always returns matching resource URIs.

Internally, the service first sends the annotation string to
the NEREngine and then retrieves a ranked list of relevant
links from the LODIndex by passing the recognized named
entities. First experiments show that organizing the indexed
resources by their types and matching them with recognized
entity types reduces semantic ambiguities and increases the
quality of the proposed resources.

3. MAP ANNOTATION
3.1 Goal and User Benefit

Our second demonstrator shows how we integrated linkage with the annotation of digitized antique maps. The goal
is to exploit semantic linking in conjunction with map georeferencing to provide spatial context to search and retrieval tasks.

Figure 2 shows an example screenshot. A user has zoomed
to a region on the map and added an annotation to a specific
1http://gate.ac.uk/sale/tao/index.html
2http://www.opencalais.com/


As in the case of video annotation, the annotation tool starts
to produce suggestions for potentially relevant linked data
resources.
In the user interface, these suggestions are superimposed on the map as a tag cloud. Each tag in the
cloud represents one link suggestion. New tags are added
to the tag cloud as additional suggestions become available,
e.g., while the user is typing annotation text. At any time,
the user can choose to accept a link suggestion simply by
clicking on the corresponding tag.

An obvious difference between maps and other types of
media, such as video, is that maps are inherently concerned
with the depiction of geography. Therefore, when a user
draws a shape on the map and adds an annotation to it, it is
likely that there is a strong relation between the annotation,
and the geographical area covered by the shape. This, for
example, is the case in Figure 2, where the user has placed
an annotation on a place name inscription near the Strait
of Gibraltar, and made an explanatory note on the origin of
the place name (The Pillars of Hercules). In order to allow the system to compute the geographical coordinates for
the shape, the map annotation tool includes functionality
for geo-referencing: Geo-referencing establishes an explicit
correspondence between the map-images pixel coordinates
and a defined geographical coordinate system such as the
well-known WGS84 (or GPS latitude/longitude) coordi-
nates. The tool supports this task by allowing users to create so-called control points. Control points are identifiable
points (e.g.
landmarks, cities, natural formations, etc.) on
the map to which the geographical coordinates are known.
These control points can then be used as a basis to translate
between both coordinate spaces.

As soon as the map has been geo-referenced with control points, the tool can provide two main benefits to the
end user. First, annotations become geographically search-
able: By including the annotations spatial footprints into
the index, the user can find annotations which pertain to a
certain place, country or region. Furthermore, the underlying indexing infrastructure can use the footprint information
to include links to geographical linked data sources such as
Geonames.org. This provides further contextual metadata,
in addition to the contextual links derived from the annotations text using NER. Second, the system can potentially
provide spatial context to any (keyword) search result: For
example, when a user searches for the term Pillars of Her-
cules, the system will be able to indicate the region around
the Strait of Gibraltar as relevant to this query.

3.2 Technical Details

The browser-based user interface is built on the open source
OpenLayers JavaScript Web mapping library. Similar to
popular Web map services like Google Maps or Yahoo! Maps,
the user interface provides a full-screen drag- and zoom-able
representation of the map.

To produce contextually relevant link suggestions based
on the annotation text, the Map Annotation Showcase relies
on the same semantic enrichment service as the the video
annotation tool.

Geo-referencing is based on computation of an affine transformation from the closest neighbor control points. Advantages of this approach are its computational simplicity, as
well as the fact that it can be applied to any type of map, irrespective of scale or projective properties. On the downside,

geo-referencing through control points is an approach that
is inherently based on interpolation. Therefore, results will
always represent approximations, and accuracy may vary
from map to map. Nonetheless, trials with scans of antique
maps from the 16th century have so far yielded promising results [6]. A more in-depth discussion of the technical details
of the map annotation tool and the tag-cloud user interface
is also presented in [7].

4. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK

Annotations are a well-understood mechanism to augment
digital items with additional information. With our LEMO
framework we can already expose that information as linked
data on the Web. By integrating linkage with annotation
processes and interfaces we can augment digital items with
relevant resources. The linked resource descriptions can then
be exploited for search and retrieval.

In our future work, we will concentrate on the improvement of our semantic enrichment service and will further
investigate the possibilities this brings for multi-lingual re-
trieval. Another goal is to enable interoperability with other
annotation systems by supporting the model currently developed by the Open Annotation Collaboration (OAC) [5].

Acknowledgments
The work has partly been supported by the European Commission as part of the eContentplus program (Europeana-
Connect).
