Towards an Approach for Formalizing the Supply Chain 

Operations 
Herve Panetto 

Research Centre for Automatic 

Control (CRAN  UMR 7039), Nancy-

Miroslav Trajanovic 

Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, 

University of Nis 

ul. Aleksandra Medvedeva 14 

18000 Nis, Serbia 
+381 63 403553 

Milan Zdravkovic 

Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, 

University of Nis 

ul. Aleksandra Medvedeva 14 

18000 Nis, Serbia 
+381 64 1144797 

Universite, CNRS 
Nancy, France 
+33 383684426 

milan.zdravkovic@masfak.ni.ac.

rs 

Herve.Panetto@cran.uhp-

nancy.fr 

traja@masfak.ni.ac.rs 

to  overcome 

incompleteness  of 

ABSTRACT 
Reference  models  play  an  important  role  in  the  knowledge 
management of the various complex collaboration domains (such 
as Supply Chain Networks). However, they often show a lack of 
semantic  precision  and,  they  are  sometimes  incomplete.  In  this 
paper,  we  present  an  approach 
semantic 
inconsistencies  and 
the  Supply  Chain 
Operations  Reference  (SCOR)  model  and  hence,  improve  its 
usefulness and expand the application domain. First, we describe 
a literal OWL specification of SCOR concepts (and related tools), 
built  with  intention  to  preserve  the  original  approach  in  the 
classification  of  process  reference  model  entities  and  hence,  to 
enable  effectiveness  of  usage  in  original  contexts.  Next,  we 
demonstrate the system for its exploitation, in specific - tools for 
SCOR  framework  browsing  and  rapid  supply  chain  process 
configuration. Then, we describe the SCOR-FULL ontology and 
its intended use. Finally, we elaborate the potential impact of the 
presented  approach,  to  interoperability  of  systems  in  Supply 
Chain Networks.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
I.2.4 
Formalisms and Methods - Representations 

[Artificial 

Intelligence]:  Knowledge  Representation 

General Terms 
Management 

Keywords 
Supply  Chain  Networks,  Ontology,  Supply  Chain  Operations 
Reference (SCOR), Semantic Interoperability. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
In  order  to  gain  real  benefits  from  Supply  Chain  Management, 
relevant  systems  must  span  full  horizontal  organization  of 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this notice  and the full  citation on the first page.  To copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

I-SEMANTICS 2010, September 1-3, 2010 Graz, Austria 
Copyright  ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09... $10.00. 

to 

overcome 

semantic 

to 

the  objective 

inconsistencies 

technologies  with 

enterprises and beyond  its customers and suppliers. For dealing 
with  the  complexity  of  such  environment,  reference  models 
played  an  important  role.  Supply  Chain  Operations  Reference 
(SCOR)  [1]  is  a  standard  approach  for  analysis,  design  and 
implementation  of  five  core  processes  in  supply  chains:  plan, 
source,  make,  deliver  and  return.  SCOR  defines  a  framework, 
which  aims  at  integrating  business  processes,  metrics,  best 
practices  and 
improve 
collaboration  between  partners.  In  this  paper,  we  present  an 
approach 
and 
incompleteness of the SCOR model, by using ontologies and thus, 
enabling  effective  knowledge  management  in  Supply  Chain 
Network,  facilitating  semantic  interoperability  of  its  participants 
and contributing to a further improvement of the reference model. 
Semantics  analysis  can  be  useful  at  different  levels  of  Supply 
Chain Networks. First, the semantic representation of queries and 
information  may  improve  the  relevance  of  the  results  and  thus, 
improve the quality of partners selection process. It can be used 
in  place  or  in  addition  to  usual  request  representation.  Second, 
semantics can be used to represent participants, or groups of them, 
leading participants to better know each other. Such information 
can be useful for routing the requests to other participants in order 
to obtain the relevant answers within a short time and with a low 
traffic load. Third, this information can also be used to organize 
the  network  so  as  to  improve  efficiency.  This  is  very  important 
for  the  open  settings  of  the  supply  chain  networks,  where  the 
traditional  approaches  to  business  process  management,  which 
attempt to capture processes as monolithic flows, have proven as 
inadequate, resulting with moving research focus from process to 
interaction  modelling  [2].  All  these  research  directions  have 
received  partial  answers  but  more  work  is  needed  on  the 
interaction  between  all  these  elements  and  their  impact  on  the 
efficiency  of  the  global  system.  The  use  of  domain  ontology  is 
already  proven  as  beneficial  for  supply  chain  management 
(SCM), in the development of self-integrating SCM systems [3], 
or  facilitating  collaboration  of  inter-enterprise  design  teams  [4], 
simulation  of  Supply  Chain  Network  [5],  or  online  negotiations 
[6],  etc.  There  are,  also  influential  efforts  to  provide  the 
exhaustive  ontology-based  semantic  models  for  SCM  [7], 
organized  in  a  modular  way  to  support  the  reusability  and 
maintainability of the involved micro-theories. However, it is still 
very  hard  to  integrate  all  these  efforts  in  a  single  formal  theory 
which  would  enable  a  multiplication  of  achieved  impacts. 
Ontologies  are  formal  models  of  collective  knowledge.  The 


domain 

by 

includes 

collaboration 

[9].  Hence,  SCOR 

consensus  on  their  structure  is  extremely  hard  to  reach  [8], 
particularly for a very expressive (or richly axiomatized) ontology 
with large number of concepts. 
The  development  of  reference  models  in  different  domains  is  a 
community response to interoperability problems. They aim at the 
standardization 
providing 
categorization  schemes  or  taxonomies    knowledge  structures, 
interpreted  in  organized  way    to  be  used  as  guidelines  in  the 
collaboration  of  humans  and  systems.  Like  most  of  the  other 
reference  models,  SCOR  is  a  form  of  knowledge  organization 
system.  The  key  feature  of  these  systems  is  subjectivity,  or 
context-dependent  determination 
lacks 
semantic  precision.  SCORs  Input/Output  entity  entails  all 
resources  exchanged  between  process  elements  and  actors  - 
physical  or  non-physical,  states,  events,  documents,  etc.  System 
entity 
information  systems,  modules,  capabilities, 
approaches or volume of use, integration levels, etc. Sometimes, 
reference  models  do  not  provide  enough  expressivity  for  a 
complete formal model. In case of SCOR, this is evident from the 
lack  of  relationship  between  metrics  and  systems,  which  could 
point  out  to  the  source  of  information  needed  for  performance 
measurement.  A  high  level  of  expressivity  provides  the  most 
beneficial environment for automated support, but it should not be 
the  ultimate  objective.  Namely,  domain  knowledge  evolves  at 
highest  rate  at  lower  levels  of  abstraction,  in  community 
interaction, where consensus is more likely to be reached. Thus, 
we  consider  the  balance  between  creation,  evolution  and  use  of 
specific,  highly  contextualized  knowledge  and  development  of 
formal  expressive  models  as  a  very  important  factor  for  the 
usefulness of domain ontology.  
Main research problem we are addressing in this paper is SCORs 
lack  of  semantic  precision.  We  also  argue  that  securing  the 
integrity of existing standard by using multiple levels of models 
expressivity is crucial. Hence, we propose the use of semantically 
aligned  models  of  SCOR 
(SCOR-KOS  OWL), 
application ontology (in this paper, we use SCOR-CFG OWL for 
process  configuration)  and  proposed  micro  theory  for  supply 
chain operations (SCOR-FULL), which semantically enriches the 
SCOR reference model. Finally, we elaborate the benefits of this 
approach for semantic interoperability of the relevant systems in 
supply chain networks. 
