Using Hyperlinks to Enrich Message Board Content with

Linked Data

Sheila Kinsella, Alexandre Passant

Digital Enterprise Research Institute
National University of Ireland, Galway
{firstname.lastname}@deri.org

ABSTRACT
Since social media sites have existed, a major element of the
conversations which take place on them has been links to
external websites. Users share videos or photos they have
seen, point to products or movies they are interested in, and
use external articles as a reference in discussions. As websites publish more structured and machine-readable data,
notably in RDF, an increasing number of the links posted
to social media sites do not just point to a webpage but are
also associated with a structured data source. The integration of such external data can give us an enhanced insight
into the conversation, both for analysing communities and
for building applications. This approach can be applied to
any online social space, but in this paper we present the
use-case of enriching bulletin boards. We investigate the
hyperlinks posted on a message board over a 10 year period
and show how the external structured information related
to these links has grown. We use data aggregated from several external sites providing RDF data or APIs to show how
enriching forums with external data can provide us with enhanced insight into online conversation. We discuss potential applications of this approach, for message boards and
for social media in general.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.4 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Systems
and SoftwareSemantic Web, Web 2.0

General Terms
Experimentation

Keywords
hyperlinks, Linked Data, message boards, online communi-
ties, online conversation, social media

The work presented in this paper has been funded in

part by Science Foundation Ireland under Grant No.
SFI/08/CE/I1380 (L on 2).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2010, September 1-3, 2010 Graz, Austria
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09 ...$10.00.

John G. Breslin

School of Engineering and Informatics
National University of Ireland, Galway

john.breslin@nuigalway.ie

1.

INTRODUCTION

Social media sites are some of the most popular sites on
the Web, with Web users spending an increasing amount of
time using them1. The conversations on these sites often
revolve around links to other sites, notably in weblogs and
bulletin boards, where such links are used to refer to external topics and related information. For example, videos
from YouTube are a popular topic on many social sites2.
These links can be seen as social objects according to the
object-centred sociality theory of Karin Knorr-Cetina [15]:
these are the artifacts around which communities are formed
and people interact. Indeed, they frequently correspond to
identifiable concepts such as movies, books or products. Understanding the characteristics of these objects (e.g. a movie
genre or book author) would be a very useful aid in understanding online conversations, in order to effectively recommend related content and enhance the serendipitous value
of Social Web applications.

Increasingly these online artifacts are being described by
the data publishers using structured data as well as in a
human-readable form, notably in the RDF format through
the Linking Open Data initiative3. Figure 1 shows an example of a post which can be complemented by data from
external sources (in this case LinkedMDB [10] and DBpedia [2]). The extra information contained by these sources
provides additional context which can be useful for both
analysis of online conversation, and for developing related
applications. As structured data becomes easily available,
the challenge is how to bridge the gap between plain-text
data and structured content, a question that we tackle in
this article.

Previous work on bringing structure to bulletin boards
includes [6] which describes how SIOC can be applied to
message boards in order to represent them in a structured
format. While this and many approaches in the Linked Data
and Social Semantic Web community have focused on representing meta-data about conversations in a unified way, with
FOAF, SIOC, etc. we describe how these conversations can
be enhanced with additional RDF data about what they
contain, i.e. regarding what are the objects (as referred to
in the object-centred view) being discussed therein. Our objective is to use the enhanced dataset to better understand

1http://blog.compete.com/2009/02/09/
facebook-myspace-twitter-social-network/
2See http://forumeter.com which tracks videos posted in
bulletin boards
3http://esw.w3.org/topic/SweoIG/TaskForces/
CommunityProjects/LinkingOpenData


Post Content: it was a nice uplifting movie but not really
as amazing as people make it out to be - as far as im
concerned there
[url=http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0211915/] are far
better uplifting movies [/url] out there.

External data:

@prefix foaf: <http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/> .
@prefix dc: <http://purl.org/dc/terms/> .
@prefix dbpedia: <http://dbpedia.org/resource/> .
@prefix dbpprop: <http://dbpedia.org/property/> .
@prefix imdb: <http://www.imdb.com/title/> .

imdb:tt0211915 foaf:topic dbpedia:Am elie .
dbpedia:Am elie dc:title "Am elie" ;

dc:date "2001" ;
dbpprop:starring dbpedia:Audrey_Tautou ;
dbpprop:director dbpedia:Jean-Pierre_Jeunet .

Figure 1: Example of a real message board post, and
external structured data relating to it.

users and communication in online communities. We also
see our analysis as relevant for developers of applications for
browsing or authoring in online communities.

Figure 2 shows the process of enriching the dataset. We
make use of standard Semantic Web technologies to take
existing Web data, integrate it with a social media dataset,
and enable analysis or application development. In partic-
ular, we focus on data from the http://boards.ie bulletin
board, the most popular Irish bulletin boards service, covering 10 years of conversations. We demonstrate how structured data can be used not only in novel applications (where
such structured data is explicitly used) but in any context
in which a community links to external data, even if such
data is not explicitly structured. This allows us to envision
a wide range of applications to understand the behaviours
of users, and how they evolve over time.

Figure 2: Process of enriching online conversations
with structured data.

The contributions of this note are as follows:

(i) we study the behaviour of users in posting links on a

message board over a 10 year period;

(ii) we present results of how much and what types of

structured data were retrievable for the posts;

(iii) we describe examples of the novel analysis which can

be performed on the enriched dataset.

We also discuss current and future applications of enrich-

ing social media with structured data.

2. TEN YEARS OF HYPERLINKS IN CON-

VERSATIONS

In 2008, the boards.ie SIOC Data Competition4 was held
and ten years of discussions from this message board site
was made available in the SIOC (Semantically-Interlinked
Online Communities) format [7]. The FOAF (Friend-of-a-
Friend) and DC (Dublin Core) vocabularies were also used
to represent elements of the dataset. The structure of the
key elements of the data is shown in Figure 3. Since the
data is already represented using the SIOC vocabulary, we
can easily extract links using the sioc:links_to property.

Figure 3: Partial structure of the SIOC dataset.

The data covers the first 10 years of existence of the message board, from February 1998 to February 2008. Over
130k users are represented in the data, along with over
7m posts which they have authored. The properties of the
dataset are described in detail in Table 1. Note that some
encoding issues were encountered while processing the data,
resulting in the omission of some posts (0.65% of total). The
long time span covered by the dataset allows us to investigate the increase in links with related structured data avail-
able, and the size of the dataset enables us to extract enough
links to study the usefulness of the data. The message
boards are moderated so any spam or advertisement links
have been removed from the messages, and consequently
from the dataset used in our analysis.

Start Date
End Date
Users
Forums
Threads
Posts
External Links

12/2/1998
13/2/2008


7,794,495

Table 1: Basic properties of the SIOC Data Competition dataset.

4http://data.sioc-project.org/

Raw SIOC Data Enhanced RDF DataHyperlink analysis and identification of external data sourcesAnalysis/Applications(SPARQL)Dataset enhancement (RDF/APIs)sioc:Postsioc:Usersioc:has_creatorResourcesioc:links_tosioc:creator_ofsioc:Forumsioc:Threadsioc:parent_ofsioc:container_ofsioc:has_parent(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4: Evolution of the dataset, by year: (a) Posts, threads, and forums; (b) Links, unique links and
domains linked to; (c) Percentage of posts containing links; and (d) Average link count for all posts which
contain links

Figure 4(a) shows the growth of the message board in
terms of posts, threads and forums. Note that Year 1 corresponds to the first twelve month period covered by the
dataset, i.e. 1998/1999 and Year 10 corresponds to the
last, i.e. 2007/2008. Usage of the message board has grown
steadily, and in 2007/2008, approximately 2.2m new posts
were created. For the remainder of this section, we focus
specifically on studying the properties of the links posted
over the span of the dataset.

How often do users post links. Figure 4(b) shows
the growth of the number of external hyperlinks, in terms
of total number of links, unique links, and domains linked
to. We exclude syntactically invalid links and links internal
to the domain of the message board. Note that we did not
resolve all links, therefore multiple distinct links may point
to the same resource (or no valid resource). Figure 4(c)
shows the percentage of posts containing links per year, and
Figure 4(d) shows the average number of links in each of
these posts. These figures show that over time, users are
more frequently including links in their posts, and they are
also including more links per post. Thus links are becoming
more prevalant in user conversations.

This shows a shift in user behaviours - in the initial stages
of the message board, user attention was held almost entirely
based on the text that participants created, whereas now
users much more frequently make use of external resources
to enrich their posts. One probable factor is that nowadays,
there is simply more content available to link to. If a fan
starts a thread about their favourite band, it requires very
little effort to embed a video from Youtube, whereas finding
a video online several years ago would have been much more
difficult. A technical aspect that may have impacted linking
habits is that message board software has improved over
the years, and the task of inserting a link has become easier.
The increasing practice of augmenting posts with links to
external information suggests that perhaps in the future,
an automatic method for doing this could be popular. An
example of a service performing such a task is Zemanta5, an
engine for blogs which analyses posts content and suggests
related tags and webpages.

Where in conversations do users post links. It is
not only the frequency of links that is notable in online con-
versation, but also the stage at which they occur. Table
2 shows the percentage of posts with links, for all posts,
for first posts of threads, and for subsequent posts. In first
posts, where a conversation is being initialised, there is a

5http://www.zemanta.com/

far higher rate of link posting. This suggests that the link
is important for the entire conversation which follows. We
argue that if we identify the object(s) described in that first
link (movie, book, musicians, etc.), that would then enable
us to have a better understanding of the focus of the con-
versation, and the main topic discussed in the rest of the
thread.

Posts
All posts
First posts
Subsequent posts

% with link(s)
6.55%
14.61%
5.84%

Table 2: Percentage of posts containing links, divided according to whether they are first in a thread.

What do users post links to. We explored the domains
which are most often linked to in the dataset and how their
popularity changes over time. Table 3 shows the most popular sites linked to in 2002/2003, and Table 4 shows the
most popular sites linked to in 2007/2008. We have labelled
each site with a description of the type of content most commonly linked to on that site - note that this may not be the
only type of content on the site, but it is the type that the
message boards users usually linked to at this time.

The list of most popular domains during the early years
of the message board is very different from the list of popular domains from recent years. Most notably, there has
been a shift from unique, read-only sites created on Web
hosting services, towards collaboratively-created read-write
or content-sharing sites with many contributors. These collaborative sites make it easier for users to put content online
without requiring technical skills. Collaborative and sharing sites also typically feature an innate structure, and they
often have associated APIs or Linked Data to enable data
reuse, thereby yielding much more semantically rich data
than traditional sites. The additional information provided
by this external structured data could be used to employ
new methods for community detection and social network
analysis.

3. ADDING STRUCTURED DATA TO CON-

VERSATIONS

In this section, we first characterise the structured data
commonly available on the Web. We then detail the structured data which we obtained related to posts in the message
board dataset.

10010110210310410510612345678910CountYearPostsThreadsForums10010110210310410510612345678910CountYearPostsThreadsForums10010110210310410510612345678910CountYearPostsThreadsForums10010110210310410512345678910CountYearLinksUnique LinksDomains10010110210310410512345678910CountYearLinksUnique LinksDomains10010110210310410512345678910CountYearLinksUnique LinksDomains 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10% Posts with linksYear 1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10Number of linksYearRank and Domain Dominant content type
1. bbc.co.uk
2. komplett.ie
3. ireland.com
4. eircom.net
5. yahoo.com
6. rte.ie
7. google.com
8. geocities.com
9. iol.ie
10. microsoft.com technical support

news media
shop
news media
Web hosting
news/discussion groups
news media
Web search
Web hosting
Web hosting

Table 3: Top 10 domains of 2002/2003.

Rank and Domain
1. youtube.com
2. wikipedia.org
3. komplett.ie
4. myspace.com
5. flickr.com
6. bbc.co.uk
7. rte.ie
8. carzone.ie
9. photobucket.com media hosting
10. ebay.ie

Dominant content type
video-sharing
collaborative encyclopedia
shop
social networking/music
photo-sharing
news media
news media
shop

shop

Table 4: Top 10 domains of 2007/2008.

3.1 Overview

While people generally link to plain HTML pages, in the
past decade many websites have begun to provide structured
data, including some of the popular sites from Table 4 such
as Amazon, Wikipedia, Flickr and YouTube. As a side effect
of this growing amount of structured data on the Web, the
links which users post on social media sites are increasingly
often to resources which are available as structured data.
Users are thereby providing an implicit machine-readable
description of the topic of conversations. We consider three
different layers of structured data sources in online commu-
nities, ordered from the most expressive to the least expressive as follows:

1. RDF Data: Rich descriptions of content provided
directly in RDF and back-ended by shared semantics
using common ontologies [5]. Such data can be either directly published in RDF (often using the Linked
Data principles [3]), embedded in Web documents (e.g.
in RDFa), accessible via SPARQL endpoints or downloadable RDF dumps.

2. API Data: Less rich data can also be obtained by
querying APIs of Web services. In that case, the description is generally provided using XML or JSON,
and can be easily converted to RDF, though it requires
additional effort. Such translation is generally done
either (1) via XSLT transformations used to directly
convert XML data to RDF/XML or (2) GRDDL to extract RDF data from microformatted XHTML documents or (3) by dedicated scripts that translate output
data, e.g. JSON, in RDF, as done for instance by the
Flickr-SIOC exporter or by SemanticTweet6. In that

6http://semantictweet.com/

case, appropriate ontologies should also be identified
to enable such translation.

3. Tag Data: This less rich data includes tags, plain text
annotations whose meaning can be ambiguous. They
are however an additional source of metadata that can
be represented using ontologies, and methods exist to
perform automatic grounding of tags to Semantic Web
concepts [1], [12], [20]. Tag data is a subset of API
data, but we consider the two separately in order to
differenciate between structured API data such as genres and dates, which are easily mapped to RDF triples,
and tags, which contain no structured information.

It is also worth noting that cases 2 and 3 involve matching simple text-strings (either tags or text output from the
APIs) to resources, which implies that one has to deal with
ambiguity and heterogeneity issues and that consequently
the accuracy of the mappings may not be 100% correct.
3.2 Empirical investigation of hyperlinks

In this study we focused on the structured data sources
that most commonly occur in the boards.ie dataset. We
parsed identifiers from URLs in order to access corresponding data from the external sources. We made use of data
from each of the three layers mentioned in Section 3.1. Table 5 shows the most commonly occurring domains in the
whole dataset. Domains for which structured data is available are labelled according to whether they are available in
RDF, or only via an API. In most of these cases the RDF
data available is in fact provided by a third-party export or
wrapper of the original website/API. The BBC website is a
notable exception - they provide RDF data natively [16].

Rank and Domain

1. youtube.com (API)
2. wikipedia.org (RDF)
3. komplett.ie
4. bbc.co.uk (RDF)
5. myspace.com (RDF)
6. rte.ie
7. carzone.ie
8. google.com
9. photobucket.com
10. flickr.com (API)
11. microsoft.com
12. eircom.net
13. ebay.ie (API)
14. imageshack.us
15. imdb.com (RDF)

16. ebay.co.uk (API)
17. yahoo.com
18. amazon.co.uk
19. google.ie
20. blogspot.com
21. play.com
22. ebay.com (API)
23. bebo.com
24. guardian.co.uk (API)
25. adverts.ie
26. overclockers.co.uk
27. geocities.com
28. dell.com
29. ireland.com
30. amazon.com (API)

Table 5: Top 30 domains linked to in the message
board. Bold font indicates some content is available
in RDF as Linked Data or else via an API.

From the domains in Table 5, we chose a subset which are
most useful for analysis. We omitted ebay.* because product data is removed after 3 months, therefore data about the
products linked to in our dataset is now inaccessible. We also
omitted bbc.co.uk because while the BBC publishes useful
structured data about their music and TV programs, the
links occurring for this domain in the message board dataset
are predominantly pointing to news articles, for which there
is not yet structured information available. Finally, we omitted guardian.co.uk because it is not generally possible to


therefore we cannot use hyperlinks to construct a query to
the Guardian API. We combined data from amazon.com and
amazon.co.uk since they contain overlapping information
about products.

Based on the remaining domains listed in Table 5, we
enriched the message board dataset with data from the following sources:

1. RDF data. The original Boards.ie dataset was available as an RDF dump, and we also used a dump of DBpedia [2] to extract information about Wikipedia articles posted. We also retrieved data from SPARQL endpoints - LinkedMDB [10] (an export of IMDB movierelated data), DBTune7 (a wrapper of Myspace music
data), and the RDF Book Mashup [4] (a mashup of
Amazon and Google Base book data).

2. API data. Some of the data we extracted is in the
form of fixed categories which do not have URIs. The
Amazon and YouTube APIs describe product groups
and categories in simple text. The DBTune genres are
assigned URIs from the Myspace Ontology8 but this
is currently a work in progress and the URIs do not
resolve. We semi-automatically mapped these three
taxonomies to DBpedia - specifically, we checked each
item for a DBpedia resource with a matching label,
then inspected the results and manually changed any
incorrect mappings. An additional API that we used in
order to gather more data was LibraryThings service
thingISBN9, which takes an ISBN as input and returns
additional associated ISBNs (e.g. other editions of a
book).

3. Tag data. Much of the data that we extracted is
contained in tags. The data sources that we retrieved
tags from are Amazon, the RDF Book Mashup, Flickr
and YouTube. We used these tags to supplement the
semantic data we retrieved by mapping them to DBpedia URIs. We used a na ve method of obtaining corresponding URIs - specifically, for each tag we checked
for a DBpedia resource with a matching label.
In
the cases where the tag matches a resource uniquely
(i.e., the resource does not redirect to a disambiguation page) we stored a triple relating the tagged resource to the DBpedia resource. This na ve method
of mapping is certain to introduce noise to the data;
however URIs which occur for multiple resources in a
thread are likely to be relevance to that conversation.
We were able to obtain resource mappings for 68% of
all unique tags and 82% of all tag instances. Note that
we have not evaluated the accuracy of these mappings
and we suggest treating these particular relations as
potentially useful, but uncertain.

We attempted to map concepts to DBpedia URIs for two
main reasons. First, many Linked Data sources provide
mappings to DBpedia, increasing the possibilities of inter-
linking. Secondly, the Wikipedia category structure enables
us to expand a set of resources to include the categories to

7http://dbtune.org/
8http://purl.org/ontology/myspace
9http://www.librarything.com/thingology/2006/06/
introducing-thingisbn_14.php

which they belong. This means that if a user links to very
specific items, it is still possible to infer the broader topic.
An example of this is shown in Figure 5, where we can see
that Am elie is a film set in Paris, and hence also a film set
in France.

imdb:tt0211915 foaf:topic dbpedia:Am elie .
dbpedia:Am elie skos:subject

category:Films_set_in_Paris .

category:Films_set_in_Paris skos:broader

category:Films_set_in_France .

Figure 5: Example of using DBpedia category structure to infer a broader topic.

Figure 6 shows the percentage of links in the data per year
for which we could retrieve external data - i.e. where there
is currently available a structured representation. We focus
on the popular domains which we identified as being likely
to have a useful structured data source i.e. youtube.com,
wikipedia.org, myspace.com, flickr.com, imdb.com and
amazon.*. Note that for the early years (1998-2005), very
little data is available, but more recently the amount of
structured data has grown rapidly.
In total, we could retrieve structured data for links in 24,264 posts, the majority of which occurred in the last year of the dataset. For
2007/2008, 9% of links posted were to resources available as
structured data. It is very likely that by now the percentage
of links with structured representations is much higher.

Figure 6: Percentage of links posted for which there
is currently available structured data.

Table 6 summarises the six domains that we considered
and the sources we used to gather structured data. Sources
marked in bold are part of the Linking Open Data project
and provide RDF data via wrappers or exporters of existing
Web data sources. The remaining unbolded sources provide
structured data in non-RDF formats, typically XML, which
we transform into RDF. The table also contains figures regarding the quantity of data which we obtained. We found
that users have linked to over 20k unique resources with
structured representions. Of these, almost half (9.8k) are
published as part of the Linking Open Data project. Table 6 also shows some examples of the relationships that we
extracted. For these relationships alone we can create or
retrieve over 100k RDF triples.

 0 2 4 6 8 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10% having structured dataYearStructured data sources

Total Distinct
Links

Items Extracted

Sample Relationships

YouTube API

Tag (mapped to DBpedia)
Category
Date published

Triples


Distinct
Objects


6,240 Article about Resource

Resource Type
and Domain
Video
youtube.com

Article
wikipedia.org
Music Artist
myspace.com
Photo
flickr.com
Movie
imdb.com

DBpedia

DBTunes

Flickr API

Linkedmdb, DBpedia

1,793 Genre of Resource

Tag (mapped to DBpedia)
Date published

540 Article about Resource

Genre of Resource
Director of Resource


Product
amazon.*
(of which Book) RDF Book Mashup,

Amazon API, LibraryThing

DBpedia

2,781 Tag (mapped to DBpedia)

Product Group

(1,540)

(1,192) Article about Resource

Author of Resource

Total

Table 6: External data sources, number of items extracted from hyperlinks, examples of relationships retrieved
and the number of triples available to enrich the original dataset. Sources in bold are part of the Linking
Open Data project.

4. UTILISING THE ENRICHED DATASET

FOR NOVEL ANALYSIS

We have seen that taking into account external structured
data can provide us with new related information, but what
can we learn from it? Since the enriched data is stored in
RDF, SPARQL provides an easy way to access the data for
different kind of analysis. Consequently, all of the analysis that we performed and which we describe in this section made use of SPARQL queries (with aggregation  to
be supported in SPARQL 1.1) and required minimal subsequent processing.

4.1 Analysis of post content

Making use of information from the Web of Data allows
us to examine how posters describe a resource which they
link to. We can access facts about resources, such as their
title, creator or category, and compare these to the text
accompanying the link.

We retrieved book and movie titles, and author and director names from structured data sources, where available,
and checked whether the names occurred in the text con-
tent. The results are shown in Table 7. We observe that
posters are far more likely to use the name of a movie than
the name a of a book when linking to it. However they
are more likely to mention the author of a book than the
director of a movie.

The use of external structured data allows us to easily
perform this sort of analysis of user behaviour, which otherwise would have to be performed by manually inspecting
posts. We can also see from Table 7 that making use of
links to structured data allows us to add new information
that is related to the hyperlinks within the post, but was
not explicitly mentioned in the post text. For example, if
we wanted to detect mentions of movies in message board
posts, searching for movie titles alone would result in missing hundreds of posts where there is a link to the movie on
IMDB.

Books (1,540 links)

Book Title

Information Item Location in Post Times Mentioned
23.37%
9.52%
0.68%
24.67%
6.26%
0.91%

Post
Anchortext
Post Title
Post
Anchortext
Post Title
Movies (957 links)

Book Author

Movie Title

Information Item Location in Post Times Mentioned
65.89%
34.01%
9.24%
4.81%
1.20%
0.00%

Post
Anchortext
Post Title
Post
Anchortext
Post Title

Movie Director

Table 7: For links to books and movies, the percentage of times that the title/author/director was also
mentioned in the post text.

4.2 Analysis of content sharing behaviour

By retrieving metadata about items posted, we can learn
more about how different types of media are shared among
social media users.

We retrieved the upload date of images and videos linked
from users posts, and compared them to the dates when
they were posted on the message board. This allows us to
compare the typical age of different types of media posted.
The distribution of the ages of images and videos are shown
in Figure 7. We observe that posters are much more likely to
post extremely new Flickr images than Youtube videos. The
median age of a Flickr photo posted is only 2 days, but the
median age of a Youtube video posted is 111 days. Reading
the posts shows that this is because users often share their
own, just uploaded photos, but when sharing videos they
are more likely to share content they have found which has


to these (e.g. mapped from tags). We can also include the
categories of these resources derived from the Wikipedia hi-
erarchy, but have omitted these for clarity.

In addition, these profiles can be modelled using RDF(S)/
OWL, enabling their reuse in other applications than the
system where they come from. One straightforward way to
to so is to use the foaf:topic_interest property to link
users to their interests. However, this does not consider
the frequency regarding how these interests have been ex-
tracted, neither if they have been extracted explicitly (e.g.
direct mapping to a structured resource) or implicitly (in-
ferred from other categories or from tags).

Hence, to enable such a finer-grained representation of
user-profiles, we designed a lightweight model, named the
Interest Mining Ontology  available at http://rdfs.org/
imo/ns , consisting of a main class imo:MinedInterest
representing an interest relationship between (1) a user (in-
stance of foaf:Person)  with the imo:person property
and (2) an interest (instance of rdf:Resource)  with the
imo:interest property10. The model also relies on SCOVO11
 Statistical Core Vocabulary [14]  and especially uses
scovo:Item to represent the number of times an interest has
been mined from a dataset. Finally, order to represent the
mining more finely, our model includes two classes inspired
by the APML12  Attention Profiling Mark-up Language
 terminology in the realm of user interests:

 ExplicitMining  when the matching has been done
with via a direct link to the resource or by direct translation (e.g. from a Wikipedia page to a DBpedia URI);
 ImplicitMining  when the accuracy of the mining
is uncertain, e.g. when URIs have been mined from a
tag set or using some disambiguation heuristics.

Then, considering our previous example, we can represent
Bobs mined interests like so: (1) Science Fiction: mined
one time using an explicit mapping and one time implicitly
using a particular heuristic (in this case mapped from a tag)
and (2) Animation: mined once via an implicit link (again,
mapped from a tag). Bobs user profile represented with
IMO is shown in Table 8.

5. DISCUSSION

Our approach of enriching social media with external data,
via hyperlinks, could be integrated with existing methods
which use Semantic Web capabilities to study online com-
munities. Mikas work on ontologies [17] is probably one
of the first studies that combined Semantic Web and social
network analysis. He provided a social model for ontology
mining from folksonomies, and showed how communities of
users are formed based on the tag clusters that they use and
some subsets from these clusters. More recently, Ereteo et
al. [11] provided an ontology of social network analysis13 and
analyzed a social network of more than 60,000 users. How-
ever, they relied only on the interactions happening inside

10Moreover, we mapped the model to FOAF (and to
foaf:topic_interest) using an online property chain,
available in the model online.
11http://sw.joanneum.at/scovo/schema.html
12http://apml.areyoupayingattention.com/
13http://ns.inria.fr/semsna/2009/06/21/voc

Figure 7: Age distribution of videos and images
posted on the message board.

Figure 8: Age distribution of books and movies
posted on the message board.

been created by someone else.

In Figure 8 we show a similar distribution plot, but in this
case comparing books and movies, which require a time-scale
of years rather than days. While all types of content items
show a similar pattern of many links to new items, tailing-off
to a few links to old items, they differ in the timescale in-
volved. For example, approximately 80% of movie and book
related discussions are about items which are over 1 year
old, whereas links to user-generated content are typically
days old. This suggests that studies of information propagation could benefit from considering the different properties of objects which are shared online - information which
is often available on the Web in a structured format.

Related analysis has been performed as part of a study
[9] of the spread of media content in the blogosphere. They
combined a blog dataset [8] and metadata gathered from
Youtube and compared propagation of videos for of different
categories, finding for example that news videos spread much
faster than music videos.
4.3 User profiling

We can aggregate all the structured data associated with
posts of a certain user and build a set of related concepts.
This enables us to mine user profiles based on their social
contributions. As an example, Figure 9 displays the information extracted about a user profile based on the resources

 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 200 400 600 800 1000Cumulative Distribution PlotTime between content creation and posting (days)Flickr (median=2)Youtube (median=111) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 200 400 600 800 1000Cumulative Distribution PlotTime between content creation and posting (days)Flickr (median=2)Youtube (median=111) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 20 40 60 80 100Cumulative Distribution PlotTime between item creation and posting (years)Movies (median=8.5)Books (median=3.3) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 20 40 60 80 100Cumulative Distribution PlotTime between item creation and posting (years)Movies (median=8.5)Books (median=3.3)Figure 9: Example of how the links that a user shares can be used to link the user to his interests.

@prefix : < http :// example . org > .
@prefix foaf : < http :// xmlns . com / foaf /0.1/ > .
@prefix dbpedia : < http :// dbpedia . org / r e s o u r c e / > .
@prefix imo : < http :// rdfs . org / imo / ns # > .
@prefix scovo : < http :// purl . org / NET / scovo # > .
@prefix rdf : < http :// www . w3 . org /1999/02/22 - rdf -

syntax - ns # > .

[] a imo : M i n e d I n t e r e s t ;

imo : user : Bob ;
imo : i n t e r e s t dbpedia : S c i e n c e _ F i c t i o n ;
imo : s t a t I t e m [

scovo : d i m e n s i o n imo : E x p l i c i t M i n i n g ; rdf : value 1

] ;
imo : s t a t I t e m [

scovo : d i m e n s i o n imo : I m p l i c i t M i n i n g ; rdf : value 1

] .

[] a imo : M i n e d I n t e r e s t ;

imo : user : Bob ;
imo : i n t e r e s t dbpedia : A n i m a t i o n ;
imo : s t a t I t e m [

scovo : d i m e n s i o n imo : I m p l i c i t M i n i n g ; rdf : value 1

] .

Table 8: Using IMO to represent ones interests.

the platform, hence not taking into account the additional
expressiveness of linked content as we show in our work.

As well as being useful for understanding online com-
munication, the work presented in this paper can also be
used in various application contexts. The most simple example of this is that the user interface of a message board
could be enhanced with external data, similar to what SuperTweet14 does for Twitter posts. A related recent initative
is Facebooks Open Graph Protocol15, which allows external
site owners to markup their content using Facebook-defined
schemas, such that these enriched content items can then
be used for metadata import into news feeds, profiles, etc.
This will increase the amount of links to objects available
online, as users will make use of this service or similar ones
to easily share links with friends, instead of just referring to
an object in plain text. It will also have the useful side-effect
of increasing the amount of structured data available online,
as publishers will format their data in such a way that it can

14http://www.cascaad.com/supertweet.php
15http://opengraphprotocol.org/

easily be consumed by Facebook.

Taking the idea of enhanced interfaces a step further, content recommendation could be performed based on semantic
links derived from information which is not explicitly mentioned in the post. For example when a user creates a post
about a movie, it would be possible to suggest posts which
mention movies having the same director. That way, we
can mine additional relationships inside the bulletin board
by using external data from the LOD cloud.
In addition
to recommending internal data, these links can be used for
instance for targeted advertising, by providing adverts to
related movies, books, etc. It could also be combined with
other recommendations systems that use the same URIs to
define their recommendations, as for instance dbrec16.

Moreover, these links could also be used to interlink bulletin boards with other content from the Social Web sphere.
We can imagine that semantically-enhanced microblog posts,
using systems such as SMOB17 or HyperTwitter18, could be
aggregated and displayed when browsing forums, so that in
addition to the current conversation, users could see what is
happening in real-time regarding the same topic.

One advantage of using RDF for representing social media data is that SPARQL queries can be used and reused for
analysis of such datasets. The current version, SPARQL 1.0
[19] is limited by a lack of support for aggregation, an important requirement for data analysis in general. We therefore
must depend on SPARQL extensions, specifically aggrega-
tion, to perform our analysis. The previously mentioned
work of Ereteo et al. on analysis of social semantic data
similarly relied on SPARQL extensions. San Mart n and
Gutierrez [18] also illustrated how SPARQL could be extended for Social Network Analysis purposes.
It is worth
noting that the extensions we used and some of those presented in these two recent works shall be included in the upcoming release of SPARQL 1.1 [13], such as aggregates and
property paths (currently time-permitting) and that others
are now available thanks to OWL2 [21], notably property
chain axioms.
In the future, the analysis we now present
will be supported by SPARQL and the approach will therefore be easily replicated using W3C standards.

16http://dbrec.net
17http://smob.me
18http://semantictwitter.appspot.com/

:Bob:Post1sioc:creator_of:Post2sioc:creator_of:Post3sioc:creator_ofamazon:B000G01ABMsioc:links_toimdb:tt0142032sioc:links_toyoutube:ajkPBl2LMMsioc:links_todbpedia:Toydc:subjectdbpedia:Transformersmoat:taggedWithdbpedia:Dune_(film)foaf:topicdbpedia:Science_fictionlinkedmdb:genremoat:taggedWithdbpedia:Animationmoat:taggedWith6. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we present a series of steps that can provide
additional useful information to consumers of social media
contributions that contain hyperlinks, based on a trend towards more links to semantically-rich items on collaborative
websites. We have studied ten years of hyperlinks posted
on a large bulletin board site. Our analysis shows that links
have become more frequent in postings throughout these ten
years, and that the the amount of structured data available
which relates to these links has sharply increased. A useful
side effect of this trend is that there becomes available vast
amounts of structured data relating to online conversations,
without requiring any special input from the users. We have
established that the data retrievable from external sources
provides new information not available from text analysis
and can give an insight into how people communicate online.
We conducted our analysis on a bulletin board site, but the
approach could be applied to any type of online conversations (e.g. blogs, real-time status updates). The approach
has possible applications in recommendation or filtering of
content, as well as providing the potential for social scientists to investigate individual online community activity or
the connections between communities based on similar or
shared sets of linked-to resources.
