The Pragmatic Web: Some Key Issues 

Pasi Pohjola 

PhD, Senior Researcher 

National Institute for Health and 

FI-00271 Helsinki, Finland 

Welfare 

P.O. Box 30 

+358-20-610 7157 

pasi.pohjola@thl.fi 

ABSTRACT 
In  recent  years  interests  towards  the  Pragmatic  Web  have  been 
increasing. Since the preliminary sketches and initial ideas in the 
first  years  of  this  decade,  some  attempts  at  defining  and 
characterizing the Pragmatic Web has emerged. Building upon the 
initial  characterizations,  the  aim of this paper is to  develop some 
of the key issues concerning the Pragmatic Web, especially those 
that distinguish it from the semantic web. By drawing ideas from 
the 
in 
technology studies, the paper aims at characterizing certain central 
features that make the web a pragmatic one. The central argument 
of  this  paper  is  that  the  Pragmatic  Web  is  a  collaborative 
technology, dependent on communities of users and the practices 
of use of the community. 

linguistic  metaphor  and  from 

research  conducted 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.3  [Information Systems]: Group and organization interfaces 
  computer-supproted  collaborative  work.  H4.3.  [Information 
Systems  Applications]:  Communication  Applications 
 
information browsers. 

General Terms 

Human Factors, Theory. 

Keywords 
Pragmatic  Web,  semantic  web,  semantics,  pragmatics,  ontology, 
knowledge  representation,  human-technology  interaction,  social 
interaction, social semantic web. 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS  2010,  September  1-3,  2010  Graz,  Austria  Copyright   
ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09... $10.00 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
In their short manifesto for the Pragmatic Web, Schoop, de Moor 
and  Dietz  [1]  draw  attention  to  certain  short-comings  of  the 
Semantic Web. The central deficiency of the semantic web is their 
static  model  of  knowledge  (ontologies),  which  implies  static  and 
predefined meaning of web-content. By quoting Singh's [2] earlier 
contribution  to  the  issue,  they  propose  that  by  extending  the 
Semantic  Web  with  communities  of  interest  and  practice, 
Pragmatic  Web  can  complement  the  Semantic  Web  in  various 
ways.  In  support  for  this  idea, they propose that insight from the 
action-language  perspective  among  others  can  serve  as  a 
theoretical  foundation  for  communication  modeling  and  system 
design [1]. 

It has been proposed that the Pragmatic Web can complement the 
Semantic Web by extending towards self-organizing communities 
of  users.  These  self-organizing  communities  of  interest  and 
practice  are  already  discussed  by  de  Moor  et  al.  in  their 
development  of  the  PORT  collaboratory  [3]  and  it  is  also 
mentioned  in  one  form  or  another  in  the  papers  by  Singh  and 
Schoop et al. This idea of self-organizing communities is also the 
backdrop to promoting the features of the Pragmatic Web such as 
ontology  negotiation  (and  ontology-building)  as  key  symbolic 
activities of the Pragmatic Web.  

The  fundamental  idea  of  the  Pragmatic  Web  has  been  illustrated 
by  drawing  an  analogy  from  linguistics.  This  is  already  done  in 
Singh's  paper  [2]  by  quoting  Charles  Morris'  core  ideas  of 
semiotics.  In  large,  the  content  of  any  generation  of  the  Web  is, 
from Web 1.0 to Semantic Web and  Pragmatic Web, represented 
in  signs  and  symbols.  Therefore,  analogously  to  language,  the 
meanings  of  the  signs  and  symbols  and  what  they  represent  are 
constituted  of  three  factors:  (I.)  Syntactical  (and  logical)  features 
of  structure  and  order,  (II.)  the  semantic  features  of  abstract 
meanings of signs, symbols and their constellations, and (III.) the 
pragmatic features of context and use. 

These  pragmatic  aspects  have  recently  drawn  the attention of the 
developers  and  investigators  of  semantic  and  Pragmatic  Web 
towards context-aware and context-sensitive conceptualizations of 
the  future  web.  The  relevant 
investigation  and 
development  include  ontology  negotiations,  the  integration  of 
contextual  ontologies,  and  developing  pragmatic  patterns  for 
defining issues such as communication, information and tasks [4] 
[5].  Authors  have  acknowledged  the  relevance  of  moving  away 

topics  of 


more  pragmatic  approach 
representing  and  defining 
representations  of  information  and  knowledge.  Despite  the  more 
pragmatic-oriented tendencies in contemporary web technologies, 
there are certain relevant pragmatic aspects of the web that remain 
uncovered if only the context is emphasized.  

to 

Although  the  Pragmatic  Web  is  a  clear  advancement  in  the 
conceptualizations of web technologies, there are certain aspects 
that  require  further  attention  and  enhancement.  One  of  them  is 
the emphasis on the self-organizing communities of practice as the 
central aspect of making the semantic web into a pragmatic one. It 
is  claimed  here  that  the  ideal of self-organizing communities can 
come  to  exclude  certain  relevant  aspects  of  human-technology 
interaction, if it is not explicated properly. It is proposed here that 
the  organization  takes  place  only  in  the  constellations  of  the 
community  and  the  technology  together,  not  in  the  community 
itself.  Another  issue  that  requires  further  attention  is  the 
participation  view  of  learning  and  knowledge  creation  promoted 
by  the  communities  of  practice  view.  It  is  recently  argued  that  it 
excludes  certain  relevant  aspects  of  the  kind  of  knowledge  work 
that  is  suggested  as  the  core  activities  of  the  Pragmatic  Web  [6] 
[7]. 

The  aim  of  this  paper  is  to  track  down  some  of  the  background 
reasons  for  the  kind  of  development  taken  place  in  semantic  and 
Pragmatic  Web  discussions.  Moreover,  the  aim  is  to  propose  an 
alternative  ontological  picture 
traditional, 
philosophical,  sense)  of  what  are  the  constitutive  features  of  the 
Pragmatic Web. In addition to explicating the fundamental ideas, 
some  implications  for  the  Pragmatic  Web  technologies  are 
discussed in more detail. One of them is the transformation of use 
of  web  technology  from  individual  centered  use  (Web  1.0)  to 
social  cooperation 
to  collaboration 
(Pragmatic Web). 

(Semantic  Web)  and 

the  more 

(in 

2.  HUMAN-TECHNOLOGY 
INTERACTION 
The  development  of  information  systems  and  especially  the 
semantic  and  pragmatic  aspects  of  the  web  have  been  dominated 
by two general approaches: technology-centered development and 
research,  and  user-oriented  development  and  research.  In  the 
former approach, the focus and emphasis has been on the systems, 
applications  and  technology  for  representing,  organizing  and 
manipulating  information  (and  knowledge).  In  the  latter,  the 
emphasis  has  been  on  the  ways  of  interaction  between  the  users 
and the system. 

The  2001  article  in  the  Scientific  American  on  the semantic web 
by  Tim  Berners-Lee,  James  Hendler  and  Ora  Lassila  clearly 
represents  the  technology-centered  approach  [8].  This  kind  of 
approach is also represented f. ex. in more contemporary work on 
system ontologies. The emphases on these are on the possibility of 
describing  and  handling  meaning  and  other  semantic  features 
within  the  system.  They  clearly  indicate  how  "semantic  tasks" 
should  be  handled  within  the  systems  and  applications  of  the 
semantic web. Research interests in these investigations are more 
on  the  issues  such  as  how  certain  human  processes  or  semantic 
processes  can  be  operationalized  and  optimized  by  computer 
systems  and  software.  In  these  technology-centered  approaches 
the  questions  of  usability  and  other  issues  of  interaction  are 

discussed  in  the  framework  of  the  traditional  approaches  to 
human-computer 
interaction  (HCI),  such  as  usability  and 
cognitive ergonomics. 

The  rise  of  the  social  software  and  the  social  semantic  web  (and 
other social media) has increased the interests also to investigating 
other ways of human-computer interaction. As the Pragmatic Web 
manifesto  suggested,  emphases  should  extend  to  communities  of 
interest  and  practice.  Following  the  research  trend  initialized  by 
the classic work of Lucy Suchman [9], investigations focusing on 
user  cultures  have  emerged.  For  example,  it  can  be  investigated 
how Facebook offers a variety of ways for greeting customs, such 
as buying birthday presents and sending birthday greetings with a 
minimal  effort  [10].  As  these  practices  extend  to  other  types  of 
technologies  trough  the  development  of  mobile  technology,  it 
might actually be more appropriate to discuss the topic in terms of 
human-technology  interaction  (with  interests  on  certain  specific 
types of technology).  

These  social  and  cultural  studies  usually  apply  the  traditional 
research methods used in social sciences, such as ethnography and 
ethnomethodology. In these, as in the social studies of technology 
in general, the technology which is used becomes typically black-
boxed.  In  contrast  to  technology-centered  approaches,  here  the 
research  interests  are  on  the  social  and  cultural  activity  of  the 
users  and  the  inherent  properties  of  the  technology  do  not  play 
such  a  crucial  part  in  these  investigations.  Of  course,  all  of  the 
user-centered  investigations  are  not  merely  social  and  cultural 
studies  on 
technology  use.  In  more  cognitively  oriented 
investigations,  the  interests  are  on  affordances  that  these systems 
and  applications  provide  for  culturally  and  socially  meaningful 
activity  [11].  Nevertheless,  in  these  types  of  studies  the  ways  of 
use  is  emphasized  over  the  properties  that  these  technologies  are 
made of. 

Table 1. Perspectives and functions 

Technical functions 

Cognitive  or  social 
functions 

Primary interest 

Secondary interest 

Secondary interest 

Primary interest 

Technology 
perspective 

Community 
perspective 

In 

the 

in  many  cases  an 

What is characteristic of both of these grand lines of approaches is 
the  underlying, 
implicit,  (ontological) 
presupposition  about  a  distinction  between  the  properties  and 
features  of  the  systems  and  applications  of  the  web,  and  the 
features  of  human  activity. 
technology-centered 
perspective,  the  inherent  properties  of  the  system  or  application 
are  emphasized  as  quite  independent  of  the  social  and  cultural 
activity  of  the  technology  users.  In  the  user-centered  or  the 
community perspective, the situation is the other way around (see 
Table  1.).  Consider  for  example  the  enthusiastic  expectations 
about  the  abilities  of  the  semantic  web  at  the  beginning  of  this 
millennium.  The  assumption  that  meaning  could  be  defined  with 
static  definitions  via  conceptualizations  (called  ontologies)  and 
manipulated  with  logical  algorithms  has  since  proven  to  be 
problematic. 


One  of  the  reasons  why  discussions  about  the  Pragmatic  Web 
have  been  seen  as  relevant is the incomplete account of meaning 
provided  by 
initiative.  Generating  and 
representing  meaning  requires  some  kind  of  interaction  between 
humans  and  machines  which  is  not  properly  captured  by 
engineered  conceptualizations  in  static  ontologies.  It  has  been 
argued  that  the  Pragmatic  Web  is  not  merely  a  knowledge 
exchange  medium;  it  should  be  an  active  knowledge  system  that 
supports  human  interaction  and  accomplishment  of  knowledge 
tasks [12].  

A more significant reason for the discussions about the Pragmatic 
Web  in  this  paper  is,  as  it  is  argued  below,  to  integrate  two 
perspectives,  community  and  technology  perspective,  together.  It 
is argued that this is needed for a holistic understanding of the use 
of  information  and  knowledge  technologies.  In  the  following 
sections, these issues are developed and discussed in more detail. 
This development aims at arguing why perspective that integrates 
these  two  aspects  is  essential  for  information  and  knowledge 
technology,  and  how 
the 
developments of the Pragmatic Web. 

issues  can  manifest 

these 

in 

3.  LEARNING FROM THE LINGUISTIC 
METAPHOR 
The linguistic metaphor, adapted from Charles Morris' description 
of  semiotics  was  deployed  by  Singh  [2]  for  illustrating  the  key 
differences between the development phases of the web. The web 
can be viewed as a symbolic system containing syntactic structure, 
semantic meaning and pragmatic context. In the syntactic web, the 
main  emphasis  is  on  the  structured  symbolic  representations.  In 
the  semantic  web,  the  main  emphasis  is  on  the  ways  these 
structured  representations  carry  and  generate  meaning.  In  the 
Pragmatic  Web, 
the  contextual 
dependence  of  the  meaning  of  these  structured  representations 
(see table 2. for summary). 

the  main  emphasis 

is  on 

Table 2. Meanings of representations in different web-types 

Type of Web 

Description 

Meaning 

Syntactic Web 

Structural 

Semantic Web 

Relational 

Pragmatic Web 

Contextual 

None 

Abstract 

Concrete 

In  the  following  sub-sections,  these  three  metaphors  of  the  web 
are  discussed  in  more  detail.  The  central  ideas  of  linked data are 
applied for demonstrating the different aspects of these three types 
of web. 

3.1  Syntactic web 
The applicability of the linguistic metaphor of syntactic, semantic 
and Pragmatic Web for characterizing different aspects of the web 
can  be  illustrated  by  using  the  method  of  generating  linked  data 
by  using  the  RDF  data  model  [13].  The  idea  of  linked  data  is  to 
provide  a  uniform  mechanism  for  representing  data  and  data 
sources. It has been also one of the hot topics of the I-Semantics 
conference  during  the  last  couple  of  years,  including  the 
triplification challenge for linked open data. 

In  RDF, 
is 
characterized  and  defined  as  a  set  of  triples,  consisting  of  a 

the  description  of 

the  resource 

in  question 

subject,  predicate  and  object.  According  to  the  Linked  Data 
Tutorial  [13],  the  subject  of  the  triple  is  the  URI  identifying  the 
described resource. The object is a literal value or URI of another 
source  relating  somehow  to  the  subject.  The  predicate  expresses 
the kind of relation that exists between the subject and the object. 
A couple of easy examples are provided in the table 3 below. 

Table 3. Linked data in the RDF data model 

Object 

Pasi 

Predicate 

Subject 

is the author of 

this paper 

The author 

is employed by 

Here the object - predicate - subject triple provides the syntax for 
representing  data.  Now  consider  a  world  wide  web  where  every 
piece of data existing would be organized by the syntax provided 
above.  What  would  the  syntactical  web  be  like  in  this  case?  If 
search  engines  would  search  only  f.  ex.  the  strings  of  characters 
provided  by  the  users,  then  we  might  call  it  a  syntactic  web.  By 
identifying only strings, such as 'Pasi' or 'THL' without providing 
any  contextual  information  about  the  relations  provided  by  the 
triple,  the  web  in  question  would  be  only  a  repository  of  data 
organized by certain syntactical rules. 

3.2  Semantic web 
If we wish to extend our web more in the semantic direction, what 
would make the "triple web" a semantic one? The easy answer is 
to  look  at  what  is  going  on  in  the  research  and  development 
organized around linked data at the moment. Tim Berners-Lee has 
even  emphasized  the  relevance  of  linked  data  to  the  whole 
semantic  web,  claiming  that  "Linked  data  is  essential  to  actually 
connect  the  semantic  web.    It  is  quite  easy  to  do  with  a  little 
thought,  and  becomes  second  nature.  Various  common  sense 
considerations  determine  when  to  make  a  link  and  when  not  to" 
[14].  It  is  proposed  that  RDF  provides a data model that follows 
the  syntax  of  the  triple  which  can  be  applied  for  describing 
semantic relations between symbols and entities.  

In  this  linked  data  example,  the  semantics  come  into  question 
when also issues that the triple represents come into consideration 
in  addition  to  the  mere  syntactic  structure  of  the  triple.  In 
linguistics,  semantics  is  understood  as  the  area  of  investigation 
dealing  with  (abstract)  meaning  of 
linguistic  entities  and 
constructs  (such  as  words,  signs,  sentences  etc.).  In  the  semantic 
web  where  all  data would be organized with the syntax provided 
with  the  triple,  it  means  that  the  user  could  f.  ex.  conduct 
"semantic"  searches,  i.e.,  search  data  through  the  kinds  of 
relations  that  exist  between  the  object  and  the  subject.  In  other 
words, the kind of relation that is defined between the object and 
the  subject  brings  semantic  content  to  data  descriptions:  it 
combines two meaningful entities (abstract or real) into each other 
in some meaningful way. 

How,  then,  does  meaning  become  existent  in  these  or  in 
representations of any other kind? There are at least two issues of 
linguistic  semantics  that  are  relevant  to  understanding  the 
fundamental  features  of  the  semantic  web.  The  first  one  is 
semantic holism and its criticism of semantic atomism. Already in 
the  works  on  meaning  by  G.  Frege  this  idea  is  developed.  It  is 
given  more  detailed  discussion  first  in  Ludwig  Wittgenstein's 


Wittgenstein  scholar  Peter  Hacker  calls  their  idea  as  the 
contextual  dictum  of  semantic  holism  [15].  The  idea  of  semantic 
holism states that every word has a meaning only in the context of 
a sentence. This is directed as a criticism against the idea that the 
meaning of expressions could be generated by knowing (only) the 
meanings of singular terms and the syntactical structure that they 
are combined with. 

In the context of linked data, this means that URI's, literal values 
and  terms  describing  the  relations  have  meaning  only  in 
combinations that the triples compose. For example, a location of 
some  set  of  data  does  not contain meaning by itself. It is only in 
the  context  of  the  predicate  and  the  object  when  it  becomes 
meaningful.  Consider  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  'Chris'  as 
an  individual  linguistic  expression?  Actually,  it  can  mean 
anything at all or nothing at all. This might be hard so see at first, 
because  we  as  competent  language-users  might  be  acquainted 
with  the  term  and  even  have  a  friend  named  Chris.  Quite 
automatically and immediately we contextualize and associate the 
term  with  these  acquaintances.  This  is  also  what  linked  data 
should  be  used  for  and  in  this  way  it  might  become  our  "second 
nature" as Tim Berners-Lee proposes. 

This  contextual  dictum  means  that  only  in  specific  contexts, 
composed  by  sentences  or  triplets,  individual  expressions  or 
symbols  carry  meaning.  The  name  Chris  becomes  meaningful  f. 
ex.  in  the  sentence  "Chris  is  the  performer  of  the  song  Lady  in 
Red".  In another context, such as in the sentence "Chris is one of 
the authors of the Linked Data Tutorial", the name comes to have 
a different meaning (and thus a different reference). Also the other 
words come to be specified within the context of the sentence. In 
the  first  sentence  for  example  the  name  of  the  song  refers  to  the 
original  cheesy  classic  one  by  Chris  de  Burgh  and  not  to  some 
crappy Youtube cover of the song. 

The second issue that is relevant to meaning and the semantic web 
is  the  nature  of  meaning  that  belongs  to  the  discipline  called 
semantics.  It  can  be  said  that  semantics  is  the  study  of  abstract 
meanings.  Consider  for  example  the  meanings  of  a  simple 
sentence  "I  will  come  to  you  at  midnight".  In  the  analysis  of  the 
semantic  properties  of  the  sentence,  we  could  begin  with 
analyzing the syntactical structure of the sentence. Then we could 
analyze  what  kinds  of  words  these  syntactical  elements  (such  as 
the  subject  and  the  predicate)  carry.  Finally,  we  could  come  up 
with an understanding about the semantic features of the sentence, 
i.e.,  its  abstract  meaning  that  the  speaker  makes a promise to the 
hearer  of  arriving  at  a  certain  specific  time.  It  could  be  f.  ex.  a 
promise  of  Romeo  to  her  loved  Juliet,  or  a vampires' threatening 
to  his  victim.  And  that  is  about  all  we  can  say  by  analyzing  the 
sentence as such. 

In  regard  to  the  linguistic  metaphor,  the  semantic  web  has  been 
quite  truthful  to  its  linguistic  counterpart.  The  conceptual 
definitions  of  ontologies  are  definitions  of  the  abstract  meanings 
and the relations of concepts. Similarly, semantic web ontologies 
have  a  hard  time  in  answering  to  the  situational  and  contextual 
variation of meaning, as well as to the development and change of 
meaning.  In  the  development  of  semantic  services, this has  f. ex. 
resulted  in  the  need  of  constant  refining  and  tuning  of  existing 
ontologies,  as  well  as  to  certain  limitations  in  the  services 
themselves [16]. 

3.3  Pragmatic web 
In  the  previous  sub-section  it  was  demonstrated  how  in  order  to 
arrive  at  a  specific  meaning  we  need  something  more  than  the 
analysis of symbolic constructs and the relations of these symbolic 
constructs  (such  as  sentences).  This  calls  for  the  inquiry  of  the 
pragmatic  features  such  as  the  context  where  the  sentences  and 
other linguistic elements are used in or appear in. For example, if 
the  sentence  "I  will  come  to  you  at  midnight"  would  have 
appeared  in  the  script  of  William  Shakespeare's  play  Romeo  and 
Juliet,  then  we  would  not  have  any  trouble  of  interpreting  the 
meaning of the sentence as Romeo's promise to Juliet.  

In  linguistics,  it  has  been  argued  that  any  proper  theory  of 
meaning should include the pragmatic features of context and use 
in  addition  to  the  semantic  and  syntactical  features  [17].  It  is 
claimed  that  the  presuppositions  for  meaningful  expressions  are 
that  they  are  constructed  with  certain  rules  of  structure  (syntax). 
In addition, there are certain rules of language use that determine 
the  kinds  of  combinations  of  words  that  construct  meaningful 
sentences (semantics). It is a well-known fact that it is possible to 
construct  syntactically correct sentences that don't have meaning. 
Also  there  are  additional  contextual  criteria  for  proper  language 
use,  i.e.,  how  these  meaningful  constructs  are  used  in  different 
contexts (pragmatics). 

What  does  the  inclusion  of  pragmatics  mean  in  the  context  of 
linked data examples used in this paper? One suggestion would be 
that  the  RDF  links,  used  to  interlink  data  from  different  sources 
can  be  used  as  a  method  for  contextual  description.  This  can  be 
further  discussed  by  contemplating  on  the  example  used  in  the 
Linked  Data  Tutorial  for  demonstrating  RDF  links.  In  the 
example,  Richard  Cyganiac  has  identified  himself  with  a  URI  in 
FOAF  (friend  of  a  friend)  profile.  First,  in  this  profile  he  has 
identified  himself  with  a  specific  URI.  By  using  the  FOAF 
convention,  he  has  a  long  list  of  references  to  people  he  knows 
(people who he is a friend with). When this profile is existent, it is 
possible  to  consider  what  relevant  contextual  information  about 
Richard  is  available.  From  the  profile,  we  know  f.  ex.  that  he  is 
located near Berlin and is interested in Semantic Web. 

There  are,  though,  few  problems  with  this  simple  picture  of  the 
Pragmatic  Web,  where  structured  meaningful 
triples  are 
characterized  with  any  available  contextual  information.  First  of 
them is the problem of relevant context. In principle, it is possible 
to explicate, define and list all kind of contextual information. The 
problem  is  how  to extract the relevant information from the total 
amount  of  information,  i.e.,  to  explicate  what  are  the  contextual 
features  and  properties  that  constitute  to  the  meaning  of  the 
linguistic construct or linked data. If the sentence "I will come to 
you at midnight" is from the play Romeo and Juliet, which of the 
many features are the relevant ones that constitute to the meaning 
of the sentence? Is it the surrounding sentences or the whole text 
in a book, author's name, or what? 

Another  problem  is  the  question,  how  the  systems  of linked data 
(or  Pragmatic  Web  in  general)  can  adapt  to  changes  in  meaning 
and  context,  or  even  to  produce  new  meanings?  There  are  some 
developments in the adaptive informatics that utilize methods and 
techniques  such  as  self-organizing  maps  and  automated 
algorithms for analyzing the complex patterns of information [18]. 
These  systems  can  be  useful  in  future  Pragmatic  Web  solutions, 
but the challenge is more complex. The meaning in the Pragmatic 


resources with syntactically defined semantic vocabulary (such as 
the  Linked  data  model).  It  is  generated  and  changed  in  constant 
interaction with users and the system. 

This  issue  can  be  emphasized  with  the  idea  of  language-games 
introduced  by  Ludwig  Wittgenstein  in  his  latter  works  [19]. 
Language-games  are  ways  of  using  words  and  sentences  under  a 
specific  set  of  rules  and  in  certain  contexts.  The  ways  of  using 
language in a conference presentation  or in a pub when having a 
drink with a couple of good friends are totally different languagegames where different rules apply. Wittgenstein also remarks that 
language  changes  through  changes  in  language-games.  New 
games emerge and old ones cease to exist. The introduction of the 
concept "unfriend", brought about by community using Facebook, 
is a good example of the ways how new language-games emerge. 
These  kinds  of  issues  are  also  the  challenges  that  the  Pragmatic 
Web needs to address. 

These kinds of challenges are also in the backdrop of introducing 
communities of interest and practice as the relevant aspect of the 
Pragmatic Web. Communities that interact with systems negotiate, 
change and define meanings. It is proposed that these users of the 
community come to form the context through their intentions and 
interests.  Nevertheless,  as  it  was  claimed  above,  intentions, 
interests  and  participation,  proposed  by  the  notion  of  the 
communities  of  practice  does  not  suffice  as  the  extra  part  that 
extends the semantic web to the Pragmatic Web. 

4.  EXTENDING THE ONTOLOGY 
As  the  previous  discussions  propose,  meaningful  representations 
of data should not be discussed merely as a feature of the web and 
its  systems  and  applications.  It  was  suggested  that  is  should  be 
seen  as  something  that  is  generated  through  constant  interaction 
between  the  users  and  the  systems.  As  the  discussion  in  the 
section  2  suggested,  this  kind  of  holistic  view  has  been 
overlooked  in  some  developments  in  semantic  and  Pragmatic 
Web. The suggestion here is that in order for this to change, there 
needs  to  be  change  in  the  very  fundamental conceptions how we 
see the artifacts of information and knowledge technology and in 
the way how we understand their use. 

These  kind  of  fundamental  issues  are  typically  discussed  in 
philosophical  ontology,  i.e.,  in  the  study  of  the  fundamental 
aspects  of  being.  The  aim  here  is  to  explicate  three  accounts  of 
technology and use in very general terms which aim at explicating 
the use and the technology as interrelated. First of them is the dual 
nature  of  artifacts  view,  an  ontological  account  developed  in  the 
area  of  philosophy  of  engineering.  Second  one  is  an  account  of 
the ontological nature of technical artifacts called the constitution 
view.  The  third  one  comes  from  the  social  studies  of  technology 
(and from science and technology studies) known as the relational 
ontology,  derived  from  the  actor-network  theory  of  Latour  and 
Woolgar (and their followers) [20]. 

4.1  Dual nature of technology 
The  dual  nature  view  in  general  claims  that  any  technology  or 
technical artifact has two natures: intentional and physical nature 
[21]  [22].  The  fact  that  the  technology  has  an  intentional  nature 
means that it has certain purposes serving some needs of the users. 
The  physical  properties  are  the  underlying  properties  that  make 
these  purposes  possible.  By  claiming  that  these  are  the  essential 

features  of  technical  things,  they  come  to  claim  that  the 
functionalities  that  technologies  have  are  dependent  on  both  the 
properties of the thing and intentions of the users. 

In the case of the Pragmatic Web, this means that intentional use 
of  the  web  should  be  understood  as  a  relevant  aspect  of  the 
systems and applications of the Pragmatic Web. It also means that 
this  intentional  use  is  partially  responsible  for  generating  the 
functions and the ways of using technology. Technologies such as 
Pragmatic  Web  services  and  applications  are  not  merely  created 
by  engineering  and  software  design,  but 
the  sometimes 
unexpected  use  is  part  of  generating  the  functionalities and ways 
of use of the services and applications. 

4.2  Constitution view of technology 
In the typical explication of the constitution view [23] the relation 
between  a  thing  (such  as  a  system  or  an  application)  and  what it 
actually is, is understood through a constitution relation. The idea 
is to argue that what a technical thing actually is is not reducible 
to  its  properties.  It  is  something  more  than  its  physical 
appearance. In addition, this constitution relation always exists in 
certain  circumstances.  A  classic  example  within  the  constitution 
literature  is  the  relation  between  a  piece  of  marble  and  a  statue. 
We can always imagine some circumstances where some piece of 
marble does not constitute a statue although in the circumstances 
we live in the piece constitutes Michelangelo's David [23]. 

The proposal by constitution view has certain similarities with the 
dual  nature  view.  The  functionalities  and  the  ways  of  use  of 
Pragmatic Web technologies become defined in the circumstances 
the  technology  exists  and  is  used  in.  In  the  more  sophisticated 
social  constitution  view  [24]  [25], 
the  circumstances  are 
explicated  in  terms  of  social  practices  of  technology  use.  Within 
the  communities  of  users,  the  ways  of  using  and  applying 
technology  becomes  a  practice.  The  difference  between  the  dual 
nature  view  and  the  social  constitution  view  is  that  the  social 
constitution view puts emphasis on the shared intentions and ways 
of use, rather than on individual intentions. 

4.3  Relational ontology 
According  to  the  relational  ontology  put  forward  by  the  actornetwork  theory  of  science  and  technology  studies  [20]  [26], 
humans (users) and technologies should be understood as hybrids, 
i.e.,  as  networks  where  neither  is  independent  of  each  other. 
Technologies  exist  and  evolve  in  these  networks  and  how  the 
technology  evolves  is  dependent  on  the  whole  network.  For 
example,  in  different  biomedical  laboratories  same  kind  of 
equipment can be specified in different ways and used in different 
ways  depending  on 
research  practices,  needs  and 
competencies  of  the  people  of  these  laboratories  [20].  Similarly 
Pragmatic Web applications should be seen as actors in a network 
of systems and users. 

the 

The  relational  ontology  puts  emphasis  on  the  interaction  of  the 
whole  system.  In  the  Pragmatic  Web,  it  would  mean  that  part  of 
the  development  and  design  need  to  be  targeted  in  the  ways  of 
supporting  and  enabling  the  interaction  between  the  different 
actors  of  the  network  (agents).  It  also  means  that  the  activity  of 
the  users  should  not  merely  adapt  to  using  of  certain  kind  of 
technology  with  certain  affordances.  Rather,  the  activity  and 
practices  should  target  at  the  mutual  development  of  the  systems 
and the practices of use. 


What  all  of  these  fundamental  approaches  to  technology  and  use 
emphasize  is  the  strong  interrelation  between the technology and 
use. Although they do it in different and somewhat contradictory 
terms,  the  take  home  message  is  that  in  order  to  capture  a  good 
overall picture of what semantic and Pragmatic Web technologies 
are,  neither  the  technology  nor  the  use  cannot  be  excluded  from 
the  picture.  It  should  be  also  emphasized  that  constitution  view 
and relational ontology highlight the relevance of social practices 
as a relevant aspect of technology use. This is important especially 
now  when  there  is  growing  interest  is  social  media  and  social 
semantic software. After all, practices are socially defined ways of 
using  and  interacting  with  technology.  They  are  also  relevant  to 
understanding the Pragmatic Web as it is argued below. 

This  practice  approach  to  technology  come  close  to  the  proposal 
of  the  Pragmatic  Web  manifesto  about  extending  the  technology 
with communities of interest and practice. Rather than addressing 
the community as a self-organizing system, this perspective claims 
that  both  the  technology  and  the  community  is  the  unit  of 
organization. Communities of practice are not just something that 
organizes itself and its activity in relation to the properties of the 
Pragmatic  Web.  Part  of  this  organizing  is  the  manipulation  and 
development of the technology together with the ways of use. 

On  more  fundamental  terms,  the  Pragmatic  Web  or  any  other 
information  systems  technology does not exist as an independent 
entity  with  certain  stable  and  essential  features  determining  the 
functionalities and ways of use. The properties are something that 
become  existent  only  in  the  network  of  users  and  technology. 
Also,  the  ways  of  use,  i.e.,  the  ways  in  which  the  technology 
becomes  constructed  can  vary  between  different  communities  of 
practice.  Understanding 
the  Pragmatic  Web  as  a  hybrid, 
constituted  by  the  users  and  the  technology,  implies  that  certain 
affordances  and  functionalities  become  existent  and  shaped  in 
these  hybrid networks of users and the technology. Moving from 
static  conceptualizations  and  ontologies  of  the  semantic  web 
towards  more  interactive  systems  of  the  Pragmatic  Web  requires 
that  these  systems  support  the  organizing  and  maintaining  the 
practices  of  interaction  in  addition  to  providing  affordances  for 
enhanced interaction. 

5.  EMBEDDED TECHNOLOGIES AND 
PRACTICES 
The ontological turn (in the philosophical sense) proposed by the 
discussions of the previous section proposes to see technology as 
embedded in practices; the real and existent technologies become 
embedded  in  networks  of  actors  and  activity,  they  become 
(essential)  parts  of  the  systems  of  human  and  non-human  actors 
(or  agents).  Rather  than  being  individual  realms  in  the  world  of 
web  technologies  and  use,  they  should  be  seen  as  forming  unity. 
In research terms this would mean that the unit of analysis would 
be  the  technology  within  the  community,  not  the  community  or 
the technology as such. 

This unity is something already discussed in research literature on 
human-technology  interaction.  Suchman's  research  was  focused 
on  the  cultural  use  of  technology.  Followers  of  her  work  have 
promoted  the  perspective  as  embodied  interaction,  derived  from 
phenomenology.  It  is  argued  that  interacting  with  computers  or 
technology  in  general  is  not  merely  a  cognitive  process,  but 
socially  or  culturally  constituted  embodied  interaction.  This  is 

partially  founded  on  a  criticism  targeted  against  an  account  of 
artificial  intelligence  holding  a  strong  analogy  between  human 
and  machine  intelligence.  The  embodied  interaction  view  holds 
that  human  intelligence  and,  thus,  intellectual  human  activity  is 
dependent  on  skilled  lived  experiences  which  cannot  be  reduced 
into mechanical algorithms and modeled cognitive processes. 

of 

human-technology 

What the Pragmatic Web manifesto also argues is that interaction 
needs  to  be  extended  to  account  also  the  cultural  or  social 
dimension 
the 
embodiment  is  considered  as  a  part  of  the  embedding  of 
technology 
into  practices  [27].  Viewing  human-technology 
interaction  as  skilled,  engaged  practice  is  only  a  part  of  the 
practices  of  interaction.  It  also  includes  ways  of  developing  and 
cultivating  the  skills  and  engagement  which  cannot  be  excluded 
from the human-technology interaction. 

interaction.  Here 

The difference between the participation view of the communities 
of practice and the view promoted here is well represented in the 
difference  of  embodied  interaction  by  Dourish  and  the  view 
promoted 
interaction  promotes 
participation  in  the  skilled,  engaged  practice,  the  perspective 
promoted  here  emphasizes 
the  aspect  of  negotiating  and 
cultivating  the  practices  for  the  development  of  skills  and  the 
enhancement of engagement. 

here.  Where 

embodied 

5.1  One more look at the linguistic metaphor 
The discussion about language-games in section 3.3 above relates 
issues of the Pragmatic Web to social practices and it can be used 
to illustrate this aspect in more detail. As it was mentioned, using 
(or  playing)  language-games  is  actually  using  language  in  some 
certain  way,  in  some  context  and  under  some  specific  rules. One 
other issue of which Wittgenstein is famous for is his discussions 
on  the  rule  following.  In  the  passages  where  he  discusses  rule 
following  he  remarks  that  the  ways  of  using  language  in  certain 
ways  are  actually  practices.  Saying  good  morning,  greeting,  or 
asking  "how  are  you"  are  all  practices  that  we  have  been 
socialized to and what we have learned. 

As  we  know  from  our  everyday  experience,  language  does  not 
stay the same. New words are created, meanings change and some 
expressions  are  forgotten.  When  language-games  change  also 
practices  change.  When  language-games  cease  to  exist,  certain 
practice  ceases  to  exist.  When  a  new  language-game  is  brought 
into existence, a new kind of practice is created. In semantics, the 
interests  are  not  so  much  on  the  practices  and  the  context.  In 
pragmatics,  the  things  that  matter  are  the  context  of  use  and 
practices  of  use  of  language.  Following  the  analogy  provided  by 
the  linguistic  metaphor,  it  can  be  argued  that  the  practices  play 
central  role  in  the  process  of  moving  from  the  semantic  web 
towards the Pragmatic Web. 

If we consider the linked data example once more, the challenge is 
how  we  can  create  systems  that  can  adapt  to  the  changes  in 
practices.  Practices  are,  by  definition,  sequences  of  actions  that 
remain  the  same  (or  at  least  almost  the  same)  through  a  certain 
period  of  time  and  they  are  also  carried  out  by  more  than  one 
person [28]. As long as the practices remain the same, the system 
can easily adapt to the context or the circumstances of users. Take 
for  example  the  institution  of  marriage  and  the  practice  that  a 
priest  has  the  responsibility  for  pronouncing  the  couple  as  a 
husband and a wife. Just like in legal documents we could define 
a  persons  marital  status  as  single  or  married  and,  thus,  link  the 


legal  marital  status  also  to  couples  of  the  same  sex.  In  such  a 
country, the use of the link 'wife' would hardly be appropriate for 
a gay couple. This is just to show how our conceptualizations and 
conventions are dependent f. ex. on our everyday practices. 

These  kinds  of  examples  and  real  life  situations  mean  that  our 
pragmatic systems, like those relying on the linked data, should be 
easily  adaptable  to  the  kinds  of  changes  in  practices  and,  thus, 
meaning.  Suggestions  towards  this  kind  of  approach  have  been 
introduced in some of the papers on the  Pragmatic Web [29] [4]. 
In  order  for  the  system  to  address  the  pragmatic  aspect  of 
language  it  has  to  build  upon  mechanisms  for  the  meaning 
evolution  processes.  Pietarinen  [30]  for  example  has  proposed  a 
semiotic  web  as  an  alternative,  building  upon  the  dialogical  idea 
of questions and answers. 

5.2  Practices and Pragmatic Web 
Following  the  previous  discussions  of  this  paper,  what  kind  of 
system  the  Pragmatic  Web  would  be  like  and  in  what  ways  it 
accords with the suggestions made in this paper? As the linguistic 
metaphor  proposes,  arriving  from  semantics 
to  pragmatics 
requires  that  also  the  practices  of  use  are  taken  into  account. 
Rather  than  being  a  repository  of  meaningfully  represented  data, 
Pragmatic  Web  needs  to  adapt  to  the  user  interaction  and  in 
various  ways.  One  possibility  can  be  that the system could adapt 
to the ways in which the represented data is used and viewed. By 
adapting  to  these  interactions  it  should  make  contextually 
sensitive  changes  into  the  ways  of  representing  and  linking  the 
data.  Examples  of  this  could  be  the  weighting  or  highlighting 
some links over others, or the other way around. 

The above mentioned is, of course, only one possibility. It would 
be  also  essential  that  the  users  could  manipulate  the  system  and 
extend  their  practices  to  the  ways  how  the  system  interacts  with 
users. Also the users should be able to construct and develop the 
means  and  ways  of  interaction, i.e., the ways of engagement into 
knowledge  creation  and  knowledge  tasks.  Take  for  example  the 
interrogative  model  of  questions  and  answers  suggested  by 
Pietarinen as the backdrop of the semiotic web. As we know from 
our  everyday  experience,  the  ways  and  practices  of  questioning 
vary  from  context  to  context.  Therefore  it  should  be  recognized 
that  only  some  types  and  kinds  of  questions  are  effective  and 
relevant  for  advances  in  knowledge.  Asking  'how  are  you'  might 
not  be  the  best  choice  for  advancing  scientific  community's 
knowledge  (although  it  might  have  an essential social role in the 
interaction). 

These  kinds  of  adaptive  mechanisms  in  the  Pragmatic  Web  need 
to conform to the needs and purposes of the context and situation 
in which the technology is applied. The Pragmatic Web should be 
adaptable  to  the  needs  and  purposes  of  use.  This  is  what  the 
relational  ontology  in  short  terms  proposes.  The  ways  in  which 
these  kinds  of  mechanisms  (tools,  artifacts)  become  constructed 
are  dependent  on  the  network,  the  activities  and  needs  of  the 
actors  of  the  network.  Consider  how  wiki  documents  are  created 
in  a  semantic  wiki,  which  is  a  paradigm  example  of  the 
participation in a community of practice. In addition to traditional 
Wikipedia,  semantic  wiki  provides  a  semantic  model  of 
knowledge  for  the  content.  Within  this  model,  people  can 
participate  in  quasi-open  development  of  knowledge  which  is 
dependent  of  and  regulated  by  the  moderators  of  the  wiki-pages 

and the practices of the community. What a pragmatic wiki should 
provide in addition is that the knowledge model should be always 
open to change (by the users and maybe also by the system itself). 
It  should  also  provide  possibilities  for  enhancing  the  ways  of 
creating knowledge into the system, i.e., to negotiate and cultivate 
the knowledge practices of the community (see table 4.). 

Table 4. Types of interaction and representation 

Type of Web  Representation 

Interaction 

Syntactic 
Web 

Semantic 
Web 

Pragmatic 
Web 

Structural: Strict rules 
of description 

Aligning  interests  to 
existing data 

Relational: 
Identifying 
information  from  the 
data 

Participation 
under 
specific  models  of 
knowledge  and  social 
practices. 

Contextual: 
Contextualizing 
information 
knowledge 

into 

Engagement 
cultivating 
knowledge 
and 
practices 

into 
both 
models 
knowledge 

From  the  knowledge  perspective,  syntactic  web  clearly  promotes 
individual interaction in knowledge tasks. The semantic web also 
extends  to  participatory  forms  of  knowledge  tasks,  promoting 
cooperation through shared models of knowledge. The  Pragmatic 
Web  is  clearly  collaborative  in  its  nature.  The  interaction  that  is 
required does not rely merely on shared models of knowledge, but 
also  on  shared  ways  of  socially  cultivating  the  ways  of 
representing knowledge. 

6.  CONCLUSIONS 
The  aim  of  this  paper  has  been  to  explicate  and  characterize 
certain fundamental features of the Pragmatic Web. The main idea 
of  this  paper  has  been  that  we  should  understand  information 
technology  in  general  and  Pragmatic  Web  as  parts  of  a  hybrid 
network consisting of both technology and humans. By using the 
linguistic  metaphor  of  syntactic,  semantic  and  Pragmatic  Web,  it 
is  argued  that  this  fundamental  idea  has  even  more  fundamental 
role  in  the  Pragmatic  Web.  Pragmatics  refers  to  use  and  context, 
of  which  the  network  with  its  practices  is  representative  of.  By 
using  the  linked  data  as  an  example,  the  paper  intended  to 
explicate  what  kinds  of  challenges  the  meaningful  representation 
of  data  has  in  general,  and  more  specifically  what  kind  of 
challenges it has in the Pragmatic Web. 

One  of  the  central  issues  that  have  been  promoted  here  is  the 
practice  approach  to  understanding  technology  and  technology 
use.  It  is  argued  that  knowledge  tasks  that  create  and  reshape 
meanings  are  also  practices  that  rely  on  the  human-technology 
interaction.  Creating  and  cultivating  ways  of  questioning  and 
answering,  for  example,  for  some  special  need  requires  the 
creation  or  cultivation  of  specific  knowledge  practices.  These 
issues  are  addressed  in  contemporary  research  on  the  computersupported  collaborative  learning.  These  authors  of  CSCL  argue 
that  in  addition  to  developing  supporting  technologies  the 
community  itself  needs  to  create  efficient  practices  for  working 
with  the  technology  [29].  In  linked  data  it  would  mean  that 
descriptions are not just merely created with the RDF framework, 


descriptions  are  conducted  and  revised.  Therefore  the  Pragmatic 
Web is clearly a collaborative web in relation to its predecessors. 

[14] Berners-Lee, T. 2006/2009 W3C Design Issues. 

Architectural and philosophical points. Linked data". 
DOI=http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html   

7.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Mikko Pohjola, National Institute for Health 
and  Welfare,  and  the  three  anonymous  referees  for  fruitful  and 
clarifying comments on this paper. 
