Linking Data For Public Administrations

Angela Fogarolli
University of Trento
Via Sommarive 14

38123 Trento

afogarol@disi.unitn.it

Paolo Bouquet
University of Trento
Via Sommarive 14

38123 Trento

bouquet@disi.unitn.it

ABSTRACT
Private and public enterprises suffer from the exponential
growth of new data, becoming available both internally within
their organizations as externally on the web. Existing databases
and applications are not set up to be using these increasingly
complex data sources. We present a novel approach designed
for a tax agency for gaining much more powerful and sustainable access to their data sources by linking them internally
as well externally with the Web of Data. The flexible and
rapid linking of our approach avoids costly mergers or consolidation of databases or in-depth re-programming of data
applications. In this paper we describe a prototype which
effectively links organizational data about persons, organiza-
tions, buildings and locations that are spread over different
databases, which enables the inclusion and the connection
with the Web of Data.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous;
E.2 [Data Storage Representations]: Linked representa-
tions

Keywords
URI, Linked-data, OKKAM

1.

INTRODUCTION

According to the the Semantic Web idea, data should be
defined and linked in a way which makes them accessible
for humans and machines. The Web of Data is a scalable
environment with explicit semantics where not only humans
can navigate information as in the World Wide Web but also
machines are able to find connections and use them to navigate through the information space. In order to make data
machine-processable, we need to follow a common model to
describe, connect and access resources and name resources
in an unambiguous way.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2010 September 1-3, 2010 Graz, Austria
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09 ...$10.00.

The Web of Data is constantly growing due to its compelling potential of facilitating data integration and retrieval.
At the same time however, closed relational database systems host the majority of enterprise information and contain
a vast amount of implicit semantic information encoded in
their schemas. In order to make these data available for the
Semantic Web, a connection must be established between
relational databases and a Semantic Web compliant form.
The most common way to publish resources in the Semantic Web follows the RDF model and uses Unique Resource
Identifiers for resource identification, in this way facilitating the creation of a comprehensive and flexible resource
description.

The OKKAM project[2] proposes a global, public infras-
tructure, called Entity Name System (ENS), which fosters
the systematic creation and reuse of identifiers for entities
in the global space of information and knowledge. This a-
priory approach enables systems to reference the entities
which they describe with a globally unique identifier, and
thus create pieces of information that are semantically prealigned around those entities. The ENS is a service which
provides the three following main functionalities:

 given a description of an entity, returns a ranked list
of identifiers of entities which better match the input
descriptions (if any);

 given a description of an unknown entity, returns an
OKKAMID for that entity and creates a reference record
in the ENS which serves for finding and re-using the
created;

 given any known ID of an entity, returns the list of
known alternative IDs (e.g. from a owl:sameAs list of
identity statements in the LOD community).

In this paper we present a prototype for interlinking and
navigating private data coming from different relational data
sources which are combined with internal and external public datasets. The application has to support tax agents in
their investigations which is based on the economic and financial assessment of the data extracted from public and
private records about a tax payer.

2. OKKAMIZING DATA

Translating data sources into RDF is not enough for joining information about entities. A real integration of information inside relational databases for exposing them on the
Web or Intranet requires the re-use of unique identifiers in


ferent databases. A lightweight integration approach we
present has two main phases: One, the databases schema
is annotated and eventually mapped to a domain ontology
which covers the application domain. Each entity in the
source databases is represented in the KB using unique identifier which refers to all of the information about the entity
described in the different databases. Unique Identifiers are
created or retrieved through the OKKAM ENS. In a second
phase, the integrated information is consumed by a user,
for instance a tax agents. They can query the KB by the
existing original database identifiers, or column properties
or by global OKKAM unique identifier. The query result
is a merge of the information retrieved from different data
sources which are then navigable as a network of connected
entities. The re-use of unique identifiers allows:

 Joins between entities described in different databases.
 Join structured data (SQL) to structured data, from
incompatible schema, or where data is dirty, poorly
normalized or lacking proper indices.

3. LINKING DATA FOR TAX CONTROL

The application we present in this paper is a pilot project
for a regional tax agency. The region has a population of 1
million people and more than 200 municipalities with their
own information systems. The goal of the pilot is to integrate and link tax-related data about people, organizations,
buildings, etc. This data come from different databases especially from the regions many municipalities, each with
their own individual data structures and formats.

We are providing a tax agent with an intelligent tool for
navigating through the data present in the many different
databases. Using unique identifiers, the tool can aggregate
data and create a profile for each tax payer. Each user profile shows different types of information, with links to other
entities such as the buildings owned, payments made, location of residence etc. The total number of triples generated
for this pilot are 2 million about 100 thousand entities.

The advantages of our solution are inherited from the Web
of Data and can be summarized based on the tasks they
facilitate:

a. Integration: Data in different RDBs can be integrated
using RDF semantics and mechanisms; in this sense, the
Web of Data can be imagined as a big database. Moreover,
information in the database can be integrated with information that comes from other Semantic Web through the link
data principles.

b. Retrieval: once data are published in Semantic Web
format(as opposed to RDBMSs), queries can span different
data sources and more powerful retrieval methods can be
built since they follow an open world assumption.
3.1 Dataset

The data about tax payers such as personal information,
payments and belongings are sensitive and private, and therefore cannot be disclosed. This places special requirements
on the use of and interaction with the ENS. We use a private version of the ENS which ensures that the information
is not publicly accessible from the web. Any private entity
can link to its public ENS profile (if available), enabling that
information about this entity can be retrieved through the

public ENS. Alternative identifiers in the ENS permit to connect with the Link Data Cloud. For example the OKKAM
entity profile for a person can contain a link (via an alternative identifier) to its description in DBpedia, DBLP or other
sources. In the Tax prototype as an example, for interlinking
private and public organizational data and the Linked Data
Cloud, we connect all entities of type location to the Geonames dataset through the use of an alternative identifier in
the location ENS profile.

Alternative IDs are introduced by the OKKAM conceptual model 1 with the property corefer [1]. The corefer property is used to express the fact that an OkkamID and a
semantic-web URI refer to the same non-web resource. The
effect of the resulting triples is that the graph about a location L in the tax datasets and in geonames are interlinked
via the OkkamID of L, without introducing unwanted side
effects that can be caused by the use of owl : sameAs (see [1]
for a discussion). In this way, OkkamIDs are used as gateway
to information about non-web resources and not as sources
of information themselves. The datasets we have aggregated
and are navigable by the tax agents, consist of the following
15 databases:

 Registry Office, register of people births and deaths
 Water Catastre, register of information about water

connections and bills related to years 2007.

 Electric Catastre, register of information about electric
connections and bills related to years 2006, 2007, 2008.
 Urban Catastre, register of information about buildings and their ownership related to years 2004, 2005,
2006, 2007, 2008.

 Property Tax Registry, register of information about
taxes due for ownership of buildings related to years
2005, 2006, 2007, 2008.

 Geonames, is a publicly accessible dataset of location
information, this allow us creation of mesh up application using the connection to locations mentioned in
the tax data sources.

Some of the this databases contains private information that
can not be disclose some others like the Urban Catastre are
public information in the Italian legislation. Excluding the
Geonames dataset the number of records analyzed for the
prototype are more than 100 thousand. An example graph
about the city of Trento in the resulting data set looks as
depicted in Fig. 1.
3.2 Integration Process

In the following section we will give a brief overview of
the task of our lightweight integration process, that for each
data source consist of three steps:

1. Schema Annotation: Adding annotations through a
custom vocabulary to the data source for allowing automatic translation into RDF format.
In this phase
we also add column mapping to a domain ontology for
the sake of homogenization but the ontology mapping
is not mandatory in the methodology. Schema Annotation followed a predefined vocabulary which describes

1http://models.okkam.org/ENS-meta-core-vocabulary.owl


The results can be filter per type of entity or per original data source name. Through a clickable navigation
of the graph the user can focus on the characteristics
of an entity or connected entities.

4. CONCLUSIONS

The re-use of unique identifiers provides a lightweight method

for aggregating data. The most important benefit of the
approach is about database transparency, we only need to
access the information we donSt need to modify the existing
data sources. The integration is very fine grain at the entity
level, which means that a tax agent can quite readily explore
the tax profile of an individual across all of the databases.
Additional information sources can be included as required
in the existing architecture by just adding a mapping file
between the new source and the domain ontology.

This solution can be used in any large organization which
has to deal with many disparate data sources both internal
and external.
