Ontos Clip and Share 

Philip Dudchuk 
Text Mining Group 

AviComp ZAO 

Moscow, Russian Federation 
philip.dudchuk@avicomp.ru 

Victor P. Klintsov 

Daniel Hladky 

Department of Technology  

Department of Business 

Ontos AG 

Biel, Switzerland 

Ontos AG 

Biel, Switzerland 

victor.klintsov@ontos.com 

daniel.hladky@ontos.com 

of  Germany  will  be  linked  to  other  articles  exactly  about  the 
Germany  linked  to  the  crisis  in  Greece,  but  not  to  everything 
about Germany. 

Furthermore,  through  the  same  balloon  (see  Figure  2)  the  user 
gets  a  link  to  the  corresponding  Wikipedia  entry,  as  well  as 
multimedia  content  from  YouTube,  Flickr  and  other  major  web 
services depending on the type of the highlighted item. 

2.  Technology behind the application 
OCaS is based on the proprietary technology of semantic indexing 
of  web  pages  with  adoption  of  DBpedia  entries  as  controlled 
vocabulary for entity extraction. 

First, the semantic engine extracts named entities and facts/events 
which interlink the entities in the document [Efimenko 2010]. The 
engine also defines most significant entities for the web-page. The 
significance is calculated as a complex measure of the position of 
the occurrence in the text, the overall number of occurrences and 
the  number  of  connected  events  and  facts  extracted  from  the 
document. 

Then,  to  display  most  relevant  data  in  the  balloon,  the  system 
forms  a  search  query  about  the  entity  in  question  and  the 
connected  facts,  events  and  most  significant  entities  in  the 
document.  The  relevant  web  services  including  Flickr,  YouTube 
and Ontos return links to pictures, video, documents, etc. 

Ontos  semantic  knowledge  base  (Ontos  KB)  currently  contains 
RDF-grounded  semantic  indexes  for  entities,  facts  and  events 
extracted  from  5+  million  documents  mainly  from  Russian  and 
English  online  news.  The  whole  machinery  resides  on  a  scalable 
grid  infrastructure,  which  allows  extending  the  overall  collection 
of indexed documents permanently. 

3.  Use Cases 
3.1  Benefits for end users 
With  the  help  of  OCaS  add-on,  the  user  can  clip  pieces  of 
different  web-pages  into  a  single  document  (see  Figure  1)  which 
also  contains  semantic  annotations  based  on  RDFa  vocabs,  and 
share  it  with  people  via  e-mail,  blogs  and  other  social  services. 
Furthermore,  the  system  suggests  recommended  tags  for  the 
selected text. 

ABSTRACT 
This  project  describes  an  application  for  creating  ubiquitous 
hypertext  on  the  Web,  which  enhances  the  user  experience  by 
allowing  clipping  and  sharing  the  information.  The  goal  of  the 
application  is  to  annotate  text  and  link  it  to  relevant  content, 
especially  from  the  Linked  Open  Data  (LOD)  community  and 
from  the  Ontos  knowledge  base.  The  paper  describes  two  use 
cases and highlights the main functionality of the application.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.3.1 [Information Systems]: Information Storage and Retrieval 

General Terms 
Semantics. 

Keywords 
RDFa, Annotation, Hypertext, Knowledge Sharing, Clipping. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Ontos Clip and Share (OCaS) is an application that automatically 
injects  hypertext  to  pieces  of  text  content  the  user  faces  on  the 
Web.  It  employs  DBpedia  as  a  controlled  vocabulary,  Ontos 
Semantic  Knowledge  Base  [Hladky  2010]  as the data integration 
instrument,  and  RDFa  as  the  standard  format  for  embedding 
semantic metadata into HTML documents. 

OCaS enables two major functions: 

1.  Providing relevant interlinked content for any web page 

the user visits. 

2.  Clipping text pieces from different pages into a single 
document and sharing it through e-mail, in the users 
blog, social services, etc. The resulting document (clip) 
also contains hypertext and RDFa tags. 

OCaS  is  implemented  as  an  add-on  for  the  top  web  browsers. 
Once the user installs it, DBpedia objects become highlighted on 
every web page the user visits. When the user hovers mouse over 
a  highlighted  item,  a  special  balloon  pops  up  which  displays 
content  from  Ontos  Semantic  Knowledge  Base  which  is  relevant 
to the entity and to the context in which it occurs. For instance, in 
a news article about the crisis in Greece, a highlighted occurrence 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part  of this  work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS 2010, September 13, 2010, Graz, Austria. 
Copyright  2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09... $10.00. 


displays  news  online  feed.  The  user,  who  already  installed  the 
toolbar, is currently browsing news on a competing media portal, 
and is exploring a story, say, about the eruption of the volcano in 
Iceland.  At  this  very  moment  the  toolbar  should  display  the 
content  related  to  the  volcano,  and  attract  the  user  to  the toolbar 
holders  story  and  multimedia  content.  This  is  quite  possible 
through  the  on-the-spot analysis  of  the entities and their links  on 
the  viewed  web  page  and  filtering  the  toolbars  content  by  the 
corresponding query. Such targeting strategy can be also extended 
to ad content. 

Furthermore,  the  content  clipped  by  the  user  can  also  be 
automatically analyzed. Entities found in the users clip and some 
other  closely  related  entities  form  the  scope  of  the  users  current 
interest.  Consequently,  the  content  on  the  news  portal  can  be 
customized automatically to take into account the users interests.  

On  blog  hosting  portals  and  in  social  networks  the  analysis  of 
users  interests  with  the  help  of  the  proposed  technology  can  be 
performed on user friend clusters gathered around certain topics. 

4.  Future Work 
Since  the  LOD  community  is  growing  we  will  focus  in  the  near 
future  on  augmenting  the  possibility  to  interlink  other  sources. 
Further  work  is  devoted  to  the  area  of  co-referencing  [Glaser 
2009], for example by using OKKAM1. Another important aspect 
is  the  personalization  of  the  annotation  process  which  will  allow 
the  user  to  define  own  vocabularies,  especially  for  named  entity 
recognition.  
