Perception and Relevance of Quality Issues in Web

Vocabularies

Christian Mader
University of Vienna

Department of Computer Science
christian.mader@univie.ac.at

ABSTRACT
Web vocabularies provide organization and orientation in information environments and can facilitate resource discovery and retrieval. Several tools have been developed that
support quality assessment for the increasing amount of vocabularies expressed in SKOS and published as Linked Data.
However, these tools do not yet take into account the users
perception of vocabulary quality. In this paper, we report
the findings from an online survey conducted among experts
in the field of vocabulary development to study the perception and relevance of vocabulary quality issues in the context
of real-world application scenarios. Our results indicate that
structural and labeling issues are the most relevant ones. We
also derived design recommendations for vocabulary quality
checking tools.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Controlled vocabularies, such as taxonomies, thesauri, or
categorization schemes, provide organization and orientation in information environments and are important instruments for document indexing, tagging, spelling suggestions,
and many other automated information retrieval tasks. The
AGROVOC thesaurus1, for instance, contains 40,000 concepts in 22 languages and is used, e.g., for automatic document indexing in the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization. The New York Times authoritative news vocabulary2 has been maintained for more than 160 years and
drives so-called topic pages, which provide access to all relevant articles the New York Times has ever written about a
certain subject. Maintainers typically want to achieve high
quality of their vocabularies because it has a direct impact
on associated computation tasks.

Most vocabularies are still being curated manually by expert users making them prone to errors and mistakes. Re-
cently, they are increasingly getting published as Linked

1http://aims.fao.org/standards/agrovoc/about
2http://data.nytimes.com/

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ISEM 13, September 04 - 06 2013, Graz, Austria
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1972-0/13/09 ...$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2506182.2506184.

Bernhard Haslhofer

University of Vienna

Department of Computer Science

bernhard.haslhofer@univie.ac.at

Data on the Web [5], which means that they become available in structured formats and follow agreed-upon representation models such as the Simple Knowledge Organization
System (SKOS) [11]. This makes them machine-processable
and allows automated quality checkers to become part of vocabulary management systems such as the PoolParty Thesaurus Manager3, just as spell-checkers are nowadays indispensable components of any text processing software.
In
the following we refer to such vocabularies as Web vocabu-
laries. However, the notion of quality of Web vocabularies is
to a great extent domain-specific and depends on the quality perception of the person(s) who curate(s) vocabularies.
It might, for instance, be perfectly valid to include circular
relations in one vocabulary but not in others.

Recently, a number of quality assessment tools have been
published: the Poolparty consistency checker 4 implements
tests for the six integrity conditions that are defined as part
of the SKOS model and introduces custom checks such as
URI syntax validation, identification of loose concepts, and
missing labels. Skosify 5 follows a similar approach but adds
identification of circular hierarchical structures and label
syntax checks. qSKOS 6, which is being developed by the
authors of this paper, goes beyond SKOS model integrity
conditions. It implements checks for additional quality criteria that were derived from existing literature and guidelines such as identification of valueless associative relations
or checks for presence of proper entry points into the concept structure. However, at the moment, none of these tools
takes the users perception of quality into account, where the
user is meant to be the curator of some vocabulary (e.g., a
taxonomist) who uses some vocabulary management system.
The work reported in this paper is a follow-up on our previous work [10], in which we identified 15 sources of possible
vocabulary quality degradations, called quality issues and
analyzed 15 existing vocabularies against these issues. We
were able to identify potential quality problems in almost
all of them. To find out about the impact of those quality issues, we performed a questionnaire-style survey on the
perception of quality from the users point of view. The goal
of the survey was to (i) evaluate known issues from a user
perspective and (ii) to explore possibilities to extend and
improve quality checks in existing tools. Our contributions

3http://poolparty.biz/products/
poolparty-thesaurus-manager/
4http://demo.semantic-web.at:8080/SkosServices/
check
5http://code.google.com/p/skosify/
6https://github.com/cmader/qSKOS

                                               9can be summarized as follows:

 We report the findings from an online survey conducted between September 20th and December 6th,
2012. During that time, 163 respondents from 28 countries and several different domains answered questions
about the relevance and perception of given quality
criteria.

 We introduced a set of usage scenarios for Web vocabularies and identified quality issues which are most
important to support these scenarios.

 From these findings we derive design recommendations
that can inform the development of vocabulary quality
assessment tools.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:

in
the next section, we discuss related work in the area of quality evaluation and briefly describe potential quality issues.
Section 3 provides details on the design of our online survey
and Section 4 reports our findings from that survey. After presenting derived design recommendations in Section 5,
we conclude this paper in Section 6 and offer directions for
future research.

2. BACKGROUND

We first elaborate on related work that addresses existing
approaches of assessing and assuring quality in Web vocab-
ularies. We then briefly introduce the quality issues from
our earlier work on which we rely in this paper.
2.1 Vocabulary Quality Assessment

We can distinguish between two main categories of quality assessment strategies: intellectual assessment, which is
domain-specific and based on the individual users quality
perception, and automated analysis, which focuses on the
formulation of metrics and rules for automatic quality as-
sessment.

Intellectual assessment strategies are described in existing standards (e.g., [13]) and guidelines (e.g., [3, 9, 15]),
which cover general criteria, such as inclusion of all needed
facets. In practice, such criteria are also often defined adhoc within the context of a certain project or vocabulary
(e.g., [4]).

Automated quality analysis procedures are usually defined
as part of existing quality checking tools and bound to the
formalism or model a vocabulary is expressed in: the Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS), for instance,
defines in total six integrity conditions [11], each of which is
a statement that specifies under which circumstances data
are consistent with the SKOS data model. Suominen et
al. [16] provide a comparison of quality criteria identified
by three automated checking tools, the PoolParty thesaurus
consistency checker, qSKOS and Skosify. To our knowledge,
Skosify is the only tool that can also automatically correct
certain quality issues. Manaf et al. [2] focus on statistical and structural properties of SKOS vocabularies such as
number of concepts, maximum hierarchy depth, or SKOS
property usage distribution among different vocabularies.
However, the authors do not draw any conclusion about the
implications of these properties on usability or quality of
Web vocabularies.

Data quality has also been discussed more broadly in Semantic Web and Linked Data research. Hogan et al. [7]
identify four categories of common errors and shortcomings
in RDF documents and Heath and Bizer [5] summarize best
practices for publishing data on the Web. In the field of ontology evaluation, catalogs of criteria for assessing ontology
quality have been proposed ([14, 17]).

However, most existing quality standards and guidelines
do not cover specific requirements of Web vocabularies. On
the other hand, work on Linked Data quality mostly focuses on (semi-)formal constraints that can be automatically checked but are not specific for Web vocabularies. In
our earlier work [10] we tried to bridge this gap by defining
a number of potential quality issues, suitable for automated
checking of Web vocabularies. In this paper we aim to evaluate these quality issues from a user perspective and find
out about their practical applicability.
2.2 Web Vocabulary Quality Issues

Previously [10], we investigated how tools could better
support taxonomists in improving SKOS vocabularies by
pointing out quality issues that go beyond the integrity conditions defined in the SKOS specification. We reviewed intellectual quality assessment strategies, examined existing vo-
cabularies, and identified potential quantifiable vocabulary
quality issues, which we then formalized into computable
quality checking functions that can be used to find affected
resources in a given SKOS vocabulary. These issues fall into
three main categories  Labeling and Documentation Issues,
Structural Issues, and Linked Data Specific Issues  and
can automatically be checked by our open-source qSKOS 7
vocabulary quality assessment tool.

Due to space limitations we focus on 8 different issues
our survey participants identified as being most relevant in
certain contexts (cf. Section 4.1). We furthermore provide
only a short description of the quality issues and refer to our
earlier work for semi-formal definitions.

2.2.1 Labeling and Documentation Issues
The intuition for this category is that SKOS vocabularies
should be tagged and documented consistently with humanreadable labels, across languages. We identified the following issues:

 Omitted or Invalid Language Tags: SKOS labeling or
documentation (e.g., skos:prefLabel, skos:note) properties miss or apply invalid language tags.

 Label Conflicts: Concept pairs that have identical pre-

ferred, alternative or hidden labels (cf. Figure 1).

 Undocumented Concepts: Concepts that have none of

the SKOS documentary properties (e.g., skos:scopeNote,
skos:example or skos:definition).

 Number of Synonyms and Non-descriptors: Concept
labels are important for, e.g., search recall and preci-
sion, so this metrics determines their number in a Web
vocabulary.

7https://github.com/cmader/qSKOS/

                                               10Figure 1: Example of a label conflict

Figure 2: Exemplary hierarchical cycles

Structural Issues

SKOS Vocabularies are represented in RDF and therefore
form a graph structure, which provides the basis for the
following issues:

 Cyclic Hierarchical Relations: Concepts related to themselves by (chains of) hierarchical SKOS properties (e.g.,
skos:broader, skos:narrower) as shown in Figure 2.
 Orphan Concepts: Concepts without semantic rela-

tions (i.e. skos:semanticRelation or subclasses thereof)
to other concepts.

2.2.3 Linked Data Specific Issues
Missing Out-Links are concepts that do not refer to thirdIn the survey we distinguish

party content on the Web.
further between two kinds of outgoing links:

 Links to other vocabularies published on the Web as

Linked Data or browsable online.

 Links to general resources such as images or websites

providing additional information.

3. METHODOLOGY

To learn about the perception and relevance of quality
issues from a taxonomists point of view, we conducted an
online survey between Sep 20th and Dec 6th 2012.
3.1 Participants

Our survey targeted practitioners working with Web vo-
cabularies: vocabulary managers who curate vocabularies,
contributors who propose terms to be changed or included,
or users who have no rights or intentions to change a vocab-
ulary.

The survey was announced on several mailing lists8 related to Web vocabulary development. We also contacted
the Semantic Web Companys customer network and posted
an invitation on its blog9. In the middle of the scheduled
8DC-VOCABULARY@JISCMAIL.AC.UK,
public-esw-thes@w3.org, public-lod@w3.org
9http://tinyurl.com/d8wyntj

NKOS-L@OCLC.ORG,

survey period on Oct 29th, we sent reminders via the same
communication channels.

In total we received 163 responses with varying coverage
because only a few questions were mandatory and some participants did not complete the survey. From 25 participants
who indicated their role, 12 were vocabulary managers, one
was a contributor and 4 identified themselves as users. Two
of these 25 participants explicitly gave no answer and 6
stated other roles with 2 of them giving no exact role de-
scription. The maximum number of responses we received
for a quality-relevant question was 56, decreasing towards
the end of the survey with 28 being the minimum. The majority of the responses came from the US (39), followed by
the UK (15) and Italy (10).
3.2 Survey Structure and Question Design

The questionnaire consists of four parts in which we (i)
present introductory information, (ii) collect general domain
and usage information, (iii) present open and closed-ended
questions targeting vocabulary quality, and (iv) collect information about the participants. The analytic and explorative
nature of the survey is reflected in the third part: To find
out about the usefulness of existing quality issues, closedended questions that can be analyzed automatically were
used. For exploring additional quality issues or improving
existing ones we included open-ended questions that allow
us to, e.g., infer rationales for rating decisions or information
on the development processes.

We employed two different kinds of closed-ended ques-
tions: first, we use multiple choice checkboxes (including an
other option) e.g., for selecting the domain or usage scenarios of Web vocabularies. Second, we formulated explicit
quality statements (e.g., Concepts should not be hierarchically related to themselves.) based on the issues identified
in Section 2.2 and asked participants to express their level
of agreement on a symmetric 6-point Likert scale, which
included a neutral option and the possibility to give no an-
swer. To learn about the participants decision rationale,
every closed-ended question was complemented by a freetext field for providing the decisions rationale. We used a
similar symmetric 6-point Likert scale to find out about the
relevance of the quality issues in relation to a vocabulary usage scenario (cf. Table 1). Participants were asked to select
one of the categories very important, important, neither, less
important, not important, and no answer/dont know.

We organized quality statements in three groups (Label-
ing and Documentation Issues, Structural Issues and Linked
Data Specific Issues) and follow this structure when discussing our findings in the remainder of this paper.
3.3 Analysis of Survey Responses

We believe that due to our chosen survey distribution
channels, we can trust in our participants expertise. We
intentionally did not require the participants to have a background in SKOS so we could reach a wider target audience.
Since a meaningful quantitative analysis and statistical interpretation would require a much larger, but hard to collect
sample, we concentrated on a qualitative analysis based on
the users responses. To identify the usage scenarios that
have been rated most important (average median value below 3) for the provided quality statements, for each statement we computed and sorted the agreement ratings by ascending median, mode, mean and standard deviation and

http://mythesaurus/conceptApreferred label (en)gene frequencyhttp://mythesaurus/conceptBpreferred label (en)alternative label (en)gene frequencyallele frequencybroaderfood companies of the United Kingdomfood brands of the United KingdombroaderDissolution of the MonasteriesChristian monasteries in EnglandMonasteries inEnglandbroaderbroaderbroader                                               11Table 1: Vocabulary Usage Scenarios

Name
Manual / Intellectual Indexing

Automatic Indexing

Tagging

Classification / Cat-
egorization

Faceted Search

Multilingual Search

Sugges-
Document
tion (Recommenda-
tion)
Spelling Suggestions
and Corrections /
Autocompletion
Term Suggestions

Query
and refinement

expansion

Navigation

results

Search
grouping / ranking
Linking (Data Inte-
gration)

Publication

Description
Performed by domain experts who process
a corpus of documents and extract relevant concepts
Algorithmic extraction of common words
in a text corpus based on statistical measures (frequency, co-occurrence,...)
The vocabulary is used by end users to do
subject indexing of a collection of items
(text corpus, images,...)
The vocabulary defines categories that
can be assigned to items of a collection
(text corpus, images,...)
Facets describe content from multiple per-
spectives, by forming a mutually exclusive
classification based on the indexed items
The vocabulary contains textual descriptions of concepts in multiple languages
Based on the search query, similar documents are included in the search result

User input (at search and indexing time)
is matched with the vocabulary terms and
corrections are suggested
Based on the structural organization of
the vocabulary and the user input, additional terms are suggested
Based on a controlled vocabulary struc-
ture, a user query is broadened or narrowed to adjust search recall
Visual guidance for exploring information
resources (e.g., websites, collections,...)
Vocabulary-supported optimization of the
visual representation of search results
The controlled vocabulary is created as an
intermediate step to provide compatibility with another data source
The controlled vocabulary is made available as is online for reuse by others to
view or download

identified the three most important issues for each usage
scenario. Furthermore, we computed the arithmetic mean
of usage scenario importance over all quality statements and
sorted them accordingly.

To find out the level of agreement for each quality state-
ment, we calculated the relative number for each possible
choice on the Likert scale (from strongly agree to strongly
disagree and no answer ) based on the total number of participants who answered the respective question. The rationales provided by the participants were analyzed qualita-
tively. We compared them to the agreement ratings, and
collected those that overlap or contradict in meaning or are
otherwise of interest for the findings section (Section 4).

For further studies we provide the anonymized data col-

lected in the survey online10.

4. FINDINGS

Since our survey focuses on the practical usefulness and
implication of our defined quality issues, we first describe
their relation to the identified vocabulary usage scenarios.
Due to lack of space we focus on 8 issues our participants
considered to be most important for the selected 6 usage sce-
narios. We then present the participants agreement levels
on quality issues, summarize their decision rationales, and

10http://tinyurl.com/oc24r3o

discuss the findings we can derive from their answers.
4.1 Usage Scenarios

The closed-ended question on the vocabulary application
scenario was answered by 76 respondents and Classifica-
tion/Categorization was mentioned most often (58), followed by Manual/Intellectual Indexing(52) and Faceted
Search(45). Multiple selections were allowed and only 5
participants selected other as a usage scenario. Publica-
tion, Navigation and Linking were mentioned as most
important for the provided quality statements. Table 2 lists
these usage scenarios in alphabetic order and ranks the quality issues by importance (1 means most important). The
quality issues are grouped by the three categories introduced
in Section 3.2.

Table 2: Importance of Quality Issues for Usage Sce-
narios


fl


Usage Scenario
Classification / Cat-
egorization
Faceted Search
Linking
Manual Indexing
Navigation
Publication

4.2 Labeling and Documentation Issues

This group of issues was considered most important for

the selected vocabulary usage scenarios (cf. Table 2).
4.2.1 Omitted or Invalid Language Tags
In our previous study we observed that language tags in
documentary concept properties (e.g., labels, notes) are either used consistently for all concepts or are omitted com-
pletely. This raised the question whether inclusion of language tags is a commonly desired feature in Web vocabular-
ies. To learn about the participants perception of omitted
or invalid language tags, we included the statement Textual
descriptions of concepts (e.g., labels) should make use of language tags in our survey. The majority of the participants
(80.4% of the 56 respondents) agreed with that statement,
5.4% disagreed, the rest selected neutral or gave no answer.
Participants who provided a rationale for their decision
stated that using language tags is highly useful in multilingual and/or multicultural environments. It supports lan-

                                               12guage independence and interoperability and enables the vocabulary to be utilized for translation use cases. Usability
has also been pointed out as a benefit of making the used
languages explicit. However, one contributor states that the
user interface should inform the user about a vocabularys
language(s) instead of showing abbreviated codes used for
language tags attached to the labels. Another argues that
language tags might be superfluous for monolingual vocab-
ularies.

4.2.2 Label Conflicts
In qSKOS we also defined a function to detect ambiguous
labels (cf. Section 2.2) on a more general level than outlined in the SKOS primer [8]. This definition is expected
to provide hints to duplicated concepts or misspelled labels.
In our study we could observe that 8 of 15 reviewed vocabularies contain pairs of distinct concepts that have identical descriptors or non-descriptors. Thus, we included the
statement Different concepts should not be labeled identically (i.e., their descriptors, non-descriptors or synonyms
should not overlap). From the total 39 answers approximately 67% of the respondents agreed, 10% disagreed and
23% gave no answer or voted neutral.

Respondents who disagreed with this statement pointed
out that identical labels cannot always be avoided, e.g., in
case of homographs or when the set of indexing terms must
not be changed. One contributor claimed label ambiguity to
be beneficial for exploring an information system because it
would lead to new search questions. Others perceive unambiguous labels as important for human communication and
automated processing, e.g., Natural Language Processing.
Confusion (users select incorrect concepts) and decreased
manageability have also been mentioned.

4.2.3 Undocumented Concepts
Documentation is often considered beneficial for human
users who work with a Web vocabulary. However, documentation can be provided on various levels. Options are,
for instance, documenting on the vocabulary level (e.g., content overview or intended usage), documentation of certain
groups of concepts, or documenting at the concept level (e.g.,
scope or history notes, definitions).
In our survey we focused on the last case by asking participants to rank their
agreement with the statement Every concept should be documented (by, e.g., scope notes, definitions, history notes).
More than 77% agreed, 9% disagreed, the rest selected neu-
tral.

Contributors who agree with this statement mention that
labels alone are often insufficient for disambiguation and un-
derstandability. Concept-level documentation provides additional context which has been identified as essential for
indexing and tagging usage scenario as well as for establishing mappings between terms and auto-categorization tech-
niques. Three contributors point out the importance of providing history notes for documenting a vocabularys evolu-
tion. Contributors who disagreed argued that not every concept needs documentation and that documentation causes
maintenance overhead that could be avoided by providing
scope by means of adequate labels and relationships. Also,
for some usage scenarios like large-scale indexing of generalinterest content, providing documentation for every concept
is perceived as impractical and unnecessary by one contrib-
utor.

4.2.4 Number of Synonyms and Non-descriptors
Web vocabularies differ widely in their support and quantity of synonyms and non-descriptors. Web vocabularies like
DBpedia categories, for example, define only preferred labels and no alternative or hidden labels. Only 5,450 of over
170,000 concepts in GTAA11 have alternative labels whereas
AGROVOC, provides on average more than 4 alternative
labels per concept12. To find out if and in what cases synonyms and non-descriptors (lexical variants) are important,
we included the statement The more synonyms and nondescriptors are defined per concept, the more useful is the
controlled vocabulary in the survey. More than 60% agreed,
10.5% disagreed and a relatively large number selected neutral (18.4%) or gave no answer (10,5%).

Again, the additional context given by a higher number
of synonyms and non-descriptors has been pointed out as
beneficial. One contributor stated that more synonyms improve usability whereas more non-descriptors (i.e.
lexical
variants) have the potential to improve interoperability with
other sources. Similarly, it has been noted that synonyms
enable more accurate searches and offer more choices in concept selection. Thus, the availability of synonyms and nondescriptors is seen as highly usage-scenario dependent. They
may be more useful in text-focused applications but not for
Linked Data applications. A rich number of synonyms has
furthermore been mentioned as beneficial for manually mapping vocabulary terms. Contributors also stated that the
quality of the included synonyms is crucial. They should
be unambiguous and fit to the content, i.e., non-required
synonyms should be excluded. Furthermore, the quantity
may increase complexity and can increase recall and reduce
precision. One contributor even argues that adding many
synonyms is a waste of time because natural language dictionaries already exist for this task.
4.3 Structural Issues

Our participants rated structural issues as important for

five out of the six usage scenarios we focus on.
4.3.1 Cyclic Hierarchical Relations
The negative aspects of cycles in hierarchical relations between concepts have been addressed in numerous tutorials
and guidelines on vocabulary development ([3, 6]). Nev-
ertheless, in our previous vocabulary study, we could find
cycles in hierarchical relations in 3 out of 15 vocabularies.
This led to the question on relevance of cycles for vocabulary
quality and to inclusion of the statement Controlled vocabularies should not contain circular hierarchical dependencies
between concepts in our questionnaire. 80% of the 30 respondents to this statement agreed (50% strongly agreed),
10% disagreed, 3.3% voted neutral and 6.7% provided no
answer or did not know.

More specifically, we observed two kinds of cyclic rela-
tions: those that involve only one concept (reflexive cycles)
and those that involve multiple concepts. Thus we included
the two statements Concepts should not be hierarchically related to themselves and Controlled vocabularies should not
contain circular hierarchical dependencies between concepts
in our questionnaire.

11http://datahub.io/en/dataset/
gemeenschappelijke-thesaurus-audiovisuele-archieven
12Numbers are taken from the dataset of our previous work,
available at https://github.com/cmader/qSKOS-data

                                               13Concerning the first statement, more then 77% of a total
31 respondents agreed (more than 51% even strongly agreed)
that concepts should not be hierarchically related to them-
selves. 6.4% disagreed, 9.7% were neutral and 6.5% gave
and no answer or did not know.

Although cycles may not turn out as problems in some
scenarios (e.g., if hierarchically related to others and not
top concept), reflexive cycles are perceived as unintuitive
and increase the complexity of a vocabulary because they
do not add value. They may represent a degenerated cycle
and contributors stated that they cannot imagine scenarios
where reflexive cycles could be a requirement. One contributor stated that cycles can be a sign of lack of care by the
vocabulary publisher. Others point out possible technical
problems due to these loops.

Contributors have argued similarly for cycles involving
multiple concepts. They are also perceived to decrease co-
herence, increase complexity, and are confusing and unin-
tuitive. However, as one participant noted, cycles are only
an issue if hierarchical relations are interpreted transitively.
Others state that cycles might be caused by misuse of hierarchical relations and suggest the use of other constructs
(e.g., alternative labels) to avoid cycles.
4.3.2 Orphan Concepts
Checking for orphan concepts, i.e., concepts that are not
linked to other concepts, is a frequently employed quality assurance method. However, we experienced a high number of
orphans in several Web vocabularies (e.g., GTAA, LCSH13,
DBpedia categories14). Thus we wanted to know how such
structures are perceived in general in the Linked Data context and formulated the statement Every concept should
be linked (e.g., associatively, hierarchically or equivalently)
to at least one other concept of the controlled vocabulary.
Approximately 65% of 37 total respondents agreed to the
statement, a small number 2.7% provided no answer. A
relatively large number of participants disagreed with the
statement (22%) and 11% voted neutral.

From the provided rationale the main concern with orphan
concepts was their lack of scope and context which impacts
the users understanding in a negative way. Furthermore
they are of little automated usage and make it easier to
navigate through the vocabulary. However, orphan concepts
sometimes cannot be avoided because some usage scenarios
do not require relations between concepts (e.g., glossaries).
In these cases, unnecessary relations for the purpose of circumventing orphans should not be invented.
4.4 Linked Data Specific Issues

Although the survey analysis indicates the importance of
interlinking Web vocabularies for various usage scenarios,
Linked Data specific issues have been considered most important only for the usage scenario Linking.
4.4.1 Links to Other Vocabularies
Establishing links to other vocabularies on the Web is
a core Linked Data design principle and also suggested in
controlled vocabulary development standards and guidelines
(e.g., [1, 3]. However, it is currently unclear, how the value of
links between online vocabularies of different provenance are
perceived from a quality point of view. Thus, we included
13http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects.html
14downloadable at http://wiki.dbpedia.org/Downloads38

the statement Good-quality vocabularies reference (link) to
other vocabularies on the web in our questionnaire. More
than 64% of total 28 respondents who gave feedback on the
statement agreed, 11% disagreed and 21% voted neutral.
The rest selected no answer/dont know.

Additional scope and the ability to share resources are
benefits of linking to other vocabularies on the Web. One
participant meant that this is especially important for nav-
igation, browsing and retrieval use cases. Other contributors noted that linking to other vocabularies Allows better cross resource searching and that it increases trust and
understandability. However, contributors also mentioned
that linked vocabularies must also have a high quality standard like, e.g., reasonably established vocabularies (LCSH,
AGROVOC). Three contributors argued that vocabularies
can be of very good quality on their own and that links to
other vocabularies are not an indicator of quality.
4.4.2 Links to Other Resources
Linked Data allows for linking to any other kind of resource on the Web such as web pages that provide additional information about a concept. To find out the impact of such links on vocabulary quality, we included the
statement Concepts should be linked to other resources on
the Web (to, e.g., refer to additional information about the
concept. More than 78% agreed with the statement, 3.6%
disagreed (no participant strongly disagreed) and the rest
voted neutral.

The decision rationales are very similar to those discussing
linking to third-party vocabularies. Linking to resources on
the Web provides additional context, rendering it useful for
end-users and automatic extraction methods as one contributor stated. Context has also been mentioned important to
assist users in choosing an appropriate term. However, link
stability has been a concern of three participants. Linked
resources should be permanently available and no broken
links should be introduced. Those who do not agree mention that vocabularies should be complete on their own and
that links to other resources provide additional values but
are no substitute for good vocabulary-internal descriptions
and definitions.
4.5 Summarized Findings

From the answers and results presented above we can infer the summarized findings listed below. They target the
covered quality issues and their relevance according to the
usage scenarios can be inferred from Table 2.

 Although not essential in a strictly monolingual con-
text, language tags in RDF literals enhance understandability and usability of the vocabulary.

 It is generally desirable to have all concepts labeled in
each supported language. However, this is not always
possible due to missing equivalents in some languages.
 Presence of documentation on the concept-level is ap-

preciated but costly and not always needed.

 Whenever possible, identical concept labels have to be
avoided to maintain unambiguity and avoid confusion.
 If a vocabulary is intended to organize and contextualize concepts, orphans should generally be avoided.

                                               14 Circular hierarchical dependencies are unintuitive and

may indicate or lead to errors.

 When judging the quality of a published and linked
Web vocabulary, also the quality of the linked resources
has to be taken into account.

 Link stability (changing availability and semantics) is
perceived a risk when interconnecting vocabularies on
the Web.

5. RECOMMENDATIONS

In this section we combine the findings from the survey
with our practical experience in working with controlled vocabularies and implementation of tools such as qSKOS. We
now provide suggestions and guidelines for quality checking
functions in Web vocabulary development tools.
5.1 Labeling and Documentation Issues

When a user creates concept labels or free-text literals,
vocabulary development tools should (semi-)automatically
add language tags. The appropriate tag can be determined
from tool parameters (e.g., providing a default language as
implemented by Skosify) or by employing existing language
detection tools. Vocabulary development tools should also
provide language information in a meaningful way on the
user-interface level to, for instance, assist users in search
term disambiguation. Label suffixes such as @de could confuse users who are not familiar with RDF-based technologies
and should thus be hidden in favor of a clearer language pre-
sentation. In cases where identical labels cannot be avoided,
we suggest to structure the vocabulary by making use of the
SKOS extension for Labels (SKOS-XL) that allows modeling labels as resources instead of literals. As a consequence,
additional information such as scope notes for disambiguation or context-specific usage information can be directly attached to labels when needed. When reporting ambiguous
labels to the vocabulary creators, conflicts between alternative and preferred labels should be reported with higher
priority than conflicts that occur between alternative labels
of different concepts. When unique preferred labels cannot
be avoided (e.g., in case of homographs), the vocabulary
development software should prompt the user to add documentation (e.g., scope notes) for further disambiguation,
especially when links between concepts are sparse. Further-
more, by monitoring search queries and user behavior, frequent mistakes can be (semi-) automatically added as hidden
labels.

As translation use-cases are a common motivation for developing controlled vocabularies, development software must
support creation of labels in multiple languages. If used in
a multilingual setting, each concept should be labeled in every relevant language. However, this is often not possible
because direct equivalents of concepts in different languages
sometimes do not exist. Thus, at least one default language should be supported, i.e. one language for which each
concepts must have a label. Vocabulary development software should tolerate these gaps in language support, but
should prompt the user to provide at least a documentation
property in the missing languages to provide orientation
for human users. Also, developers should have the choice to
handle similar language tags equally, e.g., concepts labeled
in en-GB should not require a label for en-US.

Concepts lacking context are problematic for using and
adopting Web vocabularies. The best way to provide context
is by establishing relations between concepts and linking to
other (external) resources. Thus, vocabulary development
software should encourage users to amend labels or documentation to concepts that still lack these interconnections.
Since detecting conflicting labels requires domain expertise and human input, vocabulary development and navigation interfaces should reveal a concepts surrounding (e.g.,
hierarchical) structure to support the user in manual disam-
biguation. This is also important for supporting resolution
of conflicts which can be done by merging or renaming and
provide hierarchical or associative links to other concepts.
Tools could also apply predefined rules for automatic label
rewriting, e.g., by including the broader terms labels, and
helping in resolving conflicts.
If a greater number of label conflicts occur in a vocabulary, another possibility is to
(automatically) split it into two, separately managed vocabularies with their own, clearly defined scope.
5.2 Structural Issues

As stated by respondents of our survey, circular hierarchical relations often root in misuse of hierarchical proper-
ties. Users might, for instance, interpret a concept hierarchy
either as has-a or is-a relations. To some degree, tools
could suggest replacement of such circularities. Suominen et
al. [16] introduce strategies to remove different kinds of hierarchical cycles between concepts. This approach could possibly be extended by providing feedback to the vocabulary
developer and suggesting replacement with an associative
relation. Taking into account transitivity when checking for
cycles is an important operation in this case because computation of cycles in the transitive closure can be omitted if
the user perceives hierarchical links as not being transitive.
Orphan concepts decrease cohesiveness of vocabularies and
lack context. Vocabulary development tools should suggest
semantically related concepts (e.g., inferred from existing
popular resources on the Web) that orphan concepts could
reference by mapping relations. Tools that automatically
identify orphan concepts could also order them by degree
of documentation. Orphans without additional documentation properties are more likely to constitute an error or
being misinterpreted than those with adequate documenta-
tion. Furthermore, context can also be provided by other
orphans being members of the same concept schemes or col-
lections.

Whether or not orphan concepts affect the quality of a vocabulary also depends on the vocabulary type and use case.
As we observed in the survey results, orphan concepts are
more critical for, e.g., navigation usage scenarios and less
severe for glossaries. Thus, automatic quality assessment
tools could use classification methods (e.g., based on structural properties as suggested in [12]) to infer these types and
report orphan concepts only if necessary for the vocabulary
type at hand.
5.3 Linked Data Specific Issues

Being able to assess the quality of a vocabularys linked
resources was another desire expressed by our survey par-
ticipants. Therefore, tools that analyze vocabulary quality
should offer the option to run this process also on vocabularies that are (i) linked by or (ii) link to the main vo-
cabulary. To avoid undesired effects on the semantics of

                                               15third-party content, tools should recognize if the developer
performs substantial changes to a concept that is linked by
these resources. This is manageable in local but clearly more
difficult in distributed settings, such as Linked Data. To find
in-links in the latter, one has to rely on dataset registries15
or metadata descriptors like VoID16. Given the changing nature of the Web, checks for broken links should be performed
automatically on a regular basis and developers should be
notified accordingly.

Outgoing links are generally perceived as a method to provide additional scope to concepts, even though they are not
strictly necessary for most usage scenarios our participants
want to support. Concepts that lack internal description
and documentation should therefore be reported by vocabulary development tools with a higher priority. To effectively check the quality of linked vocabularies, they should
be accessible via an SPARQL endpoint and described in a
machine-friendly way, e.g., by a VoID dataset descriptor.

A common concern among our contributors was the increased responsibility when introducing changes to a vocabulary that is linked to others. Providing history notes (ra-
tionale of changes) and methods for tracking changes (e.g.,
keeping multiple versions of concepts and vocabularies) is
thus an important feature of vocabulary development tools.
Participants of our survey have stated the need for provenance (who changed what and when) of controlled vocabu-
laries. This information should be automatically gathered
and attached to the vocabulary. Keeping historical data
is perceived essential by some of our participants because
compatibility with existing systems should be maintained.

6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we reported the results of a survey we conducted to learn about how curators and users of Web vocabularies perceive quality. We asked the participants to
express their opinion and experience on quality issues we
identified in our previous work. Our findings clearly reflect
the subjective dimension of data quality and point out contradictory approaches and opinions.

However, from the responses we can conclude that existing tools could support taxonomists in producing higherquality vocabularies by providing semi-automated labeling,
documentation, and relationship creation support. Based
on the survey results and decision rationales from our par-
ticipants, we gave recommendations on possible extensions
and improvements of quality assessment tools. Thus, these
tools could avoid and possibly fix quality problems in Web
vocabularies.

Our immediate next step will be to implement these findings in our qSKOS vocabulary quality assessment library,
which we later would like to integrate with existing vocabulary management platforms such as PoolParty. While our
current work focuses on controlled vocabularies expressed
in SKOS, we also would like to investigate which quality
criteria could be applied for more general, not necessarily
SKOS-based data on the Web.

Additionally, we plan to validate our recommendations by
implementing them in the qSKOS tool and collect feedback
from practitioners using the tool in an experimental setup.

15e.g., Sindice (http://sindice.com/), Data Hub (http://
datahub.io/)
16http://www.w3.org/TR/void/
