Insights in global public spending 

Michalis Vafopoulos

National Technical University of 

Athens 

9 Heroon Polytechneiou st. 15773, 

Zografou Campus, Greece 

vaf@aegean.gr   

Marios Meimaris
RC Athena / IMIS
6 Artemidos St, 

Marousi, 15125, Greece

m.meimaris@imis.athena-

innovation.gr

Jose Maria Alvarez Rodriguez 

South East European Research 

Center

24 Proxenou Koromila Street
Thessaloniki, 54622, Greece
jmalvarez@seerc.org 

Ioannis Xidias

National Technical University of 

Michael Klonaras

National Technical University of 

Giorgos Vafeiadis

National Technical University of 

Athens 

Athens 

Athens 

9 Heroon Polytechneiou st. 15773, 

Zografou Campus, Greece 

johnnyxidias@medialab.ntua.gr

9 Heroon Polytechneiou st. 15773, 

Zografou Campus, Greece 
mklonar@gmail.com

9 Heroon Polytechneiou st. 15773, 

Zografou Campus, Greece 

vafeiadis.giorgos@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Governments around the globe are opening up public spending data 
in order to promote transparency and citizen awareness. However, 
data openness by itself is not enough to guarantee that the data is 
consumed efficiently and in meaningful ways. In this work public 
spending data from seven governments, both local and national, 
with total value almost 1,5 trillion euro, are processed, cleansed 
and   converted   to   Linked   Open   Data,   following   best   practices. 
Namely, the cases of Greece, the UK, the US federal government, 
Australia,   the   city   of   Chicago   and   the   states   of   Alaska   and 
Massachusetts are considered. Furthermore, the resulting Linked 
Data are interlinked with external resources and made accessible on 
a public SPARQL endpoint. A web portal application with several 
functionalities  is   deployed  in  order  to   make  the  data   mashups 
understandable and easily consumable.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search 
and   Retrieval---selection   process;   H.3.2   [Information   Storage 
and Retrieval]: Information Storage---information classification; 
H.3.5 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Online Information 
Services---web-based services.

General Terms
Design, Economics, Experimentation, Standardization.

Keywords
Linked Open Data, government spending, network analysis.

ISEM '13, September 04 - 06 2013, Graz, Austria
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM 
978-1-4503-1972-0/13/09...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2506182.2506192

INTRODUCTION

1.
The Open Government Linked Data initiative aims to improve 
transparency, accountability and competitiveness in global level. 
Recent economic analyses show that when re-usable information is 
provided   to   the   public   free   cost,   then   individuals   and   private 
enterprises can create innovative and added-value products, which 
they  can  then  market   [12].   Much  of   this   raw  data   should  be 
curated, interlinked and published in formats that will provide a 
user-friendly and objective layer of information that will enable 
citizens, journalists, business people and politicians to re-discover 
their own data stories.

In particular, an increasing number of datasets  with respect to 
public expenditure is provided in the form of Open Data1 and web 
applications to process and visualize them have been emerged2. 
Practically,   all   these  efforts   act   as   e-catalogs   of   data   that   are 
fragmented   in   topic,   place   and   time   since   they  do   not   share 
common standards and methodologies. In cases where Open Data

  exist,   the   basic   obstacle   is   the   fact   that   there   are   not   even 
standards for representing the main actors (i.e. payers, payees) and 
the type of payments. Therefore, it is impossible to interlink the 
available data in meaningful ways and support decision-making. 
Surely, the cost of data discovery and collection has substantially 
decreased, but yet to get the insight in public spending demands 
high expertise and timely efforts. 

This   is   a   serious   danger   that   may   undermine   the   further 
development of LOD in general. Therefore, we need sound real 
cases   to   demonstrate   how   LOD   in   public   spending   can   be 
insightful in making decisions.
We try to overcome the aforementioned obstacles in symbolizing 
payers, payees and payments by employing transformations and 
global standards. The scope of the analysis is to demonstrate the 
power of economic LOD in analysing the market and competition 
conditions and public policy in global scale. 

1 E.g. www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2012/mar/16/us-open-spending-data 
2  See for instance  http://openspending.org 

                                               135We found that 480 out of the 2000 companies consisting of the 
Forbes Global  index3  have received public money from US, UK, 
Australia,   Greece,   Alaska,   Massachusetts   and   Chicago.   These 
governments on average distribute their expenditure in construction 
work (36.7%), office and computing machinery, equipment and 
supplies except furniture and software packages (15.3%), transport 
equipment   and   auxiliary   products   to   transportation   (10.3%), 
financial and insurance services (5.4%) and medical equipments, 
pharmaceuticals and personal care products (3.6%). 
We also employ network analysis; an efficient metaphor to analyze 
and   depict   Big   and   Linked   Data   because   it   is   intuitively 
summarizes the mass connections among related entities. 
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the 
selection of data sources. Section 3 describes the methodologies 
followed in order to process and triplify the data. Section 4 briefly 
presents   analyses   of   the   resulting   networks   of   resources   and 
Section 5 discusses the implemented application.

DATASET

2.
Data   selection,   apart   from   the   fact   that   it   was   restricted   by 
availability,   reflects   the  variety  of  global   economic  cycles  and 
policies. Greece4 is currently under economic distress but leads the 
efforts to provide real-time information about public expenditure 
(11). In UK5 there are concerns about economic slowdown and in 
USA6, the source of the 2008 financial crisis, glimpses of hope for 
development are emerging. On the contrary, Australia7  enjoys a 
decade of prosperity. In the local level, the states of Alaska8 and 
Massachusetts9 are not the typical U.S. territories. The first is not 
considered to be an interconnected and extrovert economy while the 
second has  developed a  strong social  safety  net  and a  vibrant 
economy. The city of Chicago10  is an average big city, which is 
sensitive in publishing Open Data ranging from the names of child 
molesters to the salary of each public servant.
3.
The abstract process of generating RDF models from the sources 
remains the same across datasets, however each implementation 
has   individualities   that   need   to   be   taken   care   of   in   different 
manners.   All   aspects   of   data   cleansing,   preparation   and 
triplification were done in Java. RDF manipulation was done with 
the Jena semantic web framework [9]. These will be covered in the 
following paragraphs, the exception being Greece where public 
expenditure   data   already   exists   in   RDF,   provided   by   the 
publicspending.gr project. For a description of the LD lifecycle that 
is used in publicspending.gr see [11].

DATA PROCESSING 

3  http://www.forbes.com/global2000/list/. 
4 Data range from 10/2010-11/2012 and retrieved by opendata.diavgeia.gov.gr/. 
5 Data range from 4/2010-12/2012 and retrieved by data.gov.uk .
6 Data range from 2009-2012 and retrieved by www.usaspending.gov/. 

http://data.gov.au/dataset/historical-australian-government-contract-data/ 

http://doa.alaska.gov/dof/reports/ckbkonline_reports.html

9Data range from 2010-2012 and retrieved by http://opencheckbook.itd.state.ma.us/ 
10 Data range from 1/1993-2/2013 and retrieved by http://data.cityofchicago.org 

from   2/2006-11/2012

7/2007-3/2013 

retrieved

from  

and  

range

range

and

Data

Data

retrieved   by 

by 

Data Preparation, Cleansing and 

Preprocessing
First, each dataset is subject to preprocessing and data-preparation. 
Even though the data is open, there is no homogeneity in the 
information   the   datasets   carry,   not   only   across   domains   (e.g. 
Greece vs. Australia), but also within the same domain (e.g. data 
published by different departments in the UK).

Because of the heterogeneity of the descriptions across 
datasets, minimum sets of characteristics have been identified and 
universally applied in order to provide a common denomination of 
the data model. The basic concepts in the public spending domain 
are the payment and its participants along with their metadata. The 
minimal set of metadata for each individual payment has been 
limited   to   the   following:  unique   id   of   the   payment,   payment  
amount,   payer,   payee,   CPV   subject  and  date   of   submission.  
Optionally upon existence of the relevant data, payments are linked 
to their decision documents, contract documents and so on. This 
limit of information is imposed because not all data is useful for 
our   purposes,   and   different   levels   of   detail   would   present   an 
information bias. Payments are given URIs based on their unique 
identifiers (which usually follow different formats) but the URIs 
themselves indicate the domain of origin. 

The   use   of   product   scheme   classifications   is   widely 
accepted in the e-commerce sector to enable the annotation of 
information objects providing an agile mechanism for performing 
tasks  such as exploration, searching, automatic classification or 
reasoning. In this context the European Union has established the 
use   of   the   Common   Procurement   Vocabulary  2008   (CPV)   as 
mandatory  for   all  public  procurement  notices  according  to   the 
Regulation (EC) No 2195/2002  of the European Parliament. In 
order to create a comparison of the contracts object published by 
different public administrations a hub classification must be used 
to unify those descriptions. In the present paper the CPV has been 
selected as a hub classification due to the fact there is a dataset 
already  available  as   Linked  Open  Data   that   links  international 
product  scheme classifications  [11]  to the  CPV. Although  this 
dataset   contains   some   exact   mappings   (created   by   official 
organizations), specifically for Greek payments, the rest of them 
have been created applying custom NLP techniques (making use of 
the  Apache  Lucene  and  Solr  APIs)   to   link  a   description  of  a 
product/service to a CPV concept. Specifically, we have re-used the 
reported implementation in [13,14] (that is already available as a 
LOD   dataset   under   the   id   pscs-catalogue)   where   authors   link 
together a set of PSCs applying existing NLP algorithms and entity 
reconciliation   techniques.  The   application   of   this   approach   is 
justified due to the fact that contract descriptions use different 
product classifications or literals depending on the country, e.g. 
UNSPSC (Australia), NAICS (USA) or string literals (UK), and 
they are not available as RDF, so a reconciliation tool such as Silk 
Server could not be easily used. That is why the existing custom 
reconciliation   service,   taking   into   account   the   specific 
characteristics of product descriptions, has been refined in order to 
link these new product classifications and unify the contracts object 
with the CPV enabling comparisons among different countries or 
regions.

Payers and payees are described using some form of 
unique identification in order to generate URIs, depending on the 
data origin, as well as their names.  The use of different naming 
techniques such as internal IDs or string literals implies that the 
task of grouping contracts by a supplier is not a mere process of 
searching by the same literal. In the particular case of Australia, the 

                                               136supplier name seems to be introduced by typing a string literal 
without   any  assistance   or   auto-complete   method.   Obviously  a 
variety of errors can be found such as misspelling errors, same 
company under different names, use of different kind of acronyms 
[2,3], etc. For example a company such as Oracle, Accenture 
or Capgemini can be found under different name conventions: 
Oracle Aust., Oracle University, Oracle Corpoartion (Aust) 
Pty   Ltd,   Oracle   Corp   Aust   P/L,   Accentrure,   Accenture 
Australia and CAP Gemini among others. 
In   the  Semantic   Web   area   and   more  specifically  in   the  LOD 
initiative  one  of  the  principles   lies  in  providing  a   real  unique 
identification   of   resources   through   URIs.   Thus   reconciliation 
techniques   [5,6,7]   coming   from   the   ontology   mapping   and 
alignment   areas   or   algorithms   based   on   Natural   Language 
Processing have been designed to link similar resources already 
available in different vocabularies, datasets or databases. The main 
objective is not just a mere reconciliation process to link to existing 
resource but to create a unique literal. That is why a context-aware 
method based on NLP techniques has been designed, customized 
and implemented trying to exploit the naming convention of the 
dataset.  The   technique   to   generate   a   unique   name   before 
performing  the  reconciliation  process   is   a   stepwise  method,   in 
which each step performs a filter over the string literal trying to 
remove all unnecessary words in the name to finally use an iterative 
process of string comparison and grouping to generate a unique 
and relevant name for the input dataset. This process has been 
implemented using the NLTK library and other external Python 
APIs such as fuzzywuzzy or a spell checker based on the wellknown Peter Norvig speller. The reader is prompted to [15] for 
more information. After this initial process of unifying names a 
second step to reconcile names can be easily done reusing resources 
in   OpenCorporates,   DBPedia,   Linkedin   Companies   or   Google 
Places. Although a naive implementation is already available it is 
considered an extension and ongoing work that is out of the scope 
of this report. For a particular selection of companies, which was 
drawn from the Forbes 2000 list, an algorithm has been deployed 
that aggregates different URIs that represent the same companies 
in different countries. The Forbes list has been used in order to 
retrieve   objectively   interesting   companies   and   create   payee 
supergroup URIs, because of its economic significance. These are 
in turn linked to their constituents in each country/domain, in order 
to create points of aggregation for each company. Finally, these 
supergroup URIs  are linked to DBPedia resources manually in 
order to provide more accurate descriptions and analytics of each 
company that has received public money, as will be shown in the 
following sections.

Triplification and Interlinking

After   preparing  the  data,   RDF   models   were  created   using  the 
publicspending.gr  [11]  ontology  as   well   as   other   widely  used 
vocabularies such as Dublin Core and FOAF. The resulting RDF 
models were then serialized in RDF/XML form and uploaded to the 
Virtuoso Quad Store held in publicspending.gr. For each domain of 
interest   the   data   is   stored   in   a   dedicated   named   graph.   This 
procedure created seven named graphs that cover spending data for 
Greece, the US, the UK, Australia, the city of Chicago and the 
states of Alaska and Massachusetts (Table 1). 
Table 1: Stats and figures of the seven named graphs

Triples Payers Payees

Payments ()

#Decisions

AUS 2,788,939 165


204,606,056,134

494,005 157

504,599,838,933

UK 613,3782 119

597,659,337,423 1,137,641
GR 68,804,546 3904 204,406
48,095,068,098 2,303,360


44,153,540,592


16,127,397,046

MASS 8,023,505 158

51,279,504,691 1,305,267
Total 87,629,622 4579 315,285 1,466,520,742,920 5,461,288


Furthermore,   instances   of   the   same   company   that   operates   in 
different countries/domains have been aggregated under common 
URIs   and   linked   to   their   respective   DBPedia   entries,   as   was 
mentioned   in   the   previous   section.   The   named   graphs   are 
interlinked in two different levels: (i) on the conceptual model level 
they use the same vocabularies, and (ii) on the data model through 
the   use   of   CPV   codes   and   aggregations   of   companies   from 
different datasets. This makes the superset open to comparisons 
and  analysis   across   domains,   as   will  be  shown  in  the  created 
application.
4. NETWORK STATISTICS
Despite   the   fact   that   network   analysis   has   been   successfully 
implemented in economic networks, it has not yet being applied 
widely in public spending data. The present section focuses on the 
use of basic statistics of real networks applied on the representation 
of public expenditure as a graph. The idea is simple as it relies on 
the fact that the data produced by payment authorities represent a 
payment network.

Figure  1: the major vendors of US, UK, Australia, Greece, 
Alaska, Massachusetts and Chicago11. 

Our objective is to capture interesting relations among underlying 
agents through graph visualizations.  The graph is formulated by 
the   payments   coming   from   public   agents   (payers)   to   payees 
(mainly private but could also be public). A graph node is either 
the payer or the payee that are linked through a payment, which is 
characterized   by   its   amount,   time   and   category.  A   centrality 
coefficient is a measure that captures the importance of a nodes or 
link's position in the network. There are local measures like degree 
centrality (in-out degree, weighted degree) and measures relative to 
the rest of the network such as betweeness centrality. The main 
results per dataset can be summarized as follows (see also Figure 
1):

11  Visualizations produced by Gephi software.

                                               137United   States:  there  is   one  major   node  (payer)   in   the   graph 
(Department of Defence), dispersing almost all (99%) the total 
budget (weight) of the graph. Obviously, defence has the lions 
stake in sub prime awards. Furthermore, most of the money (92%) 
is   received   by   CTA   Inc.,   which   is   solely   connected   to   the 
department   of   defence   (no   connections   to   other   nodes).  The 
dispersion of the public budget is made through 42 agents to the 
contractors. There are either payer or payee nodes in the graph (no 
mixed   mode   both   payer   and   payee-except   Smithsonian   Inst.), 
consequently there are no brokers in the network resulting the 
diameter to equal 1 and the modularity fairly low at 0.022. Due to 
the   above   characteristics,   there   are   mainly   corporates   of   the 
defence-military sector (only US companies are eligible to become 
vendors due to legal restrictions) coupled by some major global 
enterprises with less weighted degree as they do not awarded purely 
defence contracts.

United Kingdom:  is characterized by five major nodes (payers): 
health,   family,   education,   business   innovation   &   skills,   local 
government disperse 88% of the total budget. The major payees are 
local authorities or funds responsible for the proper exploitation of 
the funds  received. There  are also  private companies  receiving 
money for goods and services mainly IT, telecom and consulting. 
The dispersion of the public budget is made through 26 agents 
(payers). 

Australia:  there   are   two   major   nodes   (payers)   in   the   graph 
(Department of Defence and Defence Materiel Org.), dispersing 
almost half of the total budget (weight) of the graph. These two 
nodes are also the top out-degree nodes in the graph (22% of the 
payment links). This indicates that Defence is a major factor in the 
Australian economy sustaining a network of enterprises that selling 
goods and services suited for the defence needs of the state. The 
35% of the budget is spent by institutions related to education, 
immigration, health and social security, taxation, public order and 
telecommunication.   This   reflects,   in   general,   the   priorities   and 
major concerns of the Australian state. The dispersion of the public 
budget   is   made   in   a   balanced   way   as   there   are   no   private 
enterprises receiving excessive amounts of money (except FMS 
and Central Office).

Greece:  there are two major projects in Greece: the Subway in 
Athens and Thessaloniki and Egnatia Runway in North Greece, 
which involve international companies (e.g. Alstom). 

State of Alaska: there are distinct characteristics originating from 
the special conditions that apply to the regions low population, 
vast areas of natural resources and ecosystems, weather conditions, 
native (indigenous) population and distance from global markets. 
All   the   above   result   to   a   payment   network   where   funds   are 
allocated smoothly to local companies and authorities where health, 
education,
  resource   management, 
transportation and construction have the lead.

  environment,

  natural

State of Massachusetts:  the dispersion of the public budget is 
made in a balanced way through 157 payers to a network of local 
institutes and authorities. There are major global players as well 
but the amounts receiving are smaller due to the bigger amounts 
that are targeted to health, education and legal institutions and to 
local authorities. The graph diameter is 1 as there are payer/payee 
only nodes and modularity is 0.76 indicating the local structure of 

the payment network. It is worth noticing that there is great variety 
in the services offered, there are many companies present for every 
sector   (competition)   and   the   balanced   value   of   the   in   degree 
indicates a mature market. Massachusetts is famous for its health 
and educational institutions and this fact is validated from the 
output data.

City of Chicago is the only city examined (compared to countries 
or states) but the volume of data ranging from 1993 to 2013 offer a 
total   amount   for   examination   fairly   comparable   to   a   state   or 
country. There are distinct characteristics originating from the fact 
that a city has different needs and priorities from a state/country 
and   of   course   many   resemblances   to   one   (e.g.   no   need   for 
defence/border   safeguarding   expenses).   The   dispersion   of   the 
public   budget   is   made   in   a   balanced  way  through   52   agents 
(payers) to a network of local companies and authorities and there 
are also major global players as well. The fact that the city is a 
transportation hub and resides to lake Michigan is pictured on the 
graph as major nodes both payers and payees are present and 
belong to transportation, water management and public utilities 
sector. 

5. THE LINKED DATA APPLICATION
Using the generated RDF triples, an application was built on top of 
the data in order to serve as a web portal of information retrieval 
and consumption12. Information retrieval can be achieved using the 
SPARQL endpoint13 or datahub14 while information consumption is 
provided through the use of visualizations and profiling that makes 
use of internal data, cross-referenced data as well as external data 
about the RDF resources. Specifically, the application aggregates 
the functionality that is summarized in the following:
Payee profiles: each payee URI is dereferenced in custom and userfriendly manner in order to combine information about their public 
receipts   and   details   about   the   resource   itself   (drawn   from 
DBPedia). Furthermore, the spending they participate in is broken 
down by country/city/state.

Picture 1: Profile for Oracle with descriptions from DBPedia 
and aggregate payment data

Domain profiles: profiles for each of the seven domains (countries, 
cities and states) are available. These provide detailed descriptions 
of the places, as well as rankings of their top payees.
Network analysis: statistical analyses for the seven domains are 
available   through   the   web   portal,   containing   overviews, 
descriptions   as   well   as   quantitative   stats   about   the   respective 
networks of public expenditure.

12 Accessed at www.publicspending.net.
13 http://publicspending.
14 h  ttp://datahub.io/group/publicspending-net

 endpoint
 net/

                                               1386. REFERENCES
[1] Bowman, M., Debray, S. K., and Peterson, L. L. 1993. 

Reasoning about naming systems. ACM Trans. Program. 
Lang. Syst. 15, 5 (Nov. 1993), 795-825. DOI= 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/161468.16147. 

[2] Ding, W. and Marchionini, G. 1997. A Study on Video 
Browsing Strategies. Technical Report. University of 
Maryland at College Park. 

[3] Frohlich, B. and Plate, J. 2000. The cubic mouse: a new 
device for three-dimensional input. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (The Hague, The Netherlands, April 01 - 06, 2000). 
CHI '00. ACM, New York, NY, 526-531. DOI= 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/332040.332491.

[4] Tavel, P. 2007. Modeling and Simulation Design. AK Peters 

Ltd., Natick, MA.

[5] Sannella, M. J. 1994. Constraint Satisfaction and 

Debugging for Interactive User Interfaces. Doctoral Thesis. 
UMI Order Number: UMI Order No. GAX95-09398., 
University of Washington. 

[6] Forman, G. 2003. An extensive empirical study of feature 

selection metrics for text classification. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 
3 (Mar. 2003), 1289-1305. 

[7] Brown, L. D., Hua, H., and Gao, C. 2003. A widget 
framework for augmented interaction in SCAPE. In 
Proceedings of the 16th Annual ACM Symposium on User 
Interface Software and Technology (Vancouver, Canada, 
November 02 - 05, 2003). UIST '03. ACM, New York, NY, 
1-10. DOI= http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/964696.964697.

[8] Yu, Y. T. and Lau, M. F. 2006. A comparison of MC/DC, 
MUMCUT and several other coverage criteria for logical 
decisions. J. Syst. Softw. 79, 5 (May. 2006), 577-590. DOI= 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2005.05.030.

[9] Spector, A. Z. 1989. Achieving application requirements. In 
Distributed Systems, S. Mullender, Ed. ACM Press Frontier 
Series. ACM, New York, NY, 19-33. DOI= 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/90417.90738.

[10] Carroll, J.J., Dickinson, I., Dollin, C., Reynolds, D., Seaborne, 
A. and Wilkinson,K., 2004. Jena: implementing the semantic 
web recommendations. In Proceedingsof the 13th international 
World Wide Web conference on Alternate track papers 
&posters, pp. 7483.

[11] Vafopoulos, M., Meimaris, M., Anagnostopoulos, I., 

Papantoniou, A., Xidias, I., Alexiou, G., Vafeiadis, G., 
Klonaras, M. and Loumos, V., 2013. Public Spending as 
LOD: The Case of Greece (March 15, 2013). Available at 
SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2233998

[12] Vafopoulos, M., 2012. The Web Economy: Goods, Users, 
Models, and Policies,  in Foundations and Trends in Web 
Science: Vol. 3: No 1-2, pp 1-136. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/1800000015   

[13] Alvarez-Rodriguez, J.M., Polo-Paredes, L., Rubiera- Azcona, 
E.,  Rodriguez-Gonzalez, A., and   Ordonez De Pablos, P., 
2013. Enhancing the Access to Public Procurement Notices by 
Promoting   Product   Scheme   Classifications   to   the   Linked 
Open   Data   Initiative. Cases   on   Open-Linked   Data   and  
Semantic Web Applications, 1, 1--27. 

[14] Alvarez-Rodriguez,   J.M.,   Labra-Gayo,   J.E.,   Rodriguez-
Gonzalez, A. and Ordonez De Pablos, P., 2013. Empowering 
the access to public procurement opportunities by means of 
linking   controlled   vocabularies.   A   case   study   of   Product 
Scheme   Classifications   in   the   European     e-Procurement 
sector.  Journal of  Computers  in  Human Behavior,  Special 
Issue-ICTs for Human Capital.  (In press) 

[15] Alvarez-Rodriguez, J.M, Ordonez de Pablos, P., Michail N. 
Vafopoulos, M., and Labra, J.E, 2013. Towards a Stepwise 
Method for Unifying and Reconciling Corporate Names in 
Public Contracts Metadata: The CORFU Technique (July 7, 
