Turning the OpenMobileNetwork into a Live Crowdsourcing

Platform for Semantic Context-aware Services

Abdulbaki Uzun, Lorenz Lehmann, Thilo Geismar, Axel Kupper

abdulbaki.uzun@telekom.de, lorenz.a.lehmann@mailbox.tu-berlin.de

geismar@mailbox.tu-berlin.de, axel.kuepper@tu-berlin.de

Telekom Innovation Laboratories, TU Berlin

Service-centric Networking

ABSTRACT
The OpenMobileNetwork is a semantic model for mobile network topologies created by following the principles of Linked
Data. By correlating data in the Linking Open Data Cloud
with the OpenMobileNetwork, innovative Semantic Contextaware Services (CAS) can be realized that are not solely
driven by classic context data (e.g., geographic location), but
also include further information from the semantics of the
context in use. So far, this open-source initiative provided
rather static network topology data triplified from opensource cell databases, such as OpenCellID or OpenBMap.
Integrating dynamic and live network context data (e.g.,
current traffic and number of users in a mobile network
cell) by exploiting crowdsourcing methods will further improve the Semantic CAS experience since the historic and
live state of a mobile network cell is a valuable data source
to be taken into consideration when providing personalized
services. The challenge in realizing such a crowdsourcing
approach lies in motivating a significant number of users
to contribute with their data. For this purpose, we have
turned the OpenMobileNetwork from a static dataset into a
Live Crowdsourcing Platform for Semantic CAS including a
semantic cellular database based on extended network context ontologies, two smartphone clients, and a Measurement
Framework for gamifying the crowdsourcing process of collecting network measurements. The measurement statistics
highlight the effectiveness of this approach.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
E.2 [Data Storage Representations]: Linked represen-
tations

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Linked Data, Mobile Networks, Context-aware Services
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
ISEM 13, September 04 - 06 2013, Graz, Austria
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1972-0/13/09 ...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2506182.2506194

1.

INTRODUCTION

In recent years, more and more mobile users tend to involve Context-aware Services, especially Location-based Ser-
vices, in their everyday life, which is why they have taken
a major role in the mobile application landscape [9]. These
services usually utilize the targets context for performing
any kind of action, such as recommending events or points
of interest in the vicinity. The location context, which is
by far the most used contextual parameter, is either calculated using the Global Positioning System (GPS) or by
applying less accurate, but energy-efficient and fast CellID and WiFi Positioning methods or a combination of all.
These positioning approaches, however, require knowledge
about the mobile network topology in use. Due to the fact
that this information is kept very secret by mobile network
operators, companies like Google, Skyhook or Apple have
been exploiting the power of smartphones that are capable
of measuring cell data with which the network topology can
be approximately derived in order to build up their own
cellular databases as commercial and closed solutions with
data collected over the years from millions of crowdsourcing
devices. In contrast to those solutions, where not all of the
data is freely accessible, open databases like OpenCellID 1
or OpenBMap2 came up using the same topology estimation
approaches that allow access to the entire data acquired via
their own, but much smaller crowdsourcing communities.

The OpenMobileNetwork [12] is another open-source initiative providing mobile network topology data. Compared
to other cellular databases, its unique selling point lies in the
semantic model created by following the principles of Linked
Data [4]. Ontologies expressed in RDF 3 and RDF Schema
describe mobile networks, their topologies and components
(e.g., base stations, mobile devices or WiFi access points)
and the entire dataset is made available through a SPARQL
endpoint 4. By correlating available data in the Linking Open
Data (LOD) Cloud 5 with the OpenMobileNetwork, new and
innovative Semantic Context-aware Services can be realized
that are not solely driven by classic context data (e.g., the
geographic location) as in existing approaches, but also include further information from the semantics of the context
in use.

So far, this open-source project provided rather static net-

1http://www.opencellid.org/
2http://www.openbmap.org/
3http://www.w3.org/RDF/
4http://sparql.openmobilenetwork.org/
5http://www.lod-cloud.net/

                                               89work topology data triplified from the above mentioned open
cellular databases, such as OpenCellID or OpenBMap. How-
ever, a closer look at the data revealed serious accuracy issues and missing measurement parameters important for our
purposes. Therefore, we decided to build a new semantic cellular database by collecting our own network measurements.
We further analysed and evaluated state-of-the-art position
estimation algorithms for deriving the positions and coverage areas of mobile network cells out of a number of collected
measurements [7] in order to realize a highly accurate coverage map of mobile networks worldwide. Even though this
approach already enables the development of new semantic
applications for different types of consumers, dynamic aspects of a mobile network (e.g., the current traffic produced
in a mobile network cell, the number of users or the percentage of services used) will further improve the Semantic
CAS experience since the historic and live state of a mobile
network cell is a valuable data source to be taken into consideration when providing personalized context-aware services.
Having this kind of dynamic and live network context data,
a mobile network operator, for example, can apply a power
management in mobile networks that dynamically de- and
reactivates mobile network cells based on the current traffic produced by end users. The remaining users of a candidate cell to be deactivated can be handed over to other
overlapping cells based on the neighbouring cell relations
and the services they were using. Another usage scenario
can be that mobile advertisement providers can adjust their
location-based advertisement channels based on the services
mostly used in a certain region.

Collecting network topology measurements in order to estimate a full mobile network map and integrating dynamic
as well as live network context data requires a crowdsourcing
approach with a significant number of motivated users willing to spend time conducting those measurements and contribute with their data. This turns out to be very difficult
since most of the users do not have any direct benefit from
contributing data, which limits the number of them to opensource enthusiasts, test users, and people interested in the
project. Another problem is that measurements conducted
via wardriving or warwalking are mostly concentrated in
high-frequented areas like streets or highways, whereas very
few or no measurements are available in rural or hardly
reachable areas (e.g., while driving). This leads to measurements not being well distributed, which is, however, very
important for accurately estimating mobile network cell po-
sitions.

To overcome these challenges, we have turned the OpenMobileNetwork from a static dataset into a Live Crowdsourcing Platform for Semantic Context-aware Services including our own semantic cellular database, two smartphone
clients, and a Measurement Framework for gamifying the
crowdsourcing process of collecting network measurements
with Location-based Games (LBG). The proposed framework enables any location-based application to conduct measurements for the OpenMobileNetwork and is capable of determining locations with a lack of measurements, so that
users can be guided to those locations (while playing a game)
in order to harmonize the distribution of measurements.
Furthermore, we introduce OpenMobileNetwork for Android

(OMNApp)6 and Jewel Chaser 7 as two alternative smartphone clients that acquire static as well as dynamic and live
network context data. Moreover, we extend the basic OpenMobileNetwork Ontology by new sub-ontologies that make it
possible to query static and dynamic network context information semantically. We expect the gamification approach
to draw the attention of a much bigger user group that will
make it possible to gather more data.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
Section 2, an overview about related work in the areas of
crowdsourcing and gamification approaches is given. Section 3 describes the components of the Live Crowdsourcing
Platform, whereas the network context ontologies are presented in Section 4. Measurement statistics are provided in
Section 5 and Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. RELATED WORK

Howe [5] introduced the term Crowdsourcing and described
a method for solving problems among a group of users working together. Wardriving or Warwalking, on the other hand,
defines a more systematic and methodic approach for collecting data as it is applied by Google for Street View. Both
methods are used within the OpenMobileNetwork Live Crowdsourcing Platform for acquiring mobile network measurements including dynamic network context data.

In order to provide incentives to the crowdsourcing community when collecting data, we also apply a Gamification approach, which uses game elements to increase the
interaction of a user with a system and which is defined
as the concept of applying game-design thinking to nongame applications to make them more fun and engaging
[3]. Location-based Games, for example, have been used in
various projects as a motivation factor for data acquisition.
One example is CityExplorer, as described by Matyas [6].
This game collects GSM cell and WiFi access point data,
which is linked to the geographic location the measurement
was made.
In addition, non-geographic data, such as information about the purpose of certain buildings, is also
acquired.
In the game, a virtual board is created within
a city. The board consists of multiple tiles, which can be
conquered by players who find certain buildings like beer
gardens, hospitals, etc. in those tiles.

The game PhotoCity proposed by Tuite et al.

A similar game is FIASCO in which players compose a
short scene out of pictures similar to improvisational theatre [2]. The goal of FIASCO is to build a new kind of map
by publishing the scenes made by players. Using this alternative map, one can see places from a different perspective.
[11] also
uses crowdsourcing to gather visual data with the goal of
collecting sufficient pictures to create 3D models of objects.
In the game, a map is used to indicate locations where users
have to take pictures. If a user moves to one of the locations on the map and uploads pictures, he collects points for
this location. The player with the most points controls the
location in the game.

Rula and Bustamante [8], on the other hand, show that
crowdsourcing can be used to acquire various datasets by
utilizing the capabilities of modern smartphones and motivating a broad user base to participate. Within this context,
they coin the term Crowd Soft Control (CSC), which de-

6Available at Google Play Store
7Available at Google Play Store

                                               90Attribute

Description

OpenCellID OpenBMap OpenMobileNetwork

mcc
mnc
lac
cellid
lat, lng
acc
range
act
neighbour
ss
rxlev
ta
measures
sim-operator
psc
roaming
traffic
model
service

Mobile Country Code
Mobile Network Code
Location Area Code
Cell-ID
Latitude, Longitude
Accuracy of GPS Coordinates
Cell Coverage
Network Access Type
Neighbouring Cell Information
Signal Strength
Reception Level (Optional)
Timing Advance
No. of Measurements per Cell
SIM Card Operator
Primary Scrambling Code
Roaming State
RX/TX Total Bytes
Phone Model and OS
Service Usage Information


(X)


(X)


Table 1: Comparison of Network Measurement Parameters

scribes using soft techniques to influence the movement of
a crowd. To control the crowd, they suggest using a LBG to
provide an incentive for users to move to a location and perform an action at this location. As a proof-of-concept, they
implemented the augmented reality game Ghost Hunter in
which the player walks to a certain location to catch a ghost.
While capturing the ghost, the game takes pictures of that
location making it possible to have photos of a building from
perspectives from which most visitors do not take any pic-
tures.

While there are various approaches for using LBGs to
collect data, all of the ones that gather specific data are
limited to a certain area that is set by the operators. They
are not used to collect data on a global scale. The only game
that can acquire data globally is FIASCO since players can
choose their location freely. However, it does not enable the
operator of the game to influence the behaviour of users, so
that it is not possible to gather specific data.

3. LIVE CROWDSOURCING PLATFORM
The OpenMobileNetwork [12] is an open-source initiative
that provides and allows full access to worldwide mobile and
WiFi network topology data estimated by applying several position estimation algorithms [7] to a collection of network measurements conducted by users via a crowdsourcing
approach. This project is unique and novel compared to
other cellular databases since it makes use of the principles of Linked Data and describes mobile networks as well
as their components semantically. By establishing links to
other datasets, such as LinkedGeoData [10] and DBpedia [1],
it has been part of the Linking Open Data Cloud. Utilizing this dataset in combination with interlinked information
that is present in the LOD Cloud, new and innovative Semantic Context-aware Services can be realized that are not
solely driven by classic context data (e.g., the geographic
location) as it is in existing approaches, but also include
information from the semantics of the context in use.

So far, this open-source project provided rather static

network topology data triplified from other open cellular
databases, such as OpenCellID or OpenBMap. However,
there is no evaluation of the cellular data available, which
makes it difficult to judge the quality of these datasets. Fur-
thermore, the network measurement parameters delivered
by those projects alter in their variety and (unknown) accuracy leading to inconsistencies and big effort when matching
and merging the cells of both data sources. Moreover, dynamic aspects of a mobile network (e.g., the current traffic
produced in a mobile network cell, the number of users or
the percentage of services used) are not utilized by any of
those open cellular databases even though the historic and
live state of a mobile network cell will increase the added
value of Semantic CAS. Table 1 lists the required parameters for estimating network topologies and compares the raw
data pool of those projects to the OpenMobileNetwork. Here,
X represents parameters being conducted, whereas (X) are
attributes that are listed on the respective project websites
as being collected, but with no valid values available within
the raw datasets.

Therefore, we decided to build our own semantic cellular database by collecting network topology measurements
in combination with dynamic as well as live network context data. We have turned the OpenMobileNetwork from a
static dataset into a Live Crowdsourcing Platform including
a Measurement Framework (see Subsection 3.1) for gamifying the crowdsourcing process and two smartphone clients
(see Subsection 3.2 and 3.3) collecting cell information in
order to establish a complete database of base station and
WiFi access point locations as well as associated coverage
areas, neighbouring cell relations and live data.
3.1 Measurement Framework

We have identified two major challenges to tackle in order
to effectively utilize a crowdsourcing approach for network
measurement purposes. The first challenge is to attract a
wide range of motivated users contributing with their data,
so that we can establish a complete map. This can be done
by providing frequently changing incentives based on gami-

                                               91fication methods when collecting data. Secondly, we need to
make sure that measurements are acquired mainly in locations where no or few measurements were conducted before.
This will harmonize the distribution of the measurements
systematically collected via wardriving, which will then increase the accuracy when estimating base station positions.
The proposed Measurement Framework handles these issues and allows developers to easily create various locationbased applications on top of it with the goal of contributing
data to the OpenMobileNetwork. By doing so, the incentive can be changed frequently (e.g., in the form of different
games) keeping users motivated for a longer period of time.
It is also capable of guiding users to locations with a lack of
network measurements in order to increase the accuracy of
base station position estimations calculated out of a collection of distributed data.

Two main modules are provided by the framework working independently from each other. The first component is
called OMN Location Provider and is responsible for obtaining Framework Measurement Locations (FMLs) that represent areas where measurements are needed, whereas the
Measurement Service collects mobile network topology data
and ensures that this data is transmitted to the server. Both
functions are independent from each other enabling developers who use the Measurement Framework to decide which
part they want to use. Figure 1 displays the framework
modules and the interaction with a game.

Figure 1: Measurement Framework

To obtain FMLs, the framework generates a bounding
box based on the location of the user and transmits it to
the backend server that creates FMLs based on the current
database of measurements. This bounding box ensures that
the FMLs are within the reach of the user. In addition, by
designing bigger or smaller boxes, it allows LBG developers
to specify the traveling range for the user when collecting
measurements.

Once the backend server receives the request from the
Measurement Framework, it determines the number of measurements already been conducted within the transmitted
boundary box and clusters the existing data within the box
in order to generate FMLs outside of the clusters representing locations with few or no measurements. This enables
the framework to send players to locations around high frequented areas even when boundary boxes are created close
to those areas. To ensure that FMLs are always delivered
even in case the user does not have an active Internet connection or the backend server is unreachable for another reason,
they are generated randomly within the boundary box. The
FMLs can then be used by the application incorporating the

Figure 2: Location Provider - Boundary Boxes

Measurement Framework as a target to give to users.

As soon as the user reaches the location or while he is
moving towards it, the Measurement Service module can
be used to conduct measurements.
It provides two different measuring modes. The Full Measurement Mode collects
mobile network as well as WiFi access point data, whereas
the Light Measurement Mode omits WiFi information. During the measurement process, a GPS listener is registered in
order to get the current position of the user. Once a GPS
fix is obtained with sufficient accuracy, mobile network data
containing all available information about the network cell
the phone is currently connected to and all neighbour cells
within range is collected. After the collection process, the
data is first stored locally to ensure that no information gets
lost. In the next step, the data is transmitted to the backend
server where it is added to the database and can be further
processed by the Position Estimation Manager of the Open-
MobileNetwork. Since the database is also used to generate
the FMLs, no other user will be sent to the same location
again. If the server is not reachable, the local copy of the
measurements is kept and the thread is closed. Otherwise
the local copy is removed and previous measurements, which
have not been transmitted, are sent to the server before closing the thread.
3.2 Location-based Game: Jewel Chaser

The OpenMobileNetwork uses smartphone apps for collecting network measurements. As one proof-of-concept, the
location-based game Jewel Chaser has been developed on
top of the Measurement Framework. In this game, a player
has to collect virtual jewels on the map by going to real
world locations. As soon as the player reaches the location
where the jewel is placed, he collects the jewel and is awarded
points. The player is ranked on a high score based on the
number of jewels he has collected. Furthermore, the type of
the jewel is revealed in the form of a picture and added to
the collection of the player.

Jewel Chaser utilizes both parts of the Measurement Frame-

work. In order to motivate the user to move to points where
measurements are needed, Jewel Chaser uses the framework
to obtain FMLs as soon as the user starts the game. After-
wards, the game places jewels at the centre of every FML.
The user can view the location of the jewels on a map within

                                               92the game and move towards the closest one. As soon as the
player reaches one of the FMLs where a jewel was placed, a
full measurement is conducted including mobile network as
well as WiFi access point data.

In order to gather the maximum amount of data, Jewel
Chaser does not only conduct measurements once the player
reaches the target location, but continuously collects data
while the player has the game open. Measurements are conducted every time the player moves at least 100 metres. This
allows to continuously gather measurements while the player
is on his way to the jewel, but ensures that the server is not
flooded with unchanged data. Due to some game design de-
cisions, data is only acquired when the user is looking on
the game map.

Jewel Chaser is designed to collect measurements in a
distributed fashion and users are expected to play the game
actively. The statistics in Section 5 show that this gamification process is effective when conducting measurements
worldwide. However, the game is not very suitable for applying wardriving methods since it is designed for pedestrians and jewels are sometimes placed on locations a car
cannot reach. Moreover, the fact that data is not conducted
as soon as the app is closed might decrease the number of
measurements compared to a service collecting data in the
background, which the user does not need to explicitly run in
the foreground. Therefore, in order to reach a higher number of measurements in a short period of time (via wardriv-
ing), we also implemented OpenMobileNetwork for Android
(OMNApp), which is described in the next subsection.

3.3 OpenMobileNetwork for Android

OpenMobileNetwork for Android (OMNApp) is a background service that actively collects mobile network data in
order to estimate and derive base station and WiFi hotspot
positions. It further acquires live measurement data, such as
the total traffic produced on smartphones or service usage
information, in order to enable the modelling and visualization of the current and historic state of the network.

The app provides two operation modes. Based on the
availability of capturing nearby WiFi access points on the
device, the measurement modes are automatically selected.
In the WiFi Measure Mode, the GPS module is immediately
activated and is listening for geo-location changes. More-
over, a service is started every 15 seconds, which then forces
the WiFi module to scan for access points in its reach. After
receiving the results of the scan, the last geo-location data is
stored together with network topology and dynamic context
data, which can be gathered in time as one measurement.
A tolerance of three seconds between WiFi scans and GPS
location fix has been chosen to keep the drift between both
data at a minimum level. The second mode is selected if
WiFi is not available on the device. Every 30 seconds, the
Active Measure Mode service is started in which the measurement of the cellular network is fully dependent on the
GPS module. As soon as the GPS location fix is ready,
network topology as well as dynamic context information
is captured and stored. After having a complete measure-
ment, OMNApp checks if the device is online and decides on
whether the measurement is written on the internal/external
storage or if it can be transferred to the OpenMobileNetwork
server directly. This procedure ensures that no measurement
is lost even if there is no Internet connection and provides
the option to contribute to the OpenMobileNetwork without

causing cellular traffic. Measurements that have been stored
locally can be uploaded later on at anytime when Internet
is available again (e.g., when connected to the WiFi access
point at home) by clicking on the Upload Offline Measurements button.

OMNApp runs in the background once activated meaning
that users can use their smartphone as usual without being
disturbed by the app. This enables the acquisition of authentic dynamic network context data, such as information
about service usage or incoming and outgoing traffic. How-
ever, due to the fact that this app is more or less designed for
research purposes without providing a gamified incentive, it
is mostly used by open-source enthusiasts, test users or people interested in the project. Therefore, in the near future,
we plan to implement a client that combines the advantages
of both applications for fully exploiting the crowdsourcing
experience.

4. NETWORK CONTEXT ONTOLOGIES

After the collection phase, the set of network measurements are processed and triplified generating a semantic
cellular database based on the OpenMobileNetwork Network
Context Ontologies. Resources are identified under the namespace http://www.openmobilenetwork.org/resource/ with
the prefix omn, whereas ontology concepts are represented by
http://www.openmobilenetwork.org/ontology/ using the
prefix omn-owl. The basic OpenMobileNetwork Ontology as
presented in [12] mainly provides concepts that describe mobile network operators running base stations located in a
certain geographic position. It has been extended by several sub-ontologies in order to enable the modelling of other
static as well as dynamic network context data.

Figure 3: OpenMobileNetwork - Ontology Set

Figure 3 highlights the set of ontologies by different colours.
Static network topology data (Mobile Network Topology, WiFi
Network Topology, Neighbour Relations, and Mobile Network Technology) is represented by the ontologies in white,
whereas the grey coloured ontologies (Traffic and User, Mobile Device, and Service) model dynamic network context
data.
4.1 Static Network Context

The existing mobile network access types are semantically
modeled within the Mobile Network Technology Ontology.
A mobile network operator (who is represented by an exemplary resource omn:mnc262_1 in Figure 4) offers various
mobile network technologies using the omn-owl:provides
property. These technologies have dependencies among each

                                               93other and are classified to a mobile network technology generation through the omn-owl:isGeneration property. Having a vocabulary that describes mobile network technologies in use and their relations to each other, we can see the
technologies provided by the operators for each Cell-ID.

going traffic data as well as the number of users is saved for
every past minute if available and is related to a timestamp
resource and the day of the week in order to enable traffic
and user queries for a specific time range. Utilizing the Traffic and User Ontology, reasoning and prediction algorithms
can access this data for traffic and user forecasts.

Figure 4: Mobile Network Technology Ontology

Neighbouring cell relations are described within the Neighbour Relations Ontology (see Figure 5). Cells are linked to
other cells via the property omn-owl:hasNeighbour if the
neighbouring cells of the serving cell are known. The omn-
owl:hasBeenSeen property delivers information about the
amount of measurements where a specific neighbouring cell
has been seen when being connected to a certain cell. The
ratio of seen neighbouring cells divided by all measurements
including neighbouring cells describes the probability of having coverage in that area by neighbouring cells. This information is relevant for some Semantic CAS, especially for
the power management use case, since we need to make sure
that coverage is provided by neighbouring cells when the
serving cell is turned off due to network optimisation issues.

Figure 6: Traffic and User Ontology

Mobile devices including their access network capabilities
are described within the Mobile Device Ontology, whereas
mobile services are represented by the Service Ontology (see
Figure 7). By relating the amount of traffic produced by
a single service to the total traffic in the cell modeled in
the Traffic Ontology, popular services used in a cell can
be determined as an information basis for Semantic CAS.
The ontology further defines a Service Classification Scheme
including Service Classes (e.g., Media Streaming, Messaging or E-Mail ) that are based on Quality of Service (QoS)
paramaters, such as transmission speed or delay. With the
Service Classification Scheme, we are able to group mobile
services into classes with similar requirements and also relate them to network access technologies (via the property
omn-owl:supportsService) that are able to deliver the service with the required capabilities and optimal Quality of
Experience for the user.

Figure 5: Neighbour Relations Ontology

Concepts within the Mobile Network Topology as well as
the Neighbour Relations Ontology are used in the WiFi Network Topology Ontology in order to define coverage relations
between mobile network cells and WiFi access points. This
information can be exploited by Semantic CAS for providing higher positioning accuracy compared to mobile network
cells due to smaller coverage areas of the WiFi access points.
4.2 Dynamic Network Context

The Traffic and User Ontology supports live, daily as well
as historic traffic profiles and provides information about
the number of (historic and live) users being connected to a
cell. This information is represented by the properties omn-
owl:hasTraffic and omn-owl:hasUsers. Incoming and out-

Figure 7: Service Ontology

The dynamic network context ontology design enables the
semantic correlation of various context data. Mobile network topology information including neighbouring cells in
combination with traffic profiles, number of users, service
usage, and the provided mobile network technologies allow
for sophisticated semantic queries when realizing innovative

                                               94Semantic CAS. Depending on the scenario, more data, such
as events or weather information, can be linked to the OpenMobileNetwork enriching the complexity and quality of the
semantic queries.
4.3 OpenMobileNetwork Demo

Within the project Communicate Green 8, we have implemented the OpenMobileNetwork for ComGreen Demo9 that
visualizes how interlinked semantic data can be useful in order to establish a power management in mobile networks.
For this purpose, we enhanced the OMN Map10 by several new features in the Cell Information tab. Neighbouring
cell relations are listed in the Neighbours tab, whereas the
Historic Traffic and Daily Traffic tabs show traffic profiles
created by the sum of all traffic measurements. The tab Current Data provides live traffic and user information collected
at run-time by the smartphone clients. Service usage infor-
mation, on the other hand, can be found in the Service Usage
and Service Classes tabs. A special ComGreen button runs
the following SPARQL query (here expressed in natural lan-
guage) in order to determine the cells that are candidates
for network optimisations in the area of Sch oneberg, Berlin,
Germany: Point out all T-Mobile base stations that cover
Telekom in Sch oneberg, Berlin with total traffic served below 4 Mbits and neighbours covering the same area by at
least 70%. The results being the yellow coloured markers
on the OMN Map show the base stations that are candidates
for network optimisations.

5. EVALUATION

In [7], we have evaluated the quality of the captured data
by comparing the distances of a set of estimated base station positions to their real locations. Here, we focus on the
Live Crowdsourcing Platform and discuss the advantages as
well as drawbacks of the Measurement Framework during
tests. Furthemore, we present statistics on the number of
collected measurements that highlight the effectiveness of
the crowdsourcing approach.
5.1 OMN Location Provider

The FMLs generated by the OMN Location Provider of
the Measurement Framework enable the acquisition of data
in locations where measurements are required. In order to
guide users to undiscovered locations, the position of the
proposed FMLs out of which the jewels are created have
to be in reachable areas. Therefore, we have analysed the
locations calculated by the OMN Location Provider.

During tests, it turned out that sometimes the centre of
a FML was at a point that was not reachable. For example,
the jewel shown in Figure 8 was placed between a highway
and a railway making it impossible for a pedestrian to collect
it. This becomes even more frustrating if it is not obvious
beforehand that the jewel is impossible to reach (e.g., if it is
placed in the middle of a lake). It took the player about 15
minutes in this exemplary case to move to the jewel before
he discovered that he could not reach it.
In such a case,
players become very frustrated and do not continue to play
the game. The problem of not being able to collect jewels is
more prevalent in a city than in the countryside due to the

8http://www.communicate-green.de/
9http://www.openmobilenetwork.org/comgreen/
10http://map.openmobilenetwork.org/

Figure 8: Unreachable Jewel generated by the Location Provider

rural environment. There are more restricted areas, build-
ings, and other obstacles in a city making it more difficult
to gather all jewels in the vicinity.

This problem occurs if the framework faces a cold start
due to an empty database or if the FMLs are created randomly within the empty spaces of the boundary boxes. One
implemented solution is that many possible locations are offered to the user, so that he can choose the one that is best
to reach. Furthermore, we provide a mechanism for resetting all locations and generating new ones in case none of
them are reachable. In the near future, we plan to integrate
map data (e.g., streets, areas, or POIs) from LinkedGeoData
and other contextual information from the LOD Cloud into
the FML calculation process, so that these locations are not
generated randomly, but based on an information basis.
5.2 Measurement Statistics

The effectiveness of the crowdsourcing approach with two
smartphone clients is highlighted by statistics of the collected mobile network data. Table 2 shows the number
of conducted measurements separated by continents. After
publishing Jewel Chaser in July and OMNApp in November
2012, 1194 distinct users have collected over 150,000 single
measurements from 44 countries worldwide out of which we
have calculated 9,810 unique cells operated by 85 different
network providers.

Measurements with a rather high number (>1,000) have
been acquired in Spain, Italy, Austria, Germany, Cyprus,
Turkey, USA, Saudi Arabia, and Hong Kong mainly from
test users by applying systematic wardriving and warwalking methods with OMNApp. On the other hand, measurements with a lower number (<1000) are mostly conducted in
a distributed fashion by players using Jewel Chaser. Even
though most of the data was collected on purpose, the
gamification approach also reached a significant number of
measurements, especially on a global level, proving that a
wider range of users could be attracted for the OpenMobile-
Network. However, we also have 20 countries with only 1 to
10 measurements in total showing that people who downloaded the game and read the privacy policy, unistalled or
closed it right afterwards. Here, the balance between privacy
policy aspects and gamification methods needs to be found.
A lot of users still have issues with data being collected no
matter what kind of incentive is provided.

                                               95Continent

Countries Network Providers Measurements Calculated Cells

2G Cells

3G Cells

North America
South America
Asia
Europe
Africa

Sum


Table 2: Statistics of Collected Mobile Network Data via Crowdsourcing

All in all, we can see that a high number of measurements was achieved in a short period of time, which is very
promising for our purposes. It is also evident that OMNApp
is rather useful to conduct measurements fast and syste-
matically, whereas Jewel Chaser needs more time, but attracts more users, especially in places worldwide where we do
not have test users. The ideal crowdsourcing solution from
our perspective is the combination of systematic wardriving
or warwalking methods utilizing a background service and
support from gamification approaches for filling the measurement gaps in order to harmonize the distribution of the
data.

6. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced the evolution of the OpenMobileNetwork to a Live Crowdsourcing Platform capable of incorporating and interlinking dynamic network context data,
such as traffic or service usage information, in order to increase the added value of Semantic Context-aware Services.
This platform consists of an own semantic cellular database,
two smartphone clients, and a Measurement Framework enabling the collection of network measurements via crowdsourcing hidden behind a gamification approach. We further
presented the extensions made on the OpenMobileNetwork
Ontology for modelling not only static network data, but
also dynamic and live network context information.

The OpenMobileNetwork for ComGreen Demo (see Subsection 4.3) visualizes the usage of semantic dynamic network context data in a power management scenario.
In
the measurement statistics, we can see that even though
most of the measurements were conducted by test users in
a wardriving fashion, the location-based game also reached
a promising number of measurements, especially on a global
level. For this reason, we propose a combination of systematic data collection and support by LBGs for enriching
the existing database with measurements at undiscovered
locations.

In the near future, we will work on the implementation
of a smartphone client that combines the advantages of a
background service with a gamification approach in order to
attract more users to contribute with their data. In addition,
we plan to integrate data from the LOD Cloud into the
OMN Location Provider of the Measurement Framework in
order to avoid the random creation of FMLs. We further
work on a Context Management Cloud Platform based on
the OpenMobileNetwork and the LOD Cloud for providing
and managing innovative Semantic CAS.
