Semantic Content Management and Integration with

JCR/CMIS Compliant Content Repositories

Software Research and Development Company

Software Research and Development Company

Ali Anl Snac

Silikon Blok Kat:1 No: 14
METU, Ankara, Turkey
anil@srdc.com.tr

Suat Gonul

Silikon Blok Kat:1 No: 14
METU, Ankara, Turkey
suat@srdc.com.tr

ABSTRACT
Existing content management systems (CMSes) usually do
not offer flexible, customizable means to create semantic, domain specific indexing and search mechanisms. Therefore,
they either do not provide any semantic retrieval, search,
browsing functionalities at all on the managed content or
the semantic search functionality provided is limited as it
depends on the manual annotation of content by users. So,
in this study we describe a semantic content management
flow by extracting implicit knowledge from both the structure of the CMSes and actual content within them. The
task of additional semantic knowledge gathering and providing semantic operations on the content is a challenging
task which includes adoption of several latest advancements
in information extraction (IE), information retrieval (IR)
and Semantic Web areas. In this study, we propose a new
approach which provides automatic annotation of content
managed in CMSes with the information retrieved from the
Linked Open Data (LOD) cloud and several semantic operations on the content in terms of storage and search. We use
a simple RDF path language to create custom indexes and
retrive semantic knowledge from the LOD cloud suitable for
specific use cases. All additional knowledge is materialized
along with the actual content of document in dedicated in-
dexes. This semantix indexing infrastructure allows semantically meaningful search facilities on top of it. We realize
our approach in the scope of Apache Stanbol project, which
is a subproject developed in the scope of IKS project, by
focusing on document storage and retrieval. We evaluate
our approach in healthcare domain with different domain
ontologies (SNOMED/CT, ART, RXNORM) in addition to
DBpedia as parts of LOD cloud which are used to annotate documents and content obtained from different health
portals.

This work has been part-funded by the European Commission under grant agreement FP7-ICT-2007-3/ No.231527
(IKS - Interactive Knowledge Stack).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2012, 8th Int. Conf. on Semantic Systems, Sept. 5-7, 2012,
Graz, Austria
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1112-0...$10.00.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.2.5 [Database Management]: Heterogeneous Databases
Data translation; H.3.1 [Information Storage and Re-
trieval]: Content Analysis and IndexingIndexing meth-
ods, Thesauruses; H.3.3 [Information Storage and Re-
trieval]: Information Search and RetrievalRetrieval mod-
els, Search process
General Terms
Algorithms, Design
1.
Upon the excessive increase on the data dealt within the
daily usage, content managements systems (CMSes) have
gained an importance in terms of managing the content and
providing features which ease the end users life. On the
other hand, The LOD cloud1 have become so wide that considering the existence of such a huge knowledge, enhancement of documents in CMSes with semantically related knowledge and building semantic features on top of the semantically enhanced content is apparently reasonable.

INTRODUCTION

However, todays CMSes do not exploit the LOD cloud in a
flexible and automated manner sufficiently. Some of the web
based CMSes such as Semantic Media Wiki2, Drupal3 provide semantic annotation of content by linking documents
to the LOD cloud.
In these systems, however, users are
expected to add each annotation manually. On the other
hand, in enterprise CMSes, documents are represented with
nodes. Pre-defined properties are associated to the nodes
to be populated manually. Although, such properties may
give some explicit information about the content, without
analyzing the content itself, it is not possible to provide sophisticated semantic features. Also, manual annotation of
documents is an erroneous and time consuming task[2].

In this paper, we address the semantic incompetence of existing CMSes. We propose a unified approach which brings
several latest advancements in different areas of information
extraction (IE), information retrieval (IR) and semantic web
technologies all together. We provide a mechanism for representing the JCR4 or CMIS5 compliant CMSes in RDF for-
1http://www.w3.org/wiki/SweoIG/TaskForces/
CommunityProjects/LinkingOpenData
2http://semantic-mediawiki.org/
3http://drupal.org/
4http://www.day.com/specs/jcr/2.0/index.html
5http://docs.oasis-open.org/cmis/CMIS/v1.0/os/


mat. The representation is done by directly communicating
with the underlying data model of CMSes and extracting semantic relations, and generating RDF based semantic data
to be processed in the semantic search process. The communication is bidirectional, thus conveniently structured RDF
data can be pushed back to the content repositories.

Our approach also enables creating custom, semantically
meaningful indexes tuned with specific domains, needs. This
indexes are populated through the automatic annotation of
documents with the knowledge to be obtained from the LOD
cloud. By exploiting such a semantically enhanced indexing mechanism, we build a search machinery providing various ways to search for documents by keyword or structured
queries or navigate on them using faceted search or related
query terms.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: We will give
the overall definition of our approach in Section 2, then in
Section 3, we elaborate the semantic indexing and search
mechanism in detail. Section 4 is about integration of CMSes with our approach. Related work is presented in Section 5. Before concluding, we discuss the evaluation of our
approach in healthcare domain in Section 6 and finally the
paper concludes in Section 7.

2. APPROACH
In order not to interfere with the internals of CMSes, we
propose an approach which includes integration of several
techniques and tools from IE, semantic web mining, information storage and IR areas as external services to be used
by CMSes.

Figure 1 summarizes the workflow between the CMSes and
the semantic services provided by Stanbol. The flow starts
with submission of documents from CMSes to the Stanbol
framework. Using IE techniques, extra information about
the content (e.g language, contained named entities etc...)
are extracted. Later on, the extracted information is enhanced with the related semantic knowledge retrieved from
the LOD cloud. All of the additional semantic knowledge
related with the content is stored along with the content in

cmis-spec-v1.0.html

customized, dedicated indexes, which are suitable for specific
domains or use cases. Afterwards, several search functionalities in different modalities are provided over the indexed
content and knowledge.
3. SEMANTIC INDEXING AND SEARCH
3.1 Semantic Indexing
To be able to submit documents to semantic framework,
first a dedicated index should be ready. To create semantically meaningful indexes for specific needs, LDPath6 language is used. LDPath is an RDF query language which is a
valuable side-product of Linked Media Framework (LMF)[3]
project. LDPath is also used to query entities through the
LOD cloud.

Along with the actual content, different semantically related
knowledge is stored. Stanbol framework allows enhancing
the documents. Enhancements are returned in RDF format
and they include various information about the content of
the document such as language and named entities. While
submitting a document to an index, the same LDPath which
was used to create the specific index is used to obtain additional semantic knowledge from the LOD cloud for each
named entity. Besides, this information is fully compatible
with the target index.

Furthermore, Stanbol provides configuration of specific datasets
from the LOD cloud to be used in the enhancement process.
This is an optional step, but if it is done once at the begin-
ning, named entities are detected using the domain specific
datasets and details of the entities are obtained from them.
This would provide even more qualified annotations. After
the initial configuration, the annotation and indexing process is fully automatic. During the document submission
process, it is also possible to provide optional metadata in
the form of <field:value> pairs. Even if the passed fields
are not defined in the target index, they are dynamically
indexed.

The crucial point of the proposed semantic indexing mechanism is the materialization of all related knowledge e.g
knowledge retrieved from the LOD cloud or manually provided metadata along with the initial content. Having this
valuable knowledge allows us to provide advanced search
functionalities on top of them, which are described in Section 3.2.
3.2 Semantic Search
Exploiting the indexing mechanism, we build a machinery
providing various search modalities such as full-text search,
document retrieval via structured queries e.g. SPARQL,
Solr Query7, document filtering with faceted search, and
document exploration with related keywords suggested for
the original query term. These search modalities are realized
with the following services:

3.2.1 SPARQL Search
In the scope of Stanbol, enhancements of all documents are
stored in a single RDF graph which allows querying through
SPARQL over all documents and data sets.
6http://code.google.com/p/ldpath/
7http://wiki.apache.org/solr/SolrQuerySyntax


This service enables querying the underlying Solr indexes by
either keyword search or with Solr specific queries. Search
requests are executed not only considering the actual con-
tent, but also the related knowledge indexed along with the
content.

3.2.3 Related Keyword Search
This service provides a related keyword suggestion mechanism for the initial query terms. Currently, related keywords
are obtained from three different sources which are Wordnet,
any custom RDF data and datasets from the LOD cloud.
INTEGRATION WITH CONTENT MAN-
4.
AGEMENT SYSTEMS

In terms of integration with CMSes, Stanbol framework provides services for two main functionalities, namely: Index
Feed and Bidirectional Mapping. These services can be used
by all CMSes which are compliant with JCR or CMIS spec-
ifications.
4.1 Index Feed
This feature aims to synchronize the documents within a
CMS with their counterparts which are semantically managed in the Stanbol framework. The synchronization is realized with two simple operations which are submit and delete.

During the submission process, properties of the documents
in the CMS are also collected together with the content it-
self. Before indexing the content and its properties, enhancements regarding the content are also obtained. Eventually,
all information is indexed and maintained within Stanbol.
Figure 2 shows the detailed interactions among several Stanbol components which occur during the semantic content
management process.
4.2 Bidirectional Mapping
From one direction, this feature enables CMSes to represent their content repository structure in RDF format. This
helps building semantic services (e.g reasoning facilities on
top of the existing CMSes) using their RDF representations.
Moreover, that representation can be used in the Related
Keyword Search process in Stanbol. Therefore, it would be
possible to navigate on the documents, considering the document hierarchy in the content repository.

From the other direction, bidirectional mapping feature makes
it possible to exploit the LOD cloud within the CMSes.
Apart from the already available data on the web, any RDF
data can be mapped to the content repository. By mapping
external RDF data, CMS items can be updated or new ones
can be created. Thanks to this feature, already existing RDF
datasets from various domains in the LOD cloud can be exploited to provide qualified classification/categorization for
documents.
5. RELATED WORK
In this section, we discuss related studies of our work. Considering the way of integration of several defacto and novel
technologies, our study differentiates from existing approaches.
The study done in [1] describes a complete reference architecture for CMSes with semantic capabilities. This is an

overall architecture which covers a part of our approach. We
introduce methodologies to interact with JCR/CMIS compliant CMSes which is quite important for the data interoperability as presented in the section 4.

Configurable semantic bridges to extract semantics of JCR/CMIS
compliant repositories into an OWL model based ontology
are described in the scope of the work done in [4]. This
approach proposes navigation of documents based on the
class hierarchy in the generated ontology. However, this is a
one-way approach which only provides extracting semantic
information from a CMS but not feed the CMS with semantically enriched content. In our study, we allow update of the
CMSes by external RDF data. Furthermore, our approach
proposes various document retrieval, search and browsing
methods apart from the ontology based navigation.

LMF[3] is a framework offering storage and retrival functionalities for media content. LMF supports annotation of
media content using the LOD cloud, storage of the annotations along with the documents and publishes the stored
content and its metadata in an interlinked manner. Thanks
to the Solr field definition language, LMF allows creation
of dynamically adaptable indexes for specific use cases. We
use this dynamic index machinery as a base to storage and
search capabilities in Stanbol. On top of that, we propose
more diverse document navigation features by means of related keywords retrieved from various sources such as Word-
Net, DBPedia or any external ontology. Besides, we provide
an integration mechanism for CMSes.

Some of the web based CMSes such as Drupal or Semantic
Media Wiki offer ways to integrate the LOD cloud and also
provide semantic search through SPARQL. However, these
systems expect manual annotation from users. In our ap-
proach, the annotations are done automatically and they are
easily configurable. In addition, we provide a flexible semantic index creation mechanism and several search modalities.
Indeed, the aim is to provide more advanced semantic features for those CMSes like Drupal or Semantic Media Wiki.
A usage of Stanbol framework with Drupal can be found in
the article at 8

6. EVALUATION
During the evaluation we have used a JCR compliant CMS,
CRX9, on top of which semantic features are built. In order
to get health related enhancements for documents, we use
three different health related datasets from the LOD cloud.
To create an index suitable for health domain, an LDPath
instance which exposes properties of terms/entities defined
in the datasets is used.

Using the Index Feed feature, we have submitted all of the
documents from CRX to Stanbol framework. Before index-
ing, documents are enhanced. Thanks to the health related
datasets, we were able to recognize named entities such as
diseases, treatments, drugs, adverse reactions, etc. The obtained enhancements were stored and indexed in the dedicated semantic index which is compatible with the enhancements themselves.

8http://semantic-cms.info/
9http://www.day.com/day/en/products/crx.html


We initially searched nonenhanced documents with several
health related keywords. After that, we repeated the search
with the same keywords on enhanced documents.
In the
latter case we obtained more related results. Because, some
of the search keywords were not included in the actual content of the documents, but they were indexed as additional
semantic metadata which is related with the document con-
tent.

Thanks to the domain specific enhancements and integration with health related datasets from the LOD cloud, we
were able categorize documents according to health domain
related facets. So, we were able to navigate on documents
through those facets. This categorization and navigation
mechanisms do not exist in the actual CMS. Also, the enhancement process was fully automatic, once the external
datasets were introduced to the system.

7. CONCLUSION
In this study, we have proposed a methodology offering semantic storage and retrieval services to be exploited by the
CMSes which are not capable of managing documents together with their semantic information. The proposed approach has been realized in the scope of Apache Stanbol.

Stanbol uses Apache Solr as the underlying framework. Thanks
to the LDPath language, it is possible to create semantic
Solr indexes which can be adapted for any specific domain.
Submitted documents are enhanced and their enhancements
include detailed information about the named entities which
exist in the document. Details of the named entities are retrieved by using the LDPath from the LOD cloud so that
they would be compliant with the custom semantic index.
All of the additional (semantic) knowledge is stored along
with the document. On top of the indexes, in addition to
the full-text search, structured querying methods through
SPARQL or Solr Query syntax are also available. Further-
more, documents can be navigated via the related keyword
search mechanism.

In our approach, we propose a synchronization mechanism
between the CMSes and Stanbol so that the CMSes can benefit from the functionalities of Stanbol. Also, Stanbol offers
a mapping facility between the CMSes and external RDF
data. Given any RDF data, this feature makes it possible to
update the documents residing in the CMS. From the other
direction, it provides the functionality of representing the
structure of the CMS in RDF format so that actual structure of the CMS can be used in the semantic operations of
Stanbol.

In this paper, we introduce a framework which makes use
of the latest developments in the IE, IR and semantic web
areas. The objective is to bring different, stand-alone implementations together and address the semantic requirements
of the CMSes.
