Are SKOS concept schemes ready for multilingual retrieval

applications?

School of Electronics and Computer Science

School of Electronics and Computer Science

University of Westminster

University of Westminster

Diana Tanase

Epaminondas Kapetanios

101 New Cavendish Street London, W1W 6XH

tanasedi@westminster.ac.uk

101 New Cavendish Street London, W1W 6XH

e.kapetanios@westminster.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
This article describes our approach to accessing Knowledge
Organization Systems expressed using the Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS) data model. We share
the view that the Web is becoming a multilingual lexical
resource and a distribution infrastructure for knowledge re-
sources. We aim to tap into this for the particular use case of
Cross-Language Information Retrieval systems. The SKOS
framework allows the description of monolingual or multilingual thesauri, controlled vocabularies and other classification systems in a simple machine-understandable represen-
tation. It has support for decentralized distribution on the
Web of any resource described with it and includes mechanisms to interconnect different concept schemes. Yet, when
building our prototype CLIR system different processes require more than the existing content of a SKOS resource:
concept descriptions,
labels and basic inter-concept rela-
tions. For example the SKOS concept indexing phase entails identifying potential occurrences of a SKOS concept in
a text and to disambiguate based on the semantics referenced to in the overall SKOS scheme. By design, the SKOS
data model does not formally define semantics of its concepts thus we have built a set of three algorithms that help
generate a multilingual dataset linking to the original SKOS
dataset and providing more details about the lexical entities
that describe concepts. This new dataset contains specific
RDF triples that aid concept identification, disambiguation
and translation in CLIR.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.1 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content
Analysis and Indexinglinguistic processing; H.3.3 [Infor-
mation Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and
Retrievalretrieval models

General Terms
Algorithms, Languages, Standardization, Design

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2012, 8th Int. Conf. on Semantic Systems, Sept. 5-7, 2012,
Graz, Austria
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0621-8 ...$10.00.

Keywords
Cross-language Information Retrieval, Multilingual Semantic Web, Semantic Search, Conceptual Index, SKOS, W3C

1.

INTRODUCTION

The Multilingual Web is the reality of todays online content landscape. Our geographical boundaries have disappeared online with multilingual users meandering through
the web in search of facts, of answers to questions, in an attempt to discover new information, or just to keep alert on
what is going on throughout the world. There are though,
the language boundaries. They restrict access to the Web
in its entirety. In this context, the research field of Crosslingual Information Retrieval (CLIR) brings forward a set
of questions that focus on helping users locate and present
answers to their queries, regardless of their main language
from resources in other languages. The challenge is to build
a CLIR system that has a broad access to multilingual language and knowledge resources.

We share the view described by Calzolari [3] in 2008 that
the Web is becoming a multilingual lexical resource and a
distribution infrastructure for knowledge resources. Our aim
is to learn how to tap into it in the particular use case of a
CLIR system. The foreseen advantages of connecting CLIR
to such resources are: a) organic growth in scale, b) translations in tune with cultural changes of meaning within a
community, and c) a self-evolving system. Though an ideal
scenario, it can never be achieved without investigating how
to use existing knowledge resources published on the Web.
In this article, we focus specifically on accessing Knowledge Organization Systems (KOS) openly available and expressed using the Simple Knowledge Organization System
(SKOS) data model. The SKOS framework allows the description of monolingual or multilingual thesauri, controlled
vocabularies and other classification systems in a simple
machine-understandable representation. It has support for
decentralized distribution on the Web of any resource described with it and includes mechanisms to interconnect different concept schemes. Thus, SKOS resources provide a
promising mechanism to link a CLIR system to a variety of
multilingual domain knowledge.

Yet, while building our prototype CLIR system the question emerged, are SKOS concept schemes ready for multilingual retrieval applications? We have uncovered that different processes require more than the existing content of a
SKOS resource: concept descriptions, labels and basic interconcept relations. For example the SKOS concept indexing

149phase entails identifying potential occurrences of a SKOS
concept in a text, but also means to disambiguate based
on the semantics referenced to in the overall SKOS scheme.
By design, the SKOS data model does not formally define
semantics of its concepts. Also, not all SKOS datasets are
multilingual and we wanted to be able to add acquired machine translations to an initial dataset.

Thus, we have designed a set of three algorithms that
help generate a multilingual dataset linking to the original
SKOS dataset and adding more details about the lexical entities that describe its concepts. This new dataset contains
specific RDF triples that aid concept identification, disambiguation and translation in our prototype CLIR. Before describing the algorithms and their results we introduce SKOS
as a data model of multilingual KOS in Section 2. We walk
through a use case scenario in Section 3 that underlines how
SKOS Resources can be used at different stages while building a CLIR prototype and the need for additional lexical
details for each of its concepts. In Section 4 we detail how
a new lexical level can be automatically added to a SKOS
resources conceptual and terminological structure, and discuss our results in Section 5.

2. MULTILINGUAL SKOS RESOURCES

SKOS, as detailed in [2] and [11], is a mechanism for describing concept schemes in a machine understandable way
particularly aimed to be used by semantic technologies. A
concept scheme is a set of categories of knowledge at different granularity levels. This includes taxonomies, thesauri,
and other vocabularies. SKOS itself does not provide solutions for how to create concept schemes, but how to represent them. The value of using SKOS resources is in the
lightweight representation of domain specific vocabulary and
categorizations. They tend to contain quite large and thoroughly organized concept hierarchies and cross-references.

Specifically, a SKOS description of a concept scheme contains a range of basic information about its concepts and
the relations between them. As an example, let us refer to
Figure 1 that shows some of the details captured in the GEneral Multilingual Environmental Thesaurus1 (GEMET) for
climatic change. For each concept in this dataset, the SKOS
concept specification defines a set of multilingual lexical la-
bels: the unique preferred term, a number of alternative
terms, and additional documentation such as definitions and
optional notes that describe the concept schemes domain.
The concepts may be related to one another in a variety of ways. In this example, climate is a broader concept
than climatic change. There are no narrower concepts, but
there are a number of related terms with which it shares an
unspecified association (climatic alteration, deforestation,
man-made climate change).

The broader and narrower relationships define the hierarchical structure for the concepts, while related is used for
associations. It should be noted that the broader/narrower
terms do not prescribe a subsumption relationship, but are
given the definition that any resource annotated via a given
term can be retrieved via its broader term. Note that SKOS
allows for a loose specification of facts, and climatic change
narrower than climate for example, does not imply that the
former is a specialization of the later.

Another aspect of SKOS resources that can be observed in

1http://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet/about?langcode=en

Definition

The long-term fluctuations in temperature, precipitation,
wind, and all other aspects of the Earths climate. External
processes, such as solar-irradiance variations, variations of
the Earths orbital parameters (eccentricity, precession, and
inclination), lithosphere motions, and volcanic activity, are
factors in climatic variation. Internal variations of the climate system, e.g., changes in the abundance of greenhouse
gases, also may produce fluctuations of sufficient magnitude
and variability to explain observed climate change through
the feedback processes interrelating the components of the
climate system.

Climatic change

cambio clim atico

broader terms
climate

clima

related terms
climatic alteration
deforestation
man-made climate change

alteraci on clim atica
deforestaci on
cambio clim atico artificial

other relations
exact match
Wikipedia article
close match

AGROVOC: Climatic change
Climate change
UMTHES: Klima anderung

Figure 1: Climatic change SKOS concept from GEneral Multilingual Environmental Thesaurus

Figure 1 is its support for interconnecting concept schemes.
For example, GEMET specifies mappings between its SKOS
concepts and other multilingual datasets such as DBpedia2,
the AGROVOC3 thesaurus containing specific terms for agricultural digital goods, as well as UMTHES4, a Germancentric thesaurus about environmental protection. These
mappings represent connection points to the evolving Linked
Data and in the context of an information access system allow for the exploration of concepts and documents across
a concept schemes boundaries. Examples of mappings are
exact match (equivalent concepts), close match (similar but
not equivalent concepts), broad match (a more general con-
cept), narrow match (a more specific concept), and related
match (an associated concept).

In summary, a SKOS resource has mainly two levels of
structure: a conceptual level, where concepts are identified
and their interrelationships established; and a terminological
correspondence level, where terms are associated (preferred
or non-preferred) to their respective concepts.

A third level, optional level, can be defined using SKOS
Simple Knowledge Organization System eXtension for Labels (SKOS-XL) allowing to define a lexical level where lexical relationships are defined to interconnect terms. In the
next sections, the focus is on automatically adding this third
level to an existing SKOS resource to facilitate specific processes in our prototype CLIR.

3. USING SKOS RESOURCES FOR CLIR

In the CLIR prototype in Figure 2, SKOS datasets are
used for several processes: query construction, processing
2http://wiki.dbpedia.org/DBpediaLive
3http://aims.fao.org/website/AGROVOC-Thesaurus
4http://data.uba.de/umt/de/concepts/ 00014452.html

150	
	 

	

	

	

	


 					
 	

  	


		

  	

 	

 	
 

				 

	
	

 
		
		

 	

		

	




	


	
	 

	

	

	

  	

 	
 

				 

	
	

	


	
	

	
  		

	
	

	


 					
 	

	

  	

			

	
  			
	


 	

 
		

	
  			
	


 	

 


		



	


 	
  	
	


	
 
	


 	
			
	 	

 					
	 	

Figure 2: Re-thinking CLIR

and mapping, translation, and for generating a SKOS Conceptbased index. The first two processes are known uses for the-
sauri, like in the retrieval system created using a SKOSbased astronomical vocabularies by [6] where queries are
built using terminology from the SKOS domain vocabulary.
Also, there exists some previous work at CLEF in 2002 by
[13] that addressed the problem of mapping queries to terms
from bilingual thesauri using an exact match (identify the
longest matching entry term) or fuzzy match (using a similarity measure find a suitable candidate entry term). These
particular experiments were not conclusive on how thesauri
influence the operation of a CLIR system in terms of precision and recall. This research question is still debated within
the research community and we believe one of the reasons it
was hard to investigate in the past is the fact KOS resources
were not shared in a standard format like SKOS.

With regards to indexing techniques for mapping queries
and documents to concepts from external resources, a recent
example is Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) [5] that uses
Wikipedia as a knowledge resource that allows mapping text
to a concept space of Wikipedia articles. Other models, like
the mixed models, adopt the bag-of-words model, however,
they extend it by using taxonomies ([16]), ontologies ([7]),
networks of concepts ([9]), thesauri ([14]) or categories derived from WordNet ([4]). In each of these models, a key
step is identifying the association between a concept from
an external knowledge resource and its textual representa-
tion. This entails that there exists a specification of a partial
or fit-for-purpose concepts lexicalisation.

3.1 Scenario

Let us start with a comparative look of our prototype in
Figure 2. In both sections of the diagram, the classic versus

the prototype, a CLIR system starts by processing a query
from the source language, Spanish in this case, followed by
its translation to the target language, English. Previous
research in the field has proven that for large scale applications translating queries is a feasible approach, as opposed to
translating all documents in the collection depending on the
source language of the query. In our prototype part of the
diagram, a query is semantically annotated by matching it
to a suitable concept from the multilingual SKOS datasets.
The translation step is now performed based on the existing
multilingual labels in the dataset. The SKOS resource we
will use as a basis for the example below is GEMET.

Let us assume the initial query is asking about information on cambio clim atico and is submitted to a document
collection containing D1, D2, D3.

D1: Spanish ratification of the Kyoto Protocol in 2002 implied the commitment of limiting emissions. Since
then, Climate Change policies are extremely important for Spanish institutions.

D2: There is a changing climate in todays approach to state
welfare in England with the most vulnerable left without the support they need.

D3: The fluidity of the global economic climate and evolving
immigration enforcement policies lead to a complicated
picture of the impact of immigrants to the US economy.

3.1.1 Translation
One of the pivotal aspects of CLIR is translation, which
relies heavily on language and knowledge resources to map
information encoded in the query-language to information
encoded in the document-language. In the example above,

151we translated both words as a phrase. With external knowledge from GEMET it is straightforward to identify multiword expressions like the one in our query, but such resources
for the source language are not always available.

Linguistic resources vary in size, coverage, source style
(human or machine readable), form of entries, number of
translations alternatives given, translation ambiguity, etc.
This set of characteristics directly affects the translations
quality and was at the center of years of research in developing methods that perform well, independently of the pairs of
languages the translations are run between. Unfortunately,
the devised algorithms and techniques do not have the same
efficiency in CLIR tasks irrespective of the language [10].

In summary, according to [8] there are three main groups

of translation-related challenges:

 Identifying translation units: what words or phrases

should be translated?

 Obtaining translation knowledge: identify suitable resources for machine translation: bilingual dictionaries,
corpora, and other knowledge and lexical resources to
handle out-of-vocabulary situations.

 Using translation knowledge: words or phrases can
have several translations and choosing the most appropriate one based on context is referred to as translation
disambiguation; if this is not possible, there should be
a weighing process of the translation alternatives.

By representing documents and queries at a higher level of
abstraction, namely by using concepts, it is our approach to
avoid translation issues arising from translating individual
words in the narrow context of a query.

 Identifying translation units: SKOS concepts or phrases;

words as a fallback mechanism.

 Obtaining translation knowledge: SKOS resources,

Wikipedia and other related Web accessible services or
resources

 Using translation knowledge: select the appropriate

SKOS resource based on application domain

Therefore the matched concept for the query in our sce-
nario, based-on the preferred label for Spanish described in
GEMET, is the SKOS concept climatic change 5 and the
translated query is the union of preferred and alternative
concept labels, in this case just climatic change. Then, this
gets matched against the document collection in the same
language.

In the Classic Bilingual CLIR System and for our prototype there is a pre-processing stage when by using Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tools such as tokenizers, stem-
mers, and/or phrase identification each documents text is
split into terms that become part of an inverted term index,
where each entry points to a vector of frequencies of the term
in a document and within the collection. This index is used
for tolerance when the knowledges bases are incomplete.

Indexing

The SKOS Concept Index in the prototype version is generated using the previously created index and maps documents to SKOS concepts from a set of predefined resources.
5http://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet/concept/1471

Modeling the relationship between a document and a SKOS
concept in the context of the Semantic Web, means defining a corresponding RDF triple within a semantic repository.
Determining that a concept is expressed in a document with
input from an external knowledge resource, is referred to as
semantic annotation or semantic feature extraction. Each
annotation has two components the actual text span and
a pointer to the concept from the external resource. An
Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) in this case. This is a
challenging process that involves identification of a concepts
occurrence and disambiguation for the polysemy cases. Both
aspects require that the SKOS knowledge resource is lexicalized containing details about a concepts textual repre-
sentation.

Concepts can occur explicitly or implicitly. For the explicit case, the SKOS specification accommodates this functional requirement as mentioned in the previous section by
allowing different types of labels to be added to the dataset.
For implicit occurrences, the definition of a concept, other
annotations and its relations with other concepts can help
build a concepts textual signature, a list of key words and
phrases to feed to disambiguation algorithm 2.

For example, with the given version of the GEMET dataset,
each concept has a translated label in one of 30 languages,
but concepts are only described in English. This means
that we can only perform label matching of concepts for
non-English cases and miss out any implicit occurrences of
a concept. Using the algorithm in Section 4.2, we expand
the current resource by creating an RDF graph containing a
set of new multilingual annotations derived from the English
content of GEMET.

For our running example, the two step concept-indexing
process, where we first identify the concepts that occur implicitly in a text using information from a SKOS resource,
and then disambiguate, leads to the following result with
the annotated concepts italicized.

D1: Spanish ratification of the Kyoto Protocol in 2002 implied the commitment of limiting emissions. Since
then, Climate Change policies are extremely important for Spanish institutions.

D2: There is a changing climate in todays approach to state
welfare in England with the most vulnerable left without the support they need.

D3: The fluidity of the global economic climate and evolving immigration enforcement policies lead to a complicated picture of the impact of immigrants to the US
economy.

There were other concepts that were initially identified:
approach and lead, but correctly dropped when disambiguat-
ing.
In GEMET the concept approach refers to a way or
means of entry or access, and the scope is urban settlement,
while in the other case is the metal lead. Identifying a concept beyond matching the label of a concept in a text is
paramount for a concept-based index to improve a given
CLIR system.

Another two annotations that were removed during the
disambiguation process are the occurrences of the word climate from document D2 and D3. By using the classic
keyword-based index, all documents will be listed as relevant to the initial query, since several of the words in the

152Definition

The long-term fluctuations in temperature, precipitation,
wind, and all other aspects of the Earths climate. External processes, such as solar-irradiance variations, variations
of the Earths orbital parameters (eccentricity, precession,
and inclination), lithosphere motions, and volcanic activity,
are factors in climatic variation. Internal variations of the
climate system, e.g., changes in the abundance of greenhouse
gases, also may produce fluctuations of sufficient magnitude
and variability to explain observed climate change through the
feedback processes interrelating the components of the climate
system.

Figure 3: Climatic change Semantic Annotation

query appear also in the text of the documents. Yet, D2 and
D3 do not refer to the topic of climate change. By using the
concept-based index, only the first document will be listed
in response to the query providing better precision. Examples such as this one, justify the cost of adding a new lexical
level to an existing SKOS resource.

4. ADDING A LEXICAL LEVEL TO A SKOS

RESOURCE

4.1 Development Setup

The following list describes the main components used
in implementing and testing the algorithms to be described
below.

 Search Engine for CLIR: Terrier IR Platform6
 Relevant Java Libraries: skosapi7,
 Natural Language Processing: GATE8 Embedded is
an object-oriented framework for performing Semantic
Annotations tasks; APOLDA a GATE Plugin9

 Semantic repository: Virtuoso Universal Server10
 Other Resources: English Wikipedia
 Translation Service: GoogleTranslate
 research-esa11 an implementation for Explicit Seman-

tic Analysis

4.2 Enriching existing SKOS resources using

a self-reflection algorithm

This is the description of the algorithm we devised to enrich a given SKOS resource with a set of annotations that
are automatically translated with minimal errors in the following algorithm. The minimum requirement for running
the algorithm below with a SKOS resource as input is that
there exist definitions specifications in the selected dataset
for concepts in at least one language. Our test implementations used English as the starting language and examples of
6http://terrier.org/
7http://skosapi.sourceforge.net/
8http://gate.ac.uk/download/
9http://apolda.sourceforge.net/
10http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/
11http://code.google.com/p/research-esa/

the concepts identified for climatic change are described in
Figure 3, while the phrases identified for the same concept
are in Figure 4.

Algorithm 1 Generating Annotations

KOS expressed using SKOS
for all c SKOS Concept from the resource do

Index concept definition content
Create a unique list of the terms in the definition and
their frequency.
Semantic annotations
Using GATE Embedded, tokenize cs definition and
identify exact occurrences of other concept labels (pre-
ferred or alternate) in the definition
Phrase extraction
Using ESA and EN Wikipedia determine contentbearing phrases from cs definition
Extract groups of words from the definition that have
a strong association
The association function is based on the Language
Model12 metric

end for
OUTPUT
A set of annotations for each c a SKOS Concept from the
resource

The semantic annotation part of the algorithm relies on
APOLDA (Automated Processing of Ontologies with lexical
Denotations for Annotation) Gate plugin [15] that determines annotations based on the SKOS-converted-to-OWL
initial KOS resource. We have used the GEMET expressed
in SKOS to OWL format, a representational transformation
possible with any SKOS dataset since a SKOS concept is
an instance of an owl:Class [2]. This produced 18120 mentions of the 5208 GEMET concepts throughout all its SKOS
concept definitions.

The next annotation step, detects short phrases in a text
(2, 3, or 4 words), based on the strength of their association
computed by determining the semantic relatedness of their
English Wikipedia feature vectors. The respective vectors
are computed using research-esa implementation of the Explicit Semantic Analysis algorithm on a local instance of the
English Wikipedia13. The approach provided good results
in identifying generic phrases.

We run the above algorithm on GEMET and we have
identified 15781 occurrences of 6850 unique content-bearing
phrases and single words. These counts are provided after
removing any duplicates with the annotations obtained at
the previous step. The phrases include multiword-expressions
(e.g toxic chemical, oxygen concentration, wind velocity),
named entities (e.g New Zealand ), and other phrases (e.g
pipes supplying water ). The single words that appeared several times within a concepts definition are part of this set
of annotations. The automatically selected phrases have all
been manually checked as valid atomic groupings of words
(in terms of meaning). The semantic annotation sets are fed
into the next algorithm for disambiguation.
4.3 Disambiguation

The task of disambiguating the semantic annotations from

13http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Database download

153Definition

and all other aspects of

the Earths

such as

the Earths orbital parameters

The long-term fluctuations in temperature, precipitation,
wind,
climate.
External processes,
solar-irradiance variations,
variations of
(eccentric-
ity, precession, and inclination), lithosphere motions, and
volcanic activity, are factors in climatic variation. Internal
variations of the climate system, e.g., changes in the abundance of greenhouse gases, also may produce fluctuations
of sufficient magnitude and variability to explain observed
climate change through the feedback processes interrelating
the components of the climate system.

Figure 4: Climatic change Phrase Identification

the previous algorithm is difficult and the results we have
obtained show how the details specified for each SKOS concept impact the ability to determine if a concept is used
in a piece of text in the same sense characterized by the
SKOS resource. The algorithm involves pre-processing the
content of a SKOS resource and extracting concepts signa-
tures. We than compute a metric of relatedness between a
SKOS concepts definition and the concepts signatures from
the annotating concepts set.

Algorithm 2 Disambiguating Semantic Annotations

KOS expressed using SKOS
for all c a SKOS Concept do
Build cs concept signature
for each of cs neighbors, narrower or broader concepts
do

Add the union of their annotations labels to cs concept signature

end for

end for
for all c a SKOS Concept do

for all annotation identified for c and a SKOS concept
do

Compute the semantic relatedness between the
annotations concept signature and cs textual def-
inition
end for

end for
OUTPUT
Disambiguated set of semantic annotations

For the climatic change concept the annotation for lithosphere was removed. Judging by the SKOS concept definition this is not necessarily a bad annotation, but its removal
has low impact in terms of SKOS Concept Indexing accu-
racy. We run this algorithm with a low threshold of semantic
relatedness and found 530 annotations were removed. This
is not surprising considering we have annotated the GEMET
resource using concepts from the same resource. A third of
the annotations were wrong and this happened consistently
when there was no definition for that particular concept or
the definition was very short and there were very few neighboring concepts to build the concepts signature. Another
third of the annotations were borderline, like in the case of
lithosphere. This reflected that the definition of the anno-

tated concept just referred to the other concept, but only in
this context. The other third of annotations were correct.
For example state refers to a territory with an organized
government, yet, many concepts refer to state as a state
of matter. Overall, we believe the algorithm needs further
refinements and testing on other collections where the nature of the language used is not necessarily similar to the
language describing the concepts.

4.4 Multilingual Annotations

The final step in generating a multilingual dataset that
links to the original SKOS dataset is described in this sec-
tion. The annotations obtained after the disambiguation are
serialized as RDF triples. The added triples are expressed
using SKOS eXtension for Labels (SKOS-XL), which provides additional support for identifying, describing and linking lexical entities.

The SKOS data model described in [1] defines the property skosxl:labelRelation that links instances of skosxl:Label.
It is an extension point, for which we define two object sub
properties:
literalTranslation and domainTranslation. The
literalTranslation is used for handling the machine translation of a label using Google Translate Web Service, while
domainTranslation is intended to link labels from different
concept schemes, when there exists the transitive relation
exact match between the concepts the labels refer to. We
think domainTranslation is a useful extension to include,
since several GEMET concepts have pointers to concepts in
the bilingual UMTHES. We do not explore this further for
now, but added it to our extensions. These two relations,
capturing both translations and context, are in agreement
with other work on representing translations for the Semantic Web [12].

We also define a third property, annotation. The latter
is a sub property of skosxl:hiddenLabel and is used to express a link between the preferred label of a concept and
the annotations identified previously from a SKOS concepts
definition.

Algorithm 3 Serializing Multilingual Annotations

KOS expressed using SKOS
for all c a SKOS Concept load its annotation maps do

Source Language: en
Target Languages: es, fr, ro
for all annotation a SKOS based annotation do

Generate label ID
if c does not have a label for the target language
then

Translate

end if
Generate RDF triples description

end for
for all annotation a phrase annotation do

Generate label ID
Translate phrase
Generate RDF triples description

end for

end for
OUTPUT
A new RDF graph of lexical annotations resulted from
SPARQL queries

154Due to the output of algorithm 1 this last algorithm only
translates phrases or single words. The machine translation
outputs in some instances are words with the wrong inflections or the word order in the translated expression is not
correct. In the particular case of CLIR, words get stemmed
during indexing (for example, the word climate is stemmed
to climat), thus wrong inflections and mixed word order does
not affect the particular case of our application domain. By
running this algorithm on GEMET we were able to enrich
all concepts with relevant lexical details in Spanish, French
and Romanian. All new annotations can be used to disambiguate concepts in other languages than English.

Figure 5 details a partial SPARQL query for creating the
new lexicalizations dataset. We precede each skosxl:Label
instance with the string label followed by a concept id. In
the example query, the id number 1471 points to the climatic change concept in GEMET, while ids numbers 1462,
8366, 9327 match respectively climate, temperature, wind.
We are using the original ids for creating a GEMET annotated dataset. Note, as expected from the two types of annotations we determined in algorithms 1 and 2, we are required
to differentiate between the two annotations. For example,
a label like label 1471 1 en describes the phrase annotation
climatic variation, while label 8366 0 en describes the semantic annotation with concept temperature. By using part
of algorithm 2 we can easily create multilingual concept signature in Spanish, French and Romanian. The algorithm in
this section can easily be extended to support any number
of target languages.

5. DISCUSSION

Throughout this article we provided a detailed example of
customizing a SKOS resource for our work-in-progress prototype of a CLIR system. Existing examples of SKOS use
cases14 show that most research and development work has
focused on creating vocabularies and applications that support editing them. We believe that more diverse applications
can be built and we are trying to open the way for more classification systems to be shared in SKOS format. Though, we
are not formally evaluating the prototype CLIR system as
a whole within the scope of this article, it is important to
note that at its core this prototype is a classic CLIR system
with more flexibility in accessing language and knowledge
resources.

Returning to the initial question are SKOS concept schemes
ready for multilingual retrieval applications? We have uncovered that different processes require a level of lexicalization of a SKOS resourcess content. This can be obtained
automatically by applying the algorithms in Section 4. The
cost of building the annotations set for a SKOS resource
is computationally high, but we would like to publish after
further testing the annotated dataset for GEMET under the
Open Database License15.

Proving that connecting a CLIR system to SKOS resources
can lead to an improved retrieval system in tune with cultural changes of semantics is the broader research question
we are investigating. Thus far, we have focused on understanding the relations between content and structure of a
SKOS resource and its applicability to creating a CLIR ap-

14http://www.w3.org/2006/07/SWD/SKOS/reference/20090315/
implementation.html
15http://opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl/

PREFIX skos: <http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#>
PREFIX skosxl: <http://www.w3.org/2008/05skos-xl#>
PREFIX rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
PREFIX gemet:<http://www.eionet.europa.eu/gemet/gemet-
skoscore.rdf#>

INSERT INTO <http://gemet-annotated> {
gemet:1471 a skos:Concept ;

skosxl:prefLabel gemet:label_1471_0_en ;
skosxl:altLabel gemet:label_1471_0_es ;
skosxl:altLabel gemet:label_1471_0_ro ;
skosxl:altLabel gemet:label_1471_0_fr .

gemet:label_1471_0_en a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "climatic change"@en .

gemet:label_1471_0_es a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "cambio clim atico"@es .

gemet:label_1471_0_fr a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "changement climatique"@fr .

gemet:label_1471_0_ro a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "schimbare climatic a"@ro .

gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_1462_0_en .
gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_8366_0_en .
gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_9327_0_en .

gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_1471_1_en .
gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_1471_1_es .
gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_1471_1_ro .
gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_1471_1_fr .

gemet:label_1471_1_en gemet:literalTranslation
gemet:label_1471_1_es .
gemet:label_1471_1_en gemet:literalTranslation
gemet:label_1471_1_ro .
gemet:label_1471_1_en gemet:literalTranslation
gemet:label_1471_1_fr .
gemet:label_1471_1_en a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "climatic variation"@en .

gemet:label_1471_1_es a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "la variaci on clim atica"@es .

gemet:label_1471_1_ro a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "climatice varia tie"@ro .

gemet:label_1471_1_fr a skosxl:Label ;
skosxl:literalForm "les variations climatiques"@fr .

gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_1471_2_en .
gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_1471_2_es .
gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_1471_2_ro .
gemet:1471 gemet:annotation gemet:label_1471_2_fr .

gemet:label_1471_2_en gemet:literalTranslation
gemet:label_1471_2_es .
gemet:label_1471_2_en gemet:literalTranslation
gemet:label_1471_2_ro .
gemet:label_1471_2_en gemet:literalTranslation
gemet:label_1471_2_fr .

gemet:label_1471_2_en a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "processes"@en .

gemet:label_1471_2_es a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "los procesos de"@es .

gemet:label_1471_2_ro a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "procese"@ro .

gemet:label_1471_2_fr a skosxl:Label ;

skosxl:literalForm "processus"@fr .

Figure 5: SPARQL query to serialize annotations
and translations for the climatic change

155indexed collections. In CLEF, pages 349362, 2002.

[14] U. P. School and U. Priss. Lattice-based information
retrieval. Knowledge Organization, 27:132142, 2000.

[15] C. Wartena, R. Brussee, L. Gazendam, and W.-O.

Huijsen. Apolda: A practical tool for semantic
annotation. In Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Database and Expert Systems
Applications, DEXA 07, pages 288292, Washington,
DC, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer Society.

[16] W. A. Woods. Conceptual indexing: A better way to

organize knowledge. Technical report, Mountain View,
CA, USA, 1997.

plication. We described a set of algorithms on how to enrich
a given SKOS resource with RDF triples that facilitate the
concept-indexing stage of the CLIR prototype. Algorithms
1 and 2 can be applied for any text document not necessarily SKOS concepts definitions. Also, we believe that the
disambiguation process can be improved by using also the
inter concept schemes relations such as exact match or close
match to discover further lexical entities and improve a concepts textual signature.
