Personal Image Tagging: a Game-based Approach

Faculty of Informatics and Information

Faculty of Informatics and Information

Maria Bielikova

Institute of Informatics and Software

Engineering,

Technologies,

Slovak University of Technology,

Bratislava, Slovak Republic

bielik@fiit.stuba.sk

Institute of Informatics and Software

Jakub Simko

Engineering,

Technologies,

Slovak University of Technology,

Bratislava, Slovak Republic
jsimko@fiit.stuba.sk

ABSTRACT
An effective search and organization of personal multimedia
repositories demands very specific, owner-related metadata
(e.g. person names, places, events). Only the resource owners and their social circles are able to provide these meta-
data, but are often not motivated to do so. To increase
their motivation, we introduce a game-based personal image
annotation framework. Todays crowd-based games with a
purpose (GWAP) are able to harness human labor to acquire metadata for general domain multimedia resources.
However, their deployment in such specific domain as ones
personal multimedia is hindered by the issue of extremely
small number of competent potential workers. Therefore,
a traditional cross-worker agreement filtering of wrong answers cannot be effectively applied. In our approach (which
is an extension of an existing image tagging game), we overcome this issue by inviting user to play for his own good
i.e. annotate his own images while enjoying the game. This
additional motivation causes an overall increase of quality of
user-generated metadata and thus allows the use of less strict
tag extraction algorithms for producing final set of tags. We
show that our approach is able to yield valid image annota-
tions, specific to the context of the resource owner. We also
examine its performance with different types of annotated
images and tags.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Content Analysis and Indexing; K.8 [Personal Computing]: Games

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
human computing, games with a purpose, multimedia meta-
data, personal multimedia

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2012, 8th Int. Conf. on Semantic Systems, Sept. 5-7, 2012,
Graz, Austria.
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1112-0 ...$10.00.

1.

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

In this work, we present a human-oriented, game-based
approach to acquisition of textual metadata for personal image archives. Personal multimedia are characterized by their
limited public availability and specificity. However, just as
their general counterparts, they need to be properly decorated with metadata. This enables effective search, browsing or even automated storytelling [18] for their owners and
social circles.

Acquisition of image metadata over general domain (gen-
eral concepts) is problematic, but for personal images, it
gets even worse. While automated approaches to image annotation can identify specific visual features (such as human
faces) or categorize images, they are unable to extract the information specific to its owner such as persons name, place
or event, when the picture was taken.

Human-performed annotation generally provides better
quality metadata than automated means. The issue of (non-
monetary) motivation of people to provide annotations has
been addressed by crowdsourcing approaches (e.g. games
with a purpose  GWAP). However, existing approaches are
short handed when it comes to personal multimedia archives.
This is mainly due to privacy reasons and also the fact that
only narrow group of people is usually able to provide sufficient specific information needed for this type of content.
Only the social-based approaches (e.g. tagging or commenting images of ones social circle) are able to provide metadata addressing image owners context. However, these are
very sparse, irregular and often noisy due to sentiment, hu-
mor, etc., contained in social comments from which they are
extracted.

A main contribution of this work is a GWAP-based personal image tagging approach that produces image tags that
are valid and also specific for the user (and therefore usable
in personal image repository management).
It overcomes
the problems described above with a combination of three
kinds of player motivation to participate in the process:

1. The player enjoys interaction with a content he likes
(i.e. ones personal images or images of ones social
group). The game is considered also as an image presentation tool.

2. The player is challenged by the game.

3. The player gets his images annotated.

The idea is to let the user to play an image annotation game,
but with his own images and for his sake (his metadata,

88which can be used e.g. for better image search). The game
also aims to exploit a possible scenario when a player is
sharing the game with his social circle (to share the images
and acquire more metadata for his use).

Our approach is an extension of our existing game with
a purpose  the PexAce (a modification of a popular board
game  the Concentration), where players collect identical
card pairs and help themselves by annotating the images
on cards. The PexAce game has already proved its usefulness in general image domain [12]. In this work however, the
game functions over players own images and extracts tag for
them. The original multiple-player-agreement tag filtering
approach (used traditionally in games with a purpose) has
been modified and extended by other heuristics that take the
specific nature of personal images into consideration: existing organization of images to albums, repetition of specific
person names, places and other concepts in the annotations
created during the gameplay.

We have performed a combined quantitative-qualitative
study to evaluate our approach. We show that the game
is able to provide valid and also image-owner-specific metadata to images used in the game, while retaining a key feature of low number of participants needed to play. We further
examine the types of tags extracted as well as performance
of the game over different types of images. Also, with respect to the possible scenario of sharing the game among social circles, we measured how does the game perform, when
players are unaware of its purpose (but still play over their
images).

2. RELATED WORK

Needs and preferences of users in terms of dealing with
their personal images have been well described by a qualitative study of Vainio et al. [13]. When asked, users admitted that they like to interact with their content (watching,
but also editing), but not with its metadata. They realize the value of metadata, especially with larger reposito-
ries, but are generally not willing to systematically create
them. The most common practice in organizing a personal
image repository is just labeling the whole collections (al-
bums) with names or sorting images chronologically. There-
fore, users must rely on time-consuming sequential browsing
when trying to find a particular image. An important closure was, that users would primary welcome metadata about
persons in the images, person who took the pictures and situational context of pictures (e.g.
information about places
and events) [13]. The latter strongly implied the directions
of our research: in our study, we examine the performance
of our approach with these types of metadata.

Image metadata can be acquired either by automatic or
human-oriented means. Despite their volatile nature in terms
of quality, automated metadata acquisition approaches are
used for annotation of large image collections of the general
domain and are essential for the web-scale image search. Use
of automated means in the personal image metadata acquisition scenario may be possible, but only in the supporting
role, as they are able to work only with general concepts.
They can carry out a general category identification for im-
ages, while leaving the more specific metadata identification
to humans.

The most common practice for image web search is to analyze the context of images [6, 8]. Personal images might
have a textual context (e.g. they are being shared via social

network, got commented), but usually they do not. More
promising for this type of multimedia would be the analysis of visual features of the images, for which several approaches have been designed. Employing image segmentation and large scale vocabularies, Duygulu and Barnards experiments yielded 70% accuracy in associated tag prediction
over Corel 5K dataset [4], which was further improved after
introducing a probabilistic models [11]. Joint use of global
and local feature identification in the images also helped the
prediction [1, 5]. An effective narrow categorization was also
achieved using SVM [3] or Bayes point machine [2].

Together, all automated approaches also require very wide
training sets to perform even moderately in broad domain
range. Within the personal image annotation scenario with
the need for specific metadata, the acquisition of proper
training sets is virtually impossible, as those require already
annotated images. Nevertheless, it is imaginable that metadata acquired through human-oriented approaches (such as
one described in this paper) could be used in some machine-
learning-based, personal imagery scenarios (e.g.
identifica-
tion of persons over previously identified face regions).

Human-oriented approaches to image tagging perform qual-

itatively better than the automated ones. Apart from expert
tagging (e.g. press image databases) or paid crowd-based
services (e.g. Mechanical Turk), the approaches for usergenerated image tag acquisition could be split into social tagging approaches [17] and games with a purpose (GWAP)[14].
The social-based approaches are capable of delivering specific personal metadata to images, but irregularly and with
a lot of noise. However, social tagging also implies a notion
which we took in our research: an eventual human based
approach to personal metadata acquisition should source its
contributors through socialization phenomena.

The games with a purpose (as coined by Luis von Ahn [14])
represent a family of crowd-based approaches utilized for
various types of HITs (human intelligence tasks) including
the multimedia metadata acquisition. The first and well
known ESP Game, created by von Ahn, employed two players that had to come up with the same word describing an
image (or) given to them, thus validated each other [14].
Several other similar games followed this design, aiming to
improve the quality of tags [9] or examine the properties of
acquired tags [7].

One of the major advantages of GWAPs against the social
tagging is that they provide more control over assignment
of HITs to users. They can thus allocate the available manpower to annotation of resources that has been lacking the
metadata.

Typically, GWAPs use the redundant task solving (as
in the general crowdsourcing) to ensure their output quality [16]. However, this requires a certain number of players
able to provide metadata to a certain resource. This imposes
a problem which must be overcame prior to their eventual
use in personal images scenario: the insufficient number of
players able to do solve the task (provide enough specific
metadata).

One of the features characterizing GWAPs is to what extent they encapsulate the purpose of the game, i.e. how
well the purpose is hidden from the player. Markus Krause
et. al. argues for the highest possible degree of encapsulation and demonstrates it on the case of the OnToGalaxy
game (an ontology population game which is concealed as
a space shooter action game). Krause notes that an appar-

89ent purpose of a game potentially discourages players from
playing because they will more likely consider the game as
a work which will ultimately lead to games misfortune [10].
However, in our work, we aimed for the exact opposite, i.e.
that the players must be told about the purpose of the game
in order to improve its useful outcome, which can directly
serve for particular user or his friend or relative.

3. GAME-BASED IMAGE ANNOTATION

To enable more effective maintenance of personal multimedia repositories, we devised a method for personal image
metadata acquisition, which can be split into two parts:

 The game as a means of image annotation acquisition.
 The tag extraction procedures working over collected

annotations created in the game.

The gameplay system and the context of the use of the game
in our extension implies the high potential quality of these
annotations due to three types of user motivation:

1. Players interact with a familiar content  personal im-
ages. Therefore they know many specific information
about them and also their context. It also increases
the joy of gameplay itself.

2. Players are challenged by the game. They wish to
reach a highest possible score to overdo themselves or
members of their social circle.

3. Player who knows about the true purpose of the game
 annotating their own image set  provide annotations
not just for sake of the game, but also with respect to
the future use of tags in image search and organization.

3.1 The Image Annotation Acquisition

We base our method on an existing game  the PexAce [12,
15], which we devised for image annotation in general do-
main. The principle of the game itself is further based on
the popular memory turn-based board game called Concen-
tration. In it, players seek identical images by flipping cards
pairs facing down the board. If player finds an identical pair,
he collects it, receives point and draws another card, otherwise he passes the turn. The cards are usually laid down in
a grid with a total number of 50 to 100, so players do usually
many blind attempts at the start of the game to learn the
positions of images and remember them as precisely as they
can.

In the PexAce, as well as in our approach, this principle
is turned into single player and introduced the card annotation option for the player. Instead of having to remember,
where exactly each particular image is hiding, player have
the option to write down an annotation on the image when
he sees it and then stick it to the underside of the card.
Player can see this annotation at any time during the game
to aid his memory.

The player gets score based on his own performance: the
lower number of flips he needs to finish the game, the more
points he receives. He may also increase his score by finishing the game earlier. His score is afterward used as a reward
for competing with other players or within players own self-
challenge. In original PexAce, players competed in a central
ladder. However, in our approach we chose to pursue competition only among ones social network (not all players of

the game) as we expect less motivation for cheating, which
was experienced during the PexAce releases.

An interesting score-related feature of the game is that
players may also compete with each other even if they play
with completely different sets of images. Players cannot
make the game easier by picking some obscure set of images
for play (in fact, it might make them the game harder). They
will always have to use either their memory or make precise
annotations. This way, we can eventually pursue competition even in the centralized score ladder, while retaining the
option for each player to annotate his own images.

We have implemented the game as a desktop application
to easily reach local personal image repositories. Its player
interface can be seen in the Figure 1.
It is based on the
original PexAce look: player may flip two images at a time
and annotate them using the fields in the center. Later,
he can show these annotations by hovering over undisclosed
cards in the card grid. The image set is selected from the
file system prior to the game.

The option to annotate the images implicitly motivates
players to provide annotations really characterizing the content of the image (otherwise it would be invaluable for them).
For further automated tag extraction, this is an important
feature, as it significantly lowers the redundancy validation
requirements of the process. Because the players interact
with the personal content or a content to which they are
socially bound, they are expected to use also specific descriptions such as person names, places, events and other
contextual information, indirectly describing the image.

Other games with a purpose dealing with image annotation could also be considered to be extended to work over
personal image archives. The PexAce, however, has a significant advantage of being single-player and having its scoring
function independent of the quality of player annotations:
the scoring independence reduces the possibilities that a
player would develop a certain winning strategy in the game
which could potentially hamper the purpose of the game.
3.2 The Tag Extraction

The result of the game phase of our approach is a set
of raw textual annotations from each one is assigned to a
certain image (in a certain image set and album) by a certain
player. Our method processes the raw game annotations
by automated means to extract tags. Firstly basic natural
language processing methods  tokenization, lemmatization
and stopwords removal  are used to create tag suggestions.
A tag suggestion is a hypothetical vote of a player for a
certain term to be connected with an image.
It is based
on an assumption that terms used in the annotation text
(which could be a whole sentence or a sentence fragment)
are related to the image also individually. The follow-up
processing then tries to assume, how strong that relatedness
is.

We have devised several heuristics that estimate if the
individual terms should be assigned to the images. Given
that a tag assumption is a quartet of player, term, image
and album identifiers, an image gets decorated by a certain
tag:

 If certain number (in our experiments we used 2) of
players agree on the same suggestion for same image.
This was the validation method used also in the Pex-
Ace. This traditional crowdsourcing heuristics is very
restrictive.
It relies on sufficiently large number of

90Figure 1: The PexAce games player interface. Left grid represents game board with cards (1), some pairs
already disclosed (2), one currently ipped (3), annotable via text eld (4). Hovering over undisclosed cards
yields annotation tooltips inserted by player in the course of game actions (5).

players annotating the same image. With the low number of players however (a case of using the game for
personal image annotation), the method is prone to
let only few tags trough filter, rendering the approach
inefficient. Other heuristics were therefore devised.

 If the same user repeats the same suggestion multiple
times (we used 2) on the same image. Sometimes,
players encounter the same image in different game
sessions and provide annotations containing common
terms. Repetition might indicate (considering also the
players motivation) that the term is relevant to the
image, even it was not confirmed by other player.

 If there is a suggestion used by the same player over
multiple images (we used 4) in the same album. Here,
the heuristics counts on a widespread practice of image
owners to organize their images into album directories.
It assumes that a concept or term might recur within
multiple images in an album or even in the whole image
set. In particular, this might be case for some ownerspecific information like person names.

4. EXPERIMENTS

The purpose of our experiments and associated study was
to explore the capabilities of our method for personal images
metadata acquisition. We conducted it as a combination of
qualitative and quantitative methods. Quantitatively, we
measured correctness, specificity and understandability of
tags acquired through our method. Qualitative study examined further characteristics of the gameplay and of produced metadata and was conducted as an interview, using a
similar methodology as used by Vainio et al. [13].

Hypotheses and questions. Assuming a gameplay over

personal images and low number of players

1. Do tags generally describe the images involved in the

game?

2. Do tags address the specific context of the social group

they belong to?

3. How is the performance of the tagging affected, if players are aware about the true purpose of the game (e.g.
annotation of their own images)?

4. What types of group-specific metadata players express
through their annotations (e.g. person names, places,
events)?

5. Over which types of images, the approach works (e.g.
portraits, groups, situational images, no-persons im-
ages)?

Participants. The study was conducted with 8 participants split into two groups.
In each group, participants
belonged to a same social circle, having common interests
and also images they were familiar with. In each group, two
participants were designated as players, one as a judge for
tag evaluation and one helped with preparation of image
data set.

Data. For each group, a set of 48 images was created. Images were drawn from three albums belonging to the group
with the help of the group member. Each image was categorized either as portrait, group, situational (may involve
persons, but has a strong dynamics in it) and other/non-
person (e.g. architecture, landscapes, things). The albums
and images were selected in a manner that from each album,
an equal number of images was drawn to each category.

Methodology. The game experiment and study was
done controlled in the form of interview. The interviews
were done individually. We strictly followed prepared scenarios for each type of participant. The players were explained the rules and features of the game. Prior to that, in
one group, they were also introduced (as in Vainios study)
to the concept of image metadata and also about the true
purpose of the game  creating annotations for themselves.
This was done, so we could measure the impact of this knowledge with reference to the other group. All the players were

2134591free to speak any time during the gameplay and after it,
not just to answer our questions. These expressions were
evaluated later, qualitatively.

As for the judges, they were introduced to the concept of
(personal) image metadata, but not about the game. We
did this to keep judges as objective in the validation process
as possible.

Process. The player interviews with gameplay were ex-
ecuted. As a language, we used Slovak. During them, each
player played three games (with board sizes 6x6, 8x8 and
10x10), thus annotating each image twice (in 10x10, the
two pairs remaining for 48 prepared pairs has been drawn
randomly and were not considered in the experiment). After
all games have been played, the tag extraction procedures
were run. Then, the judges evaluated each tag assignment
for their group, answering questions:

1. Is the tag correctly describing the image?

2. If it is a correct tag, is it also specific for the group
(e.g. probably not discoverable by non-group player)?

3. If it is a correct tag, is it understandable for a nongroup member (e.g. for a portrait image an assigned
name is a self-explanatory and understandable tag)?

4. If this is a specific tag, of which type is it (choose one
of the followings: a person name, a place name, an
event where a picture was taken, other)?

4.1 Experiment results

Throughout the experiment, a total number of 366 tags
was extracted using the three heuristics mentioned above.
The traditional cross-player-voting heuristics (used in also
in the original PexAce) yielded (as was expected) just one
third of this number (exactly 122 tags). The rest was identified by the second (196) and third (48) heuristics (in that
order, i.e. already identified tags were skipped by latter
methods). This shows a major increase of tag output quantity for our extension of the original PexAce game  a traditional validation heuristic was weak, but the use of less
restrictive heuristics paid off and increased the tag gain.

The quantitative results of our experiment are summarized in the Table 4.1. For both groups together, the correctness of tags is about 90% (96% resp. 84%) and therefore
we consider our approach as able to acquire valid tags. In
average, about 38,5% (44% resp. 33%) of correct tags were
social-circle-specific, so our approach is also able to produce
tags valuable for personal archives.

Table 1: Table showing summary results of image tag evaluation (correctness, specicness for the
social group and understandability by group non-
member) for image sets of both social groups (aware
or unaware of the games purpose).

Aware (253 tags) Unaware (108 tags)
Corr. Spec. Und.


0,96 0,44 0,76

Corr. Spec. Und.


0,84 0,33 0,97


Portraits
Groups
Situations
Other
Average


Considering the total number of tags produced by each
group and the relative correctness, resp. specificity of tags,
we can see that though both groups provided some value.
The group where players were initiated to the purpose
of the game produced significantly better tags in absolute
quantity (total number of tags produced by the initiated
group was 2.5 times larger) and relative quality. Only the
understandability factor is reverse, which we explain to be
a consequence of higher absolute number of specific tags
passing through and having exclusive meaning (for instance,
there was a tag carrying name of event related to images, not
known to people who did not participated). More or less, we
can conclude that awareness about the purpose significantly
improves our methods results, however, as our qualitative
study has shown, players were also less enthusiastic about
gameplay when they were aware of the purpose.

According to judges, the specific tags mostly involved person names (53%). In lesser counts events (21%) or places
(15%) were present too. The rest (11%) was categorized as
other and involved mostly features originating from humor related annotations that players were using to entertain themselves. The humor is also a possible difference between performance of social groups in terms of specificness of
tags for the situational type of images. In the not initiated
group, the humor was present within the player annotations
and caused that term matching was not so successful for specific tags (with the far more disciplined initiated group on
the other hand). Both groups (as was expected) performed
well with portrait and groups types and were quite unsuccessful with non-person (other) type of images.

As a part of the qualitative study, we recorded that both
groups enjoyed playing over their own images, particularly
with those, they have not seen for longer time. A possible
negative feature of the game was also detected: the players
were confused and skeptical about having the same image in
more than a one game shortly afterward (which happened
because of the design of our experiment). They reported,
that they tended to use exactly the same text for annotation in both cases (which could potentially harm the term
extraction process) and that they were not sure, whether
they had seen the image in the current or a previous game.
A future-work image picking algorithm would have to take
into account the last date-of-see for each image and player.

5. CONCLUSION

Based on the experiments we conducted, we consider our
game-based approach as capable of delivering metadata suitable for personal image archives. The main advantage of
our approach is, that it can work with limited number of
participating players. This makes the game suitable to deploy within small social-circles or ultimately also for individual users. The small number of players is substituted
by unique combination of player motivation to provide valid
annotations  the game and competition experience as well
as promise of working on ones own metadata (resp. image
retrieval capabilities). We further shown that:

 The quantity of tags gained by our method was three
times higher, than it would be if we only use the cross-
player-voting (the original PexAce approach). Our
method is therefore capable of delivering tags in higher
quantities while retaining a comparable quality of tags
(even if we assume, that the cross-player-voting con-

92tributes the 100% quality, the latter extraction heuristics would have at least 85% output correctness over
the rest of tags).

 The difference caused by increased motivation and awareness of the games purpose have (in contrast with
other GWAP-related works stating the exact opposite [10]) significant positive impact on the overall approach performance in terms of tag quality and quan-
tity. A minor drawback however, was the lesser enthusiasm for playing in the (purpose) initiated group.
 Majority of specific tags produced carry the names of

persons and lesser the names of places or events.

 The game delivers correct tags for all image categories,
but in case of images without any persons, the number
of social-circle-specific tags is low, which renders our
approach limited for this type of images.

For the future work, we consider further enhancements to
our method. From the implementation standpoint, we plan
to construct and deploy a web-based version of the game,
which would be able to work with players online albums
and repositories (e.g. Flickr, Zenfolio). Next, we want to
move toward more advanced methods of term extraction:
we plan to employ term synsets (for term cross-validation)
and NER techniques, both to improve the valid term gain
from the same number of annotations.

Acknowledgment
This work was partially supported by the grants VG1/0675/
11/2011-2014, APVV-0208-10 and it is the partial result of
the Research & Development Operational Programme for
the project Research of methods for acquisition, analysis
and personalized conveying of information and knowledge,
ITMS 26240220039, co-funded by the ERDF.
