
LodLive, exploring the Web of Data 

Alessandro Antonuccio 

Venice, Italy 

Diego Valerio Camarda 

Rome, Italy 

Silvia Mazzini 

Rome, Italy 

 +39 348 7706552 
diego@lodlive.it 

+39 347 7357729 
silvia@lodlive.it 

+39 338 3971182 
ale@lodlive.it 

ABSTRACT 
LodLive project, http://en.lodlive.it/, provides a demonstration of 
the use of Linked Data standard (RDF, SPARQL) to browse RDF 
resources.  The  application  aims  to  spread  linked  data  principles 
with  a  simple  and  friendly  interface  and  reusable  techniques.  In 
this  report  we  present  an  overview  of  the  potential  of  LodLive, 
mentioning tools and methodologies that were used to create it. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
E.1 [Data Structures]: Distributed data structures  Graphs and 
networks 
E.2  [Data  Storage  Representations]:  Linked  representations   
Object representation 

General Terms 
Management,  Documentation,  Design, 
Standardization, Theory, Verification. 

Experimentation, 

Keywords 
Linked Open Data, RDF, SPARQL, graph, visualization. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
In the last years there have been a lot of linked data projects and 
hundreds of thousands triples have been stored in triplestores, but 
on the other hand its difficult to find visualization and browsing 
tools really based on RDF standards and able to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of these standards.  
We developed LodLive in order to: 

 browse RDF resources using a dynamic visual graph 
 link  resources  stored  in  different  endpoints,  discovering 

unexpected connections 

 browse inverse relations even between different endpoints 
 spread linked data standards and principles 
 offer  a  tool  which  is  ready  out  of  the  box  and  easy  for 

anyone to use 

 collect and show images linked in the browsed resources 
 show browsed resources on a map 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  to  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. I-SEMANTICS 2012, 8th 
Int.  Conf.  on  Semantic  Systems,  Sept.  5-7,    2012,  Graz,  Austria 
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1112-0 ...$10.00. 

LodLive may be a useful tool to explain and spread Web of Data 
principles.  It  can  also  be  used  to  verify  the  consistency  and 
efficacy of ontology descriptions and the integrity of the URIs. 
2.  ABOUT LODLIVE 
At  this  time  LodLive  presents  fifteen  different  ready  to  use 
SPARQL  endpoints;  you  can  add  or  remove  endpoints  from  the 
configuration  JSON  map,  you  can  also  customize  the  interface 
changing  the  look  and  feel  and  increase  navigation  efficiency 
throughout the data by specifying  the most appropriate SPARQL 
queries  for  the  datasets  you  want  to  explore.  LodLive  is  able  to 
guide  you  through  different  endpoints  if  you  configure  any  that 
contain resources connected by owl:sameAs properties. During the 
navigations LodLive  collects  the  images  provided  by  the  opened 
resources showing them in a gallery. It also collects the geospatial 
information and shows them on a map. 
LodLive, using the Sesame Framework, can parse RDF resources 
even  if  they  are  not  stored  in  a  SPARQL  endpoint.  In  that  case 
LodLive  generates  a  graph  on  the  fly  storing  the  requested 
resource  temporarily  and  makes  queries  on  it.  The  generated 
endpoint  contains  just  one  resource  so  LodLive  is  not  able  to 
calculate inverse relations but can anyway show Data Properties 
like titles, dates or descriptions. It can also show object properties 
so  the  user  who  is  browsing  may  continue  jumping  to  other 
resources one by one.  
The  basic  idea  underlying  LodLive  is  to  prove  that  resources 
published according to the W3C standards for semantic web are 
easy to reach and understand. We hope that the LodLive approach 
can stimulate Public Administrations and big data owners to add 
their resources to the LOD and share them. 
After some experimentation we noticed that LodLive can be used 
as  an  RDF/ontology  checker  very  helpful  in  the  early  phases  of 
ontology  definition,  the  graphical  representation  of  a  semantic 
Graph being the best way to prove the goodness of a RDF schema 
and  to  chose  visually  between  different  solutions.  LodLive 
doesn't provide any specific validation tools but it makes the user 
able to literally visualize an ontology and evaluate the goodness 
of  the  representation  choices  he  has  made  by  checking  Classes 
and Properties.   
The  main  innovation  of  LodLive  is  the  capacity  to  browse  a 
SPARQL endpoint directly by using a JavaScript application layer  
without  any  application  Server  being  needed.  LodLive  simply 
makes JSONP calls to the configured endpoints retrieving results 
serialized in the JSON format, then parses them in JavaScript and 
represents  the  resources  and  their  properties  in  an  HTML5  web 
page. This new way of browsing resources wants to demonstrate 
the importance of the use of SPARQL endpoints (because of their 
capacity to show inverse relations as well as direct) and encourage 

197the use of triplestore to improve federated  queries, showing  that 
Linked Open Data are superior to (just) Open Data.  
You can start your navigation querying the endpoint for a specific 
resource or start from one of the provided URI examples, then you 
can  follow  the  direct  and  inverse  connections  provided  by  the 
resource moving freely from one circle to another. Every new 
pop-open  resource  will  guide  the  user  to  those  relating  to  it, 
automatically  connecting  the  new  circle  to  the  ones  they  have 
already  opened.  A  big  circle  represents  a  class  identified  by  a 
color  and  a  label,  the  small  circles  surrounding  it  represent  the 
object  properties:  the  full  ones  represent  direct  relations,  the 
empty  ones  represent  inverse  relations,  the  black  ones  represent 
owl:sameAs  properties.  When  you  on  a  small  circle  a  new  big 
circle  is  opened  and  labeled  lines  are  automatically  drowned 
between  any  connected  opened  resources.  Every 
time  an 
owl:sameAs  property 
the  course  of 
navigation, LodLive will connect to the related endpoint, enabling 
the user to move to the new available resources within the same 
navigation environment thus showing the user the potential of the 
LOD cloud.  
LodLive is able to discriminate Datatype Properties from Object 
Properties and web URLs, images and even geographical chords 
among  these,  presenting  them  in  a  descriptive  area,  in  a  gallery 
and  in  a  map.  LodLive,  making  further  queries,  will  also  show 
Blank Nodes inner values in the descriptive area. 
LodLive  is  licensed  under  the  MIT  license,  and  it  can  be  used 
skipping  the  home  page  to  access  its  graphic  navigation  module 
by  simply  adding  the  URI  of  the  needed  resource  after  a  ? 
(question  mark)  in  the  URL  of  the  application,  which  makes  it 
easy  to  re-use  by  linking  and  adding  it  on  other  web  sites  or 
applications. 

is  reached 

throughout 

LodLive is composed of: 

 a jQuery plug-in (named LodLive-core) 
 a JSON configuration map (named LodLive-profile) 
 an HTML5 page 
 some images (sprites) 
 some other jQuery public plugins 

Figure 1 - LodLive working schema 

1983.  USING LODLIVE STEP BY STEP 
3.1  choosing a URI 
First  of  all,  choose  a  URI  using  the  provided  tools  or  call  the 
LodLive  URL  adding  ?http://your-resource.com/id.  Using  the 
endpoint  access  panel  you  can  make  simple  queries  on  the 
datasets,  choosing  a  Class  and  adding  some  keyword.  You  can 
even  choose  among  some  preconfigured  example  URI's  or  add 
you own new ones.  

3.3  browsing datatype properties 
You can access to the Dataype Properties of a resource clicking 
on the additional information button 
 located on the resource 
circle. A panel on the right will be shown containing the requested 
information even if they are stored in Blank Nodes. 

Figure 4 - additional information right panel 

3.4  browsing object properties 
You  can  expand  Object  Properties  and  open  other  circles 
representing  more  resources.  Every  new  resource  will  be 
connected to the others through arrows. Every arrow represent the 
direction  of  the  relation  and  is  labeled  with  the  name  of  the 
property.  Sometimes  one  or  more  properties  connect  the  same 
resources so more than one label can happen to be shown on the 
arrows. 

Figure 2 - single endpoint access panel 

3.2  showing resources 
LodLive makes his first JSONP call and represents the requested 
resource  on  a  circle  surrounded  by  many  smaller  ones  (Object 
Properties). The smaller circles are divided in different colors and 
shapes to suggest the type of relation. The flowers represent a 
group of identical relation and, if clicked, they will explode into 
more small circles. The colored circles are direct relations and the 
white  ones  are  inverse  relations.  The  circles  and  the  flowers 
marked with a small s letter are owl:sameAs properties. 

Figure 3 - a resource (big circle) and his object properties 

(small circles and flowers) 

Figure 5 - two connected resources 

Figure 6 - some exploded Object Properties connecting 

different resources 

1993.5  view images  
You can see all the images collected from the opened resources by 
clicking on the images button 
 located on a separate panel on 
the  left  of  the  page.  Every  time  you  open  a  resource  LodLive 
analyzes  his  properties  by  filtering  the  images,  then  it  adds  the 
collected  images  on  a  panel,  skipping  the  ones  that  are  not 
currently available. 

Figure 6 - left image gallery panel 

3.6  geolocalizing resources 
By clicking on the map button 
 located on the left of the page 
you'll open the map panel and see where the resources are located 
across the world. LodLive collects the properties it recognizes as 
geographical  chords  during  the  resource  browsing  and  shows 
them on a map.   
