Building Semantic Interoperability through the Federation 

of Semantic Asset Repositories 

(cid:109)

PwC EU Services 

Woluwedal 18 

B-1932 Brussels, Belgium 

joao.frade@pwc.be

Debora Di Giacomo 

PwC EU Services 

Woluwedal 18 

B-1932 Brussels, Belgium 

debora.di.giacomo@pwc.be

Stijn Goedertier 
PwC EU Services 

Woluwedal 18 

B-1932 Brussels, Belgium 
stijn.goedertier@pwc.be

Nikolaos Loutas 
DERI, NUI Galway 

IDA Business Park, Lower Dangan 

Galway, Ireland 

nikos.loutas@deri.org

Vassilios Peristeras 

European Commission, Directorate-

General for Informatics,  

Interoperability Solutions for European 

Public Administrations 

Rue Montoyer 34 

B-1000 Brussels, Belgium 

vassilios.peristeras@ec.europa.eu

ABSTRACT 
According  to  the  Interoperability  Solutions  for  European  Public 
Administrations (ISA) Programme of the European Commission, 
interoperability relates to the ability of disparate organisations to 
interact  towards  mutually  beneficial  and  agreed  goals,  involving 
the  sharing  of  information  and  knowledge  [1].  Semantic  assets 
and  the  agreements  associated  with  them  are  essential  elements 
for  organisations  to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  information 
they exchange (cid:177) without them this information would be of little 
use. In this paper, semantic assets are defined as ontologies, data 
models,  data  dictionaries,  code  lists,  XML  and  RDF  schemas 
which are used for information exchange and that can be reused 
by implementers of Information Systems, in particular, as part of 
machine-to-machine  interfaces.  However,  field  research  has 
shown  that  developers,  practitioners  and  researchers  working  in 
the  field  of  semantic  interoperability  in  eGovernment  tend  to 
reinvent the wheel and semantic assets are rarely reused. In order 
to encourage and bootstrap the reuse of semantic assets in the EU 
and beyond, this paper introduces two important initiatives driven 
by the ISA Programme: the Asset Description Metadata Schema 
(ADMS)  and  the  ADMS-enabled  federation  of  semantic  asset 
repositories on Joinup. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
D.2.12 [Interoperability] 
General Terms 
Standardization 
Keywords 
ADMS,  Semantic  Interoperability,  Metadata  management,  e-
Government, syndication of content, RDF, XML  

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers 
or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

I-SEMANTICS 2012, 8th Int. Conf. on Semantic Systems, Sept. 5-7, 2012, Graz, 
Austria 

Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1112-(cid:171) 

the  focus  of 

this  paper  (cid:177) 

information  across 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
The EU Digital Agenda [2] identifies the lack of interoperability 
between  electronic  public  services  as  one  of  the  seven  major 
obstacles  to  the  Digital  Single  Market  [3].  One  facet  of 
interoperability  (cid:177) 
is  semantic 
interoperability.  The  European  Interoperability  Framework  [4] 
   (cid:179)the  ability  of  organizations  to process  information 
from  external  sources  in  a  meaningful  manner,  such  that  the 
precise  meaning  of  exchanged  information  is  understood  and 
(cid:180)  
In 
the  EU  e-Government  Action  Plan  Plan  [5]  semantic 
(cid:179)(cid:171)
for  an  open,  flexible  delivery  Framework  of  e-Government 
services". It is a necessary (cid:177) but not sufficient (cid:177) condition for the 
electronic  exchange  and  usage  of 
the 
boundaries of information systems.  
Semantic interoperability requires consensus on data models and 
reference  data  (cid:177)  henceforth  referred  to  as  semantic  assets  (cid:177)  for 
to  happen  without  semantic  conflicts.  The 
data  exchange 
unnecessary  redundancy,  variants, 
lack  of  awareness  and 
management  of  semantic  assets  leads  to  increasing  costs  and 
overhead  in  the  development  and  maintenance  of  Information 
Systems. 
As they are enablers of interoperable information exchange, these 
assets  are  usually  created,  published  and  maintained  by 
standardisation  bodies.  Nonetheless,  ICT  projects  and  groups  of 
experts  also  create  such  assets.  There  are  therefore  many 
publishers of semantic assets with different degrees of formalism. 
Many  of  these  assets  are  developed  for  a  specific  business 
domain, others are  multi-purpose and cross sector. Some have  a 
very well clear geographical context, others are international. 
Despite 
importance,  semantic  assets  are  not  easily 
discoverable on the Web, e.g. via traditional search engines, and 
metadata about their meaning is seldom available. Navigating on 
the  websites  of  the  different  publishers  of  semantic  assets  and 
browsing  available  semantic  assets  is  not  efficient  either.  As 
finding them is not straightforward, ICT projects tend to reinvent 
the  wheel  and  recreate  semantic  assets  which  are  already 
available.  This 
redundancy  and 

fragmentation, 

results 

in 

their 


information.  Ultimately 

unnecessary waste of resources in the development of Information 
Systems  and  interoperability  conflicts  when  users  of  different 
semantic assets need to interconnect their Information Systems to 
exchange 
semantic 
interoperability. 
In  this  vein,  numerous  efforts  originating  in  different  domains 
have  kicked  off.  Hundreds  of  ontologies  from  Health  and  Life 
Sciences  have  been  registered  in  BioPortal  [6].  Bioportal  is  an 
instance of the Open Ontology Repository (OOR) Initiative. Other 
instances  of  OOR  include  Spatial  Ontology  Community  of 
Practice 
(SOCoP),  COLORE,  Ontohub.  However,  unlike 
Bioportal,  their  success  is  questionable  as  only  few  ontologies 
have been registered in them [7].  
The  eXtended  MetaData  Registry  (XMDR)  focused  on  the 
development  of  improved  standards  and  technology  for  storing 
and retrieving the semantics of data elements, terminologies, and 
concept  structures  in  metadata  registries  [8].  XMDR  aimed  to 
Propose  revisions  to  ISO/IEC  11179  Metadata  Registry  (MDR) 
Standard [9]. However, this effort is nowadays not active.  
Other previous work includes the eGov-Share project, which has 
led  to  a  CEN  Workshop  Agreement  [10],  and  the  Ontology 
Metadata Vocabulary (OMV) [11] focusing on describing general 
e-Government resources and ontologies respectively. 
Experience  has  shown  that  obliging  all  publishers  of  semantic 
assets  to  make  their  semantic  assets  available  on  a  centralised 
repository is in the majority of cases not a viable approach for two 
basic  reasons:  first,  there  are  simply  too  many  publishers  of 
semantic  assets;  second,  there  is  no  organisation  which  can 
sanction them to do this. Syndication of content seems to be the 
most  efficient  way  forward.  To  make  this  possible,  the  ISA 
Programme has created a vocabulary to describe semantic assets, 
the Asset Description Metadata Schema (ADMS) [12]. 
ADMS  is  a  standardised  vocabulary  which  aims  at  helping 
publishers  of  semantic  assets  to  document  what  their  assets  are 
about (their name, their status, theme, version, etc) and where they 
can  be  found  on  the  Web.  ADMS  descriptions  can  then  be 
published on different  websites  while the asset itself remains on 
the website of its publisher (a.k.a. syndication of content). ADMS 
embraces the multi-publisher environment and, at the same time, 
it provides the means for the creation of aggregated catalogues of 
semantic  assets  and  single  points  of  access  to  them  based  on 

ADMS descriptions. 
ADMS  will  do  for  semantic  assets  what  Really  Simple 
Syndication  (RSS)  has  done  for  Web  resources  and,  more  in 
particular,  for  the  publication  of  news  on  the  Web  by  the  many 
news publishers. Similar to RSS, once the ADMS description is 
created  in  RDF  or  XML  it  can  be  published  on  the  web  and 
understood  by  content  aggregators  everywhere.  The  syndication 
of  semantic  asset  descriptions  will  improve  their  visibility  and 
discoverability.  As  semantic  assets  become  more  visible  and 
discoverable,  more  projects  are  likely  to  reuse  them.  This  will 
improve interoperability as Information Systems  will use similar 
semantic  assets  at  interface  level.  The  publisher  of  the  semantic 
asset will benefit from a larger user base. 
2.  ADMS: A STANDARD VOCABULARY 
TO DESCRIBE SEMANTIC ASSETS 
ADMS [12] was conceived to overcome the barriers related to the 
discovery and sharing of semantic assets (see Figure 1).  
According  to  the  ADMS  Working  Group  any  of  the  following 
may be a semantic asset [12]:  

Syntax specifications, e.g. W3C Date and Time format 
[13], ISO 8601 [14]; 

(cid:120) 
(cid:120)  Code  lists,  e.g.  language  codes,  country  and  region 
codes such as ISO 639 [15], ISO 3166 [16], NUTS [17]; 
(cid:120)  Controlled  vocabularies  or  taxonomies,  e.g.  subjects, 
domains,  document  types,  quality  and  security  levels, 
such  as  Eurovoc  [18], Agrovoc  [19]  and 
the UK 
Integrated Public Sector Vocabulary [20]; 

(cid:120)  Reference collections of organizations and persons, e.g. 
registers  of  government  agencies,  business  registers, 
citizen databases; 

e.g. cadastre, spatial planning, map information; 

(cid:120)  References  to  geographic  locations  and  jurisdictions, 
(cid:120)  Metadata  specifications,  standards  and  schemas,  e.g. 
(cid:120)  Mapping 

UK e-GMS [21], NL OWMS [22], INSPIRE [23]; and 

conversions 
controlled vocabularies and metadata schemas. 

specifications, 

e.g. 

across 

The  ADMS  vocabulary  is  expressed  in  UML,  RDF  and  XML 
Schema. The last two can be used for exchanging descriptions of 
semantic assets over the Web.  

Figure 1 Core concepts of ADMS 


ADMS is expressed in RDF Vocabulary Description Language, a 
XSLT was developed to render it into an HTML page for human 
readers. 
The primary classes of ADMS are Semantic Repository, Semantic 
Asset and Semantic Asset Distribution. They are all subclasses of 
concepts defined in a generic model called RADion [24].  
A Semantic Asset Repository is a system or service that provides 
facilities for storage and maintenance of descriptions of Semantic 
Assets  and  Semantic  Asset  Distributions,  and  functionality  that 
allows users to search and access these descriptions.  
A Semantic Asset is an abstract entity that reflects the intellectual 
content  of  the  asset  and  represents  those  characteristics  of  the 
asset that are independent of its physical embodiment 
A  Semantic  Asset  Distribution  represents  a  particular  physical 
embodiment  of  a  Semantic  Asset.  A  Distribution  is  typically  a 
downloadable  computer  file  (but  in  principle  it  could  also  be  a 
paper  document)  that  implements  the  intellectual  content  of  an 
Asset 
The majority of terms used to express ADMS in RDF are reused 
from existing vocabularies, notably Dublin Core [25] and FOAF. 
Domain  [26],  and  range  restrictions  have  not  been  defined  for 
terms  reused  from  existing  vocabularies  and  have  only  been 
defined for ADMS's own terms. More specifically, attributes such 
as  dcterms:identifier  is  used  for  expressing  the  id  of  a  semantic 
asset and  foaf:homepage is used for linking to a Web page that is 
fully dedicated to a specific semantic asset.  
2.2  ADMS XML SCHEMA 
The  backbone  of  ADMS  in  XML  Schema  (XSD)  is  a  Common 
Library  of  information  elements  provided  by  the  Universal 
Business Language (UBL) standard [27]. 
The  philosophy  behind  this  design  is  to  achieve  reusability  of 
information elements defined by the Core Component Technical 
Specification (CCTS) of UN/CEFACT [28] (the basis of UBL). 
3. FEDERATION OF SEMANTIC ASSET 
REPOSITORIES 
The ISA programme in partnership with the DERI, NUI Galway1 
developed a prototype aggregator of  ADMS descriptions [29] to 
test the concept of syndication of semantic asset descriptions on 
the  web.  This  prototype  used  ADMS  v0.6  and  implemented  a 
SPARQL endpoint to federate a few publishers of semantic assets; 
the (cid:112) (DK), the XRepository (DE), and the European 
repository; former SEMIC.EU currently migrated to Joinup.  
Following the success of this prototype, the Commission  has set 
up  a  multidisciplinary  working  group  to  finalise  ADMS.  43 
people  of  20  EU  Member  States  as  well  as  from  the  US  and 
Australia have participated in the finalisation of ADMS. Most of 
them  were  experts  from  standardisation  bodies,  research  centres 
and the EU Commission. The working group used a methodology 
(cid:182)v.1 was officially 
released in April 2012.  
The  Commission  will  offer  a  single  point  of  access  to  semantic 
assets  described  using  ADMS  via  its  collaborative  platform, 
Joinup. This service will increase the visibility of semantic assets 

1 http://www.deri.ie  

described  with  ADMS  on  the  web.  This  will  also  stimulate  the 
reuse of semantic assets by pan-European initiatives, including the 
Commission leading to cost savings. 
For a semantic asset to be made available through the federation, 
three  steps  have  to  be  taken  as  illustrated  in  Figure  2.  First, 
publishers  should  identify  the  semantic  assets  that  they  want  to 
share and analyze them. The selected semantic assets should then 
be described following the ADMS specification (currently ADMS 
v1).  Finally,  the  descriptions  of  the  semantic  assets  should  be 
published  in  the  federation,  thus  making  them  discoverable  and 
retrievable.  

Figure 2 Typical adoption Use Case 

to 

4.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The Commission will continue to promote the adoption of ADMS 
by publishers of semantic assets and will launch the federation of 
semantic asset repositories in June 2012. 
ADMS  specification  will  be  contributed 
the  (cid:182)
Government  Linked  Data  (GLD)  Working  Group.  The  GLD 
Working Group was set up in 2011 to provide standards and other 
information which help governments around the world to publish 
their  data  as  effective  and  usable  Linked  Data  using  Semantic 
Web technologies. ADMS will be published by the GLD WG as 
First  Public  Working  Drafts  for  further  consultation  within  the 
context  of  the typical  W3C  standardization process.  The  desired 
outcome  of  that  process  will  be  the  publication  of  these 
vocabularies  as  open  Web  standards  available  under  W3C's 
Royalty-Free License. 
Finally,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  other  major  standardization 
bodies  such  as  OASIS,  The  Open  Group  and  ETSI  have  also 
