LEAPS: Realising the Potential of Algal Biomass
Production through Semantic Web and Linked data



Monika Solanki

KBE Lab

Birmingham City University

monika.solanki@bcu.ac.uk

Johannes Skarka
Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology (ITAS)

johannes.skarka@kit.edu

Craig Chapman

KBE Lab

Birmingham City University

craig.chapman@bcu.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
Recently algal biomass has been identified as a potential
source of large scale production of biofuels. Governments,
environmental research councils and special interests groups
are funding several efforts that investigate renewable energy
production opportunities in this sector. However so far there
has been no systematic study that analyses algal biomass
potential especially in North-Western Europe. In this paper
we present a spatial data integration and analysis framework whereby rich datasets from the algal biomass domain
that include data about algal operation sites and CO2 source
sites amongst others are semantically enriched with ontologies specifically designed for the domain and made available
as linked data. We then present a conceptual architecture
and a prototype implementation of a GeoWeb service that
provides querying and analysing capabilities over the linked
datasets.

General Terms
Semantic Web, Linked data, Algal biomass, SPARQL, On-
tologies

INTRODUCTION

1.
The last few decades have seen a consistent rise in energy
and oil prices along with a significant depletion of fossil
fuel resources. This has led to extensive research in the
search and production of naturally viable and sustainable
energy sources such as biofuels. Recently the idea that algae biomass based biofuels could serve as an alternative to
fossil fuels has been embraced by councils across the globe.
Major companies [4, 14], government bodies [19] and dedicated non-profit organisations such as ABO (Algal Biomass
Organisation) 1 and EABA(European Algal Biomass Asso-
ciation)2 have been pushing the case for research into clean
energy sources including algae biomass based biofuels.
Principal and corresponding author
1http://www.algalbiomass.org/
2http://www.eaba-association.eu/

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. I-SEMANTICS 2012, 8th Int. Conf. on Semantic
Systems, Sept. 5-7, 2012, Graz, Austria Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-
1112-0 ...$10.00.

In order to derive fuels from biomass, algal operation plant
sites are setup that facilitate biomass cultivation and conversion of the biomass into end use products, some of which
are biofuels. Microalgal biomass production in Europe is
seen as a promising option for biofuels production regarding
energy security and sustainability. Since microalgae can be
cultivated in photobioreactors on non-arable land this technology could significantly reduce the food vs. fuel dilemma.
However, until now there has been no systematic analysis
of the algae biomass potential for North-Western Europe.
In [20], the authors assessed the resource potential for microalgal biomass but excluded all areas not between 37N
and 37S, thus most of Europe.
In their report the IEA
Bioenergy Task 39 [5] point out that there is currently no
comprehensive analysis on the resource potential of algal
biomass available and emphasize the need for such a work.

The initiatives of producing biofuels from algae has immense
research and commercial potential.
It is also quickly evident that because of extensive research being carried out,
the domain itself is a very rich source of information. Most
of the knowledge is however largely buried in various formats of images, spreadsheets, proprietary data sources and
grey literature that are not readily machine accessible/in-
terpretable. A critical limitation that has been identified is
the lack of a knowledge level infrastructure that is equipped
with the capabilities to provide semantic grounding to the
datasets for algal biomass so that they can be interlinked,
shared and reused within the biomass community.

In this paper our objectives are two fold. Firstly, we motivate the use of Semantic Web [2] and linked data [3, 9] technologies to integrate, analyse and visualise various facets of
data from the algal biomass domain. We believe Semantic
Web and linked data have immense potential to contribute
towards making the systematic analysis of algal biomass potential available to stakeholders within a unified framework.
Secondly, we propose to contribute algal biomass knowledge
to the Semantic Web and the growing Web of data by

 laying out a set of ontological requirements for knowledge representation that support the publication of algal biomass data.

 elaborating on how algal biomass datasets are transformed to their corresponding RDF model representa-
tion.

 interlinking the generated RDF datasets along spatial

117dimensions with other datasets on the Web of data.

 visualising the linked datasets via an end user LOD
REST [6] Web service, LEAPS, (Linked Entities for
Algal Plant Sites).

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 motivates
the idea of using Semantic Web and linked data for algal biomass. Section 3 discusses related work. Section 4
presents the requirements for ontological representation of
algal biomass knowledge. Section 5 provides an account of
the raw datasets and illustrates our methodology for producing linked data. Section 6 presents the framework and
conceptual architecture for LEAPS. Section 7 illustrates an
example of the queries used in LEAPS and finally Section
8 presents our conclusions.

2. SEMANTIC WEB AND LINKED DATA FOR

ALGAL BIOMASS

One of the key gaps that have been identified within the
algal biomass domain is the lack of a semantically enriched
infrastructure for sharing and reusing knowledge.

An introspection of the algae-to-biofuels lifecycle reveals several layers where Semantic Web standards and linked data
technologies could be very successfully applied and immensely
benefit the community. Algal biomass data manifests itself
across several facets. At a very high level, the value chain
for algal biomass ranges from cultivation of algae to production of biofuels and other products from the cultivated
biomass [12]. Each of the core tasks of cultivation, harvest-
ing, processing and fuel production further involves several
intermediate processes. Besides managing the process level
domain knowledge from cultivation to marketing of the end
products, every stage in the algal supply chain is governed
by regulatory policies and strategies laid out by local government bodies and requirements defined by stakeholders.
Each of the facets consumes and produces a large volume
of unstructured data and information that opens up a huge
potential for semantically grounded information extraction
and knowledge representation technologies to be successfully
applied. Figure 13 depicts a schematic representation of
the algal biofuel value chain stages and the contributions
that Semantic Web and linked data could bring to each of
the stages. As illustrated, at each stage of the value chain
datasets can be described using well established as well as
domain specific ontologies. Besides integrating stage specific and intra-stage datasets, contextually relevant datasets
from the LOD cloud4 can also be exploited for interlinking.

Stage 1 encompasses the cultivation of algae.
It involves
setting up an algal cultivation site and incorporates datasets
about location related geographical information about the
sites, locations of sources of light, CO2, nutrients, water
and labour. The linked data for datasets is described using
domain specific and spatial ontologies.
In this paper we
showcase the publication of linked data for datasets from
stage 1.

3All figures in the paper are available at http://purl.org/
biomass/LEAPSFigures
4http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/lodcloud/state/

Figure 1: The Algal biomass supply chain

Stage 2 is concerned with the harvesting of algal biomass.
Datasets and vocabularies related to harvesting strategies
and extraction techniques are the key semantic outputs of
this stage. Besides domain specific ontologies, task and application ontologies for the processes involved in this stage
will play a crucial role in modelling knowledge.

Stage 3 involves the conversion of biomass to end use products such as biofuels and other constituents. Marketing of
the products is also an integral part of this stage. Application ontologies and product ontologies such as GoodRelations5 will be crucial in describing the datasets for this stage.

Upper level ontologies such as SUMO 6 and BFO 7 can be
employed as metadata specification at all the three stages.
Regulatory policies or domain specific rules can be specified
either as part of the vocabulary description using standards
such as OWL 2 RL8 or as rules using RuleML9, SWRL10
or RIF11. We propose to address this as part of our future
work as an extension to LEAPS.

Linked data applications built to serve the stakeholders rely
on an unambiguous and contextual representation of the domain knowledge in order to provide reliable and unambiguous answers to data driven questions raised by stakeholders.
Below we enumerate a few examples of informal queries that
could be potentially raised against the knowledge in stage 1.

 Which are the algal operation sites with CO2 sources
that have CO2 emissions less than 130000 kgs, where
total costs of supplying CO2 is lower then 5000 GBP
per ton of CO2, areal yield is greater than 30 tons per
hectare and which are located within the NUTS region UKM61? Supplement the data with supporting
information about the region.

 Which are the top ten algal operation sites with the

lowest impact on global warming potential?

 For a given algal operation site which are the first five

5http://purl.org/goodrelations/v1
6http://www.ontologyportal.org/
7http://www.ifomis.org/bfo
8http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-profiles/#OWL_2_RL
9http://ruleml.org/
10http://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/
11http://www.w3.org/2005/rules/

118most cost effective combinations of light, water, nutrients and CO2 sources?

In the following sections we illustrate how we describe and
expose some of the datasets from stage 1 of the algal value
chain as linked data, which facilitates the answering of queries
such as above as well as the visualisation of results.

3. RELATED WORK
To the best of our knowledge, there has been no effort so far
within the algal biomass community that exploits the potential of linked data and Semantic Web technologies for the
structured representation and sharing of knowledge. Therefore there are no controlled vocabularies and ontologies available to be readily reused or extended. The closest attempt
to build a taxonomy of algal strains is the AquaFuels12
project. The taxonomy is however made available as a PDF
file rather than a SKOS representation. This paper is a first
attempt in formalising biomass knowledge as OWL ontologies and publishing the datasets described using the ontolo-
gies, as linked data to be shared and reused by the algal
biomass community.

Outside the Semantic Web and linked data technological
infrastructure and within the broader context of bioenergy
and biomass, various efforts 13, 14 have been made to expose biofuels and biomass datasets to the stakeholders. The
BioEnerGIS Project 15 has developed a GIS based Decision
support tool, BIOPOLE [11] to locate the most suitable sites
for biomass plants feeding district heating systems. The
project focuses on biomass potential in the target regions
of Lombardy (Italy), Northern Ireland, Slovenia and Wallonia (Belgium). The data is stored in Microsoft access while
the Web interface of BIOPOLE has been developed using
Google maps and open layers. Clearly, the above applications are very limited in their capabilities to provide useful
support to the community in terms of sharing and reusing
knowledge.

A closely related effort on a much larger scale is the Bioenergy knowledge discovery framework (BioKDF) 16 from the
U.S. department of Energy. The portal provides a large suite
of tools, apps and spatial visualisation data maps, which
provide extensive querying options over the datasets powering the portal. Although the application presents an impressive array of features, the data made available through the
interfaces cannot be linked to external resources and there is
no evidence of ontologies being used to back the data mod-
els.

On the other hand Semantic Web technologies have been
successfully applied and several successful end user linked
data applications 17 can be found in domains such as govern-
ment, news, education, travel, music, archaeology [18] and
health care and life sciences amongst others. A project somewhat closely related to our work is the Reegle energy portal

12http://www.aquafuels.eu/
13http://maps.nrel.gov/biomass
14http://www.cifor.org/bioenergy/maps/
15http://www.bioenergis.eu/
16http://bit.ly/voHmzx
17http://bit.ly/voHmzx

18. The project provides various energy related datasets
as linked open data and a SPARQL endpoint to access the
datasets. It also provides a thesaurus for more than 3000
energy terms. In [21] the authors present a linked data infrastructure for data integration and resource discovery on
the Smart energy grid.

Some of the early works that discuss the exploitation of
linked data for building Web applications are [7, 8]. The paper and report respectively highlights tasks that need to be
undertaken in order to make the data compliant with linked
data principles and make it amenable to discovery and us-
age. More recently [9] provides a comprehensive overview on
various facets of linked data which includes its publication,
consumption and applications.

Besides being a framework that showcases the benefits of
structured knowledge representation within the algal biomass
domain, LEAPS is also a GeoWeb application. Extensive
work has been done in the Geospatial community towards
the development of vocabularies, publication and visualisation of linked data for geographical information. In [10] the
authors present an approach whereby geospatial Web resources such as location maps are treated as data in Semantic Web applications. The key idea is that these resources,
termed as geospatial proxies, could complement the semantic description of entities in some scenarios, i.e. the linked
data representation of the entities would include pointers to
these proxies. In another work [1] OpenStreetMap datasets
are transformed to the RDF data model.

4. MODELLING ALGAL BIOMASS KNOWL-

In this section we first outline a set of ontological requirements for the representation of knowledge in stage 1 of the
algal value chain. We focus on the requirements that are
crucial to the analysis of biomass potential. Guided by the
requirements, we then propose a set of ontologies. The set
comprises of well established ontologies that we have reused
and domain specific ontologies built ground-up. Together
these ontologies support the publication of algal biomass
linked data. We then propose some guidelines for URI design patterns for algal biomass community.

4.1 Ontological requirements
The domain and scope of ontologies for algal biomass is
driven by several key requirements as outlined below.

 Spatiality: The analysis of the biomass potential is
highly dependent on the locality of the possible algae
cultivation site as well as the location of the sources of
consumables (CO2, nutrients and water). It is therefore important to choose ontologies that can model
spatial concepts and relationships.

 Geometries: Another important factor in the calculation of the biomass potential is the area of the
cultivation site.
In order to represent various areal
configurations, an ontology that can represent extents,
polygons, linear and ring arrays is required.

18http://data.reegle.info

119 Units and Measurements: Besides conventional measurement units such as Kgs for quantities and hectares
for area, the cost analysis includes quantities of consumables specified in bespoke units of measurements,
i.e., Kgs/hectare or Kgs/annum. The ontology should
be expressive enough to be able to model such units.
 Territorial units for statistics: In order to assess
the overall economic potential of a region for algal
biomass cultivation, each of the potential sites in that
region have to be linked to their NUTS identifier. By
performing potential analysis on different NUTS-levels,
regions with high potential can be identified. An ontology that covers the core concepts of the NUTS system
is therefore an integral requirement.

 Domain specific knowledge: For each algae production site, information on biomass yield and site area
are determined. Additionally, data on CO2-providing
industrial or power plants are available for each site
and costs for CO2-supply can be calculated. Total
pipelines costs are determined based on the cost of the
pipes, the compression and the capture rates. Thus domain specific ontologies with levels of expressivity that
allow the modelling of attributes and relationships for
various biomass potential calculations are needed.

4.2 Ontologies for Algal Biomass
After establishing the requirements, domain and scope, an
extensive search of existing ontology repositories was undertaken in order to reuse or extend any previously defined
and closely related vocabularies. LEAPS utilises a set of
several well established and domain specific vocabularies as
illustrated in Figure 2.

tology 22.

Geometries for algal plant sites and pipelines have been
modelled using an extension of the NeoGeo geometry ontology 23. For the CO2 sources, the geometry is modelled as
a Point from the WGS84 ontology 24.

Modelling units and measurements for various attributes of
the algal biomass datasets was non trivial. The QUDT ontology 25 for dimensions and units was extended to include
bespoke units of measurements.

While it was relatively easy to discover ontologies for modelling spatial knowledge, units and measurements, discovering vocabularies conceptualising the domain knowledge for
algal biomass was non trivial. For this purpose, the ontology
space was also explored using Semantic Web search engines
such as Sindice26, SIG.MA27, Watson28 and Bioportal 29.
As noted in Section 1, due to the almost non existent uptake of structured knowledge representation in this domain,
the search did not reveal any promising domain vocabularies
that could be utilised off-the-shelf or that could be extended.
Most of the results yielded terms derived using automated
concept extraction techniques over Wikipedia and WordNet.
Many of the search results yielded URIs which did not resolve to any concrete ontologies. Given this limitation, barring a few principal terms which were extended from upper level ontologies such as SUMO and BFO, the concepts
and relationships for algal biomass had to be defined from
ground-up in accordance to the principles of ontology development proposed in [13]. The design of the ontologies
was very strongly guided by feedback from questionnaires
made available to the stakeholders, interviews with domain
experts, providers of raw datasets and grey literature from
the algal biomass and biofuels domain.

We developed conceptual OWL ontology schemas 30 for algal
plant site, CO2 sources, regions and pipelines. While the raw
datasets provided some guidelines about entities and their
attributes, the relationships between the entities within and
across datasets had to be established based on the informal
queries as exemplified in Section 2. Figure 3 illustrates some
of the core concepts, their relationships and attributes. The
figure also shows the relationship with the NUTS vocabu-
lary.

4.3 Designing URIs for Algal Biomass Data
The first two principles of linked data signify the importance
of URIs for publishing datasets on the Web of data.

Figure 2: Ontologies for algal biomass. Arrows indicate reuse

 Use URIs as names for things.

Spatial data has been modelled using a combination of several ontologies namely, WGS84 ontology 19, spatial relations
ontology, 20 the Geonames ontology 21 and the NeoGeo on-
19http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos
20http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/
ontology/spatialrelations.owl
21http://www.geonames.org/ontology/ontology_v2.2.1.
rdf

22http://geovocab.org/geometry
23http://geovocab.org/geometry
24http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84 pos
25http://qudt.org/1.1/vocab/dimensionalunit
26http://sindice.com/
27http://sig.ma/
28http://watson.kmi.open.ac.uk/WatsonWUI/
29http://bioportal.bioontology.org/
30Ontologies are available at http:/purl.org/biomass/
ontologies

120Figure 3: A partial account of core concepts, their
attributes and relationships

 Use HTTP URIs, so that people can look up those

names.

URIs provide a common mechanism to identify the same
Thing across the Web. Guidelines for URI design for public sector information [15] and location data [16] have been
published by the Chief Technology Officer Council, UK.
Inspired by these guidelines and in order to expose algal
biomass datasets as linked data, we propose URI patterns
for the datasets used in this paper to be reused across the
sector. Note that while we would like the URIs to be per-
sistent, they may evolve as the uptake of linked data within
the algal biomass community gains momentum.

In particular we propose URI sets for

 Algal plant sites
 CO2 sources
 Pipelines.

Figure 4 exemplifies some of the URIs minted for real world
algal biomass entities which have unique identifiers and which
are uniquely located in a certain NUTS region. It also illustrates the definition of a conceptual entity and a relationship
within the algal plant site ontology.

5. LIFTING XML DATASETS TO RDF BASED

LINKED DATA

As highlighted in Section 2, in this paper we focus on some
of the datasets that contribute to stage 1 of the algal value
chain. The datasets for stage 1 are utilised to make potential calculations for the production of algal biomass. By
performing potential analysis on different NUTS (Nomencla-
ture of Units for Territorial Statistics)31 levels, regions with
high potential can be identified. The calculations are based
on high resolution (300 m) data on possible algae production
sites and data on CO2 sources.

An account of the raw sources of the datasets along with
their purpose is available at [17]. All the datasets were
openly available in non-RDF formats with various origins.

The transformation of the raw datasets to linked data takes
place in two steps. The first part of the data processing
and the potential calculation are performed in a GIS-based
model which was developed for this purpose using ArcGIS
32 9.3.1. Raw datasets with various origins and formats are
first transformed using bespoke computational algorithms to
an ArchGIS specific XML format. This step is very crucial
for two main reasons: It brings uniformity in the format of
representation of the datasets and in the process of transfor-
mation, important computations that are part of the final
datasets are performed.

The second step of lifting the data from XML to RDF is
carried out using a bespoke parser that exploits XPath 33 to
selectively query the XML datasets and generate linked data
using the ontologies illustrated in Figure 2 and a linking en-
gine. While in most cases, transforming XML datasets to
their linked data counterparts is done assuming a simplistic
one-to-one mapping between the XML elements and RDF
entities, in our scenario, the original data sources had several
limitations and a one-to-one transformation was not possi-
ble. The XML data sources related the biomass production
sites and the CO2 sources via the pipeline dataset, i.e., the
pipeline dataset included for each pipeline, the integer IDs
of the production site and source it connected. There was
no direct relationship between the production sites and the
CO2 sources. This meant that in order to query for all
sources that supplied CO2 to a specific site, the query had
to be made via the pipeline dataset. Further the sites and
the source datasets included only the String literal identifier
of the NUTS region where they were located. In order to
produce a linked data representation of the datasets, that
directly interlinked the resources of sites, sources, pipelines
and region potential to each other and their NUTS regions
of location, a bespoke parser that utilised a complex underlying data structure to facilitate the transformation was
implemented.

The transformation process yielded four datasets which were
stored in distributed triple store repositories: Biomass production sites, CO2 sources, pipelines and region potential.
We stored the datasets in separate repositories to simulate
the realistic scenario of these datasets being made available

Figure 4: Representative URIs for Algal Biomass
Plant Site

31http://bit.ly/I7y5st
32http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis/index.html
33http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath/

121by distinct and dedicated dataset providers in the future.
While a linked data representation of the NUTS regions data
34, was already available there was no SPARQL endpoint or
service to query the dataset for region names. We retrieved
the dataset dump and curated it in our local triple store as a
separate repository. The NUTS dataset was required to link
the biomass production sites and the CO2 sources to regions
where they would be located and to the dataset about the
region potential of biomass yields. The transformed datasets
interlinked resources defining sites, CO2 sources, pipelines,
regions and NUTS data using link predicates defined in the
ontology network. Figure 5 illustrates the linkages between
the datasets.

Figure 5: Linked datasets for algal biomass

The integrated datasets enables a screening for promising individual sites, provides base data for more detailed planning
purposes and would be immensely useful to stakeholders in
research, national councils and industry.

6. THE LEAPS FRAMEWORK
LEAPS 35 is an end user LOD application with a Web interface built over RESTful Web services. For the stake holders in the biomass domain, it provides an integrated view
over multiple heterogeneous datasets of potential algal sites
and sources of their consumables across NUTS regions in
North-Western Europe. Figure 6 illustrates the conceptual
architecture of LEAPS.

The main components of the application are

 Parsing modules: As shown in Figure 6 and discussed
in Section 5, the parsing modules are responsible for
lifting the data from their original formats to RDF.
The lifting process takes place in two stages to ensure
uniformity in transformation.

 Linking engine: The linking engine along with the
bespoke XML parser is responsible for producing the
linked data representation of the datasets. The linking engine uses ontologies, dataset specific rules and
heuristics to generate interlinking between the five datasets.
From the LOD cloud, we currently provide outgoing
links to DBpedia36 and Geonames37.

34http://nuts.geovocab.org/
35The application will be made available online shortly on
a dedicated Web server. A video demonstrating the Web
interface of the application is available at http://purl.org/
biomass/LEAPSDemo.
36http://dbpedia.org/About
37http://sws.geonames.org/

Figure 6: Architecture of LEAPS

 Triple store: The linked datasets are stored in a triple

store. We use OWLIM SE 5.0 38.

 Web services: Several REST Web services have been
implemented to provide access to the linked datasets.
 SPARQL endpoints: SPARQL endpoints that provide
access to individual dataset repositories are available.
Snorql has been customised as the front end for the
endpoint. An endpoint for federated queries is planned
to be implemented as part of future work.

 Ontologies: A suite of OWL ontologies for the algal
biomass domain have been designed and made avail-
able.

 Interfaces: The Web interface provides an interactive
way to explore various facets of sites, sources, pipelines,
regions, ontolgoies and SPARQL endpoints. Figure 7
illustrates a typical site. The map visualisation has
been rendered using Google maps. Besides the SPARQL
endpoint and the interactive Web interface, a REST
client has been implemented for access to the datasets.
Query results are available in RDF/XML, JSON, Turtle and XML formats.

7. QUERYING LINKED ALGAL BIOMASS

In this section we highlight the benefits of representing algal biomass datasets as linked data and using Semantic Web
standards while querying the knowledge base. As outlined in
Section 3, conventional frameworks for querying over biomass
datasets do not explore knowledge available outside the datasets,
because of their inherent limitation of lack of linkages in the
dataset to external sources of information. Since we provide
links to major data hubs such as DBpedia and Geonames
we are able to provide useful background knowledge along
with the core data requested by the stakeholders.

38http://www.ontotext.com/owlim/editions

122?loc geo:long ?long.
?site site:hasSiteID ?siteID;
site:hasArealYield ?z.
?z qudt:quantityValue ?y.
?y qudt:numericValue ?arealYield.
?y qudt:unit ?unit.

SERVICE <http://localhost/repositories/co2source>
{ ?source a co2:CO2Source;

co2:hasSourceID ?sourceID;
co2:hasCO2Emission ?emission.
?emission qudt:quantityValue ?emissionQty.
?emissionQty qudt:numericValue ?emissionValue.

SERVICE <http://localhost/repositories/pipeline>
{ ?pipe a pipe:Pipeline;

pipe:hasSiteID ?siteID;
pipe:hasSourceID ?sourceID;
pipe:hasTotalCO2Cost ?cost.
?cost qudt:quantityValue ?qty.
?qty qudt:numericValue ?totalCO2CostValue.
?qty qudt:unit ?totalCO2CostUnit.

SERVICE <http://localhost/repositories/region>
{ regionID a ramon:NUTSRegion;

owl:sameAs ?related

FILTER((?emissionValue < 130000)

&& (contains(str(?region), "UKM61"))
&& (?arealYield > 30)
&& (?totalCO2CostValue < 5000) )

The Web interface of the application highlights several applications of precompiled federated queries. A SPARQL
endpoint that allows executing bespoke federated queries is
planned as an extension of the application.
8. CONCLUSIONS
Investigations into using algal biomass as an alternative source
of fuel is gaining widespread momentum. As research in the
sector progresses, a wealth of information will be available
that could be exploited by domain specific applications. In
order to facilitate further research and benefit commercial
setups, the accumulated knowledge needs to be made accessible in a machine interpretable and integrated format such
that it can be easily shared and reused by stakeholders of
the domain.

The Algal biomass community currently does not employ
any knowledge representation techniques to formalise and
structure valuable knowledge harnessed through their oper-
ations. In this paper we present a framework LEAPS that
exploits Semantic Web and linked data for making the analysis of biomass potential in North-Western Europe available
to the stakeholders. Specifically, the framework contributes
by

 enabling the screening of data for promising individual
plant sites and provides base data for more detailed
planning purposes.

Figure 7: A typical site as visualised with the
LEAPS Web interface

With our set of ontologies and URI patterns in place, we
generated linked datasets using the architecture outlined in
Section 6 and the approach illustrated in 5. Since our objective was to assess the potential of the production of algal
biomass in NUTS regions of North Western Europe, most of
the queries over the datasets are based on retrieving knowledge centered around location information. The queries are
federated across the various repositories holding the linked
data. As an example consider the informal query highlighted
in Section 2,

Which are the algal operation sites with CO2 sources that
have CO2 emissions less than 130000 kgs, where total costs
of supplying CO2 is lower then 5000 GBP per ton of CO2,
areal yield is greater than 30 tons per hectare and which are
located within the NUTS region UKM61? Supplement the
data with supporting information about the region.

The above query is federated between various datasets: the
sites dataset provides location data (lat., lng. for the sites)
and data about areal yield, the CO2 sources dataset provides
CO2 emission data for the sources and the pipelines dataset
provides information about the total cost of supplying CO2
to the sites. The NUTS regions dataset includes coreferences
to the DBpedia and Geonames dataset, which provides the
supporting information required to supplement the results
retrieved from the query. A SPARQL representation of the
query is listed below.

PREFIX site:<http://biomass.org/algae/ontologies/biomass#>
PREFIX co2:<http://biomass.org/algae/ontologies/co2source#>
PREFIX geo:<http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#>
PREFIX qudt:<http://qudt.org/1.1/vocab/dimensionalunit#>
PREFIX omgeo: <http://www.ontotext.com/owlim/geo#>
PREFIX pipe:<http://biomass.org/algae/ontologies/pipeline#>
SELECT DISTINCT ?siteID ?sourceID ?emissionValue

?arealYield ?totalCO2CostValue ?related

WHERE {

SERVICE <http://localhost/repositories/biomass>
{ ?site a site:OperationSite;

site:inNUTSRegion ?region;
geo:location ?loc. ?loc
geo:lat ?lat.

123 proposing a set of domain specific ontologies for algal plant sites, CO2 and pipelines to be shared and
extended by the community.

 defining a linked data publishing architecture that transforms raw data in disparate formats to a uniform XML
representation.

 n using a set of well established and domain specific ontologies as metadata to transform it further into linked
data.

 providing various data access options such as a SPARQL
endpoint, an interactive Google map interface and a
REST API for making the data accessible to stake-
holders.

In order to increase the uptake of Semantic web and linked
data by the algal biomass community, lots more needs to
be done. While LEAPS can currently provide integrated
information about algal plant sites, CO2 sources and the
pipelines connecting them, there are several other datasets
which need to be integrated once they become available.
One of the core datasets which should be made available as
linked data is that of algal strains. We are working with
biologists in the domain to facilitate the process of making
the taxonomy from the AquaFuels project available as SKOS
models. We believe this will go a long way in providing the
stakeholders information about the kind of algae that can be
cultivated on potential sites, thereby helping in a more accurate analysis of the economic potential of producing biofuels
from Algae.

Multifaceted visualisation of the integrated datasets is another area that we are currently focusing on to motivate the
idea of interlinking datasets. The reasoning infrastructure in
LEAPS is currently based on implicit OWL 2 DL inferences.
Work is also in progress on exploiting rule based reasoning
to model domain specific constraints.

Acknowledgments
The research described in this paper is partly supported by the
Energetic Algae project (EnAlgae), a 4 year Strategic Initiative
of the INTERREG IVB North West Europe Programme.
