Supporting Tourism Decision Making with Linked Data  

Marta Sabou 

New Media Technology Department  

MODUL University Vienna 
marta.sabou@modul.ac.at 

New Media Technology Department 

 Adrian M.P. Brasoveanu 
MODUL University Vienna 

adrian.brasoveanu@modul.ac.at 

Irem Arsal 

Tourism and Hospitality Department 

MODUL University Vienna 
irem.arsal@modul.ac.at 

ABSTRACT 
Decision makers in the tourism domain routinely need to combine 
and compare statistical indicators about tourism and other related 
areas  (e.g.,  economic).  While  many  organizations  offer  relevant 
data sets, their automatic access and reuse is hampered (i) by them 
being  offered  as  data  dumps  in  non-semantic  encodings;  (ii)  by 
them assuming some implicit knowledge that is necessary to build 
applications (e.g., that a city is situated in a certain country) and 
(iii)  by  the  use  of  incompatible  ways  to  measure  the  same 
indicator without formally specifying the assumptions behind the 
measurement  technique.  We  explore  the  use  of  linked  data 
technologies  to  solve  these  issues  by  triplifying  the  content  of 
TourMIS,  a  broadly  used  data  source  of  European  tourism 
statistics and by building a prototype system using this data.  

Keywords 
Tourism,  Tourism  Indicators,  Tourism  statistics,  Triplification, 
Data Visualization 

1.  INTRODUCTION  
The  tourism  domain  is  a  highly  complex  and  dynamic  domain 
where decision-makers often rely on forecasting models to predict 
future  demand  or  on  decision  support  systems  to  analyze  and 
compare  the  relevant  stakeholders  (e.g.,  competing  regions). 
Tourism statistics such as the number of tourists that arrive to and 
sleep  at  a  destination  are  important  for  the  industry  for  various 
decision  making  related  tasks  such  as  (i)  understanding  the 
contribution  of  tourism  to  the  destinations  economy  [3]  or  (ii) 
promoting  and  marketing  a  destination  by  forecasting  tourism 
demand,  setting  marketing  goals  and  exploring  potential  source 
markets [2].  In addition, tourism planners and public agencies can 
use  tourism  statistics  to  decide  on  planning  tourism  related 
facilities  and  infrastructure  such  as  airports,  highways,  bridges 
and water treatment facilities [2]. These important activities often 
require  combining data  from various data  sources. Indeed, if the 
decision-maker  only  makes  use  of  one,  isolated  data  source  his 
analysis is limited to the data available in that source and ignores 
other 
that  would  allow  discovering  complex 
phenomena and designing more accurate forecasting models. 
As a consequence of their importance, many organizations, such 
as the World Bank, the UN or Eurostat, provide tourism statistics 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS  2012,  8th  Int.  Conf.  on  Semantic  Systems,  Sept.  5-7, 
2012, Graz, Austria 
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1112-0...$10.00. 

indicators 

this  area, 

thus  overcoming 

(see  Section  2.1).  However,  these  tourism  related  data  sets 
primarily exist in isolation and they are often difficult to compare, 
as  they  contain  data  of  different  geographic  granularity,  time 
frequency or they employ different ways of measuring the  same 
indicator. While most data sets  are published  as open data, they 
use  syntactic  encoding  formats  that  lead  to  substantial  manual 
effort when integrating them. For example, difficulties caused by 
this technological status affected BASTIS1, a system that aims to 
support tourism decision makers in making better marketing and 
strategy decisions. BASTIS targets tourism stakeholders involved 
in  heritage  tourism  in  the  Baltic  Sea  region  and  provides  them 
with  information  on  trends  and  statistics  (both  tourism  and 
economic)  about 
the  general 
shortcoming  of  such  information.  BASTIS  integrates  data  from 
TourMIS (a key source of European tourism statistics detailed in 
Section 2.2.) and Eurostat among others, however, this integration 
is purely manual and therefore very costly and error-prone (based 
on email communication with the creators of BASTIS).  
To overcome such situations, we propose exposing the content of 
TourMIS  as  Linked  Data  and  explore  its  combination  with  data 
from  other  sources  to  support  typical  decision-making  scenarios 
such as those described in Section 2. While the tourism domain is 
often  seen  as  a  key  application  domain  for  linked  (open)  data 
technologies, typical tourism applications that make use of linked 
data have mostly focused on the needs of tourists (e.g., DBpedia 
Mobile). In  contrast, the needs of  tourism decision makers have 
been ignored so far, although they routinely need to combine and 
make sense of large, distributed and heterogeneous data sets.  
We continue by describing the details of our use case in Section 2, 
then we provide technical details about the data triplification and 
interlinking  activities  in  Sections  3  and  4  respectively.  We 
describe  a  prototype  application  that  makes  use  of  the  created 
linked  data  in  Section  5,  we  discuss  the  benefits  provided  by 
linked data to this use case in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7. 

2.  USE CASE  
Our use case focuses on the needs of decision makers in tourism, 
and in particular on enabling the following two scenarios that they 
frequently  encounter.  Firstly,  given  the  statistic  (and  therefore 
often unpredictable) nature of the tourism industry, when trying to 
understand the evolution of tourism indicators (over time, across 
competing regions, etc), decision makers need to combine tourism 
related  data  from  different,  complementary  data  sources  which 
might  provide  different  granularity  and  coverage  for 
that 
indicator.  Secondly,  when  forecasting  future  demand,  decisionmakers  must  broaden  their  investigations 
to  include  other 
indicators besides those in the tourism area and try to discover any 

1 http://www.bastis-tourism.info 

201significant correlations thereof. For example, economic indicators 
such as inflation rate2 or unemployment rate3 can have a negative 
effect on tourism. Or, when exploring the environmental effects of 
tourism,  a  decision  maker  must  investigate  any  correlations  that 
might exist between tourism statistics and sustainability indicators 
such as the percentage of forest area in a country4. We continue 
with an overview of key data sources for tourism decision makers 
and then provide details about the TourMIS system. 

tourism 

indicators 

2.1  Tourism Data Sets 
The  UN  provides  a  multitude  of  datasets  from  its  offices5, 
including  also  various  tourism  indicators  from  UNs  World 
Tourism Organization (UNWTO), such as, among others, arrivals, 
departures  and  tourist  expenditures,  measured  per  country  and 
year.  Much  of  this  data  is  open,  however,  only  provided  in  the 
proprietary  Excel  format.  Additional  UNWTO  data  is  only 
available as pdf downloads6. 
Eurostat provides a wealth of European level statistics7, including 
various 
(capacity,  arrivals,  bednights, 
expenditures  etc)  for  all  European  countries.  Measurements  are 
provided on a monthly basis. Data can be downloaded in a variety 
of formats including Excel, CSV, HTML, SPSS and PDF. 
The World Bank provides open access to over 8000 indicators8, 
including also a variety of tourism indicators measured annually 
and at a country level. The available datasets can be downloaded 
in XML and Excel formats, as well as accessed through an API. 
There are some  third party efforts to provide this data  as linked 
data such as those coordinated by ESDS9. 
We conclude that there are various sources that offer a multitude 
of indicators in the area of tourism and beyond. A general trend is 
offering this data as open data, primarily through downloading it 
in popular (non-semantic) encodings. We foresee however a next 
stage  when  more  thought  will  be  given  to  adding  metadata  to 
these  datasets  as  well  as  interlinking  them  in  the  spirit  of  the 
linked data movement and as pointed out by a recent blogpost at 
the World Bank [1]. Through the work reported here, we  take a 
step in this direction with the TourMIS system. 

2.2  The TourMIS System  
The  TourMIS  system10  is  an  online  database  that  consists  of 
tourism  market  research  data  such  as  bednights,  arrivals  and 
capacities  in  various  countries  and  cities  [5].  The  major  aim  of 
TourMIS is to have comparable data to help tourism managers in 
their  decision-making  processes  [5].  As  such,  a  supporting 
consortium,  including  National  Tourism  Statistics  Austria, 
European Travel Commission (ETC), European Cities Marketing 

2 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG 
3 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.TOTL.ZS 
4 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/AG.LND.FRST.ZS 
5 http://data.un.org/Explorer.aspx 
6 http://www.unwto.org/facts/menu.html 
7 http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/statistics/ 
search_database 
8 http://data.worldbank.org 
9 http://www.esds.ac.uk/international/access/LDaccess.asp 
10 http://www.tourmis.info 

(ECM)  and  Austrian  National  Tourist  Office,  ensures  the 
continued development and population of the system. TourMIS 
caters  for  four  main  user  groups:  firstly,  representatives  of 
national,  provincial,  regional  and  city  tourism  organizations, 
which are involved in long-term, strategic planning of the tourism 
development  of  a  region;  secondly,  tourism  suppliers  such  as 
suppliers of accommodation, food, travel, culture, sport as well as 
travel agencies and tour operators, which are mostly interested in 
local  forecasts;  thirdly,  educational  institutions  active  in  tourism 
research  and  fourthly,  consultants  and  public  authorities  and 
institutions. 
TourMIS contains data about three major tourism indicators: 
  Arrivals - the number of tourists that arrive to various types 
of  accommodations  (i.e.  hotels,  bed  and  breakfasts,  camp 
sites, etc.) at a destination; 

  Bednights - the number of bednights spent at various types of 

accommodations; 

  Capacity    the  total  bed  capacity  at  accommodations  at  a 

destination. 

tourism  organizations 

This data is provided by several organizations.  The National 
Tourism  Statistics  Austria  collects  data  from  the  Austrian 
accommodation  suppliers  regarding  key  tourism  indicators. 
ECM and ETC support the collection of measurements for the 
three  tourism  indicators  by  encouraging  their  members,  city 
tourism organizations (CTOs) of over 100 European cities and 
national 
(NTOs)  of  33  nations 
respectively,  to enter  their data  into TourMIS. The supporting 
consortium updates the TourMIS data  frequently, with new data 
being  added  almost  daily11.  Data  about  the  three  indicators  is 
available  from  1985  onwards,  in  relation  with  154  European 
destinations  (i.e.,  cities)  and  for  19  different  markets.  The 
indicators are measured both monthly and annually. As such, this 
dataset  is  more  detailed  than  similar  tourism  related  datasets  
(Section 2.1).  While other sources provide  annual measurements 
(except Eurostat), at country level, TourMIS contains both annual 
and  monthly  measurements  and  it  focuses  on  individual  cities. 
Additionally,  TourMIS  also  identifies  key  markets  based  on 
tourists origin, a feature not offered by any of the data sources we 
surveyed,  although  market  information  is  essential  for  tourism 
promotion  organizations 
international 
advertising  campaigns.  Besides  storing  raw  data,  TourMIS 
includes a method-base that computes a range of statistics such as 
market shares and market volumes of selected cities. 
3.  TRIPLIFICATION 
We triplified a subset of TourMIS containing raw statistical data 
about  the  Arrivals,  Bednights  and  Capacity  tourism  indicators. 
The data spans 28 years, 154 destinations and 19 markets (as well 
as three generic markets that cover the domestic, the foreign and 
the total market and are codified as ZI, ZA and ZZ respectively). 
TourMISs  REST  API  returns  an  XML  file  containing  a  set  of 
measurements where each measurement is about one of the three 
tourism indicators, it refers to one destination (e.g., TLL, which is 
a code for Tallinn), it has an associated year, as well as month if it 
is  a  monthly  reading,  and  a  value.  The  Arrivals  and  Bednights 
measurements  also  specify  a  market  denoting  the  country  from 
where  the  tourists  come  from  (e.g.,  RU,  for  Russia).  The 
following  example  shows  the  XML  encoding  of  an  arrivals 

in  developing 

their 

11 See http://www.tourmis.info for the latest TourMIS updates. 

202measurement for Tallinn, where 28033 Russian tourists arrived to 
Tallinn  in  January  2012.  We  have  triplified  a  total  of  201  762 
measurements. 
<data> 

<destination>TLL</destination> 
<market>RU</market> 
<year>2012</year> 
<month>1</month> 
<value>28033</value> 

</data> 
For the triplification process, we designed an ontology to describe 
the various measurements and their characteristics (Figure 1). The 
ontology models the various types of measurements and concepts 
needed  to define  their properties. ExceptionToDefinition 
is  used  to  record,  using  a  textual  comment,  cases  when  the 
measurement differs from the main definition, for example, when 
arrivals are measured "in city area only (AG)" or "in greater city 
area (AGS)". Currently, we model  these exceptions  as TourMIS 
does,  i.e.,  as  textual  comments,  however,  we  envision  a  more 
formal, axiom-based modeling as future work. 

Figure 1: Concept Hierarchy for the TourMIS Ontology 

For transforming the TourMIS content into RDF data based on the 
ontology, we extracted the data described above using the servers 
REST  API.  This  data  was  then  transformed  into  an  ontology 
model using the Jena12 library and saved into an RDF files.  
We  have  also  considered  the  use  of  existing  database  to  RDF 
translators  such  as  D2R  or  other  tools  providing  RDF/SPARQL 
access to relational databases13, however, we did not use them at 
this stage because the TourMIS database itself was undergoing a 
re-design to ensure its scalability. We will consider adopting such 
an automated solution once TourMIS has been updated, as it will 
better  suit  the  dynamic  nature  of  the  TourMIS  data  and  it  will 
allow new updates to be accessible as Linked Data as soon as they 
are added to TourMIS (with the current solution, the linked data 
set has to be regenerated to include updates). 
The final data  set accounts to just over 1 million triples. Due  to 
licensing issues described in Section 7, we are unable to provide 
this  dataset  publicly.  We  have,  however,  published  a  sample  of 
the dataset for inspection by the reviewers of this submission. The 
sample  contains (i)  all (1586) Arrivals measurements from 1985 
to 2012, measured annually, for all destinations and for the total 
market  (ZZ);  (ii)  all  (9989)  Bednights  measurements,  for  all 
destinations and all markets, measured monthly during 2005; and 
(iii) all (107) Capacity measurements, for all destinations, for year 
2007. While only a portion of the entire dataset, this sample will 
allow for checking technical correctness as well as it will give an 
insight  into  the  key  characteristics  of  the  dataset  (the  three 

12 http://incubator.apache.org/jena 
13 such as those listed at: http://d2rq.org/resources 

page 

dedicated 

to 

to 

this 

paper 

linked  all  countries 

measurements,  the  availability  of  data  over  28  years,  for  158 
destinations  and  19  markets).  The  dataset  is  stored  in  an 
OpenRDF  Sesame  repository14  and  can  be  accessed  from  the 
resource 
at 
http://tourmislod.modul.ac.at/tourmis.html. 
4.  INTERLINKING  
To lift the triplified dataset to a 5-star linked data quality level, we 
have  established  links  between  DBpedia  resources  and  the 
corresponding  destinations  in  TourMIS  (154  European  cities)  as 
well as the 19 countries that constitute the key markets covered by 
the system.  Links for both cities and countries were identified by 
querying DBpedia for entities that had the same English label as 
the label of the city/country in TourMIS (for each code used, such 
as  TTL  or  RU,  TourMIS  provides  a  corresponding  label)  and, 
additionally,  they  were  of  type  dbo:PopulatedPlace.  With 
this  query  we  successfully 
the 
corresponding DBpedia entity, and all except 20 cities. The major 
reason for  failing to find a link, was, in most of  the  case, that a 
city  did  not  have  a  dbo:PopulatedPlace  property.  Given 
the  small  number  of  outliers,  we  preferred  to  manually  add  the 
correct links for these cities instead of defining another query that 
would successfully identify links for them.  
6.  APPLICATION  
While  our  efforts  so  far  have  been  focused  on  triplifying  and 
publishing (internally) the TourMIS dataset, we have also started 
to develop applications that take advantage of the benefits of the 
linked dataset. A first prototype15, depicted in Figure 2, allows a 
visual comparison between data from TourMIS and other sources 
(currently from the World Bank). The interface allows selecting a 
country  of  focus  and  a  relevant  indicator  (currently  we  only 
support the Arrivals indicator, but we are developing support for 
the others as well). Since TourMIS offers city level data, we add 
up all the data  from  the cities belonging to  the selected country 
and  visualize  it  against  country-level  statistics  from  the  World 
Bank. However, TourMIS does not contain any information about 
the country to which a destination belongs. To solve this issue, we 
query  DBPedia  for  this  information  and  therefore  automatically 
determine the destinations that are relevant for a given country. 

Figure 2:Prototype Interface 

The  prototype  supports  decision  makers  in  the  first  scenario 
described  in  Section  2,  in  which  they  need  to  compare  similar 

14 http://www.openrdf.org 
15 Also available at http://tourmislod.modul.ac.at/tourmis.html. 

203tourism datasets which have a different granularity (in our case, a 
geographic  granularity).  The  visualization  supports  a  variety  of 
analysis  tasks.  Firstly,  the  graph  illustrates  the  share  of  tourism 
arrivals in the 9 main Austrian cities with respect to arrivals in the 
entire  country.  According  to  this  graph,  cities  attract  only  one 
third  of  Austrian  tourism,  but  almost  the  entire  growth  in  the 
industry  is  due  to  intensified  city  tourism.  This  could  lead  to 
decisions related to intensifying the marketing for city or general 
tourism. Secondly, the similar trends of the two lines (e.g., growth 
of arrivals over years, quick recovery after the 2011 crisis period) 
prove that the two data sets correlate well and that they are both 
correct. Finally, by taking advantage of the higher granularity of 
TourMIS data, this prototype could allow diving into details, by 
showing  how  the  total  arrivals  provided  by  TourMIS  are 
distributed  over  the  9  Austrian  cities  and  the  19  markets.  This 
ability to zoom into details is a key feature of all decision support 
systems, and will be implemented as future work. 
7.  BENEFITS OF USING LINKED DATA  
We hereby discuss the benefits of linked data technologies for the 
tourism  domain  and  explore  possibilities  of  evaluating  these 
benefits.  A  first  benefit  refers  to  syntactic  interoperability,  as 
linked  data  technologies  could  enable  a  common  technical 
infrastructure for  sharing tourism data that would go beyond the 
current  practice  of  providing  data  dumps  and  APIs,  and, 
consequently facilitate the automatic and dynamic consumption of 
these  data  sets  in  novel  (decision  supporting)  applications. 
Similarly  to  the  case  of  scientific  data,  LD  could  provide  a 
technical solution for exposing data in a uniform format, allowing 
easy access to it and facilitating cross-source data integration [6].  
Another benefit comes from the links that are established between 
data  sets.  While  these  links  facilitate  data  integration  primarily, 
they  also  allow  augmenting  one  data  source  with  additional 
knowledge.  For  example,  by  linking  TourMIS  cities  to  the 
corresponding DBpedia resources, we could automatically detect 
the  country  where  each  destination  is.  As  such,  within  this 
prototype, we augmented TourMIS with this location information, 
which  it  does  not  provide.  Without  this  information,  leveraged 
thanks to the previously  established links, detecting which  cities 
belong to which countries would have been a tedious manual task.  
The  semantics  that  linked  data  sets  can  carry  is  an  additional 
benefit.  For  example,  using  formal  structures  to  specify  the 
definition of each measurement (and exceptions to it) as opposed 
to  simply  adding  a  text  comment,  would  allow  comparing  the 
definition  of  measurements  within  and  across  data  sets  thus 
making  sure  that  the  right  data  are  compared.  Solutions  such  as 
using OpenMath [4] will be investigated as future work. 
Evaluating the benefits of the proposed linked data based solution 
with concrete, quantifiable measures is hampered by the following 
factors. Firstly, we just completed the data triplification stage and 
only had time to build one prototype  application. As with many 
linked data sets, their benefits are only understood after a period 
of time needed by the community to build innovative applications 
with  it.  Therefore,  we  plan  to  measure  success  as  directly 
proportional  to  the  adoption  of  this  dataset  over  time  by  the 
TourMIS  consortium  and  the  public  (subject  to  the  licensing 
issues detailed in Section 7). Secondly, the proposed LD solution 
aims to support the decision making process, whose benefits are 
by  large  intangible.  We  can  however  indirectly  measure  the 
success of our project by the number and complexity of decision 
processes  (e.g.,  structured,  semi-structure  and  unstructured 
decisions) that can be supported.  

8.  SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 
We have focused on the use case of supporting tourism decision 
makers  in their activities of  combining and comparing statistical 
indicators. After transforming TourMIS data into linked data and 
building  a  system  that  uses  it  we  concluded  that  linked  data 
technologies  (i)  can  support  uniform  data  access;  (ii)  allow 
bringing in additional knowledge from third party sources thanks 
to the established links; and (iii) can be used to formally specify 
the measurements used by different sources thus allowing for their 
automatic combination and comparison (this is future work). 
Licensing has been a major issue for our project. TourMIS is cofinanced by multiple organizations and is updated by a range of 
different  contributors  (Section  2.2).  While  form-based  data 
extraction is free upon registration with TourMIS, opening up the 
entire  data  set  for  querying  by  third  parties  is  a  major  step  that 
raises  intricate  licensing  issues  given  the  datas  heterogeneous 
origin. Therefore, for now the linked data remains closed and for 
use only within the TourMIS consortium, but discussions with the 
other stakeholders of the system are ongoing about the possibility 
to open (at least parts of) this data for public querying. 
We have many future plans. Firstly, we will continue by exposing 
not just raw data, but also data points derived by the model base 
such as market-size or market-share. Here  careful considerations 
must be given to conveying the meaning of the statistical formula 
used to derive these data points, as described in [4]. Secondly, we 
will also expose data about sights/attractions from TourMIS. This 
will  provide  an  additional  dimension  to  the  data,  and  will  raise 
more  complex  linking  issues.  In  terms  of  applications,  we  will 
extend  the  current  prototype  in  line  with  requirements  from  the 
TourMIS consortium and to include additional data sources, more 
indicators and diverse visual metaphors (e.g., maps). We will also 
explore  collaboration  with  projects  that  currently  use  a  manual 
approach to re-use and integrate TourMIS data, such as BASTIS.  
9.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  work  was  developed  within  DIVINE,  a  project  funded  by 
FIT-IT  Semantic  Systems  of  the  Austrian  Research  Promotion 
Agency (FFG) and the Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation 
and Technology (BMVIT). A. Brasoveanu was partially supported 
by 
the  strategic  grant  POSDRU/88/1.5/S/60370  (2009)  on 
"Doctoral  Scholarships"  of  the  Ministry  of  Labor,  Family  and 
Social Protection, Romania,  co-financed by  the European Social 
Fund  Investing in People. 
10.  REFERENCES 
[1]  Badiee, S. 2012. Open Data at the World Bank: 2 years 

today. Blogpost. http://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/open-
data-at-the-world-bank-2-years-old-today 

[2]  Frechtling, D., C. 2001. Forecasting Tourism Demand: 

Methods and Strategies. Butterworth Heinemann. 

[3]  Stronge, W. B. 1993. Statistical Measurements in Tourism. 
In VNR's Encycl. of Hospitality and Tourism, pp. 735-745. 

[4]  Vrandecic, D., Lange, C.,  Hausenblas, M.,  Bao, J. and 

Ding, L. 2010. Semantics of Governmental Statistics Data. In 
Proc. of the WebSci. 

[5]  Wober, K. 2003. Information supply in tourism management 

by marketing decision support systems. Tourism 
Management. 24:3, pp:241-255. 

[6]  Zapilko, B., Harth, A. Mathiak, B. 2011. Enriching and 

analysing statistics with Linked Open Data. In Eurostat Conf. 
