
D. Thakker et al.

Fig. 9. Ontological representation of one of the resultant ROIs (selection: n = 1 and RUC ).

Finalising Aggregation Function(s) to Implement. Experts were shown a mock-up of
ROIs with different selections (above). The aggregation function Portions with the
same classification ( RUC ) was deemed to be most useful for decision-making and was
implemented for the final version of the ROI inferencing service. Detecting regions
with portions that have pathologies belonging to the same classification helps decision
makers to decide on an overall approach they can take while addressing problematic
tunnel regions. Grouping affected regions according to the pathology classification is
helpful in making decisions about expertise, treatment and equipment required for
maintenance. For example,
infrastructure managers are required to send different
equipment to repair lining degradation pathologies from the one needed to fix ground
degradation pathologies. Similarly, it will require different skillsets to repair different
type of pathologies.

5 Evaluation

Overall Set-up. An evaluation was carried out to verify the correctness of the PADTUN components, namely the ontologies, pathology and ROI Inferencing components.
The goal of the evaluation was to discover any issues and to identify improvements in
these components. In addition, it was also important to check the correctness of the
input we received from the experts. Experts provided rules as tables indicating the
situations under which a particular pathology is likely to occur. The cumulative effect
of these rules and whether they match the experts tacit judgment about pathologies is
something else we aimed to capture during the evaluation.

The evaluation was conducted with tunnel experts from the project with extensive
tunnel

experience in diagnosing tunnels and strategic decision-making about
maintenance.

Pathology Inferencing Evaluation & Results. Figure 10 shows the partial interface
for the pathology inferencing component of the PADTUN system. The columns rank
?

?

?
and pathology shows the rank of the pathology. The disorders column shows the
disorders that were present in the tunnel portion under investigation and contributed to
manifesting this pathology. The colour coding shows whether the disorders are typical
disorders for the pathology.

Fig. 10. The PADTUN interface for the pathology inferencing service. It shows results of
disorders-based pathology inferencing on a tunnel portion.

For this evaluation, 41 portions of 3 tunnels were selected by consulting the experts.
The aim was to select tunnel portions with a good variety of disorders. The experts were
provided the output of the pathology inferencing service as part of the interface
(Fig. 10). They were asked to comment on individual (disorder and diagnosis influencing factors based) pathology inferencing and cumulative pathology inferencing
results.

The experts approved the presence of the pathologies and their ranking in all the
test cases for the individual (disorder and diagnosis influencing factors based)
pathology inferencing. However, during discussions it became evident that although
they agreed with the individual inferencing they were not satisfied with the cumulative
calculations. We discovered that the pathologies were correctly calculated based on
disorders and diagnosis influencing factors and according to the rules encoded.
However, in their tacit calculations, experts always expected a pathology to be present
in both the lists for them to consider the pathology in the cumulative list. As a result of
this exercise, this cumulative list rule was added to the ontology and to the pathology
inferencing service. This scenario highlights the need of domain expert involvement in
testing ontologies and the resultant benefit in terms of ongoing knowledge expansion.

ROI Inferencing Evaluation & Results. A gold standard consisting of 3 tunnels and
respective ROIs was collected from tunnel experts. These three tunnels have a different
number of portions. The tunnel 1 is one of the smallest tunnels with 19 portions but a
higher number of pathologies. The tunnel 2 has 35 portions with some portions without
any pathology. The tunnel 3 has 42 portions and a good mix of lining disorders and
pathologies. The evaluation included these 96 portions. For each of these tunnels,
experts provided ROIs based on pathology classification. For example:

Portions 1 to 3 in tunnel 1 have pathologies from Lining Degradation classifica-
tion; Portions 1 to 19 in tunnel 1 have pathologies from Lining Ageing degradation
classification.

D. Thakker et al.

Fig. 11. The PADTUN interface showing the overview of pathologies across tunnel portions.
(1) shows the regions of interest with pathologies from the same classification, e.g., (2) Lining
Degradation and (3) Lining Ageing.

Figure 11 depicts the PADTUN interface showing the overview of pathologies

across tunnel portions and highlighting ROIs.

The output of the ROI Inferencing was compared with the gold standard using
traditional IR approach of precision, recall and F-Measure [15]. True positives (tp -
exact matches from the system list and gold standard), false positives (fp - the system
indicated ROIs that were not in the expert list), true negatives (tn- possible ROIs that
were not present in either of the lists) and false negatives (fn- a region that was not
present in the system list but was present in the gold standard) were calculated.

The result is summarised in Table 2. Three configurations of the ROI inferencing
service are considered. In the first one, for a classification to be considered at least one
pathology from the classification has to be in the top three ranks. The second configuration is more restrictive and expects at the least two pathologies from a classification in the top three ranks for the classification to be considered. In the final

Table 2. Precision, recall and F-Measure results for the ROI inferencing component; (left)
considering ROIs with at least one pathology from a classification in the top 3 ranks; (middle)
considering ROIs with min 2 pathologies from a classification in the top 3 ranks; (right) considering
ROIs with at least three portions.
?

?

?
configuration, if any ROI has three or fewer portions then the ROI is discarded from the
analysis ensuring that ROIs contain a substantial number of portions for the analysis.
The configuration with the rule that at least two pathologies of a classification need
to be present in an ROI achieved the highest result in all three criteria. F-Measure was
84 %. Under an interpretation of the agreement between expert list and system list of
ROIs, this is considered to be an almost perfect agreement [16]. The configuration
restricting cut-off number of portions per ROI achieved similar performance. The least
restrictive configuration fared worst with 54 % precision.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper, we have demonstrated the application of semantic web technologies in a
new domain of tunnel diagnosis and maintenance. A DSS system, PADTUN, is presented that supports tunnel experts with decision-making about diagnosing pathologies
and detecting continuous portions with similar pathology spread. This was only possible with semantic web technologies as the aggregation mechanism requires semantic
reasoning over pathology classification. Use of semantic technologies makes the
framework flexible where the domain experts can select larger and more granular
portions with different configuration including selecting portions with similar pathologies in top ranks and ignoring short gaps. This flexibility allows us to work with the
experts to select an ideal configuration, which is in our plans for immediate future
work.

Acknowledgements. This work is part of the NeTTUN project, funded by the EC 7th Framework under Grant Agreement 280712.
