e-Document Standards as Background

Knowledge in Context-Based Ontology Matching

Audun Vennesland(B)

Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway

audun.vennesland@idi.ntnu.no

Abstract. Ontology matching is the process of finding correspondence
between heterogeneous ontologies and consequently support semantic
interoperability between different information systems. Using contextual
information relative to the ontologies being matched is referred to as
context-based ontology matching and is considered one promising direction of improving the matching performance. This PhD investigates how
such contextual information, often residing in disparate sources and represented by different formats, can be optimally represented to ontology
matching systems and how these systems best can employ this context to
produce accurate and correct correspondences. Currently we are investigating how the international e-Document standard Universal Business
Language from the transport logistics domain can provide useful context
when matching domain ontologies for this particular domain. Early evaluation tests and analysis of the results suggest that the current version
of the Universal Business Language ontology does not impact on the
matching results and that further reconfiguration and enhancements are
needed.

1 Introduction

The use of external context as input to identifying correspondence between heterogenous ontologies is seen as a promising approach within ontology matching
[1,2] and is referred to as context-based ontology matching. When two ontologies
are to be matched, they often lack a common ground on which comparisons can
be based. In context-based ontology matching the intention is to establish such
a common ground using the relations between the ontologies being matched and
their environment represented by external resources [3].

Often the external resources are represented by formal or less formal ontologies [4,5] or other sources of context. However, the quality of the external sources
varies [6], something which threatens the validity of the identified alignments.
Moreover, even if the application of semantic technologies is mature in some
domains the use of semantic technologies is still limited in many other domains
and formalized context is difficult to come by. A survey among ontology matching practitioners [2] states that integration of domain knowledge into alignment
techniques is a significant challenge. Hence, investigation of other and reliable
sources of context as well as improved techniques for exploiting such context is
required.
c Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
F. Gandon et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2015, LNCS 9088, pp. 806816, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18818-8 53
?

?

?
e-Documents standards specify through message specifications (including
XSD schemas), business process descriptions, narratives, instance data and other
material how information should be exchanged electronically.

Our approach is to identify appropriate methods for transforming such contextual information into a more formal representation, investigate how it can be
optimally employed by ontology matchers, and evaluate its impact on the ontology
matching process. e-Document standards is selected as a case based on their inherent qualities (presumably quality assured and sustainable information, mixture of
domain-specific and more generic information elements, a combination of structured and unstructured formats, and the availability of proper instance data).

2 State of the Art

2.1 Context-Based Ontology Matching

Ontology matching is the process of identifying correspondences (alignments)
between heterogeneous ontologies that enable the information systems applying
the ontologies to interpret data being communicated among them. Euzenat and
Shvaiko [3] distinguishes between element-level techniques and structure-level tech-
niques. Element-level techniques focuses on the ontology entities (or instances of
them) themselves while disregarding their relations with other entities (or instances
of them). Examples of such techniques are string-based similarity measures (which
might identify correspondences based on name similarity), language-based techniques (e.g. using NLP and lexical resources to capture conceptual similarity and
hence correspondence between entities not necessarily having the same name) and
informal- or formal resource-based techniques which employs external sources,
either formal ones such as ontologies or informal sources such as web sites or docu-
ments, to improve the matching operation. Structure-level techniques on the other
hand analyze how entities (or their instances) appear together in a structure. Some
examples of structure-level techniques are graph-based techniques (such as the
use of graph algorithms to identify similar neighboring entities and relations and
thereby calculate correspondence), model-based techniques (e.g. the use of description logic reasoning in order to identify correspondence on the basis of semantic
interpretation) and instance-based techniques (for example using statistical methods to compare sets of class instances to identify correspondence between these
classes).

Context-based ontology matching uses external resources in order to help
establish a common ground (contextualization) between the ontologies to be
matched and is considered a promising approach [1,2]. These external resources
can be formal or informal. Formal resources are typically ontological structures
using a formal language such as OWL or RDF. Different levels of ontological structures have previously been applied to aid the ontology matching task,
including the use of upper-level ontologies [4], a combination of many ontologies [5], use of less formal resources such as WordNet [7], and use of informal
resources such as web sites to identify correspondences [8].

A. Vennesland

According to [9] the use of external context can be categorized into three use
cases: (i) using the external context as a reference (e.g. using linguistic resources
to find synonyms that can help establish similarity among entities), (ii) as an
oracle (i.e. replacing the human expert when validating suggested alignments
from the matching operation by querying external background knowledge) or
(iii) as a mediator (i.e. mapping entities from the source and target ontologies
to an intermediate ontology and thereby identify correspondence).

2.2

e-Document Standards

Useful contextual information resides in e-Document standards (a.k.a. business
document standards or e-business standards) and associated material. Although
this work initially focuses on standards related to the transport logistics domain
similar standards developed using similar processes and in close cooperation
between standards developing organizations and domain experts exist in other
domains. Some examples are general trade [10,11], public and private procurement [12], food and agriculture [13], manufacturing, and consumer electronics.
So even though the focus initially is on a specific domain, the approach should
be generalizable to other domains also.

In the work so far we have focused on OASIS UBL (Universal Business Lan-
guage). UBL is an OASIS standard providing a library of e-Documents and
information elements for the procurement and transport logistics domains. In
the most recent version of the standard (version 2.1) the library consists of 698
classes (elements) with attributes and associations, encompassing both domain
specific and more generic elements. The entire library is represented in XSD
schemas.

Figure 1, which represents an excerpt from the UBL library, exemplifies some
of the possible context data available in the XSD schemas. In this particular
example, which have been compressed for the sake of brevity, we see the TransportMeans complex type, the element JourneyID, which represents a property
of TransportMeans (denoted by the cbc prefix) and the element OwnerParty,
which represents an association from TransportMeans (denoted by the cac pre-
fix). In addition to the hierarchical structure the schema also includes element
definitions, alternative business terms, cardinalities, and data type definition.

Besides the data represented by the XSD schemas, the standard provides
XML instances for all e-Documents included in the standards, offering an opportunity to apply instance-based matching techniques.

3 Problem Statement and Contributions

The use of contextual information is claimed to improve ontology matching operations and many state of the art ontology matchers utilize different types of external
sources as support in their matching operations. A preliminary literature review
suggests that few research endeavors have focused on identifying exactly which
features are attractive w.r.t. expressing context and how these features should
?

?

?
Fig. 1. Relevant information from the UBL XSD schema

be optimally represented or modeled in order to support the matching process.
Furthermore, the ontology matching systems are apparently very often targeting
the (bio) medical domain, and although some of them also performs well in other
tracks of the OAEI benchmark campaign, preliminary analysis suggest that their
performance, and the underlying matching strategies, are to some degree domain
dependent (see preliminary evaluation results in Sect. 6.2).

On this basis we have devised the following research questions:

RQ1: Which external sources of context can positively impact on the ontology

matching performance?

RQ2: How should this external context be modeled in order to maximize its

exploitation potential in ontology matching?

RQ3: Which ontology matching strategies are best suited for exploiting such

context?

4 Research Approach

The approach in this PhD can be best characterized as a mixed-strategy design
[14]. On the one hand we follow a fixed design introducing an experimental strategy where we measure the effect of manipulating the variables involved, evaluate

A. Vennesland

the effect of this manipulation, and analyze why the result became as it did. On
the other hand we use a flexible design in the sense that the overall process is
highly exploratory and that we in the end seek to establish some theories describing why this happened given the available data and the processing performed on
them. The e-Document standards represents a case study, and presumingly these
standards possess context that can positively contribute to improved ontology
matching results. But this is also influenced by how the context data is processed
by the ontology matchers (and the choice of algorithms employed).

The experimental strategy followed is illustrated in Fig. 2. The contextual
information source is transformed to a formal representation. Using this formal
representation as background knowledge, the experiment takes two ontologies
as input and identifies correspondences among them using an ontology matcher.
The resulting alignment from the matching operation is compared against a reference alignment holding the true set of correspondences among the ontologies
and evaluated on the basis of commonly accepted metrics (precision, recall and
F-measure). The evaluation results are then analyzed and if required the external
context and/or the ontology matcher is reconfigured before the next iteration in
the experiment cycle.

Transform contextual 
information to formal 

representation

Match ontologies using 
formal representation as 
background knowledge

Evaluate matching 

performance

Analyse results w.r.t. 

contextual information and 

matching strategy

information representation

strategy

Fig. 2. Overall process

5 Preliminary Results

An initial development following the approach described in the previous chapter
has been performed. The following developments are basically prerequisites for
further investigation of the research questions defined in Sect. 3.

1. Transform contextual information to formal representation: XSLT
(eXtensible Stylesheet Language Transformation) was used to transform data
from UBL XSD schemas to an OWL ontology. This work extends the generic
xsd2owl method [15] to fit with the characteristics of the UBL standard as
well as other relevant e-Document standards in order to be generalizable to
other settings.
?

?

?
2. Match ontologies using formal representation (background know-
ledge): The resulting OWL ontology from the previous step was used as
background knowledge to support the ontology matching using an existing
ontology matching system. In this initial setup we used the AgreementMakerLight (AML) ontology matcher [16,17].

3. Evaluate matching performance and analyse results: We manually
developed a reference alignment holding the correct set of correspondences
between the ontologies to be matched. This reference alignment was used as
a baseline to compare the alignment from the ontology matching operation
against. Currently this reference alignment is developed by the author and must
be validated by domain experts. The evaluation measures used were precision,
recall and F-measure (see Sect. 6 for more details about the evaluation).

Before reaching the next steps in the experiment cycle (Reconfigure contextual information representation and Reconfigure matching strategy) described
in Sect. 4 a careful analysis of the evaluation scores must be conducted. This
analysis must encompass an examination of the AML (and possibly other candidate ontology matchers) and how this matcher treats contextual information,
the suitability (heterogeneity) of the to-be-matched ontologies, a verification of
the correctness of the reference alignment, and an analysis of the UBL ontology
and how this potentially could be enriched with additional semantics as well as
data from supplementary material associated with the UBL 2.1 standard.

The generated UBL ontology is quite large, counting 1338 classes, 821 object
properties and 1314 data properties. In addition to these declarations the ontology
contains the following axioms: Sub Class, Object Property Domain, Object Property Range, Data Property Domain, Data Property Range, Functional Object
Properties, and Functional Data Properties.

Figures 3, 4 and 5 shows the structures used by the three involved ontologies
for describing the means of transport used in a transport logistics operation. As
can be seen the structures are quite similar (as perceived by humans), but the
naming conventions differ.

A difference between the generated UBL ontology and the other two is that
while the Common Framework and LogiCO ontologies use sub class relations
between classes, the relations between these entities in the UBL ontology are
represented as object properties (as indicated by the dotted associations). As
the UBL XSD schemas do not differentiate between associations representing
what conceptually could be interpreted as sub classes (e.g. that MaritimeTransportMeans could be a sub class of TransportMeans) and other associations (e.g.
that there is an association from TransportMeans to the MeasurementDimension
element that enable a specification of the dimensions of the TransportMeans) we
have treated these associations as object properties rather than identified those
that are true sub class relations.

6 Preliminary Evaluation

Two ontologies from the transport logistics domain is being matched using an
open source ontology matching system. The matching is performed both on

A. Vennesland

Fig. 3. Vehicle structure in the Common Framework ontology

Fig. 4. Means of transport structure
in the LogiCO ontology

Fig. 5. Transport means structure in the UBL ontology

classes and properties, but only equivalence correspondences are identified. The
ontologies to be matched are the LogiCO ontology [18] and the Common Framework ontology. The LogiCO ontology contains 153 classes, 96 properties and 14
individuals. The Common Framework ontology contains 331 classes, 283 properties and 1384 individuals. The Common Framework ontology imports the PROTON upper-layer ontology [19] for modeling generic concepts while LogiCO relies
on DOLCE+DNS Ultralite [20].

In this first evaluation we are using the AgreementMakerLight ontology
matching system. Although AML is primarily focused on matching ontologies
for the biomedical domain it was chosen as an evaluation testbed since it specializes in the use of background knowledge, it is easy to reconfigure and extend,
and has received top scores in the latest OAEI benchmarks which also includes
matching ontologies outside of the biomedical domain [21].

6.1 Evaluation Scenarios

The following evaluation scenarios are run:

1. A comparative evaluation of one ontology matching operation including
the two ontologies where one run is using the constructed ontology from
e-Document standards and the other run is performed without any context
information

2. A comparative evaluation of one ontology matching operation including the
two evaluation ontologies using other sources of contextual information (e.g.
WordNet)

The evaluation measures applied are precision, recall and F-measure. Precision
measures the ratio of correctly found correspondences over the total number of
?

?

?
found correspondences. Recall measures the ratio of correctly found correspondences over the total number of expected correspondences. F-measure represents
the harmonic mean of precision and recall and balances the importance of the
other two evaluation measures [3].

6.2 Preliminary Evaluation Results

With a very limited verification of the UBL ontology and the reference alignment,
the first evaluation run showed, as illustrated in Fig. 6, that when matching
the two ontologies with no background knowledge using the default confidence
level of 0.6 the precision was 77.1 %, the recall 57 % and the F-measure 66 %.
The confidence level basically states that the ontology matcher trusts with 60 %
certainty or above that the identified correspondence is correct.

When matching also the properties, this significantly decreased the scores
with a precision of only 6.2 %, a recall of 57.1 % and an F-measure of 11.2 %.
The highest scores were achieved when tuning the confidence degree from the
default .6 to .9. When matching classes only this yielded a precision of 100 %, a
recall of 52.4 % and an F-measure of 68.8 %.

When using the current version of the UBL ontology as background knowledge this did not influence the results at all, leaving the precision, recall and
F-measure measures as they were when no background knowledge was employed.
This was the case regardless of confidence level setting.

We also made an attempt using WordNet as contextual support in order to
see how this compared to using the UBL ontology as background knowledge.
When matching only the classes this produced the same scores as with the UBL
ontology. When including the properties this actually lowered the scores resulting
in a precision of 10.7 %, a recall of 33.9 % and an F-measure of 16.3 %.

These results indicatively show that the classes of the two ontologies are to
some extent homogeneous, but that the properties of the two ontologies are very
differently structured and named. Examining the resulting alignment from the
matching operation manually we see that all identified correspondences are all
exact string matches (e.g. Train = Train), while other (humanly) intuitive correspondences (e.g. CoordinateSystemName vs. GeoCoordinateSystem) have

Fig. 6. Preliminary evaluation scores

A. Vennesland

not been captured by the matching system. Another observation is that the
entities imported from the upper-layer ontologies being used (DOLCE+DNS
Ultralite in the LogiCO ontology and PROTON in Common Framework ontol-
ogy) are correctly matched. These entities are typically generic elements such as
object and event.

When examining the three ontologies more in-depth we observe that if the
ontology matching had utilized the object properties of the UBL ontology as
anchors and from this derived that two classes using the same object property
as anchors corresponds to each other the results could improve. An example of
this is the TransportMeans entity in the LogiCO ontology vs the Vehicle entity
in the Common Framework ontology (see Figs. 3, 4 and 5). The UBL ontology,
similar to the LogiCO ontology, specifies the TransportMeans class. In the UBL
ontology this class has an object property hasAirTransport. The range of this
object property is the class AirTransport. Further this AirTransport class has
an object property called hasAircraftID. In the Common Framework ontology
there is a class Aircraft which is a sub class to Vehicle. It should be possible
to derive a correspondence between the Aircraft class in the Common Framework ontology and the hasAircraftID object property in the UBL ontology
and hence that Vehicle corresponds to TransportMeans in the UBL ontology.
Following this trail a correspondence between Vehicle in the Common Framework ontology and TransportMeans in the LogiCO ontology could be deduced.
Being preliminary work there are some obvious threats to both validity and
reliability. We need to investigate more in-depth the matching techniques used by
the matching system and possibly investigate how different techniques perform
with the current setup. Further, the reference alignment should be more thoroughly assessed by domain expertise from the transport logistics domain. Such
an assessment is planned, but not performed yet. Last but not least, the UBL
ontology requires further validation and enrichment in order to make sure that
the domain knowledge possessed by the standard is appropriately maintained in
full scale. Primary candidate enhancements are to include the element definitions
from the UBL XSD schemas (see Fig. 1 depicting among other things the element
definitions) and instance data to see how this affects the evaluation scores.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

This PhD investigates how contextual information, often residing in disparate
sources and represented by different formats, can be optimally represented to
ontology matching systems and how these systems best can exploit this context to produce accurate and correct alignments. Using the Universal Business
Language as a case, we have investigated how international e-Document standards in the transport logistics domain can provide background knowledge to
support the matching of domain ontologies for this particular domain. The current developments include prerequisite artifacts required for performing the rest
of the study. Early evaluation tests involving two ontologies from the transport
logistics domain suggest that using the current version of the generated UBL
?

?

?
ontology as background knowledge does not influence the matching performance
and that several reconfigurations and enhancements are required. However, manual analysis of the two ontologies being matched and the developed UBL ontology
suggest that the UBL standard can provide useful context to support a matching between the two transport logistics ontologies. Further work include a deeper
analysis of the evaluation results, domain expertise assessment of the UBL ontology developed and the reference alignment, a more in-depth investigation of the
ontology matcher being used in the evaluation and enriching the UBL ontology
using additional contextual information from the UBL standard.
