The Design and Implementation of Semantic

Web-Based Architecture for Augmented

Reality Browser

Tam as Matuszka(B)

E otv os Lor and University, Budapest, Hungary

tomintt@inf.elte.hu

Abstract. Due to the proliferation of smartphones, Augmented Reality
applications have become more widespread nowadays. Augmented Reality browsers have especially enjoyed wide popularity within these appli-
cations. The physical environment could be extended by location-aware
additional information using these browsers. At present, typically a specific data source is used by the current Augmented Reality browsers, even
if there is an enormous amount of available data sources. The Semantic Web could help to bridge this problem. The goal of this work is to
combine Augmented Reality and Semantic Web technologies in order to
enhance the existing mobile Augmented Reality browsers using Semantic Web technologies. For this purpose, we utilize the advantages of the
Semantic Web technologies such as data integration, unified data model
as well as publicly available semantic data sources, among other things.

Keywords: Mobile semantic web  Augmented reality  Data integration  Ontology

1 Introduction

Smartphones have become an accepted part of our everyday life nowadays. With
their help, many regular activities are much easier. The spread of mobile phones
has facilitated the proliferation of Augmented Reality (AR) applications as well.
Augmented Reality allows to extend the users surrounding environment with
computer generated virtual elements [3]. One type of Augmented Reality, called
marker-based AR, uses images for this purpose. For example, when a user looks
at a picture of a newspaper via mobile phone, then a three-dimensional model
can be displayed on the top of the picture. Another type of Augmented Real-
ity, namely location-based AR, is able to superimpose location-aware additional
information about Points of Interests (POI-s) on the real-life view of the user.
Points of Interest could be, for instance, monument, statue, museum. The position of the user can be determined easily by means of the built-in sensors of
smartphones. A typical example is when the user looks around with the mobile
phone and can see the icons which represent restaurants located nearby. Thus,
the users can find interesting places and can get additional information about
c Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
F. Gandon et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2015, LNCS 9088, pp. 731739, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18818-8 46

T. Matuszka

them, even if these are not in the field of view. Augmented Reality browsers can
be used, among other things, for this purpose. These applications combine the
traditional Augmented Reality application with Internet browsing.

Currently, the existing Augmented Reality browsers use only one data source
while a huge amount of information has become publicly available on the Inter-
net. We have realized that the combination of the Semantic Web offered possibilities with the Augmented Reality may result in more advanced AR browsers
in terms of the richness of data provision. The benefits of Semantic Web technologies in the field of data integration can be used for merging data from heterogeneous sources. Currently, an enormous amount of publicly data source can
be found on Linked Open Data cloud [4] in semantically represented format.
Several data sources have spatial attributes. As a result, this information can
also serve as a data source for an Augmented Reality browser. Due to the unified data model provided by Semantic Web technologies, the data from different
sources will be stored in a common data format. Therefore, the browser does not
have to deal with the data coming from different sources during the information
processing.

The integration of geographic databases can play a particularly important
role for location-based augmented reality browsers. The implementation of our
proposed system is considered an improvement of the current Augmented Reality
browsers. For this purpose, the examination and possible further extensions of
the existing ontologies are needed. Several browsers have been developed in order
to browse the publicly available semantic datasets. Nevertheless, relatively few
of them are native mobile applications. Our proposed system is considered as a
type of a visual interface to the Linked Open Data. In this way, it contributes
to the development of Mobile Semantic Web.

The structure of the paper is as follows: after the introductory Sect. 1, we
outline the State of the Art in Sect. 2. Section 3 deals with the problem statement
and novel contributions. Thereafter, the research methodology and the proposed
approach are described in Sect. 4. Then, the intermediate result and remaining
work are presented in Sect. 5 while Sect. 6 describes our evaluation plan. Finally,
the conclusions are described in Sect. 7.

2 Problem Statement and Contributions

This research relies on the hypothesis that the existing mobile Augmented Reality browsers can be enhanced using Semantic Web technologies in terms of the
richness of data provisioning and additional practical functions. Our proposed
approach allows us to use arbitrary geographic data sources, as opposed to the
currently existing browsers. One possible scenario is the following. The user is in
a foreign city and she does not know what interesting places are nearby. It would
be great if she could somehow find out what kind of places are in the near, which
she is interested in. Of course, she can ask somebody, but the asked person may
not know every place in the city. It would be good if she could reach a data-
base, from which she could get a lot of information about her environment and
?

?

?
priate generality?

(b) How can we model the POI data sources in order to ensure the appro-

Here, generality means that the proposed approach should be able to use
arbitrary data sources which contain Points of Interests. To ensure this, an
appropriate architecture is needed that enables an efficient and scalable imple-
mentation. The effectiveness means in our case that the system is able to add
datasets on the fly to an augmented reality browser. In addition, the development of an appropriate information model is required. Since the data come
from different sources, therefore, the same properties may appear under different names in distinct datasets. For example, the name of a POI is identified
by rdfs:label property while the name of the same POI is stored by a name
attribute in a second database. These mappings can be well described by an
ontology. Thus, the examination and extension of ontologies created for this
purpose are needed.

The Design and Implementation of Semantic Web-Based Architecture

can visualize the data in a convenient way with her mobile phone. The problem
raises a number of research questions.

1. What are the challenges of integrating geographic POI datasets? In detail:
how can static databases used by AR applications be connected and extended
by semantic datasets?
The proposed approach should be able to integrate data on the fly from arbitrary geographic data sources in a unified manner. In addition, the appearing
difficulties during the integration (see details in Sect. 4) should be handled by
the system. The proposed solution has to ensure the use of semantic datasets
located in the Linked Open Data cloud. As a result, it becomes possible to
combine the currently used data with semantic datasets.

2. (a) What kind of architecture is suitable for a semantically enriched Aug-

3. How can we extend the recent Augmented Reality browsers with new func-

tionalities?
Data enrichment can serve as a possible step in the further development of
Augmented Reality browsers. However, in addition to the existing functions,
with the implementation of quite different features can be enhanced the popularity of Augmented Reality browsers.

4. Can our system be used in new application fields?

It is important to know what are the possible application areas of the newly
implemented approach. The implementation of the above-mentioned unique
functions may result in new application fields beyond the recent ones.

3 State of the Art

In the past few years, some commercial and open source Augmented Reality browsers have been published (for instance, Layar1, Mixare2, Wikitude3).

1 https://www.layar.com/.
2 http://www.mixare.org/.
3 http://www.wikitude.com/.

T. Matuszka

These applications use only one data source and the openly available datasets are
not used. Wikitude is built on Augmented Reality Markup Language (ARML)4,
Mixare and Layar use hidden and proprietary data structures [28].

Recently, some papers have been published aiming to utilize the advantages
of the combination of the Semantic Web and Augmented Reality in the field
of AR browsing. Mart n-Serrano, Herv as, and Bravo present a tourism Android
application that is using Web 3.0 technology tools in order to extract data from
various data sources with the help of publicly available services on the Internet
[15]. This approach can be seen as a possible answer to the research question 4.
FOAF ontology [8] was used for determining the users context. Furthermore,
Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) [13] served as a basis of a recommendation system that provides new places to the users using rule-based inferences.
Braun, Scherp, and Staab describe a mobile application called csxPOI (collab-
orative, semantic, and context-aware points-of-interest) in [7]. The users are
able to collaboratively create, share and modify Points of Interests using this
application. As usual, the Points of Interests represent real physical places. The
properties of such places are stored in a collaboratively created ontology. This
solution is related to the research question 2(b). However, whereas our approach
is proposed to use multiple data sources, their solution is based on POI-s created
by the users. Van Aart et al. in [27] explore the characteristics of location-aware
smartphones for browsing and searching cultural heritage information. Their
application determines the location of the user based on GPS coordinates and
creates a user context from the combination of nearby locations, local historic
events, etc. The authors combine two types of knowledge. The first one is general knowledge (for example, about geolocations and point of interests stored in
Geonames and DBpedia). The second one is specialized knowledge about cultural heritage. The issue raised by the research question 2(a) is solved in the
following way. The authors proposed a three-tier architecture: LOD resources as
a data layer, a reasoning layer, and an AR-based user interaction layer.

The management of data from different sources is the task of data integration,
which is an intensively researched area [9,20,21]. The Semantic Web technologies can be used for this purpose as well. Currently, one of the most preferred
data integration methods is the ontology-based data integration. This method is
responsible for defining the scheme and it helps to avoid the semantic problems
[23]. In our case, geographic data sources (including POI-s) are used, therefore,
these specific properties should be also considered. Harth and Gil describe their
geospatial dataset integration method in [12]. The data come from Linked Open
Data, similarly to the our proposed approach. The authors presented the NeoGeo [22] integration vocabulary to model two datasets. This vocabulary can be
seen as a partial solution to the research question 1. The authors describe the
integration of data only from the LOD while, in our case, the integration of other
data sources are also needed.

In conclusion, it can be seen that there are existing solutions for some subprob-
lems. However, in the best of our knowledge, there is no complex solution which

4 http://openarml.org.
?

?

?
can integrate arbitrary geographic data sources (including POI-s) in order to provide richer data than the existing solutions to an Augmented Reality browser.

4 Research Methodology and Approach

The main aim of this work is to design and implement a semantically enhanced
Augmented Reality browser framework by answering the issues raised in Sect. 2.
To achieve our goal, we may not necessarily invent a new approach but rather
combine existing methods and adapt as well as extend them to our own purposes.
The first step of the research is the design and implementation of the module
which enables the data integration. The task can be divided into subproblems.
The selection of a specific set of data sources that are used by the prototype is
needed. Thereafter, the schema matching [25] should be performed that gets two
schemas as input and generates semantically correct schema mappings between
them. This requires the examination of the literature and the preparation of
possible enhancements. Another similarly important problem is the entity resolution (also known as deduplication) [6,26]. This method is responsible for the
identification and merging of the same real-world entities. After reviewing the
existing solutions, our aim is to adopt them in case of such datasets that contain
Points of Interests, if necessary, to develop new solutions. We propose to use
for this purpose density-based clustering on POI-s as well as performing string
similarity metrics on POI names.

In order to have efficient and scalable operation of the system, it is essential
to construct a well-designed architecture. Our proposal offers a three-tier archi-
tecture. The first layer is the data layer, which includes a variety of data sources,
such as relational databases, NoSQL databases or semantic datasets located in
Linked Open Data cloud. The second layer is the middleware, which is responsible for the integration of data, the schema matching as well as performing the
entity resolution. It is also responsible for providing the data to the client in
a unified manner. This can be achieved by web services. The last layer is the
lightweight client, in our case it is a smartphone with Android operating sys-
tem. This part of the architecture communicates with the middleware. It is also
important to create a unified data model for the reasons mentioned in Sect. 2.
After we reviewed several spatial ontologies, we propose to use and extend the
ontology of LinkedGeoNames [1] as the information model. Our proposed approach produces the integrated data in RDF format [14]. Due to this solution,
the integrated data can easily be queried by SPARQL [24] queries, regardless
of the POI-s origin. They come from different sources and the data sources use
different data storage methods.

The next step is the investigation of the functionality of current Augmented
Reality browsers. Then, we try to identify possible potential new functions. The
current AR browsers display only a static content corresponding to a specific
POI during the browsing. This method could be more dynamic when the POI
is used as a search term and the Linked Open Data cloud is served as a data
source. The resulting semantic content can be further browsed through on the

T. Matuszka

links. Therefore, our proposed approach can be seen as a combination of an
Augmented Reality browser and a semantic browser. The system described so
far is considered to be static in the sense that users cannot add new POI-s to
the data sources. The proposed approach should provide this method as well.
For this purpose, the investigation of performance of spatial databases in terms
of insertion time and query time is needed. The system can recommend POI-s
based on their corresponding information and the users context using rule-based
inferences. For example, the user wants to go to a cinema. In that case, the system
would recommend cinemas based on the starting time and the current time. For
this purpose, Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) or SPARQL can be used.

5 Intermediate Results

We give a solution to the research question 1 and research question 2(a) in [16].
As we mentioned in Sect. 4, it should be selected a subset of data sources that are
used by the prototype during the data integration. We have chosen five datasets,
including social networks (Facebook, Foursquare), semantic datasets (DBpedia
[5], LinkedGeoData [1]) as well as Google. In the case of Facebook, Foursquare,
and Google, the public API-s were used while SPARQL queries were sent to
the public endpoints of semantic datasets. Due to the general implementation,
the system can be extended by arbitrary data source that contains Point of
Interests. For this purpose, only the implementation of the parser of the new
data source is needed, no other modifications are required during the integration
process. We have determined the common schema pairwise using COMA++
[2]. The problem of entity resolution was solved by a two-step solution. The
first step is a density-based clustering algorithm (we have chosen the DBSCAN
algorithm [11]), which determines the POI-s belonging to the common cluster
based on their coordinates. In this way, the possible same entities are determined.
However, this solution is not yet sufficient for the unique identification. Hence,
the name of the POI-s belonging to the common cluster were compared with two
string similarity metrics. If the value of the comparison exceeds an empirically
determined threshold, then the probability that the two POI-s are same entities
is quite large. The integrated data will be available in RDF format and it can
be accessed via web services. We have implemented our integration system as a
middleware, which provides web services that are accessible via REST API.

In [16], we have created an information model as well, which is related to
the research question 2(b). We have extended the ontology of LinkedGeoData
by the appropriate classes and properties. The goal of LinkedGeoData is to add
a spatial dimension to the Semantic Web. The spatial data is collected by the
OpenStreetMap5 project and it is available in RDF format. Furthermore, the
extended ontology includes the mappings resulted by the schema matching. In
addition, we wanted to provide the filtering of the POI-s by categories, thus these
categories were also selected from this ontology. In order to map the different

5 http://www.openstreetmap.org.
?

?

?
names of the categories to the ones stored in our ontology, it was necessary to create some data properties (for example, inFoursquare). For provenance reasons,
we have created a Datasource class and derived the classes of the corresponding
data sources from this class. The origin of a POI can be determined by means
of these classes. The Protege editor was used for editing the above- mentioned
OWL ontology.

In [17], we present a Linked Data-driven mobile Augmented Reality browser.
The users can navigate and collect local-aware information by means of this
solution. A sensor-based tracking approach was combined with RDF processing
of related geographical data. The used data come from semantically represented
data source from the Linked Open Data. Henceforth, we improved our prototype,
it communicates with the above-mentioned data integration middleware and
acquires the underlying data from there. In addition, we do not want to restrict
the users only to the use of existing Points of Interests, but we may want to
allow them to create new ones as well. For this purpose, we want to know,
which spatial database is the most effective in terms of insertion and query
time of POI-s. In [18], we implemented a benchmarking application which can
be used for this purpose. In addition, we measured the performance of several
relational and semantic databases. As we mentioned in Sect. 4, it could be more
dynamic when the POI is used as a search term and the Linked Open Data cloud
is served as a data source. In [19], we describe a Linked Data-driven mobile
semantic web browser. Federated datasets can be browsed by means of this
Android application. The client finds the list of resources for the desired keyword.
Thereafter, the associated data can be displayed and filtered. Furthermore, due
to the interconnectivity, the total federated dataset will become browsable.

In the remainder of this Ph.D. project, our focus lies on the following com-
ponents. The integration of our semantic browser into the prototype of our
Augmented Reality browser is needed. In addition, we want to find additional
functionalities and application areas as well as we will implement and evaluate
the rule-based recommendation system. In order to validate the work, we have
to carry out a more in-depth evaluation of the proposed approach.

6 Evaluation Plan

In the evaluation method of the entity resolution part of data integration system
we aim to use well-known evaluation metrics to count the number of correctly
identified same entities. We will use the following standard concepts: true posi-
tive, true negative, false positive, false negative, precision, recall and accuracy.
Furthermore, we want to measure the number of the resulted POI-s of several
queries separately and collectively (i.e. the result of our proposed integration
system). The fundamental assumption was that the given result after data integration will be much wider than separately.

We will perform usability test and user evaluations of our Augmented Reality
browser based on the evaluation methods described in [10]. Different measures
will be observed regarding, for example, the performance of spatial databases,
the running time of the semantic browser part of our proposal.

T. Matuszka

7 Conclusion

In this work an approach which combines Semantic Web technologies and Augmented Reality is proposed. It is designed to enhance the existing mobile Augmented Reality browsers in terms of richness of data provisioning and additional
practical functions. For this purpose, the existing data integration methods and
Augmented Reality browser approaches were reviewed. The utilization of Semantic Web technologies, such as OWL, RDF, SPARQL was proposed to achieve the
goal of this research. Preliminary results were described, namely the details of
the proposed data integration system, a prototype implementation of a client
and a mobile semantic browser as well as a plan for the future was established.
The proposed approach is regarded as an improvement of the current Augmented
Reality browsers as well as a type of a visual interface to the Linked Open Data.
In this way, it could contribute to the development of Mobile Semantic Web
as well.

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by the European Union and
the European Social Fund through project FuturICT.hu (grant no.: TAMOP-4.2.2.C-
11/1/KONV-2012-0013). The author is grateful to his supervising professor Dr. Attila
Kiss for helpful discussion, advices and comments.
