Semantics-Enabled User Interest Mining

Fattane Zarrinkalam(&)

Department of Computer Engineering,

Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran

fattane.zarrinkalam@stu-mail.um.ac.ir

Abstract. Microblogging services such as Twitter allow users to express their
feelings and views in real-time through microposts. This provides a wealth of
information both collectively and individually that can be effectively mined
so as to facilitate personalization, recommendation and customized search.
A fundamental task with this respect would be to extract users interests. This
has been mainly done using probabilistic models that rely on measures such as
frequency of co-occurrence of important phrases, which forgoes the underlying
semantics of the phrases in favor of highlighting the role of syntactical repetition
of content. Some recent works have considered the role of semantics by using
knowledge bases such as DBPedia and Freebase. However, they limit the topics
of interest to be a set of individual concepts extracted from the microposts in
isolation, i.e. without considering the relationships of the microposts to each
other or to other users. This proposal seeks to further build on these works by
introducing a definition of topical interest, which enables the identification of
more specific and semantically complex topics involving multiple interrelated
concepts. Based on this definition, methods will be introduced for the detection
of both explicitly observed and implicitly implied user interests, in addition to
the identification of user interest shifts based on the temporal clues.

Keywords: #eswcphd2015zarrinkalam 	 User interest detection 	 Microblogging service 	 Semantics-enabled

1 Introduction

With the emergence and the growing popularity of microblogging services like Twitter,
many users extensively use microposts to express their feelings and views about different topics. This has made microblogging services a source of implicit and explicit
information for user interest identification [1, 2]. This has the potential to contribute to
different application areas such as filtering twitter streams [3, 4], news recommendation
[5] and user community identification [6], among others.

When processing microposts for the identification and extraction of user interests,
traditional keyword-based methods, which are often proposed for processing formal
and large documents, are less effective on microposts, due to the short length, noisiness
and informality of the content [7, 8]. A potential approach for addressing these issues is
to consider the underlying semantics of microposts. To this end, recent works have
proposed to utilize external knowledge bases (such as DBpedia) to link the terms in
the microposts to the relevant concepts described in those knowledge bases. Since these

 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
F. Gandon et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2015, LNCS 9088, pp. 817828, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18818-8_54

F. Zarrinkalam

knowledge bases represent the concepts and their relationships, these links provide a
way of inferring underlying semantics of the microposts [810]. We intend to further
build on this approach. The following example provides the basis for this proposal as it
distinguishes its contributions from the state of the art.

Motivating Example. Each February, Tim Hortons, a well-known Canadian chain
restaurant holds a campaign called Roll Up the Rim to Win. A customer can try his luck
by buying a paper cup of coffee and unrolling the rim of the cup after finishing his
drink, to determine whether he has won a prize, where the greatest one is a Toyota
Camry. During the time when the campaign is being held, many users tweet about this
event. These tweets contain terms for which a related DBpedia concept, e.g. Tim
Hortons, Toyota Camry, Roll Up and Coffee, can be identified. These DBpedia concepts can be used to provide semantic information for the corresponding tweets. It is
easy to see that a meaningful topic of interest for this example needs to be constructed
using a collection of concepts. However, existing works usually represent each interest
using one single concept. Therefore, two DBpedia concepts Tim Hortons and Toyota
Camry are considered as two distinct interests. In other words, these approaches cannot
infer that a user is interested in a more specific topic, which is actually a combination of
multiple related concepts. Further, they often confine users interests to a set of predefined concepts (e.g. a subset of DBpedia concepts) and therefore interests to recent
events such as Tim Hortons campaign that are not among that set cannot be discovered
on the fly.

This proposal will address these shortcomings by proposing a framework that
considers the semantics of microposts with due consideration given to social network
structure and the temporal aspects of social content. Our framework is composed of
three main components: (1) The extraction of the so-called topics in a given time
interval, which are built
through conjunction of multiple semantic concepts. For
instance, during the February, conjunction of DBpedia concepts Tim Hortons, Toyota
Camry, Roll Up and Coffee might be considered to be a topic of interest. (2) Interest
detection for each individual user as it pertains to the extracted topics, whether it be
explicitly observed or implicitly implied; (3) The temporal modeling of each users
interest shifts with regards to extracted topics.

The rest of the proposal is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the
related work. The problem statement and contributions are presented in Sect. 3, and the
proposed approach is introduced in Sect. 4. Section 5 outlines an evaluation plan, and
finally, Sect. 6 concludes the proposal.

2 Background Literature

There are three different types of information available on social networks, which have
been used in the literature for extracting user interests: (1) User-generated textual
contents, such as Twitter posts (content-based), (2) Social network structure that shows
the relationships between users (network structure-based), and (3) Temporal factors
that represent the dynamic nature of user interests (temporal).
?

?

?
2.1 Content-Based Approaches

There are different approaches for extracting users interest through the analysis of the
user generated textual content. In the Bag of Words approach, users interests are
represented as a set of terms extracted from the users contents [2, 11, 12]. For example,
Yang et al. [11] have used a weighted term vector for modeling user interests, and
applied cosine similarity for measuring the similarity of users.

Topic Modeling approach provides a probabilistic model for the term frequency
occurrences in documents of a given corpus. As a matter of fact this approach forms
topics by extracting groups of co-occurring terms and views each document as a
mixture of various topics [13]. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), as a well-known
topic modeling method, is frequently used for interest detection [1416]. For example,
Weng et al. [16] have created a single document from the collection of a users tweets,
and then have discovered the topics by running LDA over this document.

Since the Bag of Words and Topic Model approaches focus on terms without considering their semantic and the relationship between them, they cannot utilize underlying
semantics of textual content. Furthermore, these approaches assume that a single document contains rich information, as a result they may not perform so well on short, noisy
and informal texts like twitter posts [79]. To address these issues, there is another line
of work for extracting user interests from microposts through representing user interests
as a Bag of Concepts. Usually, external knowledge bases such as DBpedia/Wikipedia,
Freebase and Yago are used as a source for extracting the candidate concepts. Since
these knowledge bases represent the concepts and their relationships, they provide a way
of inferring underlying semantics of the content [810]. For example, Michelson and
Macskassy [8] have proposed Twopics which first extracts a set of Wikipedia entities
from a users tweets and then identifies the high-level interests of the user by traversing
and analyzing the Wikipedia categories of the extracted entities. Kapanipathi et al. [3]
have modeled users interests by annotating their tweets with DBPedia concepts, and
have used these annotations to filter tweets based on the users interests. Abel et al. [17]
have proposed to enrich twitter messages by linking them to related news articles and
then extracting the entities mentioned in the enriched messages as the users interests.
Kapanipathi et al. [9] have introduced two kinds of interests for a user: (1) weighted
primitive interests, which is bag of concepts extracted from the entities mentioned in the
users tweets and (2) implicit interests extracted by mapping primitive interests to
Wikipedia category hierarchy using a spreading activation algorithm.

2.2 Network Structure-Based Approaches

The social connections of the users are another kind of information that can be used for
user interest extraction from social networks [4, 14, 19, 20]. The social connections are
usually modeled as a graph in which nodes are users and edges represent their con-
nections. Theory of Homophily [18] is followed by most of the works in this category
and it refers to the tendency of users to connect to users with common interests or
preferences. For example, Mislove et al. [19] have used this theory to infer missing
information and interests of a user based on the information provided by her neighbors.
Pennacchiotti et al. [4] have extracted the interests of a user by using tweets of the

F. Zarrinkalam

neighboring users in addition to her own tweets. Wang et al. [14] have extended the
Homophily theory by proposing a specific link structure assumption under which local
link structures between two nodes are consi-dered to be an indicator of node similarity.
For example, if two users share many followers, they are likely to be similar in terms of
topical interests.

2.3 Temporal Approaches

Temporal aspects are also considered in some works to infer user interests from social
networks [1, 5, 21]. For example Abel et al. [5, 21] have shown that a users interests
change over time and are influenced by public trends. They have modeled user interests in a given timestamp as a set of weighted concepts which are entities or hashtags
extracted from the users tweets in that timestamp. For calculating the weight of each
concept, the tweets with shorter temporal distance to the given timestamp are assigned
greater weight since they are considered to be more important. The authors have also
shown that considering temporal dynamics of the user interests can improve the performance of a personalized news recommender system.

2.4 Discussion

Several interesting works have been performed on extracting users topical interests
from microbloging services. However, the current works struggle with at least one of
the following limitations:

(cid:129) In most studies [13, 5, 810, 14, 17], each topic of interest is considered to be
represented by a single concept. Therefore, it is not possible to infer more specific
topics which are only expressible by combining multiple related concepts. Using
these approaches, for instance, given a tweet Tim Hortons RRRoll Up Replay
Game: Tim Hortons RRRoll Up Replay Game Prizes: (1): 2015 Toyota Camry
XSE, may identify Tim Hortons and Toyota Camry as two distinct topics. The user
might not be too interested in Toyota Camry as a general topic, but is rather
interested in a campaign which includes Toyota Camry and Tim Hortons together.
(cid:129) In most studies [1, 3, 5, 810, 14, 17], semantic topics of interest are confined to a
set of predefined concepts, e.g. only Wikipedia categories, and it is not possible to
identify emerging topical interests which are not yet in this predefined initial set.
For instance, when an event like Tim Hortons campaign appears for the first time, it
might rapidly show itself as a topic in the tweets just after a few minutes, but can
take much longer to have a Wikipedia page created for it.

(cid:129) Most of the current works [1, 3, 810, 14] do not consider the context of the
microposts to extract users interests. In other words, these works overlook the fact
that users usually make an implicit assumption that the readers are aware of the
context
is being made. So, understanding the underlying
semantics of a post may require consideration of the relationships of posts to each
other or to other users. For example, a user might have replied to many tweets
related to Tim Hortons campaign, without mentioning any of the buzzwords.

in which the post
?

?

?
(cid:129) There are some works that consider the temporal aspects for identification of the
users interests [1, 5, 21]. However, they generally do not take into account
identification of the users interest shifts during time, while this is valuable and it
can provide valuable insight about the evolution of the users behavior and
distinguishing between his short-term and long-term interests. For instance,
knowledge about the interest shifts makes it possible to distinguish between a
community of users who show interest
in Tim Hortons only each February
during the campaign and a community of users who follow this topic throughout
the year.

3 Problem Statement and Contributions

This proposal seeks to address the limitations discussed in the previous section by
proposing a framework that views the content of a social network as a temporal graph.
This graph is composed of three heterogeneous vertice types representing (i) individual
users, (ii) social contents such as microposts, and (iii) semantic concepts. More spe-
cifically, this proposal pursues the following three main contributions:

(cid:129) We propose to model user interests through a collection of topical interest. We
consider each topical interest a conjunction of several coherent semantic concepts.
To globally identify so-called topics in a given time interval from the social
network graph as defined in Sect. 4.1, a concept graph is built in which the
vertices represent the semantic concepts extracted from the microposts published
in that interval, and the edges indicate semantic relatedness between each two
concepts (Sect. 4.2). Each topic is considered to be a cluster in this graph which
includes a set of sufficiently related concepts in that time interval. This has the
added benefit that each detected interest does not necessarily need to be from
amongst a set of predefined concepts, and also, it makes it possible to define
semantically complex topics which involve multiple concepts as opposed to single
terms or concepts;

(cid:129) We view a specific users interests as a set of topics identified from the social
network. This set includes explicitly observed interests of the user and also the
implicitly implied interests. For a user, the explicit interests are identified from the
concepts he has explicitly mentioned in his microposts, with due consideration
given to the relationships of microposts to each other or to other users. The implicit
interests are the topics that the user is expected to be interested in, and these topics
are identified based on the interests of the communities the user is a member of. The
proposed framework includes a component for identifying these communities, and
based on the identified communities,
interests of the users are
determined.

the implicit

(cid:129) We further postulate that a users topical interests can differ and/or evolve based on
different time intervals, which refer to as user interest shift. We will propose
methods that will be able to accurately model and predict user interest shifts.

F. Zarrinkalam

4 Proposed Approach

This section describes the underlying representation model of the proposed framework,
along with its technical contributions.

4.1 Representation Model

The proposed framework is designed around viewing the data of a microbloging service as a heterogeneous graph with three types of vertices: (1) User vertices representing the individual users. (2) Content vertices representing the contents published by
the users. (3) Concept vertices representing the underlying semantics of social contents.
Further, the edges of the graph include instances of the different types of relationships
between the users, social contents and concepts. It is important to note that in the model
not only vertices of the same type can be interconnected, but also different vertices
types can be connected to each other.

For instance, in the case of Twitter, as shown in Fig. 1, content vertices include the
tweets and the Web pages mentioned in each tweet. Concept vertices can be DBpedia
concepts that can be derived directly from the tweets or indirectly from the content of
the Web pages mentioned in the tweets. Furthermore, some relationships that can be
used include: Follow relation between two users, relation between a user and the tweets
she has made or retweeted or marked as Favorite, relation between a tweet and the
Web pages linked in the tweet, relation between a tweet and the concepts associated
with that tweet and others.

The amount of information shown in the network graph of Fig. 1 is readily
available in Microblogging services, except for the concept vertices and their associated relationships. These concepts can be extracted using existing systems such as
TAGME [22] and DBpedia Spotlight [23] which can be used to annotate a textual
content with the resources in Wikipedia/DBpedia. For example, for a given tweet
Tim Hortons roll up the rim abuses my love for coffee AND gambling, DBpedia
Spotlight identifies three links to DBpedia: Tim Hortons is linked to the DBpedia
concept represented in http://dbpedia.org/resource/Tim_Hortons; Coffee is linked to
http://dbpedia.org/page/Coffee and Gambling is linked to http://dbpedia.org/page/
Gambling. The weighted edges between any two concept vertices represent the
semantic relatedness of those concepts. This relatedness value generally, not in a
specific time interval, can be computed using a Wikipedia-based measure, which for
instance computes the relatedness by link structure analysis techniques over wikipedia pages.

To consider the fact that the user interests are not static and they change over time,
it is required to represent the network graph as a temporal graph. We will use one of the
existing techniques [24, 25] which enable efficient storage and retrieval of temporal
graphs and allow retrieving specific snapshots of the network graph. In our proposed
approach, time is divided into fixed length intervals and a snapshot of the network
graph is retrieved for each time interval [tk-1, tk]. This snapshot includes the users of the
social network at time tk, the contents added to the network during the corresponding
time interval, and the concepts associated with these contents.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. Representation model

4.2 Concrete Contributions

The proposed framework includes three main contributions which rely on the foundations of the representation model described above. Next, these contributions are
described.

Complex Semantic Topic Extraction. The goal of this component is to identify the
so-called topics, which are modeled by clusters of concepts that are interrelated on the
network graph (shown in Fig. 2). To identify these topics for each time interval, it is
required to measure the semantic relatedness of the identified concepts in that time
interval. Since the semantic relatedness between two concepts changes over time [26],
by relying only on the static nature of knowledge bases like DBpedia it is not possible
to consider the temporal issues effectively. For instance, computing the relatedness of
Tim Hortons and Toyota Camry based on DBpedia link structure analysis results in the
same small value both in February and August. But these concepts may appear so
frequently in the users microposts in February, due to the Tim Hortones campaign.
issues by utilizing the
dynamics of the social network for computing relatedness of the concepts in a timely
manner [26, 27]. However, they compute the relatedness of two concepts in a specific
time interval only based on the co-occurrence of those concepts in the microposts
published in that time interval. In contrast, we are seeking to provide improvement over
these works by considering valuable information reflected in the 3-layer representation
model of the network graph. A potential method is discussed as follows.

There are some works that seek to address temporal

The relatedness of two concepts C1 and C2 at a given time interval can be calculated based on how similar are the content vertices associated with C1 to the content
vertices associated with C2. Following the idea of SimRank measure [28], similarity of
two content vertices C1 and C2 can then be computed based on the similarity of the
content (user) vertices associated with C1 to the content (user) vertices associated with
C2. Likewise, similarity of the user vertices can be computed based on the similarity
of their associated users and contents.

The overall relatedness of two concepts in a time interval can therefore be computed as a weighted sum of two relatedness values, i.e. the temporal relatedness
computed by the method described in the previous paragraph, and the static DBpe-
dia-based relatedness. The weight values are expected to be obtained experimentally.

F. Zarrinkalam

The computed relatedness values of the concepts are added to the network graph
corresponding to a given time interval, in terms of weighted edges between the con-
cepts. Finally, as illustrated in Fig. 2, the topics are determined by applying a graphbased clustering method on the resulting weighted graph.

User Interest Detection. After the topics are identified and modeled from the network
graph, individual users interests are modeled as a function of the identified topics. Our
goal
is to identify both explicitly expressed interests and also implicitly inferred
interests of each user. To identify explicitly observed interests, we would need to
measure the interest of each user against each topic of interest based on the content
vertices associated with that user. The basic idea is that the more frequently the concepts of a topic are mentioned in the contents of a user, the more interested the user
may be in that topic. We are going to augment this idea with using context information
of the user contents. For instance, it is possible that a user has replied to a tweet which
is much related to Tim Hortons campaign, but the reply itself does not mention any of
the concepts associated with this topic. The simple idea mentioned above is unable to
see the fact that the reply tweet is also related to that topic, and therefore does not
notice the users interest in the topic.

In order to identify implicitly inferred relations of users to identified topics, it is
interesting to extract user-topic communities. As illustrated in Fig. 3, each of these
communities include the largest set of mutually similar-enough topics along with the
users interested in those topics. To identify these communities, we would need to
measure the similarity between each pair of topics. This can be performed by measuring
similarity of each topic to a set of predefined high-level topics that can be extracted
from existing knowledge bases (e.g. the high-level DBPedia categories). Having the
user-topic communities created, the implicitly implied interests of a user can be
determined as the topics belonging to the communities in which the user resides in.

Fig. 2. Topic extraction

Fig. 3. User-topic communities

Interest Shift Detection. In order to address the interest shift aspect of user interest
detection, the identified interests of a user in several consecutive time intervals are
monitored. This helps in differentiating between the short-term and the long-term
interests of the user. Further, by considering similarity and relatedness of the topic of
interests of a user in different intervals, it is possible to model the evolution of the
users behaviour over different topics, i.e. how his interests are attenuated against some
topics and focused on some other ones.
?

?

?
One possible way of analyzing interest shift of a user, is port his topics of interest
for different time intervals to a set of points in the 2D space. Knowing that a user is
interested in a set of m topics Tk at time interval k, and a set of n topics Tk+1 at time
interval k+1, it is possible to build a matrix mn representing distances between each
pair of topics (Ti, Tj) where Ti  Tk and Tj  Tk+1. This matrix can be computed based
on using our topic similarity measure introduced in the previous section. The distance
matrix can then be transformed to a set of points in the 2D space, using Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) methods. Having the topics of interests ported to the 2D
space, it is possible to devise algorithms for identifying user interest shifts by comparing the position of the users topics of interest in different time intervals.

5 Evaluation Plan

In order to evaluate the proposed methods, we need to first collect a dataset of realworld social network users. Due to widespread use of Twitter and accessibility of its
data, a dataset will be created using Twitter data. Since our method is designed to
provide improvement over Bag of Concepts approach, we are going to compare it with
the state of the art works like [5, 8, 9]. Our evaluation plan includes two main
approaches: a user study, and an application-based study.

User Study. As it is acknowledged in different works [1, 9], the most reliable and
precise way of evaluating the results of interest detection for a user is to ask the same
user to verify the results. Then, the users feedback can be used for measuring quality
of the proposed interest detection method. However, User study is costly and its
validity is subject to different types of threats which are hard to address in reality. As a
result, we will conduct an application-based study to complement the user study.

Application-based. It is possible to evaluate the proposed method by investigating
how it affects the performance of an application which works on the basis of the user
interests. Similar to [5], we are going to use news recommender application for this
purpose. First, a ground truth is built by collecting, for each user, the news articles from
BBC or CNN to which the user has explicitly linked in his tweets (or retweets) in a
given time interval. Then, a news recommendation algorithm will be used that is able to
recommend news articles based on the users interests identified by our method. By
comparing the recommended news with the ones in the ground truth, it is possible to
evaluate quality of the recommendations, and therefore determine how successfully the
interests have been identified. Traditional Information Retrieval (IR) metrics like P@K
and Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) can be used for this step.

It must be noted that since our main goal is not to propose a news recommender
system, a simple recommender algorithm, like the one used in [5], will be used for this
application based evaluation scenario. An additional point is that, instead of using the
prepared ground truth, it is also possible to ask the users to judge the recommendations.
The plan described above, evaluates the quality of the proposed interest detection
method. However, in order to investigate the importance of the proposed interest
shift detection method, a possible approach is to use it for measuring user similarity.

F. Zarrinkalam

The idea is that considering similarity of the interest shifts of two users is a more accurate
way of measuring those users similarity, compared to simply considering the users
interests at one time interval. If this idea turns out to be valid, then the results of the interest
shift detection can contribute to applications that require measuring similarity of the users,
for instance content recommenders that employ the collaborative filtering method and
hence need to compare users for finding the neighboring users of a specific user.

6 Conclusions

User interest modeling is the basis and core of many services such as recommendation
and customization. Due to the popularity of microblogging services like Twitter and the
fact that they are considered as a source of implicit and explicit information about the
users interests, recently, user interest detection from microblogging services has been
the subject of many researches. We would like to propose a new framework to extract
user interests as semantically complex topics composed of multiple interrelated con-
cepts. This framework views data of a microblogging service as a temporal graph with
three types of vertices: (i) individual users connections; (ii) social contents like mi-
croposts; and (iii) semantic concepts that represent the underlying semantics of the
contents. This framework supports the identification of both the observed interests and
implicitly implied interests of the user, with due consideration given to the fact that a
users topics of interest may change with time. It is expected that the proposed
framework can address shortcomings of the current interest detection approaches that
are based on a more limited notion of topical interest. Further, the proposed approach is
expected to be able to improve quality of the applications which work on the basis of
user interests.
