PADTUN - Using Semantic Technologies

in Tunnel Diagnosis and Maintenance Domain

Dhavalkumar Thakker1(&), Vania Dimitrova1, Anthony G. Cohn1,

and Joaquin Valdes2

1 University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK

{D.Thakker,V.G.Dimitrova,A.G.Cohn}@leeds.ac.uk

2 SNCF, 6 Av Francois Mitterrand, 93574 La Plaine St Denis Cedex, France

Joaquin.VALDES@sncf.fr

Abstract. A Decision Support System (DSS) in tunnelling domain deals with
identifying pathologies based on disorders present in various tunnel portions and
contextual factors affecting a tunnel. Another key area in diagnosing pathologies
is to identify regions of interest (ROI). In practice, tunnel experts intuitively
abstract regions of interest by selecting tunnel portions that are susceptible to the
same types of pathologies with some distance approximation. This complex
diagnosis process is often subjective and poorly scales across cases and transport
structures. In this paper, we introduce PADTUN system, a working prototype of
a DSS in tunnelling domain using semantic technologies. Ontologies are
developed and used to capture tacit knowledge from tunnel experts. Tunnel
inspection data are annotated with ontologies to take advantage of inferring
capabilities offered by semantic technologies. In addition, an intelligent mechanism is developed to exploit abstraction and inference capabilities to identify
ROI. PADTUN is developed in real-world settings offered by the NeTTUN EU
Project and is applied in a tunnel diagnosis use case with Societe Nationale des
Chemins de Fer Francais (SNCF), France. We show how the use of semantic
technologies allows addressing the complex issues of pathology and ROI
inferencing and matching experts expectations of decision support.
Keywords: Tunnel diagnosis 	 ROI inferencing using semantics 	 Tunnel

ontology

1 Introduction

Organisations managing a large inheritance of old tunnels and underground structures
are confronted with the need to guarantee the full safety of use while optimising their
overall maintenance costs. This is particularly critical in railway tunnels, for example,
in France, the mean age of railway tunnels is 124 years, with 80 % of them over 100
years of age. For the maintenance of tunnels, diagnosing pathologies is an important
reasoning task. Tunnel experts carry out periodic tunnel inspections leading to the
evaluation of a tunnels global conditions by identification of main pathologies
based on possible causes in the form of disorders and diagnosis influencing factors
[1]. This is a complex process, prone to subjectivity and poorly scales across cases and
domains. To address this problem in the EU project NeTTUN (nettun.org), a DSS

 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
F. Gandon et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2015, LNCS 9088, pp. 683698, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18818-8_42

D. Thakker et al.

called PADTUN, is being developed involving tunnel experts and knowledge engi-
neers. Pathology Assessment and Diagnosis of TUNnels (PADTUN) system is applied
in a tunnel diagnosis use case with the French national railway, SNCF.

For tunnel diagnosis, in addition to inferring possible pathologies in individual
tunnel portions, it is also important to consider spatial elements, such as inferring
continuous tunnel portions (called here regions of interest(ROI)) with similar
types of pathologies. The key challenge is to develop an aggregation mechanism to
group together individual portions in larger regions of interest based on a similarity
of pathologies. This abstraction is extremely important for efficiency reasons. For
example, a two kilometre tunnels with ten meter portions will have 200 portions for
tunnel experts to inspect. Hence, an appropriate aggregation resulting in regions of
interest and ultimately reducing the number of individual portions to inspect, will
facilitate and improve the efficiency of the diagnosis process. The prime driver for
building PADTUN is to capture the tacit knowledge required for successful completion
of these tasks in order to preserve the knowledge and expertise of very few experts in
such organisations. Although the cost of performing these tasks well is very small,
maintenance operations and the impact of a tunnel malfunction can be costly and
catastrophic.

The PADTUN system is a novel DSS for tunnel diagnosis and maintenance using
semantic technologies. PADTUN assists tunnel experts in making decisions about a
tunnels condition with respect to its disorders and diagnosis influencing factors.
PADTUN also allows reviewing regions of interest with similar pathologies. The
use of semantics is a very fitting proposition in developing DSS [2]. For example, one
of the prominent areas where semantics has been applied is,
in making domain
knowledge required for making decisions explicit [3]. In our work, PADTUN ontologies are developed and used to model tacit knowledge from tunnel experts. These
ontologies capture the existing decision process concerning maintenance of tunnels and
provide a context model for automated decision support. The PADTUN ontologies are
the first ever ontologies developed for the domain of tunnel diagnosis and main-
tenance. Another prominent aspect, where semantics are utilised as part of PADTUN
development, is fulfilling the requirement of the DSS and decision maker to have
access to heterogeneous data. The unique feature of semantic technologies in enabling
the fusion of heterogeneous data has been employed in a number of projects [4]. In
PADTUN development, heterogeneous data, providing contextual
information are
annotated with ontologies to take advantage of the inferring capabilities offered by
semantic technologies. We use semantics even further and utilise PADTUN ontologies
for calculating homogeneous portions in order to identify regions of interest. In par-
ticular, semantics plays a key role in detecting continuity by considering semantic
similarity between pathologies represented as concepts. With this work, we contribute
to semantic web research by applying semantic technologies in urban and infrastructure
planning and maintenance, a domain that is starting to receive attention from the
semantic web community [5].

Section 2 outlines the technical architecture of the PADTUN system. The two main
components of this architecture are described in the following two sections. We carried
out an initial evaluation of the system. The evaluation details are described in Sect. 5.
We conclude by discussing the findings and outlining the future work.
?

?

?
2 Pathology Assessment and Diagnosis

of Tunnels (PADTUN)

Figure 1 depicts the integrated view of the PADTUN system. PADTUN is designed
using three-tier architecture consisting of layers for interface, application and data.

Fig. 1. PADTUN system architecture

Data Layer. Infrastructure managers, including SNCF, own and manage inspection
databases of tunnels that record the provenance of data related to inspections and any
repairs. This data contains information about any disorders diagnosed during inspections and contextual factors. In the case of PADTUN, this inspection data is made
available from SNCFs internal system as XML dumps.

In order for the system to work, PADTUN requires domain-specific knowledge.
Encoding and specifying such knowledge in ontologies is one of the main contributions
of this paper. The PADTUN ontologies are designed in consultation with the tunnel
experts in the project and by extensively reviewing literature on the subject. These
ontologies codify knowledge about tunnel disorders, diagnosis influencing factors,
lining materials and pathologies. PADTUN ontologies are described in more detail in
Sect. 3. The data layer also contains a semantic repository that allows storing the
ontologies and performing reasoning. OWLIM was chosen due to scalability reasons
[6] as the system is required to reason over a large number of tunnels and inspection
data. The system also contains a relational database in the form of MySQL to store
inspection and result data for caching purpose.

D. Thakker et al.

Processing layer. PADTUN consists of an intelligent processing layer built on a data
layer that suggests pathologies per portion and regions of interest, together with
explanations.

Three components are included as part of the processing layer. The pathology
inferencing component implemented as RESTful service utilises the ontologies and
infers a list of pathologies when provided with disorders, lining material and diagnosis
influencing factors details for individual tunnel portions. Internally, it infers pathologies
based on (i) disorders and lining material and (ii) diagnosis influencing factors and
creates a cumulative list. The ROI inferencing component, implemented as RESTful
service utilises the ontologies and the output of the pathology inferencing service to
infer regions of interest. Both of these services are described in detail in Sect. 4. The
Data management component contains business logic to convert XML to DB with
the help of a converter, and stores the inspection data as per the new schema dictated by
the ontology. In order to achieve conversion, the component consists of a mapping
between the schema and the ontologies.

Presentation Layer. This layer consists of a user interface that allows decision makers
to interact with the DSS. The interface allows users to upload tunnel inspection data
and view and manipulate the results from the pathology and ROI inferencing services.
The interface component is implemented using PHP and JavaScript.

Following sections focus on the main component of the architecture, PADTUN

ontologies, pathology and ROI inferencing services.

3 PADTUN Ontologies

PADTUN ontologies are developed using METHONTOLOGY [10] methodology.
NeTTUN use cases helped us to define scope and purpose of the ontologies and
provided a reasonably well-defined target.

Scope & Purpose. The ontologies need to capture the existing decision process concerning the diagnosis of tunnels, to provide a context model for automated decision
support. This conceptual model should include disorders observed during the inspec-
tions, tunnel common pathologies and diagnosis influencing factors. This knowledge
also needs to be classified and linked, in order to identify associations of disorders and
diagnosis influencing factors with pathologies.

Knowledge Sources. The ontologies are designed based on the knowledge of experts
within the NeTTUN project. To ensure a wide range of use and generality, extensive
literature in the area [1, 79] has been consulted.

3.1 Conceptualisation

This activity requires that the domain knowledge is structured in a conceptual model
describing the problem and its solution in terms of a domain [10]. We used a number of
methods for knowledge elicitation including expert interviews, brainstorming sessions
?

?

?
using tools such as IHMC Concept Maps to facilitate the conceptualisation process.
Initial conceptualisation focused on the elicitation of the top-level ontology concepts.

Top Level Concepts. Several tunnel type classifications were considered. For instance,
tunnels can be classified regarding their operational use, construction method, age and
other characteristics. The proposed classification regarding the PADTUN scope is
based on an elementary part of a tunnel, an atomic portion, called here tunnel portion.
A tunnel portion can be defined as an elementary part of the tunnel with all the
necessary elements that enable a diagnosis to be made [1, 8]. In this respect, a tunnel
portion presents a geology, a geometry, and structural characteristics such as lining and
repair features.

A tunnel portion is derived from larger tunnel stretches. Because the scope of
the ontologies is maintenance, these larger tunnel stretches have been defined as
Tunnel Inspection Stretch, corresponding to tunnel lengths where an inspection has
been carried out. This Tunnel Inspection Stretch has one location and has been
inspected at least once. Further, within a Tunnel Inspection Stretch, and regarding
Geology, one or more Tunnel Geo Stretch can be identified, each one characterized
by one single geology. This conceptualisation is presented in a concept map in
Fig. 2.

Tunnel Inspection Stretch

hasLocation
exactly one

Location

hasStart
hasEnd
exactly one

Tunnel meter

has Inspection at least one

at least one

Inspection

Tunnel Geo Stretch

hasGeology
exactly one

Geology

hasPart

at least one

Tunnel portion

hasGeometry
exactly one

Geometry

at least one

Lining and repair features

Fig. 2. Concept map with the top level concepts related to tunnel

Pathologies. A pathology is a problem that causes tunnel disorders; it is also the link
between the disorders and its causes. Pathologies provoke tunnel degradation, which
manifests itself in a combination of disorders, often more than one. Considering tunnel
experts interviews and literature on the subject, the most common pathologies have
been identified and classified according to these degradation processes. These were
collected from the experts as a knowledge glossary [10, 11].

Tunnel disorders. Disorders are disturbances in the expected quality level of a tunnel,
being subjected to evolution. Disorders are also symptoms of pathologies. A classification of disorders was collected from the experts as a knowledge glossary. The
associations between disorders and pathologies were provided as a table (see Fig. 3).
There were in total 227 such associations provided by the experts.

D. Thakker et al.

Fig. 3. Shows the association between pathologies and disorders with (1) mortar ageing
pathology as an example. (2) shows the coded list of lining material that has to be present to
manifest mortar ageing (3) shows the disorders i.e. potentially unstable (structure) that has to
be present to manifest mortar ageing. The coloured cell signifies the typicality of such disorder
for this pathology.

Diagnosis Influencing factors. Factors representing all elements influencing tunnel
degradation, which are considered by the expert(s) when making decisions. The
associations between pathologies and diagnosis influencing factors were provided as a
Table. There were in total 78 associations provided by the experts.

3.2 Conceptual Model

The conceptualisation of the domain was converted into OWL ontologies [12]. Figure 4
shows the upper ontology of Tunnel with linkages to other major concepts from the
domain model such as Tunnel Types, Tunnel Geo Stretch, and Pathology. The upper
level also captures that a Tunnel Portion can have disorders, diagnosis influencing
factors, lining materials.

Fig. 4. PADTUN upper ontology.

Fig. 5. Partial representation of pathologies classification based on degradation types.
?

?

?
Figure 5 shows the representation of pathologies and instances based on degradation types. Regarding the causes of the degradation (the origin of the problem), two
general groups of pathologies were identified distinguishing based on its origin. They
were ground degradation pathologies (if pathologies occur underground) and lining
degradation pathologies (if pathologies occur with lining) [7, 8]. Figure 6 depicts how
an association between a disorder and a pathology is represented in the ontology. This
example shows how the rule provided by the experts in a table (see Fig. 3) is represented in the ontology. Similarly, Fig. 7 illustrates an association between a pathology
and a diagnosis influencing factor and other contextual information such as the level of
influence.

Fig. 6. Association between a pathology & a disorder (ontological representation of Fig. 3)

Fig. 7. Showing an association between a pathology and a diagnosis influencing factor.

To facilitate the evolution of the PADTUN ontologies, they were developed as a
group of smaller but interlinked modular ontologies [13]. Table 1 presents a summary
of the ontological features of the PADTUN ontologies with size, expressivity [14], and
complexity of the core knowledge captured by axioms. In particular, PADTUN
ontologies utilise OWL features such as sameAs, disojointWith, and equivalentClass.
The PADTUN ontologies are available from here1.

1 http://imash.leeds.ac.uk/ontologies/nettun/request/.

D. Thakker et al.

Table 1. PADTUN ontologies features

Feature
No of classes
No of properties
No of individuals
No of axioms
DL expressivity

Value
?

?

?
4 Pathology and ROI Inferencing Service

Pathology and ROI inferencing services are two central components of the PADTUN
application layer.

4.1 Pathology Inferencing

Pathologies are calculated in two steps: (i) by inferring associations between disorders,
and pathologies; and (ii) by inferring associations between diagnosis influencing factors and pathologies.

The Disorder-based pathologies component of the pathology inferencing service finds
all the pathologies with disorders and lining materials present in the tunnel portion
under inspection and ranks pathologies according to the typicality of the disorders. This
inference involves SPARQL queries2 to infer associations.
The Diagnosis Influencing Factors-based Pathology component finds all
the
pathologies for the diagnosis influencing factors present in the tunnel portion under
inspection and ranks them according to their influence level. Furthermore, a check is
made if all the necessary influencing factors for a pathology are present in the portion
under investigation. If they are not, the pathology is removed from the final list and
ranking is adjusted accordingly. This inference involves SPARQL queries to infer
associations and to check the necessary conditions.

The pseudo code of these two components is presented below. The weights (m and
n in the pseudo code) were set by series of interaction with the experts. The values
m = 4 and n = 1 were found to be the best according to experts judgement based on
three tunnels. We validated this further with seven tunnels and the values were found to
be suitable without further adjustments.

The Cumulative pathologies component combines the results of the previous two
components by aggregating the score of pathologies in both the lists (disorder-based
pathology list & influencing factor-based pathology list).

2 Sample SPARQL queries are available at: http://imash.leeds.ac.uk/papers/eswc2015/appendix.
?

?

?
D. Thakker et al.

4.2 Regions of Interest (ROI) Inferencing Service

One of the decision support aspects of the PADTUN is to identify regions of interest
concerning pathologies. In practice,
tunnel experts intuitively abstract regions of
interest and in doing so aggregate tunnel portions that are susceptible to the same types
of pathologies with some distance approximation. However, it was not clear from the
outset how the experts themselves infer ROIs once pathologies per portion were
identified. Hence, a mock-up of several possible alternatives was presented to the
experts in order to identify the best way of inferring ROIs. We here present the logical
formalism for these alternative ways to define and calculate ROIs.

Lets say Top n ranked pathologies per individual portion of a tunnel are denoted
by observation, obs(P). Then a region of interest R is a continuous homogeneous
portion of the tunnel consisting of a set of individual tunnel portions (P). The granularity of continuity is determined by how big gap (n) between adjacent tunnel portions
is allowed.

In addition, homogeneity in an ROI can be determined by the validity of a logical
expression (X) that is applied to portions X of a Tunnel. The aggregation predicate
R,n(X) is





614 xj ^ U xi; xj



RU;n X   8xi 2 X 9xj 2 X xi

	

	 ^ distxi; xj  n



Where, (X) is one the following predicates which specifies different possible conditions as to when two tunnel portions can be aggregated:
Portions with (Approximately) Equal Observations (=, ). Observations under
consideration are deemed equal when they share the same pathologies. For two
portions p1 and p2, = is defined as: =({p1, p2})  obs(p1) = obs(p2). Observations are
approximately equal if all their pathologies are semantically similar:



  8 o1 2 obs p1
12

8 o2 2 obs p2

12

 ! 9o2 2 obs p1
 ! 9o1 2 obs p2


 similar o1; o2

 similar o1; o2

U p1; p2




^




f

g

Portions with (Approximately) Incorporating Observations (, ). One observation incorporates another observation if it contains all the pathologies that the other
observation has, i.e.  ({p1, p2})  (obs(p1)  obs(p2))  {obs(p1), obs(p2)}. Also,
one observation is a approximately incorporating another observation if there exists
some set of concepts in one that are semantically similar to another so that one set of
observations contain all the observations that the other observation has, i.e.

({p1, p2})  [(o1obs(p1)  (o2obs(p2)) similar(o1, o2)]

Portions with (Approximately) Overlapping Observations (, ). One observation
overlaps another observation if it contains only some pathologies that the other one
has and vice versa: ({p1, p2})  (obs(p1)  obs(p2)) =    ({p1, p2}). Also, one
observation approximately overlaps another observation if it contains some concepts
(e.g. disorders) that are semantically similar to the concepts from the other observation
and vice versa is also true, i.e.
?

?

?
({p1, p2})  [(o1  obs(p1) (o2  obs(p1)) similar(o1, o2)] 
[ (o2  obs(p2)  (o1obs(p2)) [similar(o1, o2)]]   ({p1, p2})

Portions with the Same Classification (C). Two observations belongs to the same
classification if they both contain pathologies belonging to the same ontology class.



f

UC p1; p2

g

  obs p1



 2 C ^ obs p2


 2 C:

Example. Consider a tunnel (see Fig. 8) with ten tunnel portions. The observations
consisting of pathologies on each of these ten portions are given in the figure with
O = {di, ..., dn}; where d1 = Mortar Ageing; d2 = Dissolution; d3 = Creep; d4 = Faults
Degradation; d5 = Rock Weathering and d6 = Swelling. It is also given that d2 and d6
are semantically similar, i.e. similar (d2, d6). A domain expert can then tailor what he
would like to view as region of interest by manipulating two criteria from the aggregation function: (i) allowed gap(n) and (ii) predicate ((X)) to use. Figure 8 shows
various ROIs under different selections. For example, when the selection is n = 1 and
the predicate for portions with equal observations (=) is selected (first row, Fig. 8), the
resultant eight ROIs are: {{p1, p2}, {p3}, {p5}, {p6}, {p7}, {p8}, {p9}, {p10}}.

A different selection (last row, Fig. 8), by keeping n = 1 but changing the predicate
to RUC reduces number of ROIs to one, i.e. {{p5, p6, p7, p8}}. Each portion in this ROI
belongs to the Ground Degradation Pathology class from the PADTUN ontology. The
ontological representation of this portion is depicted in Fig. 9.

Fig. 8. Result of various selections of aggregation predicates and gap. Resultant ROIs are
numbered and shown as aggregation of individual portions.

D. Thakker et al.

Fig. 9. Ontological representation of one of the resultant ROIs (selection: n = 1 and RUC ).

Finalising Aggregation Function(s) to Implement. Experts were shown a mock-up of
ROIs with different selections (above). The aggregation function Portions with the
same classification ( RUC ) was deemed to be most useful for decision-making and was
implemented for the final version of the ROI inferencing service. Detecting regions
with portions that have pathologies belonging to the same classification helps decision
makers to decide on an overall approach they can take while addressing problematic
tunnel regions. Grouping affected regions according to the pathology classification is
helpful in making decisions about expertise, treatment and equipment required for
maintenance. For example,
infrastructure managers are required to send different
equipment to repair lining degradation pathologies from the one needed to fix ground
degradation pathologies. Similarly, it will require different skillsets to repair different
type of pathologies.

5 Evaluation

Overall Set-up. An evaluation was carried out to verify the correctness of the PADTUN components, namely the ontologies, pathology and ROI Inferencing components.
The goal of the evaluation was to discover any issues and to identify improvements in
these components. In addition, it was also important to check the correctness of the
input we received from the experts. Experts provided rules as tables indicating the
situations under which a particular pathology is likely to occur. The cumulative effect
of these rules and whether they match the experts tacit judgment about pathologies is
something else we aimed to capture during the evaluation.

The evaluation was conducted with tunnel experts from the project with extensive
tunnel

experience in diagnosing tunnels and strategic decision-making about
maintenance.

Pathology Inferencing Evaluation & Results. Figure 10 shows the partial interface
for the pathology inferencing component of the PADTUN system. The columns rank
?

?

?
and pathology shows the rank of the pathology. The disorders column shows the
disorders that were present in the tunnel portion under investigation and contributed to
manifesting this pathology. The colour coding shows whether the disorders are typical
disorders for the pathology.

Fig. 10. The PADTUN interface for the pathology inferencing service. It shows results of
disorders-based pathology inferencing on a tunnel portion.

For this evaluation, 41 portions of 3 tunnels were selected by consulting the experts.
The aim was to select tunnel portions with a good variety of disorders. The experts were
provided the output of the pathology inferencing service as part of the interface
(Fig. 10). They were asked to comment on individual (disorder and diagnosis influencing factors based) pathology inferencing and cumulative pathology inferencing
results.

The experts approved the presence of the pathologies and their ranking in all the
test cases for the individual (disorder and diagnosis influencing factors based)
pathology inferencing. However, during discussions it became evident that although
they agreed with the individual inferencing they were not satisfied with the cumulative
calculations. We discovered that the pathologies were correctly calculated based on
disorders and diagnosis influencing factors and according to the rules encoded.
However, in their tacit calculations, experts always expected a pathology to be present
in both the lists for them to consider the pathology in the cumulative list. As a result of
this exercise, this cumulative list rule was added to the ontology and to the pathology
inferencing service. This scenario highlights the need of domain expert involvement in
testing ontologies and the resultant benefit in terms of ongoing knowledge expansion.

ROI Inferencing Evaluation & Results. A gold standard consisting of 3 tunnels and
respective ROIs was collected from tunnel experts. These three tunnels have a different
number of portions. The tunnel 1 is one of the smallest tunnels with 19 portions but a
higher number of pathologies. The tunnel 2 has 35 portions with some portions without
any pathology. The tunnel 3 has 42 portions and a good mix of lining disorders and
pathologies. The evaluation included these 96 portions. For each of these tunnels,
experts provided ROIs based on pathology classification. For example:

Portions 1 to 3 in tunnel 1 have pathologies from Lining Degradation classifica-
tion; Portions 1 to 19 in tunnel 1 have pathologies from Lining Ageing degradation
classification.

D. Thakker et al.

Fig. 11. The PADTUN interface showing the overview of pathologies across tunnel portions.
(1) shows the regions of interest with pathologies from the same classification, e.g., (2) Lining
Degradation and (3) Lining Ageing.

Figure 11 depicts the PADTUN interface showing the overview of pathologies

across tunnel portions and highlighting ROIs.

The output of the ROI Inferencing was compared with the gold standard using
traditional IR approach of precision, recall and F-Measure [15]. True positives (tp -
exact matches from the system list and gold standard), false positives (fp - the system
indicated ROIs that were not in the expert list), true negatives (tn- possible ROIs that
were not present in either of the lists) and false negatives (fn- a region that was not
present in the system list but was present in the gold standard) were calculated.

The result is summarised in Table 2. Three configurations of the ROI inferencing
service are considered. In the first one, for a classification to be considered at least one
pathology from the classification has to be in the top three ranks. The second configuration is more restrictive and expects at the least two pathologies from a classification in the top three ranks for the classification to be considered. In the final

Table 2. Precision, recall and F-Measure results for the ROI inferencing component; (left)
considering ROIs with at least one pathology from a classification in the top 3 ranks; (middle)
considering ROIs with min 2 pathologies from a classification in the top 3 ranks; (right) considering
ROIs with at least three portions.
?

?

?
configuration, if any ROI has three or fewer portions then the ROI is discarded from the
analysis ensuring that ROIs contain a substantial number of portions for the analysis.
The configuration with the rule that at least two pathologies of a classification need
to be present in an ROI achieved the highest result in all three criteria. F-Measure was
84 %. Under an interpretation of the agreement between expert list and system list of
ROIs, this is considered to be an almost perfect agreement [16]. The configuration
restricting cut-off number of portions per ROI achieved similar performance. The least
restrictive configuration fared worst with 54 % precision.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper, we have demonstrated the application of semantic web technologies in a
new domain of tunnel diagnosis and maintenance. A DSS system, PADTUN, is presented that supports tunnel experts with decision-making about diagnosing pathologies
and detecting continuous portions with similar pathology spread. This was only possible with semantic web technologies as the aggregation mechanism requires semantic
reasoning over pathology classification. Use of semantic technologies makes the
framework flexible where the domain experts can select larger and more granular
portions with different configuration including selecting portions with similar pathologies in top ranks and ignoring short gaps. This flexibility allows us to work with the
experts to select an ideal configuration, which is in our plans for immediate future
work.

Acknowledgements. This work is part of the NeTTUN project, funded by the EC 7th Framework under Grant Agreement 280712.
