open.data.al - Increasing the Utilization of Government 

Julia Hoxha
Institute AIFB, 
KIT-Campus Sud

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

76128 Karlsruhe, Germany

julia.hoxha@kit.edu

Armand Brahaj

Data in Albania
FIZ Karlsruhe - Leibniz Institute for 
Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1
76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen
armand.brahaj@fiz-karlsruhe.de

Information Infrastructure

Denny (cid:254)(cid:252)

Institute AIFB, 
KIT-Campus Sud

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
denny.vrandecic@kit.edu

ABSTRACT
Open  Data  practice  requires  that  data  are  freely  available  for 
everyone,  laying  the  foundations  for  transparency  and  decision 
making. Many democratic countries have supported this practice, 
freeing and facilitating access to their government data.
Open Data Albania is a new initiative that embraces the principles 
of  Open  Government  Data  for  Albania.  This  project  aims  to 
collect  from  public  offices  data  on  socio-economic  indicators, 
process  and  publish  them  based  on  semantic  technologies  and 
Linked Data principles. This work presents the approach we have 
deployed in publishing governmental data as linked data and the 
methods implemented to query datasets and visualize the results. 
In our approach, we aimed for quality of the published open data, 
designing cases of problems with great interest for the community.
Each case is offered in our website as an article accompanied not 
only with the statistical dataset, but also with graphic visualization 
and a detailed textual description. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Misc.

General Terms
Semantics

Keywords
Linked open data, open government data, ontology, semantic web

1. INTRODUCTION
Open Data Albania (ODA) is a new initiative that embraces the 
Open  Data  principles  for  Albania.  Our  goal  is to  increase 
openness of data offered by different government institutions and 
provide means of representing these data in more understandable 
ways. There are several challenges underlying our work, starting 
from the way that data is originally provided by the sources. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  to  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2011, 7th Int. Conf. on Semantic Systems, Sept. 7-9, 2011, 
Graz, Austria
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0621-(cid:1012)(cid:857)(cid:936)(cid:1005)(cid:1004)(cid:856)(cid:1004)(cid:1004)(cid:856)

Government  data  are  mostly  offered  in  heterogeneous  formats, 
missing clear semantics that clarify what the data describes, and 
displayed  in  ways  that  is  not  clearly  understandable  to  a  broad 
range user communities that need to make informed decisions.
From  a  technical  perspective,  our  work  consists  in  applying 
Semantic Web technologies to enable data integration among the 
different  organizations  and  establish  links  to  interconnect  data 
together on the Web.  We adhere to principles of Linked Data for 
publishing,  sharing  and  linking  data  on  the  web,  based  on 
standardized formats and interfaces.
This work presents the semantic approach deployed in publishing 
governmental  data as  linked  data based  on  an  ontology  that  we 
have built. It also introduces the methods implemented to query 
single or combined dataset and visualize the results.  We give an 
overview of related work in the field of open data and statistical 
vocabularies in Section 2. The semantic approach is described in 
Section  3,  whereas  Section  4  presents 
technical 
implementation followed  by  the  benefits  of  our  approach  in 
Section 5. We conclude in Section 6 with a summary of our work.
2. RELATED WORK
A quickly growing amount of statistical government data is being 
published  online  as  Linked  Open  Data1. Leading  players  that 
promote  the  openness  of  government  data  combined  with  the 
deployment  of  Semantic  Web 
the  US 
government [1] and the UK government [2]. The UK government 
has published their statistical data natively as RDF, whereas the 
institute RPI2 is in the (cid:182)
public statistical data to RDF.
Regarding  vocabularies
to  semantically  describe 
statistical data, we can mention the RDF Data Cube Vocabulary3.
The  Eurostat  wrapper  [3,  4] uses  the  Data  Cube  vocabulary  to
model statistical data and publish them as Linked Data.
Similar  to these  works, ODA uses a semantic approach for data 
representation and combines the translation of data to RDF with 
articles around a particular case, offering helpful interpretations of 
the data on the most pressing issues.

technologies  are 

available

the 

1 http://opengovernmentdata.org/data/catalogues/
2 http://www.rpi.edu
3 http://publishing-statistical-

data.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/specs/src/main/html/cube.html


The project Open Data Albania aims to collect from public offices 
data on socio-economic indicators, process and publish them in its 
website open.data.al based on semantic technologies and Linked 
Data principles. As illustrated in Figure 1, we follow an approach 
that converts the raw datasets into RDF triples, then pose queries 
on single or combined datasets and visualize the results.   
In  our  approach, we aimed for quality rather than quantity. Our 
goal was  not  to  publish  as  much  RDF  triples as  possible,  but 
rather to carefully define cases of problems and with great interest
for 
increase
understandability of  these  data  and  the  problems they  address, 
facilitating their access by web visitors and journalists.
The  initially  designed  cases  cover  problems  ranging  from  cost 
analysis  of  national  road  constructions,  which  identified  figures 
not  previously  put  together  by  the  responsible  government 
institutions, to statistics about accredited educational programs of 
the  universities,  statistics  on  high  costs  of  local  elections  in  the 
country,  to  information  on  how  people  spend  the  money  loans, 
statistics on very low health investments, etc. 

community.  Our  objective  was 

the 

to

Figure 1.  Semantic Approach for Publishing

Open Governmental Data

There  are  currently  more  than  one  hundred  of  such  cases,
covering problems that the country is currently facing and offering
clear descriptions based on the data and their visualization. Each 
of  these  cases is  offered  in  our  website as an article;
is
accompanied  not  only  with  the  dataset,  but  also  with  a  textual 
description, from the statistical analysts, that clarifies the data and 
respective  graphics. As  stated  previously,  our  aim is to increase 
the  quality  of  the  published open  data,  so  that  they  can  be
interpreted by machines, but most importantly they can be easily
understood by the human visitors.

it

3.1 ODA Ontology
The  need  to  provide  a  unified  representation  for  the  different, 
heterogeneous  data  gathered  from  the  various  sources and the 
necessity to provide formal semantics have greatly motivated us to 
use an  ontology,  which  we  make  available  online4.  While 

4 http://open.data.al/oda.owl

modeling  the  ontology,  our  goal  was  to  follow  linked  data 
principles  and  reuse as  much  as  possible  existing  well-known 
ontologies, but also extending it with other important entities. We
present this ontology in [5] and give a detailed description of it.
Reusability of existing vocabularies is a requirement that tends to 
facilitate data  processing  from  different  client  applications. 
Accordingly,  terms  from  well-known  ontologies  have  been 
reused, but we have certainly complemented them with additional 
concepts. Of particular importance are the concept and taxonomy 
of  indicators  and topics,  which  are  additionally  modeled  in  the 
ontology and defined in our own namespace. We have modeled a 
set  of  terms  as subclasses  of  concepts  (same  as for  properties) 
belonging to other vocabularies.
We have instantiated a large number of topics and related these 
topics to indicators, so that a topic may have multiple indicators 
assigned  to  it.  The  indicators  are  modeled  after  a  thorough 
analysis of the statistical data offered by the different government 
institutions.  They  are  organized 
the 
oda:subindicator relation,  forming  this  way  a  hierarchy  of 
parent-child indicators. 
3.2 From Raw to Linked Data
The  first  step  we  followed in  our  approach  was  collecting  data 
from  different  sources,  which  are  the  websites  of  various 
government  institutions  in  Albania  such  as  Ministry  of  Justice, 
Ministry  of  Finance,  Ministry  of  Economy,  Bank  of  Albania, 
Institute of Statistics, Municipality of Tirana, but also websites of 
organizations outside Albania e.g. the European Union statistical 
office (Eurostat), World Bank, International Monetary Fund, etc.
The  data  offered  online  from Albanian  institutions  is  mostly 
provided in unstructured or semi-structured formats, such as text 
documents, Excel files or XML files. Our work initially consisted 
in  restructuring the  collected  data into  datasets based  on  predefined  problems  or  cases,  applying  statistical  analysis  on  the 
datasets, then converting them into RDF triples and exposing as 
Linked Data. 

in  groups  using 

offered 

techniques,

since  data  are

3.2.1 Processing Data
The extraction of governmental data from the different sources is
manually performed,  because  of  the  complexity  in  applying 
automatic 
in  highly 
heterogeneous formats. Moreover, there are many cases where the 
information we wanted to extract related to a specific problem or
case,  was  displayed  in  unstructured  ways  within  PDF  files. 
Another  problem  is the  incompleteness  of  dataset  in  various 
sources, where several  statistical data for  particular time periods
are missing and have to be collected from other institutions.
After the raw data are collected from the original sources, they are
structured in CVS format creating the first version of the datasets. 
We  had previously  designed  a  few  templates with  directives  on
how the datasets should be structured.

3.2.2 Converting and Exposing Linked Data
Recognizing the many benefits of Linked Data, we have followed 
an approach that is in alignment with its principles, converting the 
raw statistical datasets into RDF triples, based on ODA ontology, 
and then exposing these triples online. 


The conversion into RDF triples is performed automatically via a 
tool, which we implemented applying the XLWrap wrapper5. This 
is a Java implementation, extended with new mappings between 
the  template  of  a  dataset s  Excel  file  and the ODA ontology. A 
mapping contains template (named) RDF graphs and is provided 
as part of a RDF file in TriG syntax (similar to N3).
Well-formed URI references have been used to identify resources 
such as dataset, indicator, country, year, etc.  We have invested on 
a technical infrastructure to make the URIs dereferenceable. RDF 
links  to  resources  from  other  data  sources  are  established, 
enabling visitors and user agents to navigate the Web of Data. The 
datasets  in RDF  and  XLS  formats  are  made  available  in  our 
project  website.  Each  file  is  attached  to  the  article  to  which  it 
belongs and also stored in a catalogue using CKAN registry6.
The  representation  of  the  government  data  as  Linked  Data  has 
several benefits in the following aspects: 

Integration  (cid:177) having  now  a  unified  representation and 
established  links  among  the  resources, data  from 
different sources are ready for various combinations and 
use in mashups 
Sharing (cid:177) the data we provide, based on openness and 
linked  principles, allow  easier  sharing among different 
parties

1)

2)

4)

3) Exploration  (cid:177) faceted  browser  over  the  RDFized 

datasets, offer more efficient search capabilities  
Insightful  visualization  (cid:177) facility  in  generating  visual 
representations  from  results  of  queries  posed  over  the 
datasets

The  resulting and  crucial  added-value  gained  from  the  Linked 
Data approach is the increased utilization of the government data 
by various users, mainly journalists, analysts, bloggers and NGO 
activists.
4. QUERY AND VISUALIZATION
4.1 Semantic Data Exploration
In order to assist visitors to use and understand statistical data, we 
provide  a  knowledge  explorer  that  allows  querying  the  RDF 
dataset. This faceted browser, illustrated in Figure 2, allows a user 

to  search  by  criteria  like  topics,  indicators,  sub-indicators,  and 
date. Using Ajax technology, the explorer dynamically generates 
interfaces  for the  respective  search  criteria (obtained  from  the 
ontology and RDF datasets).
A query  is  compiled  based  on  the  chosen  criteria and  sent 
afterwards  to  a  SPARQL  Endpoint.  A  list  of  buttons  is then
generated, each of them enabling different representation forms of 
the  results retrieved  from  the  query.  The  last  button  enables  a
graphic representation, passing the query results to a visualization
API.
4.2 Graphic Visualization
One of the values of making data open is that it enables anyone to 
construct 
is 
particularly  useful  for  public  sector  information,  since  it  can 
provide feedback on how effective particular policies have been. 
It
technologies  for 
understandable visual representations of statistics.
Moreover, it is important that the generation of visual graphs  is
done on the fly, as soon as result-sets from the query are retrieved 
back.  For  this  reason,  we  evaluated  a  set  of  open  source  visual 
application  interfaces  and  we  chose  to  work  with  Google 
Visualization API and Spark.

insightful visualizations  over 

crucial  for  our  project 

the  data.  This 

to  apply 

is

4.2.1 Using Google Visualization API
Google  Visualization  API  provides  access  to  a  set  of  tools  that
display data in graphical representations. The variety of different 
graphical formats and the free license were the two main factors in 
deciding for this technology.
In  order  to  generate  graphs  on  the  fly,  we  make  use  of  the 
following component: 
RDF  file: 
Visualization, source RDF documents are needed
SPARQL query endpoint: to process queries and get the 
results. We make use of existing endpoints7
Google Visualization API8

to  present  data  via  Google 

in  order 

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

5 Spreadsheet-to-RDF wrapper http://xlwrap.sourceforge.net/
6 http://katalog.opendata.al/

7 http://api.talis.com/stores/rdfquery-dev1/services/sparql
8 http://code.google.com/apis/chart/


(cid:120)
In several  cases, our  data  have  been used in  government 
advocacy, confronting statistics provided by the government and 
leading to public debates on the issued governmental reports. Our 
project  has  been  a  point  of  reference,  such  that each  of the 
influential media in Albania as published at least two articles with 
reference to ODA within the first half of 2011.

Dependency: Are there other projects depending on our data?
(cid:120)
Currently, two startup projects are based on ODA. One of them 
aims  to  create  new  forms  of  media  on  the  Web  based  on  high 
usage of statistical facts. While there is a belief that the objectivity 
should be the foundation of journalism, today transparency is the 
new objectivity.
6. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
Our  work  within  Open  Data  Albania  project  aims  to  increase 
transparency  through  data.  We  have  collected  various  statistical 
data from governmental institutions in Albania and abroad, used 
semantic technologies  to ease integration and published them as 
Linked Data. Our focus lies on the openness and quality. In order 
to  increase  the  utilization  of  the  generated  linked  data,  we 
designed  problem  cases  and  offer  statistics related  to  them,
accompanied with visualizations and detailed textual descriptions.
ODA contains information that is found interesting by a number 
of  non-Albanian  speaking  visitors, such  as staff  of  foreign 
organizations  in  Albania  (USAID,  UNICEF),  businesspersons, 
etc. In the near future, we plan to  translate our open knowledge 
base in English and extend existing datasets with more indicators 
and topics. (cid:179)
(cid:180)         
enhance  their  ability  to  work  with  statistical  data,  understand 
government data and analyze them, in order to later use these data 
for their studies, research papers and other academic works.
