A Provenance-Aware Linked Data Application for Trip

Management and Organization

Daniel Garijo

OEG-DIA

Facultad de Informatica

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid
dgarijo@delicias.dia.fi.upm.es

Boris Villazon-Terrazas

OEG-DIA

Facultad de Informatica

Oscar Corcho

OEG-DIA

Facultad de Informatica

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid

bvillazon@fi.upm.es

ocorcho@fi.upm.es

ABSTRACT
We present El Viajero, an application1 for exploiting, managing and organizing Linked Data in the domain of news
and blogs about travelling. El Viajero makes use of several
heterogeneous datasets to help users to plan future trips,
and relies on the Open Provenance Model2 for modeling the
provenance information of the resources.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
E.2 [Data storage representations]: Linked Representa-
tions

General Terms
Design, Experimentation

Keywords
Linked Data, provenance, news, blog

1.

INTRODUCTION

News content providers rarely include provenance information about the resources that they generate and pub-
lish, as already pointed out the W3C Provenance Incubator Group3 in the News Aggregator Scenario Gap Analy-
sis4. This provenance information is critical to determine
whether a resource can be trusted or not, since it allows
knowing about the source, references and process followed
to create the resource.

This paper describes how we exploit the provenance information of guides, images, videos, trips and posts in order
to help other users to reuse and explore existing contents
to plan their own trips around the world. The application

http://webenemasuno.linkeddata.es/browser_en.html

http://openprovenance.org/

http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/prov/wiki/Main_Page

http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/prov/wiki/Analysis_of_News_

Aggregator_Scenario#Gap_Analysis

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS Triplification Challenge 2011 Graz, Austria
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0014-8/10/09 ...$10.00.

manages the data retrieval transparently to the users, and
organizes the results in a map through a graphical interface.
It relies on a dataset that we5 have recently published as
Linked Data, containing the provenance information of the
editorial resources belonging to El Viajero6(which is part of
the spanish newspaper El Pa s 7). The dataset aggregates
contents created by different kind of users, ranging from
journalists and expert bloggers to common travellers wanting to share their experiences.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
describes in detail the scenario on top of which we have
developed our application, explaining how the modelling of
the provenance information is possible by reusing existing
provenance vocabularies. Furthermore, the section explains
the functionality of the application and the potential uses
for the users. Finally, Section 3 exposes the conclusions of
our work and the planned improvements for the application.

2. EL VIAJERO PLATFORM

Our scenario is related to the general context of travelling,
where travelers want to share, read and reuse experiences in
blogs and online news items. The platform on top of which
we build our application aggregates content from a variety
of newspapers and digital platforms owned by the Prisa Digital Group8: Suplemento El Pa s, Gu as Aguilar, Canal
Viajar and Prisa Digital, but it is also open for recommendations from users (with more than 1000 published),
pictures (more than 2000 uploaded and visible in the web)
and posts (from around 600 different blogs). The activity in
the web accounts to more than 590000 unique visitors per
month reading or commenting the contents produced, with
more than 5000 registered users.
2.1 Modelling the scenario as Linked Data

The provenance of the published information has been
modelled following a layered approach. On the bottom layer
we have the Open Provenance Model (OPM) [3], a domain
independent provenance model result of the Provenance Challenge Series9. OPM models the resources as artifacts (im-
mutable pieces of state), processes (action or series of actions performed on artifacts), or agents (controllers of pro-
cesses); and represents their relationships in a provenance
graph with five causal edges: Used (a process used some

http://www.oeg-upm.net/

http://elviajero.elpais.com/

http://www.elpais.com/

http://www.prisa.com/

http://twiki.ipaw.info/bin/view/Challenge/OPM

224Figure 1: Overview of the Trip Management Linked Data Application.

artifact), WasControlledBy (an agent controlled some pro-
cess), WasTriggeredBy (a process activated other process),
WasGeneratedBy (a process generated an artifact) and WasDerivedFrom (an artifact was derived from another artifact).
Moreover, OPM adds an abstraction layer for all the resources of our domain, treating guides,
images, posts or
videos as artifacts, and tracking their provenance without
any distinctions. On top of this layer we find the OPM
profile for our domain, extending the OPM core ontology,
OPMO10, with domain specific relationships (additional types
of processes, artifacts, roles and an adaptation of the geometry model proposed in [1]). Finally, on the top layer we
have several vocabularies for describing the domain-specific
properties of the artifacts in our domain, such as SIOC 11 for
the posts and blogs (recording metadata about the post like
the date of creation and publication, the author account,
etc.), MPEG-7 Ontology 12 for images and videos (bytes,
size, color,duration, etc.) and the W3C GEO13 for adding
geolocalization to the resources.

It is worth mentioning that we have enhanced the RDF
locations of the resources pointing to other resources in the
Linked Data cloud. To this end, we relied on the SILK
framework14 for discovering links to either GeoLinkedData15
or DBpedia16 resources.
2.2 Visualization of Trips, Guides and Blogs
Thanks to the publication of El Viajero as Linked Data,
users have available more than 6600 resources about almost
1000 different locations around the world. With our application these users can explore, organize and reuse the existing
contents of the platform.

The application is divided in two parts. The first one
browses the contents from the newspaper and digital plat-

http://openprovenance.org/model/opmo

http://rdfs.org/sioc/spec/

http://metadata.net/mpeg7/

http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/

http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/bizer/silk/

http://geo.linkeddata.es/

http://dbpedia.org

forms, and locates in a map all the available resources to
help users to find them. The second part allows to reproduce trips of other users and expert travellers step by step.
The viewer is based on a modified version of map4RDF17
[2], an extensible tool that uses Googles GWT framework
to visualize and access to Linked Data resources.
2.2.1 Accessing and filtetring contents around the world
Many of the available resources (such as travel guides, article reviews, images, videos or trips) belonging to the published dataset refer to specific locations around the world.
With the objective of organizing them for the users, our application adds a small marker in the map whenever there
is a resource about that location. When users click on one
of these markers, a small window appears with additional
information about all the resources referring to the location
(i.e.
title, date of publication, link to the Prisa Digitals
platforms and RDF link), so users can easily select one to
read more. This data is recovered dynamically through a
SPARQL query to the endpoint for speeding up the process (since the retrieval of the metadata from all the guides
would require a lot of time), and it is available thanks to the
publication of the provenance dataset.

We have also included year filtering for the guide retrieval.
Some users might be interested in recovering only the guides
published after the last year, in order to ensure that what
they are reading is accurate to what they might find when
travelling there.

The full provenance of the resources (i.e. their creation
and modification processes) is not displayed in the map, because the majority of the users are not looking for it when
planning a trip. However, if the user is interested we have
included a link to access this data directly. By clicking on
the RDF link, a new page appears and points to our Pubby
frontend18 where all the aforementioned provenance information can be explored.

Figure 1 shows an overview of this part of the viewer. The
Facet menu on the left allows to filter points of guides, trips

http://oegdev.dia.fi.upm.es/projects/map4rdf/

http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/pubby/

225or all resources, and on the map we can see all the current
locations of the guides. Each line of the results refers to a
different guide, and clicking on top of the title of the guide
opens the guide from El Viajeros digital newspaper.

2.2.2 Exploring and reusing trips
The provenance of the resources plays a more important
role when browsing and exploring the trips. Trips are resources that contain:
itinerary, posts, comments, photos
and videos from the user who has uploaded them previously.
Moreover, trips are modelled as workflows by using OPM.

Trips can be also seen as interactive blogs, and the application lets the user explore the evolution of a trip while
moving through the itinerary on the map. Thus, we have
created a timeline of the trip reusing the SIMILE widget for
GWT19 and extracting the contents from the provenance
information available at the endpoint20. The timeline also
contains the materials and comments uploaded by the user
and their locations, so we can reproduce the itinerary followed by the traveller in detail and see when did the user do
a certain tour or took a certain photo. An example can be
seen in Figure 2, where we display the references, photos and
posts belonging to the trip My trip to Madrid. By clicking
on each resource, we are able to obtain further information
about it in a new window, and its location in the map.

The timeline allows to reproduce the trip to other users
and give them ideas and possible points of interest from
another perspective besides the guides. Thanks to the visualization on the map, users are able to change to another
trip whenever they choose, and explore it in detail in a few
seconds.

Figure 2: Exploring the timeline of a trip.

When a user selects the trip tab after clicking on a point on
the map, the application offers a similar view to the guides
tab, showing metadata about the trips which have itineraries
with points on top of the selected location, and recovers the
metadata dynamically with SPARQL queries. The application also allows drawing the whole itinerary of the trip,
centering the map to be able to see all its points and offering customizable colors, in case the user wants to draw
various itineraries at the same time.

3. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

http://www.simile-widgets.org/timeline/

http://webenemasuno.linkeddata.es/sparql

In this paper we have presented an application that makes
use of several heterogeneous datasets published as Linked
Data to provide a visualization of the different available resources from the Prisa Digital Group. Since the location of
the resources plays an important role when planning a trip,
we have retrieved and organized the provenance information
from the resources referring to them in order to (1) display
additional metadata from the resources, and (2) provide a
dynamic timeline of the trips to help the browsing of the contents and updates made by their authors. This helps other
users to explore the contents available in the platform more
easily, and provides useful knowledge for those planning new
trips. It also offers a fast way to read the guides from the
places that users aim to visit, instead of doing it manually
over thousands of travel guides. These guides are precisely
what distinguishes this application from other trip organizers like TripAdvisor21, because there is a large amount of
data available from each destination and it does not rely
uniquely in opinions from the users.

This application also shows how the provenance is the key
to know more about the resource we are browsing, besides
the recommendations and favorable comments that it might
have. In this use case everything is retrieved and organized
around the location of the resource, according to the necessities of the users in the domain. Thanks to the published
provenance dataset we can retrieve the contents for other
user needs through SPARQL queries (e.g.
the references
used for the development of the resource, the dates, the au-
thors, etc.).Thus, additional functionality can be added very
easily, due to the flexibility of the application.

At the moment our application can be considered mostly
a visualization tool. Work is in progress is to let users create
and share their own new trips and not only browsing the existing ones (allowing them to comment and recommend trips
made by other users). We also plan to enhance the application with the locations of popular hotels and restaurants
often referred to in the guides, which belong to a dataset
that soon will be published as Linked Data (also owned by
the Prisa Digital Group).

4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported by the R&D project Webn+1.

We would like to kindly thank Alexander de Le on and Miguel
Angel Garc a.
