TWC International Open Government Dataset Catalog 


John S. Erickson
erickj4@rpi.edu

Eric Rozell

rozele@rpi.edu

Yongmei Shi

sym@cs.rpi.edu

Jin Zheng

zhengj3@rpi.edu

Li Ding

dingl@cs.rpi.edu
James A. Hendler
hendler@cs.rpi.edu

Tetherless World Constellation

Rensselaer Polytechnic

Institute

110 8th Street
Troy, NY 12180

ABSTRACT
The TWC International Open Government Dataset Catalog
(IOGDC) integrates a diverse selection of more than 70 government dataset catalogs from around the world. IOGDC
demonstrates a practical dataset catalog metadata model for
integrating diverse dataset catalogs collected from the real
world and linking those catalogs into Linked Data Cloud.
IOGDCs faceted browsing and search interface provides a
scalable and reconfigurable solution for finding and browsing open government datasets which also offers a compelling
demonstration of the value of a common metadata model
for open government dataset catalogs. We believe that the
vocabulary choices demonstrated by IOGDC highlight the
potential for useful Linked Data applications to be created
from open government catalogs and will encourage the adoption of such a standard worldwide.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3.4 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Systems
and SoftwareSemantic Web

General Terms
standardization

Keywords
metadata, Linked Data, open government, government data

A submission to the Open Government Data track of the
Corresponding author

I-SEMANTICS 2011 Triplification Challenge

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2011 Graz, Austria
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0621-8 ...$10.00.

1.

INTRODUCTION

The TWC International Open Government Dataset Catalog (IOGDC) is a data integration project for harvesting,
cleaning, aggregating, and republishing the metadata catalogs of open government datasets from around the world.
As of July 2011 more than 70 catalogs from over 25 countries have been harvested by IOGDC, linking to more than
335,000 datasets from a wide variety of categories published
online by different levels of government including local, state,
provincial, federal and others. The catalog data is republished as Linked Data via de-referencable URIs (following
Linked Data principles) and via gzipped dump files1. A
scalable, web-based faceted browsing and search interface
2 has been developed to help users find datasets using the
republished catalog data. TWC IOGDCs success at exposing existing, proprietary dataset catalogs as Linked Data is
illustrated by the following:

IOGDC integrates a diverse selection of government dataset catalogs. While a number of open government dataset catalogs, including Data.gov, Data.gov.uk,
United Nations and OpenEI.org have already provided dataset
registration and search capabilities, they are usually maintained by independent contributors and their cataloged datasets
are typically limited to specific regions or domains. IOGDC
demonstrates an incremental process that integrates semiautomatic dataset catalog harvesting activities and automated Linked Data production and publishing.

IOGDC demonstrates a practical dataset catalog
metadata model for integrating diverse dataset catalogs collected from the real world and linking the
catalogs into Linked Data Cloud.
In 2011 the W3C
eGovernment Interest Group (eGov IG) 3 began developing
the Data Catalog (DCAT) model. While the vocabulary
choices made for IOGDC (see Appendix) do not precisely
match DCAT, they are close enough to demonstrate the potential of the DCAT model. Like DCAT, IOGDC uses existing vocabularies and alignment ontologies where possible,

1http://logd.tw.rpi.edu/2011/
iogdc-dump-all-v20110608.tar.gz
2http://logd.tw.rpi.edu/demo/international_
dataset_catalog_search
3http://www.w3.org/egov/

227including datasets from the Linked Open Data cloud.

IOGDCs faceted browsing and search interface
provides a scalable and reconfigurable solution for
finding and browsing open government datasets. The
IOGDCs user interface is an efficient faceted browser that
illustrates the value of integrated open government dataset
catalogs and the supporting Semantic Web technologies.

2. OGD CATALOG COLLECTION

OGD dataset catalogs are collected for IOGDC through a
semi-automated process that includes manual catalog identification and customized semi-automated catalog harvesting.
The resulting Linked Data may be consumed by external
applications and services through SPARQL endpoints and
RDF downloads or directly by users through an efficient
faceted browser.

Catalog Identification. Government data catalogs are
released on the Web in a variety of approaches. In order to
locate the web page that publishes catalogs, we use manual
Google search and well-known catalogs of catalogs from
e.g., Open Knowledge Foundataions catalog 4. Currently,
IOGDC has collected more than 70 catalogs from national,
regional, state and city governments around the world.

Catalog Harvesting. An identified catalog might have
been published using one of many different approaches. RDFnative catalogs are extremely rare; more common are RDBMSbased listings of datasets formatted as ASP or JSP-generated
HTML tables or as simple lists. AJAX-based catalogs are
more complex since the harvesting code must deal with dynamic page content which is intended to be interpreted and
executed by the client-side browser. The TWC team targets
catalogs in which the structure is evident, the local metadata
is clear, the content are fairly static, and where the country
or region has been under-represented in IOGDC. To further
reduce complexity and especially to enable undergraduate
assistants to work on catalog harvesting, we limit the output
of initial harvesting output to CSV files in restricted structure (e.g. including header row and several key columns such
as dataset tile and homepage). Most IOGDC scraper code
can only be re-used when targeted catalogs share exactly the
same structure. e.g. Oregon 5, Baltimore6, and Washing-
ton, DC 7. However, the catalog harvesting tasks are highly
independent, therefore, many undergraduate assistants can
work in parallel in course project style, submitting their
scraper code together with their results using Subversion 8;
this model also enables reuse code from existing submitted
scrapers if desired.

3. LINKED DATA PRODUCTION

Although most catalogs share certain common dataset
properties including title, description, homepage, and download URLs, the metadata from different catalogs usually
adopt different metadata structures and vocabularies.
In
order to integrate over 70 catalogs and make them available
as Linked Data, we used the following strategies.

Linking metadata structure. We developed a metadata model to describe catalog and dataset concepts (see
4http://opengovernmentdata.org/data/catalogues/
5http://data.oregon.gov/
6http://data.baltimorecity.gov/
7http://data.dc.gov/
8http://subversion.apache.org/

Appendix). Based on an earlier proposal for government
dataset description9 and informed by DCAT, our vocabulary
was developed to fit the existing dataset catalogs found in
the wild. For example, two dataset catalogs (i.e., Raw Data
catalog and Tool data catalog) are released from one CSV file
from Data.gov, leading us to introduce two-part catalog title
structure using dgtwc:catalog title and dgtwc:catalog subtitle.
All catalogs are serialized in CSV before being converted
into Linked Data, regardless of whether they were generated by harvesting scrapers or manual process. Based on
a automatically generated and manually edited conversion
configuration, the CSV files are then converted to RDF using
TWCs LOGD pipeline, built around the csv2rdf4lod conversion and enhancement tool.10 Manual edits on the conversion configurations enable two important types of links:
(i) mapping divers column header names into our universal
metadata vocabulary to enable RDF property level linking;
and (ii) use DBpedia URIs in the value of properties, e.g. use
dbpedia:United States as the value of dgtwc:catalog country.
The result Linked Data is currently accessible through our
SPARQL endpoint. 11 as well as dataset dumps.

4. FACETED BROWSING AND SEARCH

The value of an integrated international dataset catalog is
demonstrated by the International Dataset Catalog Search
application. Figure 1 illustrates the faceted browsing interface of a search for energy data. The demo is an AJAX
system, where the client query and access catalog metadata
via a RESTful web service interface that is compatible with
the OpenSearch protocol 12. This design allows us to hide
the triplestore implementation on server side from the front
end faceted browsing component. On the service side, we
employ OpenLink Virtuoso features to provide efficient fulltext search (bif:contains) rather than using regular expressions offered by SPARQL standard. On the front end
side, we use S2S 13 and leverage CSS to control layout. The
S2S faceted browser was developed as part of the Semantic
eScience Framework project (SeSF) 14 was adapted to provide a highly efficient faceted browse and search experience
for the user.

5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Public demonstrations of IOGDC began in May 2011 and
have resulted in constructive discussions with the CKAN
and W3C eGov communities regarding the effectiveness of
our catalog and dataset metadata models. While a lot of
properties have been defined in DCAT, CKAN and our metadata model, limited metadata can be obtained from real
world dataset catalogs: even the popular category and
homepage properties are not necessarily provided in all
catalogs. Therefore, the catalog metadata model should be
revisited in the future to better adpate reality.

9http://data-gov.tw.rpi.edu/wiki/TWC_Data-gov_
Vocabulary_Proposal
10https://github.com/timrdf/csv2rdf4lod-automation/
wiki
11http://logd.tw.rpi.edu/sparql
12http://www.opensearch.org/
13http://tw.rpi.edu/web/project/sesf/workinggroups/
s2s
14http://tw.rpi.edu/web/project/SeSF

228Figure 1: Faceted browsing based International Government Dataset Search

 dcterms:description (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Description

of the dataset

 dcterms:identifier (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Unique string

ID of the dataset

 dcterms:download format (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Avail-

able formats of the dataset

 dgtwc:category (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Original category

(asserted by the catalog) of dataset

 dgtwc:categories (Range: rdfs:Literal ): All categories

(asserted by the catalog) of this dataset

 dcterms:subject

(Range: rdfs:Literal ): Original key-

words (asserted by the catalog) of this dataset

 dgtwc:keywords (Range: rdfs:Literal ): All keywords (or

tags) of this dataset

 dgtwc:agency (Range: rdfs:Resource ): Actual publisher
(typically government agency) who curates, publishes the
dataset

 dgtwc:catalog title (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Government

website (Country/State/City/Organization) which owns dataset
catalog listing dataset

 dgtwc:catalog homepage (Range: rdfs:Resource ): Catalog URL: URL of web page or unique identifier of dataset
catalog listing dataset.

 dgtwc:catalog subtitle (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Used for
Data.govs three sub-catalogs: Raw Data Catalog, Tool
Catalog, and GeoData Catalog

 dgtwc:catalog country (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Country
of owner of dataset catalog; strong indicator of spatial region covered by listed datasets.

TWCs strategy of scraping, converting and publishing
international open dataset catalog metadata has been useful in the short term, but it is unlikely to scale and has
great potential for error. Ultimately, our methods should
not be necessary; governments should be their own authoritative sources for catalog data. Our fervent hope is that
IOGDC will demonstrate to governments and other open
data providers worldwide the value of publishing catalog
metadata as linked open data using a standard metadata
model combined with a catalog metadata harvesting proto-
col.

APPENDIX
A. TWC IOGDC METADATA MODEL

Namespaces Used

dgtwc: http://data-gov.tw.rpi.edu/2009/data-gov-twc.rdf#
dcterms: http://purl.org/dc/terms/
foaf: http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/
conversion: http://purl.org/twc/vocab/conversion/

properties of conversion:DatasetCatalog
 dcterms:title (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Title or Name of

the catalog

 foaf:homepage (Range: rdfs:Resource ): URL of web

page or unique identifier for accessing catalog

 dcterms:description (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Description

of the catalog

 dgtwc:number of datasets (Range: xsd:Integer ): Es-

timated number of datasets listed in catalog

 dcterms:spatial (Range: rdfs:Resource ): Spatial Region.

Primary geographical region covered by catalog datasets

 dgtwc:spatial granularity (Range: rdfs:Resource ): Spatial Region Type. Use following values: Worldwide, Na-
tional, State, City, ...

properties of conversion:CatalogedDataset
 dcterms:title (Range: rdfs:Literal ): Title or Name of

the dataset

 foaf:homepage (Range: rdfs:Resource ): URL of web

