How to Teach Digital Library Data to Swim into Research 

Christoph Schindler 

German Institute for International 

Educational Research (DIPF) 

D-60487 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 

Cornelia Veja 

Telecommunications Department, 
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca  

Cluj 400027, Romania 

 Marc Rittberger 

German Institute for International 

Educational Research (DIPF) 

D-60487 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 

schindler@dipf.de 

cornelia.veja@com.utcluj.ro  

rittberger@dipf.de 

Denny Vrande(cid:254)i(cid:252)

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 

(KIT) 

D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany 
denny.vrandecic@kit.edu 

ABSTRACT
Virtual  research  environments  (VREs)  aim  to  enhance  research 
practice  and  have  been  identified  as  drivers  for  changes  in 
libraries.  This  paper  argues  that  VREs  in  combination  with 
Semantic Web technologies offer a range of possibilities to align 
research  with library practices. This main claim  of  the  article is 
exemplified  by  a  metadata  integration  process  of  bibliographic 
data  from  libraries  to  a  VRE  which  is  based  on  Semantic 
MediaWiki.  The  integration  process  rests  on  three  pillars: 
MediaWiki  as  a  web-based  repository,  Semantic  MediaWiki 
annotation  mechanisms, 
semi-automatic  workflow 
management  for  the  integration  of  digital  resources.  Thereby, 
needs  of  scholarly  research  practices  and  capacities  for 
interactions are taken into account. The integration process is part 
of the design of Semantic MediaWiki for Collaborative Corpora 
Analysis (SMW-CorA) which uses a concrete research project in 
the history of education as a reference point for an infrastructural 
distribution.  Semantic  MediaWiki  thus  provides  a  light-weight 
environment  offering  a  framework  for  re-using  heterogeneous 
resources and a flexible collaborative way of conducting research. 

and 

Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.12 
[Interoperability]:  Data  mapping;  D.2.10  [Design]: 
Methodologies;  E.2  [Data  Storage  Representations]:  Linked 
representations;  H.1.2  [User/Machine  Systems]:  Human  factors; 
H.2.5 
translation;  H.2.8 
[Database  Applications]:  Scientific  databases;  H.3.7  [Digital 
Libraries];  H.4.1  [Office  Automation]:  Workflow  management; 
H.5.3  [Group  and  Organization  Interfaces]:  Computer-supported 
cooperative work; J.5 [Arts and Humanities] 

[Heterogeneous  Databases]:  Data 

General Terms
Management, Design, Human Factors, Standardization 

Keywords
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this notice  and the full  citation on the first page.  To copy 
otherwise,  to  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS  2011,  7th  Int.  Conf.  on  Semantic  Systems,  Sept.  7-9, 
2011, Graz, Austria 
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0621-8 ...$10.00. 

Virtual research environment, Semantic Web, data integration, e-
humanities, Semantic MediaWiki 

identifies 

interoperability  as  one  of 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Virtual research environments (VREs) are connected to the aims 
of  e-science,  e-humanities,  cyberinfrastructure,  or  e-research  to 
enhance  research  practice  using  the  possibilities  of  networked 
technologies,  distributed  resources  and  computational  power.1
Lately,  libraries  and  archives  have  digitalized  a  range  of  their 
objects  that  can  be  addressed  from  VREs  by  encompassing 
different  tools  to  conduct  research.  Nevertheless,  the  VRE 
community 
its  main 
challenges and demands for light-weight tools [2][5]. This paper 
argues  that  VREs  combined  with  Semantic  Web  technologies 
could provide the missing link between libraries and research by 
taking  into  account  their  heterogeneous  practices  and  styles  of 
using  data  and  schemata.  This  argument  is  exemplified  by  the 
integration process of bibliographic data and metadata of a digital 
library to a VRE while offering capacities for interactions of the 
different stakeholders.  
The  integration  process  is  part  of  the  VRE  project  Semantic 
MediaWiki  for  Collaborative  Corpora  Analysis  (SMW-CorA)2
which  aims  to adjust Semantic MediaWiki  (SMW)  for research: 
enabling researchers to create a research corpus, enrich, annotate 
and  analyze  digital  objects.  The  SMW-.CorA  project  takes 
insights  from  previous  failures  into  account  by  balancing  the 
fallacies  of  false  abstractions  and  concreteness.  The  project 
adjusts  its  VRE  in  different  ways:  a)  by  following  concrete 

1 The term virtual research environment was established in the UKs 
JISC funding program and has since spread towards a wide range 
of  European  countries  and  beyond.  For  a  more  detailed 
introduction to VREs see [1][2][3][4]. 

2 This project is funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) 
entitled: Entwicklung einer Virtuellen Forschungsumgebung fur 
die  Historische  Bildungsforschung  mit  Semantischer  WikiTechnologie  -  Semantic  MediaWiki  for  Collaborative  Corpora 
Analysis  in  the  domain  of  Scientific  Library  Services  and 
Information  Systems  (LIS).  It  is  realized  in  a  co-operation 
between  the  German  Institute  for  International  Educational 
Research  (DIPF),  the  Karlsruhe  Institute  of  Technology  (KIT), 
the  Library  for  Research  on  Educational  History  (BBF)  and 
researchers of educational history. 


research practices, b) by building a community, c) by offering an 
infrastructural distribution to other scholarly communities, and d) 
by taking into account capacities of interactions between libraries, 
research and the Semantic Web. Considering this, the stabilization 
of  the  VREs  and  their  interconnected  infrastructures  challenges 
the interlocking stakeholders and their communities to align their 
heterogeneous  practices, 
for  possible 
interactions.  
The  starting  point  of  the  design  of  SMW-CorA  is  a  concrete 
research  project  in  the  field  of  the  history  of  education.  The 
research  project  aims  to  analyze  educational  lexica  spanning 
nearly  200  years,  focusing  on  networked  relationships  in  the 
domain of education. Therein, bibliographic metadata are used for 
bibliometric  analysis;  they  are  enriched  and  annotated  by  the 
educational  researchers  in  a  collaborative  wayfor  qualitative 
analysis.  
This  article  summarizes 
technologies  and 
engineering issues that were addressed for the data and metadata 
integration  to  the  collaborative  VRE.  The  Section  2  discusses 
recent developments and affordances of VREs and digital libraries 
related to research practices in the humanities. The objectives of 
the SMW-CorA project are described, the features of MediaWiki 
(MW)  and  SMW  are  elucidated,  followed  by  a  discussion  of 
different  approaches  for  the  integration  of  metadata  into  SMW. 
Section 3 describes design approaches and methods of the SMWCorA  project.  Section  4  explains  the  concrete  realization  of  the 
data  integration  process  with  heterogeneous  requirements  from 
different stakeholders and a schemata mapping. The article closes 
with a conclusion and outlook (see Section 5). 

the  approaches, 

2. SETTING THE OBJECTIVES 
2.1 Linking VREs, Digital Libraries, and 
Scholarly Research Practices  
A wide range of papers identify the possibilities of VREs in the 
humanities  [3][2][8]  or  particularly  for  historical  research  [9]. 
Nevertheless, interoperability is identified as one main challenge 
[2]. VRE tools should be able to interact with other tools used in 
research as well as archives and libraries and their objects.  
It  should  be  pointed  out  that  scholarly  research  practices  in  the 
humanities  have  adjusted  the  e-science  agenda  in  one  main 
aspect: While the so called data deluge [7], the amount of new 
ways of gathering research data, was seen as a major driving force 
in scientific research, complex relationships contrasted to this the 
so called complexity deluge [10] in the humanities. These two 
agendas outline the scope of challenges and possibilities of VREs 
and  Semantic  Web  technologies  focused  in  the  SMW-CorA 
project, i.e. how to offer researchers digital objects for their study 
while  giving  them  the  capacities  to  re-arrange  these  and  create 
new  relations,  properties  and  objects.  By  discussing  several 
problems  and  objectives  of  the  involved  communities,  their 
possible alignment is outlined in the following.  
Recently, the library and infrastructure communities have become 
aware  of  the  potential  of  VREs  for  their  assignments  [14]  and 
they regard research data as a new major field of their activities. 
Especially  in  the  humanities,  the  need  is  seen  to  offer  cultural 
artifacts  as  research  objects  in  a  digital  way  whether  these  are 
texts, 
this  context,  data 
management and curation to facilitate data sharing and re-use are 
seen  as  a  major  new  aspect  [16].  Furthermore,  new  possibilities 
for re-using the scholarly value chain are identified while calling 

images,  or  audio  recordings.  In 

information 

for  a  main  challenge  in  e-research:  building  relations  between 
research data and further artifacts [6].  
The  digital  library  community  has  started  to  use  Semantic  Web 
technologies  and  to  align  their  data  and  technologies3  Cultural 
artifacts are increasingly offered in digital formats, corresponding 
to  Semantic  Web  standards.  Hence,  a  body  of  resources  is 
available  for  research,  but  adequate  tools  for  conducting  such 
research are still lacking.  
Some  VREs4  have  started  to  use  Semantic  Web  technologies  to 
reach a higher level of interoperability. However, one of the main 
challenges  of  e-research  -  linking  research  data  with  further 
artifacts  and  offering  them  for  re-use  -  is  only  captured  in  a 
limited  way.  The  VRE  and 
infrastructure 
communities  try  to  catch  the  complexities  of  research  while 
seeing  research  lifecycles  and  scholarly  primitives  [15]  as 
heuristics  to  articulate  requirements  from  research  practice. 
Nevertheless,  in  the  humanities  the  fuzziness,  incompleteness, 
overlapping  and  distribution  of  data  and  research  practices  are 
highlighted  [10]  and  described  as  nontransparent  or  invisible 
infrastructures  [11].  This  pushes  the  problem  of  interoperability 
beyond using standardized protocols and vocabularies.  
The  digital  humanities  and  e-humanities  communities  have 
recently addressed the interoperability problem by discussing the 
design of digital editions. Their aim to represent research objects 
like  books  comprehensively  has  lost  ground  against  a  more 
pragmatic orientation: In addition to a digital representation of an 
object, the capabilities of doing things interactively are focused. 
In  this  respect  the  challenge  for  designers  of  editions  has  been 
articulated in a dramatized way: We had better start swimming, 
or well sink like a stone5 [17].  
The SMW-CorA project follows this approach while focusing the 
capacities  for  interaction  between  research,  libraries  and  the 
Semantic  Web.  This  involves  a  translation  from  a  library  to  a 
research  object  which  sets  new  requirements  beyond  schema 
matching:  a  researchers  capability  to  create  new  entities, 
relationships,  re-arrange  their  own  classifications  on  the  fly  and 
request  these  entities.  Additionally,  the  flow  of  enriched  digital 
objects back to libraries has to be taken into account.  

2.2 Semantic MediaWiki for Collaborative 
Corpora Analysis 
Instead of designing a VRE in an isolated way, SMW-CorA uses 
a participatory design approach which aims to empower relevant 
research  communities  to  engage  actively  in  the  design  process. 
Therefore  the  SMW-CorA  project  is  aligned  to  a  concrete 
research project and its research community.6

3  A 

list  of 

related 

library 

initiatives 

is  available  at 

http://ckan.net/tag/library  

4  Examples  of  VREs  which  use  Semantic  Web  technologies  are 
www.ourspaces.net/,  www.myexperiment.org,  and  Wikinger 
[13]. 

5  This  expressive  illustration  of  the  situation  of  libraries  in  a 
networked  world  inspired  the  authors  to  use  this  metaphor  as  a 
leitmotif and use it in the articles title.  

6  Therefore  the project has associated co-operators in the research 
community  of  history  of  education  as  well  as  the  Research 
Library for the History of Education (BBF) www.bbf.dipf.de/. 


Germany  articulated  their  concrete  need  for  a  collaborative 
environment  for conducting their research. The group intends to 
analyze  the  disciplinary  landscape  of  educational  science  by 
following networked relations of the lexica covering a period of 
nearly  200  years.  To  do  this  in  a  collaborative  way,  the 
educational  researchers  are  interested  in  a  research  environment 
which provides bibliographic data of the library (editors, authors, 
date of publication ...). These formalized data serve as a basis for 
further  enrichment  activities  like  adding  new  entities  and 
annotating the content in order to pursue the research interests.  
The collection of lexica that is of interest here is mainly available 
at  the  digital  library  Scripta  Paedagogica  Online  (SPO),7  hosted 
by  the  Library  for  the  History  of  Education  (BBF)  at  the  DIPF 
which has indexed the lexica and rendered them accessible online 
as  image  files.  The  corpus  contains  a  total  amount  of  nearly 
22,000  articles  and  more  than  20  lexica.  Each  lexicon  is 
bibliographically  described  as  a  collected  edition  in  the  library 
database  allegro-C.8  Therein,  three  levels  of  entities,  their 
properties and relations are formalized (lexicon, volume, article). 
Scripta Paedagogica Online accesses this database and creates via 
Perl scripts a front-end which connects the bibliographic data with 
the images of the lexica pages. Since the Z39.50 protocol contains 
restrictions  for  data  exchange,  currently  Allegro-XML  files  are 
used for the integration process. An OAI-interface will be used in 
the near future. 
While following the educational research project in practice, it is 
possible  to  articulate  the  requisite  capacities  for  interaction. 
Nevertheless,  to  avoid  designing  an  isolated  application  for  a 
particular research group, the alignment to this concrete research 
practice  is  seen  as  a  starting  point  for  an  infrastructural 
distribution  to  other  research  contexts.  Thereby,  heterogeneous 
local practices and actors in research and libraries are taken into 
account,  which  is  seen  as  a  main  requirement  for  a  sustainable 
stabilization  of  standardization  processes  and  infrastructures 
[21][22][23][24]. Furthermore, this approach offers the possibility 
to identify re-usable parts of the scholarly value chains like data, 
classifications or instruments of SMW-CorA.  
Currently, the following needs are articulated in the SMW-CorA 
project: data  integration, adding new entities, annotating and rearranging of data and metadata, monitoring and quality checking, 
analyzing  and  visualizing  results,  writing  articles,  exporting 
research  data  and  its  metadata.  These  issues  address  the 
continuous  challenge  of  the  SMW-CorA  project  designing  the 
VRE  in  alignment  with  research  practice.  The  data  integration 
process  exemplifies  the  first  step  of  the  project  while  it  has  to 
address further implications of the research process in the future. 
MediaWiki  and  SMW  already  offer  a  range  of  possibilities  to 
enhance  these  activities  but  need  to  be  aligned  with  research 
requirements. 

2.3 MediaWiki and Semantic MediaWiki 
Several VREs were analyzed on the basis of heuristics9 and SMW 
was  chosen  as  a  basic  environment,  owing  to  its  collaborative 

7  The  lexica  are  available  at  http://bbf.dipf.de/digitale-bbf/scripta-

paedagogica-online/digitalisierte-nachschlagewerke. 

8 See http://www.allegro-c.de/ 

9  The  following  heuristics  were  assessed  while  planning  the 
project: range of available  tools, participation  and collaboration, 

inherited  from  MediaWiki  and  the  wide  range  of 

aspect 
characteristics of SMW and further extensions:  
(cid:120)

Flexible,  mature  software  product,  open  source  and  wide 
acceptance  in  the  humanities  as  a  software  supporting 
Wikipedia. 
Allows  for  collaborations  on  the  level  of  Semantic  Web 
technologies  [20] permitting data interlinking and schemata 
re-arrangement.
Possible re-use of data and schemata while using ontologies 
and controlled vocabularies. 
Offers  extensions  for  import,  export  (CSV,  RDF,  BibTeX) 
and analysis (visualizing, requests) 
Interoperability  with  libraries  (OAI10,  JSON),  with  other 
Semantic Web standards (RDF) and research tools (XML11).
Customizable user interfaces (forms, templates, widgets) and 
re-usable parts of the research environment. 

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

In  order  to  fulfill  researchers  needs,  SMW  has  to  facilitate 
additional aspects. Besides usability problems of MediaWiki, the 
main technological drawback concerns the restricted possibilities 
for annotating at the level of texts or media objects. Nevertheless 
MediaWiki and SMW offer a high degree of flexibility and many 
possibilities to enhance research. As these capacities are invisible 
to researchers, they have to be aligned to their needs. Therefore 
unified  interfaces  for  specific  research  tasks  like  analyzing  with 
inline queries  against the wiki semantic properties has to be put 
into  practice.  To  fulfill  this,  SMW  has  to  adopt  the  appropriate 
design for becoming a research tool and offer re-usable parts.  
MediaWiki provides an object oriented document storage system 
for  the  data  integration  described  in  this  article  wherein  wiki 
pages are  the elementary entities. This allows storing, retrieving 
and  describing  digital  objects  as  wiki  pages  in  a  collaborative 
way.  Additionally, 
the  namespace  mechanism  allows  for 
allocating wiki pages in the storage system and offers to address a 
range  of  functionalities.  Examples  for  this  are  digital  media 
objects  (binary  plus  metadata)  stored  in  the  File  namespace, 
programming  and  rich  text  parts  in  the  Template  namespace 
and  a  hierarchical  lightweight  schema  development  in  the 
Category namespace.  
SMW expands the MediaWiki functionalities by adding semantic 
technologies and by providing a higher granularity of the storage 
system  through  properties  of  pages  and  their  relatedness.  SMW 
enables use of a wiki page as an instance of a class or the subject 
of  an  RDF  triple.  Additionally,  SMW  reuses  the  Category 
namespace to define ontology classes and allows the declaration 
of sub-class and sub-property relations. From the functional point 
of  view,  SMW  can  be  used  to  extend  the  MediaWiki  template 
mechanism  by  offering 
to  process  semantic  properties  as 
parameters  of  the  template.  On  this  basis,  semantic  forms12
facilitate user input by hiding the complex syntax of the semantic 
templates. 

interoperability, 
possible 
organizational embeddedness. 
10  See 
the  MediaWiki 

extension  OAIRepository 
http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:OAIRepository 

sustainability 

11  MediaWiki  offers  an  XML  export  and  further  extensions 

at 

and 

openness, 

http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Help:Export 

12 See http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Semantic_Forms 


template  schemata  can  be  annotated  using  standard  ontologies 
(Dublin  Core,  FOAF,  SIOC).  This  allows  direct  semantic 
metadata  search  and  inference  on  as  well  as  exposure  in  the 
OWL/RDF  format.  Semantic  queries  can  be  embedded,  creating 
dynamic content  in wiki pages. Additionally, the Semantic Web 
technology  offers  an  interoperable  platform  for  sharing  and  reusing research resources. 

to  oceanographic  data  and 

2.4 Metadata Integration and SMW 
While a comparison of data integration into MediaWiki and SMW 
as a framework for VRE13 lacks concrete comparable realizations, 
Virtual learning environments (VLEs) [2] deal with similar issues 
and  drawbacks  in  the  field  of  data  integration.  This  offers  the 
opportunity  to  take  their  exchange  practices  into  account  while 
addressing the specific needs of research environments.  
A VLE project using SMW as support for semantic technologies 
is  UNESCO's  OceanTeacher.14  This  is  a  digital  library  of 
knowledge  related 
information 
management.  It  includes  texts,  images,  objects  (PDF  and  Word 
documents, software installation packages, audio and video files) 
and links to web pages and objects on other web sites. The project 
builds an e-learning platform in the domain. The marine metadata 
are automatically collected from sensors and translated into SMW 
properties.  Afterwards,  the  metadata  are  manually  verified  and 
validated. While the project imports different documents, it does 
not integrate heterogeneous metadata which are of interest in the 
SMW-CorA project. 
The biodiversity project KeyToNature15 provides a collaborative 
environment  which  uses  a  new  method  for  metadata  collection, 
web-based repository interface, metadata repository management 
and  search  tools. The project  is  based  on  MediaWiki  and SMW 
mechanisms for addressing the issues related to interoperability in 
a collaborative space. In KeyToNature, the metadata are collected 
from data providers using MediaWiki templates and submitted to 
the wiki by a push mechanism. The automatic integration process 
triggered  by  data  providers  targets  a  Fedora  Commons  based 
central metadata repository [28]. Because this project deals with 
similar problems regarding the integration of metadata, the tools 
and  workflows  are  re-used  and  adjusted  in  the  SMW-CorA 
project.

1.

2.

Identifying  the  relevant  entities  of  the  digital  library 
(collections, digital objects, metadata catalogs, and metadata 
structures) and its capacities for doing research within SMW-
CorA. 
Engineering of light-weight ontology for the library objects 
matching  with  MediaWiki  and  SMW  and  offering  a  user 
interface for research. 

3. Configuring a workflow manager for the integration process 
that  addresses  elements,  creates  templates,  and  generates 
instances. 

To align and evaluate the integration process with research needs 
and practices of researchers, different methods of gathering data 
were used: talks, site visits, group discussions, document analysis, 
and rapid prototyping. Besides the usage of SMW as a prototype, 
drafts  of  the  user  interface  were  created  to  articulate  future 
aspects  of  the  VRE.  These  approaches  allowed  an  early  start  of 
the  explorative  part  of  the  educational  project  and  an  iterative 
feedback of the educational researchers while designing the VRE. 
The experiences of the heterogeneous stakeholders are presented, 
discussed and documented on a wiki-based platform.  

4. FROM VISION TO PRACTICE: 
SWIMMING INTO RESEARCH 
4.1 Data and Metadata Integration into 
SMW-CorA
The data integration process presented here is mainly formed by 
the  alignment  between the  digital  library, research practices and 
Semantic Web technologies. While using MediaWiki and SMW, 
options  as  well  as  limits  to  the  interactions  between  the 
stakeholders are focused in this article. For this purpose  the data 
integration and the transfer back to the library and to the Semantic 
Web were taken into account as far as it is possible at this stage of 
the  project  (see  Figure  1).  Further  aspects  of  the  research  life 
cycle and of the educational researchers needs like annotating the 
content have to be articulated by realizing the next project phases 
of SMW-CorA and of the educational research project.  

3. APPROACH AND METHODS 
The  design  approaches  described in Section  2.2  were taken  into 
account while creating the integration process. Additionally these 
are combined with iterative, agile computing16 aiming to get fast 
feedback  on 
level  of 
implementation and framework re-use. 
The matching mechanism of the integration process between the 
library, SMW, and MediaWiki was established iteratively. Three 
main interlacing steps are carried out:  

technical  and  organizational 

the 

13  The  authors  have  researched  for  comparable  SMW-VREs 

several times without a concrete result.  
14 See http://classroom.oceanteacher.org 
15 See www.KeyToNature.eu 
16 The agile computing approach in the context of e-research and 

social network sites is discussed in [19]. 

Figure 1. Metadata Integration Process. 

The  life  cycle  of  digital  content  can  be  split  up  into  6  primary 
phases  [26]:  create,  update,  publish,  translate,  archive  and 
retrieve. In this respect, SMW could be regarded as a repository 
which collects and aggregates heterogeneous metadata and media 
resources. This integration of metadata into SMW partially covers 
the first three steps of the data life cycle of digital content.  
The  used  semi-automatic  workflow  for  the  metadata  integration 
which  is  described  below  is  built  on  two  mechanisms,  i.e. 


MediaWiki  templates  and  an  extended  flexible  model  of  a 
workflow  ontology.  This  workflow  is  based  on  the  theoretical 
work  of  [30]  and  the  flexible  workflow  model  exposed  in  [28]. 
The  model  developed  in  the  framework  of  the  KeyToNature 
project  is  extended  and  adapted  in  this  project  to  make  use  of 
semantic templates.  
The  main  component  fulfilling  the  data  integration  process  is  a 
Java-based tool which consists of other tools for transforming the 
XML and images and uploading the digital resources into the wiki 
[26].  These  are  independent  reusable  components  and  opensource 
[27].  Triggered  by  a  general  XML 
configuration file stored on a wiki page, these tools can run either 
in  combination  or  as  stand-alone  systems.  The  data  transfer 
between  the 
tools  is  based  on  XML  format.  The  tools 
orchestration depends on the workflow template which in turn is 
mapped on the specified wiki metadata template for harvesting  
This  mapping  is  specified  by  means  of  a  general  configuration 
wiki page in the MediaWiki special namespace. This wiki page 
contains  parameters  and  comments  about  the  user  interface  and 
the  functionality  of  the  wiki.  The  integration  tool  harvests  only 
wiki pages, having a lexicon file in XML format as attachment. 
For example, the following configuration parameter specifies the 
name of semantic properties provided to the XML file attachment: 
(cid:120)

attachParam = Wikitext Metadata Attachment  
(Configuration parameter as semantic property referring to 
the lexicon in XML format)

This  example  specifies  that  wiki  pages  containing  the  semantic 
property Wikitext Metadata Attachment carry the last XML files 
with metadata for harvesting. The configuration wiki page can be 
different on another wiki. The only constraint required is that both 
have enabled a SMW extension.  
The  main  processes  in  digital  resources  management  imply 
collecting,  aggregating  and  storing  metadata.  The  workflow 
templates  concerning  this  metadata  management  and  the  tools 
developed  to  achieve  them  are:  IntegrationLexiconTemplate,
AchiveImageResouce  and  UploadImageToWiki.  The  latter  two 
templates  are  constrained  as  follows:  Any  UploadImageToWiki
instance 
corresponding 
AchiveImageResouce has succeeded.  
Any workflow instance is actually mapped on a lexicon entity. A 
workflow instance can perform the following actions:  
a.

The  metadata  providers  (i.e.  Digital  Libraries)  submit  the 
metadata  of  their  media  in  a  specified  form  (metadata 
harvesting).  

follow  only 

should 

b. Data in XML format are queried by an automatic Java-based 

after 

the 

tool.

c. XML  and  XSLT  transformations  assisted  by  the  metadata 
exchange agreement  validate metadata and create the digital 
object in wiki pages. 

d. Digital  resources  (images)  are  downloaded  from  a  digital 
library  and  uploaded  in  the  wiki  media  repository,  having 
automatically  created  metadata  specifying 
license, 
copyright statement and copyright holder. 
The  metadata  and/or  media  resources  are  stored  in  a  wiki 
repository  (Repository  Object  Architecture  created  as  wiki 
pages).

The  contribution  of  XML  to  implementing  uniform  data  output 
format  facilitates  an  automatic  integration  for  similar  library 
resources.  Instead  of  creating  various  data  transformation  tools, 
XSLT  transformation  was  applied.  For  an  additional  metadata 

the 

e.

provider  only  the  adjustment  of  the  XSLT  is  necessary.  For 
heterogeneous  syntactic  and  structural  data  integration,  a  hybrid 
strategy  is  considered:  Global  and  Local  as  View  (GLAV)  [32] 
that  can  create  a  sight  over  sources  by  generating  a  view  over 
global  schema  described  by  source  descriptions.  Because  this 
strategy is not flexible enough, it is usually necessary to adapt the 
crosswalk method [33] for addressing interoperability. In order to 
enable  flexible,  dynamic  mapping  between  complex  metadata 
descriptions  which  mix  elements  from  multiple  domains,  an 
application profile is created having the versatile support of SMW 
(Equivalent  Properties,  controlled  vocabulary  import17,  RDF 
export). Natural language for tools orchestration [31] is a possible 
option  for  future  developments  to  hand  the  configuration  of  the 
workflow management over to the end users.  

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

4.2 Identifying relevant Entities, Needs and 
Interactions 
4.2.1 Identifying relevant Entities, Needs and Actions 
in Research 
The  educational  research  project  and  its  usage  of  bibliographic 
data offer an adequate setting for identifying relevant entities and 
needed actions within SMW-CorA. This is seen as a starting point 
for articulating concrete needs of research practice. At this stage 
of  the  project,  the  educational  researchers  enunciated  following 
the entities and actions for the research corpus: 
(cid:120)

collections  of  lexica  (BBF),  their  entities  (lexicon,  volume, 
article, image object) as well as metadata elements 
research interests in further properties, new entities (persons, 
institutions, etc.) and relations 
developing  and  re-arranging  a  classification  schema  on  the 
fly, categorizing articles and coding the texts of articles 

Besides  the  question  of  relevant  entities  and  metadata  elements, 
the  researchers  addressed  specific  kinds  of  requirements  which 
have  to  be  realized  in  the  user  interface.  So  far,  the  following 
research needs have been articulated:  
(cid:120)

the possibility to browse in the book and the structure of the 
paper-based  lexicon  (table  of  content,  previous  and  next 
page, list of authors) 
processing  additional  metadata  to  the  entities  (related  with 
authors, articles) 
using 
understandable 
computational processing 
interoperable  formats  for  further  tools  (qualitative  and 
quantitative analysis, bibliographic tools ...)  

descriptions  which 

enable 

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

4.2.2 Identifying relevant Needs and Actions of the 
Library 
While  establishing  the  integration  process,  the  digital  library 
articulated the need to gain feedback about outcomes of scholarly 
work like quality improvements of data. This offers the possibility 
to  establish  a  workflow  between  the  library  and  the  educational 
research group. The collaborative mechanism is so far addressed 
and  will  be  implemented  with  the  OAI  interface.  Possible 
enhancements of the digital library services are:  
(cid:120)
(cid:120)

17 See http://semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Help:Ontology_import 

identification and correction of inaccurate data 
enrichment of entities with properties (persons, institutions) 


linking  of  own resources to further identifiers (for example 
GND18, DBpedia19) and other resources 

4.2.3 Identifying Relevant Entities for 
Interoperability and Re-Use 
For a while, the research community in the history of education 
has  studied  disciplinary  publication  practices  and  published 
objects like scholarly articles and books.20 This research interest 
correspond  with  developments  in  other  research  communities 
such  as  scholarly  or  science  studies,  bibliometrics,  or  network 
studies. All these research communities have in common that they 
use  bibliographic  data  concerning  authors,  titles,  references, 
affiliations and their relations from digital libraries or repositories 
as  main  research  objects.  The  bibliographic  data  and  tools  for 
analyzing these data disregard main interoperability issues, which 
can  be  seen  as  a  barrier  for  re-use.  To  offer  these  bibliographic 
data  in  a  re-usable  format  like  RDF  and  to  create  tools  for 
analyzing these are capabilities for re-usable parts of the scholarly 
value chains in these communities. 
4.3 Light-Weight Ontology for Mapping  
4.3.1 Mapping Metadata 
The  iteratively  articulated  needs  of  researchers,  digital  libraries, 
and  requirements  of  SMW  and  MW  mechanisms  have  led  to  a 
lightweight  mapping  ontology  aiming  to  offer  a  multi-layered 
research environment. Thereby, a mapping schema (XML/XSLT) 
is used which addresses the bibliographic entities and metadata of 
the  digital  library  and  integrates  these  into  the  main  MediaWiki 
namespace. In so doing, the main entities of the library represent 
wiki  pages  while  the  page  hierarchy  of  MW  is  used.  The 
following mapping relations are used and exemplified in Figure 2: 
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)

lexicon isEquivalent with Lexicon wiki page. 
volume isEquivalent with wiki sub-page 
article isEquivalent with a wiki sub-sub-page  
every  image  of  an  article  isEquivalent  with  a  wiki  page in 
the File  namespace 

The  images  of  the  articles  are  stored  in  the  File  namespace  of 
MediaWiki,  keeping  the  metadata  of  the  created  work  and  its 
scanned  image  separated.  A  property  for  the  article  page  is 
created  and  connects  the  lemma  with  the  image,  offering  the 
educational  researchers  direct  access.  Thereby,  every  semantic 
property  represents  a  wiki  page  in  the  property  namespace  of 
SMW. Additionally, the mapping ontology addresses the metadata 
of the library objects and adds these as semantic properties to the 
main  entities.  This  enables  the  educational  researchers  to  create 
new  entities  and  to  insert  formal  or  text-based  descriptions  into 
this  new  wiki  page.  Figure  3  visualizes  main  aspects  of  the 
matching mechanism: 

Figure 3. Mapping between DL Schema and SMW-CorA 

for  doing 

The  mapping  schema  addresses  further  articulated  needs  and 
relevant  SMW  features  by  processing  new  properties.  For 
interacting  with  the  research  object  and  for  offering  detailed 
metadata 
research,  several  additional  semantic 
properties were created:  
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
(cid:120)
To enable the digital library to address these entities and monitor 
the  changes,  their  main  identifier  was  integrated  into  SMW  and 
the structure of the entities was maintained. 

firstPage, lastPage of an article, firstName and lastName  
isPartOf (volume); hasPart (article), hasImage 
Type (volume, article, reference) 

Figure 2. Library Objects integrated into the Wiki 

18 The Gemeinsame Normdatei (GND)" of the German National 
Library  combines  the  existing  authority  files  PND,  SWD  and 
GKD  for  persons,  subject  headings  and  corporate  bodies.  See 
http://www.d-nb.de/eng/standardisierung/normdateien/gnd.htm  

19 See http://dbpedia.org/ 
20  Following  the  I-SEMANTICS  conference,  the  community  of 
researchers in educational history will hold a conference in its 
own  right  on  the  subject  of  networks  and  co-operations  in 
education (http://web.fhnw.ch/plattformen/tagung-netzwerk/). 

4.3.2 Addressing the User Interface 
The  researchers  articulated  specific  needs  to  interact  with  the 
research  object  lexicon  and  its  entities.  Therefore,  the  matching 
schema  addresses  the  MW  system,  the  wiki  syntax  and  wiki 
templates  to  create  a  user  interface.  As  requested  by  the 
educational  researchers,  the  possibilities  for  browsing  articles 
images  and  tables  of  contents  were  generated.  Furthermore,  the 
semantic forms combined with templates enable the researcher to 
change the value of properties like names of authors without using 
the wiki syntax. Additionally, the semantic forms extension offers 
the  use  of  a  controlled  vocabulary  of  created  classifications  to 
reduce typing errors and regulate the annotation.  


tools  and 

inter-wiki  metadata 

4.3.3 Interoperability, Re-Use and Semantic Web 
To  ensure  interoperability  with  analyses  and  bibliographic 
external 
semantic 
technologies  are  used  as a  main  platform.  In  the first step,  lowgranularity  controlled  vocabularies  in  Semantic  Web  standards 
(PRISM, SKOS, FOAF, DC) are used to simplify a RDF export to 
third parties. The elements of those vocabularies were integrated 
into 
importing 
vocabularies and ontologies. Thereby the added properties of the 
mapping  between  library  metadata  and  SMW  are  also  matched 
(i.e.  prism:startingPage).  To  offer  the  traceability  to  the  digital 
library, DC terms properties are used to address copyright aspects. 
The  Figure  4  depicts  a  part  of  the  Semantic  MediaWiki  RDF 
export:

the  SMW  mechanism  of 

the  wiki  using 

Figure 4. Controlled Vocabularies Mapping 

the 

5. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
This paper argued for the capability of VREs and Semantic Web 
technologies  to  play  an  active  role  in  the  alignment  processes 
between researchers and libraries. This was demonstrated by the 
example of a metadata integration process from a digital library to 
SMW-CorA  to  address  research  needs  and  a  first  mapping  with 
Semantic Web technologies. Thereby, the respective possibilities 
of  Social  Software  and  Semantic  Social  Software  to  share  and 
create  knowledge  in  a  collaborative  way  are  used.  SMW 
mechanisms  allow  for 
integration  of  different  digital 
resources,  using  the  same  syntax  (template  and  semantic  forms 
syntax)  and  offer  the  assistance  of  controlled  vocabularies.  The 
main  achievements  of  the  data  integration  process  can  be 
summarized as follows: 
(cid:120)
(cid:120)

Automatic metadata integration into SMW and beyond. 
Processing is extensible to a heterogeneous data integration 
process which requires only an attached workflow template 
and XSLT transformation. 
The  approach 
in  achieving 
interoperability  at  the  syntactic  and  semantic  level  with  a 
low technological entry barrier. 
It allows for the integration of external tools and adaptation. 

layered  candidate 

is  a 

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

(cid:120)

It supports researchers in accomplishing their initial research 
step:  annotating  and  categorizing  articles  and  discussing 
these in a collaborative way.  

This  article  contains  the  first  findings  of  SMW-CorA  and  the 
translation processes from a library to a research object in a VRE. 
To  stabilize  the  SMW-CorA  as  a  VRE,  further  capacities  for 
interactions between research data and research actions have to be 
realized.  One  main  aspect  that  remains  open  is  to  interlink 
different levels of annotation and analysis of the research project 
and  capture the adequate granularity and flexibility. One further 
aspect  that  needs  to  be  addressed  is  to  align  SMW-CorA  with 
further  ways  of  doing  research  from  other  disciplines.  To  reach 
this aim, the VRE challenge will be: to teach linked data to swim 
into research.  

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Part  of  this  work  has  been  carried  out  in  the  framework  of  the 
contract no. ECP-2006-EDU-410019 and co-financed from Social 
European  Found    FSE    in  the  frame  of  POSDRU/6/1.5/S/5 
project,  and  the  other  part  in  the  framework  of  the  German 
Research Foundation (DFG) project entitled: Entwicklung einer 
Historische 
Virtuellen 
Bildungsforschung  mit  Semantischer  Wiki-Technologie 

Semantic MediaWiki for Collaborative Corpora Analysis (INST 
367/5-1,  INST  5580/1-1),  in  the  domain  of  Scientific  Library 
Services and Information Systems (LIS). 

Forschungsumgebung 

die 

fur 
