Ontology Enabled Decision Support System for 

Emergency Management at Airports 

Vuk Mijovi(cid:252), Nikola Tomasevi(cid:252), Valentina Janev, Mladen Stanojevi(cid:252), Sanja Vranes 

Mihajlo Pupin Institute 

Volgina 15 

11060 Belgrade, Serbia 

+381(11)2773149

{Vuk.Mijovic, Nikola.Tomasevic, Valentina.Janev, Mladen.Stanojevic, Sanja.Vranes}@pupin.rs 

ABSTRACT
This paper presents the first prototype of the EMILI-SITE system 
that will provide an advanced simulation and training capabilities 
for emergency management in critical infrastructures like airports, 
railway/metro systems, and power grids. In addition, the EMILISITE  system  will  support  decision-making  activities  in  safetycritical  situations  in  timely  manner.  The  prototype  provides  a 
proof-of-concept  in  the  early  phase  of  the  EMILI  project  and 
demonstrates  the  applicability  of  advanced  technologies  such  as 
complex  event  processing,  semantic  technologies  and  web 
services in mission-critical applications.   

Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.2.11 [Software architecture]: Service-oriented architecture; J.7 
[Computers in other systems]: Real time, Command and control; 
H.4.2 [Information Systems Applications]: Decision support.

General Terms
Management, Security, Legal Aspects. 

Keywords
Emergency management, Airport, SCADA, Simulation, Training, 
Complex  Event  Processing,  Ontologies,  Event-Condition-Action 
rules.

1. INTRODUCTION
An emergency is any occasion or instance, natural or man-made 
that warrants action to save lives and protect property and public 
health.  In  order  to  improve  safety  and  security  of  critical 
infrastructures, like airports, railway/metro systems, power grids 
and  telecommunication  systems,  oil  and  gas  pipelines,  a  new 
generation of intelligent Emergency Management Systems (EMS) 
operating  on  top  of  existing  Supervisory  Control  and  Data 
Acquisition (SCADA) systems is needed. The aim of such EMSs 
is  to  provide  holistic  management  of  underlying  technical 
subsystem,  usually  controlled  by  independent  SCADA  systems, 
correlation  and  aggregation  of  simple  events  coming  from 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  to  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS  2011,  7th  Int.  Conf.  on  Semantic  Systems,  Sept.  7-9, 
2011, Graz, Austria 
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0621-8 ...$10.00. 

different  SCADAs  into  meaningful  complex  events,  facilitating 
real-time  assessment  of  the  safety  and  security  conditions, 
automated reaction wherever possible and provision of timely and 
objective  decision  support 
to  emergency  personnel  where 
automated action is not feasible or trustworthy. 
The  suitability  of  Semantic  Web  technologies  for  emergency 
management  has  been  tested  in  several  prototypes  such  as  the 
Semantic  Web  GIS Emergency  Management  System  [6],
the
AUtomated Risk and Utility Management system [2], the ISPIRE 
Decision  Aid  Tool  [1]  and  the  Airport  Collaborative  Decision 
Making system  [3].  In  comparison  to  these  approaches,  the 
EMILI-SITE prototype uses the Complex Event Processing (CEP) 
approach  in  addition  to  semantic  technologies  (ontologies  and 
Web services) for early and reliable detection and classification of 
emergency events. 
This paper presents the design and the implementation of the first 
demonstration  prototype  of  the  SITE  (Simulation  and  Training 
environment), as a credible proof-of-concept in the early phase of 
the  EMILI  (Emergency  Management  in  Large  Infrastructures,
http://www.emili-project.eu/)  project.  In  particular,  it  discusses 
the recommendation and decision support subsystem (RDSS) for 
emergency  management  at  airports  where  the  Belgrade  Nikola 
Tesla  Airport  is  used  as  a  representative,  modern,  mid  size 
airport  infrastructure.  A  structural  fire  has  been  chosen  as  an 
illustrative  example  of  a  concrete  emergency  scenario.  The 
remainder  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2 
introduces  the  fire  scenario  and  defines  the  main  goals  and 
requirements  for  emergency  management  at  airports.  Section  3 
presents the EMILI-SITE technical infrastructure and explains the 
functionalities  of  the EMILI-SITE system prototype through the 
description  of  some  its  components.  Section  4  provides  several 
examples of using the airport ontology in the airport use case.  

2. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AT 
AIRPORTS
Emergency  management  (EM)  in  critical  infrastructures  has 
mainly  four  aspects:  preparedness,  response,  mitigation,  and 
recovery. Main goals of an EMS in the response and mitigation 
phases  are:  detection,  evaluation  and  confirmation  of  alarms; 
determination  of  the  location  and  extent  of  an  incident;  and 
provision  of  automated  reaction  and/or  assistance  and  decision 
support to the EM personnel.

2.1 Fire Scenario Example 
Depending on the international and national regulations, as well 
as  characteristics  of  the  airport,  each  airport  defines  an  Airport


Following 

Emergency Management Plan that specifies in detail how people 
and  property  will  be  protected  in  disaster  and  disaster  threat 
situations. 
recommendations 
(http://www.icao.int/), an emergency scenario in general has three 
stages  which  correspond  to  three  alert  levels,  e.g.,  ALERT  1, 
ALERT 2 and ALERT 3. In a fire scenario, ALERT 1 is raised by 
the first fire detection. In this phase, area warden is sent to check 
and  report  on  the  alarm,  after  which  the  emergency  is  either 
cancelled  (in  case  of  false  alarm),  or  mitigation  and  response 
measures  are  taken  (in  case  of  a  real  threat).  In  our  concrete 
scenario  this  phase  does  not  last  long  (around  1  minute).  When 
fire  is  confirmed  and  its  severity  considered  as,  for  instance, 
moderate,  ALERT  2  is  raised  and  fire  mitigation  actions  are 
started. ALERT 3 will be raised if fire severity is major and large
scale actions are needed. 
2.2 Fire Scenario Sub-processes 
Main sub-processes in a fire scenario can be described as follows.
Fire detection - Fire can be detected either via fire detectors or 
by  emergency  calls  and  personnel  reports.  Personnel  reports  are 
always  considered  as  certain  alarms,  while  other  fire  alarms  are 
generally  checked  by  the  personnel  representatives.  In  a  case 
where multiple alarms are detected in the same area and in short 
time interval, the alarm is considered certain.
Situation  assessment  -  Sensor  data  can  be  used  to  assess  the 
situation and to determine the size of fire, e.g., by calculating the 
ratio  between  the  number  of  triggered  fire  detectors  to  the  total 
number of fire detectors in a certain area.  
Risk  assessment  and  evaluation  -  Risk  assessment  aims  at 
calculating  the  risk  in  a  concrete  emergency  situation  based 
identification and valuation of assets under threat. Parameters for 
evaluating risk are: place, severity and nature of the emergency, 
and  number  of  people,  and  relevancy  of  technical  equipment  in 
the affected area [2]. 
Evacuation  management  -  Evacuation  management  that  starts 
with  finding safe evacuation paths [4] depends on various static 
and  dynamic  parameters.  Static  parameters  are  the  predefined 
evacuation paths, marked by evacuation lights and the position of 
exits.  Dynamic  parameters  are  parameters  that  change  during  a 
hazard such as the safety situation along the evacuation paths and 
the number of evacuees. 
3. EMILI-SITE DEMONSTRATION 
PROTOTYPE
EMILI-SITE  is  a  hybrid  environment,  where  several  different 
software paradigm are utilized and combined in order to achieve 
the  most  powerful  amalgamation,  applicable  in  different  critical 
infrastructures.  The  prototype  consists  of  several  components: 
Automated  Response,  Decision  Support,  2D/3D  visualization, 
Route  Finder,  SCADA  Emulator,  Scenario  Editor  and  DMS 
(Document Management System). This Section will describe the 
prototype  functional  and  non-functional  requirements,  technical 
infrastructure and the implementation of the Automated Response 
and Decision Support Subsystem. 

the  following 

3.1 EMILI-SITE Requirements 
After  studying  the  current  status  of  operational  management  at 
functional  requirements  have  been 
airports 
identified: reduction of false alarms by improved interpretation of 
exceptional /emergency situations; advanced software support for 
EM  personnel,  by  assessing  risk  and  potential  impact,  and 
recommending  corresponding  contingency  plan;  provision  of 

training  environment  for  EM  personnel  in  accordance  with 
standard  International  Civil  Aviation  Organization  (ICAO) 
practice; provision of Advanced SCADA functionalities by adding 
the  semantic 
layer  facilitating  holistic  management  of  all 
technical subsystems. 
Non-functional  requirements  can  be  grouped  into  the  following 
categories:  Usability,  Interoperability,  Scalability,  Performance 
and  EM  standards.  Far  more  important  in  real-time  applications 
are the performance requirements. For example, it is expected that 
the EMILI-SITE system will respond to the needs of middle size 
airport such as the Nikola Tesla airport in Belgrade. In the worst 
case  scenario  there  could  be  up  to  10  events  in  one  second  in 
regular  operational  mode.  In emergency situation, in addition to 
regular  events,  there  will  be  also  events  coming  from  alarm 
sensors (fire detectors, device failures), and the maximal expected 
event  burst  in  a  single  second  is  about  10-20  events.  However, 
since  in  other  CIs,  such  as  power  grid,  the  alarm  rate  in 
emergency  situation  is  around  10.000-20.000  per  second,  the 
EMILI-SITE should be able to cope with much higher event rates 
compared to the airport case. 

3.2 Technical Infrastructure 

Figure 1. EMILI-SITE Technical Infrastructure.
The  main  information  units  in  the  EMILI-SITE  system  are 
represented  in  the  form  of  messages  (signal  readings,  warnings, 
alarms, actions, automated responses, recommendations, support, 
etc.),  so  Event-driven  Service  Oriented  Architecture  (SOA) 
emerged  as  a  natural  choice  for  the  integrated  EMILI-SITE 
system.  For 
this  purpose  WSO2  Enterprise  Service  Bus 
(http://wso2.com)  and  Apache  Axis2  Web  Service  engine 
http://axis.apache.org/axis2/java/core/  have  been  deployed.  In 
order  to  filter,  correlate  and  combine  information  from  raw 
sensory  input  streams  containing  simple  events  (e.g.,  signals 
from  smoke  and  temperature  sensors)  into  so-called  complex 
events,  Complex  Event  Processing  (CEP)  approach  is  used  [5] 
based  on  the  Esper  CEP  engine  (http://esper.codehaus.org/).
Furthermore,  emergency  plans  are  defined  in  a  form  of  Event-
Condition-Action  rules  i.e.  as  a  sequence  of  rules  that  can  be 
executed  automatically  or  semi-automatically,  e.g.  requiring 
selection  among  ranked  alternatives,  confirmations,  or  manual 
action from human operators. And finally, ontologies are utilized 
to achieve more formal representation of the domain of interest, 


entities,  as  well  as  describe  the  topology  of  the  critical 
infrastructure itself.

3.3 Airport Ontology 

Figure 2. Physical model of the Airport ontology.
The  airport  ontology  (see  Fig.2)  is  defined  as  an  extension  of 
SOMAL  (Superior  Operational  Management  Layer)  generic 
critical  infrastructure  core  ontology  [7].  It  aims  at  obtaining 
semantic  interpretation  of  signals  (messages)  going  to/from  the 
VIEW2  SCADA  system  (http://www.view4.rs/)  which  is  the 
Mihajlo  Pupin  Institutes  proprietary  system for supervision and 
data acquisition currently installed at the airport Nikola Tesla. In 
particular,  it  is  used  to  identify  to  which  device/system  an 
incoming (outgoing) signal belongs, which geographical location 
the  signal 
its  characteristics  are, 
relationships with other devices/signals, etc. Currently, the airport 
ontology completely covers the ground floor of the Nikola Tesla 
airport building, including more than 1000 instances and covering 
the  following  systems:  Emergency  Lighting,  Evacuation  Access 
Control,  Fire  Protection,  Flight  Information  Display,  Heating, 
Ventilation,  Air  Conditioning,  Smoke  Extraction,  and  Video 
Surveillance system.  

is  coming  from,  what 

3.4 Automated Response 
The Automated  Response  component  has  a  key  role  in  the 
situation  assessment  process  and  early  emergency  detection  and 
classification. It aims at transforming the simple SCADA events 
into  more  meaningful  complex  events  (or  responses  to  events), 
e.g.,  automatic  determination  of  the  extent  of  fire  based  on  the 
ratio of triggered and total number of fire detectors in an area.
3.5 Decision Support 
The Recommendation and Decision Support component (see Fig. 
3) has a key role in the risk assessment process. As an illustrative 
example,  we  point  here  to  a  rule  for  the  evacuation  strategy 
selection depending on the detected malfunctions or obstacles on 
the  certain  evacuation  routes.  In  a  case  that  a  malfunction  can 
cause evacuation problems, an alternative evacuation route has to 
be suggested to the operator. However, when a malfunction can 
result  in  another  accident,  e.g.  fire  spreads  to  a  neighbouring 
sector and starts even bigger fire, a new risk assessment procedure 
for the potential secondary accident has to be initiated.  

event: malfunction(var ID, var Area), 
state: sensor_system(var ID, var System), 

state: identify_location(var ID, var Area), 
state: area_sector(var Area, var Sector) 

System==evacuation_access_control
THEN DO  /-Strategy A --/ 
action: 
notification("Possible 
problem through area " + Area) 
action: FindSafeEvacuationRoute(var Area) 
ELSE IF 
System==water_curtain_system
THEN DO  /-Strategy B --/ 
action: notification("Fire sector " + Sector + 
"  is  no  longer  isolated  in  terms  of  fire 
propagation")

action: CalculateRiskInArea(var Sector) 

evacuation 

Figure 3. Recommendation and Decision Support System  

Main screen. 

is  going  wrong 

in 

the 

technical 

technical 

infrastructure  (e.g.  emergency  Manager 

RDSSs main screen accessible for anyone who is supervising the 

airport 
Operator)  is  presented  in  Fig.  3.  In  a  case  of  an  exceptional 
situation, first, a SCADA event will be triggered, signalling that 
something 
infrastructure 
(displayed on the left side of the screen in Fig. 3). Without EMILI 
  SITE,  the  Operator  has  to  be  a  SCADA  expert  to  understand 
what is going on the SCADA level. With EMILI-SITE the simple 
events  will  be  processed,  correlated  and  aggregated  into  a 
complex  event and a right recommendation will be given to the 
Operator  (displayed  on  the  right  side  of  the  screen  in  Fig.  3). 
Then, the Operator approves or disapproves the recommendation 
and  executes  actions.  In  very  critical  situations  the  Operator
cannot  decide  alone  and  will  initiate  establishment  of  the 
Emergency Operation Center.   
4. USE OF ONTOLOGY IN THE FIRE 
SCENARIO
This  section  presents  several  examples  of  using  the  airport 
ontology  (indicated  by  PREFIX  air)  to  interpret  SCADA 
signals/events,  to  provide  corresponding  2D  visualization,  and 
also  to  obtain  inputs  of  the  route  finder  algorithm.  Ontology 
querying  within  the  EMILI-SITE  JAVA  based  components  is 
enabled by the Jena Semantic Framework.   
(cid:131)
In order to obtain SCADA signals (variable ?sgn) of certain type 
(indicated  by  variable  signalType)  coming  from  certain  fire 
segment  (variable  ?se)  of  the  airport  building  (specified  by 
variable segmentID) the following SPARQL query was utilized. 
All signals coming from SCADA were interpreted and uniquely 
described by an identifier (property keyn), signal type (property 

Interpreting SCADA signals 


measurementType) and emergency related system to which the 
corresponding sensor/actuator device/signal belongs. 
"SELECT ?keyn ?measType ?system " + 
"WHERE { " +
    "?sgn rdf:type air:" + signalType + ". " +
    "?se air:area_id \"" + segmentID + "\". " + 
    "?sgn air:keyn ?keyn. " + 
    "?sgn air:measurementType ?measType. " + 
    "?sgn air:partOf ?si. " + 
    "?si rdf:type ?s. " + 
    "?s rdfs:subClassOf air:system. " + 
    "?s rdfs:label ?system " +
"}"
(cid:131)
For visualizing signals/events coming from SCADA (see Fig. 4),   
the device types (e.g. fire detectors) are extracted from the airport 
ontology.  Sensor/actuator  signals  (indicated  by  unique  identifier 
keyn) extracted in that way, were then mapped onto the 2D plan 
of the airport building according to their actual locations.  

Situation assessment using 2D visualization 

This  paper  presented  the  use  of  the  airport  ontology  in  many 
subtasks of the Recommendation and Decision Support subsystem 
such  as  alarm  detection,  emergency  classification,  Route  Finder 
algorithm  and  2D/3D  visualization.  Future  work  will  include 
further  elaboration  of  the  emergency  scenarios,  deployment  of 
complex  risk  assessment  techniques  and  more  sophisticated 
2D/3D  visualization  and  navigation  options,  as  well  as  and 
development  of  the  prototype  toward  commercially  available 
system  for  emergency  management  in  critical  infrastructures. 
Being in the early development phase, the prototype has not yet 
been evaluated on empirical bases. 

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This  paper  is  partially  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  Science  and 
Technological  Development  of  the  Republic  of  Serbia  and 
partially  by  the  European  Union  within  the  FP7  project  EMILI 
(Pr. No.: 242438).
