Adopting Semantic Annotation Systems for Corporate

Portal Management: a Telefonica Case Study

Ilya Zaihrayeu DISI -

University of Trento

Italy

ilya@disi.unitn.it

Juan Pane

Italy

DISI - University of Trento

DISI - University of Trento

pane@disi.unitn.it

andrews@disi.unitn.it

German Toro del Valle
Telefonica Investigacion y

Desarrollo, Spain

gtv@tid.es
Pierre Andrews

Italy

ABSTRACT
Corporate portals, such as the one used by the Telef onica
group, make an important integral part of the enterprise
infrastructure, facilitating the creation, sharing, discovery
and consumption of enterprise assets through blogs, news,
forums, documents and information in general. However,
as the amount of data grows, it becomes much more difficult to access the right asset in the precise moment when it
is needed. Annotation systems try to address this problem
to a certain extent by allowing the users to collaboratively
annotate assets using tags so they can be found more easily by reusing these tags in queries. However, this model
often falls short due to mismatches in the vocabularies of
different users who use synonymous, polysemous, or more
specific (or general) terms in tagging and searching. In this
paper we: (a) provide a description of the corporate portal
of the Telef onica group; (b) define a semantic annotation
model that was developed to address the above-mentioned
problems; (c) provide details of the implementation of the
annotation model for the Telef onica portal; and (d) report
the results of an initial evaluation of a concept-based search
enabled by the model.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4 [Information Systems Applications]: Miscellaneous;
I.2.4 [Knowledge Representation Formalisms and Meth-
ods]: Semantic networks; J.1 [Administrative Data Pro-
cessing]: Business

General Terms
Theory, Experimentation, Algorithms

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2011, 7th Int. Conf. on Semantic Systems, Sept. 7-9, 2011,
Graz, Austria
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0621-8 ...$10.00.

Keywords
Semmantic annotation systems, corporate portals

1.

INTRODUCTION

The corporate portal of the Telef onica group aggregates
every day corporate news, blog and forum entries, documents and information in general. However, regardless of
the enormous usefulness of the information and services exposed by the portal for the company employees, its tremendous growth in the last years has made it very difficult to
exploit all the capabilities that the portal provides. While it
provides traditional annotation, search and syndication ca-
pabilities, it becomes nearly impossible to access the right
asset in the precise moment when it is needed, often because
of the issue of indexation and tagging with solely syntactic
strings. This is why new and innovative ways to annotate,
retrieve, navigate and, basically, consume all this information have to be provided, such as those empowered by Semantic Web technologies, that go beyond the capabilities of
the conventional annotation and retrieval systems.

In this article we provide a description of the corporate
portal of the Telef onica group and point to some shortcomings of existing annotation solutions (Section 2). In Section 3
we present a semantic annotation model that was developed
to address these shortcomings. In Section 4 we show how
such a model is implemented in a semantic content management platform. We discuss how the platform is used from
inside the Telef onicas intranet corporate portal to enable
enhanced searching, navigation and consumption of the information and services. Section 5 summarises the findings
and concludes the paper.

2. THE TELEFONICA INVESTIGACION Y

DESARROLLOS INTRANET CORPORATE PORTAL USE CASE

Telef onica Investigaci on y Desarrollo1 (Telef onica I+D for
brevity) is the innovation company of the Telef onica Group2.

1http://www.tid.es/en
2The Telef onica Group is a Spanish multinational group
of companies operating in the Information Technology and
telecommunication domain. The Group stands in the 5th
position in the telecommunication sector worldwide in terms

179Founded in 1988, it contributes to the Groups competitiveness and modernity through technological innovation. To
achieve this aim, the company applies new ideas, concepts
and practices in addition to developing advanced products
and services.

Over the last few years and within the global market, Tele-
f onica I+D has grown to become a network of centres of
technological excellence that stretches far beyond the Spanish borders, extending its R+D activities to offices located
in Spain (Barcelona, Granada, Huesca, Madrid and Val-
ladolid), Brazil (S ao Paulo) and Mexico (Mexico D.F.). Cur-
rently, Telef onica I+D employs more than 1 200 employees
shared out amongst its 7 centres.
2.1 The Intranet Corporate Portal

The Telef onica I+Ds intranet corporate portal is a live,
24x7, highly active Web portal used by every single employee
at the company. To access the portal and all its information
and services, the employees have to authenticate themselves
using a user name and a password provided by the company.
This authentication mechanism allows the company not only
to control the access to the information and services but also
to audit the use of the portal made by its employees.

Since its first days in 1998, the intranet corporate portal
has become one of the main communication channel available at the company. Although it has experienced a noticeable evolution during the last years, including new sources
of information, services and technologies (mainly Web 2.0
technologies), it has always been loyal to its early principles as an open and collaborative environment of contact,
discussion and information for all the company employees.
The portal offers access to all the sources of information
and services; including infrastructure management, business
management, knowledge management and human resources
management information, services and tools.

In its current status, the portal integrates a huge amount
of heterogeneous sources of information and services provided by distinct information systems of the company. This
heterogeneous environment makes it necessary to use distinct software technologies throughout the length and breadth
of the portal. In fact, the portal is the result of a considerable technological integration effort where disparate technologies like, for example, Java Server Faces (JSF), Java
Server Pages (JSP), HTML, CSS, Javascript, Java applets,
Flash, CMS solutions, and blogging platforms coexist.
2.2 Problem Statement

Although there are currently in the market many software providers offering products which could be considered
as semantic annotation solutions such as Alitora Systems3,
Apture4, Expert Systems5, NetBase6, iGlue7, Ontoprise8,
Calais9 or Zemanta10, just to mention a few, none of them

of market capitalization, the 1st as an European integrated
operator and the 3rd in the Eurostoxx 50 ranking, composed
of the major companies in Europe (June 30th 2010).
3http://www.alitora.com
4http://www.apture.com
5http://www.expertsystem.net
6http://www.netbase.com/
7http://iglue.com
8http://www.ontoprise.de/en/home/
9http://www.opencalais.com
10http://www.zemanta.com/

provides us with the complete and maintainable solution we
need for the Telef onica I+D use case. The main reasons are:

1. Most of the already existing solutions are focused on
text content annotation including natural language processing techniques to extract entities and knowledge
out of textual documents. However, in an intranet
corporate portal many other types of content are also
exposed and susceptible of being annotated including
images, audio and video.

2. Most of the already existent solutions are focused on
either automatic knowledge extraction techniques or
semi-automatic (i.e., manual) knowledge extraction tech-
niques. A combined approach is needed where the
most effective automatic and semi-automatic techniques
are used.

3. Most of the already existing solutions lean on a corpora
of domain experts to design and to build the ontologies
to be applied in certain domains and scenarios. These
mechanisms end up being too rigid to manage highly
dynamic environments and communities like the ones
built around a corporate intranet portal. End-users
involvement in the building of the ontologies as well as
on the semantic annotation of the consumed content
are needed. In fact, end-users are the best ones to add
semantics to the content they consume.

3. SEMANTIC ANNOTATION MODEL FOR

TELEFONICA I+D

In this section we present a summary of the semantic annotation model that was developed for Telef onica I+D based
on an in-depth analysis of the state-of-the-art and requirements presented in [3] and in [2]. The model (see Figure 1)
allows the user to provide annotations that describe portal
resources. Differently from the classical folksonomy model,
apart from free text annotations, the user can also provide
semantic annotations, i.e., annotations that are linked to
ontology elements such as concepts or entities. These semantic annotations provide the basis for a number of useful
services, such as:

 Semantic Expert Search service, which takes a set
of concepts as input and returns a ranked list of users
who used these or more specific concepts in their semantic annotations. For example, searching with the
concept programming language will return users who
used concepts such as java or c++ in their annota-
tions;

 Semantic Resource Search service, which takes a
set of concepts as input and returns a ranked list of
resources that were annotated with these or more specific concepts. For example, searching with concept
the programming language will return resources annotated with concepts such as java or c++;

 User Knowledge Clouds service, which takes a set
of user identifiers as input and computes the shared
or combined knowledge cloud for these users based on
their semantic annotations. For example, if one user
used the concept java and another user used the concept programming language, then both concepts will

180appear in the shared knowledge cloud for these users
as one has a broader and the other has a more specific
knowledge of the same domain;

 Resource Concept Clouds service, which takes a
set of resource identifiers as input and computes the
shared or combined concept cloud for these resources
based on their semantic annotations. For example,
if one resource is annotated with the concept java
and another is annotated with the concept programming language, then both concepts will appear in the
shared concept cloud for these resources as one is about
a broader and the other is about a more specific topic
from the same domain.

The semantic store relies on OWLIM11 while the initial lexical resource is based on Wordnet and DBPedia.
4.2 Annotation Tool

The annotation tool adds a semantic overlay layer on top
of the Telef onica I+Ds intranet portal. Since it is a live portal used on a 24x7 basis by the company employees, a major
requirement for the integration of the tool is its inclusion in
a non-intrusive way, so that the current users of the portal
are not affected. To accomplish this requirement, the annotation tool has been implemented as a Google Chrome12
extension13.

Once the annotation tool has properly been installed in
the browser, the visitors of the intranet corporate portal can
start interacting with it. The current version of the annotation tool provides its users with three main capabilities:

1. Content annotation: Users can select any content from
the Web pages they are visiting and annotate it using
free-text tags or concepts from the background ontol-
ogy. In case no content is selected, the whole Web page
is annotated.

Since our main goal is to get as much content as possible semantically annotated, the tool provides its users
with many means to assign meaning to the selected annotations including auto-completion features, the possibility to assign meaning to free-text tags (Figure 2)
or to change the already assigned meaning at any moment of the annotation process.

Figure 1: Generic annotation model with semantics

We conducted an evaluation of the improvement of the
quality of search when semantic annotations are used on
resources (i.e., search used in the first two services listed
above). The results show that this concept-based search
could yield up to 10% more correct results w.r.t. the conventional keywords-based search. Interested readers are referred to [1] for details.

4.

IMPLEMENTATION

The semantic annotation tool for the Telef onica Corporate
Management Portal was developed as a browser extension.
In the following sections we outline the enabling platform as
well as the annotation tool.
4.1 Enabling Annotation Platform

The Annotation tool of Telef onica I+D Corporate Management Portal is built as an application on top of the INSEMTIVES platform. Interested readers are referred to [4]
for details on the INSEMTIVES toolkit and other application use cases. The INSEMTIVES platform can be downloaded from https://sourceforge.net/projects/insemtives/
files/Platform/.

The different services of the platform such as automatic

suggestion of annotations, disambiguation, cosensus and knowledge evolution, user scoring, among others can be accessed
via Java Messaging Service (JMS) or Representational State
Transfer (REST) using JSON.

All the structured knowledge is stored in the form of RDF
following the semantic annotation model sketched in [1].

Figure 2: Assigning a meaning to a free-text tag

As a way to engage the users to semantically annotate
content, we have also included into the tool distinct
incentives and game mechanics. More concretely, we
have built an expert network into the tool based on
the annotation made by the users. This way, the users
can become experts on the topics related to the annotations they have used the most (Figure 3). On
the other hand, we have also included a typical badge
mechanism to acknowledge the contributions made by
the users, let them gain status in the community as
well as to increase their loyalty. Last but not least, we
have also included some competitions into the tool to
let the users compete to be the most active contributor
of the day, the week or the month.

2. Related content: The semantic annotations made by
users are taken as the starting point to recommend semantically related content for the Web page they are

11http://www.ontotext.com/owlim/
12http://www.google.com/chrome/
13https://chrome.google.com/extensions/

181themselves, but also with users of other online communities by means of social networks such as Facebook14,
Twitter15, LinkedIn16 and Yammer17;

 include quick paths (i.e., pop-up menus entry when
right-clicking on an image, video or any content susceptible of being annotated) as well as keyboard shortcuts to speed up the annotation process.

5. CONCLUSION

In this paper we describe how knowledge and data are
created, shared, discovered, and consumed in the corporate portal of Telef onica Investigaci on y Desarrollo  one
of the biggest telecommunication provider worldwide. As
we pointed out, with the constant growth of contents on
the portal, conventional content management tools including annotation and search become less and less effective and
often fall short of providing the right asset in the precise
moment when it is needed.
In order to compensate this
shortcoming, we summarised the results of an in-depth requirement analysis of an annotation and retrieval system in
which semantics play the central role. We then presented
a semantic annotation model that meets the identified requirements and reported on the details of its implementation on top of the Telef onicas corporate portal. Although
more work is required to make final conclusions from the introduction of this semantic annotation system for corporate
portal management, the initial evaluations are promising as
they show that such a system can enable enhanced searching,
navigation and consumption of the information and services
exposed by the portal.

Acknowledgements
This work has been partly supported by the INSEMTIVES
project (FP7-231181, see http://www.insemtives.eu). We
would like to thank the members of the INSEMTIVES consortium for their support and collaboration.
