A Priori Ontology Modularisation in Ill-defined 

Domains 

Dhavalkumar Thakker1, Vania Dimitrova1, Lydia Lau1, Ronald Denaux1, Stan 

Karanasios2, Fan Yang-Turner1 

1School of Computing, University of Leeds, LS2 9JT, Leeds, UK 

2Leeds University Business School, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK 

{D.Thakker, V.G.Dimitrova, L.M.S.Lau, R.Denaux, F.Yang-Turner} @ leeds.ac.uk  

{S.Karanasios} @ lubs.leeds.ac.uk 

ABSTRACT 
Modularisation  is  crucial  to  create  re-usable  and  manageable 
ontologies. The  modularisation is usually performed  a posteriori, 
i.e. after  the ontology  is  developed, and  has been  applied mainly 
to  well-structured  domains.  With  the  increasing  popularity  of 
social media, Semantic web technologies are moving towards illdefined  domains  that  involve  cognitively-complex  processes 
carried out by humans and require tacit knowledge (e.g. decision-
making,  sensemaking,  interpersonal  communication,  negotiating, 
motivating). In such domains, a priori modularisation can enable 
ontology  creation  to  handle  the  complexity  and  the  dynamic 
nature  of  knowledge.  This  paper  outlines  an  a  priori 
modularisation  methodology  for  multi-layered  development  of 
ontologies  in  ill-defined  domains,  including  an  upper  ontology 
layer,  high-level  and  reusable  domain  layers,  and  case-specific 
layers.  The  methodology  is  being  applied  in  several  use  cases  in 
two EU projects  Dicode and ImREAL.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
I.2.4  [Knowledge  Representation  Formalisms  and  Methods]: 
Knowledge Representation Formalisms and Methods 

I.2.6 [Learning]: Knowledge acquisition 

General Terms: Design 

Keywords:  Ontologies,  Ontology  Modularisation,  Ontology 
Engineering, Semantic Web, Ill-defined domains. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Modularisation  is  highly  beneficial  for  designing  large  scale,  reusable ontologies. There are many successful implementations of 
large-scale  ontologies  in  well-structured  subject  areas,  e.g.  biomedical  (GENE  [1])  and  medical  (GALEN  [2])  domains. 
Recently,  the  modularisation  of  such  ontologies  has  been  a 
primary focus of research efforts. The existing successes [3][4][5] 
offer a posteriori approaches and tools to introduce modularity in 
already  developed  ontologies  that  have  not  been  designed  in  a 
modular way.  

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS  2011,  7th  Int.  Conf.  on  Semantic  Systems,  Sept.  7-9, 
2011,  Graz,  Austria.  Copyright  2011  ACM  978-1-4503-0621-8 
...$10.00. 

sensemaking, 

collaboration, 

the  benefits  semantics  brings 

There is a growing need for deploying semantic web technologies 
in ill-defined domains that involve cognitively-complex processes 
carried out by humans and  require tacit knowledge,  e.g.  decision 
making, 
interpersonal 
communication,  advising,  mentoring.  With  the  recent  proven 
success of semantic web and ontologies, the field is ready to take 
on  the  challenges  offered  by  ill-defined  domains,  and  to  better 
understand 
reasoning, 
aggregation,  automation)  for  applications  in  these  domains  (e.g. 
people  engaging  in  collective  decision  making  or  sensemaking 
in 
activities,  or  sharing  stories  from 
communicating,  negotiating  or  mentoring).  To 
the 
complexity of knowledge structuring in ill-defined domains, agile 
ontology engineering is required. Hence, modularisation from the 
outset,  i.e.  an  a  priori,  is  needed.  However,  there  is  a  lack  of 
methodologies  that  explain  how  to  do  a  priori  modularisation  in 
ill-defined  domains;  the  existing  approaches  are  mainly  a 
posteriori  and  have  been  applied  mostly  in  well-structured 
domains.  

their  work  practice 

tackle 

(e.g. 

in 

the 

real  world  activities 

We  face  challenges  of  ontological  modelling  in  such  ill-defined 
domains  in  the  context  of  two  European  projects:  ImREAL1  and 
Dicode2.  The  ImREAL  project  deals  with  aggregating  and 
understanding 
interpersonal 
communication  domain  for  learning.  Activity  model  ontology  is 
being  developed  and  used  for  semantic  annotation,  aggregation 
and browsing of user generated content from social media which 
provides 
real  world 
experiences  that  are  used  for  augmenting  simulated  learning 
environments.  The  Dicode  project  deals  with  providing  synergy 
between human and machine intelligence in decision making and 
collaboration  within  data-intensive  environments.  Decision 
making  and  collaboration  ontology  is  being  developed  and  used 
for  Dicode  service 
integration,  as  well  as  for  semantic 
augmentation of medical diagnosis reports and user contributions 
to argumentative interactions. 

to  examples  with 

intelligent  access 

To tackle the challenges of ontology engineering in ImREAL and 
Dicode, we have developed a priori modularisation methodology 
that enables dividing the domain ontology into several modules in 
order  to  handle  the  complexity  and  dynamicity  of  ontology 
modelling  in  ill-defined  domains.  The  paper  first  outlines 
modelling  challenges  in  ill-defined  domains  and  clarifies  why 

1 http://imreal-project.eu/ 
2 http://dicode-project.eu/ 

167is 
is 

required 
required 

then,  presents  a  priori 
then,  presents 
modularisation 
modularisation 
modularisation  methodology  for  ill-defined  domains  (#3)  and 
defined  domains  (#3)  and 
compares  the  approach  with  relevant  work  (#4);  and  finally, 
compares  the  approach  with  relevant  work  (#4);  and  finally, 
concludes by pointing at our contribution and future plans (#5). 
concludes by pointing at our contribution and future plans (#5).

(#2); 
(#2); 

2.  CHALLENGES IN ILL-DEFINED 
DEFINED 
DOMAINS AND MODULARISATION 
DOMAINS AND MODULARISATION
The  ill-defined  domains  we  deal  with  impose  several  challenges 
impose  several  challenges 
to the construction of a domain model in the form of an ontology:  
to the construction of a domain model in the form of an ontology: 

Domain  complexity.  Understanding  and  defining  these  domains 
Understanding  and  defining  these  domains 
is  hard  and  involves  heterogeneous  sources  of  knowledge,  i.e. 
heterogeneous  sources  of  knowledge,  i.e. 
expertise  from  multiple  disciplines,  such  as 
ltiple  disciplines,  such  as  psychology,  social 
science, communication and computer science.
cience. 

Expanding  knowledge  scope.  Due  to  the  evident  complexity  of 
Due  to  the  evident  complexity  of 
the  domain,  the  conceptualisation  process  is  generally  dynamic 
the  domain,  the  conceptualisation  process  is  generally  dynamic 
and evolves with user activities. This means that certain concepts 
ans that certain concepts 
and relationships are unidentified in the beginning. Hence, it is not 
identified in the beginning. Hence, it is not 
possible  to  build  an  all-encompassing  ontology  in  the  very  first 
encompassing  ontology  in  the  very  first 
instance. As  more  knowledge constructs become articulated,  it is 
instance. As  more  knowledge constructs become articulated,  it is 
likely that the domain covered by the ontology may be expanded 
likely that the domain covered by the ontology may be expanded 
to cover other domains. The issue of expanding knowledge scope 
mains. The issue of expanding knowledge scope 
also brings forth problems of reusability and scalability.  
also brings forth problems of reusability and scalability. 

Reusability.  As  the  knowledge  scope  expands,  while  new 
As  the  knowledge  scope  expands,  while  new 
knowledge  emerges,  it is  more  appropriate to reuse  and build  on 
more  appropriate to  reuse  and build on 
existing structure instead of starting from scratch. Another aspect 
tarting from scratch. Another aspect 
of  reusability  is  relevant  to  a  global  context    we  aim  at 
of  reusability  is  relevant  to  a  global  context 
publishing  components  from  the  ontology  to  be  reused  on  the 
components  from  the  ontology  to  be  reused  on  the 
WWW  in  order,  which  can  enable  usage  by 
usage  by  a  wider  community 
and can be helpful for interdisciplinary research

esearch [6]. 

Scalability.  The  scalability  of  semantic  infrastructure  is  another 
The  scalability  of  semantic  infrastructure  is  another 
potential problem while dealing with expanding knowledge scope. 
potential problem while dealing with expanding knowledge scope. 
For  instance,  a  tailored  ontology  built  for  applications  related  to 
lored  ontology  built  for  applications  related  to 
ill-defined activities in a medical domain (e.g. decision making in 
defined activities in a medical domain (e.g. decision making in 
clinical trial diagnosis  or interpersonal  communication  in doctor
diagnosis  or  interpersonal  communication  in doctorpatients  interviews)  can  be  expanded  to  reuse  large  medicine 
patients  interviews)  can  be  expanded  to  reuse  large  medicine 
ontology,  such  as  MeSH3  that  currently  includes  over  250,000 
that  currently  includes  over  250,000 
terms  corresponding  to  medical  subjects.  The  rising  number  of 
.  The  rising  number  of 
instances in this case can be a serious problem to handle within a 
instances in this case can be a serious problem to handle within a 
single knowledge repository. 

Modularisation  (which  enables  creating  smaller  but  connected 
Modularisation  (which  enables  creating  smaller  bu
ontologies  or  replacing  oversized  ontologies  with  smaller  ones 
ontologies  or  replacing  oversized  ontologies  with  smaller  ones 
[7])  can  be  highly  beneficial  for  handling  the  key  challenges  of 
)  can  be  highly  beneficial  for  handling  the  key  challenges  of 
ontology modelling in ill-defined domains, because:
defined domains, because: 

  Modularity  facilitates  development  of  smaller,  re

Modularity  facilitates  development  of  smaller,  re-usable 
pieces  of  ontologies  hence  allowing  managing 
pieces  of  ontologies  hence  allowing  managing  complexity 
and  promoting  understandability  of  the  ontologies  across 
and  promoting  understandability  of  the  ontologies  across 
heterogeneous and complex domains. 

  Modular approach also allows managing future expansion of 
llows managing future expansion of 
the  ontologies  hence  absorbing  expanding  knowledge
absorbing  expanding  knowledge  in  a 
way  that  either  minimum  restructuring  is  required  or  the 
way  that  either  minimum  restructuring  is  required  or 
restructuring is manageable. 
Modular approach encourages and facilitates reusability as it 
is easier to re-use part of ontologies.  

  Modular approach encourages and facilitates 

  Modularisation also allows handling  scalability

scalability problems by 
offering  design  choices  where  it  is  possible  to  distribute 
offering  design  choices  where  it  is  possible  to  distribute 
ontology/knowledge  bases  in  different  repositories/graphs 
ontology/knowledge  bases  in  different  repositories/graphs 
based  on  the  modules  they  represent.  Hence,  queries  and 
based  on  the  modules  they  represent.  Hence,  queries  and 

3 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/ 

reasoning  can  be  done  against  a  subset  of  the  ontology, 
reasoning  can  be  done  against  a  subset  of 
instead of one large monolithic ontology.
large monolithic ontology. 

We  outline  next  a  modularisation  methodology 
development of domain ontologies in multiple layers

ontologies in multiple layers. 

a  modularisation  methodology  that  encourages 

3.  A PRIORI ONTOLOGY
ONTOLOGY 
MODULARISATION 
MODULARISATION
The  methodology  outlined  in  this  section  is  applicable  to  a  class 
this  section  is  applicable  to  a  class 
of  problems  that  involve  cognitively
cognitively-complex  processes  carried 
out by humans and require tacit knowledge. The understanding of 
out by humans and require tacit knowledge. The understanding of 
such  domains  involves  inter-
-disciplinary  domain  experts  who 
often utilise a theoretical framework to guide the understanding of 
often utilise a theoretical framework to guide the understanding of 
tology  development  begins  with  some 
such  domains.  Ontology  development  begins  with 
theoretical  framework  and  arrives  to 
and  arrives  to  case  specific  domain 
-layered  development  of  domain 
ontologies.  We  follow  a  3-
ontologies  consisting  of  an  upper  ontology  layer,  high
upper  ontology  layer,  high-level  and 
reusable domain layer, and case specifi
and case specific layer. Each layer can be 
developed as one or more ontology modules, see Figure 1. 
developed as one or more ontology modules

Figure 1. Multi-layered ontology development

layered ontology development to conceptualise 

ill-defined domains.
defined domains. 

[8] 

to  get 
to  get 

an  understanding  of 
an  understanding  of 

Upper  ontology  layer.  The  upper  ontology  layer  covers  base 
The  upper  ontology  layer  covers  base 
concepts  derived  from  the  chosen  theoretical  framework  which 
concepts  derived  from  the  chosen  theoretical  framework  which 
facilitates the understanding of the cognitive processes performed 
facilitates the understanding of the cognitive processes perfo
in  the  domain.  For  example,  in  ImREAL,  we  use  the  Activity 
in  the  domain.  For  example,  in  ImREAL,  we  use  the  Activity 
Theory 
interpersonal 
interpersonal 
communication activities, including different applications such as 
communication activities, includ
job  interviews,  student  mentoring,  doctor-patient  interviews.  The 
job  interviews,  student  mentoring,  doctor
Activity  Theory  provides  a  framework  to  identify  the  key 
Activity  Theory  provides  a  framework  to  identify  the  key 
concepts describing an  activity, such as  SUBJECT,  OBJECT,  TOOLS, 
concepts  describing  an activity,  such as 
MOTIVATION,  OUTCOME,  COMMUNITY
COMMUNITY,  DIVISION  OF  LABOUR,  RULE, 
NORM,  ACTION,  OPERATION,  and  the  main  axioms  linking  them 
,  and  the  main  axioms  linking  them 
has at least one SUBJECT, and is defined by an 
(e.g. every ACTIVITY has at least one 
ACTIVITY VIEWPOINT that is viewpoint of the 
that is viewpoint of the SUBJECT).  

Similarly,  when  developing  a  sensemaking  ontology  in  Dicode, 
Similarly,  when  developing  a  sensemaking  ontology 
we  start  with  a  cognitive  framework  for  intelligence  analysis  [9]  
we  start  with  a  cognitive  framework  for  intelligence  analysis
which  describes  the  processes  people  undertake  when  deriving 
which  describes  the  processes  people  undertake  when  deriving 
novel  intelligence  from  massive  data  (e.g.  conducting  scientific 
assive  data  (e.g.  conducting  scientific 
experiments or clinical trials). Based on this, we identify the key 
experiments or clinical trials). Based on this, we identify the key 
intelligence  analysis,  such  as  ACTOR, 
intelligence  analysis,  such  as 
concepts  describing 
concepts  describing 
SENSEMAKING  OPERATION,  INFORMATION  SOURCE
INFORMATION  SOURCE,  INFORMATION 
FORAGING  LOOP, SENSEMAKING  LOOP
SENSEMAKING LOOP, SUPPORT  SYSTEM,  OUTCOME, 
and  the  main  axioms  linking  them  (e.g.  an  ACTOR  (sensemaker) 
and  the  main  axioms  linking  them  (e.g.  an 

168has  EXPERTISE,  utilises 
SENSEMAKING OPERATIONS, and produces an OUTCOME.) 

INFORMATION  SOURCES 

to  conduct 

Conceptualisation  at  this  level  is  conceived  and  developed 
independently  from  its  usage  context  and  avoids  defining  any 
concepts that are tied to a particular use case. This upper ontology 
is  then  expanded  to  specialise  the  base  conceptualisation  while 
moving into the direction of a case specific ontology.  

High-level  reusable  domain  layer.  A  middle  layer,  which 
evolves  organically  through  use,  is  used  to  make  the  connection 
between  the  upper  ontology  layer  and  the  case  specific  ontology 
layer.  It  specifies  the  upper  level  concepts  in  more  detail  by 
linking  them  to  more  specific  concepts  that  are  used  across 
multiple case specific domain ontology. This layer provides more 
specific  detail  of  the  domain,  which  is  still  re-usable  and  high-
level. The middle layer can include a number of layers depending 
on the commonalities between case specific layers. We term these 
middle  layers  as  high-level  reusable  domains,  since  it  is  not 
always clear or required to have these set of layers. Only thinking 
in  terms  of  reusability  makes  it  possible  to  see  requirement  for 
such middle layer. Since we deal with several use cases across the 
same  domain,  the  middle  ontology  layer  plays  a  crucial  role  in 
connecting the various use cases and ensuring re-usability. 

to 

(e.g. 

COMMUNICATION, 

include  MENTAL 
VERBAL 

The  middle  layer  in  the  activity  model  ontology  in  ImREAL 
includes  concepts that expand the  key activity concepts  from the 
upper layer. For example, interpersonal communication TOOLS are 
expanded 
VERBAL 
COMMUNICATION, 

LANGUAGE) and PHYSICAL TOOLS (e.g. CV, CLOTHING). The middle 
layer  in  the  sensemaking  ontology  in  Dicode  includes  concepts 
that expand the key information analysis concepts from the upper 
layer. For example,  SENSEMAKING  OPERATIONS are expanded with 
operations  relevant  to  the  Dicode  use  cases  (e.g.  ABSTRACTING, 
CLASSIFYING,  COMPARING,  FILTERING,  SEARCHING,  VISUALISING); 
and the information sources are specified (e.g. STRUCTURED DATA, 
UNSTRUCTURED DATA, QUALITATIVE DATA, QUANTITATIVE DATA). 

Case specific layer. The case specific layer defines the  concepts 
that  are  specific  to  each  use  case  (i.e.  closer  to  the  content  and 
usage).  The  case  specific  layers  in  the  ImREAL  and  Dicode 
ontologies  are  derived  based  on  several  knowledge  sources: 
interviews  with  stakeholders  from  each  use  case,  relevant 
documentation, user stories. The knowledge sources are analysed 
by  domain  experts  following  the  theoretical  framework  and 
building  a  knowledge  glossary.  The  concepts  from  the  glossary 
are  then  encoded  in  an  ontology  using  an  intuitive  ontology 
authoring tool ROO, developed in our group [10], which enables 
active  involvement  of  domain  experts.  At  this  stage,  it  is  often 
discovered  that  there  are  commonalities  in  the  use  cases, 
ontological  statements  are  moved  to  the  middle  layer.  This  may 
include  expanding  a  module  from  the  middle  layer  or  even 
starting a  completely new  middle layer  module. For  examples of 
concepts  in  this layer,  the  reader  is  directed  to  the  ImREAL  and 
Dicode project web sites. 

these,  we  have  followed 

One  of  the  questions  to  be  answered  while  developing  a 
methodology is how to identify what modules go into each layer. 
Standard strategies for module identification are described in [7]. 
From 
two:  (a)  semantic-driven 
modularisation - in both projects, domain experts and knowledge 
engineers  are  jointly  deciding  on  the  modular  representation  of 
the  domain  by  following 
theoretical  framework  and 
identifying  the  generality  and  specificity  of  use  cases;  (b) 
reusability-driven modularisation  a knowledge engineer further 

the 

inspected the ontology and identified concepts that can be re-used 
across use cases, and moved them to the middle ontology layer.  

The  methodology  presented  here  facilitates  iterative  ontology 
development. For example, after the first iteration of development 
for  use  cases  A  and  B,  if  it  is  discovered  that  the  theoretical 
foundation is also applicable to new application domain  use case 
C.  Then,  following  the  modularisation  methodology,  the  related 
domain  ontology  module  can  be  built  by  extending  one  of  the 
modules  from  the  middle  layer  and,  if  necessary,  can  update  the 
dependent  parent  modules.  In  the  case  of  revision  and  further 
knowledge  availability,  it  is  possible  to  pin  down  one  or  more 
modules  and  revisit  these  smaller  modules,  instead  of  having  to 
deal  with  one  large  ontology  which  will  smooth  the  process  of 
restructuring. 

4.  RELATED WORK 
In  the  current  state  of  Semantic  Web  movement,  modularisation 
of ontologies is considered best practice. The existing approaches 
develop  techniques  and  tools  for  extracting  ontology  modules  or 
partitioning  ontologies.  [11][12][13]  propose  an  approach  to 
modularisation  using  module  extraction,  i.e.  takes  an  input 
ontology and extracts modules that match a set of requirements. In 
principle,  these  module  extraction  approaches  can  be  considered 
contributing  to  a  priori  modularisation,  i.e.  aiding  a  knowledge 
engineer  in  considering  and  finding  existing  modules  while 
creating new ontologies.  However, these approaches  fall short  of 
outlining guidelines a knowledge engineer needs to consider while 
designing  modular  ontologies  from  outset,  for  example  how  to 
decide possible modules for the domain or how to derive generic 
or specific conceptualisation aspects. 

[3][4][5]  propose  another  approach  to  modularisation  using 
ontology  partitioning,  i.e.,  dividing  large  monolithic  ontologies 
into  a number of partitions. For  example, [3]  proposes automatic 
partitioning  of  large  ontologies  into  smaller  partitions  based  on 
the structure of the class hierarchy and by taking into account the 
internal  coherence  of  the  concepts.  Since  the  partitioning  is 
applied  after  an  ontology  is  created,  this  approach  can  be 
classified under a posteriori modularisation methodology.  

Limited  research  considers  a  priori  modularisation.  The  NeOn4 
toolkit  is  notable  for  its  tool-level  support  for  creating  modular 
ontologies from the beginning. It supports knowledge engineers in 
both module extraction and ontology partitioning. However, there 
is no work in applying modularisation to handle the challenges of 
ontology  modelling  in  ill-defined  domains.  Most  importantly, 
there are no systematic attempts to apply a priori modularisation 
to optimise ontology modelling and deployment across several use 
cases  within  the  same  domain,  which  is  the  focus,  and  the  key 
contribution, of the work presented here.  

5.  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In  this  paper,  we  have  outlined  an  a  priori  modularisation 
methodology  which  is  aimed  at  addressing  the  challenges  posed 
by  ill-defined  domains  that  require  (a)  an  understanding  of 
cognitive-complex  processes  and  (b)  knowledge  sources,  tacit  or 
otherwise,  from  multiple  disciplines.  The  paper  contributes  to 
research  and  practice  in  semantic  technologies  by  presenting  an 
approach  for  a  priori  modularisation  that  can  be  followed  for 
addressing  key  challenges  of  ontology  engineering  in  ill-defined 
domains (which are becoming popular with the ubiquity of social 
media and user generated content). 

4 http://neon-toolkit.org/wiki/Main_Page 

169This  work is  ongoing. The next  phase includes  parallel activities 
in both ImREAL and Dicode extending the work presented here. 
To examine the appropriateness of the proposed methodology for 
ill-defined  domains  we  apply  it  in  several  use  cases  in  both 
projects which fit the characteristics of ill-defined domains.  

In  ImREAL,  we  have  developed  the  ontology  for  the  job 
interview use case (including the three layers), and have used it in 
an  intelligent  content  assembly  workbench  which  integrates  and 
semantically  augments  relevant  content  from  YouTube  [14]  and 
user  job  interview  stories.  Following 
the  Activity  Theory 
framework,  we  have  also  conceptualised  the  second  use  case 
developing  the  knowledge  glossary.  We  are  currently  encoding 
the  additional  concepts  brought  by  the  second  use  case,  which 
leads  to  expanding  the  middle  layer  (e.g.  to  include  cultural 
norms) and defining a new module in the use case layer. This will 
allow us to utilise  the developed  semantic  augmentation services 
to  also  assemble  content  related  to  cultural  awareness  in 
mentoring.  The third use case involves doctor-patient interviews. 
It will be conceptualised using the same methodology, which will 
lead  to  expanding  the  middle  layer  (e.g.  with  emotional  signals) 
and adding another module in the use case specific layer. 

for 

in  data 

intelligence  analysis 

We  are  also  applying  the  modularisation  methodology  for 
building data intensive decision making and collaboration support 
ontology  in  Dicode.  There  are  three  use  case  partners  that  have 
diverse  need 
intensive 
environments  [15].  For  example  an  use  case  from  breast  cancer 
scientific  research  involve  intuitive  decision  making  such  as 
judgement  on  sources  for  analysis  or  perceiving  gaps  in  analysis 
while other use case on medical diagnosis of Rheumatoid Arthritis 
involves  decision  making  tasks  such  as  identifying  change  in 
condition  or  identifying  tendency  in  wrists.  We  are  currently 
encoding the Dicode ontology for the medical diagnosis use case. 
Following  the  intelligence  analysis  sensemaking  framework  we 
have developed the upper layer, and have used the interviews with 
stakeholders to built the knowledge glossary and identify concepts 
for  the  middle  and  use  case  specific  layer.  We  will  apply  the 
ontology  to  semantically  augment  and  link  medical  diagnosis 
reports  to  facilitate  the  sense  makers.  The  ontology  will  also 
enable us to describe the services developed by Dicode to support 
intelligence analysis.  

theoretical 

The a priori modularisation methodology presented here, which is 
based  on 
frameworks  and  use  case  specific 
information, allows us to compare different use cases and enables 
reusability  of  ontology  querying  and  semantic  augmentation 
services across similar use cases. The two EU projects - ImREAL 
and  Dicode  -  provide  practical  testbeds  for  validating  the 
methodology, helping us to examine its benefit in future work. 

6.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The  research  leading  to  these  results  has  received  funding  from 
the European  Union Seventh  Framework Programme  (FP7/2007-
2013)  under  grant  agreement  no  ICT  257831  (ImREAL  project) 
and  grant  agreement  no  ICT  257184  (DICODE  project).  The 
authors  are  grateful  to  project  partners  for  stimulating  ideas,  and 
specifically to the domain experts involved in ontology authoring. 
