Taking Pragmatic Dimensions of Ontologies into 

Account: Frameworks 

Celine Snoeck 

ULg / CRIFA 

Boulevard du Rectorat 5 
B-4000 Liege, Belgique  

(+32) 4 366 20 55 

csnoeck@ulg.ac.be 

Alain Giboin 

INRIA / Edelweiss Team-Project 

2004 route des Lucioles 

06902 Sophia Antipolis, France  

(+33) 4 92 38 78 14 

Alain.Giboin@inria.fr 

Brigitte Denis 
ULg / CRIFA 

Boulevard du Rectorat 5 
B-4000 Liege, Belgique  

(+32) 4 366 20 96 

b.denis@ulg.ac.be 

ABSTRACT
A major aim of the Pragmatic Web is to support communities to 
put  ontologies  in  context.  As  a  contribution  to  this  aim,  we 
present  the  framework  we  developed  to  analyze  the  way  we 
attempted  to  contextualize  the  ontologies  underlying  a  set  of 
semantic  knowledge  services  dedicated 
to  communities  of 
practice.  The  framework  was  derived  from  the  Ontology 
Framework elaborated by members of the Ontology Engineering 
community during the Ontology Summit 2007. Both frameworks 
define a series of pragmatic dimensions of ontologies. Because 
our derived framework does not cover all possible dimensions, we 
propose to complement it, by relying on existing work from the 
Ontology  Engineering  community  in  general,  and  from  the 
Pragmatic Web community in particular. In conclusion, we invite 
the Pragmatic Web community to pursue such a work by jointly 
elaborating a consensual Pragmatic Ontology Framework. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine Systems  human 
factors,  human  information  processing,  software  psychology. 
H.5.3  [Information Interfaces  and  Presentation]:  Group  and 
Organization  Interfaces  -  collaborative  computing,  theory  and 
models, web-based interaction. I.2.4 [Knowledge Representation 
Formalisms and Methods]: representation languages, semantic 
networks 
General Terms
Management,  Design,  Human  Factors,  Languages,  Theory, 
Verification 
Keywords
Pragmatic  Dimensions,  Pragmatic  Web,  Semantic  Web, 
Ontologies,  Knowledge 
Participatory  Design, 
Community of Practice 

Systems, 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
I-SEMANTICS  2011,  7th  Int.  Conf.  on  Semantic  Systems,  Sept.  7-9, 
2011, Graz, Austria. 
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0621-8...$10.00. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
In  contrast  to  the  Semantic  Web  community  who  emphasizes 
meaning  of 
information, 
the  Pragmatic  Web  community 
emphasizes how the information is used [15]. In other words, 
for the Pragmatic Web community, shared meaning is not enough; 
meaning negotiation and evolution with context change matters as 
well [4][16].  
As  a  consequence  of this contrast,  if  the focus of the Semantic 
Web is to model shared meanings with ontologies, and to use 
ontologies to provide many different kinds of web services [4], 
the focus of the Pragmatic Web is to model the context (including 
the purpose) of use of ontologies and to make Web services or 
applications more aware of this context (and purpose)[4]. Briefly 
speaking, we can say with de Moor [4][6] that a major aim of the 
Pragmatic Web is to put ontologies in context.  
This aim can be specified if we refer to the following alternative 
definition of the focus of the Pragmatic Web, a definition which 
emphasizes the notion of communities together with the notion of 
context: The Pragmatic Web main focus is not Web technology 
per se, but the contexts and communities in which these resources 
are  developed  and  used  to  accomplish  goals,  develop  mutual 
understanding, and create and realize commitments [5]. Relying 
on this definition, we could say that a major aim of the Pragmatic 
Web is to support communities to put ontologies in context. The 
work reported in the present paper is a contribution to this aim. It 
is also a contribution to the related objective of making ontology 
research  on the Pragmatic Web level  [...] focus much more on 
ontology  methodology  issues,  including  the  (partially)  human 
processes  of  modeling,  selecting,  using  and  changing  meanings 
for collaborative purposes [4]. We will indeed discuss here some 
methodological issues related to ontology contextualization. 
The goal of this paper is to account for the way we attempted to 
contextualize 
the  ontologies  underlying  a  set  of  semantic 
knowledge  services  dedicated  to  communities  of  practice  [18]. 
The  ontologies  and  knowledge  services  design  project  are 
described 
analyze  our  ontology 
contextualization  attempts,  we  elaborated  a  framework  derived 
from  the  so-called  Ontology  Framework  jointly  developed by 
members  of  the  Ontology  Engineering  community  during  the 
Ontology Summit 2007 [13]. Both frameworks define a series of 
pragmatic  dimensions  of  ontologies.  These  frameworks  are 
presented in Section 3 and the results of the analysis are reported 
in Section 4. Because our framework did not cover all possible 
pragmatic dimensions, we studied several ways to complement the 
framework,  by  relying  on  existing  work  from  the  Ontology 

in  Section  2.  To 


in 

learning,  knowledge  and 

sustained  adaptive  Learning 

Engineering community in general, and from the Pragmatic Web 
community in particular. These ways are presented in Section 5. 
We  conclude  the  paper  by  inviting  the  Pragmatic  Web 
community  to  pursue  such  a  work  by  jointly  elaborating  a 
consensual Pragmatic Ontology Framework. 
2. THE DESIGN PROJECT TO BE 
ANALYZED PRAGMATICALLY 
2.1 Goal of the Project: Designing Semantic 
(Ontology-based) Knowledge Services 
The Semantic Knowledge Services project to be analyzed was part 
of  a  larger  European  project,  the  so-called  PALETTE  (for 
Pedagogically 
the 
exploitation  of  tacit  and  explicit  knowledge).    The  goal  of 
PALETTE was to elaborate, implement and promote the use of an 
extensible set of interoperable services that appropriately address 
the 
identity  building  needs  of 
communities of practice. Three kinds of services were considered: 
Information  Services,  Semantic  Knowledge  Services  and 
Mediation or Collaboration Services. Here we only consider the 
Semantic  Knowledge  Services  and  hence 
the  Semantic 
Knowledge Services subproject (hereafter project). 
As its name implies, the goal of the Semantic Knowledge Services 
project  was  to  design  knowledge  services  based  on  ontologies. 
The ontologies were aimed to allow the services to understand 
the content of the information/knowledge resources they exploit 
(e.g.,  documents)  and  to  consequently  provide  more  accurate 
filtering,  categorization,  indexing  (annotation)  and  searching  of 
the resources. 
2.2 Users:  Communities of Practice 
Seven Communities of Practice (CoPs) were the intended users of 
the Semantic Knowledge Services. They are: (1) TIC-EF and TIC-
FA,  two  CoPs  who  gather  learners  in  educational  sciences 
following  courses 
the  Information  and  Communication 
Technologies for Education (ICTE) domain; (2) Form@HETICE, 
a network of teachers of Higher Education interested in ICTE; (3) 
Learn-Nett, a network focused on training of trainers addressing 
university  learners  who  are  future  trainers  themselves;  (4) 
@pretic,  a  CoP  gathering  teachers  of  secondary  schools  whose 
role is to be a resource person in ICTE in their schools; (5) TFT 
(Transition Formation Travail), a CoP who gathers nurses in 
charge  of  welcoming  new  professionals  or  students  during 
practical work in the hospital; (6) CoPe-L (CoPe-Learning) CoP, 
a CoP who brings together researchers working for ICTE-related 
research,  training  or  marketing  projects;  and  (7)  ePrep,  a  CoP 
involving professors and students from preparatory classes for the 
French Grandes Ecoles (CPGE). 
During  the  design  project,  CoP  members  and  animators  were 
represented by CoP mediators.  (For details about the CoPs, see 
[10].) 
2.3 Designers 
The participants to the design of the semantic KM services and of 
their  underlying  ontologies  are  represented in Figure 1.  Service 
developers and Knowledge engineers (as Ontologists) approached 
the  design  mainly  from  the  services  side.  CoP  members  and 
animators approached the design mainly from the communities 
side.  CoP  mediators  and  Service  mediators  approached  the 
design  from  both  sides.  Note  that  CoP  mediators  were  mainly 

educational  technologists;  some  of  them  were  also  CoP 
animators. 

Figure 1.  Simplified map of the participants to the design. 

in 

the  services 

2.4 The Semantic Knowledge Services 
Designed 
Six Semantic Knowledge Services were designed for the CoPs. If 
we  categorize  these  services  in  terms  of  the  main  Knowledge 
function  they  held,  we  have:  (1)  a  Collaborative  Knowledge 
Creation  service:  SweetWiki;  (2)  a  Service  for  a  Faceted 
Classification  using  Bayesian  techniques:  BayFac;  (3)  a  Semiautomatic  Annotation  and  Semantic  Retrieval/Dissemination 
service:  SemanticFAQ;  (4)  a  Knowledge  Connection  Service: 
Link Widget; (5) a Knowledge Evaluation Service: Keces; and (6) 
a Knowledge Evolution Service: CoSWEM. 
terms  of  their  level  of 
If  we  categorize 
development,  we  have:  (1)  two  user-tested  and  deployed  tools: 
BayFac  and  SweetWiki; 
(2)  one  user-tested  prototype: 
SemanticFAQ; and (3) three research prototypes (not user tested): 
Keces, LinkWidget and CoSWEM. 
If we categorize the services in terms of their intended users, we 
have  Knowledge  services  for  end-users  on  the  one  hand,  and 
Knowledge services for developers in the other hand. Knowledge
services for end-users are the services that may be used as such in 
real  end-users  settings.  These  services  are  BayFac  and 
SweetWiki. Knowledge services for developers are either proofs 
of  concept  or  basic  software  that  can  be  used  by interested 
developers to implement user-oriented services. (For details about 
the services, see [3][10][14].)
2.4 The Ontologies Designed 
Two main kinds of ontologies were developed during the project: 
(1)  a  CoP-generic  ontology  called  OCoP,  and  (2)  seven  CoPspecific ontologies. 
The CoP-generic ontology OCoP allows describing a CoP with 
generic concepts. OCoP has been elaborated from an analysis of 
corpora  coming  from  the  CoPs  themselves.  The  analysis  was 
guided  by  generic  models  elaborated  at  the  beginning  of  the 
project.  OCoP  is  structured  in  three  layers  of  concepts  (see 
Figure 2). The main concepts of the higher levels of OCoP are 
the  concepts  of:  Actors, Community,  Collaboration,  Process, 
Competency,  Decision  making,  Learner  profile,  Resources,  and 
Tools. The specific layer of OCoP refers to concepts specific to 
real  CoPs: e.g., Tutor (as an  Actor), Training supervision (as a 
Process), Training system (as a Tool). 
The seven specific ontologies are: (1) O ICTE Ontology (specific 
to  the  TIC-EF  and  TIC-FA  CoPs);  (2)  DocHETICE  Ontology
(specific to the Form@HETICE CoP); (3) OLearn-Nett Ontology
(specific to the Learn-Nett CoP); (4) Technical Problems, Human 
Problems,  and  Learning  and  Training  Problems  Ontologies
(specific  to  the  @pretic  CoP);  (5)  Transition  Formation 


Resource Management Ontology (specific to the CoPe-L CoP); 
and (7) WikiPrepas ontology (specific to the ePreP CoP). (For 
details about the ontologies, see [10][17]). 

Figure 2. The 3 layers of concepts of the OCoP ontology [17] 
The  CoP-specific  ontologies  were  developed 
to 
instantiate the services selected by the CoPs for assisting them in 
performing their knowledge management tasks. For example, the 
Technical  Problems,  Human  Problems,  and  Learning  and 
Training Problems Ontologies were developed to instantiate the 
SemanticFAQ service (the @pretics motivation being to exploit 
the educational information contained in its mailing-list archives).  
3. AN INITIAL FRAMEWORK FOR 
ANALYZING THE PRAGMATIC 
DIMENSIONS OF ONTOLOGIES 
To account for the way we tried to contextualize the ontologies 
underlying  the  CoP-oriented  services,  we  have  elaborated  an 
analysis  framework  we  derived  from  the  so-called  Ontology 
Framework, a framework jointly elaborated by members of the 
Ontology  Engineering  community  during  the  Ontology  Summit 
2007 [13]. The motivation of these cooperating ontologists was to 
allow the Ontology Engineering community to compare between 
various  Knowledge  Organization  Systems (or  KOS,  such  as 
computational  ontologies,  thesaurus,  folksonomies,  etc.)  and  to 
distinguish  among  different  approaches  to  ontology  engineering 
[13]. Because the Ontology Framework described the pragmatic 
dimensions of ontologies, we agreed that providing evidence of 
our  attempts  to  contextualize  ontologies  could  be  considered 
equivalent to providing evidence that these pragmatic dimensions 
were taken into account during our ontology design project. 
3.1 Source: The Ontology Framework 
The  Ontology  Framework  is  schematized  in  Figure  3.  This 
framework provides key dimensions along which ontologies can 
be  characterized.  Two  groups  of  dimensions  are  distinguished: 
semantic  dimensions  and  pragmatic  dimensions.  Semantic 
dimensions refer to how an ontology specifies the meaning of its 
vocabulary; 
structure  and 
representational  granularity.  More  interesting  for  us,  pragmatic 
dimensions refer to the purpose and context in which the ontology 
is designed and used; they include: intended use, use of automated 
reasoning,  identifying  whether  the  ontology  is  prescriptive  or 
descriptive, the design methodology, and governance. Gruninger 
et al. [13] provided operational definitions of these dimensions. 
We have synthesized them in Table 1.  

include:  expressiveness, 

they 

in  order 

Figure 3. The Ontology Framework ( [13]) 
3.2 The Derived Analysis Framework 
Since our goal was not to compare KOS, but to determine if, and 
how, pragmatic dimensions of ontologies were taken into account 
during the design project, we have adapted the source framework 
to this goal. 
3.2.1 The derivation process and the derived 
framework 
From  the  Ontology  Framework,  we  took  the  three  pragmatic 
dimensions directly involving human actors or for which we had 
enough  data  to  analyze,  namely:  (1)  the  intended  use  of  the 
ontologies,  (2)  the  methodology used  to  design  the  ontologies, 
and (3) the governance of the decision process about the structure 
and the content of the ontologies. We also split the methodology 
dimension  into  three  parts:  (1)  Designers,  (2)  Methods  and  (3) 
Tools.  We  furthermore  added  a  new  dimension,  the  dimension 
Intended Users. By Intended Users, we mean the users of the 
ontologies and/or of the ontology-based services that the design 
project  participants  have  in  mind:  these  users  can  be  real, 
imagined, or not imagined at all (i.e., not considered). By adding 
the Intended Users dimension to the framework, our goal was to 
explicitly introduce a user modeling aspect in the analysis. User 
modeling  in  effect is a critical task in  any user-oriented system 
design worthy of the name. 
The derived framework is schematized in Table 2. 
3.2.2 The framework based analysis procedure 
The  derived  framework  served  to  analyze  different  documents 
(deliverables,  methodology  documents,  interview  transcriptions, 
etc.)  produced  all  along  the  ontologies  and  knowledge  systems 
design process, and reporting on this process. In these documents 
we  searched  items  of  information  related  to  the  different 
pragmatic dimensions. We sought to determine whether, when, by 
whom,  why,  and  how  these  dimensions  have  been  taken  into 
account. 
4. USE OF THE FRAMEWORK FOR 
ANALYZING THE DESIGN PROJECT 
ONTOLOGIES PRAGMATICALLY  
We now report some results of the pragmatic analysis performed 
using our analysis framework. Results are reported dimension by 
dimension. 


(Synthesized from [13]) 

Table 2. The pragmatic dimensions of ontologies revisited for 

the analysis  

35$*0$7,&',0(16,2162)2172/2*,(6
5HIHUWRWKHSXUSRVHDQGFRQWH[WLQZKLFKWKHRQWRORJ\LVGHVLJQHG
DQGXVHG









6KDULQJNQRZOHGJHEDVHV
(QDEOLQJFRPPXQLFDWLRQDPRQJ
VRIWZDUHDJHQWV
,QWHJUDWLRQRIGLVSDUDWHGDWDVHWV
5HSUHVHQWDWLRQRIQDWXUDOODQJXDJH
YRFDEXODU\
+HOSSURYLGHGNQRZOHGJHHQKDQFHG
VHDUFK

6,03/($8720$7('5($621,1*

HJPDNLQJLQIHUHQFHVXVLQJWKH
VXEFODVVUHODWLRQ

63(&,$/$8720$7('5($621,1*

HJFODVVLILFDWLRQDOUHDVRQLQJLQ
GHVFULSWLRQORJLFV

*(1(5$/$8720$7('5($621,1*

HJXVLQJWKHGHGXFWLYHUXOHV
FRPELQLQJLQIRUPDWLRQIURP
DFURVVWKHRQWRORJ\

'(6&5,37,9($3352$&+(6

35(6&5,37,9($3352$&+(6

,QZKLFKWKHFRQWHQWRIWKH
RQWRORJ\GHVFULEHVWKHLQWHQGHG
LQWHUSUHWDWLRQVE\FKDUDFWHUL]LQJ
WKHHQWLWLHVDQGUHODWLRQVDPRQJ
HQWLWLHVDVDXVHURUDQH[SHUW
PLJKWFKDUDFWHUL]HWKRVHREMHFWV

,QZKLFKWKHFRQWHQWSUHVFULEHV
WKHLQWHQGHGLQWHUSUHWDWLRQVE\
H[SOLFLWO\PDQGDWLQJWKHZD\WKDW
WKRVHHQWLWLHVDQGWKHLU
UHODWLRQVKLSVDUHFKDUDFWHUL]HG

6WURQJVRIWZDUHHQJLQHHULQJ
GHVLJQOLIHF\FOHZLWK
UHTXLUHPHQWVHYDOXDWLRQDQG
YHULILFDWLRQ

,QZKLFKIRONVRQRPLHVHPHUJH
IURPWKHORFDOEHKDYLRURI
WKRXVDQGVRILQGLYLGXDOXVHUV

(1*,1((5,1*'(6,*10(7+2'2/2*<

312'(6,*1 0(7+2'2/2*<

>&(175$/,=('*29(51$1&(@
*RYHUQDQFHE\H[LVWLQJOHJDOUHJXODWRU\
DQGSURIHVVLRQDORUJDQL]DWLRQ

>$872120286*29(51$1&(@
*RYHUQDQFHE\DXWRQRPRXVFRPSXWHU
VFLHQWLVWV

,QWHQGHGXVH
7KHLQWHQGHG
DSSOLFDWLRQRIWKH
RQWRORJ\

5ROHRIDXWRPDWHG
UHDVRQLQJ
7KHNLQGVRI
DXWRPDWHGUHDVRQLQJ
VXSSRUWHGLQVRIWZDUH
DSSOLFDWLRQVWKDWXVH
WKHRQWRORJ\

'HVFULSWLYHYV
SUHVFULSWLYH
7KHVRXUFHRIWKH
LQWHQGHG
LQWHUSUHWDWLRQVRIWKH
RQWRORJ\V
YRFDEXODU\

'HVLJQ
PHWKRGRORJ\

*RYHUQDQFH
+RZGHFLVLRQV
FRQFHUQLQJWKH
VWUXFWXUHDQG
HVSHFLDOO\FRQWHQWRI
DQRQWRORJ\DUH
PDGHLQFOXGLQJWKH
VSHFLILFDWLRQRITXDOLW\
FULWHULDDQG
FHUWLILFDWLRQ

35$*0$7,&',0(16,2162)2172/2*,(672%($1$/<=('

,QWHQGHGXVH

,QWHQGHGXVHUV

'HVLJQ
PHWKRGRORJ\
'HVLJQHUV

'HVLJQ
PHWKRGRORJ\
0HWKRGV

'HVLJQ
PHWKRGRORJ\
7RROV

*RYHUQDQFH























7KHLQWHQGHGXVHDSSOLFDWLRQRIWKH
RQWRORJ\
7KHLQWHQGHGXVHUVWDVNVWREH
VXSSRUWHGE\WKHRQWRORJ\
7KHLQWHQGHG.0VHUYLFHWREHEDVHG
RQWKHRQWRORJ\
7KHLQWHQGHGXVHUVRIWKHRQWRORJ\
LQGLYLGXDOVDQGJURXSVFRPPXQLWLHV
7KHLQWHQGHGXVHUVRIWKH.0
VHUYLFHVLQGLYLGXDOVDQG
JURXSVFRPPXQLWLHV
7KHLQGLYLGXDOVRUJURXSVFRPPXQLWLHV
FRQWULEXWLQJWRWKHGHVLJQRIWKH
RQWRORJ\DQGRURIWKHRQWRORJ\EDVHG
.0VHUYLFHV
7KHRQWRORJ\EXLOGLQJPHWKRGVPDGH
DYDLODEOHWRWKHGHVLJQHUV
7KHRQWRORJ\EXLOGLQJPHWKRGV
SURYLGHGE\WKHGHVLJQHUVWKHPVHOYHV
7KHWRROVPDGHDYDLODEOHWRWKH
GHVLJQHUV
7KHWRROVSURYLGHGE\WKHGHVLJQHUV
WKHPVHOYHV
5ROHRIXVHUVDQGXVHUUHSUHVHQWDWLYHV
LQWKHGHVLJQSURFHVVDQGLWV
JRYHUQDQFH

4.1 Analysis of the Design methodology 
dimension: General 
From  the  start,  the  partners  of  the  PALETTE  project  agreed  to 
adopt a participatory design approach, the well-known approach 
to design which actively involves stakeholders (esp. end users and 
representatives of end users) in the design process to ensure that 
the  system  will  meet  stakeholders  needs.  PALETTE  project 
partners  also  agreed  to  adopt  a  dual  perspective  on  design:  the 
design-for-use  and  design-in-use  perspective  (see,  e.g.,  Folcher, 
2003). Design-for-use refers to the design activities of the design 
team  as  guided  by  the  future  use  of  the  system.  Design-in-use
refers to the idea that design continues during use through users 
further adaptations of the system. 
Adopting 
these  strongly  usage-based  approach  and  dual 
perspective may suggest that we addressed ontologies and services 
design issues with a rather systematic pragmatic manner. It was 
not so obvious, as we shall see now. 
4.2 Analysis of the Design methodology 
dimension: (1) Designers 
Participants  to  the  design  of  ontologies  and  services  have  been 
presented in Section 2.3 and Figure 1. As spokesmen of users and 
uses,  CoP  mediators  have  played  an  important  role  in  the 
consideration of pragmatic dimensions of ontologies.


dimension: (2) Methods 
The  involvement  of  CoP  representatives  and  members  in  the 
construction of the CoP-specific ontologies has led developers to 
become more aware of the necessity for CoP representatives and 
members  to  have  methods  and  tools  practical  to  them,  and  to 
understand the inputs and outputs (esp. ontology representations) 
of the service developers methods and tools. 
Self-made  methods.   CoP  representatives  often  defined  their 
own method to build the specific ontologies; they did not use 
as such the method initially proposed by knowledge engineers 
to build the CoP-generic ontology. 

Light methods. The methods self-made by CoP representatives 

were also light and not very technical. 

Use-directed methods. The methods were strongly guided by 
the intended use and application. Sometimes the ontology was 
intentionally  hidden  to  the  users  in  the  application  so  that 
users did not directly validate the ontology but the ontologybased interface. 

tools 

such  as 

4.4 Analysis of the Design methodology 
dimension: (3) Tools 
Usability of the tools.  CoP representatives were provided with 
ontology  construction 
the  SweetWiki 
ontology/folksonomy editor (see [3]), the ECCO collaborative 
ontology editor (see [9] and Figure 4), the SemanticFAQ term 
extractor  (see  [14]).  These 
tools  have  not  been  used 
intensively  because  they  have  been  perceived  as difficult to 
use  (e.g.,  no  drag-and-drop  function  to  achieve  in  a  simple 
way a hierarchical organization, no graphical representation of 
to 
that, 
the  concepts).  Note 
into  account  CoP 
the  SweetWiki  developers 
representatives  requirements 
designed  a  new  and  more  user-friendly  version  of  the 
SweetWiki editor (including, e.g., the drag-and-drop facility). 

take 

Figure 4. Actual use of the ECCO collaborative ontology 
editor (during the Extracting-candidate-terms phase) 

Familiarity  of  tools. CoP  representatives  and  members  fell 
back  on  less  specialized  tools,  and  more  practical  to  them. 
They  used  graphical  tools  such  as  FreeMind,  CMap  (see 
Figure 5), MindMap and Visio, to help them structure tags or 
keywords as concept maps. They used also familiar tools like 
spreadsheets and text processors for preliminary term sorting. 

They  even  used  hard  tools  like  physical  (non  interactive) 
white boards (see Figure 6) with colour markers, or post-its 
stuck on the white boards. It must be noted however that some 
CoP  representatives  and  members  used  the  user-friendly 
tagging facility of SweetWiki to elicit terms to be included in 
the ontology. 

Legend : New concepts in Red ; Existing concepts in Blue ; New 

link in Orange ; Concept Links in Grey. 

Figure 5. Actual use of  CMap Tools by CoP representatives 

for enriching the Decision Making set of concepts and 

relations of the OCoP ontology  

Interoperability  of  tools:  Converters. To  allow  them  using 
their  preferred  tools,  both  CoP  representatives  and  Service 
developers required and/or developed converters or translators 
of  the  inputs/outputs  of  their  corresponding  tools.  For 
example,  to  make  formal  (e.g.  RDFS)  representations  of 
ontologies legible to CoP representatives, developers provided 
them with a CMap-RDFS converter. 

Figure 6. Actual use of the physical (non interactive) 
whiteboard by CoP members and representatives for 

elaborating the @pretic 'Learning and Teaching' Ontology 

4.5 Analysis of the Intended use and 
Intended users dimensions 
The  involvement  of  CoP  representatives  and  members  in  the 
construction of the CoP-specific ontologies has led developers to 
become more aware of the importance of being clear and to agree 
on the intended use of the ontologies. For CoPs representatives 
and members in effect, the ontology was not an object that was 
sufficient by itself. They did not seek to build the ontology for the 
ontologys sake, but for a given use. Not any use however. For 
example: 


members    did  not  precisely  see  what  can  be  done  with 
ontologies,  they  asked  to  be  told  how  the  ontologies  could 
help 
the  ontologies  goal  was  not  concretely 
expressed,  debates  about  ontologies  were  endless,  and  the 
ontologies  were  neglected  or  deeply  modified  when  a  clear 
and shared goal was found.  

them.  If 

Generic  use  vs.  specific  use.  Initially,  it  was  clear  that 
ontologies would be used in Knowledge services to assist CoP 
members in searching and indexing information. But this goal 
was formulated at a level too general to talk to people; it was 
too  general  also  for  Knowledge  service  developers  to  not 
forget  that  the  ontology  must  correspond  to  a  goal.  The 
identification  of  a  specific  use  allowed  CoPs  members  or 
representatives  to  decide  whether  or  not  to  engage  in  the 
construction of ontologies. 

Service-independent use vs. service-dependent use. For several 
CoP representatives, it was quickly obvious that the goal was 
to  build  CoP-specific  ontologies  to  run  some  specific 
Knowledge service. So the construction of several ontologies 
was strongly guided by the specific service to be developed. 
The  CoP-specific  ontologies  hence  became  CoP-and-
Service-specific ontologies. 

Understandable  use  vs.  acceptable  use.    The  CoPs 
representatives  (resp.  members)  can  quite  understand  an 
intended  use  proposed  by  developers 
(resp.  CoPs 
representatives), but they may not accept this use because it 
did not match their needs.  

Intended  use  and  Intended  users.    An  important  pragmatic 
aspect  related  to  the  intended  use  is  the  intended  users 
aspect. It is indeed crucial to identify not only uses, but also 
the users who bring these uses. When the actual users were 
not clearly identified, it was difficult to target the critical uses. 
4.6 Analysis of the Governance dimension 
The  involvement  of  CoP  representatives  and  members  in  the 
construction  of  the  CoP-specific  ontologies  has  led  knowledge 
developers and engineers to become more aware of the necessity 
to concede some power to CoP representatives and members, to 
allow them to contribute to the governance of the ontology design 
process. To be exact, it must be added that CoP representatives 
(esp. CoP mediators) became also aware of the necessity to give 
some power to the CoP members themselves: 
Governance by service developers and knowledge engineers. 
In  PALETTE,  the  construction  of  ontologies  was  first 
governed and performed by Knowledge engineers. Knowledge 
engineers  decided  on  the  method  to  be  used  to  build  the 
OCoP  ontology.  Developers  decided  on  the  grids  for
analysing 
textual  sources  and  identifying  the 
candidate  terms.  During  the  construction  of  OCoP,  CoP 
representatives  and  members  were  only  providers  of  the 
textual sources or they were, at best, validators of the lexicons 
and hierarchies of the ontology. They were not co-designers of 
the ontology. 

the  CoP 

Governance  by  CoP  representatives  (esp.  CoP  mediators). 
CoP  representatives  (esp.  CoP  mediators)  exercised  more 
governance during the design of CoP-specific ontologies, e.g.: 
they  motivated  CoP  members 
in  ontology 
construction,  they  decided  on  the  intended  use  of  the 
ontology, or on the method and tools to be used to build the 

to  engage 

ontology.  For  designing  some  ontologies,  they  collaborated 
with Knowledge engineers. For some others, they performed 
themselves  the  construction.  CoP  representatives  ensured 
some  governance  in  the  validation  tasks.  If,  at  the  very 
beginning, CoP representatives performed the validation tasks 
planned by the Knowledge engineers (validation of the OCoP 
lexicons and hierarchies), they later on initiated not planned 
validations, e.g. the validation of the corpora used to construct 
the OCoP  lexicons: noticing that the initial corpora mainly 
included concepts related to the CoPs organization, and few 
concepts related to the CoPs practices, they proposed to use 
corpora containing more practice-related terms. CoP members 
in 
the  CoP
representatives. 

this  case  were  at  best 

the  assistants  of 

Governance by CoP members. During the construction of the 
CoP-specific  ontologies,  CoP  representatives  acted  with  the 
CoP  members  as  the  service  developers  acted  with  them 
during  the  construction  of  OCoP:  they  first  elaborated  the 
ontology  alone  and  asked  CoP  members  to  validate  it. 
However,  when  CoP  members  did  not  find  the  ontology
appropriate,  they  imposed  their  viewpoint  and  modified  the 
ontology,  and  sometimes  initiated  the  construction  of  a 
completely different ontology. 

Governance  alternance  vs.  Co-governance.  Besides  these 
different situations of alternances of governance between the 
different  design  participants,  we  sometimes  observed 
situations of co-governance. 

5. TOWARDS A COMPLEMENTED 
FRAMEWORK  
5.1 Why and How to Complement the 
Framework? 
The framework we have proposed is not complete indeed. It does 
not include all the possible pragmatic dimensions. First, it does 
not  include  all  the  pragmatic  dimensions  initially  proposed  by 
Gruninger  et  al.,  namely:  Role  of  Automated  Reasoning,  and 
Prescriptiveness  or  Descriptiveness  of  the  Ontology.  Second,  it 
does  not  include  other  pragmatic  dimensions  reported  in  the 
literature addressing pragmatical issues, either the literature from 
the  Ontology  Engineering  community  in  general  or  from  the 
Pragmatic Web community in particular. In short, the framework 
would need to be completed. By way of illustration, we describe 
below  some  of  the  literature  sources  that  could  be  used  to 
complement  the  framework.  From  these  sources,  we  extracted 
candidate  elements  for  complementing  the  framework.  These 
elements are synthesized in Table 3. 
5.2 Examples of Sources of Extension and of 
Candidate Complements to the Framework 
The authors quoted below are authors having explicitly adopted a 
pragmatic  approach  to  ontology  design,  i.e.,  authors  either 
referring  explicitly 
linguistic  or 
philosophical sense or in the ordinary sense of concerned with 
actual  use  or  practice  or  practical)  or  claiming  great 
consideration of the ontology uses or applications without using 
the terms pragmatics or pragmatic. So we can say that these 
authors provided us with candidate pragmatic dimensions. 
5.2.1 De Moors Pragmatic Dimensions 
De Moor [4][6] put ontologies into context through pragmatic 
patterns 
in  particular.  Pragmatic  patterns  are  template 

to  pragmatics 

the 

(in 


to  accomplish  some  objectives.  Its 

definitions that can be used as the basis of conceptual definitions 
used  in  meaning  negotiation  and  other  meaning  evolution 
process. So doing, de Moor introduced some contextual elements 
(e.g.,  the  community  of  use,  its  objectives  and  communicative 
interactions)  that  can  be  referred  to  as  pragmatic  dimensions. 
More generally, de Moor introduced three kinds of contexts that 
could  be  incorporated  into  the  framework:  (a)  the  pragmatic 
context  of  semantic  resourceswhich  consists  of:  common 
context  and  a  set  of  individual  contexts;  (b)  the  common 
contextdefined  by  the  common  concepts  and  conceptual 
definitions  of  interest  to  a  community,  the  communicative 
interactions in which these concepts are defined and used, and a 
set  of  common  context  parameters  (relevant  properties  of 
concepts,  joint  goals,  communicative situation, and so on); (c) 
the  individual  context which  belongs  to  each  community 
member  and  consists  of  individual  concepts  and definitions of 
interest and individual context parameters. 
5.2.2 Grubers Pragmatic Dimensions 
Thomas Gruber [11][12], the researcher who popularized in 1991 
the  term  ontology  in  Computer  Science,  also  took,  ten  years 
after, a pragmatic perspective on ontologies. He emphasized the 
importance of taking into account the pragmatics of ontology by 
claiming  that  Ontologies  are  what  they  do:  artifacts  to  help 
people and their programs communicate, coordinate, collaborate. 
Gruber  also  used  the  notions  of  context  and  purpose  (or 
objective),  e.g.:  Ontologies  are  agreements,  made  in  a  social 
context, 
to 
understand those objectives, and be guided by them. Moreover, 
Gruber  introduced  the notions of  ontology as contract and of 
parties  to  the  contract.  For  example  a  contract  can  link 
Scientists  and  AI  programs  (parties)  to  represent  theories 
(purpose or objective). 
5.2.3 Dividino et al.s Pragmatic Dimensions 
Considering  that  an  ontology  is  a  semiotic  object,  Dividino, 
Romanelli  and  Sonntag  [7]the  authors  of  S-OntoEval  (a 
Semiotic-based Ontology Evaluation Tool)identified three main 
types of semiotic ontology evaluation levels, the third one being 
the usability-related level which allow to assess the ontology 
pragmatics,  i.e.  the  pragmatic  aspects  of  ontology  quality. 
Dividino et al.s Pragmatic Evaluation is seen as an evaluation 
of  a  usability  profile:  Usability profiling measures focus on the 
ontology profile. An ontology profile is a set of annotations about 
the  ontology  and  its  elements.  Measures  of  an  ontology  profile 
address  the  communication  context  (i.e.,  its  pragmatics)  of  an 
ontology  with 
the  user.  Three  main  kinds  of  Usability 
Annotations are distinguished: (1) Deployment: Author, Version, 
Compatibility,  Organization,  Content  Annotation; 
(2) 
Commercial:  Price,  License,  Disclaimer;  (3)  History:  Reviews. 
These  Usability  Annotations,  and  more  generally  the  Pragmatic 
Evaluation method, can be considered as candidate complements 
to the framework. 
5.2.4 Aussenac et al. Pragmatic Dimensions 
Based  on  several  case  studies  related  to  the  construction  of 
Terminological Ontological Resources (or TOR)1 from texts in 
different  domains 
(e.g.,  car  diagnosis),  Aussenac-Gilles, 
Condamines  and  Szulman  [2]  showed  that  the  TOR  modeling 
process  involves  taking  into  account  the  nature  of  the  targeted 

1 Another expression for Knowledge Organization Systems. 

domain, task and application. The notion of application refers 
to the consideration of user needs and of TOR objectives within 
the TOR-based system to be developed. The notion of task (in 
the CommonKADS sense) refers to the goals to be achieved by 
system  and  problem  solving  methods.  The  notion  of  domain 
refers to the sphere of knowledge to be modeled. 

Table 3.  Candidate Complements to the Framework 

6RXUFHVc De Moor (2005) ;  dGruber (2003); e Dividino et al. 
(2008) ; fAussenac et al. (2002) ; gAkkermans (2008). 

35$*0$7,&',0(16,2162)2172/2*,(672%(&216,'(5('

&RQWH[WDVDJOREDO
HQWLW\

,QWHQGHGXVH

,QWHQGHGXVHUV

'HVLJQ
PHWKRGRORJ\
0HWKRGV

'HVLJQ
PHWKRGRORJ\
7RROV

*RYHUQDQFH

3UDJPDWLF&RQWH[Wc

 3UDJPDWLF:HE DVHWRI3UDJPDWLF

FRQWH[WV

 3UDJPDWLFFRQWH[W D&RPPRQ

&RQWH[WDVHWRI,QGLYLGXDOFRQWH[WV

6RFLDO&RQWH[Wd
&RPPXQLFDWLRQ&RQWH[We
,QWHQGHG2EMHFWLYHV3XUSRVHV*RDOV

 3XUSRVHV_2EMHFWLYHVRI2QWRORJLHV
HJ5HSUHVHQWLQJWKHRULHV_+XPDQ
FRPPXQLFDWLRQ_d

 &RPPXQLWLHVREMHFWLYHVc
 *RDOV_3UDFWLFDOSXUSRVHVg

7DUJHWHG$SSOLFDWLRQVf

 8VHU1HHGV
 .QRZOHGJH2UJDQL]DWLRQ6\VWHP

REMHFWLYHV

7DUJHWHG7DVNVfg

 *RDOV
 SUREOHPVROYLQJ0HWKRGV

7DUJHWHG'RPDLQVf
,QWHUDFWLRQV

LQWHUDFWLRQVc
$FWRUV_$JHQWVg

 &RPPXQLW\VFRPPXQLFDWLYH

 (J8VHUV_&XVWRPHUV

,QGLYLGXDOYV*URXSV

 (J&RPPXQLWLHVRIXVHc
 3DUWLHVWRDFRQWUDFWd

5HDOYV,PDJLQHGYV1RWLPDJLQHG8VHUV
 'HWHUPLQHVWRZKDWH[WHQWDFWXDO

XVHUVLQWHQWLRQVDUHWDNHQLQWR
DFFRXQWVHH,QWHQGHGXVH
0HDQLQJQHJRWLDWLRQDQGHYROXWLRQ
>SURFHGXUHV@c

 0HDQLQJDOLJQPHQW

$JUHHPHQW>SURFHGXUHV@d
3UDJPDWLFHYDOXDWLRQe

 8VDELOLW\SURILOLQJ_RQWRORJ\SURILOH_

XVDELOLW\DQQRWDWLRQV

3UDJPDWLFSDWWHUQVc

 3UDJPDWLFFRQWH[WSDWWHUQ_,QGLYLGXDO

FRQWH[WSDWWHUQ_&RPPRQFRQWH[W
SDWWHUQ

62QWR(YDOe
2QWRORJ\DVFRQWUDFWd
3DUWLHVWRWKHFRQWUDFWd

 HJ6FLHQWLVWVDQG$,SURJUDPV_


this 

author 

sense.  To 

5.2.5 Akkermans Pragmatic Dimensions 
Akkermans [1] suggested that for further progress the ontology 
field is to move from a semantic to a pragmatic approach in the 
communication-theoretic 
indeed, 
ontologies  are  formal  conceptualization(s) not made lart  pour 
lart, but to help achieve a goal or task by an actor. Ontologies 
serve practical purposes of action by someone or something in 
that world. We cannot detach knowledge from action. Task and 
actor  characteristics  are  key  parts  of  operational  context 
definition.    As  a  consequence  of  this  clearly  pragmatic,  useoriented  view  of  ontologies,  Akkermans  proposed  to  stop  the 
tendency  to  overlook  such  CommonKADS historical notions as 
task  templates,  strategy  patterns,  or  problem-solving  methods 
(e.g., Propose-Critique-Modify). Akkermans notions of practical 
purposes, actors or agents, problem-solving methods, and 
so  on,  can  be  considered  as  candidate  complements  to  the 
framework. 
6. CONCLUSION 
The goal of this paper was to account for the way we attempted to 
contextualize 
the  ontologies  underlying  a  set  of  semantic 
knowledge  services  aimed  at  communities  of  practice.  We 
reported the framework we elaborated to make such an account. 
Because  this  framework  did  not  cover  all  possible  pragmatic 
dimensions, we proposed to complement it, by relying on existing 
work from the Ontology Engineering community in general, and 
from the Pragmatic Web community in particular. 
This complementing work needs to be pursued. Our initiative to 
develop a framework of pragmatic dimensions of ontologies was 
restricted to the authors of this paper and reflected these authors 
point of view only. In order to integrate more points of view, we 
would  like  to  invite  the  Pragmatic  Web  community  to  jointly 
elaborate a consensual Pragmatic Ontology Framework. A way 
to initiate such a joint work can be to organize a scientific event 
similar to the Ontology Summit 2007. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The current  work was partially funded by the European Project 
FP6-028038  PALETTE.  The  authors  thank  all  the  Palette 
participants  who  contributed  to  the  design  and  evaluation  of 
