ArsEmotica: Emotions in the Social Semantic Web

Matteo Baldoni

Dipartimento di Informatica

Universita degli Studi di Torino

baldoni@di.unito.it

Cristina Baroglio

Dipartimento di Informatica

Universita degli Studi di Torino

baroglio@di.unito.it

Viviana Patti

Dipartimento di Informatica

Universita degli Studi di Torino

patti@di.unito.it

Paolo Rena

Dipartimento di Informatica

Universita degli Studi di Torino
paolo.rena@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
This work presents ArsEmotica, an application software that
aims at extracting a rich emotional semantics (i.e. not limited to a positive or a negative reception) of tagged resources.
We worked on a subset of artworks supplied by the art portal ArsMeteo, and focussed the sentiment analysis on the
collections of tags related to artworks. Our approach exploits and combines multilingual lexicons (MultiWordNet),
affective, and sentiment lexicons (WordNet-Affect, Senti-
WordNet) with an ontology of emotional categories (OntoE-
motion), enriched with over four hundred Italian emotional
words referring to the about eighty-five concepts of the on-
tology. ArsEmotica uses the ontology to identify tags directly referring to emotions, while potentially affective tags
can be emotionally annotated by the user, in a pure Web
2.0 approach. From all these different information sources,
ArsEmotica ranks the emotions related to the artworks.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4.m [Information Systems Applications]: Miscella-
neous; J.5 [Computer Applications]: Arts and Humani-
ties

General Terms
Human Factors

Keywords
Semantic web, folksonomies, ontologies, emotions

1.

INTRODUCTION

Social networks and platforms promote the participation
of users in many ways, stimulating the expression of opinions
about the contents inserted by other users, by Like/Dislike
annotations, star-rating systems, tag-based annotation and

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
I-SEMANTICS 2011, 7th Int. Conf. on Semantic Systems, Sept. 7-9, 2011,
Graz, Austria 2011 Graz Austria
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0621-8 ...$10.00.

navigation, and so forth. This huge amount of data is a
precious information source about perceptions, trends, and
feelings, and a lot of research is being carried on to identify ways for extracting meaningful information from these
data.
In this context, one emerging research field is Affective Computing, aimed at automatically recognizing the
users emotions by analyzing their behavior. Since emotions
are often related to appreciation, the feeling of users are an
important feedback that can support decisional tasks. Such
techniques, however, return very simple feedbacks, i.e. the
appreciation of a society of users given in terms of positive
and negative reception.

This work faces a more complex task: the identification
of the prevalent emotions associated by the users of a Social
Network to tagged resources. The output we aim at supplying is not merely a general appreciation but rather amounts
to a set of specific concepts, that emerge as the most significant in capturing the emotions of the users towards the
resource at issue, each enriched with a score expressing the
strength of that emotion. Thus, we propose an approach to
sentiment analysis which presents two main novelties. First,
the extraction of the emotional content from text is driven
by an ontology of emotional categories where emotions are
structured in a taxonomy, resulting in something richer than
a polarized appreciation. Second, we focus on very essential
form of textual resources: collections of tags. In many ap-
plications, users use tags to supply concise reviews. In these
cases, it is therefore possible to leave aside the complications due to text analysis (often aimed at identifying the
key words inside text) and focus on the emotional analysis.
This happens mainly for artistic domains, where resources
represent artworks, movies, books. Moreover, for languages
like Italian, for which there are few affective lexical resources
that are freely available for the development of new application softwares, tags can be the only processable information
source that can be used.

Of course, not all tags have an affective value. To identify
those bearing an emotional content, we integrated various
Semantic Web and NLP tools. Specifically: multi-lingual
and Italian computational lexicons [9] and affective lexicons
(WordNet-Affect [13] and SentiWordNet [2]) with the aim
of identifying (i) words that directly refer to emotional concepts (e.g. paura, fear), (ii) words that indirectly deliver an
emotional content (e.g.
infinito, infinite). After this anal-
ysis, it is possible to apply algorithms to identify and rank
the emotions related to the tagged resources. The algorithm

171that we have implemented reasons on the ontology structure
and is inspired by the one described in [6].

2. BACKGROUND

The research, that we have been carrying on, strictly embraces or is in some way related to different technologies
and topics, including the Social Semantic Web, computational lexicons (MultiWordNet [9], WordNetAffect [13], SentiWordNet [2]), studies on emotions in social, psychological,
and computational contexts, and Sentiment Analysis. Let
us briefly overview the background. One of the key problems in the Web is how to index resources so as to efficiently
and effectively retrieve them. Ontologies and folksonomies
are two ways for indexing resources: the former are to be
designed by knowledge engineers, while the latter are spontaneously produced by the tagging activity of the members
of a community. There are many attempts to reconcile folksonomies with ontologies [4, 3], for instance by inducing ontologies from folksonomies or by matching terms. The reason is that the Social Web aims at combining the ease of
use, typical of its platforms, with the advantages deriving
from a formal semantics, i.e.
interoperability, data/service
integration, personalization, better recommendations [12].

In this context, the identification of the feelings of a community or of its single members is receiving an increasing
attention, as an indicator of the appraisal of topics, peo-
ple, situations, resources, trends. Hence the development of
opinion Mining [7], of ontologies of emotions and of W3C
markup language proposals like Emotion ML [10, 11]. How-
ever, there are still few applications that use the most advanced results in Semantic Web technology to deal with emo-
tions. Moreover, most of the approaches use emotional ontologies where emotions are individual isolated units (e.g.
WordAffect). Such considerations motivated our focus on
the ontology of emotions in [5], an OWL ontology where
emotions are structured and organized in levels, trying to
integrate the results of the most recent psychological mod-
els. OntoEmotion provided a very useful starting point for
our aim of relating emotions to tags. The study of emotions
is particularly relevant in artistic domains where it is a common experience for users to share the feelings kindled by an
artwork with friends. As a consequence, a software which,
starting from tags freely associated to resources, can extract
a rich emotional semantics, has many possible and interesting applications. For instance, by creating new, emotiondriven navigations of the items shown by on-line museum
portals, or by creating apps for portable devices, on top
of which creating new ways of participating to art exhibi-
tions. Most of current portals allow users to express their
appreciation on artworks by means of star-rating systems.
Our ontology-driven approach could provide users with new
means for expressing and sharing emotions stirred by art-
works.

3. ARSEMOTICA

This section describes ArsEmotica, the application we developed to identify the emotions stirred by a resource. A
pre-processing phase filters tags so as to eliminate flaws like
spelling mistakes, badly accented characters, and so forth.
Figure 1 reports the three main steps that characterize the
computation after the pre-processing:
Step 1: Checking tags against the ontology of emo-

Figure 1: Overall architecture.

It amounts to check whether a tag belongs to the

tions.
ontology of emotions.
Step 2: Checking tags with SentiWordNet. Tags
that do not correspond to terms in the ontology are further
analysed by means of SentiWordNet, to distinguish objective tags, which do not bear an emotional meaning, from
subjective and, therefore, affective tags. The latter will be
presented to the user to get a feedback on which emotional
concept they deliver.
Step 3: Ranking of Prevalent Emotions. Based on
data collected in the previous steps, the tool ranks the emotions associated by the users to the resource.

The following sections explain how the extraction of the

emotional semantics is performed trough the three steps.
3.1 The ontology of emotions

The first step of ArsEmotica checks if tags are emotiondenoting words, directly referring to some concepts of an
ontology of emotions. We started from OntoEmotion, an
emotional ontology [5] developed at Univesidad Complutense
de Madrid. The ontology is written in OWL and structures
emotional categories in a taxonomy which contains 87 emotional concepts, including basic emotions (Sadness, Happi-
ness, Surprise, Fear and Anger ) as well as more specific emotional categories. The taxonomic structure basically refers
to the psychological model by Parrot [8], adapted to these
five basic emotions, and integrated with all the emotions
which appear in other well-established models. In particu-
lar, under each basic emotion we have a number of levels
which may vary.

OntoEmotion was conceived for categorizing emotion-de-
noting words. So each class was populated by instances,
consisting in words from different languages. The ontology
has two root concepts: Emotion and Word. Emotion is the
root for all the emotional concepts. Word is the root for the
emotion-denoting words, and originally had two subclasses:
EnglishWord and SpanishWord populated with about 250
words.
Intuitively, concepts Emotion hierarchy represent
language-independent emotions corresponding to common
experiences in life. Instances in the ontology represent the
words provided by specific languages for referring to emo-
tions, For example, the word rage is both an instance of the
concept Fury, and an instance of the concept EnglishWord,
which means that rage is an English word for denoting fury.
Since the tags used by the ArsMeteo community (our case

172study) are mainly Italian words, we enhanced the ontology
by adding a new subclass ItalianWord to Word. Our approach for semi-automatically populating the ontology with
Italian emotion-denoting words relies on the use of the multilingual lexical database MultiWordNet, in which the Italian
WordNet is strictly aligned with Princeton WordNet 1.6.,
and its affective domain WordNet-Affect, a well-used lexical resource that contains information about the emotion
that the words convey. The identified terms were checked
by human experts of the Italian language.

WordNet is a lexical database, in which nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs (lemmas) are organized into sets of
synonyms (synsets), representing lexical concepts. After
choosing one representative Italian word for each emotional
concept in the ontology, we used it as an entry lemma for
querying the lexical database. The query returns the word
synsets, representing the senses of that word, and are labeled
by unique identifiers. Each synset is then processed by using
WordNet-Affect. When a synset bears affective information,
all the synonyms belonging to that synset are imported in
the ontology as Italian emotion-denoting words. This allows us to automatically enrich the ontology with many synonyms of the representative words, and to filter out synsets
which not convey affective information. The resulting ontology contains more than 450 Italian words referring to the
87 emotional categories of OntoEmotion. ArsEmotica uses
the ontology during the Emotional analysis for checking if a
given tag denotes some emotional category. If yes, the tag
is immediately classified as emotional. The information
collected during this phase is stored in a DB table as a set
of triples (t, e, s), meaning that tag t is related to emotion
e with a strength value s  [0, 100]. When a tag is emo-
tional, the strength will be 100. So, for example, since the
word affanno (breathlessness) is an instance of anxiety,
the corresponding triple will be: (affanno, Ansia, 100).

3.2 Sentiment analysis and User feedback

Tags can convey affective meaning also indirectly. As observed in [14], some words can be emotional for someone due
to her individual story. In other cases the affective power
is part of the collective imagination (e.g. words like war).
As a consequence, it seems appropriate to involve the community in the definition of such indirect affective meanings.
ArsEmotica enables users to give their personal opinion on
the emotional meaning of tags which have not been recognized as directly referring to an emotional category.

When the set of tags to consider is too large (as in Ar-
smeteo, where the average number of tags for each artworks
is over than ten), the activity of evaluating them can bore
the users. Thus, we pre-process them and select the most
promising ones by using SentiWordNet 3.0, a lexical resource
for opinion mining where each synset of Princeton WordNet
3.0 is associated three numerical scores P os(s), N eg(s) and
Obj(s) which indicate how neutral (Obj) or affective (P os
and N eg, in a positive and negative sense respectively) the
synset is. Each score ranges in interval [0, 1]. Their sum is
1 for each synset.

Sentiment analysis on tags is performed on each tag that
does not belong to the ontology of emotions, by the steps
sketched in Figure 2 . Since SentiWordNet was created for
English, we use MultiWordNet to align the Italian lemma
corresponding to the tag to the English lemma. Moreover
since SentiWordNet annotates version 3.0 of Princeton Word-

Figure 2: Steps of the sentiment analysis on tags.

infinite, infinitive and inexhaustible.

Net while MultiWordNet is based on 1.6, we query such
newer lexical database for English to reach the synsets for
the words sentimentally analyzed by SentiWordNet and retrieve the affective power of the tag-word. As an exam-
ple, consider the Italian tag infinito. MultiWordNet returns
many synsets, having different corresponding English lem-
mas:
If we use
these English words for querying WordNet 3.0, we obtain
the list of all of their meanings. Now, we can query SentiWordNet and get the results of the sentiment analysis, which
are stored in a database:
(00028651), Pos(s): 0, Neg(s): 0;
(01007354), Pos(s): 0.125, Neg(s): 0.5;
(01008745), Pos(s): 0, Neg(s): 0;
(00301951), Pos(s): 0, Neg(s): 0;
(00005718), Pos(s): 0.25, Neg(s): 0.375;
(01008289), Pos(s): 0.375, Neg(s): 0.25;

The objectivity of a word is simply measured as: 1 
(P os(s) + N eg(s)). It returns values in the interval [0, 1],
1 meaning the term is objective, 0 that it conveys some
strong sentimental (positive or negative) meaning. Different
senses of the same term can have different opinion-related
properties and scores. Only when for no sense of the term
has a relevant score, we conclude that it is probably mainly
descriptive. When at least one meaning of the term has a
relevant sentimental score, we can suppose that it will stir
some emotion, thus we will offer the word to the users of the
community for an evaluation. For instance, since infinito
has a relevant sentimental score for some of its senses, it is
proposed to the users for the sentimental evaluation.

For all tags resulting potentially affective, like infinito, the
user will be free to indicate one or more emotions from the
emotional categories of the ontology with a strength value
which intuitively represents the users measure for the semantic affinity of the term with the chosen emotional cate-
gory. Again, a set of triples (t, e, s) is collected.
3.3 Getting the most relevant emotions

Once the analysis of the tags associated to a resource is
finished, it is possible to rank the emotions associated by the
users to the resource and to compute the prevalent emotion.
The implemented algorithm relies on the taxonomic structure of the ontology and is inspired by the one described in
[6], where was used to emotionally mark up a sentence by relying upon the emotions assigned to the words that compose
it. Intuitively, the algorithm allows to select the most specific

173emotion which represents the affective information related
to the artwork from the probability (score) that each of its
tag has of indicating different emotions. The basic steps
are: (1) processing the emotional concepts appearing in the
triples (t, e, s), so as to identify also those emotions in the
ontology that are related of the ones appearing in the triples.
The identified emotional concepts can be organized into layers by following the parent-child relationship (in this phase
a Jena Reasoner has been applied to the collected triples)
(2) starting from the leaves and moving upward towards the
root, compose and propagate the scores.
3.4 Case Study

The developed prototype was tested against a corpus of
tagged multimedia artworks, from the web platform ArsMeteo (http://www.arsmeteo.org [1]). 47 sample artworks and
of 842 tags were analysed (see http://www.giorgiovaccarino.
it/mostre/emozioni.html). To this aim, we designed a simple interface: the user chooses an artwork from a menu;
button tag lists on the right of the artworks preview all the
tags associated to it by the ArsMeteo community; by pressing in sequence the other buttons it is possible to perform
the analysis. Tag to Emo controls which tags belong to the
ontology, storing the corresponding triples. ArsEmotica visualize below the artworks preview the affective tags and the
emotions they refer to, Figure 3. For instance, by applying
the emotional analysis to the ArsMeteo artwork Bianca e il
suo contrario, four tags are identified as emotion-denoting
words. In particular the tag bene (good) refers to emotion
Love, while tristezza (sadness) refers to Sadness and
Gloom. By pressing Tag to Senti all the objective tags
will be discarded. By the last button the emotional engine

Figure 3: Emotion-denoting tags for an artwork

can be activated to rank the emotions of the analyzed art-
work. By applying the emotional analysis only we obtained
the emotional meaning of 14 images out of 47.

4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a software solution that, by combining state
of the art lexicons and libraries, allows both the population of an ontology of emotions with Italian emotion-bearing
terms and the extraction of the prevalent emotions from the
set of tags associated to a resource. The extracted information is richer than a polarized appreciation.

Given appropriate NLP tools, its use could be extended
also capturing the latent emotions behind textual comments.
Validating our approach with real users of the ArsMeteo

community will be part of the future work. One of the challenges is to motivate users to annotate with emotional concepts from our ontology tags which can convey an indirect
affective meaning, by devising appealing interfaces that involve the user as in games. An alternative could be to integrate the use of automatic techniques, e.g. the one proposed
in [3], for findings the proper associations of terms having
an emotional value with ontological concepts.

Acknowledgments. Thanks to A. Bolioli, F. Portis, G.
Vaccarino, Associazione Culturale Arsmeteo, Fondaz. Bruno
Kessler, ISTI CNR and NIL at Complutense Univ. Madrid.
