Prosody and the Resolution of Pronominal Anaphora
Maria Welters
lnstitutl'i.irKomlnunikationsforschungund
Phonetik , Universitfit Bonn
Poppels dorfer Alice 47, D-5315 Bonn
wolters@ikp.uni-bonn , de
Donna K . Byron
Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Re . Box 270226, Rochester , NY 14627
d by ron@cs , rochester , edu

In this paper , we investigate the acoustic prosodic marking o\[ " demonstrative and personal pronouns in task -oriented dialog  . Although it has been hypothesized that a couslie marking affects pronoun resolution  , we find flint l~e prosodic information extracted from tile data is not sufficienl to predict antcceden ! lypereliably  . Inter-speaker variation accottnts for mt , ch of lhe prosodic variation that we find in our data  . We conclude that prosodic cues shot , ld be handled with care in robust , speaker-independenl dialog systems . 
1 Introduction
Previous work on anaphora resolution has yie Meda rich basis of theories and heuristics for finding antecedenls  . 
However , most research to date has neglecled an important potential cue that is only available in spoken data : prosody  . Prosodic marking can be used to change the antecedent of a pronoun  , as demonsh'ated by lifts classic example from l . akoff (  1971  )   ( capitals indical capit ch accent ) :  ( I ) Johllicalled Jimja Relmblican , then hei insulted him j . 
(2) Johlll called Jim . /a Republican , then lll jill-sulled lll Mi . 
But exactly how the antecedent changes due to the prosodic marking on tile pronoun  , and whefller this effect happens consistently , is an open question . If consisl cnlelfecls do exisl , they would be useful for online pronoun inler pretation is poken dialog systems  . 
Prosodic prominence direct stile attention of the listener to what is important for understanding and inte F pretation  . But how should this principle be applied when words that are normally not very prominent  , such as prollouns , are accented ? More generally , does acoustic marking provide syslemalicues to characteristics of a mecedents ? IV lore specitically  , does it imply that tile antecedent is " unt mtml " in some wily ' ? The searctile two hypofl/eses we investigate in this paper  .   ( ) ur data consists of 322 pronouns from a large corpus of spoma-neous lask -orient cd dialog  , the TRAINS93 corpus ( Hee~man and Allen ,  1995) . This corpus allows us to study pronotms as they occur in spontaneous unscripted dis-COL lrse  , al ) diserie of tile very few speech corpori to have been annotated with pronoun interpretation i fommtion  . 
The remainder oF this paper is structured as follows : In Section  2  , we SUlllllill'i Ze relevant work on pl'Oll OUn resolution and report on tile few proposals for integrating prosody into pronoun resolution algorithms  . Next , in Section 3 , we presentile dialogs used for our study and the attribute saw filable in tile annotation data  , while Section 4 describes file acoustic measures that we recorn -puled automatically from the data  . Section 5 explores whelher there are syslematic or relations between these properties and tile acoustic measures fundamental frequency  , duralion , and in lensity . For lhese measures , we find I hatnlost correlations are in fact due to speaker vari-alien  , and fl/a/speakers differ greatly in their over all prosodic characleristics  . Finally , we investigate whether it is possible to use I hesc acoustic features to predict prope  , ' ties of tile antecedent using logistic regression . 
Again , we do not find acoustic features to be reliable prediclors for lhel ' catures of inleresl  . Therefore , we con-chide in Section 6 lhat acoustic measures cannot be used in sl ) eaker-independen loine anaphora resolution algorithms to predict lhefeatures under investigation here  . 
2 Background and Related Work
There is a rich literature ? ) 11 resolving personal pronouns . 
Many approaches arc based on a notion of attentional foctls  . Entities in attentional focus are highly salient , and pronouns are assumed to refer to tile most salient entity in lhcdiscourse  ( el . ( Brennanelal . , 1987; Azzametill . , 1998; Strube , 1998)) . Centering ( Grosz et al . , 1995 ) is a iame work for predicting local attentional focus  . It assumes that tile most salient entity from sentence  , 3 , ,_\] that is realized in sentence , 5' , , is most likely to be pronominalized in , 3 , z . That entity is termed the Cb ( backward-looking center ) of sentence , 5' , , . Finding ille preferred ranking criteria is an active area of research  . 
Byron and Stem (1998) adapted this approach , which had previously been applied to text , for spoken dialogs , but wilh l in fited s t , ccess . 
\] n contrast to personal pronouns , demonstratives do not rely on calculalions of salience  . In fact , Linde ( 1979 ) found lhat while it was preferred for entities within the current focus of attention  . Passonneau ( 1989 ) showed that personal and demonstrative pronouns are used in contrasting situations : personal pronouns are preferred when both the pronoun and its antecedent are in subject position  , while demonstrative pronouns are preferred when either the pronoun or its antecedent is not ill subject position  . She also found that personal pronouns tend to co -specify with pronouns or base noun phrases  ; the more clause-orseutence-likc the antecedent  , he more likely the speaker is to choose a demonstrative pronoun  . 
Pronoun resolution algoritlnns tend not to cover demonstratives  . Notable exceptions are Webber's model for discotn ' sedeix is  ( Webbcr ,  1991 ) and the model developed for spoken dialog by Eekert and Strube  ( 1999 )  . 
This algorithm encompasses both personal and delnon-strative pronouns and exploits their contrastive usage patterns  , relying on syntactic lues and verb subcategoriza -tions as input  . Neither study investigated the intluence of prosodic prominence on resolution  . 
Most previous work on prosody and pronotm resolution has focussed on pitch accents and third person singular pronouns that co-specify with persons  . Nakatani ( 1997 ) examined the antecedents of personal pronouns in a  20-minute narrative monologue . She found that pronouns tend to be accented il ' they occur in subject position  , and if the backward-looking center ( Grosz et al ,  1995 ) was shifted to the referent of that pronoun . She then extended this result to a general theory of the interaction between l  ) rominenc c and discourse structure . 
Cahu ( 1995 ) discusses accented pror Jouns on the basis of a theory about accentual correlates of salience  . 
Kamcyama ( 1998 ) interprets a pitch accent on pronouns in the fl ' a mework of I healternative semantics  ( Rooth , 1992) theoryo1' focus . She assumes that all potential antecedents are stored in a list  . Pronouns arc then resolved to the most preferred antecedent on that list which is syntactically and semantically compatible with the pronoun  . 
Preference is modeled by an ordering on these to l ' antecedents  . An accent on lhepronoun signals that pronoun resolution should not be based on the default ordering  , where the default is computed by an mnber of interacting syntactic  , semantic , pragmatic , and attentional constraints . 
Compared to he and she , it and that lmve been somewhat neglected . There are two reasons for this : First , it is not considered to be as accentable as he and she by native speakers of both British and American English  , whereas that is more likely than it to be at " a pitch accent  . An informal study of the London-Lund corptts of spoken British English  ( Svartvik , 1990) confirmed that observation . Second , that fi'cquently does not lmvea cospecifying NP antecedent  , and most research on co-speciticatiou has focussed on pronouns and NPs  . Work on accente demonstratives and pronoun resolution is extremely scarce  . Pioneering studies were conducted by Ft'ethcim and his collaborators  . They tested the effect of accented sentence -initial demonstratives that co-specify with the preceding sentence on the resolution of ambiguous personal pronouns  , and found that the pronoun antecedents switched when the demonstrative was accented  ( Fretheim ctal . , 1997) . However , tootu " knowledge , there are no studies that compare the cospecification preferences of accented vs  . unaccented demonstratives . 
3 The Corpus : TRAINS 93
Our data is taken from the TRAINS93 corpus of hunlun-human problem solving dialogs in the logistic sphnuting domain  . In these dialogs , one participant plays the role of the planning assistant and the other attempts to construct a plan for delivering specified cargo to its destination  . We used a subset of 18   TRAINS93 dialogs in which the referent and antecedent of third-person on-gend crcd pronouns I had been attnotated in a previous study  ( Byron and Allen ,  1998) . In the dialogs used for the present study , 322 pronouns ( 158 personal and 164 demonstra-live ) have been annotated . Personal pronouns ill the dialogs are it , its , itselJ ; them , the 3 , , their and themselves . 
Demonstrative pronouns in the annotation data are that  , this , these , those . There are liven mle and 11 fenmle speakers . One female speaker contributed 89 pronouns , two others produced more than 30 each ( one female , one male ) , the rest is divided unevenly among tile remaining  13 speakers . The set of dialogs chosen for annotation intentionally included a variety of speaker so that no speaker's idiosyncratic discourse strategies would be prevalentill the resulting data  . 
Table 1 describes the attributes caplurcd for each pronoun  . These features were chosen for tile annotation because many previous studies have shown them to be imporlant for pronoun resolution  . Features ill-clude attributes of the pronoun , its antecedent ( he dis-cotu'se constituent I hat previously triggered lhereferent  )  , and its referent ( the entity that should be substituted for the pronoun in a semantic representation of the sentence  )  . Cb was annotated using Model 3 from ( Byron and Stent ,  1998 ) with a linear model of discourse structure . Note that annolaled prononns were not limited to those with NP antecedents  , a sistile case with most other studies . In addition to NP antecedents , pronouns in this dataset could have an antecedent of some other phrase or clause type  , or no annomtabl cantecedent at all . There are two categories of pronouns with no annotalable antecedent  . Ill the simplest case , t impronominal reference is the first mention of the referent illtile dialog  . That happens when the referent is inferred liom the problem solving state  . For example , after " tile utterances end the engine to Coming and pick up the box cars  , a new discourse n-INog end credentities exist in this co  , ' pus , so gendered pronouns w c , -cnot in chtdcd . All dcmonst , ' a tivc pronouns were annolated ; how-ev cf , lhcre were only 5 occurrences of " this " in the selectedialogs , so e on strasts between prox in ml and distal dcmonslratives could not be studied  . 

Feature 11) l ) escriplion
I'RONTYPE PronoutlType
I'RONSUB , IPronounissulj ccl
ANTI , \] I ~( ) IM Antecedenl form
I ) ISTI ) is lance to antecedent
ANTESUILIA ntecedent is subjcc !
CBBackward-looking center trOllOU11 category
Possible Values def = tile pronoun is one of it , its , itself , them , dmy , th c in themselves dcm = the inonoun is one of that  , this , these , fllose Y = prOllOtltl subject of lllaill clause of its ullerance N : pronotm not subject of main clause 
I'I~,()NOUN = antecedent is pronoun
NI '= antecedentisms e noun phrase
N()N-NP = antecedent is other constituent , at most one utterance long NONE = pronotm is lit 'st mention or antecedent length > onetttterance SAME = antecedent and pronoun in same utterance AI  ) J = antecedent and pronoun in adjacent utterances RIMOTE = antecedent more than one utterance before pronoun Y = alStecc delll subject  o1' the lllain chmse of its tttterance N = antecedent not subject of a main clause 
Y = pronoun is Cb of its utterance
N = pronoun is not Cb
DIST cldj . I'C qllO\[?
Table 1: The features avaiht bleill the annotation data set  . 
ANTEANTESUBJ
NP/pmn . non-NP none yes no same 75 . 9% 6 . 3% 17 . 8 % 37 . 3% 62 . 7% 29 . 1% 28 . 0% 36 . 1 t0% 36 . 0% 14 . 0% 86 . 11% 18 . 9% 51 . 60, 21 . 4% 27 . 0% 25 . 5% 74 . 5% 23 . 9% personal 33 . 5% 20 . 2% demonslrafive 29 . 9% 15 . 2% lolal 31 . 7% 17 . 7%  3hble   2: Typical properties of an tcced cnt slbr personal and demonst  , ' ative pronouns ill file corpus . All percentages are given relative totile lolal ntnnber of pronouns in that category and rounded  . Boldface : most frequent antecedent property . 
tity , tile train composed of tile engine and Ix ) x cars , is awfilable for anaphoric reference . In the more subtle case , I he entity was built from a stretch ( 51" discourse longer than one utterance . In an effort to achieve an acceptable level of inier-annotal or agreelnenl for the awnohltion  , the maxinmm size \ [ or a cons filuenl to serve as ~tll~ltllecedellW\[lSde\[illedl  ( 1 be Oll Cull Cl ' ~ , l l l C C , l ) is course entities that are built fi'om longer she /chcs of lexl include object such as tile entire  131an or tile discourse itself , and such items are less reliable lo annotate . 
qaking the annotated dialogs as a whole , 21 . 4% of all prollouns have ; . ln on-NP antecedent , and 27% do not have an mmolatal ~ leantecedent a a11  . qhble 2 shows thaltile default antecedenls o1' personal and denlons h'a live pronouns follow the predictions of Schiffman  ( 1985 )  . 
The antecedent of personal pronouns i most likely itself lobe a pronoun or a full NP  , while demonstratives m'e most likely to have no antecedent  , or if there is one , it is n tost likely to be a non-NR The main role of prosodicill-lksr  , nation is to help pronoun resolution algorithms identify cases where flmse default predictions are false  . 
4 Acoustic Prosodic Cues
Our selection ( 5 1' a cottstic measures covers three classic components of prosody : fundamental frequency  ( IV ( ) )  , duration , and intensity ( Lehiste ,  1970) . The relationship between those cues and prosodic pronlinencc has been demonstrated by e  . g . ( Fant and Kruckenberg , 1989; Heufl , 1999) . Tile main correlate of English stress is F0 , the second rues ! imporlant is duration , and the least im-porlanlis in lensity (1 , chisle ,  1970) . Therefore , we will pay more all ellliolllo F0 illefls Ul'eS . Although cxperi-menial results indicate flint 1 ; 0 cues of pronlinencc can depend on the shape of file  1:0 conlour of the uucrane c ( c . f . ( Guss en hoven clal . , 1997)) , we do nol control for such illleraclions . \] llstead , we reslric lourselves to cues that are easy to CO nl put efr  ( ml limiled dala , so that a running spoken dialogue system might be able to compute them in realtime  . 
4.1 Acoustic Measures
Duration : For duration , we found lhat 1 he logarithmic duration wllues a , ' cn or nmlly distributed , bolh pooled over all speakers and for lhoso speakers will l more than  20 pronouns . Logariflmtic duration is also tile target variable of many duration models such as that of  ( van San-ten ,  1992) . We assume that speaker-related variation is covered by the w  , ' iance of lh is normal distribution ; we can control for speaker effects by including a SPEAKER factor in our models  . 
F 0 variables : F0 was computed using the \]2ntropic ESPS Waves tool get_f0 with standard settings and a framerate ( 51'10 ms . All F0 w dues were transt'onned into lhelog-domain and then pooled imomean  , minimum , and maximum F0 values for each word and each utterance . This log donmin is well motiw ~ led psychoacousti -cally  ( Zwicker and lhtstl ,  1990) .   F0 range was computed oil the values in tile log -domain  . We assume lhat the Iog-m'ithm of F0 has a nomml distribution . Therefore , we range by using z-scores , and we can use standard statistical analysis method such as ANOVA  . 
Intensity : Intensity is measured as the root-mean -square  ( RMS ) of signal amplitudes . We measure RMS relative to a baseline as given by the formulalog  ( lMS/RMS b ~ olino )  . The baseline RMS was computed on the basis of a simple pause detection algorithm  , which takes the first nmximum in the amplitude histogram to be the average amplitude of background noise  . 
The baseline RMS was slightly above that value.
4.2 Inter-Speaker Differences
Since we need to pool data from many different speakers  , we qeed to control for inter-speaker differences . 
Tim number of pronouns we have fl'o meach speaker varies between  1 for speaker GD and 86 for speaker CK . Speakers PH , male , and CK , female , are the only ones tolm ve produced more than 15 personal pronouns and 15 demonstratives . In order to test whether the SPEAKER factor affects the choice between personal pronouns and demonstratives  , we tit-ted a logistic regression model with the target variable PRONTYPE  ( personal or demonstrative ) and the predic-torsANTE , ANTESUBJ , DIST , REFCAT , CB and SPEAKER ( in this sequence ) . REFCAT is an additional variable that describes the senmntic category of a pro-noun's referent  ( eg . donm in objects vs . abstract entities ) . Even though SPEAKER is the last factor in the model  , an analysis of deviance shows a signilicant in tlu - euce  ( p < 0 . 005,F=2 . 51,df13) . A possible explanation for this is that some speakers prefer to use demonstratives in contexts where others would choose a personal pronotm  , and vice versa , or perhaps the SPEAKER variable mediates the intluence of a far  , no recomplex factor such as problem solving strategy  . Resolving this ques-lion is beyond the scope of this paper  . 
On the basis of F0 , we can establish four groups of speakers : The first group consists of male speakers with a low mean  F0 and a low F0 range . In the next group , we find both male and female speakers with a low mean  F0  , but a far higher range . Speaker PH belongs to this second group . Interestingly , for these speakers , the mean F0 on pronouns is lower titan for those of the first group  . 
Groups 3 and 4 consistentirely of female speakers , with group 3 using a lower range than group 4 . Speaker CK belongs to group 4 . 
5 Exploring Prominent Pronouns
If data about prosodic prominence is to be useful for pronoun resolution  , then there must be prosodic cues that carry information about properties of the antecedent  . In this section , we investigate if there are such cues for the properties that we have available in the annotation data  , defined in ~ lable 1 . More specitieally , we hypothesize that prosodicues will be used if the antecedent is somewhat unusual  . For example , the results of Linde and


DIST
ANTESUBJ dfall3 range 3 none 2 dur
DamSet peJw . dem . CK 110110 none nonellonon one none dur , nolle \]) or s . : me an energy range Table 3: Significant Inlluences of Antecedent Properties ( p < 0 . 05) on Prosodic Cues . in ean = z-score mean F0 , range = range of z-score F0 , dur = logarithmic duration , dem = demonstratives , pets = personal pronotms Passon neau would lead us to expect that personal pronouns with non-NP antecedents and demonstratives with NP and pronoun antecedents will be marked  . Since the antecedents of pronouns tend to occur no more than  12 clauses ago , we would also expect pronouns with more remote antecedents obe marked  . A first qualitative look at the data suggets that even il ' such these tendencies are present in the data  , they might not turn out to be significant . For example , in Figure 1 , the means of l zmeanf0 behave roughly as predicted , but the variation is so large that these differences might well be due to chance  . 
5 . 1 Correlations between Measures and Properties Next  , we examine whether the measures delined in Sec -lion  4 correlate with any particular properties o1' the antecedent . More precisely , if a property is cued by some aspect ot ' prosody  ( either duration , F0 , or intensity ) , then the prosody of a pronoun depends to a cer -lain degree on its antecedent  . In a statistical analysis , we should lind a significant effect of the relevant antecedent property on the prosodic measure  . We selected ANOVA as our analysis method , because our prosodic target variables appear to have a normal distribution  . For each of the antecedent features delined above  , we examined its inlluence on mean F0 ( imeanf0) , the z-score of mean F0 ( lz mean f0) , the z-score of F0 range ( lzrg f0) , logarithmic duration(dur ) , and normalized energy ( energy ) . In addition , we added the tactors,
PRONTYPE and SPEAKER.
Results : The results are summarized in Table 3 . For iz mean f0 and energy , the influence of SPEAKER is always considerable . There are also consistent effects of the syntactic position of a pronoun : In general  , demonstratives are shorter in subject position , and for CK , mean F0 on personal pronouns in subject position is higher than on non subject ones  ( 228 Hzvs . 190 Hz ) . 
But when we turn to the factors that interest us lnOSt  , properties of the antecedent , we cannot lind any consistent correlates , although in a hnost every dataset , there are some prosodicues to ANTESUBJ for personal pronouns  . But what these cues are may well depend on the speaker  , as the results for CK show . Herpit chrange on pronouns with as tdj cct antecedent is double the range on pronouns with an antecedent in non-su/lject position  . 


P ? l'S Olllllliroll OUllS
T--:---7::"L~o ~ ooo?o
III ~--
NII lie alllt ~ non-NPI/lO"\['ype of AtllCci ~dt~lll 
F~:8
NPIIO 111\[~no II-NP pfO
Type of All tcccd cnly ~
K--ft ~ onslkhi
Persolll Pfoll Otll S-\]--1 ; oool--I
II(II1L~stilt
Ai/tecctletllisStlbjc'ct
Eoi
Demonstrative Pronouns m
Clfi ,
IOII-SlIIjIll ) liesulj
Ai Itecct lct~lisSubject
Figure 1: Distributionel : z-score of mean F0 for dilfer ellt values of ANTEFORM and ANTESUI3J Pronouns with subject antecedents are also considerably louder  . Allillall , antecedent prol ) ertics can only ac-COUllt for a very small percell tage of tile w triatiol l in these prosodic ues  . Therefore , we should i ~ ot expect he prosodicues to be slabl c  , robust indicators for predict-insantecedent proper lies ill spoken dialog systems  . 
5 . 2 In ter - Speaker Var ia t ion we have sccn that inter-speaker diff crcl ~ cescxpl  ; ~ in much of the variation in the prosodic measures  . Table 4 gives an idea of the size and direction of these differences  . 
On the complete dataset , w clil Kl that personal pronouns are shorlor lhan demonslratives  , they have a lower intensity and show a higher average  1  ; 0 (3~tble 4) . A closer examination reveals considerable inter -speaker variation in the data  , illustrated in Table 4 . CK is fairly p to to typical . PH barely shows the difference il ~ F0 , al~d for MF , the difference in intensity is actually reversed . 
MF also has rather shor ! demonstratives . Such speaker-specilic wlriation call not be eliminated by nomtalization  . 
It has to be controlled for in the statistical lcsls  . Discovering types of speakers is diflicult-two of the  15 speakers , CK , and PH , con/ribute 48% of all pronouns . 
5 . 3 P red ic t ing Proper t ies o f t i le Antecedent Finally  , we examine how much information prosodic cues yield about the ~ tntecedent  . For this purpose , we set till a prediction lask not unlike one that all actual NLU syslenl ~ lces  . The input variables arc the prosodic properties of the pronoun  , whether the protloun is personal or demonstrative  ( P\]R . ONTYPE ) , whether it is the subject ( PRONSUBJ ) , and whether it is sentence-initial ( PRONZNIT ) . From this , we now have to deduce l ~ roper-lies of thc antecedent : syntactici ' olc  ( ANTES rdBJ )  , fern1 ( ANTEFORM ) , and distance ( DZST ) . For prediction , wc used logistic regression ( Agrest i ,  1990) . This has two advantages : not only can wccompare how well the differ-cnt regression models lit the data  , wc call also reanalyze the titled model to determine which factors have a significant inlluence oll classiIication accuracy  . 
Firsl , we conslrucl a model on the basis of PRONTYPE , PRONSUBJ , and PRONINIT . Then , we conslruct a model with these three faclors plus SPEAKER  . . finally , we train a model with PRONTYPE , dis'c . 
all 156 Hz
CK 188 Hz
PH 126 Hz
MF 166 Hz mean F0 pelw.dem.
1 57 Hz 142 Hz 208 Hz 187 Hz 109 Hz 110 Hz 184 Hz 182 Hzz-score mean pets . dent-0 . 04 -0 . 24 0 . 31 0 . 00 -0 . 43 -0 . 47 0 . 32 0 . 26 duration pelw . dem 161 ms 206 ms 151 ms 193 ms 179ms   252 ms 166 ms 164 ms intensity pet w . dem2 . 36 2 . 38 2 . 51 2 . 54 2 . 57 2 . 84 2 . 69 2 . 40 Table 4: Inter-speaker variation in prosody , disc . : complete discourse . All speakers : 322 pronouns , CK:41 personal , 45 demonstrative , PH:18 personal , 24 demonstrative , MF : 7 personal , 8 demonstrative PRONSUBJ , PRONINIT , SPEAKER and one of the three measures lz mean f0 , dur , energy . The models are trained to predict whether there is an antecedent  ( task no Ante )   , whether the antecedent is a non-NP ( task nonNP ) , whether the antecedent is remote ( task remote ) , whether the antecedent is in subject position ( task ujante )   , and whether the antecedent is the current Cb ( task cb )  . All models are computed over the full dataset , because the dataset for speaker CK is not suflicient ? for estimating the regression coefficients  . The models are then compared to see which step yielded a significant improvement : adding SPEAKER or adding the prosodic variable after we have accounted for SPEAKER variation  . 
Results : The results arc summarized in Table 5 . On all tasks except remote , PRONTYPE and PRONSUBJ performed well . Both features have a h'o ady been shown to be reliable cnes for prononn resoluti  ( m ( c . f . Section 2) . On task cb , only PRONTYPE can explain a signilicant amount of wuiation  . Models which include a speaker factor ahnost always f are better  . In models without speaker information ,   F0-relaled measures yield a larger reduction indeviance than the duration measure  . 
The reason for this is that the F0 measures preserve some information about the ditl ' ercnt speaker strategies  . Once SPEAKER has been included as well , only dur leads to significant improvements on task nonNP  ( p < 0 . 05) . 
Both demonstratives and personal pronouns are shorter when the antecedent is a non-NR  6 Conclusion and Outlook In this paper , we cx a mincd patterns of acoustic prosodic highlighting of personal and demonstrative pronouns in a corpus of task-oriented spontaneous dialog  . To our knowledge , this is the lirst comparative study of this kind . W c used a straightforward , theory-neutral operationalization of " prosodic highlighting " that does not depend on complex algorithms for  F0 stylization or ( focal ) accent detection and is thus very easy to incorporate into any realtime spoken dialog system  . We chose a spoken dialog corpus that includes demonstrativ cpronouns because demonstratives are both a prominent feature of problem-solving dialogs and a sorely neglected lield of study  . In particular , we asked two questions : Do Speakers Signal Antecedent Properties Acoustically ? Based on our data  , the answer to this question is : If they do , /heyd oit in a highly idiosyncratic way . We cannot posit any safe generalizations over several speakers  , and li"om the perspective of an NLP application , such generalizations might even be dangerous . In order to evaluate the impact of speaker strategies on the resolution of pronouns  , we need more data- 150 to 200 pronouns from 45 speakers each . Collecting this amount of data in a dedicated corpus is inefficient  . Therefore , further acoustic investigations do not make much sense at this point  ; rather , the data should be examined carefully for tendencies which can form the basis for dedicated production and perception experiments which arc explicitly designed for uncovering inter-speaker variation  . 
Are Acoustic Features Useful for Pronoun Resolution ? The answer is : probably not  . At least for this corpus , we were not able to determine any numerical heuristics that could be utilized to aid pronoun resolution  . The logistic regression experiments show that on a speaker-independent basis  , logarithmic duration might well be a reliable cue to certain aspects of a pronoun's antecedent  . In order to incorporate prosodic cues into an actual algorithm  , we will need more training material and a principled evaluation procedure  . We will also need to take into account other influences  , such as dialog acts and dialog structure . 
Acknowledgements . Wc would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers  , Rebecca Passonneau , Lncicn Galescu , James Alhm , Michael Strube , Dictmar Lancd and Wolfgang Hess for their comments on earlier vet'-sions of this work  . Donna K . Byron was funded by ONR research grant N00014-95-1-1088 and Columbia Univer-sity/NSF research grant OPG:1307  . For all statistical analyses , wcused R(I haka and Gentleman ,  1996) . 

A . Agresti .  1990 . Categorical Data Analysis . John Wiley . 
S . Azzam , K . Humphreys , and R . Gaizauskas 1998 . 
E?tending a Simple Co , ' eference Algorithm with a Focusing Mechanism . In New Approaches to Discourse Anaphora : Proceedings of the Second Colloquium on Discoulwe Anaphora and Anaphor Resolution  ( DAARC2 )  , pages 1527 . 
S . Brennan , M . Friedman , and C . Pollard .  1987 . A centering approach to pronouns . In Proceedings of the 25 thAmmal Meeting of the Association . fi~r Computational Linguistics ( ACL'87) , pages 155-162 . 
9 24 \]hsknon NP no Ante remotes jante cb significant ill fluence 
PRONTYPE , PRONSUBJ , PRONINIT , dur
PRONTYPE , PRONSUBJ , PRONINIT , SPEAKER.

PRONTYPE , PRONSUBJ
PRONTYPE , SPEAKER
Table 5: Perl brmance of Reg , ' ession Models on Tasks . Listed are factors which improve perforn mnce signilicantly  ( p < 0 . 05) D . Byron and J . Allen .  1998 . Resolving demonstrative pronouns in the TRAtNS93 corpus . In New Approaches to Discoume AnaFhora : Proceedings of the Second Colloquium on Discou/we AnaFhora attd Anaphor Resolution  ( DAARC2 )  , pages 68-81 . 
I ) . Byron and A . Stem .  1998 . A preliminary model of centering in dialog . In Proceedings of tire 36 thAn-total Meeting of the Association . for Computational
Linguistics ( ACL'98).
3 . Cahn .  1995 . The effect of pitch accenting on pro-norm referent resolulion  . In Proceedings of the 33 tj ~ Ammal Meeting of " the Association . /or Computatiomd?ing tdstics ( ACL'95) , pages 290-292 . 
M . F , ckert and M . Strubc .  1999 . Resolving discourse deictic anaphora in dialogs .   111 I ~ roceeding so J " the 9 thCoq/'erence of the European Chapter of the Association Jbr Conq  ) utational Linguistics ( I ' ; ACL'99) . 
G . Fant and A . Kruckenberg .  1989 . Preliminaries to tim study of Swedish prose reading and reading style  . KT'II Speech 7) ansmission Laborato O , Quarterly Progress and Status Report ,  2: 1-83 . 
TFrelheinl , W . wm1) on mlelen , and K . 13 or then .  1997 . 
lJnguislic constraints on relevance in reference resolution  . In K . Singer , R . Eggert , and G . Anderson , editors , CLS , volume 33 , pages 99-113 . 
B . Grosz , A . Joshi , and S . Weinstein .  1995 . Cenlering : A framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse  . Computational Linguistics , 21(2):203-226 . 
C . Gussenhoven , B . H . Repp , A . Rietveld , II . P , ump and J . Terken .  1997 . The perceptual prominence of t ' und an mntal frequency peaks  . J . Acoust . Soc . Ame , :, 102:3009-3022 . 
P . Heeman and J . Allen .  1995 . The TrainsSpokenl ) ia-logCorpus . CDROM , lJngt , istic Data Consortium . 
B . Heuft 1999 . F , ine prominenz basierte Mthodezttt Prosodie analysetrod-synthese  . Peter Lang , Frank-furt . 
R . Ihaka and R . Gentlenmn (1996) . R : A language for data analysis and graphics . Journal q/Co/nputational and Graphical Statistics  ,  5:299-314 . 
M . Kameymna .  1998 . Stressed Pronouns . 111 RBosch , R . van S and t , editors , The Focus Book , pages 89-112 . 
()xford University Press , Oxford.
G . lmkoff .  1971 . P ,' esuppositions and relative wellformedness . Iii Semantics : An Inte Misciplinao , Reader in Philosophy , Linguistics , and l'sydtology , pages 329-340 . Cambridge University Press . 
I . Lchiste .  1970 . Supra segmentals . Mrl " Press , Cambridge , Mass . 
CLimle .  1979 . Focus o1' attention and the choice of pronouns in discourse  . In qhhny Given , editor ,  & , max and Semantics 12: Discomwear id , S ) , ntax , New York . 
Academic Press.
C . Nakatani .  1997 . The Computational Processing of lntonatiol ml Prominence : A Functional Prosody Perspective  . Ph . l ) . thesis , Harvard University . 
R . Passonneau .  1989 . Gelling aldiscourse referents . In Proceedings of the 27 u ' Ammal Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( ACL'89 )  , pages 51-59 . 
M . Rooth .  1992 . A theory of focus interpretation . Natural Language Semantics , 1:75-112 . 
P , . Schiffnlan ( Passo , mcau) .  1985 . DA'course con-strair2ts on'it'and'that':A study of la/t guage use in career-court seling interviews  . Ph . \]) . thesis , Universily of Chicago . 
\] . Swulvik , editor .  1990 . 7 he London Coq ) uso . fSl~oken English : Descril ) tion and Reseam h . l . und Universily
Press , Lund.
M . Strube 1998 . Never look back : An alternative to centering . In Proceedings (!/" the 36th Amlual Meetingo . f the Association for Comtmtational Linguistics ( ACL'98 )  , pages 1251-1257 . 
J . van Sanlen 1992 Contexlt , al effects on vowel duration . Speech Co/mmmication , 11:513-546 . 
B . Webber .  1991 . Structure and ostension in the interpretation of discourse deixis  . Language and Cognitive
Processes , 6:107-135.
E . Zwicker and H . Fastl 1990. Psychoacoustics.
Springer , Be , ' lin.

