A word-grammar based morl ) hoh ) gie alnalyzer
for agglutinative languages
Aduriz 1 . +, Agirre E . , Aldezabal I . , Alegria I . , Arregi X . , Arriohl J . M . , Artola X . , Gojenola K . ,
Marilxalar A ., Sarasola K ., Urkia M.+
l ) ept , of Colllptiier 1 Aulgtlages and Systems , University of lheBasq tlo Cotlnlry ,  64 . 9P . K . ,
E-200801) onostia , Basque Counh'y
tUZEI , Aldapeta20 , E-200091) onostia , Basque Country + Universid adde Barcelona , Grin Vfiide Isis Cortes Calaialla S ,  585 , E-08007 Flarcelo najip gog ak@si . elm , es . 
Abstracl
Agglutinative languages presenl rich morphology and for sonic applications theylleed deep analysis at word level  . 
Tile work here presenled proposes a model for designing a full n lorpho-logical analyzer  . 
The model integrates lhetwo-level for nlal is nl all daullificalion-I  ) a sodfornial is ni . In contrast to other works , we propose to separate the treatment of sequential and non-sequetTtial mou  ) ho-lactic constraints . Sequential constraints are applied in lhe seglllenlalion phase  , and non-seqtlontial Olle Sill the filial feature -combination phase  . Early application of sequential nlor pholactic coils li ' aiills duringtile segnloillaiioi/ process n lakes feasible:  , ill officienli in plenleilialion of tilefull morphological analyzer  . 
The result of lhis research has been tile design and imi  ) len~entation of a fullnlor phosynlactic analysis procedure for each word in unrestricted Basque texts  . 
Introduction
Morphological analysis of woMs is a basic tool for automatic language processing  , and indispensable when dealing will l highly agglutinative languages like Basque  ( Adurizelal . , 98b ) . In lhisconlext , some applications , like spelling corfeclion , do ilOIneed illOl'el hanthese glll Olltation of each word in loits different CO lllp one nl nlorphellles alollg with their morphological information  , l to wever , there are oiher applications such as lemnializa - tion  , lagging , phrase recognition , and delernlinaiion of clause boundaries ( Adurizelal . , 95) , which need an additional global morphological i ) arsing j of the whole word . 
Such a complete nlor phological analyzer has lo consider three main aspects  ( l  ~ , ilchie et al , 92; Sproal ,  92 ) : 1 Morl ) hographenfics ( also called morphophonology )  . This ternlcovers orthographic variations that occur when linking 
IllOfphellleS.
2) morpholactics . Specil'ication of which nlor phenles can or cannot combine with each other lo form wflid words  . 
3) Feature-combination . Specification of how the selnor phemes can be grouped and how their nlor phosyntactic features can be comlfined  . 
The system here presented adopts , oil the one hand , tile lwo-level for nlal is nl to deal with morphogral filemics and sequential morl  ) ho-lactics ( Alegria el al . , 96) and , on the other hand , a unification-based wo M-grammar 2 to combine the grammatical information defined in nlor phemes and to tackle complex nlor photactics  . This design allowed us to develop a full coverage analyzer that processes efl'iciently unrestricted texts in Basque  . 
The remainder of tills paper is organizeds is follows  . After a brief'description of Basque nlorphology  , section 2 describes tile architecture for morphological processing  , where the morphosynlactic omponent is included . Section 3 specifies tile plae nomena covered by the analyzer  , explains its desigi ~ criteria , alld presents implementation andewthialion details  . Section d compares file I This has also been called  mo*7  ) hOSh , ntactic parsitlg . When we use lh c\[ ( fill #11017~\]lOSyltl~/X WC will always refer to il ~ cl ficrarchical structure at wo M level  , conlbining morphology and synlax . 
2'\]'\]lt3\[IDl'll\]WOl'd-gF ( llllllUl " should not be confused with the synlaclic lilcory presented in  ( Hudson ,  84) . 
system with previous works . Finally , the paper ends with some concluding renmrks . 
1 Brief description of Basque morphology These are the most important features of Basque morphology  ( Alegria et al ,  96 ) : ? As prepositional functions are realized by case suffixes inside word-for nls  , Basque presents a relatively high power to generate inflected word forms  . For instance , frot hasing le noun a minimum of 135 inflected forms can be generated . Therefore , the number of simple wordforms covered by the current  70  , 0 00 dictionary entries wouklnot be less than 10 million . 
?  77 of the inflected forms are simple combinations of number  , determination , and case marks , not capable of further inflection , but the other 58 wordforms ending in one of the two possible genitives  ( possessive and locative ) can be further inflected with the 135 morphemes . This kind of recursive construction reveals a noun ellipsis inside a noun phrase and could be theoretically exteuded adinf in itum  ; however , in practice it is not usual to fiud more than two levels of this kind of recursion in a wordform  . Taking into account a single level of noun ellipsis  , the number of word-forum coukl be estimated over half a billion  . 
? Verbs offer a lot of grammatical information . A verb t brl n conveys information about the subject  , the two objects , as well as the tense and aspect . For example : diotsut(Eng . : 1 amtelling you something ) . 
o Word-formation is very productive in
Basque . It is very usual to create new compounds as well as derivatives  . 
As a result of this wealth of infornmtion contained within word forms  , complex structures have to be built to represent complete morphological information at word level  . 
2 An architecture for the full morphological ana lyzer 
The framework we propose for the morphological treatment is shown in Figure  1  . 
The morphological nalyzer is the fiont-end to all present applications for the processing of Basque texts  . It is composed of two modules : the segmentation module and the morphosyntactic analyzer  . 
conformant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ U~atabas N TEZ-conf ~ \[ Segmentation module ____ ~ Horphogra Dhemics 
Morphotactics I
TEI-FS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ - p ~ conformant Cegmented TexN
Morphosyntactic analyzer
Feature-combination
Morphotactics II
TEI-FS\].............~actically
Lermnatization , linguistic Analysis tagging tools Figure 1 . Architecture 1"o1"morphological processing . 
The segmentation , nodule was previously implemented in ( Alegria et al ,  96) . This system applies two-level morphology ( Koskenniemi ,  83 ) for the morphological description and obtains , for each word , its possible segmentations ( one or many ) into component morphemes . The two-level system has the following components : ? A set of  24 morphograf ~ hemic rules , compiled into transducers ( Karttunen ,  94) . 
? A lexicon made up of around 70 , 000 items , grouped into 120 sublexicons and stored in a general lexical database  ( Aduriz et al , 98 a ) . 
This module has full coverage of free-running texts in Basque  , giving an average number of 2 . 63 different analyses per word . The result is the set of possible morphological segmentations of a word  , where each morpheme is associated with its corresponding features in the lexicon : part of speech  ( POS )  , subcategory , declension case , number , definiteness , as well as syntactic function and some semantic features  . Therefore , the output of the segmeutation phase is very rich  , as shown in Figure 2 with the word a marengan ( Eng . : on the mother ) . 
grammar mother )
POS noun ) subc ~ t common : count : + )   ( animate + )   ( nleasurable "- ) aren ( of life )   ( POS decl-suffix )   ( definite + )   ( numbers ing )   ( case genitive )   ( synt-f@noun comp ) 
J gan \]( o . 1 /  ( POS decl-suffix ) I ( case in ossivo )  \]  ( synt-f@adverbial ) I => amarengan ( o . the mother )
POS noun ) subcat common ) numbers ing ) definite + ) case in essive ) count + ) animate + ) measurable - ) synt-f@adverbial ) iq : e , ure 2 . Morphosynlactic analysise of ( unureugun(lng . :  ( m The architecture is a modular envhoument that allows differentypes of output depending on the desired level of analysis  . The foundation of the architecture lies in the fact lhat TEI-confommnt SGML has been adopted for the comnmnication alllo Ilg modules  ( Ide and VCFOIIiS ,  95) . l ~' eatures huclule Scoded accoMing TIU are used to represent linguistic information  , ill cluding tile input mMoutl ) ut of the morplaological analyzer . This reprcs cnta-tionrambles the use of SGML -aware parsers and tools  , and Callhe easily filtered into different formats  ( Artolaetill . , 00) . 
3 Word level morl ) hosyntactic analysis
This section Hrst presents the l ~ henomenal hat must be covered by the morphosyntactic analyzer  , then explains ils design criteria , and finally shows implementation and ewfluation details  . 
3.1 Phenomena covered by the analyzer
There are several features that emphasized the need of morphosyntactical mlys is in order to build up word level information : I  ) Multiplicity of values for the same feature in successive morphemes  . In the analysis of Figure 2 there are two different values for the POS ( noun and declension suffix )  , two for the case ( genitive and inessive ) , and two for the syntactic function ( @noun comp and @ adverbial )  . Multiple values at moq ~ hemc-level will have to be merged to obtain the word level infermation  . 
2) Words with phrase structure . Although the segmentation is done for isolated words  , independently of context , in several cases 3 l ? calur cw tlues starling with the "@" character correspond to syntactic functions  , like@noull comp ( norm complement ) or @ adverbial . 
the mother ) tile resulting structure is o quiwflen to the aualysis of a phrase  , as can be seen i , Figure 2 . 111 this case , although there are two different cases ( genitive and inessive )  , lhecase of the full word form is simply inessive . 
3) Noun ellipsis inside word-lbrms . A noun ellipsis can occur with i , the word ( oceasi ( mally more than once ) . This information must be made explicit in the resulting analysis  . For example , Figure 3 shows the analysis of a single word-for lnlike diot sudumtrel & z  ( Eng . : with what I am lelling you ) . The first line shows its segmentation into four morphemes  ( dietsut+en+0+ arekin )  . The feature complill tile final analysis conveys the information for the verb  ( lumlelli Hg you )  , that carries information about pc'rs on , number and case o1'subject , object and indirect object . The feature comp2 represents an elided noun and its declension stfffix  ( with )  . 
4 ) l ) erivation and composition are productive in Basque  . The rearc more than 80 deri-w / tion morphemes ( especially suffixes ) intensively used in word-for nlatiol l . 
3.2 Design of the word-grammar
The need to impose hierarchical structure upon sequences of morphemes and to build complex constructions from them forced us to choose a unil'ication mechanism  . This task is currently unsolwlble using finite -state techniques  , clue to the growth in size of the resulting network  ( Beesley ,  98) . We have developed a unification based word -grammar  , where each rule combines information flom different mot+lJlemes giving as a result a feature structure for each interpretation of a word-fol'nl  , treating the previously mentioned cases . 
3 diotsut
Iamtellh , gyou )
POS verb )   ( tense present )   ( pers-ergative is ) \[  ( pets-dative 2 s )   ( pers-absol3s ) en ( what )   ( POS relation )   ( subcat subord )   ( relator relative ( synt-f@rel-clause ( POS ellipsis ) are kin ( wire )   ( POS declension-suffix ) )  ( cases ociative )   ( numbers ing )   ( definite + )   ( synt-f@adverbial ) => diotsudanarekin ( wi ~ what lamtelling you )   ( POS verb-noun_ellipsis )   ( cases ociative )   ( numbers ing )   ( definite + )   ( synt-f@adverbial )   ( compl ( POS verb )   ( subcat subord )   ( relator relative )   ( synt-f@tel-clause )   ( tense present )   ( pers-ergative is )   ( pets-dative 2 s )   ( pers-absol3s ) )  ( comp2 ( POS noun )   ( subcat common )   ( numbers ing )   ( definite + )   ( synt-f@adverbial ) ) Figure 3 . Morphosyntactic analysis of diot xudana rekin ( Eng . : with what I am tellittg you ) As a consequence of the richna or phology of Basque we decided to control morphotactic phenomena  , as much as possible , in the morphological segmentation phase . Alternatively , a model with minimal morphotactic treatment ( Ritchie et al ,  92 ) would produce too many possible analyses after segmentation  , which should be reiected in a second phase . 
Therefore , we propose to separate sequential morphotactics ( i . e . , which sequences of morphemes can or cannot combine with each other to form valid words  )  , which will be recognized by the two-level system by means of continuation classes  , and non-sequential morphotactics like long -distance dependencies that will be controlled by the word-gmn unar  . 
The general linguistic principles used to define unification equations in the word-grann narrules are the following :  1  ) Information risen from the lemma . The POS and semantic features are risenflom the lemnm  . This principle is applied to common nouns , adjectives and adverbs . 
The lemma also gives them nnber in proper nouns , pronouns and determiners ( see Figure 2) . 
2) lnfornmtion risen from case suffixes.
Simple case suffixes provide information on declension case  , number and syntactic function . For example , tile singular genitive case is given by the suffix-tellinama+ren  ( Eng . : of the mother ) . For compound case suffixes the number and determination are taken from the first suffix and the case from the second one  . 
First , both suffixes are joined and after that they are attached to the lemma  . 
3) Noun ellipsis . When an ellipsis occurs , the POS of the whole wordform is expressed by a compound  , which indicates both the presence of the ellipsis  ( always a noun ) and the main POS of the word . 
For instance , the resulting POS is verb-noun_ellipsis when a noun-ellipsis occurs after a verb  . All the information corresponding to both units , the explicit lemma and the elided one , is stored ( see Figure 3) . 
4) Subordination morl ~ hemes . When a subordination morpheme is attached to a verb  , the verb POS and its feat m'es are risen as well as the subordhmte relation and the syntactic fnnction conveyed by then a or pheme  . 
5) Degree morphemes attached to adjectives , past participles and adverbs . The POS and diotsudan ( diotsut+en )   ( POS verb )   ( tense present )   ( relator relative ) /\/ diotsut ( POS verb )   ( tense present diot sudana rekin ( diotsut+en-I0 + arekin )   ( POS verb-noun_ellipsis )   ( cases ociative ) are kin ( 0 + arekin )   ( POS noun ellipsis )   ( cases ociative ) en ( pos ? .   . 
o ( POS ellipsis relation ) are kin ( cases ociative ) Figure 4 . Parse tree for diotmuh marekitl(Eng . : with what I am lellittgy ott ) main features arc taken from the lemma and the features corresponding to the degrees of comparison  ( comparative , supcrhttive ) aft taken from the degree morphemes . 
6) l ) e fiwttion .  1 ) miwttion suffixes select tile POS of the baseform to create the deriw > tive anti in most cases to change its POS  . 
For instance , the suffix-garri ( Eng . :- able ) is applied to verbs and the derived word is an adjective  . When the derived form is obtained by means o1' a prefix , it does not change the POS of the baseform . In both cases the morphosyntactic rules add a new feature representing the structure of tile word as a derivative  ( root and affixes )  . 
7) Composition . At the moment , we only treat the most freqt tent kind of composition  ( noun-noun )  . Since Basque is syntactically characterized as a right-head hm guage  , the main information of the compound is taken from the second element  . 
8 ) Order of application of them of phosyn-tactic phenomena  . When several morphosyntactic phenomena are applied to the same lemllla  , so as to eliminate nonsensical readings , the natural order to consider them in Basque is the following : lemmas  , derbation prefixes , deriwltion suffixes , composition and inflection ( see
Figure 4).
9) Morl ) hotactic constraints . Elimination of illegal sequences of morphemes , such as those due to long-distance dependencies , which are difficult to restrict by means of conti . uation classes . 
The first and second principles are defined lo combine information of previously recognized mOrl ~ hemcs  , but all the other principles arc related to both feature-combination adnon-sequential moq ~hotactics  . 
3.3 Implementation
We have chosen the PATR formalism ( Shiebcr ,  86 ) for the definition of the moq flm-syntactic rules . There were two main reasons for this choice : ? The formalism is base do  . unification . 
Unification is adequate for the treatment of complex phenomena  ( e . g . , agreement of conslituents in case , tmmber and definite-hess ) and complex linguistic structures . 
? Simplicity . The grammar is not linked to a linguistic theory , e . g . GPSG in ( Ritchie et al . , 92 ) ? The fact that PATR is simpler than more sophisticated formalisms will allow that in @ e future the grammar could be adapted to any of them  . 
25 rules have been defined , distributed in the following way : ? 11 rules for the merging of declension morphemes and their combination with the main categories  ,  ?  9 rules for the description of verbal subordination morphenles  , ?2 general fulcs for derivation ,  ?  1 rule for each of the following phenomeml : ellipsis  , degree of COln pavison of adjectives ( comparative and SUl ) erlative ) and noun composition . 
3.4 Evaluation
As a cousequence of the size of the lexical database and tile extensive treatment of nlor phosyntax  , the resulting analyzer offers full coverage when applied to real texts  , capable of treating unknown words and nonstandard forms  ( dialect alw triants and typical errors )  . 
We performed four experilnents to ewtluate tile efficiency of the implemented analyzer  ( see Table 1 )  . A 10 , 8 32-word text was randomly selected from newspapers . We measured tile number of words per second analyzed by the morphosyntactic analyzer and also by the whole morphological analyzer  ( results taken on a Sun Ultra 10 )  . Ill the first experiment all tile word-t'orn ls were analyzed one-by-one  ; while illtile other three experiments words with more than one occurrence were analyzed only once  . Ill the last two experime uts a memory with the analysis of tile most frequent word forms  ( MFW ) in Basque was used , so that only wordforms not found in the MFW were analyzed  . 
Test description
All word forms
Diffcrent word forms
MFW 10,000 words ( I5Mb)
MFW 50 , 000 words (75mb )  #words/sccanalyzed Morphosynt . 
words analyzer 10 , 832 3 , 692 1 , 48 34 440 1119 5308 270 words/see
Full morphological analyzer 13, 5
Table 1. Evaluation results.
Even when our language is agglutinative , and its morphological phenomena need more computational resources to build complex and deep structures  , the results provetile feasibility of implementiug efficiently a fifll morphological analyzer  , although efficiency was not the main concern of our implementation  . The system is currently being applied to unrestricted texts in realtime applications  . 
4 Related work ( Koskeniemmi ,  83 ) defined the formalism named two-level morphology . Its main contributiou was the treatment of morl ) hographemics and morphotactics . The formal is nl has been stmcessfully applied to a wide wlriety ot ' languages  . 
( Karttunen ,  94 ) speeds the two-level model compiling two-level rules into lexical transducers  , also increasing the expressiveness of the model
The morphological analyzer created by ( Ritchie et al ,  92 ) does not adopt finite state mechanisms to control morphotactic phenomena  . Their two-level implementation incorporates a straightforward morphotactics  , reducing tile number of sublexicons to the indispensable  ( prefixes , lemmas and suffixes ) . 
This approximation would be highly inefficient for agglutinative languages  , as it would create ln any nonsensical interpretatiol as that should be rejected by tile unification phase  . They use the word-grammar for both morphotactics and feature-conlbination  . 
illa similar way , ( Trost ,  90 ) make a proposal to combine two-level morphology and non-sequential morphotactics  . 
The PC-Kimmo-V 2 system ( Antworth ,  94 ) presents an architecture similar to ours applied to English  , using a finite-state segmentation phase before applying a unification-based grammar  . 
( Pr6szdky and Kis ,  99 ) describe a morphosyntactic analyzer for Hungarian  , an agglutinative language . The system clots not use the two-level model for segmentation  , precom-piling suffix-sequences to improve efficiency  . 
They claim the need of a word-grammar , giving a first outline of its design , although they do not describe it in detail . 
( Oflazer ,  99 ) presents a different approach for the treatment of Turkish  , an agglutinative language , applying directly a dependency parsing scheme to morpheme groups  , that is , merging morphosyntax and syntax . Although we are currently using a similar model to Basque  , there are several applications that are word -based and need full morphological parsing of each word-t ' or m  , like the word-oriented Constraint Graminar formalism for disambiguation  ( Karlsson et aI . , 95) . 
Conclusion
We propose a model for flll morphological analysisiuteg rating two different components  . 
Ontile one hand , the two-level formalism deals with morphographenfics and sequential morphotactics and  , on the other hand , aunil\]cation-based word-grammar combines lhe granlll-iatical in \[' or nlatioli defined inilloi ' -phelllOS alld also handles COlllp lcxillori  ) ho-tactics . 
Early application of sCqt loniial I/l Orl ) hotactic conslraints dtu-ing the segmentation process avoids all excessive la Ulllber of n leaningless segmentation possibilities before the coulputationally lllOlO expensive unification process  . Unification permits lheres ohition of a wide variety of morl  ) hological phen onlena , like ellipsis , thal force the definition of : complex and deep structures Ioro prosenl the output of the analyzer  . 
This design allowed usio develop a full coverage all alyzor that processes efficiently unrestricted lox is in Basque  , a strongly agglul in a five langttage . 
The anaiyzcl " hasb ccll integrated illagCllOl ' alfranle work for the l  ) lOCessing of l ~ asquc , with all the linguistic in odulos communicating by llle all SO\[:foat tll'CstltlCllll'eSill accordo the principles of ihe Text Encoding Initiative  . 

This research was partially supported by the Basque Government  , the University of the \]71 aS ( lUeCotlntry/lid the CICY q' ( Cotllisid nlnt cr ministorial de Ciencia y Tecnolog fil  )  . 

Aduriz 1 . , Aldczabal I . , Ansa () . , Arlola X . , I ) faz de Ilarraza A . , Insau . ~ li . I . M .   ( 1998a ) EI ) BL:a Mttlli-l~ttrposed Lexica/Sttl ) l ) c ; rl . lot the Treatment of Ba , s'que . Proceedings of the l ; irst Inlernational ConfcncncconlAuiguagc Resources and Ewduation  , Granada . 
Aduriz I . , Agirre E . , Aldczabal1 . , Alegria 1 . , Ansa O . , Arrcgi X . , Arriola J . M . , Artola X . , I ) fazdelhu'raza A . , Ezciza N . , Gqicnola K . , Maritxahu " A . , Maritxalar M . , Oronoz M . , Sarasola K . , Soroa A . , Urizar R . , Urkia M . (1998b ) A Framework . for the Automatic Pmce . vsi#~g ( if " Basqtte . Proceedings o1 the First Ii ~ ternational Con\[elelite on Lall . g tlag c Resources turf
Evaluation , Granada.
Aduriz I . , Alcgria I . , Arriohl J . M . , Artola X . , l ) fazdo Ilarraza A . , Ecciza N . , Gojcnola K . , Maritxalar M . (1995) Di \ [ . ferelt ! Issues in the Design q falemmatizer /Tagger fo Ba  , s ' q t t e . From T cxls to Tags : Issues in Mullilingual Language Analysis  . ACL SIGI ) AT Workshop , l ) ublin . 
Alcgria 1 . , Art ( Ha X . , Sarasoht K . , Urkia M . (1996) Automatic moq dzological analysis of Basque . 
IAtcrary and IAnguistic Computing ,  11 (4): 193-203 . Oxford University . 
Aniworlh E . I . . (1994) Morphological Par , ff ng with al hl ( fication-ba , s'edWordGrcmmutr . Norlh Te , x as Naturall ~ anguage Processing Workshop , 

Arlola X . , Dfazde \] larraza A . , Ezciza N . , Oo . ic no hiK . , Marilxahu ' A . , Soma A .   ( 2000 ) A proposal for the integration of NLP tools using SGML-lagged docume Hls  . Proceedings of ll~e Second Cotfforence or1 Language Resources and Evaltmfion ( IA ~ , EC2000) . Athens , Greece 2000 . 
Bcesl %, K .   ( 1998 ) Ara Dic Morphological Analysis ( m the lnlernet , l ' r occ c dings of the International Conference on Mulii-IAngual Computing  ( Arabic & lhlglish )  , Cambridge . 
Huds on R . (1990) English Word Grammmar.
Oxford : Basil Blackwcll.
ldcN . , Vcronis J . K . (1995) Text-Ett coding hHtia-tire , Bac : kgmtmd and Context . Kluwcr Academic

Karlsson F . , Voulila in cnA . , Heikkiht J . , Anltila A . 
(1995) Constrai , tGnmmr : Alxm , ?tmge-i  #ldcpcndentSystemJorPm:ffngUm'estricled
Text , Mouton do Gruyicred..
Kartmnen1, . (1994) Con , s'truct in ~ l , e . vical7)' ansdttcers . Proc . of CO 13NG'94, 406-411 . 
Koskcnniemi , K , (1983) Two-level Mc ; qdlo\[ogy:Age , eral Compt ttational Model . /br Word Form Recognition and Pmdu clioth University of Ilclsinki  , l ) clmrtm cnt of General I Anguisiics . 
l ~ ublications "11.
() flaz crK(1999) l ) epetMe/tO ' Parsing , with a , E . rtended I : in iteState Approac\]t . ACL'99,

Pr6sz6ky G . , Kis B ( 1999 ) A Unificati ( m-hascdApl ~ roach to Moq dto-syntactic I ' arsitl < ~ of Agghttinative and Other  ( Highly ) lnjlectional
Languages . ACtd 99, Ma , yhmd.
Ritchie G . , Pulhnan S . G . , FJ lack A . W . , Russcl G . 
J .   ( 1992 ) Comlmtational Moudu ) logy : Practical Mechanism , s' . fi ) rthel#lglish l , exico, . ACL-MIT Series on Natural Language Processing , MIT

Shicbcr S . M .   ( 1986 ) At/lntroductiotzto Unification-Based Approaches to Grammar  . 
CSLI , Slanford.
SproatR . (1992) Morphology an U Comput caion.
ACL-MIT Press series in Natural Language

Trost It .   ( 1990 ) The application of two-level morldzo/ogytorz on -concatenative German moqgtology  . COIANG'90, Hcl sinki . 

