Deletions and their reconstruction in tectogrammatical syntactic 
tagging of very large corpora
EvaIt AJICOVA

Charles University
Malostransk 6nfim . 25
11800 Prague , Czech Republic
hajicova@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Mark EtaCE PLO VA

Charles University
Malostransk6n & n .25
11800 Prague , Czech Republic


The procedure of reconstruction of the underlying structure of sentences  ( in the process of tagging a very large corpus of Czech  ) is described , with a special attention paid to the conditions under which the reconstruction of ellipted nodes is carried out  . 
1 . The tagging scenarios with different ( degrees and types of ) theoretical backgrounds have undergonea rather rapid development flom morphologically based part -of-speech  ( POS ) tagging through treebanks capturing the surface syntactic structures of sentences to semantically oriented tagging models  , taking into account the underlying structure of sentences and/or certain issues of the ' inner ' semantics of lexical units and their collocations  . 
One of the critical aspects of the tagging scenario capturing the underlying structure of the sentence si the ' depth ' of the resulting tree structures  ; in other words , how far these structures differ from the surface structures  . 
If we take for granted ( as is the case in most of the syntactic treebanks  ) that every word of the ( surface ) sentence should have a node of its own in the surface tree structure  , then this issue can in part be reformulated in terms of two subquestions :  ( i ) which surface nodes are superfluous and should be ' pruned away '  ,   ( ii ) which nodes should be assumed to be deleted in the surface and should be ' restored ' in the underlying structure  ( e . g . informs of different kinds of dummy symbols , see Fillmore 1999) . 
In our paper , we are concerned with the point ( ii ) . 
2 . In the TG and post-TG writings , it is common to distinguish between two types of deletions :  ( a ) ellipsis proper and ( b ) gapping . For both of them , it is crucial that the elliptical construction and its antecedent should be parallel and ' identical ' at least in some features  . The two types of ellipsis can be illustrated by examples  ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  , respectively . 
(1) Psaljenomflkoly , kterdchtal.
lit . ' He-wrote only home work's which he-wanted ' ( 2 ) Honza dal Mariirfikia Petr Idatulipfin . 
lit . ' John gave Maryrose and Peter Idatulip ' For both types  , a reconstruction is ome way or another is necessary  , if the tree structure is to capture the underlying structure of the sentences  . 
3 . The examples quoted in the previous section cover what Quirk et al  ( 1973 , pp . 
536-620) call'ellipsis in the strict sense ' ; they view ellipsis as a purely surface ellipted words is always unique and ' fits ' into the surface structure  . They difl'erentiate ellipsis fiom ' semantic implication ' which would cover e  . g . such cases as (3) and (4): (3) John wants to read . 
(4) Thanks.
If ( 3 ) is ' reconstructed ' as ' John wants John to read  '  , then the two occurrences of ' John ' are referentially different  , which is not true about the interpretation of (3) . With (4) , it cannot be uniquely determined whether the full corresponding structure should be  '1 owey outhanks ' or ' I give you thanks ' etc . 
4 . For tagging a corpus on the underlying level , it is clear that we cannot limit ourselves to the cases of ellipsis in tile strict sense but we have to broaden lhenotion of ' reconstruction ' to cover both  ( i ) deletions licensed by the grammatical i ) roperties of sentence lements or sentence structure  , and ( it ) deletions licensed only by the preceding context ( be it co-text or context of situation )  . 
4 . 1 . In our analysis of a sample of Czech National Corpus  , two situations may occur within the group ( i ) :  ( a ) Only the position itself that should be " filled " in the sentence structure is predetemfined  ( i . e . a sentence element is subcategorized for this position  )  , but its lexical setting is Tree ' . 
Thisise . g . the case of the socalled prodrop character of Czech  , where the position of the subject of a verb is ' given '  , but it may be filled independence on the context . 
(5) Pi : edsed avlfidyi:ekl , ~ epf'ed lo ~ in fivrhnaz menu vole bnihosystdmu . 
' The Prime-minister said that ( 0 ) will submit a proposal on tile change of the electoral system  . ' The ' dropped'subject of the verb pi:edlo2i ' will submit'may refer to the Prime-minister , to the Govermnent , or to somebody else identifiable on the basis of the context  . 
Here also belong cases of the semantically obligatory but deletable complementations of verbs : the Czech verb l  ) i: ( /et ' to arrive'has as its obligatory complementation a Actor and a Directional " where - to "  ( the obligatoriness of the Directional complementation can be tested by a question test  , see Panevov fi1974; Sgall et al 1986) , which can be deleted on the surface ; its reference is determined by the context . 
(6) Vlakpi ~ ije dev poledne.
' Tiletrain will arrive at no on.'
The utterer of ( 6 ) deletes the Direction ' where-to'be causes/he assumes that the hearer knows the referent  . 
( b ) Both the position and its ' filler ' are predetermined  . 
This is the case of e . g . the subject of the infinitival complement of the socalled verbs of control as in  ( 7 )  . 
(7 ) Pi " edsed avVl dyslibil pi ~ edlo ~ itn fivrhna zm6nu voleb nihosystdmu . 
' The Prime-minister promised to submit a proposal on the change of the electoral system  . ' The identification of the underlying subject of the infinitive is ' controlled ' by the Actor of the main verb  , in our example it is ' the

Another example of this class of deletions are the so called General Participants  ( close to the English one or German man ) : General Actor in ( 8 )  , General Patient in (9) , or
General Addressee in (10).
(8) Taknihabylau ~ vydfinadvakrfit.
' The book has already been published twice . ' (9) V nedeliobvy klepe ~, u . 
' On Sundays ( I ) usually bake . '(10) D6dei?ek 6 as to vypravuie pohfidky . 
' Gr and father often tells fairy-tales . ' of the socalled ' occasional ellipsis ' conditioned by the context alone  . 
We are aware that not everything in any position that is identifiable on the basis of the context can be deleted in Czech  ( as might be in an extreme way concluded from examples  ( 11 ) through ( 14 ) ) . However , the conditions restricting the possibility of ellipsis in Czech seem to be less strict than e  . g . in English , as illustrated by ( 15 ) :  ( 11 ) Miluje meactimes vd hou ~ itele . 
' We love and honour our teacher . ' (12) Mariij semvid ~ lasly gelz pivat . 
lit . ' Mary-Acc . Aux-besaw and heard to-sing ''! saw and heard Mary singing  . '  ( 13 ) Jirkasev ~ erav hospod6 opildo n6moty a Honzadneska . 
lit . ' Jirka himself yesterday in pubd runk to death and Honzatoday  . '' In the pub , Jirka drunk himself to death yesterday and Honza today  . '(14) Petrf-ikal Pavlovi , aby~elven , a
Martin , a by zfl staldoma.
' Peter told Pavel to go outside and Martin ( told Pavel ) to stay at home . '(15) ( Potkaljsive era Toma ?) Potkal . 
' ( Did you meet Tom yesterday ?) Met '.
4 . 3 in addition to setting principles of which nodes need to be restored it is also important to say in which cases no restoration is desirable  . Nodes are not restored in cases of : ( a ) accidental omission ( due to emotion , excitement or insufficient command of language , see e . g . Hlavs a 1990); ( b ) unfinished sentences , which usually lack focus ( unlike ellipsis where the ' missing ' elements belong to topic  )  ;   ( c ) sentences without a finite verb that can be captured by a structure with a noun in its root  ( in these cases there are no empty positions , nothing can be really added ) . 
All these cases have no clearcut boundaries , rather it is more appropriate to expect continual transitions  . 
5 . 1 The Prague Dependency TreeBank ( PDT in the sequel )  , which has been inspired by the build up of the Penn 
Treebank ( Marcus , Santorini &
Marcinkiewicz 1993; Marcus , Kim,
Marcinkiewicz et al 1994) , is aimed at a complex annotation of ( a part of ) the Czech National Corpus ( CNC in the sequel )  , the creation of which is under progress at the Department of Czech National Corpus at the Faculty of Philosophy  , Charles University ( the corpus currently comprises about 100 million tokens of word forms )  . PDT comprises three layers of annotations : ( i ) the morphemic layer with about 3000 morphemic tag values ; a tag is assigned to each word form of a sentence in the corpus and the process of tagging is based on stochastic procedures described by  Haii6 and Hladkfi ( 1997 )  ;   ( ii ) analytic tree structures ( ATSs ) with every wordform and punctuation mark explicitly represented as a node of a rooted tree  , with no additional nodes added ( except for the root of the tree of every sentence  ) and with the edges of the tree corresponding to ( surface ) dependency relations ;   ( iii ) tectogrammatical tree structures ( TGTSs ) corresponding to the underlying sentence representations  , again dependency-based . 
At present the PDT contains 100000 sentences ( i . e . ATSs ) tagged on the first two layers . As for the third layer , the input for the tagging procedure are the ATSs ; this procedure is in its starting phase and is divided into  ( i ) automatic preprocessing ( see
BOhmov ~ and Sgall 2000 ) and ( ii ) the manual phase . The restoration of the syntactic information absent in the surface  ( morphemic ) shape of the sentence ( i . e . for which there are no nodes on the analytic level  ) is mostly ( but not exclusively ) done-phase of the transduction procedure . In this phase , the tagging of the topic-focus articulation is also performed  ( see Burfifiovfi , Hajieovfi and Sgall 2000) . 
5.2 The reconstruction of deletions in
TGTSs is guided by the following general principles :  ( i ) All ' restored ' nodes standing for elements deleted in the surface structure of the sentence but present in its underlying structure get marked by one of the following values in the attribute DEL:ELID:the'restored'element stauds alone  ; e . g . the linearized TGTS ( disregarding other than structural relations ) for ( 16 ) is ( 16' )  . 
(Note : Every dependent item is enclosed in a pair of parenthesis  . The capitalized abbreviations stand for dependency relations and are self-explaining  ; in our examples we use English lexical units to make the representations more transparent  . ) (16) Sb fral houby . 
' Collected-hemush rooms . '(16') ( he . ACT . ELID ) collected ( mush rooms . PAT ) ELEX : if the antecedent is an expanded head node and not all the deleted nodes belong to the obligatory colnplementations of the given node and as such not all are reconstructed  , cf . e . g . the simplified TGTS for (13) in (13') . 
(13') (( Jirka . ACT ) ( yesterday . TWHEN )( pub . LOC ) drunk-himself ( to-death . MANN )) and ( drunk-himself . ELEX ( Honza . ACT ) ( today . TWHEN ) ) EXPN : if the given node itself was not ellipted but some of its complementations were and are not restored  ( see the principle ( iii ) ( b ) below )  , cf . e . g . the simplified TGTS in (15') for (15) above , with non-reconstructed telnporal modification : ( 15' )   ( I . ACT . ELID ) met . EXPN(Tom . PAT . ELID )   ( ii ) The restored nodes are added immediately to the left of their governor  . 
( iii ) The following cases are prototypical examples of restorations  ( for an easier reference to the above discussion of the types of deletions  , the primed numbers of tile TGTSs refer to the example sentences in 
Section 4 ) :  ( a ) Restoration of nodes for complementations for which the head nodes  ( governors ) are subcategorized . The assignment of the lexical labels is governed by the following principles : in prodrop cases  ( 5' )   ( comparable to Fillmore's 1999
CNI-constructionally-licensed null instantiation  ) and with an obligatory but deletable complementation  ( 6' )   ( cf . 
Filhnore's definite null instantiation , DNI ) the lexieal value corresponds to the respective pronoun  ; with grammatical coreference ( control ) , the lexical value is Cor (7') ; in both these cases , the lexical w due of the antecedent is put into a special attribute of Coreference  ; in cases of general participants ( cf . Filllnore's indefinite null instantiation-INI ) the lexical value is Gen ( 10' ) :  ( 5' )   ( prime-minister . ACT ) said((he . ACT . ELID ; COREF : prime minister ) will-submit . PAT ( proposal . PAT ( change . PAT ( system . PAT ( electoral . RSTR )))) (6') ( train . ACT ) will-arrive(no on . TWHEN ) ( here/there . ELID . DIR3) (7') ( prime-lninister . ACT ) promised (( Cor . ACT . ELID ; COREF : priln e-nainister ) submit . PAT ( proposal . PAT ( change . PAT ( system . PAT ( electoral . RSTR )))) (10')( grandfather . ACT ) ( often . TWHEN ) ( Gen . ADDR . ELID ) tells ( fairy-tales . PAT )   ( b ) Elipted optional complelnentations are not restored  ( see ( 13' ) above ) unless they are governors of adjuncts . 
( c ) For coordinated structures , the guiding principle says : whenever possible , give before a " sentential " one ( more generally : " be as economical as possible " )  , thus examples like ( t7 ) are not treated as sentential coordination ( i . e . they are not transformed into structures corresponding to  ( 17' ) ) . 
(17) Karelp fines lJan6 kv6tinyaknihu.
' Katel brought Jane flowers and a book . '  ( 17' ) Karelp fines l Jan6   kv6tiny a Katelp fines l Jan6 knihu . 
' Karelbrought Jane flowers and Karelbrought Jane a book  . ' A special symbol CO is introduced in the complex labels for the coordinated nodes to mark which nodes stand in the coordination relation and which modify the coordination as a whole  ( see ( 11' ) ) ; the lexical value of the restored elements is copied from the antecedents  ( see ( 13' ) above ) :  ( 11' )   ( ( we . ACT ) ( love . CO ) and ( honour . CO ) ( our teacher . PAT ) ) The analysis of ( 11' ) is to be preferred to sentential coordination with deletion also for its correspondence with the fact  , that in Czech object can stand after coordinated verbs only if the semantic relation between the verbs allows for a unifying interpretation  , as shown by cases , where the object must be repeated with each verb ( compare the contrast between ( 18 ) and ( 19 ) ) . 
(I8) Potkaljsem Petra , alene poznaljs emho.
' Imet Peter , but I didn't recognize him . '(19) ? ? Potkal , alene poznal jsem Petra . 
' I met but didn't recognize Peter.'
However , there are cases where the coordination has to be taken as sentential or at least at a higher level  . As modal verbs are represented as gramatemes of the main verb  , sentences as ( 20 ) have to be analysed as in ( 20' ) :  ( 20 ) Petrmuselicht 61 pfijit . 
' Peter had to and wanted to come . '(20') ( Peter . ACT ) ( had-to-come . CO ) and ( wanted-to-come . ELID . CO ) Another case of a less strict adherence to the economy principle are sentences with double reading  . Such a treat naen then allows for a distinction to be made between the two readings  , e . g . in (21) , namely between ( a ) ' villagers who are ( both ) old and sick ' and ( b ) ' villagers who are sick ( but not necessarily old ) and villagers who at e old ( but not necessarily sick ) ':  ( 21 ) Jimzachr finil star 6 an emocndvesnie any . 
' Jim saved old and sick villagers . '(2l'a ) ( Jim . ACT ) saved ( villagers . PAT (( old . CO . RSTR ) and ( sick . CO . RSTR )) (2l'b ) ( Jim . ACT ) saved (( villagers . CO . PAT . ELID(old . RSTR )) and ( villagers . CO . PAT ( sick . RSTR ))) 5 . 3 The research reported oll in this contribution is work in progress : the principles are set  , but precisions are achieved as the annotators progress  . There are many issues left for further investigation  ; letus mention just one of them , as an illustration . Both in (22) and in (23) , the scope of ' m filok do ' ( few ) is ( at least on the preferential readings ) wide ( ' there are few people such that . . . '); however ,   ( 24 ) is ambiguous : ( i ) there were few people such that gave P . a book and M . flowers , ( ii ) few people gave P . a book and few people gave
M . flowers ( not necessarily the same people ) . A similar ambiguity is exhibited by ( 25 ) :  ( i ) there was no such ( single ) person that would give P . a book and M . flowers , ( ii ) P . did not get a book and M . did not get flowers . However , there is no such ambiguity in (26) . 
(22) Mfi lok do jf jablkaanejfban,~ny.
lit . ' Feweat apples and do-not-eat banan as '' Few people e at apples and do note at bananas  . 'k vetinyne . 
lil . ' Few gave Peter book and Mary flowers not '' l ~ew people gave Peter a book and did not give Mary flowcrs  . ' (24) Mfilok dodal Petroviknihua Mariik v6tiny . 
lit . ' Few gave Peter book and Mary flowers '' Few people gave Peterabook and Mary flowers  . ' (25) Nikdonedal Petroviknihua Mariik v6tiny . 
lit . ' Nobody did-not-give Peter book and
Mary flowers '' Nobody gave Peterabook and Mary flowers  . ' (26) Petrovinik do nodalknihua Mariik v6tiny . 
lit . ' Peter nobody did-not-give book and
Mary flowers ' ' To Peter , nobody gave a book and to Mary , flowers . ' An explanation of this behaviour offers itself in terms of the interplaye l ! contrast in polarity and of topic-focus articulation : an element standing at Ille beginning of the sentence with a contras\[in polarity carries a wides cop c  ( ' few ' in ( 22 ) and ( 23 ) ) ; with sentences without such a contrast both wide scope and narrow scope interpretations are possible  ( ' few ' and ' nobody ' in ( 24 ) and ( 25 )  , respectively ) ;   ( 25 ) differs from ( 26 ) in that in the latter sentence , the element in contrastive topic is ' Peter ' in the first conjunct and ' Mary ' in the second  , rather than ' nobody ' , and there is no contrast in polarity involved . 
The tagging scheme sketched in the previous ections offers only a single TGTS for the ambiguous structures instead of two  , which is an undesirable result . However , if lhe explanation offered above is confl ' onted with a larger amount of data and confirmed  , lhed ifference between the two interpretations could be captured either by means of a combination of tags for the restored nodes and for the topic-focus articulation or by diflerent structures for coordination : while example  ( 22 ) supports the economical treatment of coordinate structures  ( the ACT modifying the coordination as whole )  , examples ( 24 ) through ( 26 ) seem to suggest hat there may be cases where the other approach  ( sentential coordination with ellipsis ) is more appropriate to capture the differences in meaning  . 
Acknowledgement . The research reported on in this paper has bccn predominantly carried out within a project suplgorted by the 
Czech Grant Agency 405-96-K214 and in part by the Czech Ministry o17 Education VS 96-151  . 
References l ~; 6hmc , vlA . and Sgall F ' .   ( 2000 ) Automatic procedures in tectogrammatical t gging  . In these lhocecdings . 
Burfifiovfi E . , ltaji~ovfiE . and Sgall P .   ( 2000 ) Taggingo J ' veO ' large coq ~ or a : T < ) pic-Foctts
Articuhltion . In this volume.
Fillmore C . J . (1999) Silemamt Fhora . " Corlms , Frallle Nel , all (\[ miss in , ~ colslplelllellts . Paper presented at the TELI ~ . I workshop : P , ratis lava . 
llaji , 2J . and ltladkfi13 .   ( 1997 ) Probabilistic cragrule-based tagger of an iqflective hmguage-aeom parisols  . In " Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing "  , Washington , D . C . , pp .  111 -118 . 
llaii6ovfiE . , Panevov fi J . and Sgall P .   ( 1998 ) Language Resources Need Amtotatimls 7b Make Them Really Reusable : The Prague Dependency  7  ) ' eebank . in " Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Language Resources &
Evaluation ", Granada , Spain , pp . 713-718.
l laji ~ ov fiE . , Partee B . and Sgall P . (1998) 7bpic-focus articulation , trOmrtite structures , and semantic ontent . Kluwcr , l ) or drccht . 
Hlavsa Z .   ( 1990 ) Some Notes on Ellipsis in Czech Language cmd Linguistics  . Studiitalian idilinguisticale oricacd applicata  19  , pp .  377-387 . 
Marcus M . P . , Kim G . , Marcinkicwicz M . A . et al ( 1994 )   7'he Penn Treebank : A mzotating l ' redicate Human Language Technology Workshop  . Morgan
Kaufmann , San Francisco.
Marcus M . P . , Santorini B . and Marcinkiewicz M . A . 
(1993 ) Building a Large Annotated Ccnpus of English : the Penn Treebank  . Computational
Linguislics , 19(2), pp . 313-330.
Panevov fi J .   ( 1974 ) On verbal frames in Functional Generative Description  . Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics 22 , pp . 3 - 40; 23 (1975), pp .  17-52 . 
Quirk R . , Greenbaum S . , Leech G . and Svartvik J . 
(1973) Aglztmmar of contemporao , English . 2nd
Ed . Longman , London.
Sgall P . , Haji~ovfi E . and Panevov fiJ .   ( 1986 ) The Meaning of the Sentence in lts Semalttic and Pragmatic Aspects  , ed . by J . L . Mey , Dordrecht,
Reidel-Prague , Academia.

