Flexible Mixed-Initiative Dialogue Management using 
Concept-Level Confidence Measures of Speech Recognizer Output 
Kazunori Koreaan and Tatsuya Kawahara
Graduat ( ~ School of lnt ' or mati (: s , Iyoto University
Kyoto 606-8501, JaI)an
kolnatani , kawahara (@ kuis.k.yoto-u.ac.ji )
Abstract
Wei ) rcsenta methodtor(:aliz(:th:xil)lemix ( ; ( l-initiative dialogue , in which the syst (: m can mak ( , etti : ctive COlflirmation madguid mn ( : ( : using ( -oncel ) t-leve , 1 confid cn (' emcmsur ( , s ( CMs ) derived from st ) eech recognizer output in ord ( :r to h and l ( : sl ) eech recognition errors . W (: d (: tine two con('et ) t-level CMs , which are oil COllt(~ , Ilt-words and on semantic-attrilmtes , uing 10-best outtmts of the Sl ) e ( : chr ( : cognizt : r and l ) arsing with t ) hrmse-level grammars . Content-word CM is usefll l for s ( : lecting 1 ) \] ausible in t ( :rl ) retati ( ms . 
Less contid ( : ntill t ( :rl ) r ( : tm tions arc given to confirmation 1 ) roc ( : ss . The strat ( : gyiml ) roved the interpr ( : tm tion accuracy l ) y11 . 5(/0 . Moreover , th ( : semanti ( :-mttrilmt ( : CMixus ( : d to ( : stimmt cuser's intention and generates syst ( mi-initiative guidances ( : v (  , ,n wh ( : nsuc ( - ( : sstSflint ( :rl ) r ( : tmtiol ~ is no to ) tain ( : ( 1 . 
1 Introduction
In ast ) oken dialogu (: system , it fr ( : ( tuently o ( :- cm : s that the system incorrectly rccogniz ( :s user utterances and the user makes exl ) ressions the system has not ( ~ xt ) ccted . These prot ) lcms arc essentially in cvital ) leinhandling the natural language 1 ) y comlmters , even if vocal ) ulary and grammar of the system are ~ lmed . This lack of robustnessione of the reason why spoken dialogue systems have not been widely deployed  . 
In order to realize a rol ) ustst ) oken dialogue system , it is inevital ) le to handle speech recognition errors . To sut)t)ress recognition errors , system-initiative dialogue is eit bctive . Butitca . n1) e adopted only in a simi ) le task . For instance , the form-tilling task can 1 ) erealized 1 ) yasimi ) lestrategy where the system asks a user the slut w dues in a fixed order  . In such a systeln-initiated intera('tion , the recognizer easily narrows down the vocabulary of the next user'sut-tcrance  , thus the recognition gets easier . 
( ) n the other hand , in moree on iplicat ( ' A task such ms inforination rctriew d , the vocml ) ulmry of the ll CXI ; l l t t ( 2 rauco call llot 1 ) elimited on all occasions , because the user should be abh ~ to input the values in various orders based on hisi  ) rel'erence . Therefore , without imposing a rigid teml ) lateut ) on the user , the system must be hav ( ~ at ) t ) rol ) riately even when sl ) ecch recognizer out-1 ) ut contain some errors . 
Obviously , making confirmal ; ionisefl ' cc tive to mvoid misun ( lerstandings caused by slme ( : h recognition errors , t to w c v e r , when contirmm-tions are made \]' or every utterance  ,   ; liedi-~dogue will l ) ccome too redundant mad con-sequcntly ; rout ) lcsom c , for users . Previous works have , shown that confirmation strategy shou M1 ) c decided according to the frequency of stretch recognition errors  , using mathematic ml formula ( Niimi and Kolmymshi ,  1 . 996) and using comt ) uter-to-coml ; ersilnulation ( W ~ tanabe et al . , 1!)98) . These works assume tixe ( tl ) erf of mance ( averaged speech recognition accuracy ) in whole ( lialogue with any speakers . For flexible dialogue management , howeve , r the confirmation strategy luust 1 ) e dynamically chang c , dbmsed on the individual utterances . For in-stmncc , we human make contirmation only when we arc not coatdent  . Similarly , confidence , inca-sures ( CMs ) of every speech recognition output should be modeled as a criterion to control dialogue management  . 
CMs have been calculated in previous works using transcripts and various knowledge sources  ( Litman et al , 1999) ( Pao et , al . , 1998) . For more tlexible interaction , it , ix desirable that CMs are detined on each word rather than whole sentence  , because the systeln can handle only unreliable portions of an utterance instead of accepting /rejecting whole sentence  . 

In this paper , we propose two concept-level CMs that are on content-word level and on semantic-attribute level for every content word  . 
Because the CMs are defined using only speech recognizer output  , they can be computed in realtime . The system can make efficient confirmation and effective guidance according to the CMs  . Even when successful interpretation is not obtained  o51 content-word level , the system generate system-initiative guidances based on the semantic-attribute level  , which lead the next user's utterance to successful interpretation  . 
2 Definition of Confidence Measures ( CMs ) Confidence Measures ( CMs ) have been studied for utterance verification that verifies speech recognition result as a postprocessing  ( Kawahara et al ,  1998) . Since an automatic speech recognition is a process finding a sentence hypothesis with the maximum likelihood for an input speech  , some measures are needed in order to distinguish a correct recognition result from incorrect one  . In this section , we describe definition of two level CMs which are on content-words and on semantic-attritmtes  , using 10-best output of the speech recognizer and parsing with phrase-level grammars  . 
2 . 1 Def init ion of CM for Content Word In the speech recognition process  , both acoustic probability and linguistic t ) robability of words are multiplied ( summed up in log scale ) over a sentence , and the sequence having maximum likelihood is obtained by a search algorithm  . A score of sentence derived from the speech recognizer is log-scaled likelihood of a hypothesis sequence  . We use a grammar-based speech recognizer Julian ( Lee et al ,  1999) , which was developed in our laboratory . It correctly obtains the Nbest candidates and their scores by using 
A * search algorithm.
Using the scores of these Nbest candidates , we calculate content-word CMs as below . The content words are extracted by parsing with phrase-level grammars that are used in speech recognition process  . In this paper , we set N = 10 after we examined various values of N as the nmn ber of computed candidates J  1Even if we set N larger t t , an 10 , the scores of it h hypotheses ( i > 10 ) are too small to affect resulting CMs . 
First , each it h score is multiplied by a factor a ( a < 1 )  . This factor smoothestile difference of Nbest scores to get adequately distributed CMs  . Because the distribution of the absolute values is different among kinds of statistical acoustic model  ( monophone , triphone , and sooi1) , different values must be used . The value of c~is examined in the preliminary experiment  . 
In this paper , we set c~=0 . 05 when using triphone model as acoustic model . Next , they are transtbrnmd from log-scaled value (< t . scale di ) to probability dimension by taking its exponential  , and calculate a posteriori probability t breach ith candidate  ( Bouwman et al ,  1999) . 

Pi = ~ nCo ~. scale djj = l
This Pi represents a posteriori probability of the ith sentence hypothesis  . 
Then , we compute a posteriori probability tbrawor d . If the ith sentence contains a word w , let 5w , i = 1 , and 0 otherwise . A posteriori probability that a word w is contained  ( Pw ) is derived assummation of a posteriori prob ~ bilities of sentences that contain the word  . 

Pw = ~ Pi " 5w , ii = 1
We define this P was the content-word CM(CM , ,) . This CM . , , is calculated t brevery content word . Intuitively , words that appear many times in Nbest hypotheses get high CMs  , and frequently substituted ones in Nbest hypotheses are judged as mn'eliable  . 
In Figure 1 , we show an example in CMw calculation with recognizer outputs  ( ith recognized candidates and their a posteriori probabilities  ) t branutterance " Futaishiscts unir csu-to ranno aruyado  ( Tell me hotels with restaurant facility . )" . It can be observed that a correct content word ' restaurant as facility ' gets a high CM value  ( CMw = 1 )  . The others , which are incorrectly recognized , get low CMs , and shall be rejected . 
2.2 CM for Semantic Attribute
A concept category is semantic attribute assigned to content words  , and it is identified by parsing with phrase-level gramnmrs that are used in speech recognition process and represented with FiniteState Automata  ( FSA )  . Since a as hise tsuni resut mnu , nokayacho with restaurant facility/Kayacho ( location ) aashisetsuni rcsuto7nn no katsurn no with restaurant fimility/Katsura ( location ) aashiscts uniresuto rannok a migamo with restaurant facility/Kmnigamo  ( location ) < g > shisctsuni with restaurant < g > sh ise tsuni with restaurant < g > shise tsuni resutor annokaya chofacility/Kayacho  ( location ) rcsutor'a~t7 tokat . ~' ~ trafacility/Katsura ( location ) 7" cs?ttorit Tt 7~ , oka migamo with restaurant facility/I ( amigamo ( location ) aash , isets uniresuto rannok afc with restaurant fimility/care  ( facility ) < g > shise tsuni resutor annokafe with restaurant facility/cafc  ( facility ) < g > set subiwor csu to ranno kayacho with restaurant facility/I  ( ayacho ( locatlon ) < g>sctsubi wo resutor annokatsu rano with restaurant facility/Katsura  ( location )   . 24  . 24  . 20  . 08  . 08  . 06  . 05  . 02  . 01  . 01 < g > : tiller model
CM , , ,\].
0 . 33 0 . 33 0 . 25 0 , 07  ( content word )  ~  ( semantic attribute ) restaurant@fimility
Kayacho@location
Katsura 0 location
Kmnigmno ~ location care ~ facility
Figure . 1: Example of content-word CM(CM , , , ) these FSAs are , classified into ( : on ( :cl ) t categories l m for e h and , we can autonatically derive the concept categories of words by parsing with these grammars  . In our hotel query task , there are sevelt concept categorie such as qocation '  , ' fi , cility ' and so on . 
For this concept (: a tegory , we also define semantic-attritm t cCMs ( CM ~: ) as t bllows . 
First , we ( -ah : uln teat ) osteriori probabilities of Nbest sentences in the same  . way of comtmt-ing content-word CM . If a concel ) t c ~ tegory c is contained in the ith sentence , let 5 , , , i = 1 , and 0 otherwise . Thet ) robability that a concept category c is correct ( Pc ) is derived as below . 
P c = Epi's c,i i = 1
We define this Pc as semantic-attribute CM(CM~) . This CM cestimates which category the user refers to and is used to generate tt'ective guidances  . 
HSel'~Sut\[el'ancc ) v ~__ speech recognizer ( ___ each content word ) g'N-be~t , candid at cs-~'j . 
/ cont3n ~ wo'd /',
CMracccpt ~ i semantic at libut c/
CMS fill \] semantic slots\[guidance\]prompt or cpht ' as c 
Figure 2: Overview of Ol U " strategy 3 Mixed-initiative Dialogue Strategy using CMs The rem : e a lot of systems that hawe a  ( lopted a mixed-initiative strategy ( Sturm et al , 1999) ( Goddeau et a . l . , 1996) ( Bennacefe . tal . , 1996) . It has several adwmtages . As the . systems do not impose rigid system-initiated templates  , the user can input values he has in mind directly  , thus the dialoguel ) ecomes more natural . In conventional systems , the system-initiated utterances are considered only when semantic mnbiguity occurs  . But in order to realize robust interaction , the system should make confirmations to remove recognition errors and generate guidances to lead next user's utterance to succcs sflll interpretation  . In this section , we describe how to generate the system-initiated utterances to deal with recognition errors  . An overview of our strategy is shown in Figure 2 . 
3.1 Making Effective Confirmations
Confidence Measure ( CM ) is usefll in selecting reliable camlidates and controlling coniirnlation strategy  . By setting two thresholds 01 , 02 (01>0~) on content-word CM(CM . ,) , we provide the confirmation strategy as t bllows . 
4 69 ? C-Mw > 0~ accept the hypothesis ? Oj >_CM~>02 - ~ make confirmation to the user " Did you say . . . ?"?02>_CM ~,, --* reject the hypothesis The . threshold 01 is used to judge whether the hypothesis is accepted or should be confirmed  , and tile threshold 02 is used to judge whether it is reiected . 
Because UMw is defined for every content word , judgment among acceptance , confirmation , or rejection is made for every content word when one utterance contains several content words  . Suppose in a single utterance , one word has CM , , , , between 0~ and 0~ and tile other has t)elow 02 , the tbrlner is given to confirmation process , and tile latter is rejected . Only if all content words are rejected , the system will prompt the user to utter again . By accepting confident words and rejecting ml reliable candidates  , this strategy avoids redundant confirmations and tb cuses on necessary confirmation  . 
We opt in fize these thresholds 0 t , 02 consider-tug the false , acceptance ( FA ) and the false rejection ( FR ) using real data . 
Moreover , the system should confirm using task-level knowledge  . It is not usual that users change the already specified slot  ; values . Thus , recognition results that overwrite filled slots are likely to be errors  , even though its CM ~ , is high . 
By making confirmations ill such a situation , it is expected that false acceptance ( FA ) is suppressed . 
3.2 Generating System-Inltiated
Guidanees
It is necessary to guidetile users to recover ti ' om recognition errors  . Especially for novice users , it is often eflbctive to instruct acceptable slots of the system  . It will be helpful that tile system generates a guidance about the acceptable slots when the user is silent without carrying out tile dialogue  . 
The system-initiated guidances are also effective when recognition does not go well  . Even when any successfl fl fl output of content words is not obtained  , the system cast gener at effective guidances based on the semantic attribute with futterance : correct : " shozaigaoosakafltnoyado "  ( hotels located in Osakapref . )
Osaka-pref ? locationi recognition candi(tat , es ( < g >: filler model ) d to zaigapo to ai rando no < g > located in Port - islands hozai gapo to ai rando no < g > located in Port-islands hozaigao osaka funo<g > located in Osaka-pref  . 
shozai gaoosaka funo<g > located in Osaka-pref.
shozai gaoosa \] cashino<g > located in Osaka -cityshozai gaoosakashino<g > located in Osaka-city shozai gao hazakino<g > located in Okazakishozai gaot cazakino<g > located in Okazakishozai gaoo harano<g > located in Oharashozai gaoo hara no<g > located in Ohara 
C2~tc semantic attributes 1 location
CMw 0.38 0.30 0.13 0.11 0.08 content words





Figure 3: Example of high semantic attribute confidence in spite of low word confidence high confidence  . An example is shown in Figure 3 . In this example , all the 10-best candidates a reconcerning a name of place but their CMw values are lower than the threshold  ( 02 )  . 
As a result , any word will be neither accepted nor confirmed . In this case , rather than rejecting the whole sentence and telling the user " Please say again "  , it ; is better to guide the user based oll the attr ibute having high CM  ,  . , such as " Which city is your destination ?" . This guidance enables tile system to narrow down the vocabulary of the next user's utterance and to reduce the recognition difficulty  . It will consequently lead next user's utterance to successful interpretation  . 
When recognition on a content word does not attr ibute CM  , it is reasoned that the content word may be out -of vocal mlary  , in such a case , the systmn shouht change the que . stion . For example , if an utterm mecoal ; alas all out of vocat ) ulary word and its semantic-attribute is inibrred as " location "  , the system can make guidance , " Pleasest)eci(y with the name of t ) re-fecture " , which will lead the next user's utterance into the system's vocabulary  . 
4 Experimental Evaluation 4 . 1 Task and Data We evaluate our nmthod on the hotel query task  . We colh ; cted 120 mimll ; es speech data by 24 novice users l ) y using the 1 ) rototylm system with GUI ( Figure 4 )   ( Kawahara et al ,  1999) . 
The users were given siml ) le instruction before handoll the system's task , retriew fi ) leil ; ( nns , how to cancelint mt values , and soo 11 . The data is segmented into 705 utterances , with at ) a use of 1 . 25 seconds . The voeal ) ulary of I ; he system contains 982 words , and the aural ) or of database records is 2040 . 
() tit of 705 lltterailces,\]24 llttelT allces (1 . 7 . 6%) are beyond the system'seal ) al)ility , namely they are out-of vocal mlary , ou ; - of grmn mar ~ out of task , or fragment of llttel ' all C ( L\]i1t bllowing ex-1 ) erim ( mt ; s , we cvahm teth (' , sys;t ' , ln\] ) erl ) )rm~nce using all ( lath including the semm , c(:el ) tnt ) le utterances in order to evahlal t ; e how the system can reject unexl ) ected utterances at ) t ) rot ) riately as well as recognize hernial utterances correctly  . 
4 . 2 Thresho lds to Make Conf i rmat ions In section 3  . 1 , wet ) resented confirmation strategy 1 ) y setting two thresholds 01 , 02 (01>02) for eolfl , enl ;- word CM(CMw ) . We opt in lize these threshoht w flues using t ; 11( ; collected data . \?e count ca:ors11 ol ; by the utterance lint by the content-word ( slot )  . The number of slots is 804 . 
The threshold 01 decidest ) etween accel ) tanee and confirmation . The w due of 0\] shou hl be determined considering both the ratio of ineofrectly accepting recognition errors  ( False At--ceptance ; FA ) and the ratio of slots that are not filh ; d with correct w fiues ( Slot ; Error ; SE rr ) . 
Namely , FA and SErr are defined an the ( : ( mq ) le-meat soft ) recision and recall rate of the outl ) ltt , respectively . 
FA = ~ el ' incorrectly accepted words of accepted words fl ~ of corre et  ; tyae cel ) ted words
SE'r r = I-of all correct words
After experimental optimization to minimize FA + SE rr  , we derive a wflue of 0 i as 0 . 9 . 
Similarly , the threshold 02 decides contirlna-tion and rejection . The value of 02 should be decided considering both the ratio of incorrectly rq jeeting content words  ( False Rejection ; FR ) and the ratio of aceel ) ting recognition errors into the onfirlnation 1 ) recess ( conditional False At :- eel ) tahoe ; cFA ) . 
fl : of incorrectly re . jetted words ~- of all rejected words If we set the threshohl  02 lower , FR decreases and correspondingly cFA increases , which means that more candidates are ol ) tained but more e ontirmations are needed . By mini-mizing \] q/ . + cFA , we deriw ; a value of 02 as 0 . 6 . 
4.3 Comparison with Conventional

Ill many convention alst)okendi ~ doguesyst ; ems , only 1best candidate of a speech recognizer out t ) ut is used in the subsequent processing . 
\ ? e ( : Oral ) are ore ' method with a conventional method that uses only  1best ean ( lidate in interpretation ae ( : uraey . ' l . ' he result is shown in % rifle 1 . 
1111 the qloeon firnlation'strategy , the hy-pothes ( , s are classified by a single threshohl ( 0 ) into either the accepted or the rejected . Namely , (: ontent words having CM , , , over threshohl 0 are aecet)ted , mM otherwise siml ) lyr(\[iected . In this case , a1; hreshold w flue of 0 is set to 0 . 9 that gives miniature FA-FSE rr .   111 the ' with confirmation ' strategy ~ the proposed  ( : oniirmation strategy is a dol ) ted using ( )1 and 02 . We set 01 = 0 . 9 and 02 = 0 . 6 . The qTA+SE rr ' in Table 1 means FA(0~)+SE rr(02) , on the assumption that the contirn mdl ) hrases are correctly either accel ) tedorrejected . -We regard this as-smnt)tion as at ) l ) rol ) riate , because users tend to answer ~ ye , s ' simply to express their affirmation ( Hockey et al ,  1997) , so the sys ; em can distinguish affirmative answer and negative olle by grasping simple ' yes ' utterances correctly  . 
471 i ~ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . %  . . . . . . . . . . . . . IIIII~t(a ) A real system in Japanese
Hotel Accommodation Search hotel type is I Japanese-style I location is I downtown Kyoto\] room rate is less than I  10  , 000 I yen
These are query results ? ( b ) Upper I ) ortion translated in English Figure 4: An outlook of GUI ( Graphical User Interface . )
Table 1: Comparison of methods
FA+SE rr FAS Erf only 1st candidate 51 . 5 27 . 6 23 . 9 no confirmation 46 . 1 14 . 8 31 . 3 with confirmation 40 . 0 14 . 8 25 . 2 FA : ratio of incorrectly accepting recognition errors SE rr : ratio of slots that are not filled with correct values As shown in Table  1  , interpretation ~ , c('u-racy is improved by 5 . 4% in the ' no confirmation ' strategy compared with the conwmtional method  . And ' with confirmation ' strategy , we achieve 11 . 5% improvement in total . This result proves that our method successflfly eliminates recognition errors  . 
By making confirmation , the interaction becomes robust , but accordingly the number of whole utterances increases  . If all candidates having CM , ounder 01 are given to confirmation process without setting  0u   ,   332 wdn confirmation for incorrect contents are generated out of  400 candidates . By setting 02 , 1 02 candidates having CMw between 01 and 02 are confirmed , and the number of incorrect confirmations is suppressed to  53  . Namely , the ratio of correct hypotheses and incorrect ones being confirmed areah no stequ M  . This result shows in distinct candidates are given to confirmation process whereas scarcely confident candidates are rejected  . 
content-word CM and semantic-attribute CM 100
FA+SE rr ( content word)
FA+SErr ( semantic attribute ) - - - --8 O6O+m < 40"N , _~ . ~ . ~ . ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ~ ' / /1 21 , _\] 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 81 threshold
Figure 5: Pertbrm~mce of the two CMs 4 . 4 Effectiveness of Semantic-Attribute

In Figure 5 , the relationship between content-word CM and semantic-attribute CM is shown  . 
It is observed that semantic-attribute CMs are estimated more correctly than content-word CMs  . Therefore , even when successful interpretation is not obtained fl ' om content-word CMs  , semantic-attribute can be estimated correctly . 
In experimental data , there are 148 slots 2 that are rejected by content-word CMs . It is also observed that 52% of semantic-attributes 2Out-of-vocabulary and out-of-grammar utterances are included in their phrases  . 
472 with CA4 cover 0 . 9 is correct . Such slots amomit to 34 . Namely , our system can generate t t . ' cc-rive guidances against 23% ( 34/148 ) of utter-antes that had been only rejected in conventional methods  . 
5 Conclusion
We present dialogue mallagement using two concel ) t-level CMs in order to realize rolm still -teractioll  . The content-word CM provides a criterion to decide whether an interpretation should be accel  ) ted , confirmed , or rejected . This strategy is realized by setting two thresholds that are optimized balancing false acceptance and false rejection  . The interpretation error ( FA+SE rr ) is reduced by 5 . 4% with no confirmation and by \]1 . 5% with confirmations . Moreover , we & ' , line CM on semantic attribut(~s , and propose a new met ; hod to generate ilbx : tive guidances . The concept-t ) ased ( : on fidence measure realizest lexible mixed -initiative dialogue in which the system can make effective contirma-tion and guidance by estimating user's intention  . 
References
S . \]~( mnacef,L . Devillers : S . Rosset , and L . Lamel .  1996 . Dialog in the I/ . AIIfl ? EL telet ) hone-1) as (~( t system . In Pwc . \] nt'l Con . fion , 5' pokc'n , Languagel ) Tvcc . ssi'n . g . 
G . Bouwman , , 1 . Sturm , and L . Boves .  1999 . In-cort)orating contid cnce measures in the . Dutch traintime table information system developed in the ARISE t  ) roject . In P ' lvc . ICASSP . 
D . God ( lean , H . Meng , J . Polifroni , S . Seneff , and S . Busayapongchai .  1996 . A formbased diah ) gue manager for spoken language al ) pli-cations . In P~vc . lnt'lCo7@onSpoken Language \]) rocessing . 
B . A . Hockey , D . l:l , ossen-Knill , B . Spejew-ski , M . Stone , and S . Isard .  1997 . Can you predict resl ) onsestoyes/no questions ? yes , no , and stuff . In Proc . EUIl , OSPEECI\]'97 . 
T . Kawahara , C.-H . Lee , ~ mdB.-H . Juang.
1998 . Flexible speech understanding based on confl ) in ed key-t ) hrase detection and verification . IEEE TTn ns . on Speech and Audio
Processing , 6(6):558-568.
T . Kawahara , K . q_?maka , ndS . Doshita .  1999 . 
Domain-independent t ) latform of spoken dialogue interfaces for information query  , in Proc . ESCA workshop on Interactive Dia-logucin MultiModal Systems  , pages 6972 . 
A . Lee , T . Kawahara , and S . Doshita . 1999.
Large . vocabulary continuous speech recognition 1 ) arser based on A * search using grammar category category-pair constraint  ( in , lapancs c ) . Trans . h ~: formation Processing
Society of , lapau ,, 40(4):1374-1382.
D . J . Litman , M . A . Walker , and M . S . Kearns . 
1999 . Automatic detection of 1 ) oor speech recognition at the dialogue level . In Pwc . of 37th Annual Meetingo . f the ACL . 
Y . Niimi and Y . Kobayashi .  1996 . A dialog control strategy based on the reliability of st  ) eech recognition . In Proc . Int ' lCml :\[ . on , 5' pok cn
Language Processing.
C . Pao , P . S('hmid , and J . Glass .  1998 . Con-tidence scoring tbrst ) eechmlder stnnding systems . In P ~ v (: . \]' nt'l Conf . on S " poken Language P~vcessing . 
. . Sturm , E . Os , and L . Boves .  1999 . Issues in spoken dialogue systems : Experiences with the Dutch ARISE system  . In Pwc . of ESCA
IDS'99 Workshop.
T . Watanal)e , M . Ar~ki , and S . Doshitm 1998.
Evaluating diah ) gue strategies un ( lex coln nm-nication errors using COlntmter-to -comlmter simulation  . 7' an . s . of IEICE , he:fogSyst . ,
E81-D(9):I0251033.

