Reusing an ontology to generate numeral classifiers 
Francis Bond *
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
24 Hikaridai , Kyoto 619-0237, JAPAN
bond@cslab.kecl.ntt.co.jp
Kyonghee Paik
Center for the Study of Language and Information
Stanford University , CA 94305-2150, USA
kpaik @ usa , net

In this paper , we present a solution to the problem of generating Japanese nmneral classifiers using semantic lasses from an ontology  . Most nouns must take a numeral classifier when they are quan-tiffed in language such as Chinese  , Japanese , Korean , Malay and Thai . In order to select an appropriate classifier , we propose an algorithm which associates classifiers with semantic lasses and uses inheritance to list only those classifiers which have to be listed  . It generates sortal classifiers with au accuracy of  81%  . We reuse the ontology provided by GoiTaikei--a Japanese lexicon  , and show that it is a reasonable choice for this task  , requiring information to be entered for less than  6% of individual nouns . 
1 Introduction
In this paper we consider two questions . The th's t is : how to generate numeral classifier such as piece in  2 pieces qfl ) a per ? To do this we use a semantic hierarchy originally developed for a different ask  . The second is : how far can such a hierarchy be reused ? In English  , uncountable nouns cannot be directly modified by numerals  , instead the noun nmst be embedded in a noun phrase headed by a classi-tier  . Knowing when to do this is a language Sl0e-cific property . For example , French deu x renseigne-merit must be translated as two pieces of information in English  . \] Iu many languages , including most SouthEast Asian lauguages , Chinese , Japanese and Korean , the majority of nouns are uncountable and nmst be quantified by numeral classifier combinations  . These languages typically have many different classifiers  . There has been some work on the analysis of numeral classifiers in natural language processing  , particularly for Japanese ( Asahioka et al . , 1990; Kamei and Muraki , 1995; Bond et al , * Visiting CSLI , Stanford University (1999-2000) . 
INumeral-classilier combinations are shown in bold  , the noun phrases they quantify are underlined . 
1996; Bond et al , 1998; Yokoyama and Ochiai ,  1999) , but very little on their generation . We could only find one paper on generating classifiers in Thai  ( Sornlertlamvanich et al ,  1994) . One immediate application fox the generation of classifiers is machine translation  , and we shall take examples flom there , but it is in fact needed fox " the generation of any quantified noun phrase with an uncountable head noun  . 
The second question we address is : how far can an ontology be reused for a difl % rent task to the one it was originally designed fox  . There are several large ontologies no win use ( WordNet ( Fellb ~ mm , 1998); GoiTaikei ( lkehara et al , 1997); Mikrokos-rues ( Nirenburg ,  1989 ) ) and it is impractical to rebuild one fox " every application  . Howevel , there is no guarantee that an ontology built fox one task will be useful for another  . 
The paper is structured as follows . In Section 2 , we discuss tile properties of numeral classifiers in more detail and suggest an iln proved algorithm fox " generating them  . Seclion 3 introduces the ontology we have chosen , the GoiTaikei ontology ( ikeharactal . , 1997) . Then we show how to use the ontology to generate classifiers in Section  4  . Finally , we discuss how well it performs in Section 5 . 
2 Generating Numeral Classifiers
In this section we introduce the properties of numeral classifiers  , focusing on Japanese , then give an algorithm to generate classiliers . Japanesc was chosen because of tile wealth of publishe data on Japanese classifiers and the availability of a large lexicon with semantic lasses marked  . 
2.1 What are Numeral Classifiers
Japanese is a language where most nouns cannot be directly modified by numerals  , instead , nouns are modified by a numeral-classifier combinatiou as shown in  ( 1 )  . 2  2~Vc uselhe following abbreviations : NOM : nominative  ; ACC = accusative ; AI)N = adnominal ; CI . = classilier ; ARGSTR2- ( : L-ADNemai\[ 2 pieces of emai\] 2 emails In Japanese , numeral classifiers arc a subclasso\[nouns . The main properly dislinguishill g them from t ) rolotypical nouns is thailhey cannot sland alone . 
Typically they postiix to numerals , forming a quan-tilterl ) hrase . Japanese also allows them to combine with the quantifier  st7 " some " or tile interrogative nani " what " ( 2 )  . We will call all such Colnbinations ot ' a numeral/quantifier/interrogative with a numeral classifier a numeral-classitier combination  . 
(2) a . 2-hiki " 2 animals " ( Numeral ) b . sO-hiki " solne animals " ( Quantilier ) c . nan-biki " how Illauymfimals " ( in lcr-rogalive ) Classiliers have different l ) rOl ) erlies del ) ending on their use . There are liveula jor types : serial which classify the kind  o1: tile noun phrasetile ,  ( . \] uan-lily ( such as -/ all " piece ") ; evenl which arc used to quantify events ( such as-kai " lill lC " )   ; meil sll-ral which ~ lreused to measure lhcU  . III Otlllt Of SOllle property ( such its sench i "- cm " )  , group which refer to a collection of melnbers ( such as - inuregloup )  , and taxononfic which force ( he noun phrase to be inlerpreted as a generic kind  ( such as - . vim " kind ") . 
We propose the l : ollowing basic struclurc for sortal classiliers  ( 3 )  . The lexical slruct tlrewead opt is an extension ot ' Pustejovsky's  ( 1995 ) generative lx-icon , with tile addition of an explicit quantilication relationship  ( Bond and Paik ,  1997) . 
\[\[ AR(;Ix:numeral +
ARGSTR(3)/LD-ARG1 y : ,, la . , . qlicrLOUANTCluant:5-f5 . es(x , y ) There are two variables in the arguments trut -lure : the numeral  , quantifier or interrogative ( represented by numer a 2+ )   , and the noun phrase being classilied . Because the noun phrase being classilied can be omitted in context  , it is a default argun-lent , one which participales in tile logical expressions in the qualia  , but is not necessarily expressed syntactically . 
= argunlelll slructur c ; AR ( ; = argument ; \[)-AR ( ; = defaultm-gu-menl , QUANT = quantilication . 
Serial classiliers differ from each other in tile restrictions they place on the quantilied variable  7V  . 
For example tile classilier-n in add stile restriction y : human  . That is , it can only be used to classify human referents . 
Japanese has two number systems : a Sine-Japanese one based on Chinese for example  , ichi " Olle " , lli"\[wo " , s(lll " lhree " , etc . , and ~ tll alternative nalive-Jal)anesc ystem , for example , hitotsu " one " fitlalsu " two " , milsu " three " , etc . In Japanese tilella-live system only exists for the numbers from one to ten  . Most classitiers combine with the Chinese lorms , howevm ; different classiliers select Sine-Japanese for some numerals  , for example , ni-hiki " two-el " , and most classifiers undergo some form of sound change  ( such as-hiki to-biki in ( 2 ) ) . 
Wc will not bcconcerned wilh these morllhological changes  , we refer interested reMers to Backhouse (1993 , I1g-122) for more discussion . 
Numeral classiliers characteristically premodify the noun phrases they quantify  , linked by an adhere-in alcase marker , as in (4) ; or appear ' t\]oating ' as adverbial phrases , lypically to before the verb : (5) . 
The choice between prenominal and lloming quan -lifters is hu'gcly driven by discourse related considerations  ( 1 ) owning ,  1996) . In this paper we concen-lrale on ( he semantic ontribution of the quantiliers , and ignore tile discours effects . 
(4) 2-isii-notegami-oy on da2-CI . -AI ) N letter-A : cread
I read two letters ( 5 ) tcgami-o2-tsii yonda letter-ACC2<:L read
I read two letters
Quantilier phrases can also function as noun l ) hrascs on their own , with anaphoric ordeictic reference , when what is being quantilied is recoverable from the context  . For example ( 7 ) is acceptable if the letters have already been referred to  , or arc clearly visible . 
(6 ) \[ some background with letters salient\] ( 7 ) 2-tsfi-oyonda ( Japanese ) 2-CI , -ACC read 1 read two letters In the pre-nonlinal construction tile relation between ihe target noun phrase and quantilier is explicit  . For muneral-classilier combinations the noun phrase itself as in  ( 8 )  ; or of a subpart of it as in ( 9 )   ( see Bond and Pail ( 1997 ) for a fuller discussion )  . 
(8 ) 3-tsfi-notegami3-CL-ADN letter 3 letters ( 9 ) 3-mai-notegami3-CL-ADN letter a 3page letter 2 . 2 An Algorithm to Generate Numeral

The only published algorithm to generate classifiers is that of Sornlertlamvanich et al  ( 1994 )  . They propose to generate classifiers in Thai as follows : First create a lexicon with default classifiers listed for as many nouns as possible  . This was done by automatically extracting noun classifier pairs from a sense-tagged corpus  , and taking the classifier that appeared most often with each sense of a noun  . 3 Then , the most fiequent classifier is listed for each semantic lass  . Generation is then simple : if a noun has a default classifier in the lexicon  , then use it , otherwise use the default classifier associated with its semantic lass  . 
Unfortunately , no detailed results were given as to the size of the concept hierarchy  , the number of nodes in it or the number of nouns for which classifiers were found  . As the generation procedure was not ilnplemented , there was no overall accuracy given for the system  . 
As a default , Sornlertlamvanich et al's algorithm is useful . However , it does not cover several exceptional cases , so we have refined it further . The extended algorithm is shown in Figure 1 . 
Firstly , we have made explicit what to do when a noun is a member of more than one semantic class or of no semantic lass  . In the lexicon we used , nouns are , on average , in embers of 2 semantic classes . Howevm ; the semantic lasses are ordered so that the most typical use comes first  . For example , usagi " rabbit " is marked as both animal and meat  , with animal coming first ( Fignre 3) . 
In this case , we would take the classifier associated 3111 fact , Thai also has a great many group classiliers , much like he M , flock and pack in English . Therefore ach noun hast WO classifiers , a sortal classifier and a group classifier listed . 
Japanese does not , so we will not discuss the generation of group classiliers here  . 
with the first semantic lass . However , in the case of usagiit is not counted with the default classifier for animals-hiki  , but with that for birds-wa , this must be listed as an exception . 
Secondly , we have added a method for generating classifiers that quantify coordinate noun phrases  . 
These commonly appear in appositive noun phrases such as ABC-toXYC-no  2-sha " the two companies , 
ABC and XYZ".
1 . For a simple noun phrase ( a ) If the head noun has a default classifier in the lexicon : use the noun's default classifier  ( b ) Else if it exists , use the defimlt classifier of the head noun's first listed semantic class  ( the class's default classifier )   ( c ) Else use the residual classifier-tsu2 . For a coordinate noun phrase generate the classifier for each noun phrase use the most frequent classifier Figure  1: Algorithm to generate numeral classifiers In addition  , we investigate to what degree we could use inheritance to remove redundancy from the lexicon  , ffanoun's default classifier is the same as the default classifier for its semantic lass  , then there is no need to list it in the lexicon . This makes the lexicon smaller and it is easier to add new entries  . Any display of the lexical item ( such as for maintenance or if the lexicon is used as a human aid  )  , should automatically generate the classifier from the semantic lass  . Alternatively ( and equivalently ) , in a lexicon with multiple inheritance and defaults  , the class's default classifier can be added as a defeasible constraint on all lnembers of the semantic class  . 
3 The Goi-Taikei Ontology
We used timontology provided by GoiTaikei--A Japanese Lexicon  ( Ikehara et al ,  1997) . We choose it because of its rich ontology , its extensive use in many other NLP applications , its wide coverage of Japanese , and tile fact that it is being extended to other numeral classifier languages  , such as Malay . 
The ontology has several hierarchies of concepts : mantic classes  ( 12-levelt ' eestructure ) for common nouns , 200 chtsses ( 9-level tree structure ) for proper nouns and 108 classes for predicates . We show the top three levels of the common norm ontology in Figure  2  . Words can be assigned to semantic lasses anywhere in the hierarchy  . Not all semantic lasses have words assigned to them  . 
The semantic classes are used in the Jalmnese word semantic dictionary to classify nouns  , verbs and adjectives . The dictionary in chtdes 100 , 000 common nouns ,  70 , 000 technical terms ,  200 , 000 proper nouns and 30 , 000 other words : 400 , 000 words in all . The semantic lasses al ' e also used as selectional restrictions on the arguments  o1' predicates in a separate predicate dictionary , with around 17 , 000 entries . 
Figure 3 shows an example of one record of the Japanese semantic word dictionary  , with the addition of the new I ) IFAU1\]I"CLASSIFIFA lield ( underlined for elnphasis )  . 
Each record has an index form , pronunciation , a canonical form , part-of-speech and semantic classes . Each word can have up to five common iloun classes and ten proper noun chtsses  , hit he case of usagi " rabbit " , there are two common noun classes and no proper noun classes  . 
4 Maplfing Classiliers to the Ontology
In this section we investigate how l ' arthe semantic classes can be used to predict default classitic rs for nouns  . Because most sortal classifiers select for some kind of semantic lass  , we thought that nouns grouped together under the same senmntic class should share the same classifier  . 
We associated classifiers with semantic classes by hand  . This took around two weeks . We found that , while some classes were covered by a single classifier  , around 20% required more than one . For example , 1056: song is counted only by-kyoku " tune " , and 989 : wakervehicZe by only by-seki " ship " , but the class \[961:weapon \] hadmenl-bet's counted by-hen " longth in " , - chO"knife " ,  - . fitri " swords ",-ki " machines " and more . 
We show the most flequeut numeral classifiers in Table  1  . We ended up with 47 classifiers used as semantic lasses'de fault classifiers  . This is in line with the fact that most speakers of Japanese know and use between  30 and 80 sortal classifiers ( l ) own-ing ,  1996) . Of course , we expect o add more clas-sifters at the noun level  . 
8 01 semantic lasses turned out not to have clas -siliers  . This included chtsses with no words associated with them  , and those that only contained nouns with referent so abstract we considered them to be uncountable  , such as greed , lethargy , etc . 
We used the default chtssifiers assigned to the semantic classes to generate defeasible del ' aults for the noun entries in the common and technical term dictionaries  ( 172 , 506 words in all ) . We did this in order to look at the distribution of classifiers over words in the lexicon  . In the actual generation this would be done dynamically  , after the semantic lasses have been disambiguated  . The distributions of classifiers were similar to those of the semantic lasses  , although there was a higher proportion counted with the residual classilier-tsu  , and the classifier for machines-ekti . This may be an artifact of the 70 , 000 word technical term dictionary . As further esearch , w c would like to calculate the distribution of classi-\[iers in some text  , althot tgh we expect it to depend greatly on the genre  . 
The mapping we created is not complete because some of the semantic lasses have nouns which do not share the same classifiers  . We have to add lnore specific defaults at the noun level  . As well as more specific sortal classifiers , there are cases where a group classifier may be more appropriate  . For example , among the nouns counted with-~zi~there are entries such as couple  , twins and so on which are often counted with- kumi " pair "  . 
In addition , the choice o1' classilier can depend on factors other than just semantic lass  , for example , hire " people " can be counted by either-ninor -mei  , the only difference being that-mei is more polite  . 
it was difficult to assign default classifiers to the semantic lasses that referred to events  . The sechtsses mainly include deverbal nouns ( e . g . ko nomi " liking ") and nominal verbs ( e . g . , benkyO " study ") . 
These can stand for both the action or the result of the action : e  . g . kenkyl 7" a study/research " . In these cases , every application we considered would distinguish between event and sortal classification in the input  , so it was only necessary to choose a classifier for the result of the action  . 
5 Evaluation and Discussion
The algorithm was tested oil a 3700 sentence tna-claine translation test set of Japanese with English translatious  , although we only used the Japanese J ~ The test set is available at www  . kecl . ntt . co . jp/icl/mtg/resources . 
9 3   1 : noun 2 : concrete 3  :  388  :  533 : agent place object i000 : abstract 1001  :  1235  :  2422 : abstract thing event relation Figure 2: Top three levels of the GoiTaikei Common Noun Ontology  ; ' CCo ; ' H-INDEX FORM

CANONICAL FORM
PAP . TOFSPEECH\])IEFAULTCLASSIFIER
SEMANTIC CLASSESey + ) -:~  ( usagi ) "5~-~"/ usagi/~ , ( usagi ) noun ~ g~(-wa )
COMMONNOUN 537:beast  \]  843 meat/egg\]Figure 3: Japanese LexicalEntry for rabbit " usagi " We only considered sentences with a noun phrase modified by a sortal classifier  . Noun phrases modi-lied by group classifiers , such as-soku " pair " were not evaluated , as we reasoned that the presence of such a classifier would be marked in the input to the generator  . We also did not consider the anaphoric use of numeral classifiers  . Although there were ninny anaphoric examples , resolving them requires robust anaphore solution , which is a separate problem . We estimate that we would achieve the same accuracy with the anaphoric examples if their referents were known  , unfortunately the test set did not always include the full context  , so we could not identify the referents and test this  . A typical example of anaphoric use is (10) . 
(1o ) shukka-garuiseki-de 500-hon-wo shipment-NOM cumulative 500-CL-ACC top pa-shitaroached Cumulative shipments reached 500 ? bar-rels/rolls/logs / . . . 
In total , there were 90 noun phrases modified by a sortal classilier . Our test of the algoritlm l was done by hand , as we have no Japanese generator . We assumed as input only the fact that a classifier was required  , and the semantic lasses of the head noun given in the lexicon  . Using only the default classi-tiers predicted by the senmnticlass  , we were able to generate 73 (81%) correctly . A classifier was only judged to be correct if it was exactly the stone as that in the original test set  . This was a hnost double the baseline of generating the most common clas-sifter  ( - nin ) for all noun phrases , which would have achieved 41% . The results , with a breakdown of the errors , are summarized in Table 2 . 
In this small sample , 6 out of 90 (6 . 7% ) of noun phrases needed to have tim default classifier marked for the nouu  . In fact , there were only 4 different nouns , as two were repeated . We therefore stinm te that fewer than 6% of nouns will need to have their own default classifier marked  . Had the default classifier for these nouns been marked in the lexicon  , our accuracy would have been 88% , the maxinmm achievable for our method . 

CI . ASSIFIERP , eferents class lied Semantic Class (2 , 710) Noun (172 , 506)
No . % Example No.%
None Uncountable referents 794 29 . 33: agent 34,548 20 . 0 - kai ( IN ) events 703 25 . 91699: visit 35,050 20 . 3-tsu ( O ) abstract/general objects 565 20 . 92: concrete 52,921 30 . 1-nin(J , ,) person 298 11 . 05:person 8,545 4 . 9-ko(\])i I ) concrete objecls 12 44 . 6854: edible fruit 14,380 8 . 3-hen(J ?) long thin objecls 521 . 9673: tree 3,775 2 . 1-mai(~)fi at objecls 321 . 2770: paper 2,8071 . 6-teki(l ', ; ~ J ) liquid 2 10 . 8652: tear 1,219 0 . 7-dai(?i't ) lnechanicit clnS/furniture 18 0 . 7962: machinery 5,087 2 . 9-hiki ( l ; ri ) animals 120 . 6537: beast 1,361 0 . 8 Other 38 classifiers 913 . 4 12,813 7 . 4 Table 1 : Japanese Numeral Classiliers and associated Semantic Classes 
P , esult % No.
Correctly generated 81% 73
Incorrectly generated 19% 17
Total 100% 90
Breakdowno1'En'ors
Noun needs default classilier - - 6
Target not in lexicon , bad entry 4() ther errors 7 Table 2: P , esults of atplying the algorilhm Looking at it from allol her point of view  , the GoiTaikei ontology , although initially designed i ' or . lapanese analysis , was also useftfl for generating Japanese numeral chtssifiers  . We consider that it would be equally useful for the same task with Ko-l'can  , or even lhetm relaled language Mahty . 
We generated the residual classilier-tsu for nouns not in the lexicon  , this proved to be a bad choicel br three unknown words  . If we hadame ( hod o1: deducing senlanlic chtsses for tln known words wc couM have used it to predict the classii icr more successfully  . 1; or example , kikan-l & vhika " institutional investor ''5 was not in the dictionary , and so we used the senmntic class for lOshika " investor "  , which was 175: investor , a subtype of 5: person . Hadkikan-toshika " institutional investor " been marked as a subtype of company  , or if we had deduced the semantic lass from the modifier  , then we would have been able to gener-5hmlitufional illvcStOl ' S are\[inancial institutions tha ! invests av in ~  , s of individuals and non-lina . ncial companies in the financial nmrkets . 
atethocorrect classifior-sha . In ono case , w c feltl hode fault ordering of the semantic lasses should have been reversed :  673: tree was listed before 854 : edible fruit for ringo " apple " . 
The remaining errors were moro problematic.
There was one cxamplc , 80, O00-nin-amari-no . vl ,  #nlei " about 80 , 000 signatures " , wl fich could be ueated as rel:ercnt tlansfof : shomei " signature " was being counted wilh the classifier for people  . 
Another l ) ossibl canalysis is that the classilier is the head of a referential noun phrase with deic-tic /almphoric reference  , equivalent to the si , qnalu JwsoJ ' a hold SO , 000 people . A COUlJewer equile literary in sly lc : for example lOnen-no loshi  "10 years ( Lit : 10 years of years ) " , where the loshi " year " lmrt is redundant , and would not normally be used . in two of the errors the residual classilier was used instead of  ( he more specific default . Shhnoio ( 1997 ) prc ~ diclsflint this will happen in expressions where lheamot lnl is being emphasized more than what is being counted  . Intuitively , lifts applied in both cases , but we were ul\]able to identify any features we could exploit  1o make this judgment autolnatically . 
A more adwmced semantic analysis may be able lo dynamically delermine the appropriate semantic class for cases of rel'er cnt transfer  , unknown words , or words whose semantic lass can be restricted by context Our algorithm  , which ideally generates the classifier from this dynamically determined semantic class allows us to generate the correct classilier in context  , whereas using a default listed for a noun does not  . This was our original motwit on 1'oi " generating chtssitiers 1?o111 seman ( i classes , rather than using a classifier lis ( ed wilh each noun as S or nlert-In this paper we have concentrated on solving the problem of generating appropriate Japanese numeral classifiers using an ontology  . 11\] future work , we would like to investigate in more detail the conditions under which a classifier needs to be generate &  6 Conclusion In this paper , we presented an algorithm to generate Japanese numeral classifiers  . It was shown to select the correct sortal classifier  81% of the time . The algorithm uses the ontology provided by GoiTaikei  , a Japanese lexicon , and shows how accurately semantic lasses can predict numeral classifiers for the nouns they subsume  . We also show how we can improve the accuracy and efficiency ftm her through solving other natural language processing problems  , in particular , referent ransfer , anaphore solution and word sense disambiguation . 

The authors thank Kentaro Ogura , Timothy Baldwin , Virach Sornlertlamvanich and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments  . 

Yoshimi Asahioka , Hideki Hirakawa , and Shinya Amano .  1990 . Semantic lassification and an analyzing system of Japanese numerical expressions  . 1PSJ SIGNotes90-NL-78, 90(64):129-136, July . ( in Japanese) . 
A . E . Backhouse .  1993 . The Japatwse Language : Anh ~ troduction . Oxford University Press . 
Francis Bond and Kyonghee Paik .  1997 . Classifying correspondence in Japanese and Korean  . In 3rd Pacific Association for Computational Linguistics Conference:  PACLING-97  , pages 58-67 . 
Meisei University , Tokyo , Japan.
Francis Bond , Kentaro Ogura , and Satom Ikehara.
1996 . Classifiers in Japanese-to-English machine translation  . In 16th International Coqference on Computational Linguistics :  COLING96  , pages 125-130 , Copenhagen , August . ( http://xxx . lanl . gov/abs/cmp-ig/9608014) . 
Francis Bond , Daniela Kurz , and Satoshi Shirai.
1998 . Anchoring floating quantifiers in Japanese-to -English machine translation  . In 36th Anmtal Meeting of the Association . for Computational Linguistics and 17th hzternational Conference on Computational Linguistics :  COLING/ACL-98  , pages 152-159 , Montreal , Canada . 
Pamela Downing .  1996 . Nunwral Class ( tier Systems , the case of Japanese . Jolm Benjamins , Amsterdam . 
Christine Fellbamn , editor .  1998 . WordNet : An Electronic Lexical Database . MIT Press . 
Satoru Ikehara , Masahiro Miyazaki , Satoshi Shirai , Akio Yokoo , Hiromi Nakaiwa , Kentaro Ogura , Yoshifumi Ooyama , and Yoshihiko Hayashi . 
1997. GoiTaikei--A Japanese Lexicon..
Iwanami Shoten , Tokyo . 5 volumes/CDROM.
Shinichiro Kamei and Kazunori Muraki .  1995 . An analysis of NP-like quantifiers in Japanese . In First Naturall_zmguage Processing Pactific Rim Symposium :  NLPRS-95  , volume 1 , pages 163-167 . 
Sergei Nirenburg .  1989 .   KBMT-89 -- a knowledge-based MT proiect at Carnegie Mellon University  . pages 141-147, Aug .  1618 . 
James Pusteiovsky . 1995. The Generative Lexicon.
MIT Press.
Mitsuaki Shimojo .  1997 . The role of the general category in the maintenance of numeral classifier systems : The case of tsu and ko in Japanese  . 
Linguistics , 35(4) . ( http://ifrm . glocom . 
ac.jp/doc/sOl . 001. html).
Virach Sornlertlamvanich , Wantanee Pantachat , and Surapant Meknavin .  1994 . Classifier assignment by corpus-based approach . In 15th International Conference on Computational Linguistics :  COLING94  , pages 556-561 , August . ( http://xxx . lanl . gov/abs/cmp-ig/9411027) . 
Shoichi Yokoyalna and Takeru Ochiai . 1999.
Aimai-na sfiry6shi-o fukumume is hiku-no kaisekih6 \[ a method for analysing noun phrases with ambiguous quantifiers  . \] . In 5th Almual Meeting of the Association for Natural Lzm guage Processing  , pages 550-553 . The Association for Natural Language Processing . ( in Japanese) . 
,+a:~--:~ , 5 oNNT ' JZNN , ~N  ~ , q ~ NN , t 37% , 6% ~ cr ) ~ l ~ l , ~ Ucr ) b ' ~ Jb ~'\ [ ~ l ~% -5:
