The Weekata Glance-
Crosslanguage Cross-document
Information Extraction and Translation
Jim Cowie , Yevgeny Ludovik , Hugo Molina-Salgado , and Sergei Nirenburg
Coml ) uting Research Laboratory
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces , New Mexico
\] cowie , eugene , hsalgado , sergei@crl . nmsu . edu

Workolltile production of texts in English describing instances of a particular event type from multiple news sources will be described  . A system has been developed which extracts events  , such as meetings , fi-om texts hi English , P , ussian , Spanish , and Japanese . The extraction is currently carried out using only ontological information  . Tile results of a set of such extractions were combined to produce a table of event instances  , dates tamped , with links back to the original documents . The original documents can then be summarized and translated by the system on demand  . 
By using techniques flom information retrieval , information extraction , summarization , and machine translation , in a multilingual cnvironl-nent , new documents can be produced which provide " at aghmce " access to news ell events  fron3 multiple sources . 
The paper concludes with a discussion of the key resources which need to be developed to enhance tile accuracy and coverage of the techniques used in our experiment  . 
1 Introduction
Multilingual inlormation extraction ( MUC6) , : mmmarization ( AAAI98) , and cross-hmguage ii Hormation retrieval ( tlarntan ,  1995 ) have overtile past three or four years become emerging technologies which are being driven in part by tile develop n \] ent of tile WWW  , iuld also by the general availability of machine readable texts in many languages  . It appeared to the authors that an interesting application could be built which demonstrated an integrated use of these technologies in combination with a variety of machine translation techniques  . 
The system we describe here has as its central component a multilingual information extraction engine  , which uses an ontology as its main controlling element  . 
Extraction based summarization produces summaries , either in tabular form , or by generating sentences using structured information derived flom texts  . Sumnmries of this type are fl ) cused on whatever events , the underlying extraction system handles . The summaries are in li)rmative in nature . Thai is they provide specific facts which may allow a user to gain sufficient inormation without reference to tile original documents  . The potential applications are : producing personal profiles  , assuming a series of documents on an individual are awfilable over time  ; tracking complex events , assuming a script is available which describes the event in terms of simpler events  ; and monitoring re , single event types in a data stream . This is tile application we foctls on in this paper  . 
The method is partict darly pronlising lortexts in multiple hmguages it stile structured information produced by infl  ) rmation extraction is relatively easy to translate  . The principle drawback is that an information extraction system of this kind needs st  . oh expensive resources its ontology ( one for all languages ) and otological lexicons ( one per language )  . The development of tile system itself is not expensive  , il we can get these resources . 

The extraction method described here is based on tile Mikrokosmos ontology  ( Mahesh ,  1995) , and uses the concepts in the ontology both to define an extraction template and to control the extraction process  . At present the only infornlation used fl ' omtile Mikrokosnlos lexicons  , which supply language specific semantic and syntactic subcategorization information  , is the mapping flom a citation form to an ontological concept  . 
The complete system is composed of many preexisting components and has been tested using two weeks of news from English  , Spanish , Russian , and Japanese newspapers . We first give an overview of the steps used to generate an eventbased cross-document summary  . 
2 Overview of Processing
The system uses a set of preexisting modules.
These are : automatic language/code set recognition for a text  ( Ludovik et al ,  1999) , sentence based summarization ( biased towards domain keywords )   ( Cowie et al . , 1998) , part of speech tagging , noun phrase recognition , proper name recognition and classification ( Cowie et al 1993 ; Cowe ,  1996) , ontology based extraction , translation of the final filled template to English  , and output generation . Additional document and template filters have been added attile fi'on tandbackends of the system to reduce the amount of text to be processed and to remove templates which are only sparsely filled  . 
For example , when a text is gathered in Spanish by the web spider it will be checked to see if any of the person names of interest occur in the document using a list of names in Spanish  . If this is the case the document is then part-of -speech tagged and noun phrases and proper names are recognized  . In the present system proper names are handled using a table lookup process  , rather than a more complex ( and accurate ) pattern based method . The ontology based extraction fills outtile slots to produce a completed template  . This is then translated by looking tip words in the lexicon and by transliterating  , or translating , proper names . The completed template is then stored with references to the original document  . 
A set of templates are then used to produce one of a variety of reports either for all events or for a single event type  . These can be sorted on the different slots in tile template  . A table is then produced using HTML containing links to each original docunaent  , o document summarization and translation tools , and the slot fillers from each template . 
Intilerest of this paper we focus oll the configurable xtraction method  , tile preliminary tests caMed out on the system , and we close with a discussion olltile improvements to resources and tools needed to make this a robust and useful technology  . 
3 Extraction
The three events used in the present system are " election "  , " travel " , and " meeting " . For each of these a template was defined containing slots whose content would seem likely to occtu in newspaper articles  . Each of these slots was then mapped to one or more ontology concepts to produce a " control template "  . The three events are currently defined as follows: 
ELECTION " ELECT " , "ELECT""PERSON-ELECTED " , " NAME-
HUMAN "" PLACE " , " NAME-PLACE "" DATE " , " TIME""POSITION-ELECTEDTO " , "SOCIAL-

TRAVEL " TRAVEL " , " TRAVEL-EVENT " " PERSON-TRAVELLING " , " NAME-
HUMAN "" ROLE " , "SOCIAL-ROLE "" TO-PLACE " , " NAME-PI . ACE""DATE "," TIME "
MEETING " MEETING " , " MEETING""PERSON 1" , " NAME-HUMAN""PERSON 1" , " NAME-HUMAN""PERSON 3" , " NAME-HUMAN""ROLE 1" , " SOCIAL-ROLE "" ROLE 2" , "SOCIAL-ROLE " ;'" ROLEY' , " SOCIAI , -ROLE " " PLACE " . " NAME-PLACE "" DATE " , " TIME " The left hand label defines then alne / , ole of the slot , tile right hand defines one . or more , ontological concepts which should be found for any phrase in the text which is a potential filler for tile slot  . The method of tOtal ) late definition is completely generic , and should allow a user with rapidly configure an extraction system for new simple event types  . 
To perform an extraction , after the phrase recognition step , each head word in a sentence is looked up in tile lexicon and its associated concepts found  . Each lexicon entry is then matched with the concepts in tile control template slots  . Alnatch may also be found using ancestors of the concept found in tile lexicon entry  . Thus for the lexicon entry " Bishop " , in English , the attached concept is " RELIGIOUS-ROLE " , which is a kind of " SOCIAL-ROLE " . 
Tile combination of lexical entries which has the highest match  , and which contains the key concept for the event is chosen and a completed extraction template is produced  . 
Lexical subcategorization patterns , which will also help increase the accuracy of this selection process  , have not been used yet . 
The ontological lexicons for Japanese and Russian were created by joining a bilingual Source language to English lexicon with an English to ontology lexicon  . This process adds a significant amount of artificial ambiguity to the final source language to ontology lexicon  . 
Using correctly created lexicons for each language and syntactic knowledge for each lexical entry would allow the extraction process to operate more accurately  . 
Lexical E . try Example elect elect VLG-np\[PROPEITY-NAME agent\]-V-np\[PROPERTY-NAME beneficiary \]- pp_adjunct\[PROPERTY-NAME inverse-social-role -relation CONSTRAINT social-object PREP tel 
Ontology Entry Example ( MAKE-FRAME ELECT ( ISA ( VALUE ( COMMONVOTE ) ) )   ( 1 ) EFINITION ( VALUE ( COMMON " to select for an office by voting " ) ) )   ( BENEFICIAR . Y ( SEM(COMMON
HUMAN ))) ( INSTRUMENT(SEM(COMMON

Two Examples of Extraction
The following examples are both produced by tile extraction method operating on bracketed texts produced by part of speech tagging and phrase recognition  . 
On Thursday April 16 , Clinton began his two day state visit in Santiago  , Chiletome et with Chilean President , Eduardo Frei , and then onto the Sur@nit of the
Americas.
Slot = MEETING ; Filler = meet
Slot-PERSON 1 ; Filler=ClintonSlot=PERSON2 ; Filler=Eduardo Frei
Slot = ROLE1:EMPTY
Slot : ROLE 2 ; Filler=Chilean President Slot = PLACE ; Filler=SantiagoSlot-DATE ; Filler=Thursday April 161-Ipe , '3Ja , I~eHTBopHcEJlblkHHB c'rpeTHol c > ~ cI-\[petBla ~ eH'l'OMCIIIAKY lFIHTOtfOM  19   HO~t6p~4   1987 I ' . UMocKue . 
SI , OT = MEETING ; filler=~c'rpe'rxa~c ~ iSLOT=PERSON 1 ; filler = IBopm'g ~ bll , IJ n
SI , OT = PERSON2=>EMPTY
SI . OT = ROLE1; l\]ller = FIpea Hy~eH'r
SLOT = ROLE2; filler = l-Ipe~eH'rOM
SLOT = PLACE ; filler = MocKt ~ e
SI , OT = DATE ; filler=19 no ~ . ldp~ . 1 1987   4 Testing Two weeks of news stories were gathered from two newspapers in each of our four languages : English  , Spanish , Russian , and Japanese . We then filtered this docmnent collection and kept only those doculnents which mentioned specific surnames  , for eighteen different people . This entailed generating lists of these names in all four languages  , including moq ) hological variants for Russhm . This was intended to focus the extraction process to specific domains  ( business and politics principally )  . The extraction process was then run on the remaining set of documents and the resulting templates translated and used to generate the final tables of events  . 
Many of the entries are inaccurate . One of the principal causes is the lack of syntactic information to constrain the extraction process  . 
Simple improvements could be made by adding constraints based on appositions  , prepositions , significant number of entries do contain useful information and the ability to scan  , in one language , the output from eight sources in four languages i obviously a useful one  . 
5 Problems
There are many problems associated with a system of this degree of complexity  . Many are related to the quality and coverage of the resources available for processing  . Techniques , for example , for proper name recognition and classification are wellknown  . However , good quality name recognition software is only freely available at the present for English  . Using general web resources it is often difficult to discover document creation dates  , an important piece of information in a system of this type  . 
Coreference resolution is not handled in tiffs system at present  . This is normally achieved in current information extraction systems by allowing merging of templates fiom adjacent sentences  . 
The availability of largescale on omastica ( bilingual lists of proper names ) is also crucial to the translation of extracted information  . Work is currently under way to develop these resources for a variety of languages  . 
The problem of reference in general is a more interesting one  . There are currently two Boris Berezovsky ( s ) appearing in the news . One is a pianist , the other the Russian politician . The question is , " How is it possible to let our end user appreciate which person a reference is being made to ? "  . Perhaps some document classification system needs to be added to allow the automatic detection of document topics  , which could be used to provide additional information in the interface  , either for displayor for filtering . 

The current system demonstrates the feasibility of a knowledge based approach to information extraction  . It appears that it is possible to generate meaningful documents flom multilanguage sources  , although the initial amount of el Tort required to get reasonable coverage and robust per lk  ) mmnce is significant , particularly in the area of resource development . 

We would like to acknowledge the contributions of many colleagues at CRL  . We would also like to thank MITRE and Kyoto University lbrallowing us to use their English and Japanese part of speech taggers  . 

Cowie , J ., L . Guthrie ~ T . Wakao , W . Jim J.
Pustejovsky and S . Waterman (1993) The
Diderot Infornaation Extraction System . In Proceedings of the FilwtCop !\[' erence of the
Pacific Association for Computational
Linguistics , ( PACLING 93). Vancouver,

Cowie , J .   ( 1996 ) CRL's approach to MET ( Multilingual Named Entity Recognition )  . In Proceedings of the Tipster Text II24 Month
Workshop . Morgan Kaufinan.
Cowie , J . , E . Ludovik and H . Molina-Salgado ( 1998 ) hn proving Robust Domain Independent Summarization  . In Proceedings of Natural Language Processing and Industrial Applications  . Moncton , Canada . 
Harman , D . K ., ed . (1995) NIST Special
Publication : The Fourth Text Retrieval
Conference ( TREC4), Systems Laboratory,

Ludovik , Y . , R . Zacharski and J . Cowie ( 1999 ) Language Recognition for Mono - and Multilingual Documents  . In Proceedings of VEXTAL'99, Venice , Italy , pp .  209-214 . 
Mahesh , K . and S . Nirenburg . (1995) A Situated Ontology for Practical NLP . In Proceedingsq /' the Workshop on Basic Ontological Issues in Knowledge Sharing  , International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  . Montreal , Canada . 
MUC6 ( 1995 ) Proceedings of the Sixth Message Under ~' tanding Conference  ( MUC6 ) Morgan
Kaufman . San Mateo , Calilbrnia.

