Matching at one-based and tune-based approach to English 
intonation for concept-to-speech generation
Elke Teich
Universitgt des Saarlandes , Saarbricken & University of Sydney
Catherine I . Watson and Cdcile Pereira
Macquarie University , Sydney
Abstract
Tlle paper describes the results of a comparison of two annotation systems for is sto slal  ; ion , the tone-based ToBIal ) proach and the 1 ; une-based api ) roach proposed by Systemic Func-ti ( mal Grammar ( SFO )  . The goal of this comparison is to detine a mapping between the two systems t br the purpose of concept-to-speech generation of English  . Since ToB : is widely used in Sl ) eech synthesis and SFG is widely used in nal ; ural language generation and of t ~ rsa linguistically motivated ae collnt of intonation  , it ; appears a promising step to comt ) ine the two approaches for concept-to-speech . A corpus of English utterances has been analysed with both ~\]  . ~()13I and SFG categories ; eomparison of the analysis results has lead to the identification of some basic equivalents between the two systems on which a mapping can be based  . 
1 Introduction
The pallet describes the main results of a con > parison of /  ; he ToB : ( Tone-and-Break-Indices ) ai ) proach ( Pierrehumbert ,  1 . 9801 Silvermanel ; al . . ,   19961 to annotating English speech data with information about intonation and one of the British School approaches  ( e . g . , Brazil et al (1980)) , Systenfie Fmmtional Grammar ( SFO ; ( Halliday , 19671 Halliday ,  1970)) . The goal of this comparison is the definition of a mapping between the two systems  . 
This attempt has a two-fbld motiw ~ tion.
First , it is motivated by computational ppli-cation in concept-to-si  ) eech systems , in which text in spoken mode is automatically generated from an underlying abstract lneaning representation  , it is widely acknowledged that in order for spoken language technology to gain wider acceptance  , it has to improve on the quality of output considerably  . Itere , appropriate intonation is one of the major factors  ( ct ' . Cole et al .  (1995)) . The concrete goal we are pursuing is to connect a noil-the-shelf speech synthesizer for English  ( FESTIVAL ; ( Black et al ,  1998 ) ) with an automatic text generation system tbr English based on SFO  ( Matthiessen & Bateman ,  19911 . Since in the SFO approach , intonation is accounted for as part of grammar rather than as an independent component  , it is straightforward to extend the grammatical resources of a systemically based text generation system with an account of intonation  ( cf Teich et al ( 1 . 997 ) iml ) lenmnting such all approach for German concet/t-to -speech generation  )  . Connecting such a system to a speech synthesizer requires mapping the OUtl  ) ut of the generator to the input requirements of the st  ) eech synth ( > sizer . In the FESTIVAL systei11 , the intonation of the text to be synthesized can be manipulated  1  ) y ~ m notation with TOBI labels . Therefore , a map l ) ing betwee Il the SFC and the ToBI annotation systems is required  . 
Second , there is a theoretic all notivation.
With a mapping between tile ToBI and the slpo systems for intonational motation  , it will be possible to link the 1 ) honetic analysis of speech data to an interpretation f intonational meaning as it is proposed by SFO  . Existing speech corpora that are acoustically analysed and annotated with ToBItail then be used to test some of the assumptions brought forward by SFO about then at m:e of intonation  . Also , with a mapping between ~ oBI and SFG annotations , an exchange of annotated corpora between ToBI and SFO users would be possible  . 
We report on the analysis of as l ) eech corpus compiled fl ' om Halliday ( 1970 ) with ToBI and SFO labels ( See .  3) . The intonation analysis is based on an acoustic analysis of the speech data in terms of fundamental frequency  ( F0 )  . 

The data are represented in EMU ( Cassidy & ; Harrington ,  1996) , a database system for storing speech data that provides for an mltiple-tier analysis of acoustic  ( e . g . , F0 contour and speech wavetbrm ) and phonological ( segmental and suprasegmental ) features . We present hemajor differences and commonalities between ToBI and SFO  ( See .  2) . On the basis of the corpus analysis , we identify matches between the tunes assmned by Halliday and unique sequences of To \] ~ It ones  ( See .  4) . We conclude with a smmnary and a sketch of future work  . 
2 Intonation Annotation
The majority of text-to-speech systems that allow for the manipulation of an input string so as to control intonation employ the ToBI system  ( Silverman et al ,  19961 , which is based on the autosegmental-metrical approach originally setup by Pierrehumbert  ( 19801 to describe American English intonation . Versions of ToBI for other languages have been developed  , e . g . , Grice et al (19961 for German , and are also widely used in computational contexts  . One major theoretical difference between the ToBI approach and the British School approaches  , uc has the one advocated by SFG , is that in the latter there is a builtin focus on the relation between into-mttion and nmaning  . In spG , intonation contours are distinguished according to their di  , ff cr cn tial meanings , i . e . , they label pitch movements that are commonly interpreted by the speakers of  ( British ) English as having quite different pragmatic purport  ( cf . Teich et al (1997)) . This is whats nakes the SFO approach attractive in the context of concept-to-speech generation  , in which it is crucial to be able to represent criteria for selecting an intonation contour appropriate in a given context  . TOBI , on the other hand , is a phonetic-phonological annotation scheme tbr intonation  . Since it is widely used , there exist nmnerous tools supporting analysis with a high degree of analytical rigor  . It seems the retbred oubly significant to combine the two approaches in an attempto achieve high -quality synthesized speech output  . 
While clearly some fimdamental theoretical ditferences exist between the ToBI and SFG approaches  , more technically there is a basic com-mortality . Any annotation schemet brintonation nmst establish three principal constructs for the representation f intonation : the units of intonation  , a set of categories that describe the pitch movement occurring in that unit  , and a set of labels that mark the nuclear stress oi1 which the pitch movement is realised . 
In the remainder of this section we briefly describe how these constructs are realised in ToBI  ( Sec .  2 . 1) and in SFG ( See .  2 . 2) and sketch them Q or differences between them . 
2.1 ToBI
There are two tiers to the ToBI analysis , the tonal analysis and the analysis of the strength of the word boundaries  , which is referred to as the " break index " . The Tomtones are either high ( H ) or low ( L) . The break index gives the strength of a word's association with the tbl-lowing word  , where 0 is the strongest perceived conjoining and 4 is the most disjoint ( Beckmang cAyers ,  19971 . In our analysis ( See . 3), we only consider the tonal part of TOBI . 
The Tom intonational phonology model aligns at une with the words of an utterance  ( cf . Harrington 8 cCassidy (1999)) , wherc some of these words are accented . The words of an utterance are grouped into phrases  . There are two types of phrases , intonational and intermediate ph , mses . Utterances always consist of one or more intonational phrases which iut m:n consist of one or lnore intermediate phrases  . 
The break between two intonational 1 ) hrases is greater than 1 ) etween two intermediate ) hrases , the bl'eak index being 4 in the former case and 3 or 2 in the latter . 
Words that have prominence in a phrase or utterancem : e accented  ( sentence level stress )  . 
Unlike lexical stress which is usually fixed , sentence level stress is variable . When a word carries sentence level stress , a pitch accent is associated with the syllable of primary stress  . 
Pitch accents are denoted by * . The most common pitch accent is an H * , which is usually realised as a pitch peak near tim vowel in the primary stressed syllable  , it is also possible to have pitch accents which are a combination of a pitch movement towards and including a peak or trough  . One sudl bitonal accent is L+H * , which moves from a low in pitch towards a high . 
Intermediate and intonational phrases carry edge tones  . Intermediate phrases carry phraset ones , indicated by- . The phraset one L-is low pitch following the final pitch accent of a phrase  . 


Margaret's looking for you

L-c)eq


C ) 22 600 22800 23000 23200 23400 time ( ms )   ( a )   23600   23800 is there any more news of the French oH * L* elections 

H-24 500 25000 25500 26000 time ( ms )   ( b ) in the far
H *
L-corner of that field the !1t * FI . TtUK , 255002 6000 26500 foot path

L-goes over a stile
H * 27000 27500 28000 time(ms)(c)
Figure 1: Examples of ' the pitch contours of three utterances in the corpus  , mid the associated To I\]I labels tone 2 tone 3 tone 4 tone 5  \  ( fidl ) conveys certainty / ( rico ) conveys uncertainty -- ( level/lowrise ) " continuation tone "\/ ( fall-rise ) seems certain ( reservation )  / \  ( rise-fall ) seems uncertain ( strongly assertive ) Figure 2: SFC tones and their meanings The phrase to neH- represents high pitd t following the last pitch accent  . Tiletone associated with an intonation phrase is a boundary tone and is indicated by %  . The boundary tone H % represents a final rise and the L % boundary tone is typically interpreted as the absence of a final rise  ( cf . Ladd (1996)) . 
Every intermediate phrase must have at least one pitch accent  . By definition , the last accented word in any intermediate phrase is always the nuclear accented word  , and it is usually perceived as more prominent han any other accented word  . The utterance ( a ) in Fig .   1 is produced by an H'L-L % combination and typically interpreted as a neutral declarative  . The second utterance ( b ) has a H'L'H-H % combination ( yes/no question )  . The final example ( c ) illustrates a complex ntterance , made up of more than one intonation phrase . 
2.2 SFG
According to SFG the unit to which intonation is attributed is the tone group  . At one group consists of . feet , and feet consist of syllables . At one group carries a tune or tone , which can be falling ( tone1) , rising ( tone2) , level ( tone 3) , faning-risiug ( tone 4) , or rising-f~lling ( tone5) . 
See Fig .   2 giving these five options with their approximate pragmatic meanings  . The examples in Fig .   3 show how tone is annotated in SFG : then mnber gives the kind of tone  , the double slashess nark the tone group boundaries and the single slashes mark feet  . Also , there may be combinations of different ; tones in one utterance , e . g . , tone 4 followed by tone 1 ( example ( c ) in Fig .  3) . 
Each tone group contains an element which carries the nuclear stress  , called Tonic . In the default case , the Tonic is placed on the last lex- ( a ) //1 Margaret's/looking for you // ( b )  /  /2 A is there/anymore/news of the/Iq-enche/ leetions //  ( c )  /  /4 A in the/farcorner of that/field the // 1 foot-path goes/overa/sq ; i\]e_//
Figure 3: Examples of SFG labelling icalelenmnt in tile to negroup  ( unmarked nuclear stress )  . In marked cases , the Tonic can be placed on other elements in the to negroup  . 
For an example of the tbrmer see ( b ) in Fig . 3 ( Tonic denoted by underlining ) ; an example of the latter is ( a ) in Fig .  3 . 
The Tonic represents the nuclear stress and is part of the tonic segment of the tone group  . 
If the Tonic does not fall on the frst syllable of the tone group  , there is an element preceding it , called the pretonic segment . It carries a socalled Pretonic stress ( see ( b ) in Fig . 3) . 
2.3 Preliminary comparison
On a technical level , the major differences we can observe between the ToBI and SFG annotation schemata of intonation are the following  . 
Units . While there is a rough correspondence between the intonation phrase/intermediate phrase in ToB ~ and the tone group in SFG  ( cf . Harrington & Cassidy (1999)) , in Tom the refit of the foot is not acknowledged . 
Pitch movement . While in ToBI , the primitives of description of pitch movement are distinct highs  ( It ) and lows ( L )  , where a particular pitch movement is described by a sequence of highs and/or lows in the pitch  , in SFC the primitive of description is the tune , i . e . , a relative concept , such as arising , falling or level tune . 
Nuclear stress . While in ToBI , the mm lear stress is marked by the last starred tone in the sequence of tones and is thus only implicitly indicated in the annotation  , SFG marks nuclear stress explicitly by marking up the Tonic  ) While there is a basic match in terms of accounting for the pitch movement and we cast thus expect to be able to recast To BI tone sequences as SFC tones  , we may encounter some problems due to the non -acknowledgement of tile unit of foot in ToBI on the one hand  , and due to ToBI marking up pitch accents other ICE Sec  .  2 . 1 , however : the nuclear stress in Tom is by definition the last starred tone  . 
832 than the nuclear stress , on the other hand.
3 Method 3.1 The Corpus
Theeorl ) us was obtained from tlm recorded ( lat ~ which colnes with Italliday ( 1970 )  . We inv (; sti-gated tones 1 ,  2 , and / l , and tone sequen (' es1&1 , l & 2 , 2& l ,  2 & 2 , l & 4 , mid 4 & 1 . A total of 290 utterances were analysed ( = 1700 words of text , approx . 350 to negroul)s ) . The utter~mces ranged fl:ominono-and polysyllabic words to sentences  . The utterances varied into ne , number of feet , the position of the Tonic , and whether there were silent t ) eats in the tone group . Also , some of the utteran (: eshada pre-tonic segmenl; , others did not . 
3.2 Labelling
The labelling of the data a ( : ( :or ( ling to SFG ( : ri-teria was obtained from Halliday ( 1970 )  . The labelling of the dater using ToBI was done l ) y a trained acoustic l ) honeti ( : ian . 2 The exisl ; ing recording was digitised at 20 kltzas 16 bits an > ples , and stored on a Unix machine . The pitch tracks were calculated using ESPS WAVES +  . 
The labelling of the data was done in F , MU ( Cassidy & Harrington ,  1996) . All the intonational and in l ; ermedit ~ tel ) hrases were marked , as ' , were the pit (: hac (' , ents , 1) hrasal and 1) oun ( l-ary tones . 
4 Results
The first l ) art of the studyest a Mished that there is a basic eorresl  ) onden ( : el ) tween the SFG tones mid particular sequences of ToBIlal  ) elst br the simplest possible utterances , i . e . , those consisting of atonic segment only . As can be seen from ~ l ~ , l)le1 , tone1 usually corresponds to H'L-L % , tone2 to L'HH % and tone4 to II*L-H % . a These siml ) lemilts usually have one pitch a ( '- cent and (  ; o incide with one intonation t ) hrase ( : ( resisting of one internmdiate 1 ) hrase . 
In a second step , we looked at the more complicated utterances , i . e . , those with a pretonic segment , and those consisting of a sequence of tone groups  . In these cases there is usually more 2The phonetieimt was aware of the Sl . '(' analysis . However , the ToBI analysis was done listening to the audio files and looking at the pitch plots  . 
a This confirms e . g . , L add (1 . 996 ) stating that the British-style " nuclear-tones " are merely the specific ont-binations of accents and edge tones  . 
than one l ) it ch accent per utterance . Further , if the utterance has a Pretonic , there is always a pitch accent in that segment . Also , what can lie seen here is that there is no more than one internlediate l  ) hrase pertone group , and more than ( liet one group per intonation phrase . 
Table 2 gives ; lie ToBIs eqllenee for the ut-t ; eran( ; es which include a pretonic segnle . nt . The results are essentially the same as for the s in > p h  ; utterances (~151) le1) . One small difference is that tone 1 and tone 4 can have either an H * or a ! H * nuclear accent . This however is expected ,   ) ecause it simply means that although the nuclear accent is high  , it is downstepped from an earlier It * accent . 
rl ' al ) le , 3 gives the TOBIS ( Xluences for utter-anees consisting of SF (  ; to negroul ) sequences . 
The Tonianalysist br the final tone in a sequence are essentially the same as t br the utter-anees given in Table  2  . The first to ne group in as e(lllen ( ; e is more often than not an interme- ( liate t ) hrase rather than a separate intonation l ) hrase . I to weve i ' , keel ) ing in mind the dominating intonation 1 ) hrase , the ToBI sequences for the first elenmnt in a sequence are essentially the same as t'omld for utterances with a  1  ) re-toni ( : clement ( Table 2 )  . The results shown in Tal)les1 ,  2 , and 3 taken together show that t brt ones 1 ,  2 , 4 there is one corresponding ' l . ' oBI sequence each tlmt characterize stile interval  1  ) e-tween the nuclear accented word and the edge of the  1  ) hrase regardless of the complexity of the ul ; terance . 
We also tbund a very close correspondence between the ~ ibnic in SFG and the nuclear accented syllable in the Tomanalysis : In virtually all cases they were in exactly the same place in the analyses  . When the utteran (: es are more (: onlplex , e . g . , they have a 1)retonic segment , or consist of sequences , in l ; he ToBI analysis 1 ) it ch accents are also lint in other places , not just on themmlear accented syll a Me . ToBI analysis , unlike SFC , allows for more than just the nuclear accented syllable to be marked up  . The extra pitch accents from the ToBI analysis are potentially a problem for a ToBI-SFG mapping  . 
However , closer examination of the placelnent of these other  1  ) it ch accents revealed that they always fall on the first syllable of a foot  ( also when that is not the one carrying the nuclear stress  )  . 
This suggests that the SFG feet can give some cents are likely to  tM1 or , that these other pitch accents may be an indication of toot boundaries  . 
5 Conclusions
In this paper we have presented the results of a comparison between the ToBI and the SFG systems for analysing intonation  . The goal of this comparison has been to establish equivalents between them  . The motivation behind this is to make the two systems collaborate in concept-to-speech generation : Tom is a phonetic-phonological approach to the deserip-tion of intonation  , SFG offers a linguistic approach to intonation , tb cusing on the meaningful intonation patterns . ToBIi8 widely used in speech synthesis , SFG is widely used in natural language generation  . It seems therefore a promising step to combine the two approaches tbr concept-to-speech generation  . 
Through this study we have established some basic matches between SFG tones and ToBI sequences of pitch accents and edge tones  . Here , we have concentrated on the SFG tones1 , 2 and 4 . We have analysed tones 3 and 5 as well and identified their ToBI equiwdents using the same method  ( cf . Sections 3 and 4) . In the next step we will integrate the SFG description of intonation for English in the existing SFG-based Pen-man generation system and then interface the FESTIVAL synthesizer with the generator using the correspendence stablished by our analyses  . 
In another step of analysis we will look more closely at other kinds of realization of nuclear stresses  , such as bitonal pitch accents , to establish whether they reflect linguistic meanings  . 
What also remains to be investigated is the assignment of pitch accents other than the nuclear stress  . Nuclear stress can be predicted on the basis of linguistic and pragmatic information  , but it is not clear under which conditions other pitch accent should be placed  . Our observation above ( See .  4 ) that pitch accents other than the nuclear stress are typically placed on the first syllable of a footmay be a possible motivation  . 
We are aware that there is controversy among researchers about rhythm  . However , if it turns out that rhythm is a useful concept in the prediction of non-nuclear pitch accents  , then we will consider including it in our approach  . 
6 Acknowledgements
We thank J . Harrington , C . Matthiessen , M . Halliday and the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments  . 

M . E . Beckman & G . M . Ayers .  1997 . Guidelines for ToBI labeling ( Version 7 . 0) . Ohio State Uni-versify . ( ling . ohio-state . edu/Phoneties/E-ToBI) . 
A . Black , P . Taylor , & R . Caley .  1998 . The FESTI-VAL speech synthesis ystem ; system documentation , ( Version 1 . 3 . 1) . University of Edinburgh . 

D . Brazil , M . Coulthard , & C . Johns .  1980 . Discourse Intonation and Language Teaching . Long-l Ilan , London . 
S . Cassidy & J . Harrington .  1996 . Emu : An enhanced hierarchical speech data management system  . PT v ceeding so \] " the 6th Australian International Conference on Speech Science and Technology  , pp .  361--366 . 
R . A . Cole , J . Marimfi , H . Uszkoreit , A . Zae-hen , & V . Zue .  1995 . Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology  . 

M . Grice , M . Reyelt , R . Benzlniiller , J . Mayer , & A . Batliner .  1996 . Consistency in transcription labelling of German intonation with GTom  . Pw-ceedings of the 4th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing  , pp .  1716-1719 . 
M . A . K . Halliday .  1967 . Intonation and Grammar in British English . Mouton , The Hague . 
M . A . K . Halliday .  1970 . A Course in Spoken English : Intonation . Oxford University Press , Oxford . 
J . Harrington & S . Cassidy .  1999 . Tcch , niques in Speech Acoustics . Kluwer Academic Publishers,

D . R . Lad & 1996 . Intonational Phonology . Cambridge University Press , Cmnbridge . 
C . M . I . M . Matthiessen & J . A . Bateman .  1991 . Text Generation and Systemic Functional Linguistics : Experiences from English and Japanese  . Pinter,

J . B . Pierrehulnbert .  1980 . The phonology and phonetics of English intonation  . Ph . D . thesis , MIT . 
K . Silverman , M . Beckman , J . Petrelli , M . Ostendorf , C . Wightman , P . Price , J . Pierrehumbert , & J . Hirschberg .  1996 . ToBI : A standard t br labelling English prosody . Proceedings of ICSLP92, volmne2, pp .  867-870 . 
E . Teich , E . Hagen , B . Grote , &: J . Bateman .  1997 . 
From communicative contexto speech : Integrating dialogue processing  , speech production , and natural anguage generation . Speech Communici-ation , 21:73-99 . 

Hallid ; wandescrit)tionToll(~ql . ' olu descril)tion
Tonic : lfoot1 H*I , -L % ( 20 ) and 1 or more 2L*II-H % ( 20 ) syllables 4H'L-H % ( 19 ) 
Tonic : lin-1 . H'L-L % (18) coml ) let e foot2L'H-H % (9), %1 . foot4 H*I , -H % (10) Tonic : > 1 foot ( first might 1 . H'L-L % (17) , L+H*L-L % (1) , be incomplete ) II*L-H*L-L % (1) , H*L-!II*L-L % (1) 2I1*It-It % (1) , L'H-It % (10) 4tt*H-It % (1) , IVL-It % ( 9 ) 2 ~ d ) lc'1: Simpletone groups Ibdliday and escril ) tion Tone ToBI description 1 ( 4O ) ! H'L-L % ( 18 )  , H'L-L % (22) Pretonic + tonic with 1 . or >1 feet2 ( 20 ) L'H-H % ( 20 )  4  ( 19 ) ! H'L-n % ( 12 )  , H'L-H % (7) Table 2: tivOli(?groups with a Pr(~ , tOlfi ( : 2bnesTone&ToB\] descrit ) tion1 & 1 Tone1 ( 20 ) !It*L- ( 4 )  , H'L-L % (5) , It*L-(11) 2&1 Tone2(10) L'It-(5) , L * It-tt % (4) , L+It*H-(1)1 ~ Q , 2 Tone 1 ( 9 ) H'L- ( 9 ) 2&2 Tone 2 ( 9 ) It * It- ( 1 )  , II*L-It % (1) , L*It-(8)1&4 Tone1(10) It*L-(1 . 0) 4 ck 51 . ~ lbne4(10) ! H'H-(1) , ! H*L-II % (3) , 1I*I : It % (6)
Ton(;1
I ~* L-L % (20)
Tone 1
H'L-L % (6), ! H'L-L % (2), L'L-L % (2)
Tone 2
L*II-H % (9)
Tone 2
L'H-H % (10)
Tone 4
H'L-It % (10)
Tone 1
H'L-L % (9) , ! It*L-L % (1) 2 d ) lc3: To negroup sequences
