Modelling Speech Repairs
in German and Mandarin Chinese Spoken Dialogues
Shu-Chuan Tseng
Da-Yeh University
112 Shan-Jiao Rd . Da-Tsuen
Changhua , Taiwan 515


Results presented in this paper strongly support the notion that similarities as well as differences in language systems can be empirically investigated by looking into the linguistic patterns of speech repairs in real speech data  . A total of 500 Gemmn and 325 Mandarin Chinese overt immediate speech repairs were analysed with regard to their internal phrasal structures  , with particular focus on the syntactic and morphological characteristics  . Computational models in the form of finite state automata  ( FSA ) also illustrate the describable regularity of
German and Mandarin Chinese speech repairs in a formal way  . 

Spontaneous speech analysis has recently been playing a crucial role in providing empirical evidence for applications in both theoretical nd applied fields of computational linguistics  . For the purpose of constructing more salient and robust dialogue systems  , recent analyses on speech repairs , or more generally speaking , on speech disfluencies in spoken dialogues have tried to explore the distributional characteristics of irregular sequences in order to develop annotation systems to cope with speech repairs  ( Heeman and Allen 1999 , Nakatani and Hirschberg 1994) . This new research direction , nevertheless , has until recently merely focused on the surface structure of speech repairs on the one hand  . On the other hand , except for very fewilw estigation starting to deal with speech repairs across several languages  ( Eklund and Shribcrg 1998 )  , most of the studies on speech repairs have investigated only single languages  . 
In addition , studies have shown that syntactic and prosodic features of spontaneous speech data provide empirical evidence with regard to reflecting the speaking habits of speakers  , and also help to develop better parsing strategies and natural language processing systems  ( Heeman and Allen 1999 , Hindle 1983) . These systems should understand and reacto the language use of human users  ( Lickley and Bard 1998 , Tseng 1998) . 
This paper presents results of a comparative stud )  , of speech repairs with the goal of examining and modelling repair syntax by looking into empirical crosslinguistic spccch data  . In this paper , the phenomena of speech repairs are introduced first  , followed by an empirical crosslinguistic analysis of speech repairs in German and Mandarin Chinese  , which have different language typologies . Speech data , therefore , were collected to look for linguistic sequences and particularities of spontaneous speech  , which usually cause difficulties for language dialogue systems  . Syntactic patterns found in the comparative analysis have subsequently been formalised to make clear the internal structures of speech repairs  . Formal modelling in FSA should finally show the fonnal characteristics of repair sequences in these two language systems  . 
1 Related Work
This section sumlnariscs previous results related template model of describing repairs is introduced  , l bllowed by a brief sumnaary of recent studies on speech repair processing in 
German and Mandarin Chinese.
1.1 Template Model of Repairs
Most models of repair structures ( Lcv clt 1983 ) apply a template-based approach . In 1) rinciplc , a telnplate model is colnposed of three parts : rcparandum  ( R c p )  , editing tcnns(E t ) and alteration ( Alt ) . The rcpar and una denotes the speech stretch , which nccd stobc repaired , whereas the alteration is the repair itself . Editing terms are seqnences produced between the reparandum and the alteration  , which often appear in tbrm of silent or filled pauses and can also b cabsent  , depending on the Sl ) caking situation . A classification systenl of repairs can bc derived from the structural relations betv  , ' e cll the reparandum , the editing term and the alteration : ? addilion repait : s'Exan \] pie:-#:  -2~  , ~ ,  - -~ , i , J  ~ , ,= e , ~4'\[ . * . / ej~j(Rcp ) % . " IN ~ ; -~-#~ng(TWPTH Corpus ) l__t'J"J(Alt) .   .   .   .  ':  , a -' ~ , , ? suhstilulion repaitw Examl ) lc : Unduntenrnnten is thalt diegel be Mutter ( R c p ) / ilA ( E t ) die or ang cM utter ( Alt )   ( Sagcrer el al .  1994 )  -~ ?  repel/l/or1 repairs Example : Ena and crecht crk all teen or a Rj cstip  ( R c p ) or anj cstip ( Alt )  . (Lcvelt 1983)3 ? abridged repair , s ' Example : I think that you get-it is more strict in 
Catholic schools . ( Hindle 1983) 1 . 2 Gramnmr-Oriented Production of
Gernmn Speech Repairs
German , an Indo-Europ can language , is a language with a strong emphasis on grammatical flexion  . Phrases with congruence in gender , i Verbatiln translation : will influence whole
POSSESSIVF ,- particle Mmle industry
POSS\]:; SS1 VI';-particle investment interests.
Sentential translation : It will influence the whole the whole industrial investment interests  . 
2 And beneath that is the yellow nut dl the orange nut  . 
3 And at the right side an orange do to range dot.
munber and case are important from syntactic and naor phological viewpoints  . Tiros , phrasal boundaries may play a role in the production of German repairs  . Results provided by Tseng ( 1999 ) empirically support the significant role of phrasal boundaries in German by examining Gcmmn specch repairs  . Phrasal boundaries seem to be the positions to start as well as to end speech repairs  . The following utterance in which a German repair is produced clearly illustrates this t  ) he nolneu on : " lch habeeiuen Wiirfelrai leiner mitemem Gewm de  4''  , where miteiner is a phrasal liagmcn t and mit einem Gewinde  , starting fi ' oln the phrasal beginning , is a complete phrase repairing the previous phrasal fiagment  . In her conversation analysis on sclf-rc pairs in Gennan  , U hm al m ( 1997 ) also lnentions that repairs tend to appear at constituent boundaries illn lost cases  , i . e . , deleting problem sequences involved in repairs will result in the utterances containing speech repairs be colning wellformed  . 
1.3 Lcxis-Oricnted Production of Chinese
Speech Repairs
One way to illustrate the differences in languages is to examine and to compare the types of speech repairs in the languages respectively  . The modcrn description methodologies of gralm nar structures in German and Chinese  ( Chao 1968 , Li and Thompson 1981 ) originated froln similar theoretical backgrounds . However , Chinese has a great variety of coln pound words , but lacks grammatical narkings at the morphological level  . To be morn specific , the word formation in Chinese is accomplished by combining morphelncs  , where each morpheme has its own lexical content and orthographic character  . This is essentially different from the syntactic -lnorphological derivation as well as compounding in Gennan  . 
Lee and Chen ( 1997 ) classified Chinese speech repairs in patterns and developed a language l nodol for their language recognition system to  4 I have one cube with a \[ fcminine , singular , dative , indefinite \] with a \[ neuter , singular , dative , indefinite \] bolt . 
865 cope with speech repairs . However , they did not carry out any further investigations on the structure of repairs  . Different fronlthe production of German speech repairs  , Chui (1996) proposed , in her studies on repairs in Chinese spoken conversations  , that syntax seems to play a less important role than the lexical complexity and tile size of words in the production of Chinese speech repairs  . For instance , not t be constituent boundaries , but the completeness of the lexical content and the scope of the lexical quantity of the words should  ( ~ ) and engineer ( ~-~_~ ) in the utterance / , g ~; / c / / g ~ y ~ ~_ ~ ~ > ~ ' ~ , f#/;~"/2t ~ . ~ s , are the major factors which influence the production of repairs  . 
2 Data and Corpus
In order to examine the production of speech repairs in different languages  , the German corpus BAUFIX and the Chinese corpus TWPTH were chosen to carry out further comparative analyscs  . 
2.1 German Data : BAUFIX
The BAUFIX corpus ( Sagerer el al .  1994 ) consists of 22 digitally recorded German human-human dialogues .   44 participants co-operated in pairs as instructor and constructor  , where their task was to build a to y-plane . 
Because of the limited visual contact between dialogue partners in some given cases  , subjects had to rely on their verbal comnmnication to a great extent  . This corpus setting was especially constructed to force subjects to repair their speech errors  . For the purpose of this paper to investigate repair syntax  , the corpus analysis is mainly concerned with immediate self-repairs  . 
They were identified and hand-annotated by the author  . In total ,   500 speech repairs were classified according to their syntactic attributes such as categories and parts of speech  . They were subsequently analysed with respect o the  5 Verbatim translation : Hc should NEGATION -particle should promotengineer  ( word fragment ) engineer so quickly DISCOURSE-particle . 
Sentential translation : He shouM should not be promoted to engine el  ( word fragment ) engineer so so on . 
location of interruption and their repair structure  . 
2.2 Mandarin Chinese Data : Taiwan
Putonghua Corpus ( TWPTH)
Taiwan Putonghua Corpus ( TWPTH ), where
Putonghua refers to Mandarin Chinese , was recorded in Taiwan . The speakers were all born in Taiwan and their first language is Taiwancsc  ( Southern Min )  . The speakers w cr c given the instructions in advance to speak in usual conversation style and they could speak on any topic they wanted to  , or even on no topic at all . 
Thus , the spontaneous and conversation-oriented speech data were obtained  . A total of 40 speakers were recorded including five dialogues and  30 monologues . Three dialogues were analysed for the study in this paper and each is about  20 n finutes long . In total ,   325 immediate speech repairs were identified in these three dialogues and they were annotated according to the POS system developed for the Sinica Corpus  ( CKIP 1995 )  . 
2.3 Comparison of Repair Data
Seine central statistics on BAUFIX and TWPTH data are summarised in Table  1: 
Table 1: Summary Statistics 13 AUFIXT WPTH
Language German Mandarin Chinese total no . of woMs 35036   9168 words woMs 47655 characters total no . of repairs 500325 no . words involved 1823 words 950 woMsmrc pairs 1622 characters % repair-woMs of 5  . 2 % 10 . 4% ( woM ) total words 3 . 4% ( chmacter ) % of phrases PP 34 . 8% VP 35 . 7% involved in repairs NP 38% NP 41 . 2 % Table 1 shows that the percentage of problem words ( words involved in speech repairs ) is similar in both BAUFIX and TWPTH corpora . 
Witbregard to the number of words ( i . e . lexicalitelns ) 10 . 4% of overall words in TWPTH are involved in repair sequences  , whereas only 5 . 2% of words in BAUFIX are found in repair sequences  . However , the statistics show a pattern , Mlich is more closely related ,  3 . 4% and 5 . 2% respectively , if we consider the number of characters instead of words ill Chinese  . Chinese Chinese , lexical items are composed of characters , where each character is all independent lneaningful mono syllabic morpheme  . This study can possibly provide insights into the role of characters in Chinese at syntactic and morphological levels  . 
Other interesting results that can be noted from Table  1 are the types of phrases involved in repair sequences  . In BAUFIX , because of the task-oriented corpus setting , few verbs were used . lnstead , the focus is more on NPs and PPs , since the speakers had to express exactly what the parts look like and where to place them  . 
Different from BA UF1 X , the TWPTH speakers did not have to give exact descriptions  . 
Therefore , a considerable number of verbs were used , which we can observe from the high pereentage of VPs involved in repair sequences  . 
However , in both corpora , NPs make up a high percentage , 38% and 41 . 2% respectively . For this reason , NPs will bcfurther investigated for their syntactic structures  . 
3 Analysis of Repair Syntax in NPs
Tiffs section is concerned with the distribution and patterns of NPs in the context of repair syntax in German and Mandarin Chinese  . 
3.1 Regular Patterns
Among 190 NPs involved in repair sequences in BAUFIX , there arc 147 NPs for which the internal structure within the NPs can bc given exactly as follows  ( Tscng 1999 )  , 
NP => N
NP => DET+N
NP => DET+ADI
NP => DET + ADI+N
NP-->DET+ADJ+ADJ+N
NP=>so+DET+N
NP=>so+DET+ADI4-N
NP=>so+DET+AD\]+ADJ + N where lheother 43 NPs in repairs are abridged repairs , therefore , their internal structures cannot be determined . 
Compared with Gennan NP-rc pairs , Chinese speakers produce rather simple repair sequences in NPs  . Only 62 . 7%  ( 84 out of 134 ) of Chinese repairs found in the corpus are single NP phrases  . 
The rest of repair sequences in which NPs are involvcd  , contain other phrasal categorie such as verb phrases or adverbials  . Since these dialogues arc concerned with normal and everyday conversations  , no complicated noun phrases were used . These NP-rc pairs have the following structures :
NP => N
NP => DET
NP => DET+N
NP => ADI+N
NP=>QUAN+CLASS
NP=>OUAN+CLASS+N where QUAN denotes numbers and CLASS means classifiers in Chinese  . 
3 . 2 Syntactic Formalization 83 . 4% out of 147 specific NP repairs in German start at phrase -initial positions and end at phrase-final positions  . In the Chinese data , only thrcc NP-repairs among the 84 single NP-repairs were not traced back to file phrase-initial position  . Phrasal boundaries play a role while speech repairs are produced in both languages  , especially phrase-initial positions before the rcparandum  . The syntactic structure of the maiority of German and Chinese repairs in NPs can bcfonnally described by means of phrasal modelling  . 
Figure 1 : Phrasal Modelling of German NP-Rc pairs the type DET ADJN in BAUFIX  , where the reflexive arrow on DET designates the sequence or a false determiner  , whereas the second DET is supposed to be the corrected word accordingly  . 
The initial element DET in a German noun phrasc , i . e . the phrase-initial boundary is the most frequent location at which a repair is restarted  . In other words , while producing repairs , speakers tend to go back to the determiner to repair NPs  . 
Although the data investigated here is not necessarily representative for most Chinese speakers  , this result , does not empirically confirm Chui's conclusion ( 1996 ) that syntax should playaless important role than the lexical complexity and the quantity constraint of the to-be-repaired lexical items  , hlstead , the phrase-initial position seems to be the location to restart repairs in Chinese  . Therefore , the results indicate that the lexical content of the to-be-repair edit clns tends to play a less important role than syntax in both languages  . 
3.3 Cross-Linguistic Differences
In contras to the similarities between German and Chinese speech repairs lncntioned in the sections above  , differences can also be identified . 
Some differences can bcnoted through a comparison of repair syntax in German and Mandarin Chinese  . It is more colnnlon for NPs in German to be repaired directly within NPs  , whereas in Chinese NPs are often repaired within a more complex syntactic context  , i . e . 
Chinese repairs arc composed of more than one phrasal category  . To investigate the syntactic and morphological distribution of speech repairs in both languages  , the length of retracing in both languages i examined  . The results are presented in Table 2 . 
Table 2: Distribution of Retracing retraced words or German Chinese characters  ( words )   ( characters )  0 22 . 5% 3 . 6% 1 62 . 9% 61 . 9% 2 12 . 9% 27 . 4% 3 1 . 7% 6% 4 0 1 . 2% No similarity between German and Chinese was obtained by checking the nuln bcr of retraced words in Chinese  , because the majority of " the retraced parts " in Chinese are word fragments  . 
But it is clearly shown in Table 2 that Gennan words and Chinese characters play a similar role in the production of speech repairs  . Whether it has to do with the syllabic weighting in both languages or the semantic on t cnt of characters in Chinesenecds fnrther linguistic investigation  . 
4 Formal Modelling
With regard to relations of repair syntax and the editing structuring in repairs  , instead of only looking into their surface structure  , the syntactic regularity in German and Chinese NP -repairs can be modelled in the form of finite state automata  . We again take German as example . 
4.1 Finite State Automata
Finite state automata similar to M with e -transitions denoted by a quintuple < Q  , E ,  8 , q0 , IF > defined as follows can model more than 80% of overall German NP-repairs :
Q = q0, ql , q2, q3, qf,
E = det , adj ,  11 , dct-dG , adj-d , n-d , e , q0 is the initial state , 
F = q3 and ~5(q0 , det ) = ql , 8( ql , adj ) = q2 ,  6(@ , n ) = q3 , 8 ( q0 , det-d)-qf , 6( ql , adj-d ) = q f , 8( q2 , n-d ) = q f , 6( qf , e ) = q0 , 8( ql , e ) = q0 ,  6(@ , e ) = q() ,  8(@ , e ) = q0M is graphically illustrated in Figure 2 . Several particularities are described in this automaton  . 
First , when NP-repairs are produced , no matter where the real problmn word is located ( It can be dct-d , adj , adj-d , nor n-d ) , speakers tend to go back to the phrase-initial position to restart lheir speech  . It the case of NPs , the determiner is the most frequent location for re-initiating a correct speech  . The final position is in most cases phrase-final . Therefore , in M , there is only one final state q3 . This models the coherence within NP phrases in German that speakers usually complete plu Tases  , after they have started them . 
6 Det-d , adj-d , and n-d denote fragmentary ( or false ) determiners , adjectives and nouns respectively . 

Figure 2: FiniteState Automaton M
E 4.2 Discussion
The FSAM suggested above is suitable for the syntactic haracteristics of speech repairs in both German and Chinese  . Repair syntax has been taken into consideration from a procedural point of view  , instead of simply dcscribing the sequential structures  . In this modcl , probabilities ( for instance , word frequency or acoustic features ) on the arcs can be implemented to operate a parsing system  , which can deal with speech repairs , t to w c v e r , speech data of appropriate size are needed to obtain significant probabilities  . 
\[" or more linguistic insights into the word -character relations in Chinese or across languages  , i . e . the ovcrlapping syntactic and morphological role of phrasal boundaries  , further modification is necded to make the rcpair processing and detection in the Chinese case more realistic  . 

This paper has shown that speech repairs not only play a decisive role in speech processing technology systems  , they also provide empirical evidence and insights into the inherent linguistic characteristics of languages  . Based on the results of corpus analysis , similar syntactic features of speech repairs ill German and Chinese were identified and the repair syntax was formally modelled by means of phrasal modelling and finite state automata  . Discrepancy at the morphological evel of both languages was shown and more detailed investigations are necessary  . Further analyses on acoustic-prosodic features of crosslinguistic data amCmTently being can'ied out  . 

Fd like to thank the Sonderforschungsbereich ( SFB 360 ) colleagues in Bielefeld who collccted and pre -proeessed the BAUFIX data as wall as the colleagues in the Industrial Research Technology Institute  ( IRTI ) in Chu-Dong who kindly supported me with the TWPTH corpus data  . Without them the investigation described in this paper would not have been carried out and this paper could not possibly have been written  . 
Refefences
Chao Y .-R . (1968) A Grammar of S )) ol : en Chinese.
Berkeley : University of California Press.
Clmi K . -W .   ( 1996 ) Organization oJ " Repair #7 Chinese Convel : vation . Text 16/3, pp .  343-372 . 
CKIP (1995) S#Tica Balanced ('. or pus . Tedmical
Report no . 95-02/98-04. ( in Chinese)
Ekhmd R . and Shribcrg E . (1998) Civ . ~' s-l , ingui . vticl)i , vfhten~3 , Modeling : A Comparative AnaO~si , voJ " , S  ~ , edish and American Engli , s'hthtman-Human and Hltnlan-Machme Dialogs . in : Proceedings of lCSLP'98 . Sydney , Australia . pp .  2631-2634 . 
Hecman , P . and Allen , J . (1999) Speech Repair . ~' , hT to national Phra , s'es and Discozuwe Marketw : Modell#Tg , S ) ~ eake tw ' Utterances in , S )) oken Dialogue . Computational Linguistics 25/4 . to appear . 
Hindle , D . (1983) Determ  #dstic Par , s ' mg of , ~ vntactic Non-Jluencies . In : ACL'83 . 
Philadelphia , USA . pp . 123-128.
Lee Y . -S . and Chen H . -H .   ( 1997 ) Using Acoustic and Prosodic Cuesto Correct Chhwse Speech Repaim  . In : Proceedings of EUROSPEECH'97 . 
Rhodes , Greece . pp . 2211-2214.
Levelt W . J . (1983) Monitoring and 5' elf-l~epair #7
Speech . Cognition 14. pp . 41-104.

Li C . and Thompson S .   ( 1981 ) Mandarin Chinese : A Functional Reference Grammar . Berkeley :
University of California Press.
Liekley , R . J . and Bard , E . G .   ( 1998 ) When Can Listeners Detect Di ~ fluency m Spontaneous 
Speech ? Language and Speech 41/2. pp.

Nakatani , C . and Hirschberg , J . (1994) A
Corpus-Based Study of Repair Cuesm
Spontaneous Speech . Journal of lhe Acoustical
Society of America 95. pp . 1603-1616.
Sagerer G . and Eikmeyer H . and Riekheit G .   ( 1994 ) "WtrbauenjetztemFlugzeug":Konstruierenim Dialog  . Arbeitsmateriafen , Technical Report . 
SFB 360 " Situierte Ktinstliche Kommunikation.
University of Bielefeld , Germany.
Tseng S . -C . (1999) Grammat ; Pro . vody and Speech DLs fluencies #~ Spolcen Dialogues . PhD Thesis . 
University of Bielefeld , Gemlany.
TscngS . -C . (1998) AL  #~ guistic Analysis of Repair S(~ , ,nals m Cooperative Spoken Dialogues . In : Proceedings of ICSLP'98 . Sydney , Australia . pp . 

Uhmann , S . (1997) Selbstreparaturen in
All tags dialogen : E in Fall . \[ ilreine integrative
Konvetwations theorie . In : Syntax desges prochenen Deutsehen . Ed . Schlobinski . 
Westdeutscher Verlag . pp . 157-180.

