Authoring Multimedia Documents using WYSIWYM Editing 
Kees van Deemter and Richard Power
Infbrmation Technology Research Institute
UI fiversity of Brighton , Brighton , UK,
Kees . van . Deemter , Richard . Power@itri . brighton , ac . uk
Abstract
(1 ) This paper outlines a future ' ideal'nmlti -media document authoring system that allows authors to speci\[y content and form of the document independently of each other and a tah igt ~ level of abstraction  ;   ( 2 ) It describes a working system that implements a small but significant part of the flmc-tionality of such an ideal system  , based on semantic modeling of tile pictures as well as the text of the docunmnt  ; and ( 3 ) It explains what needs to be done to bridge the gap between the implemented system and the ideal one  . 
1 A Future ~ Ideal ' Multimedia
Document Authoring System
A Document Authoring System is a tool that helps an author to writ  (  ; docmnents . If the system support stile authoring of documents that combine'presentations'in diflb  . rent media ( text and images , for example ) , we will speak of a multimedia document authoring system  . Ideally , a multimedia document authoring system would allow authors to speci  ( y the content and fbrm of a high-quality document in ways that are both simple and etiicient  . More specifically , an ideal system would aft brd the tbllowing options to the author:  1  . Easy determination of content . ~Content ' is taken to mean the factual ( i . e . , propositional ) content of the docmnent-in other words , the content of the Knowledge Base ( KB ) that forms the input to tilt document authoring system  . 
2 . Easy determination of style and layout . In the absence of specific instructions from the author  , style and layout should be determined using intelligent defimlts  . ( For example , tile standard settings may require tilt document obe in fi  ) rmal , with avoid-ancc of technical terms , lists and footnotes , without n laximum paragraph length , and with numbered sections . ) Defaults can be overridden by the author , where upon other defaults mw become relevant . 
3 . Easyal location oJ ' media . As in the case of style and layout , the system has to use judiciously chosen de . faults : perhaps using illustrative pictures wherever suitable pic-turks are available  , and graphs or tables wherever large amomlts of homogeneously structured quantitative information are involved  . As above , defaults may be over-ruled by specific requests from the author  ; if a request is impossible to fifll fil , an appropriate error message shouldtm gener at c(t . 
4 . Easy annotation of non-generated presentations . In some cases , it will be possible t br the system to generate presentations  . In other cases , this mw be impossible : Liter-ally quoted texts , for example , or historic photogral ) hs , m~y predate the use of the system , in which case it may be necessary to treat them as ' canned ' and to annotate then l to allow the system to make intelligent use of them  . 
5 . Easy post-edit in . q . Once tile system has produced a document according to the specifications of the author  , the ideal system would oiler tools to address remaining ilm dequacies using postediting  . 
' Easy'means efficient , protected against inconsistencies , and not requiring specialist skills or knowledge . A domain specialist , -who may not know anything about knowledge representation  , logic , or linguistics-could use such a system to menl ; s in any desired bmguage using any desired ( : olnbination of media . The 1) reduction and ut ) -( b ~ ting of ( ; omplex documents would l ) e greatly simplitied as a result . 
In present-day practice , these requirements end to be far from realized : authoring docuxnents by means of such l  ; oots as MSWORD or POWER , -POINT requires much low-level int ; eraction , such as the typing of (: haracters ( make yl ) o ; trd antithed ragging of figures from one plwsic ~ d lo-cal  ; iont ; om ~ other . In SOllle cases , allh ~ telli-gent Mult , in ledial ) resentation Systc , ln(IMMPSe . g . , Bordegoni et al1 . 997) can be used ( see AIR 1995 , Maybury and Wahlster 1998 for some surveys ) , which ( nnploys techniques from Artificial Intelligence to allow higher-lew ~ linter a  ( '-l ; ion . Present IMMI'S , howev ( , r , meel ; few of the \]' e(luirenmnl ; snenl ; ioned al ) ove . Most () fl ; hem , f i ) rexmnl ) le ~ require in tmt ( ) t ' a highly Sl ) e ( :ial-ize . d11 al ; llre(e . g . , the ( ; omt ) lex logical for nm-lasent ; ere(t in the wIP sysl ; em , An(trd and II . is I ; 1995)1 and l ; hey allow an author little ( : ontrol over the tbnn ( e . g . , layout , textual style , me(lia allocation ) of the ( loelln lenl; . The issue of easyam lol . ation(d ) is never even ad ( lress (' , ( t , to timbe , stof our knowledge . 
The , next section descril ) esaniml ) hnnented system tbrl ; he authoring of teztual ( lo (: uinents l , hal . 
can ) e~rgue ( lt of lt llill requirements ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) and which tbrms nsuit nbh:st ~ rting point for working towards the ' ideal ' multimedia sys-l  ; e111 outlined above ,  . Section 3 des ( :ril ) es~tll extension of this system in which signiticallt  as-1  ) ect ; sofre(luireln('nt ; s35h ~ we also been il nl ) le-men l ; ed . Key features of l ; his new sysl ; emnre its ability to use . semantic'repre . s'entatio'n . sl ; hatare . 
common to the different media , and the ability to construct natural language feedback texts to help the author understand the contenl  ; and the form of ; lie document while it is still raidere on sl ; ruction . The concluding section exl ) lains what needs to be done to till the gap ) el , ween the iml ) lemenl ; edsysl ; eln and , tie ideal one . 
1 An exception is AIA , Tes ( : ow hit : h takes natural language input ~ requiring the system to interpret unconstrained natural language  ( Stock 1991 )  . Avoiding the need for doing this is an important design motivation for WYS l WYM-based syst  ; enis . 
2 A WYSIWYM-based System tbr the Author ing o f Textual 

Elsewhere ( Powermid Scott 1998, Scottel ; al.
1998 , Scott 1999) , a new knowledge-editing 1 net ; hod called ~ WYSIWYM editing ' has been introduced and motivated  . WYSIWY Mediting allows a domain expert to edit a knowledge base  ( KB ) by in l ; er~wl ; ing with a . \[~ed baekic . : rt , , generated by the system , which pl'esents both the knowledge , already defined and the options for exl ; ending and modit ~ ying it . Knowledge is added or modified by return-based choices which directly Mti  ; et the knowledge base ; the result is displayed to the author by means of an auto-matic ~ lly generated feedback text : thus ~ What You Seels What You Meant '  . WYSIWY Min-stantares a general recent trend in dialogue sys-l  ; ems ; owards moving some of the initiative from the user to the sysl  ; em , ~dlowing such systenls to avoid the ( titli ( ; ulties of t ) ro ( ; essing % t ) cn~(i . e . , ture ensrained ) input . 
Of parti (: ular importance , here , m : eat ) plieations of WYSIWYM to the generation of documents  ( : ont~dning text mid1 ) ietures ; the t ) resent section tb cuses on ( multilingual ) tezt generation : l ; heKB ( : re~Lted with the help of WYSIWYM is used as input to a natural language generation  ( NLG ) l ) rogrmn , pro(hu:ing as output a document of some sort , for I ; he benelit of ~ mend user . Present apt ) lications of WYSIWYM\[ ; oi ; exl ; generation use a KL-ONE-I , yl ) e knowledge representation language as input to two NLG sys-\[  ; elli S . () lie NLG sys ; elll generates tb . ed back texts ( for l ; her aft ; her ) ml(tI ; h('other gener ~ d ; es on trotl ; exi ; s ( for all ell ( tllser ) . Olleat ) plication currently under develot mmnl ; has 1 ; 11( ; creation of Patient Informal ; i on Leaflets ( PILLS ) a Sits domain . The present vt ; rsion of this PILLs system allows authors to enter information about possible sideeft'cots  ( ' if you are either pre . qnanto1"allergict openicillin , then tell your doctor ' ) and how to handlelned ical devices such as in halers  , inoculators , etc . By interacting with the feedback texts generated by the system  , the author can detine a procedure for perfornfing a task  , e . g . preparing an in haler for use . AllewKB leads to the creation of a procedure instance  , e . g . p . The permanent part of the KB(i . e . , the TBox ) spt , ei fiesl ; haI ; proceduresma , y betions in both cases . In the atomic case , the options include Clean , Store , Remove , etc . , and these are made visible by means of a metal from which tile author can select  , say , Remove . Tile program responds by adding a new instance , of type Remove , to the KB:
Remove ( p )   ( ' There is a procedure p whose type is Remove . ') th ' om the updated knowledge base , the genera-for produces a feedback text
Remove this device or device-part from this device or device-part  , making use of the infbrmation , in the TBox of the system , that Remove procedures require an Actee and a Source  . Such not yet defined attributes are shown through mouse-sensitive anchors  . By clicking on all anchor , the author obtains a popup metallisting the pernfissible values of the attrilmte  ; by selecting one of these options , the author updates the knowledge base . 
Clicking on this device or device part yields a popup menu that lists all the types of devices and their parts that the systenl knows about  , in-eluding a Cover ( which , according to the TBox must have a Device as Owner  )  . By continuing to make choices at anchors , the author might expand the knowledge base in the tbllowing sequence : ? Remove a device's cover from a device or device-part ? Remove a device's cover from an inhaler of a person ? Remove a device's cover from your in haler ? Remove your in haler's cover from your in-haler At this point the knowledge base is potentially complete  , so a ( less stilted ) outp'uttczt can be generated and incorporated into the leaflet  , e . g . 
Please remove the cover of your ill-haler.
Longer output texts can be obtained by expanding the feedback text fit r ther  . Anuml ) er of proi ) erties of the PILLS system are worth stressing . First , the systems ut ) ports a high-level dialogue , allowing the author to disregard low-level details  , such as the exact words used in the output text . This makes it possible to interact with the system using  , say , French ( provided a generator t br French feedback texts is available  )  , for the i ) roduction of leatlets in Japanese ( provided a generator for Japanese output texts is available  )  . The semantic model in the TBox guarantees that many types of inconsistencies  ( e . g . , a medicine that has to be taken both once and twice a day  ) are prevented . Second , a sire-pleversion of WYSIWYM has also been applied to the tbrm of the text  , allowing the author to specit ) it separately from its content . This is done by allowing the author to use WYSIWYM tbr building a second  , form-related KB which describes the st ~ . tl c and layo ' ut of the docmnent . 
This KB , for example , may state that the maximum paragraph length is 10 sentences and that there are not botnotes . ( A second , form-related TBox detern fines what the options determining layout are  . ) This form-related KB constrains the texts that are generated  . By interacting with feedback texts describing the tbrm-related KB  , the author changes the stylistic/layout properties of the document  . 
AWYSIWYM-based System for the Authoring of Mul timedia 

ILLUSTrl , ATE is ai1 extension of PILLS producing documents that contain pictures as well as words  . Consider a to y exaln l ) le , adapted from ABPI (1997) . Suppose the document says Remove the cover of your in haler  . An instruction of this kind may be illustrated by the picture below  . How can a document authoring system produce a document in which appropriate pic-tnres illustrate the text when this is desired ? ILLUSTRATE does this by allowing an author to ask t brpictorial illustration of the intbrmation in the document by interacting with the feedback texts  . The author can indicate , fbragiven mouse-sensitive stretchs of the feedback text  , whether she would like to see the part of the document hat corresponds to sillustrated  . If so , the system searches its library to find a picture that matches the meaning of s  . In Fig . 2 , the author has requested illustration of the in-

Figure 1: One of the picture . sill the lit ) rary of the a , u thoring system struction ( : or resl ) onding with timtext ' Remove your in haler's cov (  , rfi'om your in haler ' .   ( The otlm r four options are irrelevant for t ) resent purposes . ) In domains where all the pictures are , i\[:Jle ; % . ' . turef, . ' , oda ! ~ t?C , srltr0l\]en lova your in haler's cover h' ,   .   .   .   .   .   .  ,  .  , , ,  .  ; ,  . h . I .   .  ,  . 
t i i i l i i : . ' . t 2 c . . f v s , : l : t ;

CLR(gel ) ell:t ~, a , % i . : !! , , , , d , , di , r ~ Figur (' 2: Screen(hunt ): Author makes are - . 
quests for illustration variations on a common theme  , suitnble pictures can be generated . Ill the case . of l ) atient ; Information Le Mtets , however , this was not a practical option because of the many ditDrent kinds of things depicted in the leaflets : medicine packages  , body parts , medical at ) l ) licmmes , var- . 
ioust ; yl ) eS of actions , etc . Pictures , moreover , are he , wily reused in the di it ' erent leatlets writ-tell \]  ) y the S & lilO company . For these reasons , IIAAJSTRATt ? , llses ~ tii alternative al ) proaeh , selecting pictures from a library , each of which is ; tnnol ; at , ed with ~ t formal rel ) r ( ; sentation of its meaning . We will explain the workings of IL-LUSTRATE by answering three questions :  ( \] ) What kinds of rei ) resent ~ tions are used ill the library to annotate the pictures with relevant as-l  ) ects of their meaning '? ( 2 ) How is the . ~ ; emanti- ( : ally annotated library of t ) i ( : tures created '? and ( 3 ) What selection algorithm is employed to retrieve all optimally approt  ) riate illustration for a given part of the , KB frolll the library ? We shall assmne that the information whose illustration is requested con ' esponds with the following for-mul~t in the KB  , which tel ) resents the metaling of the feedback text ill Fig .  2 . 
R , ' ~ , , , , , '.( t ,), VA cto , '( p ) = .',:
I ~, . a ~., '(. ~:) gSo , ,, , .,: c ~( ; , ) = va ~
In halcr(y ) ~ Actce(p ) = zg = v.
(' There exists a ' Remove . ' action whose Sere'co is an Inhah ' . r and who . ~ eAd , ee is a Cover of the same in haler . ') 1 . What kinds of representations are used ? Representations say what information each pict m'e intends to convey  . Irrelew mt details shouht be omitted . It has been observed that photographic pictures express ' vivid ' information and that this intbrmation can be expressed by a conjmmtion of positive  , literals ( Levesque1 !) 86 . In line with this obserwttion , ILLUSTI/ATErei ) resents the llle a , nillg of the picture in Fig . 1, for example , as follows : ; ~+ . ',,, . o ~, + . '( p )* + So ', , . r',:+ . '( p ) = :\]
H-I*",'(V ), VA , tc~;(~,)=aC,,', . ',,'( ~) aO ', , , , , . ', '(~) = :, j . 
( The leattet . ~;(le , ~ mril)e Inhalers , Autohale . rs , and Aerohalers . ) If any of the w triables c , : r , y , z has & Ii oc('ur relice ill the llle ; tlling rel ) resentation of mlother 1 ) i ( : ture the i ~ these occurrence score f'er . 
This ~: dlows the systmn to know wh( . ' ntwopi(:-tm'es depict the same . i ) erson , for examt ) le ( Vail
Demrd:er and Power 1999).
2 . How is the library created ? This is a question of greatimi  ) ortml ce because the library contain semantic representations that m'el Ill tCh more detailed than those in current picture re-trieval systems  ( e . g . Vande ~ v Vaal \] 995 ) nml this couht potentially nmkethe & llllOtat ; i Oll t ; ask extremely ) ur ( lensome ( Enser 1995) . The an , ~ wertothist ) rol ) lemmay be unext ) e(:t ; e(l:ILLUS-TI1ATE u . qi' . sWYSIWYMit ; self to emtl ) leauthorst . t ) associate ; t given t ) icture with a novel rep-resenl ; ;tl ; ion . The class of representations tlmtture is , alter all , a ( ' vivid ' ) subset of tile class of representations allowed by the TBoxt brtim text of the document  , and consequently , tim same WYSIWYM interlhce can be used to create snch representations  . Fig .   3 contains a screen-dump of the annotation process , wtmre the cnr-rent annotation corresponds with the formula Cover  ( z ) & Owner ( z ) = y . Note that this formula is still incomplete because the nature of the Source is undefined  . ( When it is finished , the feedback text will beeq niwtlen to that in Figure  2  . ) The top of the screendump shows the accompanying feedback text containing anchors tbrfls rther additions  . 
Figure 3: Screendump : A stage during tile annotation of a picture  3  . What is the selection algorithm ? A picture can illustrate as sitem of information without expressing everything in it  . For example , Fig .   1 does not show that the Actor is the Reader and it leaves the type of ' Haler ' unspecified  . ( They all look alike . ) So , a selection rule must allow pictures to omit intbrmation : 
Selection Rule : Use the logically strongest picture whose representation is logically impl ied by the information to be illustrated  .   ( Van Deemter 1999 ) Logical strength is determined on the basis of the two semantic representations alone  . Determining whether one representation logically ira-liliestim other  , where one is an instance in the KB and tim other a representation of a picture  , is easy , given that both a reconjunctions of positive literals  . 
This brief description should suffice to highlight the following advantages of ILLUSTRATE : ? One unif brm interface is employed for all actions that involve the editing of semantic representations  , regardless of the type of presentation ivolved ( i . e . , its media ) . 
? When used for the construction of annotations of pictures  , the TBox of the systems nakes sure that only those properties can enter an annotation that are relevant in connection with it  . In the present domain , for example , the height of the patient is irrelevant , and consequently the TBox does not make height all attribnte of a person  . 
, , Pictures are retrieved by a reasoning process involving classicalogic  ; since a match between a picture and a piece of the KB can never be inexact  , there is no need t br the retriew fl process to be probabilistic  , as has to be done when the system has less control over the form of annotations  ( Van
Rijsl)ergen 1985, Van Deesnter 1999).
Specific aspects of ILLUSTRATE have been described elsewhere  , but the assumptions belfind the system as a whole have not bees stated before  .   ( For tlm representation scheme and the selection scheme see Van Deemter  1999  ; t br the treatment of sequences of pictures see Van Deemter and Power  1999  . ) We have so t'nr sin > plified by assuming there to be only one author  . In fact , however , an intelligent authoring system is most useflfl when there are several authors  ( each of which can be allowed to work in a different langnage  )  . More specifically , it is plan-sible that the personant horing the annotations in the library is not the santo as the person  ( s ) who author ( s ) the document itself . 
4 Future Work Towards the Ideal
The PILLS system ( section 2 ) makes a first stabat fnl filling text-related requirements  1 and 2 nmntioned in section 1  . The ILLUSTRATE demonstrator goes beyond this , fulfilling important aspects of requirements 3 and 4 as well . 

Yet , there is a considerable gat ) l ) etween the im-i ) hmlented system and the ideal one of section 1 . Possit ) leimprovements do not only concern the ( : overage of the sysl ; em , but matters of system are hitectm : e as well . Three ( titti ; rent sets of improvements may l)edis (: erned . Firstly , there is rcquirelnent 5 of section 1 , whi (: h requires easy postediting . It is easy to allow at % hers to make h ) w-lev cl corrections in the document a . f-let the interaction with WYSIWYM , HIlL unless the system ' understands ' the , meaning of the editing actions , i ) ostediting destroys tlm con-ne ( : tiont ) etween the edited document an ( l the ( : ontent of l ; he various knowledge l ) nses . Conse-quenl ; ly , l ) OSt-editing is not at ) ractieal t ) ossit ) il-ity yet , giv ( ; n the state of the , m : t in text-and picture understanding . 
Other imt ) rovements would 1) elesst ) rol ) lem-atic . On the one hand , there are issues that have been t~mk led by other research groups and whose so hltions we inten  ( t to ( : arty over to a WYS l WYM-l ) ased set l ; ing . These ( : on ( : ern the generation ot'gral ) hies Kern underlying rel ) re-sentations ( Wahlster et ; al .  1993 ) and the 1 ) rot ) -lemofot ) timizing timlay out of text &\] ) i ( : turedo ( : uments ( e . g . Grat)h et al1996), l'orin-stall(;e . Three remaining imt ) rovements , ( mtheOt\]lall(t ~ ~ L Felllal ; t(~rs for fill ; tirel ; (' . s(?~l;(;ll:?Media alloc ,, tio'n , . \] LLUSTRAT Feml ) o(li (' , so neway in whi (: hmedia may be allocated . 
Other mechanisms ( : ould give the system more autonomy . For example , l ; he system may use rules ( e . g . I / . oth and Hettey1 . ! ) 93 ) to decide all tOll Onl Ollsly what ill for lllation is in need of illustration  . Simih ~ rly , authors may 1 ) eenabled to 1 ) oint at thm nlmail 1 ) ie-tures , where ul ) On the system triest of in ( t a suitable place in the document o include them , based on the ret ) resentation of their meaning and making use , of the Selection Rule of section 3 . By thus allowing the author and the system to coot  ) crate on media allocation , this ditiicult task will t ) el nade more tractable ( see the recent discussion sill ETAI 1997-8 )  . 
? Other media . Little in ILLUSTRATE hinges on the fact that the ol  ) jects in the lil ) rary are t ) ictures . The Sall l ( . ~ system , for exam-t)le , can be used t brammtating somulor canned tezt ( for examl ) le , a complext ) it of btw:ode , which needs to be rendered literally ) . Of great practical interest , finally , is the 1 ) ossil ) ility of including docunlents authored previously ( and possibly by a different author )  , leading to iterative applications of WYSIWYM . 
? bttcraction bctwc . cn media . Ide ~ flly , the words in a text should be Ml'ected by the inclusion of a picture : First  , and most obviously , texts im~y be cn lauicd by retbrences to 1 ) ictures ( e . g . , references like ~ See Fig . 
3' mayle . addet ,: f Paraboniant Vanl ) eemter 1999) . Secondly , texts may 1) ered , uccd because information expressed in the 1 ) ict mecanl ) eshortened ( or left out all ; ogether ) . One type of situation where this h~q ) l ) ensicx empliiied by t ; he text '12 , o-move the ( ' al ) sule froll l the foil as shown in the \] ) i ( : ture ' ( ABPI 1997 )  , a ( : ( :omt ) anie ( t1 ) yat ) i ( : ture showing how this may be done . Oth ( ; rtyt ) es of situation in ( : lude the case where quantil ; ative in for ln~t tion is ex-1 ) resse ( t through a vague textual descril ) l ; ion (' a blol ) of (: ream ' , ~ a tinger tipo foint mead : ' ) that is made more l ) re ( : ise by means of a picture showing t\]w , required amount . 
It should 1 ) e noted that each of these extensions del ) ends ( ' ru ( ' ially on ILLUSTRA'I'E : sat ) ility toma . nil ) ulate the semanti ( : rel ) resentations as s ( )- ( ' iated with multimedia objc ( : ts , whoxc'one mid the same rel ) resental ; i on language is used f br the difl'erent media : a lmfl time dia qnterlingua '  ( e . g . Barkcr-Plummer and Greeves 1995) . 
In the ( ' ase of an author selecting at ) icturc using tlmmb nails , tbrexami ) le , the semantic rel ) resentation cnal ) les the author to ( a ) tind a suitabh ; local ; ion for the t ) ie ture and (1)) a dat ) t the ,  ( ; extl ) yomitting fl'omi ( ; information that is now expressed by the picture . 
A final extension of the ideas outlined in this t ) a per would involve completing the symmetry between feedl  ) ack and outl ) ut : all t ) resent WYSIWYM systems Il SeImrely textual feedback  . 
Inprin (: it ) le , however , feedt ) ack can l ) e as multimodal as the target document . We are currently exploring the 1 ) ossibility of allowing an author to express some of her choices by clicking on a mouse-sensitive part of a picture  ; the system could generate an ui ) dated feedback text ( possibly along with an updated t ) icture ) domains , for example , where a brief description of an object may be difficult to obtain  , this might lead to a fllrther improvement of the
WYSIWYM technique.

ABPI (1997) . The Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry  ,   1996-1997 ABPI Compendium of Patient Information Leaflets . 
Am(1995) . Special Issue , edited by P . McKevitt , on Integration of Natural Language and Vision Processing : Intelligent Multimedia  . 
Artificial Intelligence Review 9, Nos . 2-3.
E . Andr 6 and Th . Rist (1995) . Generating Coherent Presentations Employing Textual and Visual Material  . Artficial Intelligence Review 9: 147-165 . 
D . Barker-Hummer and M . Greeves (1995).
Architectures for Heterogeneous Reasoning.
In J . Lee ( Ed . ) Prec . of First International Workshop on Intelligence and Multimodality in Mnltimedia  Inte1:faces : Research and Applica-lions ( IMMI-1 )  , Edinburgh . 
M . Bordegoni , G . Faconti , S . Feiner , M.T.
Maybury , T . Iist , S . Ruggieri , P . Trahanias , and M . Wilson (1997) . A Standard Reference Model for Intelligent Multimedia Presentation Systems  . Computer Standards & Interfaces 18, pp .  477-496 . 
P . Enser (1995) . Progress in Docmnentation ; Pictorial hffbrmation II , etrieval . Journal of Documentation , Vol . 51, No . 2, pp . 126-170 . 
ETM (1997, 1998). ETAI News Journal on
Intelligent User Interfaces , Vol1, No's1 and 2.
W.H . Graf , S . Neurohr , and R . Goebel (1996).
A Constraint-Based Tool for the Pagination of Yellow-Page Directories  . In U . Geske and H . 
Simonis ( Eds . ) Procs . of KI96 workshop on declarative constraint programnfing . GMD-
Studien 297, St . Augustin.
H . J . Levesque (1986) . Ma~king Believers out of Computers . Artificial Intelligence 30, pp . 81-108 M . Maybury and W . Wahlster (1998) . Readings in Intelligent User Interthces . Morgan
Kaufmmm Publ ., San Francisco.
I . Paraboni and K . van Deemter (1999) . Issues for Generation of Document Deixis . Ill E . 
Andrd ctal . ( Eds ) Procs . of workshop on Deixis , Demonstration and Deictic Belief in Multimedia Contexts  , ill association with tilellth European Smnmers School in Logic  , 
Language and Information ( ESSLLI99).
R . Power and D . Scott (1998) . Multilingual Authoring using Feedback Texts . In Prec . of
COLING/ACL co  #: ference , Montreal.
S . Roth and W . Hefley (1993) . Intelligent Multimedia Presentation Systems : Research and Principles  . In M . Maybury ( Ed . ) Intelligent Multimedia Interlaces , AAAI Press , pp . 13-58 . 
D . Scott , R . Power , and R . Evans (1998).
" Generation as a Solution to its own Problem " , Accepted for Prec . of 9th International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  . 
D . Scott (1999) . The Multilingual Generation Game : authoring fluent texts in unfamiliar languages  . Proceedings of the 16th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( IJCAI'99 )  . 
O . Stock (1991) . Natural Language and Exploration of an Information Space : the aLF fl'es coInteractive Systein  . In M . Maytmry and W . 
Wahlster (1998).
K . van Deemter (1999) . Docunlent Geueration and Picture Retrieval . In Prec . of Third Int . Conf . on Visual hfformation Systems,
Amsterdam , Springer Lecture Notes.
K . van Deemter and R . Power (1999) . Inclusion of Picture Sequences in Generated Docmnents  . 
In Prec . of iburth Portuguese Conf . on
Artificial Intelligence , Evora , Springer Lecture

H . van de Waal (1995) . ICONGLASS ; Anleone-graphic classification system . Amsterdam 1973-1985 (17 vols) . ISBN0-7204-8264-X . See also < http://iconelass . leg . ruu . nl/home , html > . 
C . J . van Rijsbergen (1989) . Towards an inibr-mation logic . In : Prec . ACM SIGIR . 
W . Wahlster , E . Andrd , W . Finkler , H.-J.
Profitlich , and Th . Rist (1993) . Plan-based Integration of Natural Language and Graphics Generation  . Artificial Intelligence 63, p . 387-427 . 

