Integrating compositional semantics into a verb lexicon 
Hoa Trang Dang , Karin Kipper and Martha Palmer
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Pennsylvania
200 South 33rd Street
Philadelphia , PA 19104, USA
htd,kipper,mpahner@linc.cis.upenn.edu

We present a classbased approach to building a verb lexicon that makes explicit the close association between syntax and semantics for Levin classes  . We have used Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammars to capture the syntax associated with each verb class and have augmented the trees to include selectional restrictions  . In addition , semantic predicates are associated with each tree  , which allow for a coln positional interpretation . 
1 Introduction
The difficulty o1' achieving adequate handcrafted semantic representations has limited the lield of natural language t  ) rocessing to applications that can be contained within well-de Iined subdomains  . 
Despite many different lexicon development approaches  ( Mel'cuk , 1988; Copestakc and Sanfilippo , 1993; Lowe et al ,  1997) , the field has yet to develop a clear conseusus on guidelines for a coln putational lexicon  . One of the most controversial areas in building such a lexicon is polyselny : how senses can be computationally distinguished and characterized  . We address this problem hyemploying compositional semantics and the adjunction of syntactic l  ) hrases to support regular verb sense extensions . This differs l'rom the Lexical Conceptual Structure  ( LCS ) approach exemplified by Voss ( 1996 )  , which requires a separate LCS representation for each possible sense extension  . In this paper we describe the construction of VerbNet  , a verb lexicon with explicitly stated syntactic and semantic information for individua lexical items  , using Levin verb classes ( Levin ,  1993 ) to systematically construct lexical entries . We use Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammar ( LTAG )   ( Joshi , 1987; Schabes , 1990) to capture the syntax for each verb class , and associate semantic predicates with each tree . 
Althougl a similar ideas have been explored for w : rbsense extension  ( Pusteiovsky , 1995; Goldberg ,  1995) , our approach of applying LTAG to the problem of composing and extending verb senses is novel  . LTAGs have an extende domain of locality that captures the arguments of a verb in a local manner  . The association of semantic predicates to a tree yields a complete semantics for the verb  . More-ovel , the operation of adjunction in LTAGs provides a mechanism for extending verb senses  . 
2 Levin classes
Levin verb classes are based on the ability of a verb to occur in diathesis alternations  , which are pairs of syntactic frames that are in some sense meaning preserving  . The fundalnent alssuln ption is that the syntactic frames arc a direct reflection of the underlying semantics  , l to wever , Levin classes exhibit inconsistencies that have hampered researchers ' ability to reference them directly in applications  . Many verbs ale listed in multiple classes , some of which have conflicting sets of syntactic frames  . Dang et al ( 1998 ) showed that multiple listings could in some cases be interpreted as regular sensextensions  , and defined intersective Levin classes , which are a more line-grained , syntactically and semantically coherent refinement of basic Levin classes  . We represent these verb classes and their regular sens extensions in the LTAG for lnalism  . 
3 Lexicalized rI ? ee Adjoining Grammars 3 . 1 Overview of formalism Lexicatized Tree Adjoining Granunars consist of a finite set of initial and auxiliary elementary hees  , and two operations to combine them . The minimal , nonrecursive linguistic structures of a language , such as a verb and its complements , are captured by initial trees . Recursive structures of a language , such as prepositional modifiers which result in syntactically embedded VPs  , are represented by auxiliary trees . 

Elementary trees are combined by the operations of substitution and adjunction  . Substitution is a simple operation that replaces a leaf of a tree with a new tree  . Adjunction is a splicing operation that replaces an internal node of an elementary tree with an auxiliary tree  . Eveu tree is associated with a lexical item of the language  , called the anchor of the tree . 
Tiletree represents the domain over which the lexical item can directly specify syntactic on straints  , such as subject verb number agreement , or semantic constraints , uch as selectional restrictions , all of which are implemented as features . 
LTAGs are more powerful than contextfree grammars  ( CFG )  , allowing localization of socalled unbounded dependencies that cannot be handled by CFGs  . There are critical benefits to lexical semantics that are provided by the extende domain of locality of the lexicalized trees  . Each lexical entry corresponds to a tree . If the lexical item is a verb , the conesponding tree is a skeleton for an entire sentence with the verb already present  , anchoring the tree as a terminal symbol . The other parts of the sentence will be substituted or adjoined in at appropriate places in the skeleton tree in the course of the derivation  . The composition of trees during parsing is recorded in a derivation tree  . The derivation tree nodes correspond to lexically anchored elementary trees  , and the arcs are labeled with information about how these trees were combined to produce the parse  . Since each lexically anchored initial tree corresponds to a semantic unit  , the derivation tree closely resembles a semantic -dependency representation  . 
3.2 Semantics for TAGs
There is a range of previous work in incorporating semantics into TAG trees  . Stone and Doran ( 1997 ) describe a system used for generation that simultaneously constructs the semantics and syntax of a sentence using LTAGs  . Joshi and Vijay-Shanker (1999) , and Kallmeyer and Joshi (1999) , describe the semantics of a derivation tree as a set of attachments of trees  . The semantics of these attachments is given as a conjunction of formulae in a flat semantic representation  . They provide a specific methodology for composing semantic representations much like Candito and Kahane  ( 1998 )  , where the directionality of dominance in the derivation tree should be interpreted according to the operations used to build it  . Kallmeyer and Joshi also use a flat semantic representation to handle scope phenomena involving quantifiers  . 
4 Description of the verb lexicon
VerbNet can be viewed in both a static and a dynamic way  . Tile static aspect refers to the verb and class entries and how they are organized  , providing the characteristic descriptions of a verb sense or a verb class  ( Kipper et al ,  2000) . The dynamic aspect of the lexicon constrains the entries to allow a compositional interpretation i LTAG derivation trees  , representing extended verb meanings by incorporating adjuncts  . 
Verb classes allow us to capture generalizations about verb behavioL Each verb class lists the tlle-mafic roles that the predicate-argument structure of its members allows  , and provides descriptions of the syntactic fi ' ames conesponding to licensed constructions  , with selectional restrictions defined for each argument in each frame  , l Each frame also includes semantic predicates describing the participants at various stages of the event described by the frame  . 
Verb classes are hierarchically organized , ensuring that each class is coherent-that is , all its members have common semantic elements and share a common set of thematic roles and basic syntactic frames  . This require some manual restructuring of the original Levin classes  , which is facilitated by using intersective Levin classes  . 
5 Compositional Semantics
We use TAG elementary trees for the description of allowable frames and associate semantic predicates with each tree  , as was done by Stone and Do-ran . The semantic predicates are primitive enough so that many may be reused in differentrees  . By using TAGs we get the additional benefit of an existing parser that yields derivations and derived trees fiom which we can construct the compositional semantics of a given sentence  . 
We decompose each event E into a tripar-tite structure in a manner similar to Moens and Steedman  ( 1988 )  , introducing a time function for each predicate to specify whether the predicate is true in the preparatory  ( d ~ ring ( E ) ) , cuhnination ( er~d(E )) , or consequent ( res~ll : ( E )) stage of an event . 
hfitial trees capture tile semantics of the basic senses of verbs in each class  . For example , many I These restrictions are more like preferences that generate a preferred reading of a sentence  . They may be relaxe depend-ing on the domain of a particular pplication  . 

S\[cv cnt=E\]S\[event=E2\]
NP . , . sH$VP\[cvcnt=E\]NParqo$VP\[ event=E1 \]\[+ anin mtc\]\]\[+animale\]
VVNI ), ~, . ql$
I\]\[+animate\]1"1 . 11 r Ullmotion(during(E ), X a, . al ) motion ( during ( El ) , X argl ) Figure 1 : Induced action alternation for the Run verbs verbs in the Run class can occur in the induced action alternation  , in which the subject of the inmmsi-tive sentence has the same thematic role as the direct object in the transitive sentence  . Figurel shows the initial trees for the transitive and intransitive variants for the Run class  , along with their semantic predicates . The entity in motion is given by argl , associated with the syntactic subject of the intransitive tree and the direct object of the transitive tree  . 
The event denoted by the transitive variant is a composition of two subevents :  E1 refers to the event of av . qlrunning , and E2 refers to the event of an entity ( argO ) causing event El . 
Predicates are associated with not only the verb trees  , but also the auxiliary trees . We use a flat semantic rcpmsentatiou like that of Kalhncycr and Joshi  , and the semantics of a sentence is the conjunction of the semantic predicates of the trees used to derive the sentence  . Figure 2 shows au auxiliary tree for a path prepositional pllrase headed by " to "  , along with its associated semantic predicate . 
When the PP tree for " to the park " is adjoiued into the intransitive tree for " John ran "  , the semantic interpretation is the conjunction of the two predicates motion  ( during ( E )  , john ) A goal ( end(E ) , john , park ) ; adjunction into the transitive tree for " Bill ran the horse " yields cause  ( during ( E2 )  , bil I , El ) Amo-tion(during(El) , horse ) A goal ( end(El ) , horse , park ) . 
In both cases , the argument X , rs ? 0 . ,rgl ( john or horse ) for the anxiliary tree is noulocal and colnes from the adjunction site  .   2 The arguments are recovered from the derivation tree  , following Candito and Kahane . When an initial tree is substituted into another tree  , the dependency mirrors the derivation structure , so the variables associated with the sub-2X . , . .qo, . , . ga is the variable associated with the cntity in motion  ( ar91 ) in the tree to which tile PP a ( Uoins ( argO )  . 
stituting tree can be referenced as arguments in the host tree's predicates  . When an auxiliary tree is adjoined , the dependency for the adjunction is reversed , so that variables associated with the host tree can be referenced as arguments in the adjoining tree's predicates  . 

VP ar:j O*PP\[evc,~t = l~\]
I'NP . rql$
Iloqoal(end(E ), X , ., .; jo.,,.r11, Xa , . ~ j1)
Figure 2: Auxiliary path PP tree
The tripart it event structure allows us to express the semantics of classes of verbs like change of state verbs whose description requires reference to a complex event structure  . In the case of a verb such as " break " , it is important to make a distinction between the state of the object before the end of the action and the new state that results afterwards  . This event structure also handles the ona-tive construction  , in which there is an intention of a goal during the event  , that is not achieved at the end of the event . The example of the cona-rive construction shown in Figure  3 expresses the intention of hitting something . Because the intention is not satisfied the semantics do not include the predicates manner  ( end ( E )  , fi~rcefuI , X , rgo ) A conmct ( end(E ) , X , rgo , X c ~ rgO , that express the completion of the contact with impact event  . 
The ability of verbs to take on extended senses in sentences based on their adjuncts is captured in a 
NP a ~. qO$VP\[evcnt = E\]
VNP argl$
I hitmanner ( during(E ), direeted motion , Xa, . .qo ) A contact(end(E ) , Xar ~ O , Xar~l ) A7 na T , ,nel ' ( end(E ) , f of ' e ef ' ~ l , Xar9O)s\[cvcnt = r~:\]
NP arq0 $ VP
VVP
I hit VPP

I at manner ( during ( E ) , direct , edmotion , X ~ r:io ) Figure 3: Syntax and semantics of transitive and conative construction for Hit verbs natural way by the TAG operation of adjunction and our conjunction of semantic predicates  . The original Hit verb class does not include movement of the direct object as part of the meaning of hit  ; only sudden contact has to be established . By adjoining a path PP such as " across NP " , we get an extended meaning , and a change in Levin class membership to the Throw class  . Figure 4 shows the class-specific auxiliary tree anchored by the preposition " across " together with its semantic predicates  , introducing a motion event that immediately follows  ( meets ) the contact event . 
VP\[evenI:E\]
VP . rf/o*\[cvcnt=EargO\]PP
PNP argl.~
IaCI'OSS meets(E , , . .,jo , E ) A motion(during(E ), X~m~,0 . ,, . 91) Avia ( during(E ), X ~ r,jo . ~ r~l,X a, . ,j1)
Figure 4: Auxiliary tree for " across " oll the LTAG formalism  , for which we already have a large English grammar  . Palmer et al ( 1998 ) defined compositional semantics for classes of verbs implemented in LTAG  , representing general semantic components ( e . g . , motion , manner ) as features on the nodes of the trees . Ore " use of separate logical forms gives a more detailed semantics for the sentence  , so that for an event involving motion , it is possible to know not only that the event has a motion semantic omponent  , but also which entity is actually in motion . This level of detail is necessary for application such as animatiou of naturalanguage instructions  ( Bindiganaval et al . , 2000) . Another important contribution of this work is that by dividing each event into a tripartite structure  , we permit a more precise definition of the associated semantics  . 
Finally , the operation of adjunction in TAGs provides a principled approach to representing the type of regular polysemy that has been a major obstacle in buildiug verb lexicons  . 
Researching whether a TAG grammar for VerbNet can be automatically constructed by using development tools such as Xia et al  ( 1999 ) or Candito ( 1996 ) is part of our next step . We also expect obeable to factor out some class -specific auxiliary trees to be used across several verb classes  . 
6 Conclusion
We have presented a classbased approach to building a verb lexicon that makes explicit and implements the close association between syntax and semantics  , as postulated by Levin . The power of the lexicon comes from its dynamic a spec that is based  7 Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments  . This researeh was partially supported by NSF grants  IIS-9800658 and IIS-9900297 and CAPES grant 0914-95  . 


Ralna Bindiganawde , Willianl Schuler , Jan M . Allbeck , Nornlan I . Badler , Aravind K . Joshi , and Martha Pahner .  2000 . Dynamically Altering Agent Behaviors Using Natural Language Instructions  . Fourth International Cot ! ference on
Autonomous Agents , June.
Marie-Hdl~ne Candito and Sylwtin Kahane . 1998.
Can the TAG derivation tree represent a senlan-tic graph ? An answer ill the light of Meaning-Text Theory  . In Piz ) ceed htgs of the Fourth 77 ~ G+Workshop , pages 2124 , Philadelphia , PA , August . 
Marie-Hdl~ne Candito .  1996 . A Principle-Based Hierarchical Representation f LTAGs  . In Proceedings of COLING96, Copenhagen , Denlnark . 
Aim Copestake and Antonio Sanfilippo . 1993.
Multilingual exical representation . In Proceedings , 2 . 1" the AAAI Spring Symposium : Bttilding Lexicons . for Machine Translation , Stanford , California . 
Hoa Trangl ) ang , Karin Kipper , Martha Pahner , and Joseph Rosenzweig .  1998 . hw estigating regular sense extensions based on intersective Levin classes  . In Proceedings of COLING-ACL98,
Montreal , Canada , August.
Adele E . Goldberg .  1995 . C ' onslruclions . A Construction Grammar Approach 1o krgumentSlrttc-lure . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , Ill . 
Aravind K . Joshi and K . Vijay-Shanker . 1999.
Compositional semantics wilh Lexicalized Tlee-ac\ [ joilfing Granllnar : Hownlueh underspecification is necessary ? In Proceedings of the Third International Worksho I  ) on Conq ) tt-rational Semantics ( IWCS-3 )  , pages 131-145 , 
Tilburg , The Netherlands , January.
Aravind K . Joshi .  1987 . An introduction to tree adjoining grannnars . In A . Manaster-Ramer , ditor , Mathematics of Language . Jolm 13elljamins , Am-sterdaln . 
Laura Kalhneyer and Anwind Joshi .  1999 . Underspecified selnantics with LTAG . In Proceedhlgs of Amsterdam Colloquium on Semantics  . 
Karin Kippm , Hoa Trang Dang , and Martha Palmer.
2000 . Class-based construction of a verb lexi-CO ll . IllPn ) ceedings of the Seventh National Conference on Art !\[icial httelligence  ( AAAI-2000 )  , 
Austin , TX , July-August.
Beth Levin .  1993 . English Verb Classes and AIter-nation , A Preliminary h w estigation . Tile University of Chicago Press . 
J . B . Lowe , C . E Baker , and C . J . Filhnore .  1997 . Af nnne-semantic approach to semantic annotation . 
Ill Proceedings 1997 Siglex Workshol J/ANLP97,
Washington , I).C.
I . A . Mel'cuk .  1988 . Semantic description of lexical units illan explanatory combinatorial dictionary : Basic plilmiples and heuristic criteria  . 
International , lournal of Lexicography , I : 3:165-188 . 
M . Moens and M . Steedman .  1988 . Telnporal ontology and tenlporal refel'ence . Computational
Linguistics , 14:15-38.
Marthal ~ allnel " , Joseph Rosenzweig , and Willialn Schuler .  1998 . Capturing Motion Verb Generalizations in Sylmhronous TAG  . Ill Patrick Saint-l ) izim , editol , Predicative Forms in Natural Language and in Lexical Knowledge Bases  . Kluwer

James Pustejovsky . 1995. The Generative Lexicon.
MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts , USA.
Yves Sehabes .  1990 . Mathematical nd Computational Aspects of Lexicalized Grammars  . Ph . D . 
thesis , Compnter Science Department , University of Pennsylvania . 
Matthew Stone and Christine Doran .  1997 . Sell-tence Plalming as l ) escription using Tree Adjoining Grammar . Ill Proceedings of ACL-EACL'97,
Madrid , Spain.
Clare Voss .  1996 . lnlerlinxua-l ) ased Machine 7'ranslation o\["&~atialExpressions . PI'LD . thesis , University of Maryland , Depamnent of Computer Science . 
Fei Xia , Martha Pahnei , and K . Vijay-Shanker.
1999 . Towards enli-autolnating grannnar development . Ill Proceedings of the 51h Natural Language Proces'sing Pacific Rim 3  )  , mposium(NLPRS-99) , Beijing , China . 

