Chinese Generation in a Spoken Dialogue Translation System 
Hua Wu , Taiyi Huang , Chengqing Zong and Bo Xu
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition , Institute of Automation
Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100080 , China
Email : wh , huang , cqzong , xubo@nlpr . ia . ac . cn

A Chinese generation module in a speech to speech dialogue translation system is presented he:re  . The input of the generation module is the underspecified semantic representation  . Its design is strongly influenced by the underspecification f the inlmtS and the necessity of realtime and robust processing  . We design an efficient generation system comprising a task-oriented microplanner and a general surface realization module for Chinese  . The microplanner performs the lexical and syntactic choice and makes inferences fiOln the input and domain knowledge  . 
The output of the microplanner is fully instantiated  . This enables the surface realizer to traverse ltle input in a topdown  , depth-first fashion , which in turn speeds the whole generation procedure  . The surface realizer also combines the template method and deep generation technology in the same formalism  . 
Preliminary results are also presented in this paper  . 
1,, Introduction
In this paper , we will present the core aspects of the generation component of our speech to speech dialogue translation system  , the domain of which is hotel reservation . The whole system consists of five modules : speech recognizen translator  , dialogue manage h generator and speech synthesizer  . And the system takes the interlingua method in order to achieve multilinguality  . Here the interlingua is an underspecified selnantic representation  ( USR )  . And the target language is
Chinese in this paper.
Reiter ( Reiter 1995 ) made a clear distinction between templates and deep generation  . The template method is rated as efficient but inflexible  , while deep generation method is considered as flexible but inefficient  . So the hybrid method to combine both the methods has been adopted in the last few years  . Busemann ( Busemann 1996 ) used hybrid method to allow template , canned texts and general rules appearing in one formalism and to tackle the problem of the inefficiency of the grammar-based surface generation system  . Pianta ( Pianta 1999 ) used the mixed representation approach to allow the system to choose between deep generation technology and template method  . 
Our system keeps the surface generation module general for Chinese  . At the same time , we can also deal with templates in tile input without changing tile whole generation process  . If tile attribute in the feature structure is " template "  , then the value must be taken as a word string , which will appear in the output without modification  . The surface generation module assumes the input as a predicate-argument structure  , which is called intermediate representation here . And any input of it must be first converted into an intermediater presentation  . 
The whole generation process can be modularized fimher into two separate components : microplanner and syntactic realizer  . The microplanner is task-oriented . The input is an USR and the function of it is to plan an utterance on a phrase - or sentence -level  . It maps concepts defined in the domain to a functional representation which is used by the syntactic generation components to realize an appropriate surface string for it  . The functional description is made of feature structures  , the attribute-value the intermediate representation between the microplanner and the syntactic generator  . The intermediate representation is fully instantiated  . 
This enables the surface realizer to traverse the input in a topdown  , depth-first fashion to work out a grammatically correct word string for the input  , which in turn speeds the whole generatiou procedure  . So our system use a task-oriented microplanner and a general surface realizer  . The main advantage is that it is easy to adapt the system to other domains and maintain the flexibility of the system  . 
In this paper , section 2 gives a brief description of our semantic representation  . 
Section 3 presents our method on the microplanning procedure  . Section 4 describes the syntactic generation module . Section 5 presents the preliminary results of our generation system  . 
Section 6 presents discussions and future work.
2. Semantic Representation
The most obvious characteristics of the selnantic representation are its independence of peculiarities of any language and its underspecification  . But it lnUSt capture the speaker's intent . The whole semantic representation has up to four components as shown iu figure l : speaker tag  , speech act , topic and arguments . 
The speaker tag is either " a " l bragent or " c " for customer to indicate who is speaking  . The speech act indicates the speaker's intent . The topic expresses the current focus . The arguments indicate other inforlnatiou which is necessary to express the entire meaning of the source sentence  . 
USR ::= speaker:speechact:topic:m'gument
Speaker : := alc
Speech_act : := give-information I request -information\[  . . . 
Topic : := ( concept = attribute)^
Argument : := ( concept = attribute ) l*
Figure 1 Underspecified Semantic Representation Both the topic and arguments are made up of attribute -value pairs in functional formalisms  . The attribute can be any concept defined in the dolnain of hotel reservation  . The value can be an atomic symbol or recursively an attribute-value pair  . The symbol "^" in the topic expression indicate that the expression can appears zero to one time  , while The symbol "*" iuthear gument expression shows that the expression can appears zero to any times  . 
And the attribute-value pairs are order free . Both topic and arguments are optional parts in the USR  . 
Let us consider a complex semantic expression extracted from our corpus  . It is shown in Example I:a:give-information :   ( available -- ( room = ( room-type=double ) ) )  :  ( price = ( quantity = 200& 240 , currency = dollor )) I(1)
In Example 1 , the speech act is give-information , which means that the agent is offering information to the customer  . The topic indicates there are double rooms . The arguments list the prices of double rooms , which shows that there are two kinds of double rooms available  . So the meaning of this representation is " We have two kinds of double rooms which cost  200 mad 240 dollars respectively " . From the USR , the kinds of rooms are not expressed explicitly in the format  . Only from the composite value of the concept " price " can we judge there are two kinds of rooms because the price is different  . This is only one example of underspecification , which needs inferences from the input and the domain knowledge  . 
3. The Microplanner
The input to our microplanner is the underspecified semantic representation  . From the above semantic representation , we can see that it is underspecified because it lacks in fornlation such as predicate-argument structure  , cognitive status of referents , or restrictive/attribute fimction of semantic properties  . Some of the non-specified pieces of ilf formation such as predicate/argument structure are essential to generate a correct translation of the source sentence  . Fortmmtely , much of the information which is not explicitly represented can be inferred fiom default knowledge about the specific domain and the general world knowledge  . 
The lnicroplanner includes two parts : sentence -level planning and phrase-level planning  . 

The sentence planner maps the semantic representation into predicate argument structure  . 
And the phrase planner maps the concepts defined in the domain into Chinese phrases  . 
In order to express rules , we design a format t ' or them . The rules are represented as pattern-constraints -action triples  . A pattern is to be matched with part of the input on the sentence level and with the concepts on the phrase level  . 
The constraints describe additional context -dependent requirements to be fulfilled by the input  . And the action part describes the predicate argument structure and other information such as mood and sentence type  . An example describiug a sentence-level rule is shown in Figure  2  . 
( ( speaker = a )   ( speech_act = give-information ) ( topic = available )   ( topic_value=room ) ) ; // pattern ( exist ( concept , ' price ')) ; // constraint (   ( cat=clause )   ( mood = declarative )   ( tense=present )   ( voice = active )   ( sentence type = possessive )   ( predicate='4f' )   ( args = ( ( ( case-pos )   ( lex:-#get ( attribute , ' room ' ) ) )   ( ( case = bel )   ( cat = de )   ( modifier- ( #gct ( altributc , ' price ' ) ) )   ( auxiliary = ' l'lj ' ) ) ) )  ( ! optiolml : pre_mod = ( time =  #get ( attribute , ' lime ')))) ; // action
Figure 2 Example Microplanning l > , ule
First , we match the pattern part with the input USI > ,  . If matched , the constraint is tested . In the example , the concept price lnust exist in the input . 
The action part describes the whole sentence structure such as predicate argument structure  , sentence type , voice , mood . The symbol " #get " in the action part indicates thaithevalue can be obtained by accessing the phrase rules or the dictionary to colnplete the structure recursively  . 
The "  #get " expression has two parameters . The first parameter can be " concept " or " attribute " to indicate to access the dictionary and phrase rues respectively  . The second parameter is a concept defined in the domain  . In the example , the "  #get " expression is used to get the value of the domain concepts room and price respectively  . The symbol " optionah " indicates that the attribute-value pair behind it is optional  . If the input has the concept , we fill it . 
After the sentence - and phrase-level phmning , we must access the Chinese dictionary to get the part-of-speech of the lexicon and other syntactic information  . If the input is the representation iExample I , the result of the microplanning is shown in Figure  3  . 
( cat = clat , s e )   ( sentence_type=possessive )   ( mood = declarative )   ( tense=present )   ( voice = active )   ( predicate = ( ( cat=vcm )   ( lex='4 f' ) ) )   ( args = ( ( ( case = pos ) (cat = nct ) (lex ='~ J , Vl ' iq ' ) )  ( ( case = bel )   ( cat = de )   ( modifier = ( (cat=mp )   ( cardinal = ( ( cat=nc )   ( nl = ( (cat=num )   ( lex='200' ) )  ( n2 = ( (cat=num ) (lex="240' ) )  ( q tf = ( ( cat=ncl )   ( lex='0 ~ ) t \]' ) ) ) )  ( at , xiliary = ( lex='I'1I' . 1' ) ) ) ) lVigure 3 Microplanning Result for Example 1 In the above example , " cat " indicates the category of the sentence , plnases or words . " h'x " denotes the Chinese words . " case " describes the semantic roles of the arguments  . 
Target language generation in dialogue translation systems imposes strong constraints on the whole generation  . A prominent pmblen a is the non-welformedness of the input  . It forces the generation module to be robust to cope with the erroneous and incomplete input data  . In this level , we design some general rules . The input is first to be matched with the specific rules  . If there is no rules matched , we access the general rules to match with the input  . In this way , although the input is somehow ill-formed , the output still includes the main information of the input  . An example is shown in (2) . The utterance is supposed for the custom to accep the single room offered by the agent  . But the speech act is wrong because the speech act " ok " is only used to on one Iopic  . 
c:ok : ( room = ( room-type := single , quantity = 1 ) ):  ( 2 ) Although example ( 2 ) is ill formed , it includes most information of the source sentence  . 
Our robust generator can produce the sentence shown in  ( 3 )  . 
Cl'i-)kf/iJ ~ J : ( yes , a single roont ) (3) 4 . Syntactic realizatim The syntactic realizer proceeds from the microplannir ~ g result as shown int " igure  3  . The realizer is based on a flmction aluuificati , ,m fornmlism . 
litt Ms module , we also introduce the templaten lethod . If lheinput includes an attribute ~ w flue pair which uses " template " as file attribute  , then rite w flue is taken a scanned lexts or word strhws wilh slots  . It will appear in the output without any modificati  ( m . So we can embedtile template into the surface realization without modifying tlw who h : generation l  ) rocedure . When the hybrid method is used , the input is first matched with the templates defined  . If matched , the inputs will go lollle surface realizer directly  , skiplfing tl , cmi croplanning process . 
The task of the Chinese realizer i : ; as tollows: , Define the sentence struclure ? Provide ordering constraints among the syntactic on stituents of the sentence ? Select the functional words  4  . 1 \] Intermediate Representation The intermediate representation  ( IR ) is made up of feature structures . It corresponds to the predicate argument structure  . The aim is to normalize the input of tile surface realizer  . It is of considerable practical benefit to keep the rule basis as independent as possible front external conditions  ( such as the domain and output of tile preceding system  )  . 
The intermediate representation includes three parts : predicate int " ormation  , obligatory arguments and optional arguments . The predicate in R ) rmation describes the toplevel information in a clause includiug the main verb  , lhemood , the voice , and so on . The obligatory arguments are slots of roles that must be filled in a clause for it to be contplete  . And the optional arguments specify the location , the time , the purpose of the event etc . They arc optional because they do not affect rite contpleteness of a clause  . An example is shown in Figure 4 . The input is for the sentence " ~ J~l'f\]~\]l  ~   1   1'1  @ )  \ \[ ) iJ li ! . ~?"( Do you have single rooms now ?) . " agrs " antt ' ? opt " in Figure 4 represent obligatory arguntents and optional arguments respectively  . 
( ( cat=clause )   ( sentence ) yp e = possessive )   ( mood : yes no )   ( lense=present )   ( wfice-:active )   ( predicate = ( ( cat=veto )   ( lex = " ( J " ) ) )   ( args = ( ( ( case :-: pos ) (ca ! - pron ) (lex ='? j<f \]' ) )  ( ( case "- bel )   ( cai ~: nct ) (lex =' " l% ) v .  \[' ( iJ ' ) ) ) )  ( opt = ( dme = ( (cat=:adv ) tiex = ' J : l ) lu ( Ii ' ) ) ) ) ) Fip , urc 4F , xample Intermediatel ) , el ) rescnlalion 4 . 2 Chinese Reallizalion In tile synlaclic generation module  , we use ihe\[unclional unification fommlism . Attile same lime , we make use of dlcsystcl nicview poir l/of lhe systcrnic function grammar  . The rule system is made up of many sub- . sysienls such as transitivily system , mood system , tense system and voice syst cllt . The input 111ust depend on all of these systems to maked if R : rent level decisions  . 
In a spoken dialogue Iranslalion system , real = lime generation is tile basic requiremenl . As we see froln the input as shown in Figure 3 , the inlmt to the syntaclic generation provides enough iuformation about sentence and phrase struct me  . 
Most of the informatiou in tile input ix in stauti at cd  , such as the verb , the subcategorization frame and the phrase members  . So the generation engine can traverse the input in a topdown  , depth-first fashion using tmification algorithm ( Elhadad 1992 )  . The whole syntactic generation process is described in Figure  5  . 
The input is an intermediate representation and the output is Chinese texts  . The sentence unification phase defines the sentence structure and orders the components anlo Dg  , tile sentence . 

The phrase unification phased cl'ines the phrase structure  , orders the co~nponenls inside the phrases and adds the function words  . Unlike English , Chinese has no morphological markers for tenses and moods  . They arc expressed with fml clional words . Selecting functiol ml words correctly is crilical for Chillescgeneration  . 
,qelltellCC \[ ~' t "~''~'- t ~ unificaion ~ lst ?  -- -- !'-  ; ~ 7~II1 I-t ln if cat iOll \] ~ CX t Figure 5 Sleps of the Synlacfic generator
The whole unification procedure is : , , Unify the input with the grammar at the sentence lvel  . 
? identify the conslitules inside the inptll ? Unify the constituents with tile grammar a ! the phrase level recursively in a topdown  , depth-first fashion . 
5. Results
The current version of the system has been tested on our hotel reservation corpus  ( Chengqing Zong ,  1999) . The whole corpus includes about 90 dialogues , annotated by hand with underspecificd semantic representation  . I1 contains about 3000 USRs . Now we have 23 speech acls and about 60 concepts in lhe corpus . 
The generation lnodul c is tested on all sentences in the corpus  . And 90% of the generated sentences arcrated as grammatically and semantically correct  . The other 10% are rated as wrong because the mood of the sentences i not conect  . This is mainly caused by the lack of the dialogue context  . 
6. Discussion and Future Work
In spoken language translation systems , one problem is the ill-formed input . How to tackle this problem robustly is very important  . At the microplanning level , we design some general rules . The input is first to be matched with the sl~e < : ific roles  . If there is no rules matched , we access the gene . ralroles to In alch with the input . In this way , although the inl ) U ! is somehow ill-formed , the output includes the main information of the input  . And at the surface realization level , we make some relaxation on tests to improve the robuslness  , l ; ,  . g , oMigatory arguments may be missing in the utterance  . This can be caused by ellipsis in sentences such as the utterances ":\] : ~ J ~  . " ( stay for three days ) . We have to accept it as a sentence without the subject because they are acceptable in spoken Chinese and often appear in daily dialogues  . 
We arc planning to l : tuther increase the robustness of the system  . And if possible , we also hope to adapt our generation system to other  ( lolnaills . 

The research work described in lhispaper is Sulsport cd by the National Natural Sciencet  ; oundation of China under grant number 69835030 and by the National '863' Hi-Tcch Program under grantn unlber 863-306-ZT03-02-2  . 
Thanks also go to several allony l/lOtlSl'e VieWel ' S for their valuable comments  . 
Reference;
Stephan Iuscmann . (1996) Best-first surl'ace realization . Intile Eighthlnt crnatiolml Naturall . anguagcGeneration Workshop , Sussex , pages 101-

Michael Elhadad and Jacques Robin . (1992) Controlling Content P . calization with Functional Unification Grammars . Aspects of Automated Natural
Language Generation . t51) 89-104
E . Pianta , M . Tovcna .   ( 1999 ) XIG : Generating from Interchange Format Using Mixed Representation  . 

Ehud Reiter . (1995) NLG vs . Templates . In lhe Fiflh Et , rop can Workshop on Natural Language Generation , 

Chengqing Zong , Hua Wu , Taiyi Huang , Be Xu .   ( 1999 ) Analysis on Characteristics of Chinese Spoken Language  . In the Fiflh Natural Language Processing
Pacific Rim Symposium , 151) 358-362
