Binding Constraints as Instructions of Binding Machines 
Ant6nio Branco
I ) ept . of ll ~ fi ) rmatics , University of Lisbon
Faculda de de Ciancias de Lisboa
Campo Grande , 1700 Lisboa , Portugal
Antonio . Branco@di.fc.ul.pt

Binding constraints have resisted to be fully integrated into the course of grammatical processing despite its practical relevance and crosslinguistic generality  . The ultimate root for this is to be found in the exponential " overgenerate & filter " procedure of the mainstream rationale for their satisfaction  . 
In this paper we design an alternative approach based on the view that nominals are binding machines  . 

Binding constraints are an important set of filters in the process of anaphor resolution '  . As they delimit the relative positioning of anaphors and their possible antecedents in the grammatical geometry  , these constraints are of crucial importance for restricting the search space for antecedent candidates and enhancing the performance of resolvers  . From an empirical perspective , they stem from quite robust generalizations and exhibit a universal character  . 
given their parameterized validity across natural langnages  . From a conceptual point of view , in turn , the relations an aong binding constraints involve nontrivial symmetry  , which lends them a moduhtr nature . Accordingly , they have typically been taken as one of the most intriguing and robust gramnaar modules  . 
I See Annex for examples and the definition of binding constraints  . 
Ill contrast to this , however , the formal and computational handling of binding constraints has presented nonnegligible resistance when it comes to their integration into the representation and processing of grammatical knowledge  . 
In its mainstream formulation , the methodology for verifying the compliance of grammatical representations with binding constraints requires a series of extra grammatical parsing steps  ( Chomsky ,  81) . More recently , prominent unification-based frameworks either require special purpose extensions of the description formalism for a partial handling of these constraints  ( LFG : Dalrymple ,  93) , or offer no integration yet for them into the grammatical setup  ( HPSG : Pollard and Sag ,  94 . . Backofen et al . , 96) . 
Our primary aim in this paper is to bridge this gap between the gram  , natical nature of binding constraints and their full integration into grammar processing  . In Section 1 , we review previous steps towards this goal proposed in the literature  . Building on these contributions in Section 2 , we introduce the rationale of a new methodology for the verification of binding constraints  , in Section 3 , in the light of this new approach , we show how these constraints are fully integrated into g  , ammar and the drawbacks of current methodology are overcome  . 
1 The Cohldexation Paradigm
The specification of binding constraints have greatly evolved in the htst three decades  . The device of coindexation for marking anaphoric stems from the fact this device is at the heart of the mainstreal nlethodology for verifying these constraints  , a methodology whose basics were proposed in ( Chomsky ,  80 ,  81 ) and have been adopted since then in its different variants  . 
L 1 Post-grammatic all overger atior ~ and fi ltering This methodology can be outlined as in Fig  .  1 . 
After the grammatical parsirig of aser iterice with nNPs has been completed :  ( i ) iteration : repeat ( ii ) - ( iii ) uritilall possible different assignments of n indices  ( tokens ) have been exhausted ;   ( ii ) indexation : generate a tree by assigning indices to its NPs  ;   ( ill ) filtering : store the arniotated tree if the indexation of NPs respects binding constraints  , other wi ' ~ edc:let cit . 
Fig . 1? ('/ wm , vk ), '. val:;()i ? ithm
As noted as early as in ( Correa , g /') , thi : ~ approach is grossly inefficient . Later Fong ,   90? showed that its complexity is of exponential order  . Moreover , this methodology disregards any concern with interfacing grarn mar with systems for reference processing  . The input for such systems will riot l ) cagrammatical representatiori to lie refined vis4-vis the heuristics for anaphores ohition , but a forest of differently labeled trees that have to be internally searched and compared with each other by anaphore solvers  . 
Besides the efficiency issue , this methodology implies the conceptua lawkward ne . , ; s of having a <2 tnodnle of ~ rammar that is not made operative ~ , ranallaatical processing , but as an during the <2 extragrammatical dd-on . Correa , 88, p . 1 23~ observed that although the integration of binding constraints " into rules which rnay be used to derive structure that already satisfies the \[ constraints \] is not a straightforward task "  , that should be the path to follow , a point also strongly stressed in subsequent elaboration  o11 this is stie by Merle ,  93 . 
1.2 Packaging anaphoric ambiguity
A first proposal for enhancing integration of binding cosntraints into grammar is due to Correa  ,  88 . Simplifying some details , the proposed algorithm can be outlined as in Fig . 2 . 
Start fl ' om the top of the tree with two empty stacks A and B where indices will be collected  , respectively ocalc-commanding indices and nonlocal c-commanding indices  . 
While walking down a tree where every NP l-i as a distinct index  ( type ) :
When an NP is found: ( i ) copy : leave a copy of A ( if it is an anaphor ) or B ( if it is a pronoun ) at the NP node ; ( ii ) a , vsign : take the first index i of the stack copied into the NP node  . , take the NP iridex j , and annotate the NP with j = i ; ( iii ) collect : add NP index j to A . 
When a local domain border is crossed : ( iv ) reset : reset B to Am : B . 
t,'i , g-.2-, Cor/ea'sa & or ithm
This algorithm was given two different implementations  , one by Correa ,  88 , the other by Ingria and Stallard ,  89 . Further elaboration by Giorgi et al ,  90 , and Pianesi ,  91 , led to a restatement of this algorithm using formal language techniques  . 
The do-it-while-parsing approach of Correa's implel nenlation has the advantage of discarding  ) OSW a special-purpose\[ . ' erammatical module for binding . That iml ~ lementation , however , tulns out to be del ) cndent on a topdown parsing strategy . On the other hand , lngria and Stallard's implementation has the advantage of being in delmridenl of the parsing strategy adopted  . 

This was done however at the cost of still requiring a special purpose postgrammatical parsing module for binding  . 
Besides the issue of bringing binding into grammar  , it is worth noticing that this evolution inside the coindexation paradigm presented a significant improvement and yet a clear drawback  . On the one hand , if one disregards step ( ii )   ( a disguised recency heuristic spuriously mixed with binding constraints  ) and considers the result of verifying binding constraints to be the assignment to an NP of the set of indices of its antecedent candidates  , then it is possible to discard the proliferation of indexed trees as a way to express anaphoric ambiguity  . 
On the other hand , the algorithm is acknowledged not to be able to cope with constraints possibly involving nonlocal anaphoric links  . Principle C , backwards anaphora or cross over cases were not accounted for  ( Correa ,  88 , p . 127, Ingria and Stallard , 89, p . 268) . Moreover , as stack B only contains indices of the nonlocal c-commanders  2  , but not all indices in the tree except those of the local c-commanders  , Principle B is also not correctly accounted for . 
1.3 Packaging nonlocality
Other contributions to improve the coindexation method are due to Dalrymple  , 93 and Johnson ,  95 . Instead of being directed to packaging ambiguity as the one above  , they have in common being concerned with packaging nonlocality  . 
1.3.1 Nodes as mirrors of trees
Johnson's algorithm is embodied in Prolog code.
Abstracting away from details associated to that format  , it gets the outline in Fig . 3 . 
2 C-command is a configurational version of the command relation where xc-commands y iff the first branching node that dominates x dominates y  . 
Although this outline renders the algorithm in a bottom up fashion  , Johnson in geniously developed an implementation that is independent of the parsing strategy resorting to delaying mechanisms  . Crucially , in spite of its postgrammatical flavor , likewise Correa's implementation , this algorithm does not require postgrammatical processing  . 
These results were obtained with some ( i ) Repeat ( ii ) until all NP ~ ( l <_i_<n ) in the tree have been used as starting points ;   ( ii ) Walk up the tree from NP i and repeat ( iii ) until the top node of the tree is reached ; ( iii . i ) When other locally c-commanding
NPj is found : ( iii . i . i ) if NP i is a short-distance reflexive , annotate NPi with i = j ; ( iii . i . ii ) if NP i is a nonreflexive , annotate NP~withi:~j ; ( iii . ii ) When other non-locally c-commanding NP 3 is found : if NP ~ is a non-pronoun , annotate NP ~ with i ~ j . 
Fig .  3 -  . lohns on's algorithm accessory devices : Each node in the tree is " conceptualized as a pair consisting of a tree and a vertex in that tree "   ( p . 62) . Consequently , the whole tree where a given NP appears is locally accessible to be " walkedup " since its replica is present at the pair  ( Category , Tree ) , which is the
NP node itself.
This algorithm improves the coindexation methodology in terms of efficiency as it does not resort to free indexation  . Note , however , that the anaphoric ambiguity of pronouns and nonprououns in ot captured  ( Principles B and C ) since grammatical coindexation of pronouns or nonpronouns with their possible antecedents is dismissed  . Only reflexives and their antecedents end up coindexed  , while the index of a pronoun is only made " unequal " with the c-commanding antecedents  . Nevertheless , even dispensing with free indexation and restricting the representation of anaphoric ambiguity to reflexives  , this approach does not get rid of the proliferation of trees : For a given reflexive  , each corresponding tree/coindexation represents a different antecedent candidate  . 
1 . 3 . 2 Equations with regular expressions The I_ , FG/I ) alrymple ,  93 , account of binding resorts to a different approach to generalize over the eventual nonlocality of anaphoric links  . It uses lexical " inside- . out equations " , a special-purpose extension of the description formalism which may include regular ' expressions  ( as in ( 3 ) below for long-distance reflexives ) :  ( 1 ) John/introduced Bill j to himself // ) - . 
kimse(\[!((() Bi-c ; <, ,, i " 1") SUBJ ) o . = 1"c ~ or ((() 13L(; < , ~ u "1" )   ( ) B\] ) c ~= ~' o ( 2 ) * John introduced Bill/to hirrli . 
him : (((() BI <<, :, II ")() BJ)o . ~" i"o.
(3) Zhangsaniyi wei\[LMiyi wei\[ . . . z_~i_i/j / k / . . . \] . . . \] Zkangsanithouglu\[Li . v ( it lumg k tf . . kimi/j,d . ./ . . . Jz(ji : (( OBJ*J ") S\[JBJ)< ,  =  1" o The right hand side of the equation stands for the sernantic representation  ( c  ~ ) of tile functional-strncture ( '\]' ) of the anaphor . The left hand side stands for the semantics of the antecedent : In  ( 3 ) the Chinese long-distance reflexive is an Object in a functional--structure where one of the upstairs Subjects may be the antecedent  . 
Although initial scepticism about the tractability of these equations was dissipated by Kaphmand Maxwell  ,  88 , the survey by Backofen et al ,  96 , reports that no iml ~ lemented I , FG grammar was known to handle binding . To a significant extent this bears on tile fact that many different equations have to be defined for every anaphor : Each equation specify concrete grammatical functions for the anaphor and its potential antecedent  , but either the anaphor or the antecedents may occur with one of a range of several grammatical functions  ( see an-finimal ex , ' lnlple ill(1)) . Moreover , it is not defined how nonlexical NPs ( e . g . anaphoric definite descriptions , ruled by Principle C ) may be assigned the respective equation . 
However these difficulties turn out to be solved , the LFG variant of the coindexation methodology presents the same type of problems of Johnson's approach  . The proliferation of representations is not avoided : The ambiguity of reflexives may end up represented by several different grammatical representations  . These representations correspond to the satisfaction of the different equations involving different grammatical functions  , as in (1) , and possibly result also from the several existential interpretations of functional tm certainty in the case of long-distance reflexives  , as in (3) . 
Likewise , the ambiguity of pronouns is omitted in the single functional-structure resulting from the universal interpretation f negative quations associated with these anaphoric expressions  . 
Moreover , the positive equations for reflexives do not require identity of indices between anaphorically related expressions  , but instead impose identity of semantic representations  , this way incorrectly enforcing any type of anaphora  ( bound , bridging , e type , " donkey " , etc . ) to the sole modality of coreference . 
2 The Concept o f B ind ing Mach ine Being partially successful in overcoming problems of tile original post-gramnmtical " overgenerate & filter " methodology  , each of tile contributions mentioned above brought totile for e essential dimensions of binding that have to be concomitantly acconnted for  . Accordingly , an alternative methodology for binding constraints these dimensions : lexicalization  , anaphoric ambiguity , packaging and nonlocal context packaging . 
Given these hints , a breakthrough depends now on changing some entrenched primitives underlying the concept ion of binding constraints  . These constraints have been basically taken as syntactic well conditions : "\ [ they\]capture the distribution of pronouns and reflexives "  ( Reinhart and Reuland ,  93 , p . 657) . In line with Gawron and Peters ,  90 , however , we take them as conditions on semantic interpretation  , as they delimit nonlocal aspects of meaning composition  . 
In what follows , we set up a semantics-driven methodology for verifying binding constraints  , organized under the rationale that an NP is a binding machine :  ( i ) it reads a representation of the context ;   ( ii ) updates its own semantics given this context and its own anaphoric potential  ( in accordance with its binding constraint , if it is a non-quantificational NP ) ; ( iii ) and makes a contribution to the context , against which other NPs are interpreted . This rationale is in line with the insights of Johnson and Klein  , 9 0 concerning the processing of the semantics of nominals  , and also the spirit ( but by no means the letter ) of the dynamic semantics framework ( Chierchia ,  95) . 
The output of a nominal n as a binding machine is simply the incrementing of the context with a copy of its reference marker  ( Kamp and Reyle ,  93) . The internal state of the machine after its operation is a compacted representation of the anaphoric potential of n  , if any , under the form of the set of the reference markers of the grammatically admissible antecedents of n--this internal state results fiom the binding constraint  , lexically associated to n , being applied to the input . The input is a representation of the relevant aspects of the context under the form of a set of three lists of reference markers  , A , Z and U , from which the internal state/semantics of anaphors can be computed  . 
Taking n and its subcategorizing predicator p , A is the list with the reference markers of the complements of pordered according to their relative obliqueness  ; Z includes the elements of A plus the reference markers of the upstairs predicators directly or indirectly selecting the domaiu of p  , observing the multiclausal obliqueness hierarchy ; and U is the list of all reference markers in the discourse context  . 
Given this setup , the verification of binding constraints consists in a few simple steps  . If n is a short-distance r f lexive , A' is associated to its semantic representation , where A ' contains the reference markers of the o -commanders of n in A  . If n is a long-distance reflexive , its semantic representation icludes Z ' , such that Z ' contains the o-commanders of n in Z  . If n is a pronoun , the set B = U\(A ' uref in , ,) is coded into its representation . Finally if n is a nonpronoun , its semantics keeps a copy of C = US(Z'uref in , ,) . 
3 An HPSG exercise
This methodology can be easily accommodated in a unification-based framework such as HPSG  . 
We designed an extension to the UDRT component for HPSG of Frank and Reyle  ,  95 . 
This component is encoded as the CONT ( ENT ) value , which is enhanced now with feature ANAPH(ORA ) . On a par with this extension , also the NONLOC ( AL ) value is extended with the new feature BIND ( ING )  , with subfeatures LIST-A , 
LIST-Z , LIST-U and LIST-proto U.
The SYNSEM value of a pronoun is as follows : p , MAX
LSLI , - MIN ~ V ~\]
SU . ORD
J\[l,ABEl,LOC\[CONT/C ? NDs\[LARG-R~\]\[ . A . NAPIt\[-REFM\[JJ\[ANTEC non-Ioc-ocom ( lW\] , VVI , ~ j-)-LIST-A
NLOCIBIND LIST-ZIJST-U
LIST-proto U ( \[~\] ) j ( in first argnnlent ) all markers in the context . 
~ iven in LISI'-Uwflue , and remove l ' rom them both the localo -commanders  ( included in second argunrent ) of tliet ) ronoun and the pronoun itself ( in third argument )  . 
Under the conception of nominals as binding machines  , LISTSA , LIST-Z and LIST-U stand for the input , ANTEC(EDFNTS ) encodes the internal state , and REF ( ERENCE ) M(ARKF . R ) encodes the output . The SYNSEM of other anaphors , ruled by Principles A , CorZ , art quite similar to the one above . The major difference lies in the relational constraints in ANTEC value  , which encode the corresponding binding constraint  3  . 
Turning now to the lists with reference markers , we handle them by means of a new HPSG principle , the Binding I ) omains Principle . This principle consists of three clauses constraining signs and their values with respect othese lists  . 
I ) ue to space limitations a , we illustrate this Principle with its (' lause 1 , for LIST-U and

Binding Domain ~ Principle , Clause I(i ) in every sign , LlST-protoW value is identical to the concatenation fLl ST-protoU values of its daughters  ; ( ii ) in a sign of sort discourse , I , IST-proto U and LIST-Uw flues are token-identical ; ( iii ) in a non-NP sign , LIST-Uwflue is token-identical to each LIST-U value of its daughters  ; ( iv ) in an NP signk : ( iv . i ) in Spec-daughter , LIST-U value is the result of removing the elements of LIST-e\value of Head-daughter from the I  , IST-Uvalue ot'k ;   3 Binding constraints finnon lexical nominals are lexically stated in their determiners  . 
4 Binding constraints are fttlly integrated in a computation all IPS  (  ; gramma , , documented in ( Branco ,  99) . 
(iv . ii ) in Head-daughter , LIST-U value is the result of removing the value of REFM of Spec-daughter from the IJST-U value of k  . 
The HPSG ontology was extended with the sort d is course corresponding to sequences of sential signs  . Subclause ( iv ) above is meant to avoid what is known as i-within - i effect  . 

In this paper we designed an alternative to the mainstream postgrammatical " overgenerate & filter " methodology for the verification of binding constraints  . Our semantics-driven methodology is based on the conception of NPs as binding machines  . We showed how this innovation helped to integrate binding constraints into gramma representation and processing and to avoid the intractability implied by the mainstrea methodology  . 

I am grateful to Hans Uszkoreit for patient advice and criticism  . My thanks go also to Mark
Johnson for helpful discussion.

Recent results ( Xue et al ,  94 , Branco and Marrafa ,  98 ) indicate that there are four binding constraints :
Principle A.'
A locally o-commanded short-distancer flexive must be locally o-bound  . 
Leeithinks\[Ma . ~ is a whimselj , i/j/.
Principle Z:
Ano-commanded long-distance rllexive must be o -bound  . 
Zhang . valqzhidao/Lis'/remvei\[gqH~gwttk:ui . vihmmz ! / i / . // kl/Zhangsankow\[Lisi think\[Wang wumost like sell'I\]Zhangsani knows that Lis !/ thinks that \ Vangwuk like shimi  , j/lmnselfkmost ( Xue et al ,  94) 1 09
Principle B:
A pronoun must be locally o-free.
Leeithinl ~ v\[M a.x ). saw himi/*j\]\].
Principle C:
A nonpronoun must be o-free.
\[ Kimi's JJ ' iend\]jt kinks\[LeesawKimi/*j\].
These constraints are defined on the basis of some auxiliary notions  . The notion of local domain involves the partition of sentences and associated grammatical geometry into two zones of greater or less structural proximity with respect othe anaphor  . O-command is a partial order under which , in a clause , Subjects o-comm and Direct Objects , DirectObjectso-command Indirect Objects , and so on , following the usual obliqueness hierarchy of grammatical functions  , being that in a multiclausal sentence , the upstairs arguments o-command the embedded arguments  , etc . The notion of o-binding is such that xo-binds y iff xo  . .commands y and x and 3' are coindexed , where coindexation is meant to represent anaphoric links  . 

Backofen , R . , T . Becker , J . Calder , 3 . Capstick , L . Dini , J . D6rre , G . Erbach , D . Estival , S . Manandhar , A . Mineur , G . van Noord , S . Oepen , 1 t . Uszkoreit .  1996 . Final Report of the EAGLES Formalisms Working Group  . Luxemburg : EC . 
Branco , A . , and P . Marrafa .  1998 . Long-distance Reflexives and the Binding Square of Opposition  . 
G . Webelhuth , J . Koenig and A , Kathol . eds.
Lexical and Constructiomll Aspects of Linguistic Explamaion  . Stanford : CSLI Press , 163-177 . 
Branco , A . . 1999 . Reference Process Mg and its Ulliversal Constra Mts  . Doctoraldisse , tation . 
Lisbon : University of Lisbon.
Chierchia , G . . 1995. Dylmmics of Mealling.
Chicago : Univ . of Chicago Press.
Chomsky , N . . 1980 . On Binding . Linguistic lnquily , 1-46 . 
Chomsky , N ..1981. Lectures on GovermneJlt and
Binditlg . Dordrecht : Foris.
Cor , ea , N ..1988. A Binding Rule for
Government.-binding Parsing . COLING'8& 123-129.
Dah'ymple , M ..1993. The Sy~tax of Amtphoric
Binding . Stanford : CSLI Press.
Erbach , G . . 1995 . ProFIT , Prolog with Features , Inheritance and Templates . EACL'95, 180-187 . 
Fong , S . . 1990 . Free Indexation . ACL'90, 105-110 . 
Frank , A . , and U . Reyle .  1995 . Principle--Based
Semantics for HPSG . EACL'95, 916.
Giorgi , A . , F . Pianesi and G . Satta .  1990 . A Computational Approach to Binding Theory . 
COLING'90, 16.
Ingria , R . , and D . Stallard .  1989 . A Computational Mechanism for Pronominal Reference  . ACL'89, 262-271 . 
Johnson , M . . 1995 . Constraint-based Natural Language Parsing . Barcelona : 7th ESSLI . Course

Johnson , M ., and E . Klein . 1990. Discourse,
Anaphor and Parsing . ACL'90, 197-302.
Kamp , H . , and U . Reyle .  1993 . From Discourse to
Logic . Dordrecht : Kluwer.
Kaplan , R . , and J . Maxwell .  1988 . An Algorithm for Functional Uncertainty . COLING'88, 297-302 . 
Merlo , P . . 1993 . For an Incremental Computation of Intrasentential Coreference  . IJCAI'93, 1216-1221 . 
Pianesi . F . . 1991 . Indexing and Referential Dependencies within Binding Theory  . EACL'93, 39-44 . 
Pollard , C . , and I . Sag .  1994 . Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar . Stanford : CSLI Press . 
Reinhart , T . and E , Reul and .  1993 . Reflexivity . 
Linguisticlnquio ,, 657-720.
Xue , P . , C . Pollard , and I . Sag .  1994 . A New Perspective o,1 Chinese Ziji . WCCFLI3 . Stanford :
CSLI Press.

