Japanese Case Structure Analysis
by Unsupervised Construction of a Case Frame Dictionary 
Daisuke Kawahara , Nobuhiro Kaji and Sadao Kurohashi
Graduate School of Intbrm~tics , Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi , S~kyo-ku , Kyoto ,  606-8501 , Japan
kawahara , kaji , kuro@pinc . kue e . kyoto-u , ac . jp

In Japanese , case structure analysis is very im-t ) ortant to handle several trouble some characteristics of Japaneses nchass crambling  , on fis-sion of ease components , middis appearance of case markers . However , f i ) r lack of a wide-coverage ase frame dictionary , it has been difficult to perforn l case structure analysis accu-rat  ; ely . Although several methods to construct a ease fl ' mnedictionary from analyzed corpora have been proposed  , they cannot avoid data sparseness 1) rol ) lem . This paper proposes an unsupervised method of constructing a case frame dictionary from an enormous raw corpus by using a robust and accurate parser  . It also pro-rides a case structure analysis method based on the constructed ictionary  . 
1 Introduction
Syntactic analysis , or parsing has been a main objective in Natural Language Processing  . In case of Jat ) anese , however , syntactic analysis cannot clarify relations between words ill sentences because of several trouble some characteristics of Japanese such as scrambling  , omission of case components , and disappearance of case markers . Therefore , in Japanese sentence analysis , case structure analysis is an important issue , and a case frame dictionary is necessary for the analysis  . 
Some research institutes have constructed Japanese case frmnedictiouaries manually  ( Ikehara et al , 1997; Infbrmation-Technology Promotion Agency , Japan ,  1987) . However , it is quite expensive , or almost impossible to construct a wide-coverage easefl ' an m dictionary by hand  . 
Others have tried to construct a case fl'mne dictionary automatically from analyzed corpora  ( Utsuro et al ,  1998) . However , existing syntactically analyzed corpora are too small to learn a dictionary  , since case fl ' ameiuformation consists of relations between ouns and verbs  , which r nul-tiplies to millions of combinations . 
Based on such a consideration , we took the fbllowing unsupervised learning strategy to the  . Japanese case structure analysis : 1 . At first , a robust and accurate parser is developed , which does not utilize a case fl'mnedictionary ,  2 . a very large corI ) us is parsed by the parser,3 . reliable noun-verb relations are extracted from the parse results  , and a case frmne dictionary is constructed from them  , and 4 . the dictionary is utilized for case structure analysis  . 
2 Characteristics of Japanese language and necessity of case structure analysis In Japanese  , postpositions function as case markers (   ( Ms ) mida verb is final in a sentence . 
The basic structure of a Japanese sentence is as f bllows:  ( 1 ) kate 9a coat woki ~' u . 
he nominative-CM coat accusative-CM wear ( lie wears a coat ) A clause modifier is left to the modified noun as follows:  ( 2 ) kate 9 a kite-iru coatlie nom-CM wear coat ( the coathe wears ) The modified noun followed by a postposition then becomes a case component of a matrix verb  . 
The typical structure of a Japanese complex sentence is as f bllows : hat of color to l  ) ic-marker wear coatnia ' wa ~' cr " ~ ,  . 
coal ; dative-CM harmonize ( c/ ) harmonizes the color of his/her hat with the coat he/she wears  ) In terms of autolnatic analysis , the problen > atic characteristics of Japanese sentences can be summarized as follows:  1  . Case componenl ; s are often scrambled or omitted . 
2 . Case-marking postpositions disappear when case components are accompanied by topic-markers or other special  1  ) ost positions meaning ' just ' , ' also ' and others . 
cx ) karv'wa coat meti:itc-iv'u.
he to liC-lna . rker coat also wear ( I le wears a coat a . lso ) 3 . A noun modified 1 ) ya clause is usually a case component for the verb of the mo  ( litlying clause . However , there is no case marker for their relation . In case of sentence 3 , there is no case marker for coat in relation to kite-ir'u'wear '  . Note that ' hi ( dative-CM ) of coat : ni does not show the case to kitc-ivu ' wear '  , lint to a was cr'v , ' harmonize ' . 
4 . Sentence 3 exhibits a typical structural am-1 ) iguity in a , lalmnese sentence . That is , ir'o " ~ va'color topic-marker ' poss it ) lymodi-tieskit , c-iru ' wear ' or awa . scv ' uqmr monize ' . 
In English , sentence structure is rather rigid , and word order ( the position in relation to the verb ) clearly defines cases . In Japanese , how-ew % thel ) roblem 1 above makes word order useless , and CMs constitute the only int ' ormation for detecting cases  . 
Nevertheless , CMs often disapl ) ear because of the problems 2 and 3 , whidl means that simple syntactic analysis cmmot clari  ( 5 ~ casessui\[i-cientl > ForeXalnple , given an inlmt sentence : (4) har'cwaDcv , tsch , -gomehano , sv ,  . 
he topic-marker Germallalso sl ) eak ( hespeaks German also ) a simple syntactic analysis just detects both kar ' c'he'andD cutsch-go'German'modifies\]ta ' a as ~ t ' speak '  , but tells nothing about which is subject and object  . This analysis result is not sufficient for subsequent NLP applieations like Japanese to English machine l  ; rmmlation . 
Then , what we need to do is a case structure.
analysis based on a case fl ' a medictiol mry , or a subcat , of each verb as follows : hanasu'speak':ga ( nor a ) ks're'he ' , hire'person''we(ace)cigo'English ' , kotoba ' language ' ~; i ? ' U , ~%vear':ga(nora ) kavcqm ' , hil , o'person'we ( ace ) fuhu'cloth ' , coat'coat'a'tl Jasel'~t'harlllonize': ga  ( nor a ) kar'c'he ' , hito'person '' we ( ace ) ire ~ color ' ni ( dat ) fltku ' cloth ' Consultation of such a dictionary can easily find that kar'c'he ' is a nomilm tive case and Dev  , tsch , -90' German ' is an accusative (: as (' , in the sentence 4 . 
Furthermore , a ( : ase frame dictionary C all solve the problem 4 above , that is , some part of structural ambiguity in sentences . In case of sentence 3 , at ) r ( )l ) erhead for ' ir ' owa ' color topic-marker ' ( : all ) eselected by consulting case slots of kir'u ~ wear ' and those of a ' was cru ' harmonize '  . 
3 Unsupe , rvised construction of a case fralned ic tionary Thiss  ( x : tion explains how to construct a case frall l ( * , dictionary fl ' om corl ) or a autonmtica . lly . 
As mentioned in the introduction section , it ; is quite expensive , or ahno stiln l ) ossible to construct a wide-coverage case frame dictionary by lmnd  . In Japanese , , some noun q - copula works like an adjective . For example , sa~tseida ' posi-tiveness+Colmla ' can take 9a case and ' hi case . 
However , such case frames are rarely covered t ) y the existing h and made dictionaries 1 . 
Fm'thermore , existing halld made dictionaries cover typical obligatory cases like ga  ( nominative )  , wo ( accusative ) , ni ( dative ) , but do not cover compound case marker such as ni -kandz  . it c ' in terms of ' , ' wo-rncqutte'concerning ' and others . 
Then , we tried to construct an example-based case frmne dictionary from corpora  , which de-lOut method collects case frames not only t br verbs  , but also tbradjectives mM nouns-k copula . In this paper , we use ' verb ' instead of ' w ; rb/adjective . orll Olll--copula . ' for simplicity . 

Table 1: The accuracy of KNP.
' wa~7t to clause clause 9a'wenika'r ' arr ~ . a de?lori topic-modif ~ ying modifying noln . ace . dative from to from marker verbs nou IIS'lbtal 91  . 2% 97 . 7% 94 . 2% 83 . 8% 85 . 3% 82 . 8% 88 . 0% 84 . 3% 95 . 5% 91 . 3% scribes what kind of cases each verb has and what kind of nouns can fill a case slot  . Very large syntactically analyzed corpora could be useful to construct such a dictionary  . However , corpus annotation costs very much and existing analyzed corpora are too small from the view point of case frame learning  . For exmnple , in Kyoto University Corpus which consists of about  40  , 000 analyzed sentences of newspaper articles , very basic verbs like tetsudau ' help ' or v , kets v , kcr'u'accept ' appear only 10 times or 15 times respectively . It is obvious that such small data are insufficient for automatic asefrm nelearning  . That is , case frame learning must be done from enormous unanalyzed corpora  , in unsupervised way 2 . 
3.1 Good parser
NLP research group at Kyoto University has been developing a robust and accurate parsing system  , KNP , over the last ten yem's ( Kurohashi and Nagao , 1994; Kurohashi and Nagao ,  1998) . 
This parser has the following advantages : ? . Japanese is an agglutinative language , and several Nnction words ( auxiliary verbs , suffixes , and postpositions ) often appear together and in many cases compositionality does not hold among them  . KNP treats such function words careflfly and precisely  . 
? KNP detects scopes of coordination structures well based on their parallelism  . 
? KNP employ several heuristic rules to produce m fique parses for the input sentences  . 
The accuracy of KNP is shown in Table 1 , which counted whether each phrase modifies a proper head or not  . The overall accuracy was around 90% , and the accuracy concerning case components varies from  82% to 98%  . 
21n English , several unsupervised methods have been proposed ( Manning , 1993; Briscoe and Carroll ,  19!)7) . 
However , as mentioned in Section 3 , automatic Japanese case analysis is much harder than English  . 
We can collect pairs of verbs and case components from the automatic analyses of large corpora by KNP  . 
3.2 Coping with two problems
The quality of automaticase frame learning could be negatively influenced by the % llowing two problems : Word sense ambiguity : A verb sometimes hasw ~ rious usages and possibly has several case frames depending on its usages  . 
Structural ambiguity : KNP performs fairly well , but automatic parse results inevitably contt ~ in errors  . 
The tbllowing sections explain how to solve these problems  . 
3.2.1 Word sense ambiguity
If a verb has two or more meanings and their case fl ' ame patterns differ  , we htwe to disambiguate the sense of each occurrence of the verb in a corpus first  , and collect case components for each sense respectively  . However , unsupervised word sense disambiguation ffl'ee texts is one of the most ditficult problems in NLP  . At the very begim fing , even the definition of word senses is open to question  . 
To cope with this problem , we made a very simple but useflt l assumption : a light verb has diff brent case frames det  ) ending on its main case component ; an ordinary verb has a unique case frmne even if it has two or more meanings  . For example , the case frmne of the verb narn ' become ' differs depending on its ni  ( dative ) case as % llows: .   .   . gab ? oukinina ' runora . become ill ? .   . ga .   .   . to tornodachinina'r " unora . with become a fliend In most cases , the main case components are placed just in front of the light verbs so that the automatic parser can detect their relations verl  ) s t , aS ? t\]gCl " ~ l , ' help ' yomul'ead'caselnarkel"s(1 , o111) , , , , o ( it (:(:) ' r~ , i(dat)ae(op ) . qa(no\]n ) ' wo(at(;)hi , ( dat ) & ( o10 example nomls husband , person , child , staff , I , SUS l ) eet , faculty ,   . . . 
.jol ) , shol ) , farm work , preparation , election , move ,   . . . 
son , friend , ambassador , meml ~ er , than k , holid ~\ y ,   . . . 
volunte( , r , aft ' air , otfice , rewar(l , house , headquarters ,   . . . 
lX;rson,\], chihl , adult , parent , teacher, . . . 
newspaper , book , magazine , article , nov(J , letter ,   . . . 
chiht , person , daughter , teacher , student , reader ,   . . . 
newspaper , book , magazine , library , class room , bathroom ,   . . . 
reliably . Therefore , as for five major and trou-t ) le some light verbs ( . ~' . , r'u'do','n wr'u,q ) ceomo ?, ar'u'is .   .   .  '  , iu ~ s~w' , nai ' not ') , their case fl'mnes are distinguishe depending ( m their left neighbouring case components . For other verbs , we aSStlll lea\]lnique ease frame . 
3.2.2 Structural ambiguity
As shown in '_\['~ df le1 , KNP detects heads of case conlt ~ onents in faMy high accuracy  . However , in order to collect nmch reliable data , we discarded moditier-hcad relations in the aul ; on mti-tally Imrsed corpora in the following cases : ? When CMs of ease conq xments disappear because oi " topic markers or others  . 
? When the verb is followed 1 ) ya causative auxiliary o1'a passive auxiliary , l ; he case tm . t-t(:rnise\]mnged and the 1 ; race in KNI ' is not sorclial ) le . 
Based on the conditions al ) ove , case components of each verb are collected froln the  1  ) arscd corpora , and the collected at a arc considered as case frames of verbs  . However , if the flc quency of a CM is very low compared to other CMs  , it might t)e collected because of parse errors . So , we set the threshold for the CM flequency as 2 ~ , where m . fmeans the frequency of the 1nest folln(tChJ . if the fl'equeney of ~ tCM is less tlmn the threshold  , it is discarded , l . ~ brexalnple , suppose the most frequent CMf in ' a verb is we , 100 times , and the frequency of niCMt br the verb is 1 . 6 , niCM is discarded ( since it is less than the threshold ,  20) . 
a . 3 Const ructed case f rmne d ic t ionary We applied the al  ) ow ' , procedure to Mainichi Newst ) al ) er Corpus ( 7 years ,  3 , 600 , 00 ( sentences ) . Fronlthecortms , case franws of 23 , 497 verbs are constructed ; the average number of ease slots of a verb is 2 . 8 ; the average munber of cx an q flc nouns in a ( : as ( : slot is 33 . 6 . Table 2 shows exmnlfles of constructed ease Dames . 
Although the constructed at a look a pl ) ropri-ate in most cases , it is hard to evaluate a ( lictio-nary statica . ll > In the next section , we use the dictiomu'y in case structure analysis and evaluate the analysis result  , wlfichalsoim \]) lies an cvahu ~ . ti(m of the dictionary itself . 
4 Case s t ructure ana lys i s us ing the const ructed case frame dictionary  4  . 1 . Matching of an input sentence and a case fral lle'Jl ~ e basic  1  ) ro ( : c dure in ( ' a sestrucl ; ul " eanalysis is lo match an inlml sentence with a case frame  , aS show 11 illl qgUl ' C ,  1 . 
The matching of case conq ) on enl:s in an input and case slots in a case fl ' alll O is  ( \[ Olle Oll the following conditions : I . When a ease component has a CM , it must be assigned to 1 ; 11 o case slot with the same

. When a case COml)Onent does nol : have a CM , it can 1) e assigned to the 9 a , we , or ni
CM slot.
.  ( ) nly one case component can be assigned to a case slot  ( unique case assiglmmnt constraint )  . 
The conditions above may produce nmltil ) le matching patterns , and to select the proper one all lOng , l l c l l l , 11 Oll 118 of case CO lllp on (' , lltSal'oCOlll-pared with examph ' , sin case slots of the ( tictio-nary . 
435 syoruiwa.
(5) document topic-marker/k a ,' e . i . ___1 !  , , e 1 ~" walashila " hand \[ ( 1 handed the document to him . )
WaRlSU'h and ' ga defendam , president ....
we money , nlell O , bribe . . . .
niperson , suspect , ...
deaffair , office , room ....
(6 ) Deutsch-gome/Gcl'nlan also qhHII ( ISII speak "-7' ; cq/ ; i'i ; irat eacher who speaks also German ) ~ professor , president 1 niperson , friend . . . .
-- we reason English Japanese to ( sentence ) Figure 1: Matching of an inl ) ut sentence and a case fl : ame . 
Even though a 3 , 600 , 000 sentences corpus was used for learning , examples in case slots are still sparse , and an input noun mostly does not match exactly an example in the dictionary  . Then , a thesaurus i employed to solve this problem . 
In our experiments , NTT Semantic Feature Dictionary ( Ikehara et al , 1997) is employed as a thesaurus . Suppose we calculate the silnilar-ity between W l and  w2  , their depth is dl and d2 in the thesaurus , and the depth of their lowest ( most specitic ) common odeis de , the similarity score between them is calculated as follows :=  ( 4 ? + If W 1 and w2 are in the same node of the thesaurus , the similarity is 1 . 0, the maximum score based on this criteria . If W l and w2 are identical , the similarity is 1 . 0, of course . 
The score of case assigmnent is the best similarity between the input noun and examples in the case slots  . The score of a matching pattern is the sum of scores of case assignments in it  . If two or more patterns meet the above conditions  , one which has the best score is selected as a final result  . 
In the case of sentence 5 in Figure 1 , karc 7ti ' he dativ c-CM' is assigned to then i case slot . 
Then , syoruiwa ' document topic-marker ' can be assigned to the gaor wo case slot  . By calculating similarity between syor ui and 9a-slot examples and wo-slot exmnples , it ; is considered to be assigned to the wo slot . 
In case of sentence 6 , none of the case components has a CM . Based on similarity calculation , Deutsch , - go is assigned to ' wo , sense i is assigned to ga . 
4 . 2 Pars ing with case structure analysis A complex sentence which contains a clausal modifier exhit  ) its a typical structural ambiguity of Japanese ; case components left to a verb of a clausal modifier  , Vc , possibly modify V ~: or a matrix verb Vm . 
For example , in sentence 3 , ir'o'w~L'color topic-inarker ' possibly modifies kite-iru ' wear ' or  ( l , ~l)(\] , Sel ' ~ l , qlariilonize ' . 
KNP , a rule-based parser , handles this type of ambiguity ~ s follows . If a case component is followed by a comma , it is treated as modif\[yingVm ; if not , it is treated as modif\[ying1~: . Although this heuristic rule usually explains real data very well  , sentence 3 will be analyzed incorrectly . 
Parsing which utilizes a case frame dictionary can consider which is a proper head  , V ~ or Vm , t bran ambiguous case compolmnt by comparing examples in the case slots of V ~ and  14~  . Such a consideration nmst be done considering wlm to ther case components modifly Vc and Vm  , since the assigned case slot of a case component might differ depending on the candidate structure of the sentence due to the unique case assignment constraint  . 
Therefore , it is necessary to expand the structural ambiguity and consider all the possible structures f bran input  . So , we calculate the matching score of all pairs of case components and verbs in all possible structures of the sentence  , and select the best structure based on the hat color bott  . ~\] tinohal ~, ~~ ~ ~ ~ - - -__ ire wa color - - I
C(;?ltIt\[
CO at ~5"? rll harlll Olli Ze
WeClOth , tllli\]'/)l'lll,CI)la . . . . ~ WO \] pOWCI ', face ,  lind ~ . II departy , oily , home . . . . ni I prcl)lcnce , cItlth . . . .
kite-it'lt Co ( It I1i HWCLTCI ' ll weal " coat hllrn lolli ZC hatire wa -2   ( distance penalty ) c?l?r ~\] kite-iru\[co . t,,i ~ ~ CO at IdilA't ! rllkiru ' wear ' ~ . \awa , ~ emt'harllloilizc'2,:2,,,,,,6 . . . .
Figure 2: Parsing with east structure analysis.
sum of the matching scores in it.
Since the heuristic rule employed illKNP is actually very useful  , we in (: or porate it , that is , l ) enalty score is imposed to the modifier-hea ( lre-la . tion depending on the distraint between ~ tmod -ifi  (  ; l " and a head . If a moditier is not followed by a comma , the penalty score ,  0  ,  -2  ,  -4  ,  -6  ,   . . . is imposed when a moditler modifie . s the first ( nea . r-est ), second , third , t burth, . . . verbs illa sentence respectively ; if with a comma , the tm nalty score ,  -2  ,  0 ,  -2 ,  -4 ,   . . . is impose & For example , sentence 3 was analyzed t ) your method as shown ill Figure 2 . Since the simi-lm'ity score between fro~color ' a  . nd the ' we-slot of u wa . s ' cr ' uh munonize is nmch larger t ; \] i all theft l ) et ween ire ' eol off and the ga-slot of lci'r'u . ' wear ' , the correct structure of these lltellee was detected  ( the right-lmnd parse of Figure 2 )  . Note that , furthermore , both the ease of ireill reb > tion to a was cru ' harmonize '  , and the case of coal , in relation tokite-iru'we ar'we redete ( : ted correctly . 
Structm ' alambiguities often cause a combinatorial explosion when a sentence is long  . However , by detecting the SeOl ) eS of coordinate structures 1 ) e % reh and , which off ; ellaPl ) ear in long'l'td ) le 3: The at : curacy of case detection . 
( ; or re(:I ; ill (: or l'e( ; t \]) arsing ease case error ( lel ; e(:l ; ion ( tete ( : tion topic-marleer 82   13   5 clausal modifier 73   18   9 senl ; ences , we can reasonably limit the possil ) lesl ; ructures of the sentence . 
The ~ werage analysis peed of tile ext ) criments described in the next section was about 50 sen-tenets/aria . ' Filetinm-oul , of onerain . was only employed to 7 out of 4 , 272 test Sell tellces . 
4.3 Experilnents and discussion
We used 4 , 2 72 sentences of Kyoto University colpus as a test set  . We parsed them by our new l nethod ( Figure 3 shows several examt ) les ) and cheek c , d two 1 ) oints : case detection of mn biguous case ( -omponents and syntactic analysis . 
First , we randomly selected ambiguous ease components : 100 l , ol ) ic-mark cA case components all ( t100 ( : a secoral ) orients moditied by clausal the Treasury 3gatsuki kes : ~ and esettlen lell till March , ,  . l'hintaku gink otlkakuk mtgaI impr<n'ed by case iajb mtatim leach trust bank tsttmit are teirtt save liptokubetsu  t3  , uhokil ~ , 1o specially reserved money mrikuzushi wo collstllll ptiollgai  , ,'yoltha the Foreign Minislcr m tnitonwru allow hm ~shhula  . 
policy mikk an iontile third \] 4 Mexicoga Mexico\[IglppyoltshiRlimln'oredhy cavei@~tmltli ? ~* iillltl  ( RlnCC ~ ~\] i@l re Ixm shimulo ? prevention o1" inl\]alion\[

L ' eizaim is a kunifimm clalplll lcy t , wtite al ~ ( Rl\[st ' L vlltttl'i ~ hifa cxphdn Figure 3: Exmnt ) les of them mlys is results . 
modifiers , and checked whether their cases were correctly detected or not  . As shown in Table 3 , the accuracy of the analysis was fairly good : that tbr topic-markers was  82% and that tbr clausal modifiers was 73%  . 
Then , we compared the parse results of our method with those of the original KNP  . As a result , 565 modifier-head relations differed ; in 260 cases , our method was correct and the original KNP was incorrect  ( by considering the structures in the Kyoto University Corpus as a golden standard  )  ; in 224 cases , vice versa . That is , our method was superior to KNP by 36 cases , and increased the overall accuracy from 89 . 8% to 89 . 9% . Since the heuristic rule used in KNP is very strong  , the improvement was not big . 
The improvement of the accuracy , though small , is valuable , because the accuracy around 90% seems close to the ceiling of this task . 
5 Conclusion
We proposed an unsupervised construction method of a case frame dictionary  . We obtained a large case fl'alne dictionary , which consists of 23 , 497 verbs . Using this dictionary , we can detect ambiguous case components accurately  . 
Also since our method employs unsupervised dictionary learning  , it can be easily scaled up . 
References
Ted Briscoe and John Carroll .  1997 . Automatic extraction of subcategorization from corpora  . 
In Prvccedings of ANLP-97.
Satoru Ikehara , Masahiro Miyazaki , Satoshi Shirai , Akio Yokoo , Hiromi Nakaiwa , Ken-tarou Ogura , and Yoshiflmfi Oyama Yoshi-hiko Hayashi , editors .  1997 . Japanese Lexicon . Iw an anfi Publishing . 
Information-q ~ chnology Promotion Agency ,, Japan .  1987 . Japanese Verbs : A Guide to the H~A Lea : icon of Basic  , Japa ~ tcsc Verbs . 
S . Kurohashi and M . Nagao .  1994 . A syntactic analysis method of long japanese sentences based on the detection of conjunctive structures  . Computational Linguistics , 20(4) . 
S . Kurohashi and M . Nagao .  1998 . Building a jal ) an eseparsed corpus while improving the t ) arsing system . In Prvcccdin . qs of " Th . cFir ; sth ~, tcr'nationalCo't@r~ncconLwn guageR . csources 64 Evaluation , pages 719724 . 
Christopher D . Maturing .  1993 . Automatic acquisition of a large snb categorization dictionary froln corpora  . In Pr ' occ cdings of ACL-93 . 
Takehito Utsuro , Takashi Miyata , and Yuji Matsumoto .  1998 . General-to-simeific model selection tbr subcategorization preference  . In Proceedings of th . c 17th International ConJ'cr-cnccon Computational Li'n . quistics and the 36th Annual Mect in . q of the Association for
Computational Lin . quistics.

