Perception , Concepts and Language : 7~ oA ~9 and IP a Ge
Matthias Rehm and Karl Ulrich Goecke
Faculty of Linguistics and Literature
University of Bielef (' ld
rehm , goecke@coli.uifi-bielefeld.de

A two-level natural language generation system tbr situation and action descriptions  ( SADs ) of a sinm-lated assembly robot is presented , in the first step , multimodal inibrmation is used to obtain a conceptual representation  ( CR ) of an event . The second step is the lmrallel , incremental surface realizatiou of utterances from the robot'st  ) erspecl ; ive basc xl on the CR . Theoretical issues addressed are semantics of SAI ) s and distribution of lexical and syntactic processing  , leading to a natural type of in ( : rementality in NLG . 
1 Introduction
Following ( Reiter , 1 . 994) , in them a , jority of systems language generation starts with content determination  . This step is fllrther subdivided in deep content dcl  . cr'm , inatio , n where a decision takes i ) lat-ew hat infornmtion shou hl1 ) e ( : ommmficated to the lmare J'm M7q , ,eto'rical p anning where this ilfl'ormation is or -galfized in a rhetorically coher  ( m trammer . However , the definition of deet ) content deternfination allows two difl'ering interpretations : One perspective is that there already exists a set of representations of different contents in a specific representation tbrmat  . 
The task is to select one of these representations to be commmficated  . This processisty l ) icalty implemented using discourse structure information and other criteria  ( e . g . Grice's maximes , (Grice , 1975)) . 
Timor , hert ) erspective is more extensive . If , initially , no set ; of rcpresentations i available , deep content deternfination could also comprise the creation of this set  . In many technical apt ) lications , this viewpoint does not really make sense . In the most wides l ) read case-language generation out of ~ database -the systein is the set of representations  . A possibly more complex case-language generation by agents  1 -seems to be no problem either : Taketile world model and tile lflan representing the agent's environment and fl ~ ture actions  , respectively and then select fi'om these representations the content to be verbalized  . Approaches of this kind are 1For a discussion of this notion see e . g . ( Franklin mid(\]raessc . r , t996) . 
indeed al ) plied in various cene description or robotic systems  , e . g . ( Now ~ k , 1987), ( Lfingle et al , 1995) . 
I to we ver , there are agent architectures not enter-tahfing a coherent world i node l and not having an explicit planat  ( ' . very level of action available . Such agent architectures have emerged within behavior-oriented robotics over the past fifteen years  ( e . g . 
( Brooks , 1986)) . Percet ) tion and control 1 ) rocesses are distributed over many inodules and interacl  ; 012 a local rather than a global basis . Thus , reactive l ~ e havior is modeled . 
Considering the problem of language generation , it becomes more natural to adopt the second t ) er-spective about what deep content determination should meanill this context  . In this paper , we present a naI ) proach to natural hmguage generation wherein a first step  , a set of possible utterances of an agent is constructed  1  )  3 , the system " R . oADl ~) r the lack of a better term , we call l ; his pro-eess concCl ) tualizatio , n . The intermediate struclurc , is based on the Conceptual Semantics paradigm ( e . g . 
( Jackendoff , 1 . 990)) . In a second stel ) , what is classically thought of as language generation is accomplished with the system IP a Ge  ( Increnmntal Parallel Generator )  . Here we propose an mssively parallel approach that leads to a natural kind of either qualitative and quantitative incrementality  ( c . f . ( Flakier , 1997)) . 
Thel ) at ) er is structured as follows : In section 2 , some theoretical claims are clarified and the implementation of ~  , oJl ' D is illustrated with an example conceptualization  . The corresponding CR is also used in section 3 where IP a G e is described . An outlook on directions for further research ill section  4 concludes this paper . 
2 Conceptualization
The example domain of our work is the artificial agent CoT ~  , el(c . f . ( Milde et al , 1997)) . It is as in > ulated assembly robot , al ) let omanipulate wooden to y parts and instructable by a human user  . Due to its behavior-l ) ased control architecture , not every instructed action is carried out as expected  . Thus , an explanation of ongoing actions by the robot is desir-namely situation/action descriptions  ( SADs )  . 
SADs are descriptions of the enviromnent and the actions of an agent from its own perspective  . 
In the chosen domain , possible SADs are : Ich be we gemich zu demb lauen Wiirfel  ( I ammoving towards the bhmcube ) or Ichlegeden Wiirfelau feine Leiste ( I amplacing a cube on a connection bar )  . 
A theoretical and an application-oriented issue are addressed with the investigation of SADs : First  , we claim that internal and sensoric parameters of the agent play a decisive role in detern fining the semantics of SADs  , especially of action verbs . Second , by generating SADs , we enable an interactor to understand what the agent is doing  . This is particularly interesting if there is no direct visual contact between the agent and the interlocutor  . 
Sensor data ( visual , telemetric , haptic ) and internal states ( activation of behavior generating modules ( BM )  , joint values ) of Co7?A set've as selection criteria ( SC ) of interpretative schemata ( ISM ) containing also conceptual units ( Goeeke and Milde ,  1998) . 
These units constitute the interface totile surface generation process  . If the SC are present in the current sensoric pattern of the robot  , an ISM may become active and the corresponding concept information is passed to surface generation  ( c . f . section 3) . 
Some SC are temporally extended : A sensor value has to be in some interval for a certain amount of time to function as a trigger for an ISM  . 
Additional to sensor data and internal values , ISM themselves can be part of the SC of other ISM  . The latter ones are then said to have a higher degree of complexity then the former ones  . ISM may be subsumed by other IS Mormay bear a part/whole-relation to other ISM  . An ISM is subsumed by another one if its SC constitute a proper subset of the SC of the subsuming ISM  , including time restrictions . For example , the ISM MOVE , detecting a movement of the robot that is not specified with respect to direction or velocity  , is subsumed by MOVE-TO-OBJECT which , in addition , recognizes a goal of the movement , namely some object . Part/whole-relations of ISM exist if a " higher " ISM combines others to identify more complex actions  . In this case , the " lower " ISM not necessarily has to be active over the whole time interval that the higher one covers  . 
Thus , ISM forma hierarchy ( see fig .  1) . ISM on the lowest level ( St . ; E , MOVE , BUMI', . . . ) are basic in the sense that they only contain sensor data as SC  . 
Complex ISM in levels 1 to 4 integrate sensor data as well as other ISM . 
When an ISM becomes active , the corresponding conceptual representation ( CR ) is a possible candidate to be passed to the surfime generation component  . As it is possible that several ISM are active . - d ; ~5:'f ~'~7" S~Z ~ ~ it : ? gfiJ : ; ' ~5g'~f <' Y ' ~ T~2"-'i''::-?:'i' ; ~  ;  " - ' ! " ' "  . ::'"~'~ i ::::'~""", .   .  -  .   . 
Figure 1: Screen depiction of the ISM-hierarchy . Active ISM are coloured ; edges mark subsumption or part/whole-relations . 
at the same time , a selection has to take place . At present , the only criterium relevant for selection is the position of the corresponding ISM within the hierarchy  . Thus , only the CR of the highest active ISM is going to be verbalized at the given time  . 
CRs contain information about objects , their properties attd about events tile agent is involved in  . They follow the Conceptual Semantics by , Jackendoff ( Jackendoff ,  1990) . In the next section , an example shows the representation sueding oA D in more detail  . 
2.1 Example
In the following , the conceptualization of tile SADI chdrehemich zu demblauen Wiirfel  ( I am turning to the bhmcube ) is going to illustrate the processing mechanisms described in the previous section  . 
Suppose a situation where visual and movement information is provided by the sensors of tile robot  . 
Among other things , the ISM SEIC checks for the existance of values in the interface for either object type  ( type )  , object color ( color ) or object position within the visual field ( x-gundy-g )  . A possible configuration is type : ccolor : bx - g :  102 y-g : 99 width : 83 height : 200 The SC of SEE is a disjunction of several conditions  . If any of these conditions is met , tile ISM becomes active : x-g > 0 \[ y-g > 0 \[ width attribute-value pairs in the interface and the SC of Sl  , ' , I , " shows that solne relevant paranmters are indee ( 1 present . Thus , SEE t ) ecomes active . 
The understmcified CR of SEE is EVENT : see , AGENT : ? , OBJECT : 0BJ , ( COLOR:COL ) . EVENT and AGENT arc instantiated with default vahms  . Tile associated transition rules sl ) ecit\[y the remaining conceptual parameters : type OBJ---+OBJ color COL--+COL Consequently  , the comt ) let eCI1 , of sI . : g is EVENT : see , AGENT : i , OBJECT : c , COLOR : b 2 On the basis of the sensor data down : -8 and velocity : 0  . 441355 , denoting a downward move-inent with a certain velocity  , the ISMMOVF becomes active at the same time . 
The basic ISMSEE and MOVE serve as SC for the COlnplex ISM TUIN-TO which identifies the turning of the robot towards an object  ;  . Furthermore , TURN-q'O has some additional SC . The complete setix as follows:
MOVE ~ SEE((cont100) x-g )( , : , , , it lOO)y-g )) fo ,  . scycles Thus , if MOVE an (1SEE are active tbr five cycles and , in addition , the object in the visual tM dismoving to the center of vision  , ' I'\[JI/ . N-'I'O is activated . 
MOVE and SEE make available their CRs to TUI/N-TO . By this nmans ,  1 ) reviously unst ) e ( : if icdt ) a rame-tersin't ' UII , N-TO's Cl ~ , c&n ) espell ( ~ dout via the . 
transition rule see ( OBa , COL)~OBJECT , C () L()1\] . 
resulting in the flflly instantiated CREVENT : turn  , AGENT : ? , PATH : to , OBJECT : c , COLOR : b . 
If TUI/N-TO turns out to be the highest active ISM at  ; a given time , it is selected for surface generation . 
3 Generating the utterance
After conceptualizing the agent's current action at the level of ISMs  ( content determination ) it has to be decided how the corresl ) onding CR can be articulated in a natural language utterance  . A fimda-mental division in lexieal and syntactical processing along with an incremental and parallel processing behaviour are the crucial features of tile proposed architecture for surface realization  . Such a processing behaviourix facilitated by the use of CRs as interface between " R  . oA Dandi PaGe . 
2 c stands for the concel ~ tual entity ' cube ' , b for ' l ) hm ' . 
" ~; oipho\]D ~ i,i,\["t ~ l

IPIIOCF . SSING in MnltliMioll
Figure 2: The architecture of the generation system . 
Conceptual , lcxical , and syntactical information is stored centrally on the blackboard  . All processes can obtain this information if needed  . 
3.1 Blackboard architecture
The blackl ) oard is the central storing device of tile system . All processes write their results on tile blackboard and obtain their input structures there  . 
In such an architecture parallel processing can be achieved in a convenient fashion  . 
3.2 Parallel processing
Parallel processing can be found on various levels of abstraction  . The flmdmnental division runs 1 ) etween lexical and syntactical 1 ) rocessing ( see fig .  2) . When a ( 1 ) art of a ) CR originating from tile ISM is written on the blackboard  , processing of this structure starts sinmltaneously in both components  . Using a conceptual lexicon as described by Jackendoff a transfor-nlation process constitutes the first si : el  ) on the lexi-eal side ( Jackendoff ,  1990) . On the syntactical side , a1 ) locess based on the type-phrase-corresl ) ondence , also described by Jackendoff , starts processing in this component . The type-t ) hrase-correst ) ondence constrains the choice of possible phrases to realize a structure with a given conceptual type in an utterance  . 
Different processes inside these two components works in mltaneously on different CRs  . On the lexieal side , the three subprocesses transformation , choosing of lexeme and morphological processing can be identified  . On the syntactical side the real ) ping of conceptual types on possible phrase structure rules and the instantiation of these rules take place  . 
3.3 Incremental processing
In natural anguage generation , incremental processing is a central issue . According to Finkler's definition two fundamental types can be identified : quantitative and qualitative incremental processing  ( \]? in-kier ,  1997) . 
Quantitative incremental processing nmans that the inlmt to a process can be divided into differ -\ ] AGENT  i152   29   ) \]7\[PATH to ( \[ OB . I ~ CT\])\] 29

OBJECT cube - ~
COiOR\]J29\[COLOR blue\]29
Figure 3: A complex CR with its subparts which can serve as inlmt increments to the generation pro-tess  . Parts of the same structure are coindexed . The relevall t features f br generation fron lCRs are : tilt type  , the head , and tile number and types of argu-lnents . Thus , \[PATH to ( \[0BJECT\] ) \] is a possible increment . 
ent parts and that processing of these parts is possible  . Qualitative incremental processing outhe other hand denotes the possibility to  ( ) btain a first , suboptimal result and to elaborate it wtmnnew ilf forma-lion is available  . 
IP a Gerealizes both kinds of incremental processing  . Parts of CRs correspond to possil ) lephrase structures that constitute the utterance  , i . e . type-ptlrase-corresl ) on dence . Thus quantitative incre-inental processing can be achieved illanatural way  . 
An arbitrarily complex part of a CR can serve as an increment  . 
Qualitative increnlental processing is accomplished on tile level of instantiating phrase structure rules  . A pllrase C all always be realized by several rules of differing colnplexity  . D ) rexaln ple , a noun phrase call be realized illone of tile following w ws : as a noun  , as a determiner and a noun , as an adjective and a noun , etc . All rules for a given CRm:e started as independent processes trying to  ii1-stantiate ttmirright hand sides . The result of a successful process is written on the blackboard and all processes with equal or less complexity are stopped  . 
Processes of higher complexity can try fllrther to instantiate their phrase strnctnre rules  . Ill case Olm of these processe succeeds , the former result is over-written by the more colnplex one  . Depending on the utterance tilne of tile given phrase a more or less complex result is achieved  . 
3.4 Example
The exmnple introduced in section 2 . 1 is continued here . Outlmt of the ISM and thus input to tile generation process is tlmCR dei  ) icted in figln'e3 . 
This structure will be realized in an utterance like Ichdreher eich zu dem Wiirfel  ( I anlturning to tlm cube ) bzw . Zudemblauen Quaderdreheichreich ( To the blue cuboid I am turning )  . Tlm generation process is exemplified by the processing of the 

3.4.1 Transformation
Every CR carries enough information to initiate different processes in lultaneously  . At the moinent all input structure is supplied , it triggers processing inside the lexical and tile syntactical comt  ) onent : tile transformation and the mapping process  . 
As CRs describe meaning by a structural mech -alfism  , the same head can have different in eanings ill different structural constellations  . ~iS'anst'orina-lion-a disanlbiguation process -isimt  ) lemented as a lookup process in a conceptual lexicon  . The entries in tiffs lexicon are sorted by different keys  . The first key is the type of the CR . Int ) ut increments to tile lexical processing component are typed CI/  , s . 
Thus a type specific distribution of processing seelns natural here  . 
By the PATH-stnmture tim PATH-specific transformation process is triggered  . The lookup process will yield a socalled intermediate structure already with some syntactic intbrmation such as category infornlation :\[ PRED " co  , CAT prep , ARG29\]29 . \[ OBJECT cube\]will yield:\[PRED block,
CAT n \] 29.
3.4.2 Mapping
PATH-all ( \]0 BJECT-structure initiate tlmmal ) -t ) ing process simultaneously to the transfiwma-lion i  ) rocess . Duringmal ) t ) ing the tyl ) e-1 ) hrase-correspondence as described by ( Jackendotl ' , 1990) is used . A given tyl ) e can be expressed in an utter-ante only by a restricted set of possible phrases  . Anml ) t ) ing of the types of the int ) ut structures to the relevant 1 ) hrase structure rides takes place . Tllese rules are then started as independent threads  . 
In Gerlnan , structures with type PATH are nearly always realized as prepositioiml pllrases  . The PATH-specific map l ) ing process will tlms start PP-rlfles , e . g . PP29-+PREPNP or PP29-+PREPADV . Tile 0 BJECT-structure will trigger the 0BJECT-sl ) ecificmat ) pingt tlrea ( 1 which will start NP-rules , e . g . NP2:)-+N,NP29-4DETN , or NP29~DETADJN . 
3.4.3 Instantiation
All thread started during the mapping process constitute the instantiation module  . These threads co > respond to phrase structure rules and try to substitute the righthand side non-tern finals with inflected words  . If one rule is fill filled , the result will be written on the blackboard . All rules for the same constituent which m:e more colnplex will continue processing  . If such a more complex rifle is flfl fill e(1 , it ; will overwrite the result on the blackboard by a in or et  ) euttered del ) ends ( m the time the outtmtt ) rocess reaches the eorrest ) onding 1 ) hrase and on the time e on traint given 1 ) yml ' a Eqcncy t larameter . A lowurgency corresponds to more 1 ) recessing time whereas a highurgency denotes the need for a fast result  . 
Let's have a closer look on dmNP 29-rules . If Wiirfelis SUl ) t ) lied 1) ytile h ; xicalt ) rocessing corn-t/orient , all N - (: on sl ; ituents will be sul/sdtuted 1 ) y this word : ( i ) NP29-+Wiirfel , ( ii ) NP29-+ DET Wiirfel ,   ( iii ) NP29-+DETADJ WiirfeLRule ( i ) is complete , and will be written on the 1) ladd ) oard . If the OUtlmt1 ) roeess reaches the noun t ) hrase at that moment of time Wiirfel ( cube ) will lie used as noun phrase . Otherwise the more complex threads ca . ntry to fl fl till their rules . Next , e . g . , the del;erminer reaches the t)laekl)oard , lhfle(ii ) will t)e(:Oml ) lel ; emM will over write the , former result ;: NP2:)-+ dem Wiirfel . Now , the ul ; l;ere(1i1(31_111 phrase will be dem
Wiirfel ( tilecut ) el.
3.4.4 Choosing Lexemes
The infle(:l ; edwords a . re1 ) rovided t ) y the lexical pro- ( : essing ( : on q ) onent . After th ( ; disambiguat ; ion of l : heinf ) ul ; stru(:i ; m'es during the trmmfl ) rmationf ) rocess 1) os sibh ; lexenw , s : have tolm chosen that will con-st ; il ; ute the ul ; tera , n(:e . This pl '( )(: e , qs is ( ) ll (' , ( ~ re(ireah/okul ) in a lexi(:on . The tirst key to this h/okul ) is the synl ; acdccal ; egory which is given in the interm (> diatesl ; r11( ; l ; l11" e~s . ThllS ~ l cat ( ~gory-sl ) e ( : iti ( : distribution of 1 ) ro ( : essesi realized here . 
h , ' bmy coneel ) tS can be paral ) hras ( ! d1 ) yamun-l ) er of words , l %) r(~'X mnl)le , l;lm(:(m(:el ) t of cube ('~ t . llt ) o , e , xl ) ressed ill German t ) y words like Wiirfel , Quader , Block , Klotz , Qua & rat , eL(: . ( (: ulm , (:, lboid,1)h)ek,7?7, S(luare'l) . One of these has I ; ()1) e chosen . This is mainly donerm Momly but the process takes i l l l  ; O : , lC ( : ( ) llll ; l ) r(?f (' , rell ( ; evaluesl ;  gll ; ll-a , lll ; eel ; lmt 111ore Ullll Sllal words wilt not be chosen as often as fl'equ  ( ' , nt words . 
\[ PRED block , CAT n\]2: ) will trigger the N-Slm ( : ifi ( : choosing process . It is 11 to s\[ ; likely that the result of this 1 ) ro ( : ess will 1 ) e\[STEM Wiirfel , CAT n\]2:) . \[PRED zu , CAT prep , ARG29\]2:) will yiehl\[STEM zu , CAT prep , SUBCAT np'):)\]2!) . A nount ) hrase is sut ) (: a . l;egorize . d , a stimtyt/e of the argument is OBJECT . 
a . 4.5 Morphological Processing
The chosen lexemes have to 1) einth ', (: l ; ed . Agmn , this morl ) hological processing c ( ntsists at the moment of a k ) oku I ) l ) ro ( : ess . All 1 ) ossible woM for lns are listed along with the needed agreenm  , n ( ; infornmd on . 
3L ( X ( !III ( ~ S~l ' ( l l l l (   ( ! rsi O ( )d \] l ( l ' ( !  ; Is the ~( ll (!\]' ; ll ' Ol ' lllot " D . 
word , i . e . llO , inflected . This 118~145 ( is not to 1 ) e confused with the notions of lemma and lea : tree as introduced by Imvelt  ( 1  , evelt ,  1989) . 
4 Nol ; corro , ct\])Ill ; found ill ~ tCtllall ~ - t tlgtHl~ge data . 
Thus , \[STEM Wiirfel , CATn\]29 is changed lille\[SURFW iirfel , CATn\]29 mM\[STEMzu , CAT prep\]~9 into \[ SURF zu , CAT prep\]20 which are used during the instmltiad on process . 
4 Conclusion
The systems deserit)ed have been imi ) lemented ill . \] av ~ lmM ; esl ; edintile at ) ove-nmntioned context . 
Currently , the cone eptu Mization is a puret ) ol ; l ; om-uplneclmnism . No deliberative information like all artner model or intentions is taken into a ecolll  ;  . A discourse model could improve the selection mecha-llisln for CIs signific mMy  . IntPAGE , it couklal so be used for t ; he treatment of ellipses or anal ) her a . 
References 11 . A . Brooks .  1986 . A rotmstlayered control system for a mobil ( , ' robot . IEEE Journal of R , obotics and
Automation , 2:14-23.
W . Finkler .  1997 . Automatische Selbst korrekturbeid ( ' rinkrcmcnt cllen G ( ' nerier'ung cs prochcner Sprache untcr R calze it b c dingungen  . lfix . 
S . lh ' anklin and A . Gr~msser .  1996 . Is It ; an Agent , or , Jllsl ; ~ l Progranf ?: A Ta , x Oll Oltly for Autonomous Agents . In J .  \]) . Miiller , M .  3 . Wt/olridge , and N . R . .\]( innings , editors , Intelligent Agcnl , sIlLA gentTh , cories , Arch , i le(:l , ures , and Langv , age , s . , t ) ages 21-35, Berlin . S1) ringer . 
K . U . Goecke and J . -T . Milde .  1998 . Situations - undAktions l ) eschreil/ungendure heinenteilau-lOll ( )llleU Montagerot ) oter . IuComput (' . rs , Lin-g'u , istic , % and l)h , onetics b(' . t,wc(m , Lan , g'tt , age and , gp (' . cch , . , vohmm1, pages 331335, Frankfmta . M . 
\] ~ eterl , ang.
II . P . Grice .  1975 . l , ogi (" mid conversation . In P . Cole and . I . L . Morgan , editors , Syntaz and Se-ma'n , t , ics , volume 3 , pages 41-58 . A(:a(lelni(:l>re . qs,
New York.
11 . Jackendotf .  1990 . Semantic Str'u(:tu~vs . MIT l ) ress , Cambridge , MA . 
T . bSngle , T . C . Liil , h , E . Sl ; opl ), G . I\]erzog , and G . Kamstrut ) .  1995 . KANTRAA Natural Lan-gua . ge 17nterfa(:e for Intelligent Robots . lk'richt114, Universit Stdes Sambmdes , 3 . SFB 314 . 
W . J . M . Levelt .  1989 . 6' peaking : Frvm Intention to Articulation . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 
.J . -T . Mihle , S . Strit ) l)gen , ; rodK . Peters .  1997 . 
Situated communication with robots . Ill 1st Int.
Workshop on Ituman-Computcr ConvcTwation.
n . - z . Now lk .  11987 . Tczt gencric run gausvis'a clh:nDatcn:13 csch , reibung cny on Stra , ~'c'nszcncn . 
Springer , lh ~' rlin.
E . Reiter .  1994 . Hasa Consensus NL Generation Architecture Allpea . red , mM is it Psycholinguisti-tally l'lausible ? Ill Prec  . ofth , c7th Int . Workshop on Natural Language General , ion , t/ages 163170 . 

