Unscrambling English word order
Allan Ramsay L : Helen Seville
Centre for Computational Linguistics
UMIST , PO Box 88, Manchester M601 QD , England
allan/he:teng@cc:t,umist,ac.uk

We propose a treatment of ' extra position ' which allows items to be assimilate directly even when they at  ) pear far from their canonical positions . This treat nmnt supports analyses of a number of phenomena which are otherwise hard to describe  . The ap-1 ) roach requires a generalisation of standard chart i  ) arsing techniques . 
1 Extraposition in English
It is widely accei ) ted that sentences such as 1I saw the girl wh , o your tnv ther said h , ef ancied . 
2 The soup was OK , butth , emain course Ith , ought wa sawful . 
involv c items (' who ' , ' the mai'a , eoursc' ) being found far away from their normali ) ositions ( as the complement of ' fancied ' and the subject of ' was a@d '  )   . 
It seems likely that ; the modifiers ' in the parle ' and " with , all my heart ' in 3l > n the parkImet Arthur . 
4 Ibcliev cd with , all my heart th , at sh , cloved me . 
arc also ' out of position ' , since you would normally expect VP-modi ( ying PPs of this kind to appear immediately to the right of the modified VP  ( so that the canonical versions of these sentences would have been  '1 metArt hur in the park ' and ' I believed that site loved me with all my heart  . ') . The rearc various reasons for moving things around in this way-moving ' who ' to the left  ; in ( 1 ) provides an easy way of l ) icking out the boundary of the relative clause ; moving ' the main course ' and ' in the park ' in  ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) puts them in totlmmatically/informationally more prominent positions  ; and moving the sentential complement'that she lov cdme ' to the right in  ( 4 ) reduces the attachment ambiguity that arises in the alternative form  . 
This is all wellknown , and is treated in most grammatical frameworks by hallucinating an item in the canonical position  , and then rememl ) ering that halhlcination uI ) to (  ; tie 1 ) oint at which the out-of-place item is encountered  . Exactly how the halhlci-nation is remelnbered varies fron ~ one framework to another  , with Ulfification grammars generally carrying intbrmation about it on a category-valued feature  ( usually called slash , ) . The main problem with this al ) l ) roach is that it is difficult to control the situations in which ' traces ' of this kind get proposed  . 
( Johnson and Kay ,  1994 ) suggest using ~ sponsors ' in order to license the introduction of traces  , whereast ) on soris some item of the required kind that has already  1  ) een found , and which is hence potentially going to cancel with the trace  . 
If your parser works ti'om left , right then this will work for items which have been left-shifted  , but clearly it cmmot work for right-shifted items  , since the sI ) on s or will not have t ) een found at the time when it is needed . Thus we cannot use as I ) on sorto justify hallucinatill ganS-compti ) r ' believed ' in ( 4 )  , or for the heavy-NP-shifts in 5He 6Ite h , ouse . 
gave uph is job.
built on that . spotth , emost appalling lyugly In any casc , the notion that some item has been left-or right-shifted fails to account for cases of ' in -traposition ':  7 Ibclievc Betty is a fool . 
8Betty , Ibelicvc , is a fool.
9 Bettyis , I believe , a fool.
It is at least 1 ) lausible that ( 8 ) and ( 9 ) are variants oil ( 7 )  . They're made out of the same words , they have the same truth conditions : the only trouble is that part of the sentence seems to be in the wrong t  ) laee . 
This is analogous to the situation in (2) and (3) , where items we removed to the fi'ont to make them more prominent  . It seems as though in ( ; tie current case the words ' I believe ' have been shifted into the middle  , and 1) arc n the sised , to nmke them less prominent . We will show how to deal with this by a dal ) ting mid when we say that tim PP that results from satu-rating ' on ' modifies a VP to its left we are referring to cases like  ( 12 )  , not to 14 On them at the cats at . 
( or even ' On the mats at the cat .  ' , where tile expectation that the subject will appear to the left of the verb has also been violated  . ) It seems as though we need the standard FRCP to cope with the canonical cases  ; the weakened FRCP ' to cope with cases where the phrase occurs in some unexpected position  ; and something else to constrain the unexpected positions which are actually possible  . 
Tile constraints on what can be moved around take two tbrnls  . Firstly , we have say whether something can be nloved at all  , which we do by introducing a polar-valued feature called moved : items which appear away from their canonical positions are marked moved  ( rioht ) or moved ( left )  , depending on the direction in which they have been shifted  . 
Arguments and targets which aren't allowed to move will be marked-moved by tile item that subcategorises for them  . 
Secondly , we have to specify where those items that can move are allowed to get to  . We do this by using linear precedence rules ( LP-rules )  , most of which place constraints on immediate local subtrees  . 
Thus we can say things like A , B , C :+ wh@A&-wh . @ B-+start@A < start@B to capture tile fact that if A and B are local subtrees of C  , then if A is WH-marked and B is not then A must precede B  ( A's start must be before B's )  . 
Note that the signature of the rule mentions C , even though in this case the body does not . 
The facts about extraposition are captured by rules which specify the circumstances under which a local subtree can  ( or must ) be + moved . Tile key constraints for trees representing structures with verbal heads are as follow : A  , B , C:-wh@A&-aux@C&A = snbject@C-moved@A ( if A is the subject of C , where A is not WH-marked and C is not mi auxiliary  , then A may not be moved ) A , B , C : mov cd@A = right ~ X ( XE dtrs@C&start@core@C <  start@X ) start @ X < start ( ~ A )   ( if A has been right-shifted , then Chad better have some other daughter X between C's head and A  . 
Tileflfll rule says that C must be heavier than X  , where we take ' C is heavier than X ' to mean that C covers more words than X  , so that tlf is rule covers (4) , (5) and (6)) . 
There are an mnber of other such rules , of which the most complex relates to ' ttmt ' -clauses  ( denoted by -~ cornp )  . The description of such clauses comes in two parts  , one to say that-~vh phrases may not be extracted and one to say that+wh phrases must be extracted  . 
( i ) A , B , C:CC clause & + comp@C&+compact@C----wh @ B  ( ii ) A , B , C:CC clause &+ corn p@C&-compact@C--~+ wh@B The first part of this says that if combining A and B produces a ' that'-clause C  , then if C is + compact ( so nothing has been extracted from it ) then it , had better be-wh ( in other words , nothing properly inside it can be + wh ) . If ontile other hand Cis-compact hent here must be solnething extracted from it  , in which case the item which has been extracted must markitas + wh  ,  . These rules cover the ( un ) aeceptability of 15I know that she loves me . 
16 ~ I knowme that she loves.
17 who I know that sh , eloves.
18* I know that whoshe loves.
5 Intraposition
The rules in Section 4 provide a reasonable account of simple extraposition  ( both left and right ) from clauses . We now return to 7I believe Betty is a fool . 
8 Betty , I believe , is a fool.
9 Bettyis , I believe , a fool.
Suppose we use FRCP' , with no LP-rules , to analyse (8) . We will get , mnong other things , the phrases and part phrases shown in Fig . 1 ( tile commas are treated as lexical items , so that ' Betty ' starts at 0 , the first comma at 1 , and ' I'at2 , and so on ) . 
The first couple of steps are straightforward : ' a fool ' results fl ' om combining ' a ' and ' fool  '  . It ; has no holes in it , its extreme start and end are the stone as its compact start and end  . Then ' is a fool'results froin combining ' is ' and ' a fool '  , and again all the pieces are in the right place , so the extreme start and end are the santo as the compact start and end and the phrase is + compact  . 
At step 3 , ' Betty ' is integrated as the subject of ' is a fool '  . The result starts at 0 , since that's where 1 a fool 6   8   6   8   2 is nt bol 5   8   5   8   3 Betty is a . fool 5   8   0   8   4 believe Betty is a fool 3   4   0   8   5 I 1  ) elieve Betty is a % ol 24086 , I believe Betty is at bol 04087 , I believe Betty is a fool ,  0 8 0 8
Figure 1: Analysis of ( 8 )   ( : Oral ) act+++'Betty'starts , and is-compact , since it does not include all the intervening words  . 
At 4 this-compact sentence l ) ecomes the complement of ' believe ' . The result is again-compact , since it fails to include the word q ' or the two commas which at  ) pear 1 ) etween its start and end l ) oints . 
The compact core is now the word ' believe ' , so the comi ) act start and en(t are 3 and d . 
.At ; 5 , the VP'believe Betty is a fool'combines with ' I'to produce ' I believe Betty is a fool '  . The two commas then combine with this phrase , marking it as being parenthe . tie a lnd , when the second comma is included , finally marking it as + compact . 
Similar structures would be created during the t ) rocessing of ( 9 )  , with the only difl'erence l ) eing that ' is a fool ' would 1 ) e the first-corn , pact phrase found . 
Apart fl : om that the analysis of ( 9 ) would tm identical to the analysis of ( 8 )  . 
' i ~ h crem ' e two problems with this ai ) l ) roa ( : htosen-Ix ' ames of this kind: ( i )  1 ) ecause we obtain identical syntactic analyse so f  ( 7 )  , (8) mid(9) , then any ( : Oln-t ) ositional semantics will assign all three the same interpretation  . This is not entirely wrong : I cannot fairly say a  . ny of these sentences unless I do believe that Betty is at bol  . But it is also clearly not entirely right , since it misses the difl brence in emi ) has is . We will not discuss this any further here . ( ii ) be (: mlsewe are not applying the LP-rules , we get rather a large number of mmlyses . Without LP-rules , we gel ; a single analysis of '1 believe B ctty is a fool ' , having constructed 23 t ) artial and complete , edges .  1 , br ' Betty , I believe , is a fool'we get three analyses ( including the correct one ) having constructed 1 . 01 edges . Most of t , hesem'isefl'om thet ) resence of the commas , since we have to allow for the possibility that each of these  ( : ommas is either a not ) ening or closing l ) racket , or a conjmmtion in a comma-sei ) a rated list of coltiunets . 
Others arisef l'om the fact that we have removed all the LP-rules  , so that we are treating English as having completely Deeword order  . Case marking still provide some constraints on what can combine with what  , so that in the current case ' I ' is the only possible sul  ) ject for ' believe ' and ' Betty ' is the only possible subject for ' is '  . If we had been dealing with 19 Betty , Fredbelieves , is a fool then we would have had six analyses froln  107 edges , with the new ones arising because we had assign e ( 1 ~ Fred ' as the subject of %" and ' Betty ' as the sul  ) -jec ~ of ' believes ' . 
Clearly we need to reinstate the general LP-rule . % whilst allowing for the cases we are interested in  . 
These cases are characterised in two ways : ( i ) some word that requires a sentence has oc ( -urre ( 1 in ~ context where a:st ) lit'sentence is available , and ( ii ) this word is adj aeeilt to a 1 ) arenthetical comlna . The statement of this rule is rather long-winded , but the result is to provide a single analysis of  ( 8 ) from 66 edges , and a single analysis of (9) from 70 edges . 
6 ~ more X than Y '
Most ( : ases of extral ) osition in English involve sentences , lint there are a numl ) er of other 1 ) he nomena where items seem to have 1 ) een shifted around . Consider for instance the following examples : 20 Geo~yeate more than six peaches . 
21 Harrietate more peaches than pears.
22\[a'n , atemorepca ehcs than , \] ulia.n.
In (20) , " more ' than si : r ' looks like a complex determiner  . How many peaches did George eat ? More than six . The easiest way to analyse this is by assmning the ft'more ' subcategoriscs for a ' than -phrase'  . 
In (21) and (22) , however , the than-phrase seems to have becomedi@)inted . It still seems as though ' more . ' heads a complex determiner , since ( 22 ) would support the answer ' more than Julian ' to the question ' How many peach cs did I an cat ?' a We therefore introduce lexical entries tbr ' more ' and ' tha'n ' which look roughly as follows: a though  ( 21 ) does not seem to support ~ morc than pears ' as an mmwerto ' How many peaches did Harri et cal ' ?'  . The problem seems l ; obe that NP complements o'than ' are actually elliptical  ( see below )  , and it seems to be harder to recover the elllpsed sentence ' More than sheate pears ' than to recover ~ More than Julianate peaches ' or era  , ore than Julianate ' . 
667 sign/n ? m ? ? , '/ flJJ/sy'l/L Jill L foo I wh < JM subcat /\[ in\[phon'than'\]l\II semantics  .   .   . 
sign phon'than '
Ionfootsyn\[\[...
\[ foot\[wit <>\] subcat(X semantics ...
The entry for ' more ' says that it will make a specifier if it finds as atmated phrase headed by ' than '  . The entry for'than'says that it will make a phrase of the required types olong as it finds sonm argument X  . We know very little about X . In (20) it is a number , in (21) and (22) it appears to be an NP . In fact , as ( Puhnan , 1987) has shown , the best way totl fink about these examples is by regarding them as elliptical fbr the sentences  23 Harrietate more peaches than site a tepears . 
241 an atemore peaches than Julian atep each , es . 
Other kinds of elliptical phrase are permitted , as in 25Kei that e more peaches than Lucy did . 
or even 26 Marthaate more ripet it an unripep cach , es .   4 We the retbre allow arbitrary phrases a stile argument to ' than '  . All we need now are the LP-rules describing when arguments of ' than ' should be extraposed  . These simply say that if you are combining the determiner ' more ' with a ' than '- phrase  , then if the sole daughter of the ' than '- phrase is an mnber then it must not be shifted  , and if it is not then it must be right-shifted . 
( i ) d , B , C : AE det & phon@A = ' more ' & cat@B = than & dtrs@B =< D >&  ( DEnnmor Deadj )   4Note that in this case the argument of ' than ' is not displaced  . 
-->-moved@B(ii ) A , B , C : AE det & phon@A = ' more ' cat ? B = than & not ( dtrs@B =< D >& ( D < . : amor D < adj ) ) --~ moved@B = right With these LP-rules , we get approl ) riate structural analyses for ( 20 )   ( 25 )  . We do not , however , currently have a treatment of ellipsis . We therefore cannot provide sensible semantic analyses of  ( 21 ) and ( 22 )  , since we cannot determine what sentences ' peaches ' and ' Julian ' are elliptical for  ( imagine , for instance , trying to decide whether ' Eaglese at mores par ~vws than crows'meant'Eagles eat more spar -rv ws than crows cats sparrows ' or ' Eagle seat more sparrows than eaglese at crows '  )  . 
If the structure of ' more peaches th , an pears ' involves a displaced'than'-phrase , then it seems very plausible that the stone is true for  27 Nickwrote a more elegant programth , an Olive . 
28 Peter wrote a more elegant prvgramth , anth , at . 
This is given further supt ) or t by the acceptability of examples like 29 A progrum more elegant hant hat would be hard to find  . 
where tile ' than '- I ) hrase is adjacent o the modified adjective ' elegant ' rather than to the noun ' program ' which is modified by the whole phrase ' more elegant than that '  . 
Frustratingly , it just does not seem possible to reuse the lexical entry above for ' more ' to cope with these cases  . In (20) (25) , ' more ' made a detern finer when supplied with an apl  ) ropriate ' than '- phrase . 
For ( 27 ) - ( 29 ) it needs to make somettfing whicll will combine with an adjective/adverb to produce an intensified version of the original  . We therefore need tile t bllowing entry : ) lion ~ more ~ subcatsign < > J semantics .   .   . 

This needs a ' than'-phrase to saturate it , and once it is saturated it will combine with an adj  ( adjective or a ( tverb ) to nmkeane wadj . There are two questions to be answered : should such a complex adj att pear to the left  ; or right of its target , and should the ' than'-phrase be extraposed or not ?  ( 28 ) and ( 29 ) show that these questions are in-timately connected  . If the ' than'-phrase is right-shifted , then the resulting modifier aptmars to the left of its target  ( 28 )  ; if it is not , then the moditier appears to the right (29) . This is exactly what is pre-dict e ( 1by ( Willimns ,  1981 ) 's suggestion that head-final moditiers generally appear to the left of their targets  ( ' a quietly sleeping man ' ) whereas non-head-final ones apt ) ear to the right ( ' a ' llt ( t'lt sleeping quietly ' )  . All we need to do is to make right-shifting of the ' than'-l  ) hrase optional , and to invoke Williams ' rule . , using the coral ) act core of the modifier . Thus the compact modifier ' more elegant h , anthai , ' fl'om(2I ) is not head final , since the whole thing is cora-l ) act but the head , ' el want ' , isi1ot ; the last word ; the non-colnt ) aet one ' move ch ; gant . .  . than that ' from (28) is head final , since this time ' elegant ' is the last , word in the (: ompact core ' more el want ' . Hetme ' more clegant h , an that't bllows its targe , ta . nd ' more clwant .   .   . thanth , at ' precedes it . No new LP-rules are required , and 110 challg(s1 ; (1 th ( gellel : a lrll lefor locating moditiers are required  . 
7 Conc lus ions \? e have shown how retrieving disl  ) laeed items directly , rather than t ) ositing a trace of some kind and the nean cellill g it against an appriate iteln when one turns up  , can I ) rovide treatlllellts of left - and right -extraposition which display the advantages that  ( Johnson and Kay , 1994) obtain for left-extraposition . This approach to extraposition can be extended to deal with ' intraposition ' and to cases where items have been extracted ti'om non-clausal items  . In order to avoid overgeneration , we needed to introduce a set of LP-rules which are applied as phrases are constructed in order to ensure  , that items have not been shifted to unacceptable positions  . The extra computation required for checking the LP-rules has no effect onl  ; he comI ) lexity of the parsing process , since they simply add a constant ( and t ~ irly small ) extra set of steps each time a new edge is proposed  . As a rought mr formance guide , the graln In argenerates five analyses for 30 Ite built on that site a more unattractive house than theeric which he built in Greenwich  . 
on the basis of 237 edges ( the different global analyses m'ise from the attachment ambiguities for the wn : ious modifiers  )  , and takes 4 . 1 seconds to < 1 o so ( compiled Sicstus on a Pentiunl 350 )  . This sentence contains a right-shifted NP , which itself contains a ' more . . . than . . . ' construction and also a relative clause with a left-shifted WII-pronoun  , and hence could be expected to cause problems for al  ) l ) roaches using si ) on sors , while 8 Betty , I believe , is a fool . 
takes 0 . 27 seconds . Tit (' . worst case comple?ity analysis for this kind of approach is fairly awf lfl  ( O ( ly ) X 22 ( N-I ) ) where 1 ~ is the number of unsaturated edges in the initial chart and N is the length of the sentence  ( Ramsay , in press )) . In practice the LP-rules provide sufficient constraints on the generation of non-coral  ) act phrases for pertbrmal me to be generally acceptable on sentences of about twenty words  . 
References
M Johnson and M Kay .  1994 . Parsing and empty nodes . Computational Linguistics , 20(2):289300 . 
RM Kal ) lan . 1973. A general syntactic processor.
In R . . Rustin , editor , Natural language proeessin . q , pages 193241, New York . Algorithmics Press . 
M Kay .  1973 . The MINI ) system . In R . Rustin , editor , Naturnl Language Processing , pages 155188 , New York . Algorithmics Press . 
CJ Pollard and IA Sag .  1988 . An I'nfovmation Based Approach to Syntax and Semantics : Vol  1 Fundamentals . CSL Ilecture notes 113, Chicago
University Press , Chi (: ago.
CJl?ollard and IA Sag .  1994 . Head-driven Ph~nscStr'uct'n reG~nmmar . ( ~ hi (', ago University Press,

SGl'uhnan .  1987 . l ~ vents and VP-modifiers . in B . G . T . Lowden , editor , Proceedings of the Alvcy Sponsored Workshop On Formal Semantics in Natural Languag cP ' roecs siug  , Colchester . University of Essex . 
AMR am say . in press . Parsing with discontinuous phrases . Nat'mnl Language Engincering . 
IASag and TW as ow .  1999 . Syntactic theory : a formal introduction . CSLI , Stratford , Ca . 
E Williams .  1981 . On the notions ' lexically related'att ( t ' head of a word ' . Ling'uistic Inquiry , 12:254274 . 
MM Wood .  1993 . Categorial Grammars . Routledge , London . 

