A Formal Semantics for Generating and Editing Plurals 
Paul Piwek
ITRI-University of Brighton
Watts Building , Moulse coomb,
Bright on BN24GJ

Paul . Piwek@itri.brighton.ac.uk
Abstract
Wc present a formal semantics for an object -oriented formalism which allows for the representation of plura  , lobjects ( such as ' Three N ' , ' Most of the N ' , ' Some N ' ,  . . . ) . The semantics is given in terms of it mapping to a variant of Discourse Representation Theory  . It is motivated by its suitability lkw natural anguage generation and interactive dit-ing of the representations  . 
1 Introduction
A natural anguage generator typically generates a noun plnasel'roma representation consisting of an object with one or more attributes  ( cf . Reiter & l ) ale , 2000) . Usually this representation is supplemented with inl'ormation concerning the context in which the noun phrase has io be realized  ( e . g . , the set of distractors , whether tile object is in focus , etc . ) . \]; or instance , the lil , ICUP , l system ( Dale ,  1992 ) deals with reference to plural objects by having the l'ollowing three attributes on physical objects : structure  , whose w flue can be either a set or individual , cardinalio , which in case of a set records the numbers of elements which the set has  , and constituents which in case of a set contains the elements of the set  . 
Our proposal is intended to extend the representations proposed in  ( Dale , 1992)) Most importantly , wc replace the attribute cardinalily with the more general attribute quant  ( for quantifier ) whose value is a quantilier such as ' most ' , ' few ' ,  '5' , '<6' ( at most 6) , etc . Furthermole , we introduce the new attribute parl_of which takes its a value a nob  . jecl of which the object in question is a part . ~ ~ Note that we are dealing with the generation of plurals from  ( logically ) structured data as opposed loraw data as in , e . g . , Stone (1999) . 
2We use the mcfcologicat ' part of ' relation as an alternative It  " subset ' For details  , see the next section . 
The object-oriented ( 00 ) for lnalism in which we implement tile al ' or elnentioned attributes is an extension of standard oo formalisms  . It is known as Scoped Semantic Networks ( SSN ; Kibble et al , 1999; Power ,  1999) .   3 An SSN consists of a network of objects together with a mapping  o1' these objects to a set o1' logical contexts . This makes it possible to represent universal quantification  , implication , negation and other logical operators . In particulal ; Power ( 1999 ) shows how an SSN can be mapped into a I ) is course Representation Structure ( DRS ; Kamp & Reyle ,  1993) , lhus providing a for-lnal semantic interpretation of SSNs  . 
In tiffspaper , we provide a mapping of SSNs with plural objects to an adapted version of Discourse Represemation Theory  ( I ) RT )  . The mapping is provided to obtaint % rmalt ruth conditions for the SSNs  . 
Such alna Plfing provides us with a mathenmlically precise characterization el ' the information which is represented by a SSNill terms of its truth -condilions  . 
This is useful if we want to automatically nanipu -lalelhe information which is represented by means of an SSN  . For example , we can formally define whether some piece of information is a heady implicit in some other piece of information  ; in other words , we can deline a notion of logical consequence . Related to this is the possibility to use the semantics in order to test the consistency of the in-formatiou conveyed by an SSN  . For tlmt purpose , we can do so called model checking : an SSN is consis-lent if we can construct a model-that is  , a logically possible state of the world-in which tile SSN is true according to our truth conditional semantics  . 
We do not provide a direct formal semantics for SSN  , but rather map it to a more convenient logicall ' ormalist n  , i . e . , I)P , T . The main reason for tiffs approach is that phenomena which we will be modelling in this paper  , i . e . ( plural ) reference and a Sccalso , e . g . , Sowa (1984) . 
607 anaphora , have been studied extensively within I ) RT ( see , e . g . , Kamp & Reyle , 1993; Krahmer & Van Deemter , 1998; Piwek ,  1997) . Fnrthermore , we believe that the adaptation of DRT that we propose is of interest in its own right  . 
The mapping which we provide from SSNs with plural objects to DRSs requires some modifications to standard DRT with plurals  ( Kamp & Reyle , 1993: Chapter 4) . For networks with only singular objects , there is a straightforward mapping of the objects in a network to the discourse referents which populate a DRS  . Things are different for networks with plural objects  . Consider : ( 1 ) Susan has found most books which Bill needs . 
The DP , S for this sentence is : (2) y book(y ) need ( bill , y ) found ( susan , y ) Intuitively , the meaning of this condition is that : fi ' ) rmosty which satisfy the conditions to the le/'t of the diamond  , it holds that they also sati , @ ~ the condition on the right . Note , that the representation contains no plural discourse referent corresponding to the Nt '' most books which Bill needs '  . The ' y ' in this representation is a referent for singular individuals  . This might make one wonder how it is possible in standard DRT to refer back to plural individuals as in:  ( 3 ) Susan has found most books which Bill needs . 
They were on her desk.
For this purpose , there is a socalled abstraction operation ( Kamp & Reyle ,  1993:313 ) with which we can obtain a discourse referent for the set of books which Bill needs and Susan J bund  . In more technical terms , the set is obtained by the summation of the values which'y ' can take  . Thus there is no direct way of mapping a plural object in a semantic network  ( which represent the interpretation of an NP ) to a plural discourse referent in the corresponding DRS  . For this reason we have chosen to adapt the DP , T formalism , so that plural noun phrases do directly col Telate with plural discourse referents  . 
We now proceed as follows . In Section 2 , we specify the mapping from SSNs to our version of DRT  . In the next section ( Section 3) , we describe an application which uses the SSNs with plurals  . We finish this paper with a conclusion section ( Section 4 )  . 
2 From SSNs to DRSs
In this section , we provide a mapping from SSNs into discourse representation structures  ( DRSs ) with plurals . We start out by specifying the target of the mapping  , i . e . , plural DRT . 
DRSs with Plurals Following Kamp & Reyle (1993) , we treat singular objects and sets of objects as entities of the same kind  . Both amconsidered to be individuals : atomic and non-atomic individuals  , respectively . Thus , the model theory follows the models which Link ( 1983 ) provides for count nouns fl The idea is that the denotation of an NP which contains a count noun can be uniquely subdivided into atomic parts  ( as opposed to the denotata of mass nouns )  . The domain for NPs is structured by a prot-whole relation which satisfies the axioms of upper semilattices  ( for background information on these lattices see Kamp & Reyle  ,  1993:398-406) . 
Informal terms , a model is defined as follows : A model _/14 is a quintuple ( Lt , g , Pred , @mrzt , Name ) which consist of : ( 1 ) A domain of individuals with the structure of a complete  , free , atomic upperscmi lattice H = ( U , C ) with zero ;   ( II ) A domain of eventualities with the structure of a complete  , free , atomic upper semilattice g = @7 , C ) ;   ( III ) A function Pred mapping predicates P to their extension sink //  , such that ( III . 1) for tim relations representing thematic roles , such as agent and patiertt , I@ed assigns a set of tuples ( c , a ) , where cCE and a GU . 
(III . 2) for eventuality predicates , Prod(P ) C_E . 
(I11.3) For objectype predicates , Prod(P)CU.
(IV ) A function Qua~tt mapping determiners DEW to their corresponding interpretations  , i . e . , a set consisting of tuples  a , b ) ( where a , bCU ) . 
( V ) A function Name mapping constant somembers of U . in particular , the constant sc/ , , where P is a predicate are mapped to ? Pred(P ) , i . e . , the supremum , also known as the sum , of the interpretation fP . 
Notice that in our models there are separate domains for objects and eventualities  ( i . e . , states and events ) . 
4 For a critical discussion and alternative to Link ( 1983 )  , see for instance L and man (1989) . 

The relations agent and patient have an eventuality as their first argument and an object as second argument  ( cf . Parsons , 1990) . agent ( e , o ) is to be interpreted as : object o is the agent of eventuality e  . 
Furtherlnore , there are predicates applying to eventualities and others applying to objects  . 
For our purposes , the most interesting part of the definition is the function Q~ta  , ~ , t ; which maps determiners to their respective interpretations  . We take the interpretation of a determiner to be a set of tu-pies  , where each tuple consist of a pair of ( plural ) individuals . For instance , take the deterlniner ' most ' . 
Q ' ~ m , nt , maps it to the following interpretation : '5 ( 4 ) Q~g a ~ , t(Most ) = ( r , c ) : rcc&r is a non-atomic entity of M&kl-> Thus ' most ' corresponds to the set of all tuples of individuals  , such that the first individual is a non-atomic part of the second one and the cardinality of the first is greater than or equal to the cardinality of the second divided by two  . Henceforth , we will call the second individual the context individual  ( cf . Westerstfihl , 1985) . Given a noun phrase , such as ' most birds ' , the first individual is intended as the interpretation of the entire noun phrase whereas the second individual plays the role of the context against which the noun phrase is interpreted  . 
The context individual can be restricted by extralinguistic circumstances  ( e . g . , the siluation in wlaich a noun phrase is produced  ) and by linguistic means ( as in ' most of the birds on the beach ' , where ' the birds on the beach'supplies the contextual individual  )  . 
Let us focus on the DRS condition which is interpreted in the models in terms of @ m  , ~ , t . This condition functions as a substitute for the duplex conditions of standard DRT  6 The condition in question is: '51tere we follow Ihe ' more than half ' interpretation of ' most ' common fi ' om the literature on GEneralized Quantiliers  ( see , e . g , I ? , arwise & Cooper , 1981; Keenan & Westerstahl ,  1997) . This interpretation is not entirely unproblematic  ; see , for instance , ( Kamp & P , eyle ,  1993) . Our use of the interpretation is , however , solely for illustrative purposes . We can also accommodate for alternative mappings furQ ~ u ~ nt  ( Most )  . 
Similarly we cannot go into detaile discussions of other quantifiers such as  , for instance , ' many ' ( of . Lappin , 1988) . 
6Within the conlines of this paper it is impossible to give a full formal delinition of our version of plural I  ) RT , thcrelore we focus on the aforementioned condition  . The other definitions closely lollow those in Kamp & P  , eyle ,  1993: 425-427 ,  677-6'79) . 
If z is a discer n ; rereferent and t is a discourse re\[er-entor constant  , then DET t(:c ) is a condition . 
The verification condition for this condition is :   ( 5 ) M~fDET t ( : C )   ( if " ( 1 1 IIIItIIAJ'f > Let us illustrate these definitions with a simple example  . Consider : (6) At most two men walk . 
The NP'At most two men'introduces a plural discourse referent X  , together with a number of conditions on that referent  . Additionally , the verb ' walk ' supplies a condition to the effect that all the members of X walk  . 7, s(7)

AT_MOST_2 c . . . . . . .   ( X ) man ( z ) walk ( z ) walk * ( X ) The first condition says that X consists of a subset of the set of all men  ( cm , , , ~ , alternatively , we could use a set of contextually given men ) and that X should consist of at most 2 individuals belonging to that set . ' ? The implicative condition is there to make sure there is no other set apart from X with  ( other ) men who are also walking . Such a closure condition is particularly useful for the direct representation of monotonically decreasing quantifiers  . ~? A quant or Q is monotonically decreasing if and only if for all  7For cxpository reasons , we have left out explicit represEn-tations of events in this example  . But , see the next section for a
DP , Swith plurals and events.
8Note that when a predicate in a condition is marked with a '*'  , this means that the prcdicate is interpreted distributively over the atomic parts of the objects in its denotation  . 
"JWe assume that : @ Umt(AT_MOST_2) = ( r , c ) : rCc&I , '1 < 2mln Van Eijck (1983) , an allemative approach is proposed within a fl ' a mework which also allows for the direct representation of plural referents in DRT  . lie propose store analyse monotonically decreasing quantiliers in terms of negation and monotonically increasing ones  . This , however , means that WE no longer have a direct correlation between plural discourse referents and monotonically decreasing quantifiers  . Furthermore , it prevent such quantifiers from any anaphoric uptake as in ' Fewer than ten students took the test  . They all passed it ' . 

X , Y , Z it holds that : if QXY and Z~Y , then QXZ . Thus , for instance ,   ( a ) ' At most two meuwalk and talk ' does not imply that  ( b ) ' At most two men walk ' . If we would represent ( a ) without the closure condition ( i . e . , there is a set of at most two men and each of them walks and talks  )  , then ( b ) ( i . e . , there is a set q \[" at most two men and each of them walks  ) would follow fi'om ( a )  . However , if we add to the representation f ( a ) that there are no other sets of men who walk and talk and to the representation of  ( b ) that that there are no other sets of men who walk  , then ( a ) no longer follows fiom ( b ) ; the additional information in ( a ) that there are no other sets elmen who both walk and talk  , does not entail that there are no other set so / ' men who walk  . 
Seeped Semantic Networks A seeped semantic network  ( SSN ) is a triple ( D , L , f ) , consisting of a typed DAG ( Directed Acyclic Graph ) D , asef of logical contexts L and a function f which assigns a logical context  ( which are treated as primitive objects separate from those in the DAG  ) to each of the objects in the DAG . In the DAG , there are objects which correspond with logical operators  , such as implication and negation , and nonlogical objects , such as physical objects and events . The function f , which assigns logical contexts to objects in a typed DAGD  , satisfies the following constraints : ( I ) The root object and all the objects which are direct descendants of a logical operator are assigned a unique logical context  . These contexls in herithepartial ordering ( in the DAG ) of the objects with which they are associated . Furthermore , this set of logical contexts constitutes the range of f  . 
( II ) Logical operators which have not been assigned a context by clause  1  . are mapped to the logical context of their nearest ancestor to which clause  1  . applies . 
(III ) Objects which arc not assigned to a logical context by the clauses  1  . and 2 . are assigned to a logical context in accordance with DRT's accessibility rules  . 
Consider , for instance , the following sentence : (8) If a man is happy , then he whistles . 
We can represent this sentence by means of the SSN in Figure  1  . In this representation , the dots represent objects , the circles represent logical contexts ( an object inside a circle belongs to the corresponding logical context  )  , the solid arrows represent attributes and the dotted arrows represent that the object fi'om which the arrow originates belongs to the context o which the arrow points  . 
There is a straightforward procedure form appiuga SSN into a I  ) RS : ( I ) Logical contexts are mapped into boxes , where the nesting of the boxes is isomorphic to the partial ordering of the corresponding logical contexts  . 
( II ) Objects are inserted into the box which corresponds with their logical context  , except for logical operators . 
The latter are mapped onto the appropriate operators on the boxes of their directly subordinate objects  . 
(III ) Typing statements T ( z ) of a nonlogical object are added to the same box as the object z itself  . 
( IV ) Attributions /( . % !/) , where z and !/ are nonlogical objects , are added to the same box as z . 
: ~= ~ implication %% happy ( e )  ~ ?  ) whistle 4# . 
e ' ~' O0~""0:4~?man
Figure 1"Network for (8)
By applying these rules , we obtain the following
DP , S for the SSN in Figure 1: ( 9 ) xehappy ( e ) man ( x ) agent ( e , x)e ~=> whist le(e')agem(e' , x ) Note how the three circles in the SSN correspond with the three boxes of the DRS  . Furthermore , the discourse referent z colresponds to the object in the SSN of the type man and inhabits the same box as the conditions which correspond to the object of type happy and the attribute agent  . 
SSNs with Plurals In this section , we describe an extension of SSNs for countable plural objects  . This extension requires no changes to the format of SSNs  . 
Rathel , we introduce a number of special-purpose their mapping to appropriate terms in a DRS  . 
We introduce two attributes on cotmlable objects :   ( I ) quant . The w due of this feature is reslricted to an oltiect of the type det_type  . Examples of tlle subtypes of dcl , d , ypear c2 ,  > 1 ,  < 3 , all ,  . f > w , etc . 
(11) parl ,_ of . The value of this feature is restricted to countable objects  . 
The lnapping of SSNs which include these special -purpose attributions and types to al  ) P , s is defined as follows: ( 1 ) For typing statements T ( x )  , where T is a subtype of del , _type:ignore the statement 7' ( x ) and the object x ; ( H ) For attribution squant(x , y ) such that ~ z : p ( , ,rt_of(: , : , z ) & z is an a , ,cho , '& Tt(x ) & 7~( y) , add to the box in which also x lives the l bllowing condition :  . r = T2(c7~) . Note that in this case T ~ is subtype of & : t_type  ,  . The role of contextual individual is played by ( :7 , ~ , i . e . , a constant which denotes lhe supremum of the denotation of TI  . Furthermore , we add a closure condition ; ( I\]tl ) For attributions q'uant(:r , y ) such that ~ z : part_of(x , z ) & T1 ( x )  & 7 ) ( y ) add to the box in which also : r lives the following condition : x =  5/  ) ( z )   . Furthermore , we add a closure condition ;   ( IV ) Otherwise apply the standard mapping rules for
SSNs ( see the previou section).
Consider , lbrinstance , the ( phual ) SSN for lhe sentence ' At most two men walk ' in Figure  ( 2 )  . 
:,?) walk-.f:133
V?mar , at most 2
Figure 2: Network for ' At most two menwall <' This SSN contains only one logical context which is inhabited by the objects of type man and walk  . The object of type man is possibly plural : its quant attribute points to an object of type at  . anost_2 . The value of the other attribute , i . e . , part_oJ ; is not instantiated in this case . This is represented by means of the empty box . When we apply the rules for mapping SSNs to DRSS , we obtain the following representation : ( lO ) at
AT_MOST_2 c' . . . . . . ( X ) man(X ) walk(c ) agent(e , X ) ze Iman(z ) zcXagent(e ' , z ) => walk(e')~e . ' ~ The first four conditions correspond to the types of the nodes and the attributes of the SSN  . They are followed by the closure condition . 
3 Editing Plurals
In tiffs section , we describe how plural SSNs can be used for WYSIWY Mediting  ( Power et al ,  1998) .   1~ WYSIWYM stallds for What Yot tSee\]s What Yott Meant  . it is a technology for directly manipulating knowledge representation suing natural language feedback  . WYSIWYM\]las been used in various systems for ( multilingual ) document authoring and query formulation . The proposal which is presented in tiffspaper has been in a plemented as part of the MILF  , query-answering system ( e . g . , Piwekctal . , 2000) . 
The basic idea underlying WYSIWY Mediting can be presented by means of a simple diagram  . 
W ~-" update , ~'(! llt't'll(!
Feedback text with anchors \[// . ~select , paste , VIeWcut , copy
Figure 3: The editing cycle 11SCC also : http://www . itri . l~righton . ac . uk/resea,'ch . htnfl:ff:WYS l WYM Semantic Network ( SN ) in a knowledge base ( KB )  , the system generates a description of the SN in the form of a ' feedback text ' containing ' auchors ' rep-reseuting places where the knowledge base can be extended  . Each anchor is associated with popup menus , which present he possible editing operations on the SN  . On the basis of the operation that the user selects  , the knowledge base is updated and a new feedback text is generated from the slew contents of the SN  . 
? conjunction fitted_with ?/~--~? conjunction carrier S ? lid bulkl ~ bilge ' ~ l ? pump ? v  1   3 ? purpose states equipment fire . fighting
Figure 4: Network underlying (11)
Let us slow go through an example of editing plurals as it is supported by our prototype system  . Let us join in at a point where the network in figure  4 has been constructed .   12This network is presented to the user by means of the following feedback text :  ( ll ) A solid bulk carries " is fitted with three bilge pumps  . Some equipment is used fox " fire fight-ing . Some states . 
copy copy some cut
Figure 5: Pop-up menu on ' three bilge pumps ' The spans in boldface indicate where tile network is still incomplete  . Other spans of text represent specific objects in the network  . For instance , the span ' three bilgepumps ' is associated with a plural object of the type ' bilgepump '  . When the user clicks 12In order to keep the example transparent , not all information in the network has been represented  . Attribute names on the edges , attributes without a value which arc not expressed in the feedback text and the mapping fi ' om objects to their logical contexts have been ommited  . 
on this span , tile menu of Figure 5 . pops up . Let us assume that the user selects ' copy ' . In that case , the object which is associated with the span is saved in a buffer  . Subsequently , the user can click on the span ' Some equipment ' . This cause stile following menu to pop up :
I insert new past e
Now , file user can paste the object from tile buffer into tlle location in tile network which is associated with ' Some equipment '  . This gives rise to the network in figure 6 and the following feedback text : ( 12 ) A solid bulk carrier is fitted with three bilge pumps  . They ax'e used for fire fighting . Some states , ? conjunction fitted with ? ? conjunction carrier S ? lidbulk / ~ bilgeZl ? ~ purpose pump ? Z  . . states fire_fighting v 1 3
Figure 6: Network underlying (12)
Note that nowtile first attributes of both ' fitted_with'aud'purpose'point to the same object  . In the feedback text , this is expressed by using a pronoun for the second reference to the object  . 
Van Deemter and Power ( 1998 ) originally defined the ' copy ' operation for singular objects  . When we move to plurals , alternatives to a simple copy operation become available  . Here , we want to discuss one of those operations , i . e . , copying part of an object , instead of the entire object . Let us return to ( l1) . Suppose that the user had chosen ' copy some ' on the menu of Figure  5  . The effect would have been that a new object would have been created in the buffer with its attribute ' part_of'pointing to the object conesponding to ' three bilgepumps '  ( its ' quant ' attribute would still have to be filled ill  )  . Pasting this object in totile location marked by ' Some equipment ' would have yielded the following result : pumps  . Some number of them is used for fire-lighting . Some states . 
Note that the text contains an anchor for the yet to be specified value of the ' quant ' attribute  . Clicking on the anchor activates the following menu : Selection of ' one ' yields the following text  , which is generated from the network in Figure 7: ( 14 ) A solid bulk carrier is fitted with three bilge pumps  . One of them is used for firefighting . 
Some states.
* conjunction fitted with ?/ f solid bulk / carrier 
V ,   , bilgeJ -- bilge , pumpz ~? purp ? se\[&pump ~ Z .  ~,~ . . o ~ 4 I states ? fire_fighting t
Figure 7: Network underlying ( 14 ) 4 Conclusions In this papel , we have described some editing operations on object-oriented networks with plural objects and provided a Deeise formal interpretation for these networks in terms of a version of Discourse Representation Theory  . The networks which we have used are an extension of commonly used oo networks for natural language generation  . In particulm , our networks cover quantificational plural noun phrases such'most N '  , ' fewN ' , etc . 
Acknowledgements The research reported in this paper was carried out as part of the ECEs prit funded CLIME proiect  ( EP25 . 414) . Thanks are due to Lynne Cahill , Roger Evans and Neil Tipper for stimulating co -of  , eration within the CLIME temnat the University of Brighton  . Furthermore , i would like to thank Alexander Boer , Kcesvail Deemtcr , Rodger Kibble , Richard Power and two anonynlous COLING reviewers for commenting on earlier versions of tiffs paper  . 

Barwise , J . & P , . Cooper ( I981) , Generalized Quantifiers and Natural Language , in : Linguistics and Philosophy 4 . 
Dale , R . (1992), Generating Referring Expressions , M1T
Press , Cambridge.
Kamp , 1t . & U . Reyle (1993) , From Discourse to Logic , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht . 
Keenan , E . & D . West crst fihl (1997) , Generalized quantifiers in linguistics and logic , ill : Van 13 en them , J . & A . ter Meulen , Handbook of Logic and Language , Elsevim , 
Amsterdam , 837-894.
Kibble , R . , P , . Power & K . van l ) eemt cr (1999) , Editing logically complex discourse meanings , in : Proceedings of 1 WCSII1 ,  147-162 . 
Kmhmel ; E . & K . vanl)ccmter (1998) , ' On the Interpretation of Anaphoric Noun Phrases  '  . in : Journal of Semantics , 15(3/4), 355-392 . 
l , and man , F . (1989), G , ' oupsI and II . in : Linguistics and Philosophy ,  12 ,  559-605 , 723-744 . 
Lappin , S .  (1988) , The Semantics of ' Many ' as a Weak Determiner , in : Linguistics ,  26 ,  1021-1037 . 
Link , G .  (1983) , The Logical Analysis of l ) lurals and Mass Terms . in : Baeucrle , R . , C . Schwarze & A . yonStc chow(eds . ), de Gmyter , P , erlin/New York , 303-323 . 
Parsons , T . (1990), Events in the Semantics of English . The
M1T Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts.
Piwek , P .  (1997) , Accent Interpretation , Anaphora P , csolution and hnplicature l ) erivation , in : The Proceedings of lhe 1 lth Amsterdmn Colloquium , University of Amsterdam ,  5560 . 
Piwek , P . , R . Ewms , L . Cahill & N . Tippe ,  (2000) , Natural Language Generation in the MILl-System , in : Proceedings of the IMPACTS in NLG Workshol ) , Schlosst ) agstuhl , Germany . 
Powe , ', R . , 1) . Scott and P, . Evans (1998) , What Yott See IsWhat You Meant , Proceedings of ECAI98 , \]h'ighton , 

Powcl ; R .  (1999) , Controlling logical scope in text generation , Proceedings of the European Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , Toulouse , France . 
P , eitct ; E . & P , . Dale (2000) , B t , ilding Natural Language Generation Systems , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 
Sowa , J . (19841, Conceptual Structures , Addison Wesley,
Reading , Massachusetts.
Stone , M .  (1999) , Describing Sets with Covers and Sets of Ofdinary Assigmnents  , in : Proe . of The Generation Nominal Expressions , workshop associated with ESSLLI99 . 
Vanl ) eemter , K . and R . Power (1998) , Corefe , ' enee in knowledge editing , in : Proceedings of the COLING ACL workshop on the Computational Treatment of  . Nominals,
Montreal Canada , 56-60.
Van Eijck , J .  (1983) , l ) is course Representation Theory and l ) lurality . In : ter Meulen , A . ( ed . ) Studies in Model theo-relic Semantics , For is , GRASS-I . 
Westcrstfihl , D . (1985), l ) eterminers and ContextSets . in : J . 
van Benthem and A . ter Meulen ( eds . ) Generalized Quantiliers in Natural Language , For is , GRASS-4 . 

