Japanese Named Entity Extraction Evaluat ion 
-Analysis of Results -
Satoshi Sekine
Computer Science Department
New York University
715 Broadway , 7th floor
New York , NY 10003, USA
sekine@cs , nyu.edu
Yoshio Eriguchi
Research and Development Headquarters
NTT Data Corporation
1-21-2, Shinkawa , Chuo-ku,
Tokyo , 104-0033, Japan
eriguchi ~ rd , ntt data , co.jp
Abstract
We will report on one of the two tasks in the IREX  ( Information Retrieval and Extraction Exercise ) project , a new ~ luation-based project fbr Infbrmation Retriewfl and Intbrmation Extraction in Japanese  ( Sekine and Isahara , 2000) ( IREX Committee ,  1999) . The project stm'ted in 1998 and concluded in September 1999 with many participants and collaborators ( 45 groups in total from Japan and the US )  . In this paper , the NmnedEntity(NE ) task is reported . It is a task to extract NE's , such as names of organizations , persons , locations and artifacts , time expressions and numeric expressions from news-p~t  ) erarticles . First , we will explain the task and the definition , as well as the data we created and the results . Second , the analyses of the results will be described , which include analysis of task diifieulty across the NE types and sys-tern types  , amflys is of dolna in dependency and comparison to hm nanper ~ brmance  . 
1 Introduction
The need for II1 and IE technologie sigetting larger because of the improvements ill computer technology and the appearance of the Internet  . 
Many researchers in the field feel that theew ~ l -uation based projects in the USA  , MUC ( MUC
Home page , 1999) and TREC ( TREC Home-page ,  2000) , have played a very important role in each field . In Japan , however , while there has been good research , we have had some dilficul-ties comparing systems based on the same platform  , since our researd t is conducted at many different  ; Ulfiversities , companies , and laboratories using different data and evaluation lnea-sures  . Our goal is to have a common platform in order to evaluate systems with the stone standard  . We believe such projects are nseflfl not only for comparing system performance lint also to address the following issues :  1  ) To share and exchange problems among researchers , 2) To a eeulnt ll ~ , telarge quantities of data ,  3 ) To let other people know the importance and the quality of IR and IE techniques  . 
Finishing the project , we believe we achieved these goals . 
In this paper we will describe one of the two tasks in the IR  . EX project , the Nmned Entity task . 
2IREXNE 2.1 Task
Named Entity extraction involves finding Named Entities  , such as names of organizations , persons , locations , and artifimts , time expressions , and numeric expressions , uchas money and percentage expressions . It is one of the ha-sictechniques used in IR and IE  . At the ewfl-uation , participants were asked to identit\[y NE expressions as correctly as possible  . In order to avoid a copyright I ) roble In , we made a tool to convert a tagged text to a set of tag off'set information and wc only exchanged tagott  ; et int brlnation . 
2.2 Definition
The definition of NE's is given in an 18-page document , which is available through the II1EX home page ( IREX Home page ,  1999) . There are 8 kinds of NE's shown in ' lh fl ) le 1 . In order to avoid requiring a unique decision ~ brambiguous cases where even aln nnan could not tag unambiguously  , we introduced a tag " OPTIONAL ''1 . If a system tags an expression 1This tag is newly introduced in IREX and does not exist in MUC  . The tag accounts for 5 . 7% of all NE occur-ORGANIZATION The Di et , 1 REX Commit ; tee
PERSON Sekine , \?akanohana
LOCATION Japan , '\] bkyo,Mt.Fuji
ARTIFACT Pentiuln II , Nobel Prize
DATE March 5, 1.965; Yesterday
TIME11 PM , nfidnight
MONEY 100 yen , $12, 345
PERCENT 1 . 0% , a half ~ i ~ ble 1: NE Classes within the OPTIONAL tag , it ; is just ignored forth . escoring . The defilfition was created 1 ) ased on the MUC/MET definition ; however , the process of lnaking the definition was not easy  . In par-ticula I ' , the definition of the newly introduced NE tyl ) e " artifact " was Colitroversial . W'eadmit that more consideration is needed to make a clem ' er definition of the NE typos  . 
Comparing the NE task in Japanese to that in English  , one of the ditIiculties comes from the fact that there is no word del in fiter in Japanese  . 
Sysl ; elns have to identity the ) oundaries of expressions . This will 1 ) ecome complicated when we want to tag a sul ) string of what ix generally considered a , Japanes ( ~ wor(t , l/or ( ~ xaml)le , i l . t . Jal ) alleset here is a word " Ratnich ? " which means " Visil  ; 3 apa . n " and consists of two Chinese e h . aracters , " Ra ?"( Visit ;) and " Nichi " ( abbreviation of . Japan ) . Althoughmmly word seg-reenters ident if ~ yit as a single  , word , we expect to extrtmt only " Nichi " as a local ; ion . '\]' his is a tricky prol ) lem , as opposed to the ease in English where a word is the unit of NE candidates  . 
2+3 Runs and Data
There were three kinds of NE exercises , the dry run , are stricted ( hml Mntbrmal rtm , and a general domain tbl ' mal 1'1111 , which will be explained later . Also we created three kinds of training ( h~ta : the dry run trailfing data , the CI . L_NE data and the formal run domain restricted trail > ing data  . Td)le2 shows the size of each dataset . 
Note that CRL_NE ( latal ) elongs to the Colllnltt-nicationll . esearch Laboratory ( CIL ) , but it is ronces ill the gener Mdolnaill ev Muation and  2  . 1% in the restricted omaine , valuation ( the t . ypes of the evaluation will be explained later ) . 
ineht(tedill the tat)le , because the data was created by IREX participants  , using the definition of IIEX-NE , +rod distributed through I \] , EX . 
Data Number of articles
Dry Runtraining
Dryt . hm
CIIL_NE data
D ) rlnall ' lln ( restricted ) training
Formal run ( restricted )
Formal run ( general ) 1 . 174 ~ nor ( let to ensure the , fairness of the exercise in the formal \]' un ~ we used newspaper articles which no one hade w~r seen  . We , set the date to fl ' eeze the system development ( April 13 ,  1999) . 
The date for the evahtation was set one month after that  ( lat ; e(May 13 to \] 7 ,  1999 ) so that we could select the test m'ticles fl'om the  1  ) criedt ) etween those dates . \? e thank the Mainichi Newspaper Cor I ) oration for provi ( ling this data forust \]: ee of charge . 
2 . 4 Restricted domain in the fbrmal run , in order to study system portability and the effect of domains on NE perfoilllanc  ( ' , , we had two kinds of evaluation : rest ; riote domain and general domMn . In the general domaine wth tation , w ( , selected articles regardless of dolna in . The domain of the restricted domain evaluation was a  . lmouneed one month before the develolmmnt freeze date  . It ; was an " arrest ; " domain defined as follows and 211 the articles in the restricte domain are selected based on the definition  . 
77 rearticles arc ' related to an e ' u cnt " , , frost " . The event is defined as th , ca'r'rc . st of a . suspect o1's'~t , 5' pects by police , National \]) olicc , State police of other police forces including the o'ncs of foreign countries  . It includes articles mentionirtg a narrest event in the past  . It : excludes articles which have only i'n : formation about requesting a narrest warrant  , art accusation or sending the pape'rspc'training to a case to an Attorney's OJJicc  . 
1107 2 . 5 Results 8 groups and 11 systems participated in the dry run , and 14 groups and 15 systems participated in the % rmal run 2  . Tim evaluation results were made public anonymously using systeln ID's  . Table 3 shows the ew ~ luation results ( Fmeasure ) of the formal run . Fmeasure is calculated from recall and precision ( IREX Coin-mittee ,  1999) . It ranges from 0 to 100 , and the larger the better
System ID 12501) general 57 . 69 80 . 05 66 . 60 70 . 34 66 . 74 72 . 18 75 . 30 77 . 37 57 . 63 74 . 82 71 . 96 60 . 96 83 . 86 69 . 82 57 . 76 restrict 54 . 17 78 . 08 59 . 87 80 . 37 74 . 56 74 . 90 77 . 61 85 . 02 64 . 81 81 . 94 72 . 77 58 . 46 87 . 43 70 . 12 55 . 24 diff . 
-3 . 52 -1 . 97 -6 . 73 +10 . 03 +7 . 82 +2 . 72 +2 . 31 +7 . 65 +7 . 18 +7 . 12 +0 . 81 -2 . 50 +3 . 57 +0 . 30 -2 . 5 2 ~li ~ ble 3: NE Formal run result 3 Analyses of the results 3  . 1 Difficulty across NE type In Table 4 , tile Fmeasure of the best performing system is shown in the " Best " column  ; the average Fmeasures are shown in the " Average " column t breach NE type on the formal runs  . It can be observed that identifying time and nu -lneric expressions is relatively easy  , as the average Fmeasures are more than 80% . In contrast , the accuracy of the other types of NE is not so good  . Ill particular , artifacts are quite difficult to identify . It is interesting to see that tagging artifacts in the general domain is  mud1 harder thins in the restricted domain . This is because of the limited types of artifacts in the restricted domain  . Most of the artifacts in the 2The participation to the dry run was not obligatory . 
This is why the number of participants is smaller in the dry run than that in the form alrmL restricte domain are the names of laws  , as the do in ain is the arrest domain . Systems lnight be able to find such types of names easily because they could be recognized by a small number of simple patterns or by a short list  . The types of timartifacts in the general donm in are quite diverse  , including names of prizes , novels , ships , or paintings . It n fight be difficult to build patterns for these itelns  , or systems may need very complicated rules or large dictionaries  . 
3.2 Three types of systems
Based on the questionnaire for the particit ) ants we gatlmred alter the formal runs , we found that there are three types of systems . 
? H and created pattern based
These are pattern based systems where the patterns are created by hand  . A typical system used prefix , sutlqx and proper noun dictionaries . Patterns in these systems look like " If proper nouns are followed by a suffix of person name  ( for example , a common suflqxlike " San " , which is a hnost equivalent to Mr . and Ms . ) then the proper nouns are at ) ersonnmne " . This type of system was very common ; there were 8 systems in this category . 
? Automatically created pattern based
These are pattern based systems where some or all of the patterns are created an-tolnatically using a training corl  ) us . There were three systems in this category , and these systems used quite different methods . One of them used the " error driven method " , in which hand created patterns were applied to tagged training data and the system learned from tlm mistakes  . Another system learned patterns for a wide range of information  , including , syntax , verb frame and discourse information fl'om training data  . The last system used the local context of training data and several filters were applied to get more accurate patterns  . 
Fully automatic
Systems in this category created their knowledge automatically from a training corpus  . There were four systems in this category . These systems basic Mly tried to assign one of the four tags  , beginning , middle or ending of an NE , or out-of NE , to
Orgmfization 78
Person 87
Location 8d :
Artifact 44
Date 90
Time 82
Money 86
Percent 84
Total 84
General domain
Average Expert 57   96   68   99   70   98   26   90   86   98   83   97   86   100   86   97   70   98 

Table 4: Results
Restrict domain
Average Novice Expert each word or each character . The source information for the training was typically character type  , POS , dictionary in % rma-tion or lexical information . A stile learning meclmnism , Maximmn Entrot ) y models , decision trees , and HMMs were used . 
It is interesting to see that tile top three systems came  , fi'om each category ; the best system was a hand create , d pattern based system , tile second system was an automatically created pattern based system and the third system was a fully automatic system  . So we believe we cannot conclude which type is SU l  ) erior to the eth-el'S . 
Analyzing the results of the top three sys-to , ms , we observed the , importance of tile dictionaries . The best hand created pattern based system seems to have a wide coverage dictionary for person  , organization and location names and achieved very good accuracy t br those categories  . Howe . ver , the hand created pattern based system failed to capture the evahmtion specific pattenls like " the middle of April "  . Systems wore required to extract the entire ex-1 ) ression as a date expression , but ; the system only extracted " April " . The best hand created rule based system , as well as the best~m to lnat-ically created patternlmsed system also missed other specific patterns which in chlde abbreviations  ( " Rai-Nichi "= Visit-Japan )  , conjmm-tions of locations (" Nichi-Be ?"= , \] alton-US ) , and street ; addresse , s (" Meguroku , 0 okayama 2-12-1") . The best hilly autolnatic system was successflfl in extracting lllOSt of these specific patterns  . However , the flflly automatic system has a probleln in its coverage  . In lmrticular , the training data was newspaper articles published in  1994 and the test ; data was fro 151 1999 , so there are several new names , e . g . the prilnem in-ister's name which is not so co1111noll   ( 0 buchi ) and a location nmnelike " Kosovo " , wl fich were rarely mentioned in 1994 but apt ) eared a lot in 1999 .  ' . Fhe system missed many of them . 
3.3 Domain dependency
In Table 3 , the differences in performance between the general domain and the restricted o-main ~ r  ( ' shown ill the cohmm " diff . " . Many systems 1 ) erfl ) nne ( l better in the restri ( : ted domain , although ~ small nt ll nl ) er of systems per-for lned better ill the genera \] domain  . There were two systems which intentiomflly tuned their systems towards the restricted domain  , which are shown in bold in the table . Both of these were alnong the systelns which perfbrlned much better  ( more than 7% ) ill the restrict e . d domain . The system which achieved the largest improvement was a fully automatic system  , and it only replaced the training data for the domain restricted task  ( so this is an intentionally tuned system )  . It shows the domain dependency of the task , although further investigation is needed to see why some other systems can perform nmch better even without domain tinting  . 
3.4 Comparison to human performance
In Table 4 , hulllan performance is shown in the " Novice " and " Expert " cohtmns  . " Novice " mean stile average Fmeasure of three graduate students all  ( l " l ; xpert " means the average Fmeasure of the two people who were most rethe answer  . They frst created two answers independently and checked them by themselves  . 
The results after the checking are shown in the table  , so many careless mistakes were deleted at this time  . We Call say that 98-99 Fmeasure is the performance of experts who create them very carefully  , and 94 is a usual person's perf of lnance . 
We can find a similar pattern of performance among different NEs  . Hmnans also performed more poorly for artifacts and very well for time and numeric expressions  . 
Tile difference t ) etween the best system performance and huln an perfbrlnance is  7 or more Fmeasure , as opposed to the case in English where the top systems perform at  , a level comparable or superior to human perforn lancc  . There could be several reasons for this . One obvious reason is that we introduced a ditficult NE type  , artifact ~ which degrades the overall performance more for the system side than the lmman side  . 
Also , the difficulty of identifying the expression boundaries may contribute to the difference  . Finally , we believe that the systems can possibly improve , as IREX was the first evaluation based project in Japanese  , whereas in English the retrove been 7 MUC's and tile technology may have matured by now . 
5 Acknowledgment
We would like to thank all the participants of IREX projects  . The project would never have been as successful as it was without the participants  , all of whom were very cooperative and constructive  . 

IREX Committee 1999 Proceedings of the
IREX Workshop
Satoshi Sekine , Hitoshi Isahara .   2000 : " IREX:IR and IE Ewdnation Project in Japanese " Proceedings of the  LREC2000 coT@fence
IREX Hornepage http://cs . nyu . edu/projects/proteus/irex MUC Home page http:/ / www  . muc . saic . com/
TREC Home page trec.nist.gov /
NTCIRH(nneI ) age httl)://www . rd . nacsis . ac . jp/fitcadm / ind ex-en . html
TSC t tome I ) age httl , :// alga . jaist . ac . j p:S000/tsc  /  4 Conclusion We reported on tile NE task of tim IREX project  . We first explained tile task and the definition , as well a . sthed ~ tawe created and the results . The analyses of the result were described , which include analysis of task ditficulty across the NE types and system types  , analysis of domain dependency and comparison to human performance  . 
As this is one of the first projects of this type in  , Japan , we may have a lot to do ill the future and holmflfly tile results of tile project will be beneficial for fllture projects  . A stile next step , II / , EX will be merged with a similar project NTCIR ( NTCIR Home page , 2000) which places more eml ) has is on IR . , with a newly created project for sumlnarization , TSC ( TSC Home page ,  2000) , and contil me this kind of effort fortile fllture . 

