An Empirical Investigation of the Relation Between Discourse Structure and 

Dan Cristea
Department of Computer Science
University " A.I . Cuza "
Ia ~ i , Romania
dcristea@infoiasi,m
Daniel Marcu
Information Sciences Institute and
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles , CA , USA
matwig@isi.edu
Nancy Ide
Department of Computer Science
Vassar College
Poughkeepsie , NY , USA
ide@cs.vassal:edu
Valentin Tablan *
Department of Computer Science
University of Sheffield
United Kingdom
v.tablan@she J .' field , ac.uk

We compare the potential of two classesel' linear and hierarchical models of discourse to determine coreference links and resolve anaphors  . The comparison uses a colpus of thirty texts , which were manually annotated for coreference and discourse structure  . 
1 Introduction
Most current anaphora resolution systems implelnent a pipeline architecture with three modules  ( Lappin and Leass , 1994; Mitkov , 1997; Kameyama ,  1997) . 
1 . ACOLLF . CT module determines a list of potential antecedents  ( LPA ) for each anaphor ( l ~ ronourl , deli-nile noun , proper name , etc . ) that have the potential to resolve it . 
2 . AFILTI ~ , P , module eliminates referees incompatible with the anaphor fi'om the LPA  . 
3 . APP , EFERENCE module determines the most likely antecedent on the basis of an ordering policy  . 
In most cases , the COLLECT module determines an LPA by enumerating all antecedents in a window  o1' text that precedes the anaphor underscrutiny ( Hobbs , 1978; Lappin and Leass , 1994; Mitkov , 1997; Kameyama , 1997; Ge et al ,  1998) . This window can be as small as two or three sentences or as large as the entire preceding text  . The FILTEP , module usually impose semantic on-straints by requiring that the anaphor and potential antecedents have the same number and gendm  ; that selectional restrictions are obeyed , etc . The PREFERENCE module imposes preferences on potential antecedents on the basis of their grammatical roles  , parallelism , fi'equency , proximity , etc . In some cases , anaphora resolution systems implementhese modules explicitly  ( Hobbs , 1978; Lappin and Leass , 1994; Mitkov , * On leave fi'om lhe Faculty of Computer Science , University " AI . I . 
Cuza " of lasi.
1997; Kameyama , 1997) . In other cases , these modules are integrated by means of statistical  ( Ge et al ,  1998 ) or uncertainty reasoning tecl miques ( Mitkov ,  1997) . 
The fact that current anaphora resolution systems rely exclusively on the linear nature of texts in order to determine the LPA of an anaphor seems odd  , given flint several studies have claimed that there is a strong relation between discourse structure and reference  ( Sidner , 1981; Grosz and Sidner , 1986; Grosz et al , 1995; Fox , 1987; Vonkctal . , 1992; Azzamelal . , 1998; Hitzcman and Pocsio , 1998) . These studies claim , on the one hand , that the use of referents in naturally occurring texts imposes constraints on the interpretation f discourse  ; and , on the other , that the structure of discourse constrains the LPAs to which anaphors can be resolved  . The oddness of the situation can be explained by lh of ac ! that both groups seem prima filciem be right  . Empirical experiments studies that employ linear techniques for determining the LPAs  o1' alm phol's report recall and precision anaphora resolution results in the range of  80%   ( Lappin and Leass , 1994; Gectal . , 1998) . Empirical experiments that investigated the relation between discourse structure and reference also claim that by exploiting the structure of discourse one has the potential of determining correct coreferential links for more than  80% of the referential expressions ( Fox , 1987; Cristca et al , 1998) although to date , no discourse-based anaphora resolution system has been implemented  . Since no direct comparison of these two classes of approaches has been made  , it is difficult to determine which group is right  , and what method is the best . 
In this paper , we attempto I ill this gap by empirically comparing the potential of linear and hierarchical models el ' discourse to correctly establish coreferential links in texts  , and hence , their potential to correctly resolve anaphors . Since it is likely that both linear-and discourse-based anaphora resolution systems can implement similar FILTER and PI~  , I~FERENCE strategies , we focus here only on the strategies that can be used to COL-ct  , son deterlnining whether discourse llteories can help an anaphora resolution system detemfine LPAs that are " better " than the LPAs that can be contputed from a linear interpretation f texts  . Section 2 outlines the theoretical assumption so fotu " empirical investigation  . Section 3 describes our experiment . We conclude with a discussion of tile results . 
2 Background 2.1 Assumptions
Our approach is based on the following assmnptions : I  . For each anaphor in a text , an anaphora resolution system must produce an LPA that contains a referent to which  111e anaphor can be resolv cd . The size of this LPA wuies fronl system to system  , depending on tile theory a system implements . 
2 . The smaller the I , PA ( while retaining a correct antecedent ) , the less likely that errors ill the \]7 tI , TH : ( lid PI' , V , I ; F , RI ; , NCI ~ , modules will affect the ability of a system to select the appropriate referent  . 
3 . Theory A is better than lheory B for the task of rel-erence resolution if theory A produces IJ ' As that contain more antecedent so which amt phors can be corrcclly resolved than theory B  , and if the l , l ~ As produced by theory A arc smaller than those pro-duccd by theory B  . l ; or cxaml ) lc , if for a given anaphor , theory A produces an I , PA thai contains a referee to which the anaphor can be resolved  , while theory B produces an IJ ~ A that does not contain such are\[eree  , theory A is better than theory B . 
Moreover , if for a given anaphor , theory A produces an Lt ) A wilh two referees and theory B produces an LPA with seven rel ' crees  ( each LPA containing a referee to which tile an al ) her can be resolved )  , lheory A is considered better than theory 11 because it has a higher probability of solving that anaphor correctly  . 
We consider two classes of models for determining the 
LPAs of anaphors illatext :
Linear-k models . This is at class of linear models in which the LPAs include all the references foulad in the discourse unit underscrutiny and the k discourse units that immediately precede it  .   Linear-0 models an approach that assumes that : tll anaphors can be resolved intra-unit  ; Linear-1 models an approach that cor , ' esponds roughly to centering ( Grosz et al ,  1995) . Linear-kisconsistent with the asslunl ) tions that underlie most current anaphora resohltion systems  , which look backhunits in order to resolve an anaphor  . 
l ) is course-V1:k models . In his class ()1' models , LPAs include alllherefcrent M expressions fotm d in the discourse unit underscrutiny and the k discourse units that hierarchically precede it  . The units that hierarchically precede a given unit are determined according to Veins Theory  ( VT )   ( Cristea et al ,  1998) , which is described brielly below . 
2.2 Veins Theory
VT extends and formalizes the relation between discourse structure and reference proposed by Fox  ( 1987 )  . 
It identilies " veins ", i . e . , chains of elementary discourse units , over discourse structure trees that are built according to the requirements put for thin Rhetorical Structure Theo  , y(RST ) ( Mann and Thompson ,  1988) . 
One of the conjectures ( ) 1' VT is that the vein expression of an elementary discourse unit provides a coherent " abstract " of the discourse fi'agm cn that contains that unit  . As an internally coherent discottrse fragment , most ( )1' the anaphors and referentM expressions ( REst in a unit must be resolved to referees that oceul " in the text subs:used by the units in tilevein  . This conjecture is consistent with Fox's view ( 1987 ) that the units that contain referees to which anaphors can be resolved are determined by the nuclearity of the discourse units thal precede the anaphors and the overall structure of discourse  . According to V'I ; REs of both satellites and nuclei can access referees of hierarchically preceding nt  , -cleus nodes . REs of nuclei can mainly access referees of preceding nuclei nodes and of directly subordinated  , preceding satellite nodes . And the interposition ( ) 1' a nucleus after a satellite block stim accessibility of the satellite for all nodes that att'elovcer in the corresponding discourse structure  ( see ( Cristea et al , 1998) for a full delinition ) . 
Hence , the fundamental intuition unde , lying VT is that the RST-sp ceilie distinction between nuclei and satellites constrains the range of referents to which anaphors can  19e resolved ; in other words , the nucleus-satellite distinction induces for each anaphor  ( and each referential expression ) a Do , naita of Refcrenlial Accessibility ( DRA ) . For each anaphora in a discourse unit ~ z , VT hypothesizes that a can be resolved by examining referential expressions that were used in a subset  o1' the discourse units that precede it ; this subset is called the DRA of u . For any elcntentary unit u in a text , the corresponding DRA is computed autonmtically from the rhetorical representation f that text in two steps :  1  . l teads for each node are computed bottom-up over the rhetorical representation tree  . Heads ( ) 1" elementary discottrset raits are the traits themselves  . Heads of internal nodes , i . e . , discourse spans , are con > pt , ted by taking the union of the heads of the immediate child nodes that : ire nuclei  . For example , for the text in Figure I , whose rhetorical structure is shown in Figure 2 , the head ()1' span 115 , 711 is unit 5 because the head ( ) t ' the inmmdiate nucleus , the elementary unit 5 , is 5 . However , the head of span 116 , 7\] is the list (6 , 7 ) because both immediate children are nuclei of a multinuclear relation  . 
2 . Using the results of step 1 , Vein expressions are e Omlm ted top down l breach node in the tree  . The vein of the root is its head . Veins of child nodes . . . . . . get , moved te CG e ~ Therapy In ~ , a small biotechnology concern here ,  2 . to become_~_t > president and chieCoperating officer  .  \[ 3 . \[ Mr . Casey , 46 years old , \] was\[president of J&J's McNeil Pharmaceutical subsidiary  , \]* t . which was merged with another J&J unit , OrthoPharm aceutical Corp . , this year in a cost-cutting move . 
5 . I , Ir . Casev\[succeeds M . James Barrett ,  50 , as\[president of ~ , ~netic Ther-ap ~ . 
6 . Mr . Barrett remains chief executive officer 7 . and becomes chain a an . 
8 . \[ Mr-\]r . Casey \] said 9 . ~made the move te\]e smaller compan ~ i0 . because ~ saw health care moving toward technologies like products  . 
ll . U believe that the field is emerging and i ~ prepared to break loose  ,  12 . \[he\[said . 
Figure 1: An example of text and its elementary units . 
The ' eferential expressions surrounded by boxes and ellipses correspond to two distinct coreferential equivalence classes  . Referential expression surrounded by boxes refer to Mr : Casey  ; those surrounded by ellipses refer to Genetic The rcq~y Inc  . 
are computed recursively according to tile rules described by Cristea et al  ( 1998 )  . The DRA ot " a unit u is given by the units that precede u in  1t~e vein . 
For example , for the text and RST tree in Figures 1 and 2 , the vein expression of unit 3 , which contains units 1 and 3 , suggests that anaphors from unit 3 should be resolved only to referential expressions in units  1 and 3  . Because unit 2 is a satellite to unit 1 , it is considered to be " blocked " to referential links fi'om trait  3  . In contrast , tile DRA of unit 9 , consisting o1' units1 ,  8 , and 9 , reflects the intuition that anaphors l ? om unit 9 can be resolved only to referential ext ) ressions fi'om unit 1 , which is the most important trait in span \ [1 , 7\] , and to unit 8 , a satellite that immediately precedes unit 9 . Figure 2 shows the heads and veins of all internal nodes in the rhetorical representation  . 
2.3 Comparing models
The premise underlying out " experiment is that there are potentially significant differences in the size of the search space rcquired to resolve referential cxpressions when using Linear models vs  . Discou'se-VT models . For example , for text and tile RST tree in Figures 1 and 2 , the Discourse-VT model narrow stlle search space required to resolve the amphor the smaller company in unit  9  . 
According to VT , we look l brpotential antecede Us for the smaller company in the DRA of unit  9  , which lists units I ,  8 , and 9 . The antecedent Genetic Therapy Inc . 
appears in unit 1; therefore , using VT we search back 2 units ( units 8 and 1 ) to lind a correct antecedent . In contrast , to resolve the same reference using a linear model  , four units ( units 8 ,  7 ,  6 , and 5) must he examined before Genetic The ; zq ? y is found . Assuming that referential links are established a stile text is processed  , Genetic Therapy would be linked back to pronottn its in unit  2  , which would in turn be linked to the first occurrence of the antecedent  , Genetic Therapy Inc . , in unit 1 , tile antecedent determine directly by using V'E In general  , when hierarchical adjacency is considered , an anaphor may be resolved to a referent hat is not the closest in a linear interpretation of a text  . Simihu ' ly , are f-erential expression can be linked to a referee that is not the closest in a linear interpretation of a text  . However , this does not create problems because we are focusing here only on coreferential relations of identity  ( see section 3 )  . Since these relations induce equivalence classes overtile set of referential expressions in a text  , it is suf\[i-cient that an anaphor or referential expression is resolved to any of the members of the relevant equiwlence class  . 
For example , according to V'I , the referential expression MI : Casey in unit 5 in Figm'e 1 can be linked directly only to the referee Mr Casey in unit  1  , because the DRAo1'unit5 is 1 , 5 . By considering the coreferential links of the REs in the other units  , tilefull equivalence class can be determined . This is consistent with tile distinction between " direct " and " indirect " references discussed by 
Cristea , et al (1998).
3 The Experiment 3.1 Materials
We used thirty newspaper texts whose lengths varied widely  ; the meano-is 408 words and tile standarde-viation/t is 376  . Tile texts were annotated manually for coreference rlations of identity  ( Hirschman and Chin-chef ,  1997) . Tile coreference relations define equivalence classes oil the set of all marked referents in a text  . Tile texts were also manually annotated by Marcu et al  ( 1999 ) with disconrse structures built in the style of Mann and Thompson  ( 1988 )  . Each discourse analysis yielded an average of 52 elementary discourse units . 
See ( Hirschman and Chinchor , 1997) and ( Marcu et al , 1999) for details of tile annotation processes . 

H = 19*
V = lg*tI = l "? r . . . = 19* . . . . . . .
H = IL----V = lg*_..........
H = i ~:-.,,-
V 19:+:~f- .   .   .   .   . ~''-~% l .  3 5 9 * 1 2 3 4


DF ~,= 13___-------~__------___
I-_I
H = 5-----___';,~=159* q_L___=67 . _~-"-"-\;=xt ,, 5679*5//%,,\67
H = 9"?"=19*
IH = 9i . . . . ila - - - - . . . . . . . .

V = 19"~~---- .   .   .   . -- i2125\[-13-213 919 1011*\"=1(g)9
DRA = 11 12
Figure 2: The I ) , ST analysis of the text in ligure I . The trcc is rcprescnted using the conventions proposed by Mann and Thompson  ( 1988 )  . 
3 . 2 Compar ing potent ia l to es tab l i sh co - re ferential links  3  . 2 . 1 Method The annotations for coreference rchttions and rhetorical struclure trues for the thirty texts were fused  , yielding representations that r cllect not only tile discourse strut-lure  , but also the coreference quivalenc classesspe -citic to each t c x l  . Based on this information , we cval-ualed the potential of each of the two classes  ( 51" models discussed in secd on 2 ( Linear-k and Discourse-VT-k ) to correctly establish coreferential links as follows : For each model  , each k , and each marked referential expression o . , we determined whether or not tlle corresponding LPA  ( delined over k elementary units ) contained a referee from the same equiw dence class  . For example , for the Linear-2 model and referential expression lhe . vmaller company in t , nit 9 , we estimated whether a co-refer cntial link could be established between the smaller company and another referential expression in units  7  ,  8 , or 9 . 
For the Discourse-VT-2 model and the same referential expression , we estimated whether a coreferential link could bEestablished between the smaller company and another eferential expression in units  1  ,  8 , or 9 , which correspond to the DRA of unit 9 . 
q benable a fair comparison of the two models , when k is la , 'ger than the size of the DRA of a given unit , WE extend that DRA using the closest units that precede the unit underscrutiny and are not a h ' eady in the DRA  . Hence , for the Linear-3 model and the referential expression the smaller conq ~ any intrait  9  , we estimate whether a coreferential link can be established between the xmaller company and another eferential expression in units  9  ,  8 ,  7 , or 6 . Fortile Discourse-VT-3 model and tiles a mercf-ermltial expression , we estimate wh clher a coreferential link can be established between the smaller company and another eferential expression in units  9  ,  8 ,  1 , or 7 , which correspond I (5 the DRA of mill 9 ( unfls 9 ,  8 , and 1) and to unit 7 , the closest unit preceding unit 9 that is not illils

For the l ) is cottrse-VT-k models , we assume I hat the Fxtended DRA ( EDRA ) of size \] co faun it ~ t .   ( EDRAz : ( '~ ) ) is given by the lh'st 1 _<k units of a sequence that lists , in reverse order , the units of the DRA of ' ~ zplus the/c-l units that precede tt but arc not in its DRA  . 
For example , \[' or the text in Figure 1 , the following relations hold : EDRAc , (!)) = 9; EDRAI(C . )) = 9, 8; EDRA . ,(9) =  . q , 8, I;EI ) RA3(9):=9,8,1,7;I'~DRA . , I(!)) = !), 8, 1, 7, 6 . For Linear-ki node ls , the EDRAz : ( u ) is given by u and the k units that immediately precede ~ t  . 
The potential p(M , a , EDRA , ~ )   ( 5t ' a model M to determine correct coreferential links with respect o a ref-E rential expression a in unit u  , given a corresponding EDRA of size k ( EDRAt . ( u )) , is assigned the value 1 if the EDRA contains a coreferent from the same equiwt-lence class as a  . Otherwise , p(M ,   , , EDRAt ~) is assigned the value O . The potential p(k 4 ,  6' , k ) of a model M to determine correct co-rEferential links for all referential expressions in a corpus of texts C  , using EDRAs of size k , is computed as the SU llloF the potentials p(M , a . , EI ) RA  #) of all referential expressions ct in C ' . 
This potential is normalized to awdue bEtweEn 0 and 1 by dividing p ( k/l , C , k ) by the number ot ' referential By examining the potential of each model to correctly determine coreferential expressions for each k  , it is possible to determine the degree to which an implementation of a given approach can contribute to the overall efficiency of anaphora resolution systems  . That is , if a given model has the potential to correctly determine a significant percentage of coreferential expressions with small DRAs  , an anaphora resolution system implementing that model will have to consider fewer options overall  . Hence , the probability of error is reduced . 
3.2.2 Results
The graph in Figure 3 shows the potentials of the Linear-k and Discourse-VT-k models to correctly determine coreferential links for each k from  1 to 20  . The graph in Figure 4 represent she same potefftials but focuses only onks in the interval  \[2  , 9\] . As these two graph show , the potentials increase monotonically with k , the VT-k models always doing better than the Linear-k models  . Eventually , for largeks , the potential performance of the two models converges to  100%  . 
The graphs in Figures 3 and 4 also suggest resolution strategies for implemented systems  . For example , the graphs suggests that by choosing to work with EDRAs of size  7  , a discourse-based system has the potential of resolving more than  90% of the coreferential links in a text correctly . To achieve the same potential , a linear-based system needs to look back 8 units . If a system does not look back at all and attempts to resolve coreferential links only within the unit underscrutiny  ( k = 0 )  , it has the potential to correctly resolve about 40% of the coreferential links . 
To provide a clearer idea of how the two models differ  , Figure 5 shows , for each k , the value of the Discourse-VT-k potentials divided by the value of the Linear-k potentials  . For k = 0 , the potentials of both models are equal because both use only the unit in focus in order to determine coreferential links  . For k = 1 , the Discourse-VT-1 model is about 7% better than the Linear-!model . 
As the value of k increases , the value Discourse-VT-k/Linear-k converges to 1 . 
In Figures 6 and 7 , we display the number of exceptions , i . e . , coreferential links that Discourse-VT-k and Linear-k models cannot determine correctly  . As one can see , over the whole corpus , for each k_<3 , the Discourse-VT-k models have the potential to determine correctly about  100 more coreferential links than the Linear-k models  . As k increases , the performance of the two models converges . 
3, 2, 3 Statistical significance
In order to assess the statistical significance of the difference between the potentials of the two models to establish correct coreferential links  , we carried out a Paired-Samples TTest for each k  . In general , a Paired-Samples TTest checks whether the mean of casewise differences between two variables differs from  0  . For each text in
IO000%__~_____x.~-.,:..-~'........
a0~? oo~??'~?-.~:.. -.....

40 O0% ? o
EDRA size----VT-k .   .   .   .   .   .   . tmeaf . k Figure 3: The potential of Linear-k and Discourse-VT-k models to determine correct coreferential links  ( 0 < k < 20 )  . 
9"5 . 00% 90 . 00"/,, 85 . 00% 800O % 75 . ( X ~% 70 . 007~ ~ ~  .  - ' " ' " -"'"" --""  . . . .  . .
J 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9
EDI1ABt=~?---13---VT-k-- . If , , . Linear-k Figure 4: The potential of Linear-k and Discourse-VT-k models to determine correct coreferential links  ( 2 < k _ < 9 )  . 
the corpus and each k , we determined the potentials of both VT-k and Linear-k models to establish correct coreferential links in that text  . For ks smaller than 4 , the difference in potentials was statistically significant  . For example , for k = 3, t = 3 . 345, df = 29, P = 0 . 002 . For values of k larger than or equal to 4 , the difference was no longer significant . These results are consistent with the graphs shown in Figure  3 to 7  , which all show that the potentials of Discourse -VT-k and Linear-k models converges to the same value as the value of k increases  . 
3 . 3 Comparing the effort required to establish coreferential links  3  . 3 . 1 Method The methodes cribed in section 3 . 2 . 1 estimates the potential of Linear-k and Discourse-VT-k models to determine correct coreferential links by treating EDRAs as sets  . However , from a computational perspective ( and t . a 6'" .   .   .   . \[/", tl ' . , u0 . 9 ~ o . 97I ~, oo I "'700c , "?"', o'500"- . -"~-~400\'--,"'* x ?"---12~:~: . . . . . .
2 OO~00234567t31 0

Figure 5: A direct comparison of Discourse-VT-k and Linear -VT-k potentials to correctly determine coreferential links  ( 0 < k < 20 )  . 
Figure 7: The number of coreferential links that caunot be correctly determined by Discourse-VT-k and Linear -k models  ( 1 < k < 10 )  . 
14130---~u,~:?~::g~:\[t . .:~g<_ . ~, ~ g : ~ .   .   . t ~_ ~ . ~_~_ ,  . = ~ r,~~
EORA ~ lz ~
Figure 6: The number of coreferential links that cannot be correctly determined by Discourse-VT-k and Linear -k models  ( 0 < /~' < 20 )  . 
presumably , from a psycholinguistic perspective as well ) it also makes sense to compare the effort required by the two classes of models to establish correct coreferential links  . We estimate this effort using a very simple metric that assumes that the closer an antecedent is to a corresponding referential expression in the EDRA  , the better . Hence , in estimating the effort to establish a coreferential link  , we treat EDRAs as ordered lists . For example , using the Linear-9 model , to determine the correct antecedent of the referential expression the smaller company in unit  9 of Figure 1  , it is necessary to search back through 4 units ( to unit 5 , which contains the referent Genetic Therapy ) . Hadunit 5 been Ml : Cassey succeeds M . 
James Barrett ,  50 , we would have had to go back 8 units ( to unit 1 ) in order to correctly resolve the RE the smaller company  . In contrast , in the Discourse-VT-9 model , we go back only 2 units because unit 1 is two units a way fi'om unit 9   ( EDRA : ~ ( 9 )  = 9 ,  8 ,  1 , 7 ,  6 ,  5 , 4 ,  3 ,  2) . 
We consider that the efforte ( AJ , a , EDRA a . ) of a model M to determine correct coreferential links with respectoone referential  , in unit u , given a corresponding EDRA of size L"(EDRA ~ . ( , ) ) is given by the number of units between u and the first unit in EDRAk  ( u ) that contains a co . -referential expression of a . 
The effort e(M , C , k ) of a model M to determine correct coreferential links for all referential expressions in a corpus of texts C using EDRAs of size k was computed as the sum of the efforts e  ( M , a , EDRA k ) of all referen-tia ! expressions a in C . 
3.3.2 Results
Figure 8 shows the Discourse-VT-k and Linear-kefforts computed overall referential expressions in the corpus and allks  . It is possible , for a given referent a and a given k , that no coreferential link exists in the units of the corresponding EDRA a  . . In this case , we consider that the effort is equal to k . As a consequence , for smallks the effort required to establish coreferential links is similar for both theories  , because both can establish only a limited number of links  . However , as k increases , the effort computed over the entire corpus diverges dramatically : using the Discourse-VT model  , the search space for coreferential links is reduced by about  800 units for a corpus containing roughly 1200 referential expressions . 
3.3.3 Statistical significance
A Paired-Samples TTest was performed for each k . For each text in the corpus and each k , we determined the effort of both VT-k and Linear & models to establish correct coreferential links in that text  . For all ks the difference in effort was statistically significant  . For example , for k = T , we obtained the values t = 3 . 5 l , df = 29, P = 0 . 001 . These results are intuitive : because EDRAs are treated as ordered lists and not assets  , the effect of the discourse structure on establishing correct coreferential links is not diminished as /  , ' increases . 
4 Conclusion
We analyzed empirically the potentials of discourse and linear models of text to determine coreferential links  . 
Our analysis suggests that by exploiting the hierarchical structure of texts  , one can increase the potential ~00-k .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
I000 tORA~zQ--VT~ess .   .   .   .   .   .   . ~ oss Figure 8: The effort required by Linear-k and Discourse-VT -k models to determine correct coreferential links  ( 0 < h < 10 0 )  . 
q of natural anguage systems to correctly determine coreferential links  , which is a requirement for correctly resolving anaphors  . If one treats all discourse units in the preceding discourse qually  , the increase is statistically significant only when a discourse-based coreference system looks back at most four discourse units in order to establish coreferential links  . However , if one assumes that proximity plays an important role in establishing coreferential links and that referential expressions are more likely to be linked to referees that were used recently in discourse  , the increase is statistically significant no matter how many units a discourse-based coreference sys~tern looks back in order to establish coreferential links  . 
Acknowledgements . We are grateful to Lynette Hirschman and Nancy Chinchor for making available their corpora of coreference annotations  . We are also grateful to Graeme Hirst for comments and feedback on a previous draft of this paper  . 

Saliha Azzam , Kevin Humphreys , and Robert Gaizauskas .  1998 . Evaluating a focus-based approach to anaphora resolution  . In Proceedings of the 361h Ammal Meeting of the Associatiot ~ for Computational Linguistics and of the  17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLl NG/ACL'98 )  , pages 74-78 , Montreal , Canada , 
August 1014.
Dan Cristea , Nancy Ide , and Laurent Romary .  1998 . 
Veins theory : A model of global discourse cohesion and coherence  . In Proceedings of the 36th Ammal Meeting of the Association Jot " Computational Linguistics attd of the  17th lntertmtional Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING/ACL'98 )  , pages 281-285 , Montreal , Canada , August . 
Barbara Fox .  1987 . Discourse Structure and Anaphora . 
Cambridge Studies in Linguistics ; 48 . Cambridge University Press . 
Niyu Oe , John Hale , and Eugene Charniak .  1998 . A statistical approach to anaphora resolution . In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshot ) on Vet 3 , Large Corpora , pages 161-170 , Montreal , Canada , August 1516 . 
Barbara J . Grosz and Candace L . Sidner .  1986 . Attention , intentions , and the structure of discourse . 
Computational Linguistics , 12(3):175-204, July-

Barbara J . Grosz , Aravind K . Joshi , and Scott Weinstein . 
1995 . Centering : A framework t br modeling the local coherence of discourse  . Computational Linguistics , 21(2):203-226, June . 
Lynette Hirschman and Nancy Chinchor , 1997. MUC7
Coreference Task Definition , July 13.
Janet Hitzeman and Massimo Poesio .  1998 . Long distance pronominalization adglobal focus . In Ptv-ceedings of the 36th Ammal Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics attd of the  17th hzternational Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING/ACL'98 )  , pages 550-556 , Montreal , 
Canada , August.
Jerry H . Hobbs .  1978 . Resolving pronoun references . 
Lingua , 44:311-338.
Megumi Kameyama .  1997 . Recognizing referential links : An information extraction perspective  . In Proceedings of the ACL/EACL'97 Workshop on Operational Factors in Practical , Robust Anaphora Reso ht-tion , pages 4653 . 
Shalom Lappin and Herbert J . Leass .  1994 , An algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution . Computational Linguistics , 20(4):535-561 . 
William C . Mann and Sandra A . Thompson . 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory : Toward a functional theory of text organization  . Text , 8(3):243-28i . 
Daniel Marcu , Estibaliz Amorrortu , and Magdalena Romera .  1999 . Experiments in constructing a corpus of discourse trees  . In Ptvceedings of the ACL'99 Workshot ) on Standards and 7 bols for Discout : reTagging , pages 4857 , University of Maryland , June 22 . 
Ruslan Mitkov .  1997 . Factors in anaphora resolution : They are not the only things that matter  , a case study based on two different approaches . In Proceedings of the ACL/EACL'97 Workshop on Operational Factors in Practical , Robust Anaphora Resolution , pages 1421 . 
Candace L . Sidner .  1981 . Focusing for interpretation f pronouns . Computational Linguistics , 7(4):217-231,

Wietske Vonk , Lettica G . M . M . Hustinx , and Wirett . G . 
Simons .  1992 . The use of referential expressions in structuring discourse  , l~mguage and Cognitive Processes ,  7(3 , 4):301-333 . 

