Learning to Select a Good Translation
Dan Tidhar and Uwe Kiissner
Technische Universit At 13erlin
Fachbereich Informatik
Franklinstr . 28/29
D-10587 Berlin

ukldan ~ cs , tu-berlin , de
Abstract
Withintile machine translation system Verbmobil , translation is 1 ) ertbrmed simultaneously 1 ) y four in del ) endent translation lnodules . The \[' our competing l ; ranslatiol ~ s are coati ) ned 1) yase , \[e ( ' tion module so as to for lna single optimal outlmt for each in tm t utterance  . The selection module relies on confidence values that are delivered together with each of the alternative translations  . S in ( : e the ( : onfidence values are computed t ) y four independent modules that are flm danlentally difl'erent from  ( mean other , they are not dire (: tly (: oml ) arat ) le and ne , ed to l ) erescaled in order to gain ( : on q ) a rative signiticance . In this pat ) er we describe a machine lecturing method tailored to overcome this difficulty l  ) y using offline hmnanthed back to determine an at ) prol ) riate confidenceres ( : aling scheme . Additionally , we des ( :rit ) esome others our ( : es of information that are used tbr selecting 1 ) el ; ween the comt ) eting translations , and describe the way in which the seh ' , c tion t ) rocess relates to quality of service specifi ( 'ations . 
1 Introduction
Verbmobil ( Wahlster ,  2000 ) is a speech to speech machine translation system , aimed at handling a wide range of spontaneous pee ( ' h phenomena within the restricted domain of travel t  ) lanning and at ) pointment sche ( hfling dialogues . For the language 1 ) airs English German an ( 1 Gerinan-English , t bur different translation methods are applied in parallel  , thus increasing the system's robustness and versatility  . Since , exa (: tly one translation should t )( ; t ) roduce (1 for each int ) ut utterance , a selection 1) rocedure is necessary . In order to be nelit more from this diversity , the alternative translations are furthermore , combined within the t ) omld-aries of single utterances , oas to form \] low corn-pound translations . Combining translations t'r on l different sources within a multi-thread MT system has already proved beneficial in the past  ( Frederking and Nire , nlmrg ,  1994) . Ouri ) resent work difl hrsfl : om the work reported in there ill several ways  ( at ) art from the trivial fact that we use ' four heads ' rather than three  )  . Firstly , we attempto investigate a systematic solution to  ; 11( ; in coln parability of the various confidence values  . Secondly , as we deal with speech to speech rather than text to text translation  , dit'-ti ; renl ; segmentations for each given input string are allowed  , l naking the segment combination process signitic ~ mtlyulore CO ml  ) licated . 
1.1 Incomparability
Eat ; h translation l nodule calculates a confidence value t breach translation that it  ; produces . 
However , since the w~rious translation methods are flm dalnentally difl'erent from one another  , the resulting contidenee values cannot t ) edi-re ( : tly ( : omt ) ared across modules . Whereas we do assmnea gener ~ fl ( : or rest ) ondence between confidence w flues and translation quality within each one of the mo  ( hfles , there is no guaranty whatsoever that a high value delivered t  ) ya certain module wou Mindeed signify al ) etter translation when comt ) ared with another value , even a much lower one , which was delivered l ) y another module . An additional step needs to 1 ) e taken in order to make the confidence w flues comparable with one another  . 
1.2 Working Hypotheses
It should be noted that one of our working hypotheses  , namely , that coniidence values do generally reflect translation quality  , also ( : om-t ) ensates to ~ t certain extent t brtile lack of a wide range theory of translation  , according to which translations of d if li ; rent sorts could be mlanimously ewduated . The task of evaluating annotators , ince the applicable criteria are diverse , and at the absence of a comprehensive translation theory  , very often lead to contradicting conclusions . This difficulty is partially dealt within section  4  . 1 below , but tbrpractical reasons we tend to accept the need to rely on human judgment  , partially theory assisted and partially intuitive  , as inevitable . Another presupposition that underlies the current work is that the desirable rescaling Call be well approximated by means of linear polynomials  . This assumption allows us to remain within the relatively friendly realm of linear equations  ( albeit inconsistent )  , and reflects two basic guiding principles : firstly  , that tile rescaling is motivated by pragnlatical needs  , rather than by descriptive aspirations , and secondly , that it should not contradic the presupposed correlation between confidence and quality within each module  , which implies that the rescaling functions should be monotonous  . 
2 The Various Translation Paths
The Vcrb mobil system includes four independent translations paths that operate ill parallel  . The input shared by all paths consists of sequences of annotated Word ItypothcscsGraphs  ( WHG )  , produced by the speech recognizer . Each translation i nodule chooses independently a path through the WItG  , and a possible segmentation according to its grammar and to the prosody information  ( Buckow et al ,  1998) . This implies that even though all translation modules share the same input data structure  , both the chosen input string and its chosen segmentation may well differ across modules  . This section providestile reader with very brief descriptions of the different translation subsystems  , along with their respective confidence value calculation methods  . 
? The ali subsystem implenlents an exam-piebased translation approach  . Confidence values are calculated according to the matching-level of the input string with its counterparts in the database  . 
? The stattrans ( Och et al . , 1999 ) subsystem is a statistical translation system . 
Confidence values are calculated according to a statistical language model of the target language  , in conjunction with a statistical translation model  . 
? The syndialog ( Kippctal . , 1999 ) subsystem is a dialogueact based translation system  . Here the translation invariant consists of a recognize dialogue act  , together with its extracted propositional content . 
Tile confidence value reflects the probability that tile dialogueact was recognized correctly  , together with the extent o which the propositional content was successflfly extracted  . 
? The deep translation path in itself consists of nmltiple pipelined nlodules : linguistic analysis  , senlantic onstruction , dialogue and discourse semantics , and transfer ( Emele and Dorna , 1996) and generation ( Kilger and Finklcr ,  1 . 995) components . The transfer module receives dis-anlbiguation information from the conte  . xt ( Koch et al , 2000) and dialogue modules . 
The linguistic analysis part consists of several parsers which  , in turn , also operate ill parallel ( Ruland et al ,  1998) . They include all HPSG parser , a ClmnkParser and a statistical parser , all producing data struc-tm:es of tile same kind , namely , the Verbmobil Inter : face Terms ( VIT a )   ( Schiehlenctal . , 2000) . Thus , within the deep processing path , a selection problem arises , similar to the larger scale problem of selecting the best translation  . This internal selection process within the deep path is based on a probabilistic VIT model  . Confidence values within the deep path are computed according to the amount of coverage of the input string by the selected parse  , and are subject to modifications as a byproduct of combining and repairing rules that operate within the semantics mechanism  . Another source of intbrmation which is used for calculating the ' deetf confidence values is the generation module  , which estimates the percentage of each transfered VIT which can be success fiflly realized ill the target language  . 
Although all confidence values are finally scaled to the interval  \[0  , 100\] by their respective gen-crating modules , there seems to be hardly any reason to believe that such fimdamentally dif-tudes that a ye directly comi  ) aral ) le with one another . As expected , our experience has showntts at when confidence values are taken as such  , without any further modification , their compar-at w ; significance is indeed very l in fited . 
3 The Selection Procedure
In order to improve their coml ) a rative significance , the delivered confidence w flue sc(s ) , t breach given segments , arc rescaled by linear flmctions of the tbrm : a -c  (  , s ) + b .   ( 1 ) Note that each in I ) ut utterance is decomt ) osed is to several segments in det ) endently , and hencet ) oten tially differently , by each of tim translation I ) at hs . The different segments arc then cora-l ) ned to tbrma data structure which , by analogy to Word Itypotheses Graph , (: ass be called ~ l ~' av , slation Alternatives Graph , ( TAG ) . The size of tiffs graph is bound t ) y4 ' ~ , whi ( : h is reached if all translation paths hat ) pento ( : hoose an idea > tical partition into exactly n segments  . The following vectorial not ~ tion was a dot ) tedinor-de Y to simpli ( y the simultaneous reference to all tYanslation t ) at hs . The linear coefficients are represented by the following tbur-disnensional vectors : ~  , ~O " syndial ? gi ;= l )' s'Y'n dial ? 9(1 , start , tans ~) ~ tattra'n . sad ccpb deep ( 2 ) Single vector comt ) onents cms then be referred to by s in q ) let ) Yojections , if were t ) Yenent the different translatiols paths as orthogonal refit vectors  , so that . ~ denotes the vector to rrent ) ending to the module by whichs had been generated . 
The normalized confidence in then represented by :   ( a .  +  ( 3 ) In order to express the desirable fav < ) ring of translations with higher input string coverage  , the COml ) ared magnitudes are actually the ( rescaled ) confidence w flues integrated with respect to the time axis  , rather than the ( rencaled ) confides , covalues as n . ch . Le ; I111 betim \] ength of a segment . s of the input stream , in milliseconds . Let SEQ be the set of all possible segment sequences wil  ; lf in the TAG , and SeqESEQ any particular sequence . 
We define tile normalized confidence of
Seqast bllows : s ~ Seq
Tlf is induces the following order relation : Based on this relation  , we define the set B of best sequences as t bllow n : B  ( SEQ ) = scqESEQI seq is a maxin mm element in ( SEQ ; _ < c )  ?  ( 4 ) The selection procedure consists is l generating the various possible sequences  , comlmting their respective normalized confidence values  , and arbitrarily choosing a member of the set of best sequences  . It should be noted that not all sequences need to be actually generated and tested  , due to the incorporation of Dijkstra's wellknown "Shortest Path " algorithm  ( e . g . in ( Cormenctal . , 1989)) . 
4 The Learning Cycle
Learning the Yes ( : aling coefficients in l ) erformed offline , and shouht normally take place only once , ulsless new training data is asseml ) led , or new criteria t br the desirable nystelll ) eh ~ tvior have been tbrmulate ( l . Tim learning <; y <: lecon-sisl , n of incorporating human feedback ( training set alotation ) and finding a set of rescaling ( : oe\[ticients so as to yield a selection t ) ro ( : edure with optimal or close to optimal accord with the human ewfluation  . A training set , consisting of test dialogues that cover the desirable systens functionality  , is fed through the system , while separately storing the outt ) uts produced 1 ) y the various translation modules . These are then subject to two phases of mmotation  ( see section 4 . 1) , resulting in a set of ' best'sequences of translated segments t breach input utterance  . 
The next tank is to determine the at sl ) ropri-ate linear rescaling , that would maximize the accord 1 ) etween the rescaled confidence w flues and the 1 ) references x pressed by those ' best'sequences . In order to do that , we first generate a large set of ilm qualities as ( tesc Yibed in section 4 . 2 below , and then ai ) proximate their optimal solution , as described in section 4 . a . 
845 4.1 Training Set Annotation
As mentioned above , evaluating alternative translations is a complex task  , which sometimes appears to be difficult even for specially trained people  . When one alternative seems highly appropriate and all the others are clearly wrong  , a vigilant annotator would normally encounter very little difficulty  . But when all options fall within the reasonable reahn and differ only slightly fl'om one another  , or even more so , when all options are far from perfect , each having its m fiquely combined weaknesses and advantages what criterion should be used by the annotator to decide which weaknesses are more crucial tlmn the others ? Our human feedback cycle is two tbld:first  , the outputs of the alternative translations paths are annotated separately  , so as to enable the calculation of the ' offline confidence values ' as described below  . 
For each dialogue turn , all possible combinations of translated segments that cover the input are then generated  . For each of those possible combinations , an overall offline confidence value is calculated  , in a similar way to which the ' online ' confidence is calculated  ( see section 3 )  , leaving out the rescaling coefficients , but keeping the time axis integration . These segment combinations are then t ) resented to the annotators t brase condround , sorted according to their respective otfline confidence values  . 
Tlle annotator is requested at this stage merely to select the best segment combination  , which would normally be one of the first ; to appear on the list . The first mmotation stage may be described as ' theory assisted annotation '  , and the second is its more intuitive complement .  % ) assist the first mmotation rotund we have compiled a set of m motation criteria  , and designed a specialized annotation tool for their application  . 
These criteria direct the annotator's attention to ' essential information items '  , and rethr to the number of such items that have t ) een deleted , inserted or maintained during the translation . 
Other criteria are the semantic and syntactic correctness of the translated utterance as well as those of the source utterance  . The separate annotation of these criteria allows us to express the ' offline confidence ' as their weighted linear combination  . The different weights can be seen as implicitly establishing a method of quantifying translation qnality  . One can determine , for instance , which is of higher importance -- syntactical correctness  , or the transmission of all essential intbrmation items  . Using the vague notion of ' translation qnality ' as a single criterion would have definitely caused a great divergence in personal annotation style and preferences  , as can be very well exemplified by the case of the dialogueact based translation : some people find word by word correctness of a translation mch more important than the dialogue act  ; invari-ante , while others argue exactly the opposite ( Schmitz ,  1997) , ( Schmitz and Quantz ,  1995) . 
4.2 Generating Inequalities
Once the best segment sequences for each utterance have been determined by the completed am ~ otation procedure  , a set of inequalities is created using the linear rescaling coetficients as variables  . This is done simply by stating the requirement hat the normalized confidence value of the best segment sequence should be better than the normalized confidence values of each one of the other possible sequences  . For each utterance with n possible segment sequences  , this requirement is expressed by ( n-1 ) inequalities . It is worth mentioning at this point that it sometimes occurs during the second annotation phase  , that numerou sequences relating to the same utterance are considered ' equally best'by the annotator  , in such cases , when not all sequences are concerned but only a sul  ) set of all possible sequences , we have allowed the annotator to select nnfl tiple seqnences as q  ) est ' , correspondingly multiplying the number of inequalities that are introduced by the utterance in question  . These multiple sets are known in adwmce to be inconsistent  , as they in fact formulate contradictory requirements  . Since the opt infization procedure attempts to satisfy the largest possible subset of inequalities  , the logical relation between such contradicting sets can be seen as disjunction rather than conjunction  , and they do seem to contribute to the learning process  , because the different'equally best'sequences are still favored in comparison to all other sequences relating to the same utterance  . 
The overall resulting set ; of inequalities is normally very large , and can be expected to be consistent only in a very idealized world  , even in the absence of ' equally best ' mmotations  . The inconsistencies reflect many imperfections that characterize both the problen lath and and the which is the fact that the original confidence values  , as usef lfl as they may l)e , are nevertheless far from reilecting the human annotation and evaluation results  , which are , furthermore , not always consistent an long themselves . The rest of the learning process consists in trying to satisf ~ y as many in equalities as possible without reaching a contradiction  . 
4.3 Optimization Heuristics
Thel ) rol ) lemoffinding the l ) est rescaling co-eiliciellts reduces itself , under the al ) oveinen-tion cd presut ) t ) ositions , to that off in ( ling the maxilnal COll sistent sul ) set of inequalities within a larger , most likely inconsistent , set ; of linear in equalities , and solving it . In ( Amaldi and Mat-tavel \] i ,  1997) , the problem of extracting close-to-lnaxilll Ulll consistent subsystelns fi'om an inconsistent linear system  ( MAXCS ) is treated as part of a strategy for solving the prol  ) lenl of partitioning an inconsistent linear system into alain real nu Intmr of consist xmtsul  ) systems ( MIN PCS )  . Both t ) rol ) h' , nlsare NP-hard , ) uI ; through a the rnlal variation of previous work by ( Agmon , 1954) and ( Motzkin and Schoenberg ,  1954) , a greedy algorithm is t brmulated t ) y ( Amaldi and Mattavclli ,  1997) , which can serve as an effective heuristic tbrol ) taining optimal or near to optimal solutions lbr MAXCS  . 
hnplementing this algorithmill the Clmlguagc , ellal ) led us to comple , te the learning cych' , t ) y t in d i u g a so l ; of coetlicients that maximizes , oral . least nearly maximizes , the accord of t ; h ( ; rescaled ( : on fidence w flues with the judgment 1 ) rovided by human aunot ; ators . 
5 Additional Information Sources lln del ) endently of the confidence rescaling process , we have made several attempts to incorporate additional latin'maton ill order to refine the selection procedure  . Some of these attempts , such as using probabilistic language model in-fi ) rmation ~ or inferring fi'om the logical relation between the approximated propositional con-te  , nts of neighboring utterances ( e . g . trying to eliminate contra ( liction ) , have not been fruitful enough to be worth full descril  ) tionill the present work . The following two sections describe two attempts that do seem to be worth mentioning in fltrther detail  . 
5.1 Dialogue Act Information
Our experience shows that the translation quality that is accomplished by the different modules w ~ ries  , among the rest ; , according to the dialogue act at hand . This seelns to be particularly true for syndia log  , the dialogueact based translation path . Those dialogue acts that normally transmit very little propositional content  , or those that transmit no propositional content at all  , are normally handled better t ) y syndialog compared to dialogue acts that transmit more information  ( such as INFORM , wlfieh can in principle transmit any proposition )  . The dialogueact recognition algorithm used by syndialog does not comt  ) ute the single most likely dialog act , but rather a probability distril ) ution of all possible dialogue acts 1 We represent the dialogueact probability distribution for a giv  ( m segment . s by the vector d~t ( , ~) , where each component denotes the conditional i ) rol ) al ) ility of a certain dialogue act , given the segment . s : ( PI ) & ( . *) = The . vectors g and b f l : om section 3 above are replaced by the matrices A and 13 which are simply a cone a tem ~ tionf the rest ) ective ( tb doguea ( ' tv ( x ' tors ? lJ , ,t X = and 0 = The normalized confidence wflue , with . incorporated dialogue act information can then be expressed as := + ?  . 7 )  . It , ll ? . sd?'cq5 . 2 Disambiguat ion In format ion Within the deep translation path  , several types of underspecitication are used for representing ambiguities  ( Kiissner ,  1997) , ( Kiissner ,  1998) , ( Emele and Dorna ,  1 . 998) . Whenever an ambiguity has to be resolved in order for the translation to succeed  , resolution is triggered on demand ( Buschbeck-Wolf ,  1997 ) ? Several types 1For more ilf formation about dialogue , acts in Vca'b-mobil , see ( Alexanderssonctal . , 1997) module ( Koch et al ,  2000) , which uses various knowledge sources in conjunction fbrresolving anaphorical and lexical ambiguities  . Examples for such knowledge sources are world knowledge  , knowledge about the dialogue state , as well as various sorts of morphological , syntactic and semantic information . Since the deep translation path is the only one that includes contextual disambiguation  , its confidence value is incremented by the selection module whenever such ambiguities occur  . 
6 Quality of Service Parameters
Translation quality is t ) erhaps the most significant Quality of Service ( QoS ) parameter as far as MT systems are concerned . The selection module and the learning procedure as described above  , are indeed ain md at optimizing this parameter . Additionally , we have further experimented with our selection module in order to accommodate for other QoS parameters as well  . 
Analogously to QoS in Open Distributed Programming  ( ODP )  , we can distinguish t ) etween the tbllowing main categories : timeliness , volume , and reliability . In the timeliness category , we refer to the delay from the beginning of the acoustic in tmt till the begiln fing of the acoustic output  , which is highly dependent on the sys-tem's incrementality  . The algorithm described so far requires the presence of all translated segments within a given dialogue turn  , betbre the selection itself cast take place . This implies a relatively long delay , because the biggest possible increment unit , i . e . the whole turn , is being used . The maximal increlnentality , and therefore the minimal delay , are achieved when the first ready segment is being chosen at each point  . This implies , however , a possible deterioration in translation quality , and increasing the risk that due to segmentation differences across modules  , no appropriate continuation would be found t br the frst segmen that had been chosen  . The latter is referred to as ' loss rate ' , and belongs to the reliability category of QoS dimensions  . The tradeoff between loss rate and incrementality is parameterized by the selection module  , by selecting a segment as soon as n translation modules have delivered segments with similar segmentations  ( 1 < n < 4 )  . Within the vohnne category , we define the realtime factor ( RTF ) as the relation between the overall processing time  ( from the beginning of acoustic input till the end of acoustic output  ) and the overall speaking time ( lmginning of acoustic input till the end of acoustic input  )  . In order to SUl ) portconformance to RTF specification tbr the translation service  , the selection module supports a QoS signal interface  . AQoSman agenmnt module monitors the runtime behavior of the translation modules  , and signals the selection process if the estimated  R3~F is expected to exceed the specification . Upon receiving such a signal , the selection module attempts to complete its output without waiting \[' or fllrther translated segments  . 
7 Conclusion
We have described certain difficulties that arise fl ' om the attempto integrate multiple alternative translation paths and to choose their optimal coml  ) ination into one'l ) est ' translatiou . 
Using confidence values that originate fl'om different translation modules as our basic selection criterion  , we have introduced a learning method which enables us to select in maximal accord with decisions taken by human annotators  . Along the way , we have also tackled some problematic aspects of translation evaluation as such  , described some additional sources of information that are used by our selection module  , and briefly sketched the way in which it ; supports quality of service specifications . The extent to which this module succeeds in creating higher quality compound translations is of course highly dependent on the appropriate assignment of confidence values  , pertbrmed by the translation modules themselves . As a rough criterion tbrevaluating our success , we compared the selection module's output to the best re-suits achieved by a single translation path  . Recent Verbmobil evaluation results demonstrate an improvement of  27  . 8% achieved by the selection module , measured by the number of dialogue turns that were marked ' good ' by a mm-tators who were presented with live alternative translations tbr each turn  , namely , those delivered by the four single paths , and the coml ) ound translation delivered by the selection module . 


S . Agmon . Th , cr clazatiov , mcth , od for linear in-cq'aaliticsC ; madi:m , \] our nM of M~tthcmati(:s ,  6:382-392 , 19M . 
J . Ale . xm Mersson , B . liuschb(~(:k-Wolf,
T.lhtjin ~ tmi , M . Kipp , S . Koch , l , kMaier,
N.1l . cithing cr , B . Schmil;z , M . Siegel . Dialoquc
Acts in VERBMOBIL-2Sc<:oud Editio ~ l , \]) FKI Saar briick cn , Universitiil ; Sl ; ul ; garl; , Technis (' he Univ ( , rsitSt\]h'rl in , Univ('rsiti~tdesSa ~ MmMcs , Verbmol ) il Rot ) of t2 26 , Mai \] . 997 . 
E . AmMdi , M . Mattavelli . A combinatorical optimization approach to extract pieccwise tin-car structure  . \[: rom nonlinear data and a ' n application to optical J to'w scgmantatio'n  , TR\[)712 , Corncll Comlml ; ational ( ) t ) timiz ~ tion Project , Corn ( ;ll University , Itlm (: a NY , USA . 
J . Bu (: kow , A . Batlincr , F . Gallwitz , R . Ihfl)cr,
E . NSth , V . Wm:nke,mMH . Nicmmm . Dove-tailing of Acov , stics and Prosodyi'n , 5' pov , ta-rico ' as Speech R , c cognitio ' , , In Pro (: . in t . Conf . 
on St ) ok cn Languag c Processing , vohm w ,  3 , pages 571-574 , Sydlmy , Australia , De , (: cmbcr 1998 . 
B.Buschbc(:k-Wolf.lb:sol,atio ',, on Demar ~, d.
1 Jniv crsil ; i~t Stuttgarl; . Verl ) mol ) ill , et ) or t1 96 . 
May \]997.
T . ( ~ orlll Cll , ( Ll~eiscrson , \] . \]/, ivcl; . I ) ~ . t'rod'ltctiontoAlgorithmsMIT\])r(;ss , ( Smfl)ri(tgc , Massachusetts , \]98 ! t . 
M . Emcle , M . Dorna . EJfici cnthnph:mcu , tation of a Semantic-based T'lnn . ~/ ~ r Approach In Proceedings of the 12th Eurot ) can Conference on Artificial intelligence ( ECAI-9 ( i )  . August 1996 . 
MZEmclc , M . Dorna . Ambiguity Pre , s + : r , ving Machine 7 ; in nslation ' asing l ) ack cdR cprcs'c'uta-tions . In Proceedings of tim\]7th Int ( ; rna-l ; iomfl ConfcrcncconComtml ; ~ tion MLinguistics ( COLINGACL'98) , Montre M , Canada . 
August 1998.
FLlKcdcrking , S . Nirenburg . Thr (' , cltc , ,ds arc Better than One , ANLP94 P , p95-100 ,  1994 . 
A . Kilger , W . Finklcr . \] ncrcmcntalGeneration . for Real-Time Applications , DFKI Report ; RR-95-11 , Germantl , ('sc~rch Center for Ar-titiciM Intelligence - DFKI GmbH  ,  1995 . 
M . Kipp , J . Alcxandersson , N . R cithinger . Understanding Spou , tancous Negotiation Dia-h) . q'uc Proceedings of the , IJCAI Worksho I ) Knowledge and Reasoning in Practical Dia-h ) guc Syst cllts , Stockhohn , Sweden , August 1999 . 
S . Koch , U . Kfissncr , M . S t c d c . Contc:ctnaIDis-ambig'aation , hiW . Wahlstcr , Ed . Vcrbmobihl ; b ' andations of Spccch , to Speech , 2 ~' anslation
Springer Verlag , 2000.
U . Ki is sncr . Applying DL in Automatic Dialog v , e Interpreting , Proceedings of the Interna I ; ional Workshop on Descril)tion Logics-DL-97 , pp 54-58 , Gifsur Yvette , France ,  1997 . 
U . Ki is sncr . Description Logic Unplugged Proceedings of the , Internation M Workshop on Description Logics - DL-98  , pp 142-146 , ~ lY cn to , Italy ,  1998 . 
T . S . Motzkin , I . J . Schocnberg . Th , cr clazation method for linear in equalities Cmm ( tian Journal of Mathem ~ l ; ics ,  6:393-4()4 ,  1954 . 
F . .l . () ch , C . Tillmnnn , lt . Ncy . ImprovcdAlign-mcnt models for Statistical A / htchinc ~ J  ) ' au , sla-tion , In Proc . of the Joint SIGI ) ATC on f . on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro -tossing and Very Large Corpora  , Univ crsity of Maryland ,  1999 . 
T . Ruland , C . J . Rut ) p , J . Spilker , H . Weber , C . Worm . Mak , in 9th , cMost of Mult@licity : AM ' ulti-Parscr Multi -Strategy Ar  ( : h , it cct ' ar ~: forth , c \]? , ob'ast Proccssiu , g of , 5'poke . v,La'n,g'aagc . 
Proceedings of ICSLP 1998.
M . Schich ; n , ,\] . Bos , M . l ) or n a V erbmobiln l , c , r-fat (' , ~lhrms ( VITs ) , In W . Wahlsl ; er , Ed . 
Ve'rbmobil:I , b' , ,ndatiou , ~" of Spccch , to Spccch , ' l ' ranslation Springer Vcrlag ,  2000 . 
B . Schmitz . Pragmatik basic rtcs Masch , in ellcs Dolmctsch cn . \]) iss crtation , FB Informatik,
TUBerlin , 1997.
B . S(:hmitz , J . J . Quantz . Diah ) gucActs in Automatic Dialoquc Interpreting in Proceedings of the Sixthinl  ; crll~l ; ion ~ l Conference Ol Irl Th co-rctic M and Mcthodologic MIssues in Machine'l Yanslation  ( TMI-95 )  , Lcuven ,  1995 . 
W . Wahlster , Ed . Vcrbmobih ~ bundations of Speech , to Speech , ~' anslation Springer Vcrlag ,  2000 . 
C . Worm , C . J . l : l , ut ) t ) . Towards Robust Uudcr-standing of Spccch by Combination of Partial 
Analyses Proceedings of ECAI 1998
