You'll Take the High Road and I'll Take the Low Road: 
Using a Third Language to hnprove Bilingual Word Alignment 
Lars Borin
Department of Linguistics , Uppsala University
Box 527
SE-75120 Uppsala , Sweden


While language-independents elztence alignment programs typically achieve a recall in the  90 percent range , tile same cannot be said about word alignment systems  , where normal recall figures tend to fall somewhere between  20 and 40 percent , in tile language-indepeudent case . 
As words ( and phrases ) for wlrious reasons are more interesting to align than sentences  , we need methods to increase word alignment recall  , preferably without sacrificing precision . 
This paper reports on a series of experiments with pivot a ligtunent  , which is tile use of one or more additional hm guages to improve bilingual word aligment  . Tile conclusion is that in a multilingual parallel corpus  , pivot alignment is as a feway to iucr case word alignment recall without lowering the precision  . 
1 Introduction
For about a decade and a half now , researchers in Natural language processing ( NLP ) and general and applied linguistics have been working with parallel corpora  , i . e . , in the prototypical case corpora consisting of original texts in some soume language  ( SL ) together with their translations into one oi " more target hmguages  ( TL )  . In general linguistics , they are used -- in tile same fashion as monolingual corpora -- as handy sources of authentic language  . In computational linguistics and hmguage engineering  , various methods for ( semi- ) automatic extraction from such corpora of , among others , translation equiw dents , have been explored . 
2 Why is word alignment more interesting and why is it difficult ? Alignment--tile explicit linking of items in the SL and TL texts judged to correspond to each other ~ is a prerequisite for the extraction of translation cquiw dents fi'om parallel corpora  , and tile granularity of tile alignment naturally determines what kind of translation units you can get out of these resources  . With sentence aligmnent , youget data which can be used in , e . g . , translation memories . If you want to build bi - or multilingual lexica for machine translation systems  ( or for people )  , however , you want to be able to align parallel texts on the word  ( and phrase ) level . This is because , in the last two decades , NLP grammars havc become increasingly lexicalized  , and granlnlars 1'o1" machine translation -- as opposed to translation melnories  , or example-based machine translation , neither of which uses a grammar in any interesting sense of tile word -- for nano exception in this regard  . 
The entries of tile lexicon , which is the major repository of linguistic knowledge in a lexicalized gramnlar  , are mainly made up of units oil tile linguistic levels of words and phrases  . 
The problem here is that sentence alignment is a fairly well-understood problem  , but word alignment is much less so . This means that while language-independent sentence alignment programs typically achieve a recall in the  90 percent range , the same cannot be said about word alignment systems  , where norn ml recall ligures tend to fall somewhere between  20 and 40 percent , in the language-independent case . Thus , we need methods to increase word alignment recall  , preferably without sacrificing There are many conceivable reasons for word alignment being less ' effective ' than sentence alignment  . Different language structures ensure that words comparatively more seldom standina one-to-one relationship between the languages in a parallel text  , because , e . g . , ? SL function words may correspond to TL grammatical structural features  , i . e . 
morphology or syntax , or even to nothing at all , if the TL happens not to express the feature in question  . At the same time , function words tend to display a high type frequency  , both because of high function aload ( i . e . , they are needed all over the place ) and because they tend to be uninflected ( i . e . each function word is typically represented by one text word type  , while content words tend to appear in several inflectional variants  )  . This of course means that function words will account for a relatively large share of the differences in recall figures between sentence and word alignment  ; ? orthographic conventions may disagree on where word divisions should be written  , as when compounds are written as several words in English  , but as single words in German or Swedish , the extreme case being that some orthographies get alng entirely without word divisions  ; ? word alignment must by necessity ( because word orders differ between languages ) work with word types rather than with word tokens  , while sentence I Alignment recall is here understood as the number of units aligned by the alignment program divided by the total number of correct alignments  ( established by independent means , normally by human annotation ) . 
Precisiolz is the number of correct alignments ( again established by independent means ) divided by the number o1' units aligned by the alignment program ( i . e . , the numerator in the recall calculation ) . We will not in this paper go into a discussion of null alignments  ( our celanguage units having no correspondence in the target language x pression  ) or partial alignments ( part , but not all , of a phrase aligned ) , as we believe that he results we present here are not dependent on a particular treatment of thcse- -admiuedly trouble some -- phenomena  . 
alignment always works with sentence tokens , 2i . e . , it relies on linear order . 
This means that polysemy ( one type in the SL corresponding to several types in the TL  )  , homonymy ( several types in the SL corresponding to one type in the TL  )  , and combinations of polysemy and homonymy will disrup the correspondence even between structurally similar languages  ; Thus , the circumstance that linear order cannot be used to constrain word alignment--beyond the restriction that putative word alignments must appear in one and the same sentence alignment unit--together with the other factors  . just mentioned , conspire to make word alignment a much harder problem than sentence alignment in the language -independent case  .   3   3 Improving word alignment by combining knowledge sources The project in which the research reported here has been carried out  , the ETAP project ( see section 8 , below ) , is a parallel translation corpus project , the aim of which is to create an annotated- -understood as part-of-speech  ( POS ) tagged and aligned--multilingual translation corpus  , which will be used as the basis for the development of methods and tools for the automatic extraction of translation equivalents  . 
Lately , we have been concentrating on finding good ways to improve word alignment  . 
Tile word alignment system we currently use ( which was developed in a sister project in our depamnent  , the PLUG project ; see Sfigvall Hein ( to appear ) ) works itel'atively with many kinds of information sources  , and it seems that this is a good way to proceed . 
Distributional parallelism , coocurrence , string 2In parallel corpus alignment , hatis , but note . g . in searching in translation memories . 
3 We must stress that we are talking about the la , guage-i , dependellt case here . For any particular language pair , language-specific linguistic ( and possibly other ) information can be used to improve both sentence and word alignment  , although the former will probably still stay a head of the latter in terms of per for  , nance . 
98 similarity ( both between and within languages )  , and part of speech are some of the information sources used  , and also ( heuristically based ) stemming to increase type frequencies for the distributional measures  ( see , e . g . Tiedemann ( to appeara ) , Tiedemann ( to appear b ); Molamed (1995) , Melamed (1998)) .   111 OUl " work in the ETAP proiect we are looking for additional such information sources  , and so far we have corico iltratod our ell : errs oriox ploririglinguistically rich information  , such as word similarity ( Berth ,  1998 ) and the combination Of word alignlllent and POS taggillg  ( Borill , to appeara ) . 
There must certainly exist other sources of information  , in addition t : othose mentioned above , lhat carl be used to iln provo word alignlnent . This paper discusses one particular such source , namely the use of a third hlnguage in the aligmnent process  . Apart fronlanearlier presentation by the present author  ( Berth , to appear b ) , I have not seen any mention in the literature of the possibility of using a third language in this way for improving word alignmor it  . Simard ( 1999 ) describes how the use of a third language can be brought to bear upon the simpler problem of senlence alignment  , but he does not consider the harder problem of word alignmenl  . Perhaps it has not being thought of for the siln plc reason that it is possible only with  # ul Ulingual parallel corpora  , and -- for obvious reasons -- not with b/lingual corpora  , which has been the kind of parallel corpus that has received nlost attention from researchers in the field  . 
4 Pivot alignment
Since the third language acts as , as it were , a pivot for the alignment of the two other languages  , we refer to the method as pivot alignment , and it works as follows , with three languages , e . g . Swedish ( SE ) , Polish ( PL ) and Serbian-Bosnian-Croatian ( SBC )  , where the aim is to align Swedish with the other two languages on the word level  . 



Perform the pairwise alignments SE-~PL,
SE-->SBC , PL--->SBC , and SBC-oPL;
Check whether there exist aligned words on the indirect ' alignment path  '4 
SE-oSFJC-oPL , which are not on the direct path SE--->PL . If there are , add them to the SE-oPL alignnaents . 
Do the same for the indirect path
SE-->PL-oSBC and the direct path

In orderlor this procedure to work , we must believe that 1 . there will be differences in tile SE-+PL and SE- -bSBC alignments  , and 2 . that these dilTerenees will'survive'the
PI , ---bSBC and SBC-->PL aligments.5
Hypothesis (1) seems plausible , since the word alignment system used ( Tiedemann ( to appear a )  , Tiedenlann ( to appear b ) ) actually aheady utilizes several kinds of information to align the words in the two texts  . In particuhu , it uses distributional information , cooccurrence statistics , iterative size reduction , ' naive'stemming , and string simihuity to select arid rank word alignment carididates  ( but #* el linear order ; cf . also section 3 above ) . Thus it is fully conceiwt ble , e . g . , that distributional information will provide one ot ' the links and word similarity the other in a three-language path  , such as SE-->PL--->SBC , 6 while synonymy or polysemy ( i . e .   , distributional differences ; see above ) will 4It is this metaphor of the alignments going by different ' paths ' or ' roads ' to lhesal ne goal which has inspired nlelobor row the firsl part of the title of this paper froll ltile chorus of tiles ong " Loeb Lolll Olld "  . 
5Incidentally , the indirect path could be extended with lilt ) relallg tlaoes , e . g . Swedish --> Polish --+ E , lglish-o Spanish , etc . , but we have not investigated this possibility , although we explore the possibility of using several additional languages in parallel  , below . 
6This is perhaps intuitively the most likely situation in this particular case  , since Polish and Scrbian-Bosnian-Croatian are fairly closely rchlted Slavic languages lhat share many easily recognizable cognates  , while both ~ . ll ' elll Hchlll Orcrein oiely related to
Swedish aligned se-sbc+se-pl-sbcse-pl+se-sbc -pl 
SO-OS+se-en-esse-Oll+se-os -0n found links links in recall standard 429   19  . 11% 19 . 35% 370 15 . 41% 16 . 49% 454 19 . 16% 20 . 92% 442 21 . 49% 22 . 40% correct partly not ( C ) con: ( PC ) con: 57   17   8   37   14   6   65   14   8   7   1   72   14   9   70   14   11   2   2   72   14   13 precision , precision correct C+PC 69 . 51% 90 . 24% 69 . 88% 90 . 36% 64 . 91% 89 . 47% 67 . 21% 90 . 16% 74 . 71% 90 . 80% 75 . 79% 90 . 53% 73 . 68% 88 . 42% 72 . 73% 86 . 87% Table 1 . " First pivot alignment experiment results ( null links in standard not counted ) \[From Borin ( to appear b ) \] preven the first link to be made on the direct path SE-+SBC  . 
5 An experiment with pivot alignment
In recent work ( Borin , to appear b ) , we reported on a small preliminary experiment to test the feasibility of the method  . We proceeded as follows : 1 . The ETAPIVTI corpus was used for the experiment . This is a five-language parallel translation corpus of text from the Swedish newspaper for immigrants  ( In van drartidning en ; the English version is called News and Views ) . Swedish is the source language , and the other four languages are English ( EN ) , Polish , 
Serbian-Bosnian-Croatian and Spanish ( ES ) . The IVTI corpus has roughly 100 , 000 words of text in each language ; 2 . The PLUG link annotator ( Merkel (1999),
Merkel et al ( to appear ) ) was used to produce evaluation standards ( " gold standards " ) for the following alignment directions : SE-+PL , SE-+SBC , PL--+ SBC , SBC --- , ' PL in one group , and
SE-+EN , SE-+ES , EN--+ES , ES-+EN in the other .   500 words were sampled randomly fl ' om the Swedish source text  , and the standards with Swedish as the source were made manually by me from this sample  . The target units of these . 

standards were then used as the basis for the manual establishment  ( again by me ) of the various target language alignment evaluation standards  . Because of null links , misaligned or differently aligned sentences , etc . , the size of the evaluation standards varied fi ' om  366 to 500 words ; In addition to the already wordaligned
SE--+EN , ES , PL , SBC , we aligned the other language pairs necessary for the experiment  ; The evaluation function in the aligmnent system was used to calculate recall and precision for each word alignment  . In addition to this , we manually extracted the additiona links , if any , that would be found on the indirect path through the third language  . 
The null links mentioned in ( 2 ) above were largely due to the sampling procedure choosing many function words  , which often ( also in this case ) are trouble some in the context of finding good translation equivalents  , since they may not correspond to words in the TL ( see section 2 above )  . 
The results of the preliminary experiment are shown in Table  1  . 
We see that only a few units survived the trip through two languages  , but out of those that did , most contributed positively to the total result . SE-+ES and SE-+PL were the alignments which benefitted most from pivot aligned  ( standard ) sc-pl ( 501  ) +se-en-pl+se-es-pl+se-sbc-plsc-cs ( 501 ) + Se-OIl-CS+se-i~l-esso-on ( 501 ) + SC-eS-Cll+se-pl-ense-sbc ( 501 ) + sc-pl-sbc
COI'I'~Cglillks


Iconvct+2+2+5+9+9+3+1224 . 55% 24 . 95% 24 . 95% 25 . 75% 26 . 35% 35 . 93% 37 . 92 37 . 13% 38 . 52% 91 . 06% 91 . 20% 91 . 20% 91 . 47% 91 . 67% 92 . 78% 92 . 63% 93 . 01% 92 . 75% 30 . 14% 92 . 05% +7 31 . 74% 91 . 82% +1 30 . 54% 92 . 16% +8 31  . 94% 91  . 87% 28 . 94% 94 . 48% +2 29 . 34% 94 . 56% Table 2 . " New pivot aligmnent experiment results ( null links iJ 1st amlard not counted , " correct and partly correct lill k . s " counted together ) alignment ( through EN and SBC , respectively ) , while the result wets in significant for SE-+SBC and perhaps even detrimental in the case of 

We saw these results as suggestive , rather than conclusive . It certainly seemed that the closer genetic relatedness of the two Shtvic languages worked to our advantage  , but we concluded that we needed to do more experiments  , bolh with more language combinations and with a modilied sampling procedure  . Inpmticular , we wanted to get rid o1' the problematic function words ( see above )  . 
Since the recall is fa Mylow to start with , even a few correct additional alignments mean a great deal for the overall performance of the word alignment system  . Thus , we though that this approach would be worth pursuing t ' urther  . 
6 A new experiment with pivot alignment
To coufirm these results , we redesigned slightly and extended our experimental procedure  , in tile following way . A new sampling o1' the same corpus was performed , but this time we lirst constructed a stop word list consisting of the  50 most frequent word types in the Swedish part of the IVT  1 corpus , as a language-independent way of approximating the set  o1' function words in the language . Thus , we had a new sample , with more content words , to compare with the previous one , tile hyt ~ othesis being that a larger percentage of content words would be able to contribute more links in the pivot alignment process  . 
We also added some new hmguage combinatious , so that we now would be able to whether there is a difference in using Spanish as a pivot in aligning Swedish and English  , as opposed to using Polish . We also investigated what the result would be of using more than one additional language in parallel  . 
The new pivot alignment paths investigated ( in addition to the ones investigated in the lirst experiment  ) are represented by the following ' language triads':?SE-->EN-~PL?SE--~ES-+PL?SE-->PL- +EN?SE-->PL-+ES The hypothesis wets that the new setup would make the possible effect of close genetic relatedness more discernible  , which indeed seems to be the case ( see below ) . 
The results of the new experiment are shown in Table  2  . We see that gone up quite a bit , presumably because function words have been avoided in the standard  ; ? initial alignment precision still remains at the same high level as before  ; ? all but two of the alignments added by pivot alignment are correct  , i . e . recall is raised without a decrease in precision ; ? difl~rent pivot languages add different alignments  , i . e . there seems to be a cunmlative positive effect fiom adding more languages  ; ? the degree of relatedness of the languages in a triad seems to play a role for how well pivot alignment will work for the particular triad  . 
7 Discussion and conclusions
With the new experimental setup , we conlirmed the results fiom the earlier experiment  , i . e . , recall increases , but precision does not suffer . 
This tendency is even more marked in the new series of experiments  , in addition , there seems to be a clear division along genetic lines  ; Polish is the best pivot language for Swedish -Serbian-Bosnian-Croatian aligment  , and vice versa , while Spanish works better together with English . Another subcorpus in the ETAP project contains a Finnish part  , and we aim at investigating the effects of using this non-Indo-European language  ( all the languages are Indo-European in the two experiments described here  ) as one of the languages in a similar experiment It seemed that the choice of content words  ( or rather : lower-frequency words ) over function words did lead to a better esult , but this should be t ' urther investigated . 
We also see that the more languages we add , the better the results become , i . e . , different additional anguages complement each other  . 
In general , there was little overlap in the contributions that each language added to the final result  . 
It should be mentioned at this point , that the sampling and annotation procedure used did not allow us to check upon incorrect alignments which may have propagated through the pivot language  . The sampling procedure would have to be redesigned for this to be possible  , 7 which we plan to do in the future . 
For the same reason , we do not have all the data needed to calculate the significance of the results  . Thus , the results will have to remain suggestive for the time being  , although the suggestion is strong that pivot alignment works the way it was hypothesized to work  . 
In sc . : nmary , the results are encouraging , in that the links added through pivot alignment were largely correct links  , i . e . pivot alignment could be expected to make a positive and safe contribution -- i  . e , increasing recall without lowering precision--in a word alignment system as one of many independent knowledge sources  . 
8 Acknowledgements
The research reported here was carried out within the ETAP project  ( Borin , to appear c ) , supported by the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation as part of the research programme Translation and Interpreting--a Meeting between Languages and Cultures  . See http://www . translation . su . se/Leif-J6ran Olsson , who is responsible for systems development in the ETAP project  , wrote most of the software which made the experiment reported here possible  . 
I wish to thank the members of the PLUG project for generously letting us use the U plug system and the PLUG link annotator  . 
7 To do this , you would sample sentences instead of sampling words randomly throt  , ghouthe corpus , which is the way it is do neat present . Actually , the sampling and annotation software was devised for strictly bilingual word alignment evaluation  , and not t"o1" the purpose which it has been pressed into serving here  . 


Lars Borin .  1998 . Linguistics isn't always the answer : Word comparison in computational linguistics  . In Thellth Nordic Confereuce on Computatioual Linguistics  . NODALIDA'98 Proceedings , pages 140-151 . Center for Sprogteknologi and Dept . of General and Applied Linguistics , University of

Lars Borin . to appear a . Alignment and tagging . In Parallel Corpora , Parallel
Worlds . Dept . of Linguistics , Uppsaht

Lars Borin . to appear b . Pivot alignment . In Proceedings of the 12th Nordic Conference ou Compulatiom tl Liuguislics ( Nodalida 99 )  . 
Lars Borin . to appear c . The ETAP project--a presentation and status report  . 
ETAP research report et ap-rr-01, Dept . of
Linguistics , Uppsala University.
I . Dan Mehtmed .  1995 . Automatic ewfluation and uniform filter cascades for inducing Nbest translation lexicons  . Inl ' rocee diugsq\["the Thi ; zl Worksho I ) ou VeO , Large

i . Dan Melamed .  1998 . Word-to-word models of translational equiwflence . Technical
Report IRCS Technical Report-#98-08,
Department of Computer and Information
Science , University of Pennsylwmia.
Magnus Merkel .  1999 . Undelwlauding am / Enhanciug Trauslatiou I ) 3 , Parallel Text Processing . Dept . of Computer and Information Science , Link 6 ping University . 
Magnus Merkei , Mikael Andersson , and Lars
A hrenbmg . to appear . The PLUGL in k
Annotator-interactive construction of data froln parallel corpora  . In PcuMlel Corpolzt , Parallel Worlds . Dept . of Linguistics,
Uppsala University.
Anna Sagvall Hein . to appear . The PLUG project : Parallel corpora in Link ( Sping , Uppsala , G~3 teborg : Aims and achievements . 
In Parallel Corpora , Parallel Worlds . Dept.
of Linguistics , Uppsala University.
Michel Simard .  1999 . Three languages are better than two . In Proceediugs of the 1999 Joint SIGI ) AT Conference on Eml ) irical Methodsiu Natural Lauguage P~vcessing and VeO  , Large Cowora , pages 211 . 
J 6rg Tiedemann . to appear a . Uplug-a modular corpus tool for parallel corpora  . In Parallel Corpora , l'alz ~ llel Worlds . Dept . of
Linguistics , Uppsala University.
J 6rg Tiedemann . to appear b . Word alignment step by step . In Proceediugsq /' the 12th Nordic Confereuce ou Compulalioual
Liuguis'tics ( Nodalida99).

