Automatic Senmntic Classification for Ch in eseUn known Compound Nouns 
Keh-Jiann Chert & Chao-jan Chen
Institute of Information Science , Acadeinia Sinica , Taipei

Timpa per describes a similarity-based model to present hemor phological rules for Chinese compound nouns  . This representation model serves functions of 1 ) as the morphological rules of the compounds ,  2 ) as a mean to evaluate the properness of a compound construction  , and 3 ) as a mean to disambiguate the semantic ambiguity of the nlor phological head of a compound noun  . An automatic semantic lassil'ication system for Chine-seunknown compounds it hus implemented based on the model  . Experiments and on ' or analyses arc also presented . 
1. Introduction
The occurrences of unknown words cause difficulties in natural language processing  . Tile word set of a natural anguage is open-ended . There is no way of collecting every words of a language  , since new words will be created for expressing new concepts  , new inventions . Therefore how to identify new words in a text will bctile most challenging task for natural language processing  . It is especially true for Chinese . Each Chinese morpheme ( usually a single character ) carries meanings and most are polysc-incus . New words are easily constructed by combining lnorphelnes and their meanings are tile semantic composition of morpheme components  . 
Of course there are exceptions of semantically noncompositional compounds  . In Chinese text , there is no blank to mark word boundaries and no inlqec-tional markers nor capitalization markers to denote the syntactic or selnantic types of new words  . 
Hence the unknown word identification for Chinese became one of the most difficult and demanding research topic  . 
The syntactic and semantic categories of unknown words in principle can be determined by their content and contextual information  . However many difficult problems have to be solved  . First of all it is not possible to find a uniforln representational schemand categorization algorithm to handle differentypes of unknown words  , since each type of unknown words has very much differeut morphosyntactic structures  . Second , the clues for identifying differentype of unknown words are also different  . For instance , identification of names of Chinese is very much relied on the surnames  , which is a limited set of characters . 
The statistical methods are commonly used for identifying proper names  ( Chang et al 1994 , Sun et al 1994) . The identification of general compounds is more relied on the morphemes and tile semantic relations between morphemes  . 
There are cooccurrence restrictions between morphemes of compounds  , but their relations are irregular and mostly due to common sense knowledge  . The third difficulty is the problems of ambiguities  , such as structure ambiguities , syntactical nbiguitics and semantic ambiguities . 
For instances , usually a morpheme charac-ted word has multiple lneaning and syntactic categories  . Therefore the ambiguity resolution became one of the major tasks  . 
Compound nouus are ttle most frequently occurred unknown words in Chinese text  . 
According to an inspection on tile Sinica corpus ( Chen etc .  1996), 3 . 51% of lheword tokens in the corpus are unknown , i . e . they are not listed in the CKIP lexicon , which contains about 80 , 000 entries . Alnong them , about 51% of the word types are compound nouns , 34% are compound verbs and 15% are proper names . In this paper we locus our attention on the identification of the compound nouns  . We propose a representation model , which will be facilitated to identify , to disambiguate and to evaluate the structure of a compound noun  . In fact this model can be extended to handle compound verbs also  . 
1 . 1 General properties of compounds and their identification strategy The semantic ategory and syntactic category are closely related  . For coarse-grained analysis , syntactic ategorization and semantic ateg or i -zation are close related  . For instances , nouns denote entities ; active verbs denote events and stative verbs denote states  . For finegrained analysis , syntactic and semantic lassifications taked if l ' erent classification criterion  , in our model the coarse-grained analysis is processed first  . The syntactic categories of an unknown categories will be identified according to its top ranked syntactic categories  . Different syntactic categories require different representational models and different finegrained semantic lassification methods  . 
The presupposition of automatic semantic classification for compounds i that the meaning of a compound is the semantic om-position of its morphemi components and the head morpheme determines the major semantic class of this compound  . There are many polysyllabic words of which the property of semantic composition does not hold  , for instances the transliteration words , those words should be listed in the lexicon . Since for the majority of compounds the presupposition hold  , the design of our semantic lassification algorithm will be based upon this presupposition  . 
Therefore the process of identifying semantic class of a compound boils down to find and to determine the semantic lass of its head mor-phen- ~ e  . However ambiguous morphological structures cause the difficulties in finding head morpheme  . For instances , the compound in la ) has two possible morphological structures , but only lb ) is the right interpretation . 
1a)~2\] . .l . .'American ' b ) ~ /~ . ' Amcrica '' people ' , c ) ~\ [" ~ l ) \' beautiful '' country-man ' Once the morphological head is deterlnined  , the semantic resolution for the head morpheme is the next difficulty to be solved  . About 51 . 5% of the 200 most productive morphemes are polysemous and according to the Collocation Dictionary of Noun and Measure Words  ( CDNM )  , in average each ambiguous morpheme carries 3 . 5 different senses ( Huang et al 1997) . 
2. Representation Models
Compounds are very productive types of unknown words  . Nominal and verbal compounds are easily coined by combiniug two/many words/characters  . 
Since there are more than 5000 commonly used Chinese characters and each with idiosyncratic syntactic behaviors  , it is hm , t to derive a set of morphological rules to generate the set of Chinese coln pounds without overgeneration runder generation  . The set of general compounds is an open-class . The strategy for automatic identification will be relied not only on the morphosyntactic structures but also morphosemantic relations  . In general , certain interpretable semantic relationships between morphemic must be held  . However there is no absolute lneans to judge whether the semantic relations between morphemic omponents are acceptable  , i , e . the acceptability of such type of compounds is not simply ' yes ' or ' no '  . The degree of properness of a compound should depend on the logical relation between morphemic omponents and their logicalness should be judged by cominou sense knowledge  . 
It is a hnostiln possible to in \] plement a system with common sense knowledge  . Chen & Chen ( 1998 ) proposed an example-based measurement to evaluate the properness of a newly coined compound instead  . They postulate that for a newly coined compound , if the semantic relation of its morphemic omponents i similar to the existing compounds  , then it is in ore likely that this newly coined compound is proper  . 
2.1 Example-based similarity nleasure
Supposed that a compound has the structure of XY where X and Y are morphemes and supposed without loss of generality Y is the head  . 
For instance , ~ i <~-' learn-word-machine ' is a noun compound and the head morpheme Y is ~' machine ' and the modifier X is ~':' learn-word '  . In fact the morpheme f~~has four different meanings  . They are ' machine ' , ' air plane ' , ' secret ' and ' opportunity ' . How do computers judge which one is the right meaning and how is the compound construction wellformed or logically lneaningful ? First of all  , the exaln ples with the head morpheme ~ are extracted from corpora and dictionaries  . The examples are classified according to their meaning as shown in the 
Table 1.
Senses semantic category examples ( l ) machine < ~> Bo 0ll ( 2 ) air plane < ~ ~> Bo 223 ( 3 ) opportunity < N~>Ca042 ( 4 ) secret < ~> Da011 Table 1 . Four senses of tile morpheme ' ) ~' and their respective samples comparing the similarity between it and each class of exalllples  . Tilen leauing of the inputul \] kuown word will be assigned with the moaning of tile class with the most simihum or phosemantic structures with this unknown word  . Tile similarity measure is based on tile following formula  . 
Supl ) osed that each class of examples for ll  Sl he following SOlU all tic relatiol l rules  . The rules silow the possible semantic relations between prel'ix and suffix Y and their weight in termol ' i he frequency distribution of each semantic category of the pro-fixes in tile class  . 
Rules : Semi + Y Freql
Sere2+Y Freq 2:
Semk+Y Freqk ( freqi:tile number of the words of the l ' or m Semi + 

Take sulTix ~- with moaning of ' machine ' as ox aulple  . Ig ortilen lorph onle I'ulachine ' , tile extracted CO lllpotlllds of the for nlX+~j~- ' machine ' and tile semantic categories of the  n3odifiors al'e shown il1 Table 2 and the n3orpl~ological rule derived froill the mix in Table 3  . The scnlai/tic types alld their hierarchical structure are adopted  fro111 tile Chilin ( Moielal .  1984) . The similarity is measured between the semantic class of tile prefix X  o1' tile unknown conlpound and tile prefix semantic types shown in the rule  .   ( ) no ot ' the meas-uroulonts proposed is : SIMILAR  ( Sere , Rule ) = ; il , kln forlllati ( )n-Load ( Sem ( hSemi ) * lq-eqi/Max-vahle Where Sereistile semantic class of X  . Max-value is tile maxinlal vahle o1' ~\]\ [ n fornlation Load ( S~Selni ) * Freqi for all semantic lasses S . Their iax-wllue normalize stile SIMILAR value to 01  . S ( h Semi denotes the least common ancestor of S and Semi  . For instance , ( Hh03(' lHb06) = H . Tile Information-Load ( S ) of a senmntic class Six defined as Entropy ( so nlantic system ) -Entropy ( S )  . Simply speaking it is the anlount of reduced entropy after S is seen  . En-tropy(S ) = ~\] i = l , k-p(SemilS )* LogP ( SemiJs ) , where Semi , Sem 2 . . . . . Semk is lheset of the bottoln level selnantic lasses contained in S  . 
Jr , 5% t , n  ~ , ~-( f ~) AoI73 llh031 , (7J ~#~( t ~) Bo 171 , ~;' . te (7"( , l ~) A oI 73I11~032 SII ; ~(~) If 083 Ih063I~JTl(\]~)11 c01311 e032 ll~(L , t t ~ ( 4~ ) Ili 141 tlj 345 LI~7':~@~ ) I 1c ( )32  ( 7PJ '-?! ( '~~ ) Fa 221
I ~1 ~ ) j ( 4~ ) Eb 3424 ~ Jl ~ ( 4~ ) Iic071'i:\['~ ) 2@~ ) Eb 342/JJ ( JC ( lJ  ~ ) I h03 1~1 ~ , , , : (~) AoI 621 171 62 ? , 3~(4 , ~) P > e(>51 gg~'l . ;@)I)k1621fg191~J~!',lZ(~J~)1h0425', J(,) . @) Be041, ~': ~\[ ;41@~)117192 . - - Ill Iu " . : ILT-)I':(IN ) Ca039 Ca041 ~ . ~ pl ) (4~) FhOI2Os ~! l\]Ja(t ~) 11c122IJl:\] ; ' ; : : (45~)1\[c231~t&iI(q~b\]~ , 12i 4 , ,i~1;~( . 4', 2~) Fa 212 . hl 102 Table 2 . The senlanlic categories ol'modifiers of tile COlllpouud sel'X-"f ~ ~ mathinc " Takelhe wordl~'~i:J':I ~' learning-word-inachine ' as example  . Intile table 3 , the results show tile estiinated similarity between tile 
X - ~ J , ~ Seru if req i

Ao 173


Ae162

Ilnl ' or rnation-Load ( HglI1f-IHh031 ) = hlfornlation-Load ( H ) =2 . 231 lnfornlation-Load ( Hgl 11 NI 1e032 ) = hlformation-Load ( Ii ) =2 . 231 Inforuultion-l ~ oad ( ItgI 11I'3 fig 191 ) = lnformation-Load ( Hg ) =5 . 91 ? i = l , khfformation-Load(HglI1f-ISemi )* Freqi=2 . 231"3+2 . 231"2+5 . 912" 1 +  . . . . . .

Max-Vahlel = Zihffornlation-Load ( Hg031 f-I Semi ) * Freq i = 1 55 . 164 S1 MILAP ,= (104 . 632 / 155 . 164) = 0 . 6743 Table 3 . The derived morphological rule for tile ulorphenle ' machine ' and tile simihu'ity measure of  , ~ . ~l ~ j ? : t ~ " aS ; _i I1OUn conlpound which denotes a kind of nlachille . 
175 compound ~-~ and the extracted examples . The similarity value is also considered as the logical properness value of this compound  . In this case is 0 . 67 , which can be interpreted as that we have 67% of confidence to say that ~ z ~' learning-word -machine ' is a wellformed compound  . 
The above representation model serves many functions  . First of all it serves as the morl3hological rules of the coln pounds . Second it serves as a mean to implement the evaluation function  . Third it serves as a mean to disambiguate he semantic ambiguity of the morphological head of a compound noun  . For instance , them are four different @ . 
Each denotes ' machine ' , ' air plane ' , ' opportunity ' and ' secret ' and they are considered as four different morphemes  . The example shows that ' ~~ ~ ~' denotes a machine not other senses  , since the evaluation score for matching the rules of '~-' machine'has the highest evaluation score among the ln  . 
The above discussion shows the basic concept and the baseline model of the example-based model  . The above similarity measure is called over-all -similarity measure  , since it takes the equal weight on the similarity values of the input compound with every member in the class  . Another similarity measumis called maximal -similarity  , which is defined as follows . It takes the maximal value of the similarity between input compound and every member in the class as the output  . 
SlM2 ( Word , Rule ) = Maxi = l,k(Information
Load(Sem~Semi ))/ Max-value2
Both similarity measures are reasonable and have their own advantages  . The experiment results showed that the combination of these two measures achieved the best performance on the weights of w  1=0  . 3 and w2 = 0 . 7 ( Chen & Chen1998), i . e . SIM=SIMI*wl+SIM2*w2, where wl+w2=1 . We adop this measure in our experiments . 
It also showed a strong co-relation between the similarity scores and the human evaluation scores on the properness of testing compounds  . The human considem dbad compound showed also low similarity scores by computers  . 
3 . System Implementation 3 . 1 Knowledge sources To categorize unknown words , the computer system has to equip with the linguistic and semantic knowledge about words  , morphemes , and word formation rules . The knowledge is facilitated to identify words , to categorize their semantic and syntactic lasses  , and to evaluate the properness of word formation and the confidence level of categorization  . In our experiments , the available knowledge sources include : 1 ) CKIP lexicon : an 80 , 0 00 entry Chinese lexicon with syntactic categories for each entry  ( CKIP 1993 )  . 
2) Chilin : a thesaurus of synonym classes , which contains about 70 , 000 words distributed under 1428 semantic lasses ( Mei 1984 )  . 
3 ) Sinica Corpus : a 5 million word balanced Chinese corpus with word segmented and part-of-speech tagged  ( Chen 1996 )  . 
4) the Collocation Dictionary of Noun and
Measure Words ( CDNM ) : The CDNM lists collocating measure words for nouns  . The nouns in this dictionary are arranged by their ending morpheme  , i . e . head morpheme . There are 1910 noun ending morphemes and 12 , 3 52 example nouns grouped according to their different senses  . 
Each knowledge source provides partial data for representing morphological rules  , which in-clndes lists of sample compounds , high frequency morphemes and their syntactic and semantic information  . Unknown words and their frequencies can be extracted from the Sinica corpus  . 
The extracted unknown words produce the testing data and the morpheme-category asso-ciation -strength which are used in the algorithm for the syntactic category prediction for unknown words  ( Chen et al 1997 )  . The CKIP dictionary provides the syntactic categories for morphemes and words  . The Chilin provides the semantic categories for morpheme and words  . 
The CDNM provides the set of high frequency noun morphemes and the example compounds grouped according to each difference sense  . The semantic categories for each sense is extracted from the Chilin and disambiguated manually  . 
The sample compounds for each sense-difl'emntiated morpheme xtracted from CDNM form the base samples for the morphological rules  . Additional samples are supplemented from the Chilin  . 
3 . 2 Tile algorithm for morphological analysis The process of morphological analysis for compound words is very similar to Chinese word segmentation process  . It requires dictionary lookup for matching nlor phemes and resolution methods for the inherent ambiguou segment a-ventional word segmentation algorithms cannot apply for the morphological analysis without modification  , since then lorpho-syntactic behavior is different froth syntactic behavior  . Since ihcstructure of the Chinese COlll pound nOt lllS is head final and the most productive morphemes arc mono syllabic  , there is a simple and effective algorithm , which agrees with these facts . This algorithm segments input compounds flom left to right by the longest matching criterion  ( Chcn & Liu 1992 )  . It is clear that the loft to right longest lllaiching algorithm prel'ers shorler head and longer modifier structtlres  . 
3.3 Senlantic categories of morphemes
The semantic categories of morphemes arc lot-lowed from the thesaurus Chilin  . This thesaurus is a lattice structure of concept taxonomy  . Mor-phemes/words may have multiple classification due to either ambiguous classification or inherent so-illantic mn biguitios  . For lheam biguous scn'lantic categories o1' amorl ) hcmo , lh clower ranking se-nmntic categories will be eliminated and leave the higher-rankings cnlantic categories to conlpotc during the identification process  . For instances , in the table 2 only there ; tier categories of each example are shown . Since the majority of nlorphemcs are unanlbiguous  , they will compensate the uncertainty caused by die semantically ambiguous roof phemes  . The rank of a semantic category of a mot'-phonic depends on the Occurrillg order  o1: lhis lilO1-plionlo in ils synonylngroup , sincelh carrang cincnt of the Chilin cilirics is by this natural  , hi addition , dt lo to limit coverage o 1: Chil in , nlally of the ll\]Ol'-phemes arc not listed . For the unlisted morphemes , we recursiv cly apply the currellt algorithm to predict their semantic categories  . 
4. Semantic Chlssification and Ambiguity
Resolution for Compound Nouns
The demand o1" a semantic hlssification system for COlll pound nouns was first raised while the task of selnantic tagging for Chinese corpus was lriod  . The Sinca corpus is a 5 in Ilion-word Chinese corpus with part of speech lagging  , litlhis corpus there are 47 , 777 word typos tagged with conllll OnnOl . lllS and Ollly 12 , 536 Oftholll are listed ill the Chilin . They count only 26 . 23% . In oilier words the scm and c categories for most of the common nouns arct in-known  . They will be the target for automatic semantic classification  . 
4.1 Derivation of morphological rules
A list of ' most productive lrior phoinos arc first generated from the unknown words extracted fl'om the Sinica corpus  . The morphological rules o1' the sot of the lllOSl productive head mor-phonies llO derived flonltheir examples  . Both the CI ) MN all ( \] Chilin provide SO lil Oox an lplcs . 
Solhrthereare 1910 head morphemes for compound nouns with examples in the system and increasing  . They are all monosyllabic morphemes . For the top 200 most productive mor-phen lcs , among them 51 . 5% are polysemous and in average each has 3 . 5 different meanings . \]' tie coverage of ihect lrrollt 1910 illor phonlosis aboul 71% of ih cuilk ii own noun conl pounds of theie sling dala  . Therosl 29% t in covorod noun nlor phonlos are cilher polysyllabici-llor pholiies or/lielow frequency nlorl ~ hemes  . 
4.2 Semantic classification algorithm
The unknown compound nouns extracted from the Sinica corpus w'cre classified according to Ihc morphological representation by the simihtr-ity -bascd algorilt nn  . The problcms of semantic ambiguitics and out-of -coverage morphcmcs were two major dilTicultics to be solved during the classification stage  . The complete scmanlic classification algorilhm is as follows : I  ) For each in pu ! noun compound , apply morphological analysis algorilhm lode rive die morphemic components of the input compound  . 
2) I ) clcrminc the head nlorphen lc and modifiers.
' flit:dcfaull headillor phcllloislh clast lii or-phonic of a conlpound  . 
3 ) Got die synlactic and semantic categories of the modifiers  . If a modil \] or is also antin-known word , lhen apply this algorilhm rocur-sively to idendfy its son-i all tic category  . 
4 ) For lhehead morpholne with the representational rules  , apply si in ilarity illeast lro for each possible sornantic chtss and outptlt the so-manlic class with lhe highests i in i lariiy w thic  . 
5 ) If the headillor phonlo is not covered by tile nlor phological rules  , search its semantic lass from the Chilin . If its semantic lass is not list in the Chilin , then no arisw cr can be found , if it is polysemous , then the top ranked classes will be the output . 
In lhcstep I , thc algorithm rcs olvcs the possible ambiguities o1' the morphological slrtlct tlrcs of the input CO lllpound  . In the step 3 , these lllantic categories of the modil'ier arc determined  . There arc some complications . The firsl complication is lhat lhemodifier has nmltiple semantic are-lower ranking order will be eliminated  . The remaining categories will be processed independently  . 
One of the semantic categories of the modifier pairing with one of the rule of the head morpheme with the category will achieve the maximal similarity value  . The step 4 thus achieves the resolution of both semantic ambiguities of the head and tile modifier  . However only the category of the head is our target of resolution  . The second complication is that the modifier is also unknown  . If it is a not listed in the Chilin , there is no way of knowing its semantic categories by tileer a'rent available resources  . At the step 4 , the prediction of semantic category of the input compound will depend solely on the information about its head morpheme  . If the head morpheme is unambiguous then output the category of the head morpheme as the prediction  . 
Otherwise , outpu the semantic a tegory of the top rank sense of the head morpheme  . The step 5 handles the cases of exceptions , i . e . no representational rule for head morphemes . 
4.3 Experimental results
The system classifes the set of unknown common nouns extracted from tile Sinica corpus  . We randomly picked two hundred samples from tile output for the performance valuation by examining the semantic classification manually  . The correction rate for semantic lassil'ication is  84% and 81% for tile frst hundred samples and the second hundred samples respectively  . We further classify time rrors into different ypes  . The first type is caused by the selection error while disambiguating the polysemous head lnorphemes  . The second type is caused by the fact that the meanings of some compounds are not semanticom -position of tile meanings of their morphological components  . Tile third type errors are caused by the fact that a few compounds are conjunctive structures not assumed head-modifier structure by the system  . Tileforth type errors are caused by the head -initial constructions  . Other than tile classification errors , there exist 10 unidentifiable coln pounds , 4 and 6 in each set , for their head morphemes are not listed in tile system nor in the Chilin  . Among tile 190 identifiable head morphemes ,   142 of them are covered by the morphological rules encoded in the system and  80 of the ln have multiple semantic categories . 
Tile semantic categories of remaining 48 head morphemes were found fiom the Chilin . If the type 1 selection errors are all caused by the 80 morphemes with multiple semantic categories , then the correction rate of semantic disambiguation by our similarity-based measure is  ( 80-15 ) /80 = 81% . 
Testing data 1 Testing data 2 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Total : 100 error : 12 type l ( semantic selection error ) :8 type 2 ( non-compositional ) :2 type 3 ( conjunction ) : Itypre 4 ( head-initial ) : 1 unidentified : 4
Total : 100 error : 13 type l ( semantic selection error ) :7 type 3 ( non-compositional ) :5 type 3 ( con . junction ) :0 typre 4 ( head-initial ) : 1 unidentified : 6 Table 5 . The performance valuations of 5 . Further Remarks and Conclusions In general if an unknown word was extracted from corpora  , both of its syntactic and semanticate go-ries are not known  . The syntactic ategories will be predicted first according to its prefix-category and suffix -category associations as mentioned in  ( Chen et al 1997 )  . According to the top ranked syntactic predictions  , each respective semantic representational rules or models will be applied to produce the morphosemantic plausibility of the unknown word of its respective syntactic atego-rization  . For instance if the predicted syntactic the semantic lassification algorithm categories are either a common noun or a verb  , the algorithm present in this paper will be carried out to classify its semantic ategory and produce its plausibility value for the noun category  . Similar process should deal with tile case of verbs and produce tile plausibility of being a verb  . The final syntactic and semantic prediction will be based oil their plausibility values and its contextual environments  ( Bai et al 1998 , Ide 1998) . 
The advantages of tile current representational model are :  1  ) it is declarative . New examples and new mor-changing the processing algorilhm  , but 111e performance o1' the system might be increase due to the increlnent of the knowledge  . 
2 ) The representational model not only provides the semantic classification of the unknown words but also gives the w due of the phmsibil-ity  o1' a compound construction . This value could be utilized to resolve the aln biguous matching between compeling compound rules  . 
3 ) The representational model can be extended for presenting compound verbs  . 
4 ) It acts as one of the major building block of a self-learning systeln for linguistic and world knowledge acquisition on the lnternel environ-ll lell t  . 
Tile classification errors are caused by a ) some of the testing examples have no semantic omposi-tion property  , b ) some semantic lassifications are too much finegrained  . There is no clearcut difference between some classes  , even Imman judge cannot l nake a right classification  , c ) there are not enough samples that causes the simihuity-based model does not work on the suffixes with few or no sample data  . The above classification errors can be resolved by collecting the new words  , which are Selnantically nol > compositional , into tile lexicon and by adding new examples for each na or phenle  . 
Current Selnanticategorization system only roughly classifies the unknown compound nouns according to their semantic heads  . In the future deeper analysis on the semantic relations between modifier and head should also be carried otll  . 
6. Rel'erences
Bai , M . H . , C . J . Chert & K . .I . Chert ,  1998 , " POS-lagging for Chinese Unknown Words by
Contextual P , ules " Proceedings of
ROCLING , pp . 47-62.
Chang, . 1 . S . ,S . D . Chert , S . J . Ker , Y . Chert , & J . 
Liu , 1994"A Multiple-Corpus Approach to
Recognition of Proper Nmnes in Chinese
Texts " , Computer Processing o /" Chinese and Oriental Languages  , Vo\[ . 8, No . 1, pp . 

Chert , C . J . , M . It . Bai , K . J . Chert ,  1997 , " Catego-ry Guessing for Chinese Unknown Words . "
Proceedings of the Natural Langttage
Processing Pac(fi'cRim Symposimn 1997, pp .  3540 . NLPRS'97 Thailand . 
Chert , K . J . , C . J . Chert , 1998, " A Corpusbased
Study on Computational Morphology for
Mandarin Chinese ", in Qlmnlitative and
Comlmtationa \ [ Studies on the Chinese lxmg ttage Edsbyl ?  , cnj an finK . Tsou , City
Univ . of Hong Kong , pp 283-306.
Chert , l < eh- . liann , Ming-Hong Bai ,  1997 , " Unknown Wolzll ) etection for Chinese by a
Corpusbased Learning Method . " Proceedings of the lOth Research on Comlm -lalional Linguistics International Conference  , pp 159-174 . 
Chert , K . J . & S . II . Liu ,  1992 , " Word ktentification for Mandarin Chinese Sentences  , " lbv-ceeding so . f14th Colili , g , pp .  101 - 107 . 
Chien , Leefeng ,  1999 , " lWF-tree-based Adaptive Keyphrase Extraction for Intelligent Chine-se Information Retrieval  , " Information Processing and Management , Vol . 35, pp . 

l ; ungP . , 1998 , " Extracting Key Terms from Chinese and Japanese Texts  , " Computer Processing of Oriental Languages , Vol . 12, #1, pp 99-122 . 
Huang , C . R . E1 al . ,1995 , " Thelnlroduction of Sinica Corpus , " Proceedings of ROCIJNG
VIII , pp . 81-89.
lhtang , Chu-P , en , Keh-Jiann Chert , and Ching-hsiung Lai ,  1997 , Mandarin 1) ally Classification l ) ictionary , Taipci : Mandarinl ) aily Press . 
Ide , Nancy & Jean Veronis ,  1998 , " Special Issue on Word Sensel ) is ambiguation " , Computational Linguistics , Vol . 24,  #I . 
Lee , J . C . , Y . S . Lee and H . H . Chert ,  1994 , " Identification of Personal Names in Chinese Texts  . " Proceedings of 7th ROC
Computational Linguistics Conference.
Lin , M . Y . , T . H . Chiang , & K . Y . Su , t993, " A
Preliminary Study on Unknown Word
Problem in Chinese Word Segmentation "
Proceedings of Reeling V1, pp 119-137.
Mei , Gia-Chu etc . , 1984 Iq*--4~~q ~ qg . ( Chilin-thesaurus of Chinese words ) . Hong Kong , McDonald1) . , 1996 , " Internal and External Evidence in the Identification and Semantic 
Categorization of Proper Names ", in
Corpus Processing Jot Lexical Acquisition , J . Pustejovsky and B . Boguraev Eds , MIT
Press 1996.
Sun , M . S . , C . N . Huang , H . Y . Gao , & Jie Fang ,  1994 , " Identifying Chinese Names in Unrestricted Texts  "  , Communication of COLIPS , 
Vol . 4 No . 2.113-122.

