Fertilization of Case Frame Dictionary
for Robust Japanese Case Analysis
Daisuke Kawahara ? and Sadao Kurohashi??
?Graduate School of Information Science and Technology  , University of Tokyo
? PRESTO , Japan Science and Technology Corporation ( JST)


This paper proposes a method offertilizing a Japanese case frame dictionary to handle complicated expressions : double nominative sentences  , non-gapping relation of relative clauses , and case change . Our method is divided into two stages . In the first stage , we parse a large corpus and construct a Japanese case frame dictionary automatically from the parse results  . In the second stage , we apply case analysis to the large corpus utilizing the constructed case frame dictionary  , and upgrade the case frame dictionary by incorporating newly acquired information  . 
1 Introduction
To understand a text , it is necessary to find out relations between words in the text  . What is required to do so is a case frame dictionary  . It describes what kinds of cases each verb has and what kinds of nouns can fill a case slot  . Since these relations have millions of combinations  , it is difficult to construct a case frame dictionary by hand  . We proposed a method to construct a Japanese case frame dictionary automatically by arranging large volumes of parse results by coupling a verb and its closest case component  ( Kawahara and Kurohashi ,  2001) . 
This case frame dictionary , however , could not handle complicated expressions : double nominative sentences  , non-gapping relation of relative clauses , and case change . 
This paper proposes a method offertiliz-ing the case frame dictionary to handle these complicated expressions  . We take an iterative method which consists of two stages  . This means gradual learning of what is understood by an analyzer in each stage  . In the first stage , we parse a large raw corpus and construct a Japanese case frame dictionary automatically from the parse results  . This is the method proposed by ( Kawahara and Kurohashi ,  2001) . In the second stage , we apply case analysis to the large corpus utilizing the constructed case frame dictionary  , and upgrade the case frame dictionary by incorporating newly acquired information  . 
We conducted a case analysis experiment with the upgraded case frame dictionary  , and its evaluation showed effectiveness of the fertil-ization process  . 
2 Japanese Grammar
We introduce Japanese grammar briefly in this section  . 
Japanese is a head-final language . Word order does not play a case-marking role . Instead , postpositions function as case markers ( CMs ) . 
The basic structure of a Japanese sentence is as follows:  ( 1 ) kare he ganom-CM hon book wo acc-CM kaku write ( he writes a book ) ga and wo are postpositions which mean nominative and accusative  , respectively . karega and honwo are case components , and kaku is a verb 1 . 
There are two phenomena that case markers are hidden  . 
A modifying clause is left to the modified noun in Japanese  . In this paper , we call a noun modified by a clause clausal modifiee  . 
A clausal modifiee is usually a case component for the verb of the modifying clause  . There is , however , no case marker for their relation . 
1 In this paper , we call verbs , adjectives , and noun + copulas as verbs for convenience . 
(2 ) honbook wo acc-CM kaita write hit opers on ( the person who wrote the book )   ( 3 ) kare hega nom-CM kaita write hon book ( a book which he wrote ) In ( 2 )  , hito ? person ? hasga ? nominative ? relation to kaita ? write ?  . In (3) , hon ? book ? haswo ? accusative ? relation to kaita ? write ?  . 
There are some noncase-marking postpositions , such as wa and mo . They topicalize or emphasize noun phrases . We call them topic markers ( TMs ) and a phrase followed by one of them TM phrase . 
(4) karehewa
TMhonbook wo acc-CM kaita write ( he wrote a book )   ( 5 ) kareheganom-CM honbookmo
TM kaita write ( he wrote a book also )
In (4), wais interpreted as ga?nominative ? . In (5), mois interpreted as wo ? accusative ? . 
3 Construction of the initial case frame dictionary This section describes how to construct the initial case frame dictionary  . This is the first stage of our twostage approach , and is performed by the method proposed by ( Kawahara and Kurohashi ,  2001) . In the rest of this section , we describe this approach in detail . 
The biggest problem in automatic case frame construction is verb sense ambiguity  . Verbs which have different meanings should have different case frames  , but it is hard to disambiguate verb senses very precisely  . To deal with this problem , we distinguish predicate-argument examples , which are collected from a large corpus , by coupling a verb and its closest case component  . That is , examples are not distinguished by verbs such as naru ? make/become ? and tsumu ? load/accumulate  ?  , but by couples such as ? tomodachininaru ? ? make a friend ?  , ? byoukininaru ? ? becomesick ? , ? nimotsu wotsumu ? ? load baggage ? , and ? keiken wotsumu ?? accumulate experience ? . 
This process makes separate case frames which have almost the same meaning or usage  . 
For example , ? nimotsu wotsumu ? ? load baggage ? and ? bus shi wotsumu ? ? load supply ? are separate case frames  . To merge these similar case frames and increase coverage of the case frame  , we cluster the case frames . 
We employ the following procedure for the automatic case frame construction :  1  . A large raw corpus is parsed by a Japanese parser  , and reliable predicate-argument examples are extracted from the parse results  . Nouns with a TM such as wa or mo and clausal modifiees are discarded  , because their case markers cannot be understood by syntactic analysis  . 
2 . The extracted examples are bundled according to the verb and its closest case component  , making initial case frames . 
3 . The initial case frames are clustered using a similarity measure  , resulting in the final case frames . The similarity is calculated by using NTT thesaurus  . 
We constructed a case frame dictionary from newspaper articles of  20 years ( about 20 , 000 , 000 sentences ) . 
4 Target expressions
The following expressions could not be handled with the initial case frame dictionary shown in section  3  , because of lack of information in the case frame . 
Non-gapping relation
This is the case in which the clausal modifiee is not a case component of the verb in the modifying clause  , but is semantically associated with the clause . 
(6 ) k are gahes yu doken wo initiative nigiru have kaigimeeting  ( the meeting in which he has the initiative ) In this example , kaigi ? meeting ? is not a case component of nigiru ? have ?  , and there is no case relation between kaigi and nigiru  . We call this relation non-gapping relation . 
Double nominative sentence
This is the case in which the verb has two nominatives in sentences such as the following  . 
(7) kuruma car wa
TM engine ga engine yoi good ( the engine of the car is good ) In this example , wa plays a role of nominative , so yoi ? good ? subcategorizes two nominatives : kuruma ? car ? and engine  . We call this outer nominative outerga and this sentence double nominative sentence  . 
Case change
In Japanese , to express the same meaning , we can use different case markers . We call this phenomenon case change . 
(8) Tomga


Mary no of shiji wo support et a derive ( Tom derived his support from Mary ) In this example , Mary has kara ? from ? relation to et a ? derive ? . In this paper , we handle case change related to no ? of ? , such as ( no , kara ) . 
The following is an example that outer nominative is related to no case  . 
(9 ) kurumano car engine ga engine yoi good ( the engine of the car is good ) The outer nominative of ( 7 ) can be nominal modifier of the inner nominative like this example  . This is case change of ( no , outerga ) . 
There is a different case from the above that an NP with no modifying a case component does not have a case relation to the verb  . 
(10 ) k are gahe kaigino meetings yu doken wo initiative nigiru have  ( he has the initiative in the meeting ) In this example , kaigi ? meeting ? has a no relation to syudoken ? initiative ?  , but does not have a case relation to nigiru ? have ?  . This example is a transformation of (6) , and includes case change of ( no , non-gapping ) . 
5 Fertilization of case frame dictionary We construct a fertilized case frame dictionary from the initial case frame dictionary shown in section  3  , to handle the complicated expressions described in section  4  . 
We apply case analysis to a large corpus using the dictionary  , collect information which could not be acquired by a mere parsing  , and upgrade the case frame dictionary . 
The procedure is as follows ( figure 1):1 . The initial case frames are acquired by the method shown in section  3  . 
2 . Case analysis utilizing the case frames acquired in phase  1 is applied to a large corpus , and examples of outer nominative are collected from case analysis results  . 
3 . Case analysis utilizing the case frames acquired in phase  2 is applied to the large corpus , and examples of non-gapping relation are collected similarly  . 
4 . Case similarities are judged to handle case change  . 
5 . 1 Case analysis based on the initial case frame dictionary Case analysis of TM phrases and clausal modi-fiees is indebted to a case frame dictionary  . This section describes an example of case analysis utilizing the initial case frame dictionary  . 
(11) so no that honbook wa
TMk are gahe to syok an library deiny on daread ( heread that book in the library ) Case analysis of this example chooses the following case frame ? to syok and eyonda ? ? read in the library ?  ( ?*? in the case frame means the closest CM . ) . 
CM examples input read nomperson , child , ? ? ? heacc book , paper , ??? bookloc * library , house , ??? library kare?he ? and to syok an ? library ? correspond to nominative and locative  , respectively , according to the surface cases . The case marker of TM phrase ? honwa ? ? book ( TM ) ? cannot be understood by the surface case , but it is interpreted as wo ? accusative ? because of the matching between ? h on w a ?? book  ( TM ) ? and the accusative case slot of the case frame ( underlined in the case frame )  . 
gano fueru consumer bank company outer ga corporation bank Jap an effect result profit  ( 1 ) case frames based on parsing ( 2 ) collection of outer nominative ( 3 ) collection of non-gapping relation ( 4 ) case similarity judgement
Figure 1: Outline of our method 5 . 2 Collecting examples of outer nominative In the initial case frame construction described in section  3  , the TM phrase was discarded , because its case marker could not be understood by parsing  . In the example (7) , ? engine gayoi ? ? the engine is good ? is used to build the initial case frame  , but the TM phrase ? kurumawa ? ? the car ? is not used  . 
Case analysis based on the initial case frame dictionary tells a case of a TM phrase  . Correspondence to outer nominative cannot be understood by the case slot matching  , but indirectly . 
If the TM cannot correspond to any case slots of the initial case frame  , the TM can be regarded as outer nominative . For example , in the case of (7) , since the case frame of ? engine gayoi ? ? the engine is good ? has only nominative which corresponds to ? engine ?  , the TM of ? kurumawa ? cannot correspond to any case slots and is recognized as outer nominative  . On the other hand , in the case of (11) , the TM of honwa is recognized as accusative , because hon ? book ? is similar to the examples of the accusative slot  . 
We can distinguish and collect outer nominative examples in this way  . 
We apply the following procedure to each sentence which has both a TM and ga  . To reduce the influence of parsing errors , the collection process of these sentences is done under the condition that a TM phrase has no candidates of its modifying head without its verb  . 
1 . We apply case analysis to a verb which is a head of a TM phrase  . If the verb does not have the closest case component and cannot select a case frame  , we quit processing this sentence and proceed to the next sentence  . In this phase , the TM phrase is not made correspondence with a case of the selected case frame  . 
2 . If the case frame does not have any cases which have no correspondence with the case components in the input  , the TM cannot correspond to any case slots and is regarded as outer nominative  . This TM phrase is added to outer nominative examples of the case frame  . 
The following is an example of this process.
(12) nagailong sumo sumowa
TMashi-koshini legs and loinsfutangaburden kakaruimpose  ( long sumo imposes a burden on legs and loins ) Case analysis of this example chooses the following case frame ? futangaka ru??impose a burden ?  . 
CM examples input impose nom * burden burden dat heart  , legs , loins , ??? legs and loinsfutan ? burden ? and ashi -koshi ? legs and loins ? correspond to nominative and dative of the case frame  , respectively , and sumo corresponds to no case marker . Accordingly , the TM of ? sumowa ? is recognized as outer nominative  , and sumo is added to outer nominative examples of the case frame ? futangakaru ?  . 
This process made outer nominative of 15 , 302 case frames ( of 597 verbs) . 
5 . 3 Collecting examples of non-gapping relation Examples of non-gapping relation can be collected in a similar way to outer nominative  . 
When a clausal modifiee has non-gapping relation , it should not be similar to any examples of any cases in the case frame  , because the constructed case frames have examples of only cases except for non-gapping relation  . From this point of view , we apply the following procedure to each example sentence which contains a modifying clause  . To reduce the influence of parsing errors , the collection process of example sentences is done under the condition that a verb in a clause has no candidates of its modifying head without its clausal modifiee  ( ???? [ modifying verb] N1 no N2? is not collected )  . 
1 . We apply case analysis to a verb which is contained by a modifying clause  . If the verb does not have the closest case component and cannot select a case frame  , we quit processing this sentence and proceed to the next sentence  . In this phase , the clausal modifiee is not made correspondence with a case of the selected case frame  . 
2 . If the similarity between the clausal modifiee and examples of any cases which have no correspondence with input case components does not exceed a threshold  , this clausal modifiee is added to examples of non -gapping relation in the case frame  . We set the threshold 0 . 3 empirically . 
The following is an example of this process.
(13 ) gyomubusiness woit on a mucarry on menkyolicense wo syutoku-shitaget  ( ? got alicense to carry on business ) Case analysis of this example chooses the following case frame ? gyomu  , business woit on a mu ? ? carry on work , business ? . 
CM examples input carry on nombank , company , ???- acc * work , business business Nominative of this case frame has no correspondence with a case component of the input  , so the clausal modifiee , menkyo ? license ? , is checked whether it can correspond to nominative case examples  . In this case , the similarity between menkyo ? license ? and examples of nominative is not so high  . Consequently , the relation of menkyo?license ? is recognized as non-gapping relation  , and menkyo is added to examples of non-gapping relation in the case frame ? gyomu  , business woit on a mu ? . 
(14 ) ih ouniille gally denwatele phonegy omubusiness woit on and e-it a carry on ut agaisuspect  ( suspect that ? carried on telephone business illegally  ) In this case , the above case frame is also selected . Since ut agai ? suspect ? is not similar to the nominative case examples  , it is added to case examples of non-gapping relation in the case frame  . 
This process made non-gapping relation of 23 , 094 case frames ( of 637 verbs) . 
Collecting examples of non-gapping relation for all the case frames Non-gapping relation words which have wide distribution over verbs can be considered to have non-gapping relation for all the verbs or case frames  . We add these words to examples of non-gapping relation of all the case frames  . 
For example , 5 verbs have menk yo ? license ? ( example ( 13 ) ) in their non-gapping relation , and 381 verbs have ut agai ? suspect ? ( example ( 14 ) ) . 
We , consequently , judgeut a gai has non-gapping relation for all the case frames  . We call such a word global non-gapping word . 
We treated words which have non-gapping relation for more than  100 verbs as global non-gapping words . We acquired 128 global non-gapping words , and the following is the examples of them ( in English )  . 
possibility , necessity , result , course , case , thought , schedule , outlook , plan , chance ,  ? ? ? 5 . 4 Case similarity judgement To deal with case change  , we applied the following process to every case frame withouter nominative and non-gapping relation  . 
1. A similarity of every two cases is calculated.
It is the average of similarities between all the combinations of case examples  . But similarities of couples of basic cases are not handled  , such as ( ga , wo ) , ( ga , ni ) , ( wo , ni ) , and so on . 
2 . A couple whose similarity exceeds a threshold is judged to be similar  , and is merged into one case . We set the threshold 0 . 8 empirically . 
The following example is the case when this process is applied to ? setsumei  , syakumei womotome ru??dem and explanation , excuse ? . 
CM examples demand nomcommittee , group , acc * explanation , excused at government , president , about progress , condition , state , no progress , reason , content , In this case frame , the examples of no ? of?2 are similar to those of nitsuite ? about ? , and the similarity between them is very high ,  0 . 94 , so these case examples are merged into a new case no/ni-tsuite ? of/about ?  . 
By this process ,  6 , 461 couples of similar cases are merged . An NP with no modifying a case component can be analyzed by this merging  . 
6 Case Analysis
To perform case analysis , we basically employ the algorithm proposed by ( Kurohashi and Nagao ,  1994) . In this section , our case analysis method of the complicated expressions shown in section  4 is described . 
6.1 Analysis of clausal modifiees
If an clausal modifiee is a function word such as koto ?  ( that clause ) ? or tame ? due ? , or a time expression such as 3 ji ? three o?clock ? or saik in ? recently ? , it is analyzed as non-gapping relation . 
2 Innocase in case frames , every noun which modifies the closest case component of the verb is collected  . 
The other clausal modifiee can correspond to ga ? nominative ?  , wo ? accusative ? , ni ? dative ? , outerga ? outer nominative ? , non-gapping relation , or no ? of ? . We decide a corresponding case which maximizes the  score3 of the verb in the clause . If a clausal modifiee corresponds to ga , wo , ni , or outerga , the relation is decided as it is . If it corresponds to non-gapping relation or no , the relation is decided as non-gapping relation . In the case of corresponding to no , the clausal modifiee has no relation to the closest case component of the verb  . 
A clausal modifiee can correspond to non-gapping relation or no under the condition that similarity between the clausal modifiee and case examples of non-gapping relation or no is the maximum value  ( which means two nouns locate in the same node in a thesaurus  )  . This is because a noun which is a little similar to case examples of non-gapping relation may not have non-gapping relation  . 
6.2 Analysis of TM phrases
If a TM phrase is a time expression , it is analyzed as time case . The other TM phrase can correspond to ga ? nominative ?  , wo ? accusative ? , or outerga ? outer nominative ? . We decide a corresponding case which maximizes the score of the verb modified by the TM phrase  . When the verb has both a case component with ga and a TM phrase  , the case component with ga corresponds to gain the selected case frame  , and its TM phrase corresponds to wo or outer ga . If the correspondence between the TM phrase and outerga case components gets the best similarity  , the input sentence is recognized as a double nominative sentence  . 
6.3 Analysis of case change
If the selected case frame of the input verb has merged cases which include no ? of ?  , no case in the input sentence is interpreted as the counterpart of no between the merged cases  . If not , the no case is considered not to have a case relation to the verb and has no corresponding case in the case frame  . 
3This score is the sum of each similarity between an input case component and examples of the corresponding case in the case frame  . 
Table 1: Case analysis accuracy clausal modifiee TM our method  301/358   307/345   84  . 0% 88 . 9% baseline 287/358 305/3458 0 . 1% 88 . 4%
Table 2: Non-gapping relation accuracy precision recall F our method  82/116   82/92   70  . 7% 89 . 1% 78 . 8% baseline 88/14888/9259 . 5% 95 . 7% 73 . 3% 7 Experiment
We made a case analysis experiment on
Japanese relevance-tagged corpus ( Kawahara et al . , 2002) . This corpus has correct tags of predicate -argument relations  . We conducted case analysis on an open test set which consists of  500 sentences , and evaluated clausal modi-fiees and TM phrases in these sentences  . To evaluate the real case analysis without influence of parsing errors  , we input the correct structure of the corpus sentences to the analyzer  . 
The accuracy of clausal modifiees and TM phrases is shown in table  1  , and the accuracy of non-gapping relation is shown in table  2  . The baseline of these tables is that if a clausal modifiee belongs to a non-gapping noun dictionary in which nouns always having non-gapping relation as clausal modifiees are written  , it is analyzed as non-gapping relation . 
The accuracy of clausal modifiees increased by 4% . This shows effectiveness of our fertil-ization process  . However , the accuracy of TM phrases did not increase . This is because the accuracy of TM phrases which were analyzed using added outer nominative examples was  4/6  , and its frequency was too low . The accuracy of case change was 2/4 . 
8 Related work
There has been some related work analyzing clausal modifiees and TM phrases  . Baldwin et al . analyzed clausal modifiees with heuristic rules or decision trees considering various linguistic features  ( Baldwin et al ,  1999) . Its accuracy was about 89% . Tor is awaanalyzed TM phrases using predicate -argument cooccurences and word classifications induced by the EM algorithm  ( Torisawa ,  2001) . Its accuracy was about 88% for wa and 84% formo . 
It is difficult to compare the accuracy because the range of target expressions is different  . Unlike related work , it is promising to utilize our resultant case frame dictionary for subsequent analyzes such as ellipsis or discourse analysis  . 
9 Conclusion
This paper proposed a method offertilizing the case frame dictionary to realize an analysis of the complicated expressions  , such as double nominative sentences , non-gapping relation , and case change . We can analyze these expressions accurately using the fertilized case frame dictionary  . So far , accuracy of subsequent analyzes such as ellipsis or discourse analysis has not been so high  , because double nominative sentences and non -gapping relation cannot be analyzed accurately  . It is promising to improve the accuracy of these analyzes utilizing the fer-tilized case frame dictionary  . 

Timothy Baldwin , Takenobu Tokunaga , and
Hozumi Tanaka .  1999 . The parameter-based analysis of Japanese relative clause constructions  . In IPSJSIJ Notes 1999-NL-134, pages 55?62 . 
Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi . 2001.
Japanese case frame construction by coupling the verb and its closest case component  . In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference  , pages 204?210 . 
Daisuke Kawahara , Sadao Kurohashi , and Ko?iti Hasida .  2002 . Construction of a Japanese relevance-tagged corpus  . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation  , pages 2008?2013 . 
Sadao Kurohashi and Makoto Nagao . 1994.
A method of case structure analysis for
Japanese sentences based on examples in case frame dictionary  . In IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems , volume E77-D

Kentaro Torisawa .  2001 . An unsupervised method for canonicalization of Japanese postpositions  . In Proceedings of the 6th Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Simposium  , pages 211?218 . 
