A Robust Cross-Style Bilingual Sentences Alignment Model 
Tz-Liang Kueng Keh-Yih Su
Behavior Design Corporation
2F , No . 5, Industry E . Rd . IV,
Science-Based Industrial Park,
Hsinchu , Taiwan 30077, R.O.C.
cavs , kysu@bdc.com.tw

Most current sentence alignment approaches adopt sentence length and cognate as the alignment features  ; and they are mostly trained and tested in the documents with the same style  . Since the length distribution , alignment-type distribution ( used by length-based approaches ) and cognate frequency vary significantly across texts with different styles  , the length-based approaches fail to achieve similar performance when tested in corpora of different styles  . The experiments show that the performance in F- measure could drop from  98  . 2% to 85 . 6% when a length-based approach is trained by a technical manual and then tested on a general magazine  . 
Since a large percentage of content words in the source text would be translated into the corresponding translation duals to preserve the meaning in the target text  , transfer lexicons are usually regarded as more reliable cues for aligning sentences when the alignment task is performed by human  . To enhance the robustness , a robust statistical model based on both transfer lexicons and sentence lengths are proposed in this paper  . After integrating the transfer lexicons into the model  , a 60% F-measure error reduction ( from 14 . 4% to 5 . 8%) is observed . 
1 Introduction
Since the bilingual corpus is a valuable resource for training statistical language models [ Dagon  , 91; Su et al , 95; Su and Chang ,   99] and sentence alignment is the first step for most such tasks  , many alignment approaches have been proposed in the literature [ Brown  , 91; Gale and Church , 93; Wu , 94; Vogel et al , 96; Och and Ney ,  2000] . Most of those reported approaches use the sentence length as the main feature to perform the alignment task  . 
For example , Brown et al ( 91 ) used the feature of number-of-words for alignment  , and [ Gale and Church , 9 3] claimed that better performance can be achieved ( 5 . 8% error rate for English-French corpus ) if the number-of-characters is adopted instead . 
As cognates are reliable cues for language pairs derived from the same family  , Church ( 93 ) also attacked this problem by considering cognates additionally  . Because most of those reported work are performed on those Indo-European language-pairs  , for testing the performance on non-Indo-European languages  , Wu ( 94 ) had tried both length and cognate features on the Hong Kong Hansard English Chinese corpus  , and 7 . 9% error rate has been reported . Besides , sentence alignment can also be indirectly achieved via more complicated word corresponding models [ Brown et al  , 93; Vogel et al , 96; Och and Ney ,  2000] . Since those word corresponding models , which also achieve similar performance , are more complicated and run relatively slow , they seems to be over-killed for the task of aligning sentences and will not be discussed in this paper  . 
Although length-based approaches abovementioned are simple and can achieve good performance  , they are usually trained and tested in the text with the same style  . Therefore , they are style-dependent approaches . Since performing supervised-training for each style is not feasible in many applications  , it would be interesting to know whether those length-based approaches can still achieve the similar performance if they are tested in the text with different styles other than the training corpora  . An experiment was thus conducted to train the parameters with a machinery technical manual  ; the performance is then tested on a general magazine  ( for introducing Taiwant of oreign visitors )  . It shows that the testing set performance of the length-based model  ( with cognates considered ) would drop from 98 . 2% ( tested in the same technical domain ) to 85 . 6%  ( tested in the new general magazine ) in F-measure . After investigating those errors , it has been found that the length distribution and alignment-type distribution  ( used by those length-based approaches ) vary significantly across the texts of different styles  ( as would be shown in Tables 5 . 2 and 5 . 3) , and the cognate-frequency1 drops greatly from the technical manual to a general magazine in non-Indo-European languages  ( as would be shown in Table 5 . 3) . 
On the other hand , sentence length is seldom used by a human to align bilingual sentences  . They usually do not align bilingual sentences by counting the number of characters  ( or words ) in the sentence pairs . Instead , since a large percentage of content words in the source text would be translated into their translation-duals to preserve the meaning in the target text  , transfer-lexicons are usually used for aligning sentences when the alignment task is performed by human  . To enhance the robustness across different styles  , transfer-lexicons are thus integrated into the traditional sentence-length based model in the proposed robust statistical model described below  . After integrating transfer-lexicons into the model  , a 60% F-measure error reduction ( from 14 . 4% to 5 . 8%) has been observed , which corresponds to improving the cross-style performance from  85  . 6% to 94 . 2% in F-measure . 
The details of the proposed robust model , the associated features extracted from the bilingual corpora  , and the probabilistic scoring function will be given in Section  2  . In Section 3 , we briefly mention some implementation issues . The associated performance evaluation is given in Section  4  , and Section 5 would address error analysis and discusses the limitation of the proposed statistical model  . Finally , the concluding remarks are given in Section 6 . 
1Here ? Cognate ? mainly refers to those English proper nouns  ( such as those company names of IBM , HP ; or the technical terms such as IEEE-1394 , etc . ) that appear in the Chinese text . As they are most likely to be directly copied from the English sentence into the corresponding Chinese one  , they are reliable cues . 
2 Statistical Sentence Alignment Model
Since an EnglishChinese bilingual corpus will be adopted in our experiments  , we will denote the source text with m sentences as  ESm1   , and its corresponding target text , with n sentences , as CS n1 . Let Mi = typei , 1 ,  ? ? ?  , typei , Ni denote the ith possible alignment-candidate , consisting of NiAlignment-Passages of type i , j , j = 1 ,  ? ? ?  , N i ; where type i , j is the matching type ( e . g . , 1?1,0?1,1 ? 0, etc . ) of the jth Alignment-Passage in the ith alignment-candidate  , and Ni denotes the number of the total Alignment -Passages in the ith alignment-candidate  . Then the statistical alignment model is to find the Bayesian estimate M?among all possible alignment candidates  , shown in the following equation
M ? = argmax

P ( MiES m1, CS n1). (2.1)
According to the Bayesian rule , the maximization problem in (2 . 1 ) is equivalent to solving the following maximization equation 
M ? = argmax

P ( ESm1, CSn1Mi)P ( Mi ) = argmax
MiP ( Aligned-Pairi , N i i , 1 typei , N i i , 1) P ( typei , N i i , 1) = argmax

Ni ? j=1 P ( Aligned-Pairi , j Aligned-Pairi , j?1 i , 1  , typei , ji , 1 ) ?
P ( typei,jtypei,j?1i , 1), (2 . 2) where Aligned-Pairi , j , j = 1 ,  ? ? ?  , N i , denotes the jth aligned EnglishChinese bilingual sentence groups pair in the ith alignment candidate  . 
Assume that
P ( Aligned-Pairi , j Aligned-Pairi , j?1 i , 1  , typei , ji , 1) ? P ( Aligned-Pairi , j typei , j ) ,  (2 . 3) and different type i , j in the ith alignment candidate are statistically  independent2  , then the above maximization problem can be approached by searching for 
M ? ? argmax

Ni ? j=1 P ( Aligned-Pairi , j typei , j)P ( typei , j ) ,  (2 . 4) where M ? denotes the desired candidate . 
2A more reasonable one should be the first-order Markov model  ( i . e . , Type-Bigram model ); however , it will significantly increase the searching time and thus is not adopted in this paper  . 
2.1 Baseline Model
To make the above model feasible , Aligned-Pairi , j should be first transformed into an appropriate feature space  . The baseline model will use both the length of sentence [ Brown et al  , 91; Gale and Church , 93] and English cognates [ Wu ,  94] , and is shown as follows : argmax

N i ? j=1 f(?c , ? wtypei , j)P (? cognate)P ( typei , j ) ,  (2 . 5 ) where ? c and ? w denote the normalized differences of characters and words as explained in the following  ; ? c is defined to be ( ltc?clsc)/?lscs2c , where lsc and ltc are the character numbers of the aligned bilingual portions of source text and target text  , respectively , under consideration ; c denotes the proportional constant for target -character-count and  s2c denotes the corresponding target-character-count variance per source-character  . Similarly , ? w is defined to be ( ltw ? wlsw)/?lsws2w , where lsw and ltw are the word numbers of the aligned bilingual portions of source text and target text  , respectively ; w denotes the proportional constant for target -word-count and  s2w denotes the corresponding target-word-count variance per source-word  . Also , the random variables ? c and ? w are assumed to have bivariate normal distribution and each possesses a standard normal distribution with mean  0 and variance 1  . Furthermore , ? cognate denotes ( ? Number of English cognates found in the given Chinese sentences ??? Number of corresponding English cognates found in the given English sentences ?  )  , and is Poisson3 distributed independent of its associated matching-type  ; also assume that ? cognate is independent of other features  ( i . e . , character-count and word count ) . 
2.2 Proposed Transfer Lexicon Model
Since transfer-lexicons are usually regarded as more reliable cues for aligning sentences when the alignment task is performed by human  , the above baseline model is further enhanced by adding  3Since almost all those English cognates found in the given Chinese sentences can be found in the corresponding English sentences  , ? cognate had better to be modeled as a Poisson distribution for a rare event  ( rather than Normal distribution as some papers did  )  . 
those associated transfer lexicons to it . Those translated Chinese words , which are derived from each English word ( contained in given English sentences ) by looking up some kinds of dictionaries , can be viewed as transfer-lexicons because they are very likely to appear in the translated Chinese sentence  . However , as the distribution of various possible translations  ( for each English lexicon ) found in our bilingual corpus is far more diversified4 compared with those transfer-lexicons obtained from the dictionary  , only a small number of transfer-lexicons can be matched if the exact-match is specified  . Therefore , each Chinese-Lexicon obtained from the dictionary is first augmented with its associated Chinese characters  , and then the augmented transfer-lexicons set are matched with the target Chinese sentence  ( s )  . Once an element of the augmented transfer -lexicons set is matched in the target Chinese sentence  , it is counted as being matched . So we compute the Normalized-Transfer-Lexicon -Matching - Measure  , ? Transfer ? Lexicons which denotes [ ( ? Number of augmented transfer-lexicons matched ?? ? Number of augmented transfer-lexicons unmatched  ?  ) /? Total Number of augmented transfer-lexicons sets ?]  , and add it to the original model as another additional feature  . 
Assume follows normal distribution and the associated parameters are estimated from the training set  , Equation (2 . 5) is then replaced by argmax Mi
N i ? j=1 f1(?c , ? wtypei , j)P (? cognate ) ? f2(?Transfer ? Lexicons ) ?
P ( typei,j ). (2.6) 3 Implementation
The best bilingual sentence alignment in those above models can be found by utilizing a dynamic programming algorithm  , which is similar to the dynamic time warping algorithm used in speech recognition [ Rabiner and Juang  ,  93] . Currently , the 4For example , the English word ? number ? are found to be translated into ? ? K ?  , ? K ? , ? ? K ? , ? ? K ? , ??? K ? ,  ?? ? , ? ? ? etc . , for a specific sense in the given corpus ; however , the transfer entries listed in the dictionary are ? ? K ? and ??? only  . 
Case I ( Length-Type Error )   ( E1 ) Compared to this , modern people have relatively better nutrition and mature faster  , working women marry later , and there has been a great decrease in frequency of births  , so that the number of periods in a lifetime correspondingly increases  , so it is not strange that the number of people afflicted with endometriosis increases greatly  . 
( C1) ? ? ? , ? HA????o  , < ? v??w u , ?>? by u ?? , ? ?2~% V ? ? b ?$? ? , ? ? q??P 66? ?6 . ? ? J7(E2) The problem is not confined to women . 
(E3 ) ? Sperm activity also noticeably decreases in men over forty  , ? says Taipei Medical Collegeurologist Chang Han -sheng  . 
( C2) . ? u?4,?4? ? uJ(,???6 p???'?C ??? ?+3L??;z 
Case II ( Length & Lexicon-Type Error )   ( E1 ) Second , the United States as well as Japan have provided lucrative export markets for countries in this region  . 
( E2) The U . S . was particularly generous in the postwary ears , keeping its markets open to products from Asia and giving nascent industries in the region a chance to catch up  . 
( C1) w ? , D(?1 ? ? r ? [ ? ?= ? ? ? , U = ? ? ? ? hE ? ? ? ? Figure 1: An illustration of length & lexical type error maximum number of either source sentences or target sentences allowed in each alignment unit is set to be  ?4?   ( i . e . , we will not consider those matching-types of ?5?   1?  ,  ?5? 2? ,  ?1? 5? , etc ) . 
Let s1 ,  ? ? ?  , sm and t1 ,  ? ? ?  , tn  be the parallel bilingual source and target sentences  , and let S(m , n ) be the maximum accumulated score between s1 ,  ? ? ?  , sm and t1 ,  ? ? ?  , tn under the best alignment path . Then S(m , n ) can be evaluated recursively with the initial condition of S  ( 0 , 0) = 0 in the following way:
S(m,n ) = max0 ? h,k ? 4
S(m ? h,n ? k ) + score(h , k ), (3 . 1) where score ( h , k ) denotes the local scoring function to evaluate the local passage of matching type ? h?k ?  . 
4 Performance Evaluation
In the experiments , a training set consisting of 7 , 331 pairs of bilingual sentences , and a testing set with 1 ,   514 pairs of bilingual sentences are extracted from the Caterpillar User Manual which is mainly about machinery  . The cross-style testing set contains 274 pairs of bilingual sentences selected from the Sinorama Magazine  , which is a general magazine ( for introducing Taiwant of oreign visitors ) with its topics covering law , politics , education , technology , science , etc . Figure 1 is an illustration of bilingual Sinorama Magazine texts  . 
For comparing the performance of alignment , both precision rate ( p ) and recall rate ( r ) , defined as follows , are measured ; however , only their associated F- measure5 is reported for saving space . 
p = [ Number of correct alignment-passages in system output ] [ Total number of all alignment -passages generated from system output ]  ,  (4 . 1 ) r = [ Number of correct alignment-passages in system output ] [ Total number of all alignment -passages contained in benchmark corpus]  . 

A Sequential-Forward-Selection ( SFS ) procedure [ Devijver ,  82] , based on the performance measured from the Caterpillar User Manual  , is then adopted to rank different features . Among them , the Chinese transfer lexicon feature ( abbreviated as CTL in the table )  , which only adopts Normalized-Transfer-Lexicon -Matching - Measure and matching-type priori distribution  ( i . e . , P ( typei , j )) , is first selected , then CL feature ( which adopts character-length ) , WL feature ( using word-length ) and EC feature ( using English cognate ) follow in sequence , as reported in
Table 4.1.
The selection sequence verifies our previous supposition that the transfer-lexicon is a more reliable feature and contributes most to the aligning task  . Table 4 . 1 clearly shows that the proposed robust model achieves a  60% F-measure error reduction ( from 14 . 4% to 5 . 8%) compared with the baseline model ( i . e . , improving the cross-style performance from 85 . 6% to 94 . 2% in F-measure ) . The 5Which is defined as 2prp+r . 
Training Set Testing Set I Testing Set II [ Caterpillar User Manual ] [ Caterpillar User Manual ] [ Sinorama Manazine] 
Baseline Model 98.91 98.21 85.56
CTL 98.26 97.51 97.51
CTL+CL 99.32 98.19 89.61
CTL+CL+WL 99.61 98.83 94.07
CTL+CL+WL+EC 99.75 99.11 94.16
Table 4 . 1: Performance ( F-measure % ) of each model and SFS result also indicates that the length-related features are still useful  , even though they are relatively unreliable . 
5 Error Analysis
In order to understand more about the behavior of the various features  , we classify all errors which occurs in aligning Sinorama Magazine in Table  5  . 1 ; the error dominated by the prior distribution of matching type is called matching-type error  , the error dominated by length feature is called length-type error  , and the error caused from both length features and lexical-related features  ( either one is not dominant ) is called length & lexicon-type error 6 . 
From Table 5 . 1 , it is found that the matching-type errors dominate in the baseline model  . To investigate the matching-type error , the prior distributions of matching-types under training set [ Caterpillar User Manual ] and testing set II [ Sinorama Magazine ] are given in Table  5  . 2 . The comparison clearly shows that the matching -type distribution varies significantly across different domains  , and that explains why the baseline model ( which only considers length-based features and matching-type distribution  ) fails to achieve the similar performance in the cross-style test  . However , as the ?11? matching-type always dominates in both texts , the matching-type distribution still provide useful information for aligning sentences when it is jointly considered with the lexical-related feature  . For those Length-Type errors generated from the baseline model in Table  5  . 1 , different statistical characteristics across different styles are listed in Table  6In our experiment , we do not find any error dominated by lexical -related feature  . 
5 . 3 . It also clearly shows that the associated statistical characteristics of those length-based features vary significantly across different styles  . Furthermore , although English-cognates are reliable cues for aligning bilingual sentences and occurs quite a few times in the technical manual  ( such as company names : IBM , HP , etc . , and some special technical terms such as ? RS-232?  , etc ) , they almost never occur in a general magazine such as the one that we test  . Therefore , they provide no help for aligning corpus in such domains  . 
Table 5 . 1 also shows that errors distribute differently in the proposed robust model  . The length-type , instead of matching-type , now dominates errors , which implies that the mismatching effect resulting from different distributions of matching types has been diluted by the transfer -lexicon feature  . Furthermore , the score of erroneous lexicon-type assignment never dominates any error found in the proposed robust model  , which verifies our supposition that transfer -lexicons are more reliable cues for aligning sentences  . 
To further investigate those remaining errors generated from the proposed robust model  , two error examples are given in Figure 1 . The first case shows an example of ? Length-Type Error ?  , in which the short sentence ( E2 ) is erroneously merged with the long sentence ( E1 ) and results in an erroneous alignment [ E1 , E2:C1] and [ E3:C2] .   ( The correct alignment should be [ E1  :  C1] and [ E2  , E3: C2] . ) Generally speaking , if a short source sentence is enclosed by two long source sentences in both sides  , and they are jointly translated into two long target sentences  , then it is error prone compared with other cases . The main reason is that this short source sentence would contain only a few words and thus its associated transfer- 
Proposed Robust Model Baseline Mode
Error Type Percentage ( % ) Error Type Percentage ( % ) Matching-Type Error 21 . 9 Matching-Type Error 81 . 2 Length-Type Error 62 . 5 Length-Type Error 14 . 9 Length & Lexicon-Type Error 15 . 6 Length & Lexicon-Type Error 3 . 9 Table 5 . 1: Error Classification while aligning Sinorama Magazine  10   01   11   12   21   22   13   31   14   41   42 Caterpillar 0  . 1% 0 . 25% 93 . 58% 2 . 31% 3 . 4% 0 . 05% 0 . 11% 0 . 08% 0 . 06% 00 Sinorama 0 . 28% 0 65 . 54% 1 . 69% 24 . 86% 0 . 28% 0 5 . 08% 0 1 . 98% 0 . 28% Table 5 . 2: Comparison of prior distributions Cognate Length Features  ( ? c , ? w ) ? cognate ? Transfer ? Lexicon
Occurrence Rate 7 cs 2 cws
Sinorama 1 . 1% 0 . 59 1 . 79 2 . 76 7 . 80 -0 . 46 0 . 25 -0 . 60 0 . 02 Table 5 . 3: List of all associated parameters lexicons are not sufficient enough to override the wrong preference given by the length-based feature  ( which would assign similar score to both merge -directions  )  . 
The second case shows an example of ? Length & Lexicon-Type Error ?  , in which the source sentence ( E1 ) is erroneously deleted and results in an erroneous alignment [  E1: Delete ] and [ E2  :  C1]  . ( The correct alignment should be [ E1, E2:C1] . ) The main reason is that the meaning of sentence ( E1 ) is similar to that of ( E2 ) but stated in different words , and the translator has merged the redundant information in his/her translation  . 
Therefore , the length-feature prefers to delete the first source sentence  . On the other hand , since most of those associated transfer-lexicons in the source sentence  E1 cannot be found in the corresponding target sentence  C1  , the Transfer-Lexicon feature also prefers to delete the first source sentence  E1  . It seems that this kind of errors would require further knowledge from language understanding to solve them  , and is beyond the scope of this paper . 
7The occurrence rate is defined as ? Number of sentences that contained congates ?/? Total number of sentences ?  6 Conclusions Although those length-based approaches are simple and can achieve good performance when they are trained and tested in the corpora of the same style  , the performance drops significantly when they are tested in different styles other than that of the training corpora  . ( For instance , the F-measure error increases from 1 . 8% to 14 . 4% in our experiment . ) The main reason is that the statistical characteristics of those features adopted by the length-based approaches  ( such as length-distribution , alignment-type-distribution and cognate -frequency  ) vary significantly from one style to another style  . 
Since human align sentences mainly by examining the similarity between different meanings conveyed by the given bilingual sentences pair  , not by counting the number of characters in sentences  , the transfer-lexicon is expected to be the more reliable cue than the sentence length  . A robust statistical sentences alignment model , which integrates the associated transfer-lexicons into the original length-based model  , is thus proposed in this paper . Great improvement has been observed in our experiment  , which reduces the F-measure error generated from the length-based model from  14  . 4% to 5 . 8% , when the proposed approach is tested in the cross -style case  . 
Last , length-features , cognate-feature and transfer-lexicon-feature are implicitly assumed to contribute equally in aligning sentences in this paper  ; however this assumption is not usually held because different features might have various dynamic ranges for their scores and thus contribute differently to discrimination power  . To overcome this problem , various features would be weighted differently in the future  . 

We would like to thank both Prof . Hsin-Hsi Chen and Prof . Kuang-Hwa Chen for their kindly providing us the aligned bilingual Sinorama Magazine for conducting the above experiment  . The appreciation is also extended to our Translation Service Center for providing the bilingual Caterpillar User 
Manual for this study.
References 1 . [Brown et al , 91] Peter F . Brown , Jennifer C . Lai , and Robert L . Mercer , (1991) . ? Aligning Sentences in Parallel Corpora ? , Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 169-176, 1821 June 1991, UC
Berkeley , California , USA.
2 . [Brown et al , 93] Peter F . Brown , Stephen A . Della Pietra , Vincent J . Della Pietra and Robert L . Mercer , (1993) . ? The Mathematics of Statistical Machine Translation : Parameter Estimation ?  , Computational Linguistics 19:263-311 . 
3 . [Chen , 93] Stanley F . Chen , (1993) . ? Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora Using Lexical Information ?  , Proceedings of the 31th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 916,2226 June 1993, Ohio State University,
Columbus , Ohio , USA.
4. [ Church , 93] Kenneth W . Church , (1993).
? Charalign : A Program for Aligning Parallel Texts at the Character Level ?  , Proceedings of the 31th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 1-8 , 2226 June 1993 , Ohio State University , Columbus , Ohio , USA . 
5 . [Dagon et al , 91] Ido Dagon , Alon Itai and Ulrike Schwall ,  (1991) . ? Two Language Are More Informative Than One ? , Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp .  130-137 , 1821 June 1991 , UC Berkeley , California , USA . 
6 . [Devijver82] Pierre A . Devijver and Josef Kittler , (1982) . Pattern Recognition : A Statistical Approach , Prentice-Hall Inc . , N . J . , USA , 1982 . 
7 . [Gale and Church , 93] William A . Gale and Kenneth W . Church , (1991) . ? A Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora ?  , Computational
Linguistics 19:75-102.
8 . [ Och and Ney , 2000] Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney ,  (2000) . ? A Comparison of Alignment Models for Statistical Machine Translation ?  , Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 1086-1090, 18October2000, Hong Kong . 
9 . [Rabiner and Juang , 93] Lawrence Rabiner and B . H . Juang , (1993) . Fundamentals of Speech Recognition , Prentice-Hall Inc . , N . J . , USA , 1993 . 
10 . [Su et al , 95] K . Y . Su , J . S . Chang and Una Hsu , (1995) . ? A Corpus-Based Statistics-Oriented Two-Way Design ?  , Proceedings of TMI-95 , Vol . II , pp .  334-353 , Centre for Computational Linguistics , Katholieke Universiteit Leuven , Leuven , Leuven , 
Belgium , July 57, 1995.
11 . [Su and Chang , 99] K . Y . Su and J . S . Chang , (1999) . ? A Customizable , Self-Learnable Parameterized MT System : Text Generation ?  , Proceedings of MTSUMMIT VII , pp . 182-188, Singapore . 
( Invited Talk ) 12 . [ Vogel et al , 96] Stephan Vogel , Hermann Ney and Christoph Tillmann ,  (1996) . ? HMM-Based Word Alignment in Statistical Translation ?  , Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp .  836-841 , 2427 June 1996 , UC Santa Cruz , California , USA . 
13 . [Wu , 94] Dekai Wu , (1994) . ? Aligning a Parallel English Chinese Corpus Statistically with Lexical Criteria ?  , Proceedings of the 32th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp .  80-87 , 2730 June 1994 , New Mexico State University , Las Cruces , New Mexico , USA . 
