Applying an NVEF Word-Pair Identifier to
the Chinese Syllable-to-Word Conversion Problem

Jia-Lin Tsai
Intelligent Agent Systems Lab.
Institute of Information Science , Academia Sinica , 
Nankang , Taipei , Taiwan , R.O.C.

Wen-Lian Hsu
Intelligent Agent Systems Lab.
Institute of Information Science , Academia Sinica , 
Nankang , Taipei , Taiwan , R.O.C.



Syllable-to-word ( STW ) conversion is important in Chinese phonetic input methods and speech recognition  . There are two major problems in the STW conversion :  ( 1 ) resolving the ambiguity caused by homonyms ; (2) determining the word segmentation . This paper describes a noun-verb event-frame ( NVEF ) word identifier that can be used to solve these problems effectively  . Our approach includes ( a ) an NVEF word pair identifier and ( b ) other word identifiers for the non-NVEF portion . 
Our experiment showed that the NVEF word pair identifier is able to achieve a  99  . 66% STW accuracy for the NVEF related portion , and by combining with other identifiers for the non-NVEF portion  , the overall STW accuracy is 96 . 50% . 
The result of this study indicates that the NVEF knowledge is very powerful for the STW conversion  . In fact , numerous cases requiring disambiguation in natural language processing fall into such ? chicken-and-egg ? situation  . The NVEF knowledge can be employed as a general tool in such systems for disambiguating the NVEF related portion independently  ( thus breaking the chicken-and-egg situation ) and using that as a good fundamental basis to treat the remaining portion  . This shows that the NVEF knowledge is likely to be important for general NLP  . To further expand its coverage , we shall extend the study of NVEF to that of other cooccurrence restrictions such as noun-noun pairs  , noun-adjective pairs and verb-adverb pairs . 
We believe the STW accuracy can be further improved with the additional knowledge  . 
1. Introduction
More than 100 Chinese input methods have been created in the past  [16]  . Currently , the most popular input method is based on phonetic symbols  . Phonetic input method requires little training because Chinese are taught to write the corresponding pinyin syllable of each Chinese character in primary school  . Since there are more than 13 , 000 distinct Chinese characters ( with around 5400 commonly-used )  , but only 1 , 300 distinct syllables , the homonym problem is quite severe in phonetic input method  . 
Therefore , an intelligent syllable-to-word ( STW ) conversion for Chinese is very important . A comparable ( but easier ) problem to the STW conversion in English is the word sense disambiguation  . 
There are basically two approaches for the STW conversion :  ( a ) the linguistic approach based on syntax parsing or semantic template matching  [3  , 4 , 7 , 8] and ( b ) the statistical approach based on the ngram model where n is usually  2 or 3   [912]  . The linguistic approach is more laborious but the end result can be more user friendly  . On the other hand , the statistical approach is less labor intensive , but its power is dependent on training corpus and it usually does not provide deep semantic information  . Our approach adopts the semantically oriented NVEF word pairs  ( to be defined formally in Section 2 . 1 ) plus other statistical methods so that not only the result makes sense semantically  , but the model is also fully automatic provided that enough NVEFs have already been collected  . 
According to the studies in [13] , good syllable sequence segmentation is crucial for the STW conversion  . For example , consider the syllable sequence ? zhe4   liang4   che1   xing2   shi3   shun4   chang4? of the Chinese sentence ???????? ( This car moves well )  . ? By dictionary , the two possible segmentation results are ( we use ?/? to indicate syllable word boundary )   ( 1 ) ? zhe4/liang4/che1xing2/shi3/shun4chang4? ( 2 )  ?  zhe4/liang4/che1/xing2   shi3/shun4   chang4? using the longest-syllabic-word-first strategy [14]  . The two ambiguous portions are / che1   xing2/shi3/   ( /??  , ??/? , ? , ? , ? , ? , ?  , ?/) and/che1/xing2shi3/(/? , ? , ? /?? ,  ??/) , respectively . In this case , if the system has the information that ??-?? ( car , move ) ? is a permissible NVEF word pair and its corresponding syllable-pair ?  che1-xing2shi3? has been collected , then the correct segmentation and word pair ??-? ?   ( che1-xing2 shi3 ) ? of this syllable sequence can be determined simultaneously  . 
Since NVEF word pairs are usually the key features of a sentence  , if identified correctly , they become good reference words for the ngram models to predict the remaining unconverted syllables  . We [15] showed that the knowledge of NVEF sense-pairs and their corresponding NVEF word pairs  ( NVEF knowledge ) are useful for effectively resolving word sense ambiguity and getting highly accurate word segmentation for those ambiguous NVEF word pairs in Chinese  . 
In this paper , we shall show that the NVEF knowledge can be used effectively in the STW conversion for Chinese  . Section 2 describes our approach . The experimental result is presented in Section 3 . Directions for future research will be discussed in section  4  . 
2. Development of an NVEF-based Word

Hownet [16] is adopted as the system?s word sense dictionary , which provides the knowledge of Chinese lexicon ( 58 , 541 words ) , parts-of-speech ( POS ) and word senses . We have integrated Chinese words in Hown et , Sinica corpus [17] , Cilin(tong2yi4ci2ci2lin2 ? ? ? ? ? ? ?) [18] , Chinese dictionary ( guo2yu2 ci2 dian3 ? ? ? ? ? ? )   [19] and Chinese word lists in [20] into a commonly-used machine-readable dictionary ( MRD ) called common MRD , which provides the knowledge of Chinese lexicon ( in which the top 60 , 000 words are selected from the list of 252 , 307 words in descending order of word frequency ) , word frequencies and syllable words . The syllable of each word in common MRD was translated by the inversed process of phoneme-to -character system presented in  [4  , 8] . Word frequency is computed according to a fixed size training corpus consisting of  4  , 539 , 6 24 Chinese sentences obtained from the online United Daily News  [21]   ( during the period of 17
January , 2001 to 30 December , 2001).
2.1 Definition of the NVEF Sense-Pair,
Word-Pair and Syllable Word-Pair
The sense of a word is defined as its DEF ( concept definition ) in Hownet . Table 1 lists three different senses of the Chinese word ??  ( Che/car/turn )  . ? In Hownet , the DEF of a word consists of its main feature and secondary features  . For example , in the DEF ? character ?? , surname ? , human ? , Proper Name ?? of the word ?? ( Che) , ? the first item ? character ??? is the main feature  , and the remaining three items , ? surname ? , ? ? human ? , ? and ? Proper Name ? , ? are its secondary features . The main feature in Hownet can inherit features in the hypernym-hyponym hierarchy  . There are approximately 1, 500 features in Hown et . 
Each feature is called a sememe , which refers to a smallest semantic unit that cannot be further reduced  . 

Table 1 . Three different senses of the Chinese word ?? ( Che/car/turn ) ?
Word POS/Sense(i . e . DEF in Hownet ) ? Che N/character ?? , surname ? , human? , Proper Name ? ? car N/L and Vehicle ? ? turn V/cut ? ? The Hownet dictionary used in this study contains  58  , 541 words , in which there are 33 , 264 nouns ,  16 , 723 verbs and 16 , 469 senses ( including 10 , 011 noun-senses and 4 , 462 verb-senses ) . 
In our experiment , we have also added the DEFs for those words not in Hownet  . 
A permissible NV word pair such as ??-?? ( car-move ) ? is called a noun-verb event-frame ( NVEF ) word pair . According to the sense of the word ?? ( Che/car/turn ) ? and the word ??? ( move )  , ? the only permissible NV sense-pair for the NV word pair ??-??  ( car , move ) ? is ? L and Vehicle ??- ? Vehicle Go ? . ? We call such a permissible NV sense-pair an NVEF sense-pair  . Note that an NVEF sense-pair is a class that includes the NVEF word pair instance ??-??? as well as the corresponding NVEF syllable word pair ?   che1-xing2   shi3  . ? 2 . 2 Definition of the NVEF KR-Tree A knowledge representation tree  ( KR-tree ) of NVEF sense-pairs is shown in Fig . 1 . There are two types of nodes in the KR-tree : concept nodes and function nodes  . Concept nodes refer to words and features in Hownet  . Function nodes are used to define the relationships between their parent and children concept nodes  . 
If a concept node A is the child of another concept node B  , then A is a subclass of B . 
Following this convention , we shallom it the function node ? subclass ? between A and B  . 
Noun-sense class is divided into 15 subclasses according to their main features . They are bacteria , animal , human , plant , artifact , natural , event , mental , phenomena , shape , place , location , time , abstract and quantity . 
Three function nodes are used in the KR-tree as shown in Fig  . 1: Figure 1 . An illustration of the KR-tree using ???? ( artifact ) ? as an example noun-sense subclass . 
(1 ) Major-Event ( ???? ) : The content of its parent node represents a noun -sense subclass  , and the content of its child node represents a verb-sense subclass  . A noun-sense subclass and a verb-sense subclass linked by a 
Major-Event function node is an NVEF subclass sense-pair  , such as ?& L and Vehicle ?? and ? = Vehcile Go ?? in Fig  .  1 . To describe various relationships between noun -sense and verb-sense subclasses  , we have designed three subclass sense-symbols , in which ? = ? means ? exact , ? ?&? means ? like , ? and ?%? means ? inclusive . ? An example using these symbols is given below . 
Given three senses S1 ,   S2 and S3 defined by a main feature A and three secondary features B  , C and D , let S1 = A , B , C , D , S2 = A , B , and S3 = A , C , D . Then , we have that sense S2 is in the ? = A , B ? exact-subclass ; senses S1 and S2 are in the ?& A , B ? like-subclass ; and senses S1 S2 , and S3 are in the ?% A ? inclusive-subclass . 
(2 ) Word-Instance ( ??  ) : The content of its children are the words belonging to the sense subclass of its parent node  . These words are learned automatically by the NVEF sense-pair identifier according to sentences under the Test-Sentence nodes  . 
(3 ) Test-Sentence ( ??? ) : Its content includes several selected test sentences in support of its corresponding NVEF subclass sense-pair  . 
2.3 An NVEF Word-Pair Identifier
We [15] have developed an NVEF sense-pair identifier for word sense disambiguation  ( WSD )  . 
This sense-pair identifier is based on the NVEFKR -tree and the techniques of longest syllabic 
NVEF-word-pair first ( LS-NV WF ) and exclusion word list ( EWL ) checking . By modifying this identifier , we obtain our NVEF word pair identifier described below  . 
Step 1. Input a syllable sequence.
Step 2 . Generate all possible NV word pairs whose corresponding NV syllable word pairs are found in the input sequence  . Exclude certain NV word pairs based on EWL checking  . 
Step 3 . Check each NV word pair to see if its corresponding NV sense-pairs  ( there can be several such pairs ) can be matched to an NVEF subclass sense-pair in the 
KR-tree . If one such NV sense-pair matches an NVEF subclass sense-pair in the KR-tree  , then this permissible NVEF sense-pairs and their corresponding NVEF word pairs can be used for the sentence  . 
Resolve conflicts using the LS-NVWF strategy.
Step 4 . Arrange all remaining permissible NVEF sense -pairs and their corresponding 
NVEF word pairs in a sentence-NVEF tree . If no NVEF word pair can be identified from the input sequence  , a null sentence-NVEF tree will be produced . 
A system overview of the NVEF word pair identifier is given in Fig  .  2 . The output of this
NVEF wordpair identifier is called a sentence-NVEF tree  , as shown in Fig .  3 . 

NVEF word pair identifier
KR tree sentence-NVEF tree input syllables

LS-NV WF & EWL checking
Figure 2 . A system overview of the NVEF word pair identifier . 

Figure 3 . A sentence-NVEF tree for the Chinese syllables ? yin3   liao4   li3   han2   you3   bu4   ming2   wu4   zhi2  ( ????????? There are uncertain matters in the drink )  . ? 2 . 4 A Word Identifier for the non-NVEF portion To supplement the NVEF word pair identifier for the portion of syllable sequence that is not converted by the NVEF knowledge  , a separate word identifier is developed . A system overview of the identifier for the NVEF portion and non-NVEF portion is given in Fig  .  4 . Our word identifier for the non-NVEF portion includes four sub-identifiers whose details are given below :  ( 1 ) Number-classifier-noun phrase ( NCN phrase ) identifier : There are many specific linguistic units  , such as names , addresses , determinatives - measure compounds ( DM ) etc . in syllables which need to be recognized in order to supplement the NVEF word pair identifier  ( which works in a topdown fashion ) Although the number of these linguistic units are infinite  , they can be recognized by finite regular expressions  [22]  . Following this fact and Chinese grammar , we have developed an NCN phrase identifier to identify phrases consisting of the numbers  , classifiers , and nouns , in particular , the commonly-used number-classifier-noun syllable pattern  , such as syllables ? yi1   bai3   wu3   shi2   ge4   guan1   zhong4   ( ??????? one hundred and fifty audience )  . ? To develop this identifier , we first divide the related words in Hownet into three subclasses for the construction of the NCN phrase  , i . e . 
numbers ( the POS is ? NUM ?) , classifiers ( the POS is ? CLAS ? ) and nouns ( the POS is ? N ? . ) Secondly , to enrich the knowledge in Hown et ,   12 new numbers and 172 new classifiers are added into the original Hownet  . Then we create a table listing 13 , 366 classifier-noun word pairs ( CN word pairs ) and their corresponding CN syllable word pairs , such as ? ge4-guan1 zhong4(?-??) . ? This table is called the CN word pair list , which is generated by training corpus ( Monosyllabic nouns are not considered in this table  )  . 
NVEF word pair identifier
KR tree segmented sentence and a sentence-NVEF tree unsegmented syllable input 

NCN word identifier specific-monosyllabic word identifier unique-syllabic word identifier common MRD training corpus non-unique-syllabic word identifier Figure  4  . A system overview of the NVEF-based word identifier  . 
Now , take the syllables ? yin1   yue4   ting1   you3   yi1   bai3   wu3   shi2   ge4   guan1   zhong4   ( ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? There are one hundred and fifty audiences in concert hall  ) ? as an example . 
The NCN phrase identifier will first identify the words of number syllables ?  yi1   bai3   wu3   shi2  ( ???? one hundred and fifty ) ? combined by combining two matching number syllables ?  yi1   bai3  ( ? ? one hundred ) ? and ? wu3shi2 ( ? ? fifty )  . ? Secondly , if the number of characters of the recognized number syllables is greater than  1  , the NCN word identifier will continue on checking the following syllables with the CN word pair list  . In this case , since the following syllables ? ge4   guan1   zhong4? are found in the CN word pair list , it will be identified as CN word pair ??-?? . ?  ( 2 ) Specific-mono syllabic word identifier : When a monosyllabic word in Howneth as exactly one POS  , and that POS is in the set ADJ ( adjective ) , ADV ( adverb) , AUX ( auxiliary ) , COOR ( coordinator) , CONJ ( conjunctive ) , PREP ( preposition ) , STRU ( structure word ) , we call this word a specific-monosyllabic word . There are 525 specific-monosyllabic words found in the used

Consider the following monosyllabic word ?? already  ( yi3 )  . ? We shall use the POS information of polysyllabic words immediately preceding and following this word to decide if ?  yi3? should be identified as ?? ( already ) ? . 
According to the training corpus , the top 3 preferred POSs of words following ?? ( already ) ? are V ( verb )  , ADV ( adverb ) and ADJ ( adjective) . Therefore , the top 3 preferred POSs of syllable words following ? yi3? should also be V , ADV and ADJ provided that ?? ( already ) ? is to be identified . The top 3 preferred POSs of syllable words preceding and following a specific-mono syllabic word will be called the top  3 preceding and following preferred POSs , respectively . 
Now , consider the syllable sequence ? gong1   cheng2   yi3   wan2   cheng2   le5   ( ? ? ? ? ? ? The project has been done ) ? as an example . 
First , by checking syllable-by-syllable from left to right  , our algorithm recognizes that there is a specific -monosyllabic word ?  yi3? in this sentence . Then , it will use the longest-syllabic-word-first strategy to identify the syllable word ?  wan2   cheng2? following ? yi3? and the syllable word ? gong1   cheng2? preceding ? yi3?  . It will check whether at least one of the distinct POSs of the preceding and following syllable words are within the set of top  3 preceding and following preferred POSs of ? yi3?  , respectively . Since this is indeed the case , the word ??? will be identified . 
After the input syllables have been processed by the NVEF word pair identifier  , the NCN word identifier , and the specific-monosyllabic word identifier , the remaining unconverted syllables will be segmented in a right-to-left fashion using the LS -NVWF strategy in the following process  . 
(3 ) Unique-syllabic word identifier : When a given syllable word maps to exactly one word in the common MRD  , we call the mapped word in MRD a unique-syllabic word  , e . g . the word ????/ yin1yue4hui4/? . These unique-syllabic words will be identified directly from right to left  . 
(4 ) Non-unique-syllabic word identifier : This identifier is used at the very end to deal with those remaining unconverted syllables  . It is an ngram based approach . Define the NVEF frequency to be the number of sentences including a given NVEF word pair in the training corpus  . First of all , the identifier will select , from the sentence-NVEF tree , the NVEF wordpair having the largest NVEF frequency as the main NVEF word pair  . Recall that the unconverted syllables have been segmented by the longest-syllable-word-first strategy from right to left  . Finally , it will convert each segmented syllable word to its corresponding word by the following steps :  ( a ) find all distinctly mapped words of a given syllable word from the common MRD  ,   ( b ) compute the cooccurrence frequency of each mapped word with the key NVEF word pair one-by-one in descending order of mapped words ? frequencies  ,   ( c ) whenever the cooccurrence frequency is greater than  0  , then convert the given syllable word to this mapped word  ,   ( d ) if all the computed cooccurrence frequencies in step  ( b ) are 0 , the given syllable word will be convert to its mapped word with the largest word frequency  . 
Take the non-unique syllable word ? jin4? in Table A1 as example , the list of its mapped words in descending order of word frequency were ??  ( enter ) /212 , 481? , ?? ( near)/115 , 913? , ? ?( exhaustive)/58 , 387?  , ?? ( forbid)/17 , 702? , ?? ( strongly ) / 8 , 089? , ?? ( Jin Dynasty ) /4 , 524? , ?? ( soak)/1 , 677?  , ?? ( cinder)/722? , ??( Jin)/114? and ?? ( redsilk)/41 . ? Since the cooccurrence frequency of the mapped words with the key NVEF word pair ???-??  ( locale , enter ) ? is first greater than 0 at the word ?? ( near ) ? , the non-unique syllabic word ? jin4? will be converted to the word ?? . ? 3 . Experimental Results Define the STW accuracy to be the ratio of the  #of correct characters identified over the total  #of characters  . We use the inverse translator of phoneme-to -character system in  [3] to convert a test sentence into a syllable sequence  , then apply our STW algorithm to convert this syllable sequence back to characters and calculate its accuracy  . 
If a sentence contains an NVEF word pair , this sentence is called an NVEF identified sentence  . 
Since the purpose of this study is to demonstrate the effect of applying NVEF word pair identifier to the STW conversion  , we shall focus on converting NVEF identified sentences  . 
10 , 0 00 NVEF identified sentences are randomly selected from the test sentences in the KR-tree to be the closed test set  ; and another 10 , 0 00 sentences are randomly selected from Sinica corpus to be the open test set  . Note that sentences in open test set are not necessarily 
NVEF identified sentences.
The results of the STW experiment are shown in Table  2 listed in three columns : ( 1 ) the NVEF word pair identifier ;   ( 2 ) the other four sub-identifiers for the non-NVEF protion  ; and (3) the combination of (1) and (2) . 

Table 2. The results of the STW experiment.

Closed test 99.76% 94.65% 97.10%
Open test 99.55% 93.64% 95.97%
Average 99.66% 94.08% 96.50%
For more details , the accuracies of the four identifiers in Section  2  . 4 are listed in Table 3 below . 

Table 3 . The STW accuracies of the four sub-identifiers for the non-NVEF portion  ( 1 )   ( 2 )   ( 3 )   ( 4 ) Closed test 100 . 00% 94 . 68% 97 . 45% 89 . 01% Open test 97 . 25% 94 . 02% 97 . 37% 86 . 10% Average 98 . 31% 94 . 32% 97 . 41% 87 . 35% 4 . Conclusions and Directions for Future

In this paper , we have applied an NVEF word pair identifier to the Chinese STW conversion problem and obtained excellent rates as shown in Table  2  . The knowledge used in this study includes : ( 1 ) the NVEF knowledge , (2) the CN word pair list ,   ( 3 ) the top 3 preferred POSs following or preceding the specific-monosyllabic words  ,   ( 4 ) the unique-syllabic word list and ( 5 ) the cooccurrence frequency of words with a selected key NVEF word pairs  . Besides the NVEF knowledge in (1) , which can be ( and has been ) generated semiautomatically , the other knowledge can all be trained automatically  . 
Our database for the NVEF knowledge has not been completed at the time of this writing  . The
NVEFs are constructed by selecting a noun-sense in Hownet and searching for meaningful verb-sense associated with it  . 
Currently , only 66 . 34% (=6 , 641/10 , 011 ) of the noun-senses in Hownet have been considered in the NVEF knowledge construction  . This results in 167 , 203 NVEF subclass sense-pairs and 317 , 820 NVEF word pairs created in the KR-tree . In the training corpus , about 50% of the sentences includes at least one NVEF word pair in it  . 
Based on this experiment , we find that the NVEF-based approach has the potential to provide the following information for a given syllable sequence :  ( 1 ) well-segmented Chinese sentence , (2) sentence-NVEF tree including main verbs , nouns , NVEF word pairs , NVEF sense-pairs , NVEF phrase-boundaries , and (3) the CN word pairs . This information will likely be useful for general NLP  , especially for sentence understanding . 
The NVEF knowledge is a general linguistic key -feature for sentence analysis  . We are encouraged to note that the NVEF knowledge can achieve a high STW accuracy of  99  . 66% for the NVEF related portion . Our NVEF word identifier can be easily integrated with other existing STW conversion systems by using the NVEF word identifier as a first round filter  , namely , identifying words in the NVEF related portion ( thus , providing a good fundamental basis ) and leaving the remaining unconverted syllables to other systems with a good potential to enhance their accuracies  . 
We shall continue our work on covering all the noun-senses in Hownet for the NVEF knowledge construction  . This procedure can now be done fully automatically with  99  . 9% of confidence . The study of NVEF will also be extended to that of other cooccurrence restrictions such as noun -noun  ( NN ) pairs , noun-adjective ( NA ) pairs and verb-adverb ( ND ) pairs . Note , however , that the study of these latter pairs will be much simplie fied once the key-feature NVEFs of a sentence have been correctly extracted  . We shall also try to improve our NVEF-based approach for the STW conversion and further extend it to speech recognition  . 
The results in [15] indicate that the NVEF knowledge can also be used effectively for word sense disambiguation  . In the future , we shall apply the NVEF knowledge to other fields of NLP  , in particular , document classification , information retrieval , question answering and speech understanding . 
References 1 . Huang , J . K .  1985 . The Input and Output of Chinese and Japanese Characters  . IEEE Computer , 18(1):18-24 . 
2 . Chang , J . S . , S . D . Chern and C . D . Chen .  1991 . Conversion of Phonemic-Input to Chinese Text Through Constraint Satisfaction  . Proceedings of ICCPOL'91, 30-36 . 
3 . Hsu , W . L . and K . J . Chen .  1993 . The Semantic Analysis in GOING-An Intelligent Chinese Input System  . 
Proceedings of the Second Joint Conference of Computational Linguistics  , Shiamen ,  338-343 . 
4 . Hsu , W . L . and Y . S . Chen .  1999 . On Pho-neme-to-Character Conversion Systems in Chinese Processing  . Journal of Chinese Institute of Engineers ,  5:573-579 . 
5 . Lua , K . T . and K . W . Gan .  1992 . A Touch-Typing Pinyin Input System . Computer Processing of Chinese and
Oriental Languages , 6:85-94.
6 . Sproat , R .  1990 . An Application of Statistical Optimi-zation with Dynamic Programming to Phone-mic-Input-to -Character Conversion for Chinese  . Proceedings of ROCLING III , 379-390 . 
7 . Chen , B . , H . M . Wang and L . S . Lee .  2000 . Retrieval of broadcast news speech in Mandarin Chinese collected in Taiwan using syllable - level statistical characteristics  . 
Proceedings of the 2000 International Conference on Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing  . 
8 . Hsu , W . L .  1994 . Chinese parsing in a pho-neme-to-character conversion system based on semantic pattern matching  . Computer Processing of Chinese and Oriental Languages  ,  8(2):227-236 . 
9 . Kuo , J . J .  1995 . Phonetic-input-to-character conversion system for Chinese using syntactic connection table and semantic distance  . Computer Processing and Oriental
Languages , 10(2):195-210.
10 . Lin , M . Y . and W . H . Tasi .  1987 . ? Removing the ambiguity of phonetic Chinese input by the relaxation technique  , ? Computer Processing and Oriental Languages ,  3(1):1-24 . 
11 . Gu , H . Y . , C . Y . Tseng and L . S . Lee .  1991 . Markov modeling of mandarin Chinese for decoding the phonetic sequence into Chinese characters  . Computer
Speech and Language , 5(4):363-377.
12 . Ho , T . H . , K . C . Yang , J . S . Lin and L . S . Lee .  1997 . 
Integrating long-distance language modeling to pho-netic-to-text conversion  . Proceedings of ROCLINGX International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ,  287-299 . 
13 . Fong , L . A . and K . H . Chung .  1994 . Word Segmentation for Chinese Phonetic Symbols . Proceedings of International Computer Symposium ,  911-916 . 
14 . Chen , C . G . , K . J . Chen and L . S . Lee .  1986 . A model for Lexical Analysis and Parsing of Chinese Sentences  . 
Proceedings of 1986 International Conference on Chinese Computing , Singapore ,  33-40 . 
15 . Tsai , J . L , W . L . Hsu and J . W . Su .  2002 . Word sense disambiguation and sense-based NV event-frame identifier  . Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing  ,  7(1):29-46 . 
16 . Dong , Z . and Q . Dong , Hownet , http://www . keenage . com / 17 . CKIP .  1995 . Technical Report no .  95-02 , the content and illustration of Sinica corpus of Academia Sinica  . 
Institute of Information Science , Academia Sinica , http://godel . iis . sinica . edu . tw/CKIP/r_content . html 18 . Mei , J . et al 1982 . Tong2Yi4Ci2Lin2 ? ? ? ? ? ? , Shanghai Dictionary Press . 
19. Taiwan?s Ministry of Education . 1998.
Guo2Yu2Ci2Dian3 ( Electronic Chinese Dictionary) , http://www . edu . tw/m and r/clc/dict/20 . Tsai , C . T .   ( 2001 ) A Review of Chinese Word Lists Accessible on the Internet  . Chih-Hao Tsai Research
Page http://www.geocities.com/hao510/wordlist/.
21 . On Line United Daily News , http://udnnews . com/NEWS/22 . Huang , C . R . et al 1996 . Readings in Chinese Natural Language Processing . Journal of Chinese Linguistics , 9:1-174 . 

