
An Agent-based Approach to Chinese Named Entity Recognition 

Shiren Ye Tat-Seng Chua Liu Jim in
School of Computing , National University of Singapore , 
Singapore , 117543
yesr@comp . nus . edu . sg chuats @ comp . nus . edu . sgLiujm@comp . nus . edu . sg


Chinese NE ( Named Entity ) recognition is a difficult problem because of the uncertainty in word segmentation and flexibility in language structure  . This paper proposes the use of a rationality model in a multiagent framework to tackle this problem  . We employ a greedy strategy and use the NE rationality model to evaluate and detect all possible NEs in the text  . We then treat the process of selecting the best possible NEs as a multiagent negotiation problem  . The resulting system is robust and is able to handle different types of NE effectively  . Our test on the MET2 test corpus indicates that our system is able to achieve high  F1 values of above 92% on all
NE types.
1. Introduction
Named entity ( NE ) recognition is a fundamental step to many language processing tasks  . It was a basic task of the Message Understanding
Conference ( MUC ) and has been studied intensively . Palma & Day (97) reported that person ( PER ) , location ( LOC ) and organization ( ORG ) names are the most difficult subtasks as compared to other entities as defined in MUC  . 
This paper thus focuses only on the recognition of PER  , LOC and ORG entities . 
Recent research on NE recognition has been focused on the machine learning approach  , such as the transformationbased learning ( Aberdeen 95 )  , hidden Markov model ( Bikel et al 97) , decision tree ( Sekin et al 98) , collocation statistics ( Lin 98) , maximum entropy model ( Borthwick 99) , and EM bootstrapping ( Cucerzan & Yarowsky 99) . Other than English , several recent works examined the extraction of information from Spanish  , Chinese , and Japanese ( Isozaki01) . Most approaches for Chinese NE recognition used handcrafted rules  , supplemented by word or character frequency statistics  . These methods require a lot of resources to model the NEs  . Chen et al ( 98 ) used 1-billion person name dictionary and employed mainly internal word statistics with no generalization  . Yu et al ( 98 ) employed a common framework to model both the context and information residing within the entities  , and performed rule generalization using POS ( part-of-speech ) and some semantic tags . A similar system is also reported in Luo&Song ( 01 )  . 
Chinese NE recognition is much more difficult than that in English due to two major problems  . 
The first is the word segmentation problem ( Sproat et al 96 , Palmer 97) . In Chinese , there is no whitespace to delimit the words , where a word is defined as consisting of one or more characters representing a linguistic token  . Word is a vague concept in Chinese , and Palmer ( 97 ) showed that even native speakers could only achieve about  75% agreement on ? correct ? segmentation . As word segmentation is the basic initial step to almost all linguistic analysis tasks  , many techniques developed in English NLP cannot be applied to Chinese  . 
Second , there is no exterior feature ( such as the capitalization ) to help identify the NEs , which share many common characters with nonNE ( or common words )  . For example , while ? is normally associated with the country China  , it could also mean the concepts in , a tor hit ; and ? normally refers to the surname Zhang , but it also means the concepts open , sheet or spread . 
Moreover , proper names in Chinese may contain common words and vice versa  . 
Because of the above problems , the use of statistical and heuristic rules commonly adopted in most existing systems is inadequate to tackle the Chinese NE recognition problem  . In this paper , we consider a new approach of employing a rationality model in a multiagent framework  . 
The main ideas of our approach are as follows.
First , we use an NE rationality measure to evaluate the probability of a sequence of tokens being a specific NE type  , and adopt a greedy approach to detect all possible NEs  . Second , we treat the process of selecting the best NEs among a large set of possibilities as a multiagent negotiation problem  . We test our overall approach on the MET2 test set and the system is able to achieve high F1 values of over 92% on all NE types . The results are significantly better than most reported systems on  MET2 test set . 
The rest of the paper describes the details of our rationality-based and multiagent negotiation approach to detect and refine NEs  . 
2 . Rationality Model for NE Detection 2 . 1 Named Entity and Its tokens Feature For clarity and without lost of generality  , we focus our discussion mainly on PER entity . The problems and techniques discussed are applicable to LOC and ORG entities  . We consider a simple PER name model comprising the surname followed by the first name  . Given the presence of a surname ( as cue-word ) in a token sequence , we compute the likelihood of this token playing the role of surname and the next token as the first name  . The pair could be recognized as PER only if both tokens are labeled as positive  ( or of the right types ) as shown in Table 1 . If either one of both of the tokens are evaluated negatively  , then the pair will not be recognized as PER based on the model defined above  . 
Sentence PER ? Label Remarks ?????? Y?(+)?(+) . . . invite Zhang Feitospeak . . . 
? ????? N ? ( - )  ? ( - ) ? a piece of airline ticket ????????? ( + )  ? ( - ) // Illegal PER ????*?? ( - )  ? ( + ) // Illegal PER * Strictly , ??? and Mr . Zhang are not really person names . 
They are references to person names and should be detected via coreference  . 
Table 1: An example of NE and nonNE
Although the example depicted in Table 1 is very simple , the same idea can be extended to the more complex NE Types for ORG and LOCs  . 
The number of tokens in a NE may vary from 2 in PER to about 20 for ORG . One constraint is that the sequencing of tokens and their labels must be consistent with the respective NE type  . 
Also , there are grammatical rules governing the composition of different NE type  . For example , LOC may consist of a sequence of LOCs ; and ORG may include PER and/or LOC on its left . 
Thus by considering one pair of tokens at a time , and by extending the token sequence to the adjacent token one at a time  , we can draw similar conclusion as that depicted in Table  1 for complex NE types . 
2.2 The Rationality Computation
If we know the probability distribution of each type of token in a window  , NE recognition is then the procedure of evaluating the rationality or certainty of a sequence of tokens with respect to a NE type  . Motivated by the results in Table 1 we view NE recognition as a special coloring problem  . Initially , all the tokens in the corpus are considered as a sequence of Whiteballs  . Given a chain of tokens appears in a NE window , we want to use the probability distribution of these token store-paint some of the white balls to different colors  . A sequence of appropriately colored balls would induce an appropriate NE  . 
For simplicity , we again focus on PERNE type with 2 tokens . The surname token will be colored red and first name blue  . We assume that the number of PER names in the corpus is N  , and the rest of tokens is M . Because there are N surname and N first name tokens in the corpus  , the total number of tokens is M+2N . Hence the marginal probability of PER name is
Pr(PER ) = N/(2N + M).
Red Blue White Format Pr . Format Pr . Format Pr.
Reda RbR0a RbB1 aRbW 0
Bluea BbR
N/(N+M ) a BbB0 aBbW
M/(N+M )
Whitea WbR
N/(N+M ) a WbB0aWbW
M/(N+M )
Note : Red ? Surname ; Blue ? First-name ; White-Others Table 2: Possibility combination of neighboring tokens within the corpus for PER Table  2 shows the possible relationships between the red and blue balls for the PERNE type by considering the grammer that the surname must be followed by a first name in a formal PER  . As we only permit the token pair for PER to be labeled as a red ball followed by a blue ball  , the following sequences are not possible under our model:  ( a ) ared ( or blue ) ball follows by itself ; ( b ) are dball follows by white ball ; and ( c ) a white ball follows by the blue ball . 
Thus a RbR ( ared follows by a red ) , aRbW , a B b B , and a WbB are illegal combinations . 
Given a pair of tokens a and b in the corpus , they are labeled as surname a R and bR times , as first name a B and bB times , and as non-PER a W and b W times respectively . The expected value of a token sequence ab representing a PER when a is red and b is blue is : BRB RB Rbababa 
NN ?=?= (1)
The expected value of the cases when the token pair abis not a PER name is the sum of expected values of four cases : a BbR  , a B b W , a WbR , a WbW ( see Table 2) , which after simplification , is given by: (     )   (     )   ( 2 ) 
BRB WWR WW RB
BWWR WRBR
BWR Wabababababab
NMN MNMN Maabb
NM=+++????=++++++++?+=+The ratio between the cases when abis a PER versus when a b is not a PER is: 
CRB RB abab
RB abab ? ? = = ? ? ? ?     (3) where ;  (   ) (   )
RBRBab
BWR Waba abb ? = ?=++; and NM
N ? += . We call RbRacab and ??? , , the rationality values of tokens ab , a and b of being a PER , red ball or blue ball respectively . 
On the other hand , the probabilities of a as a surname ( red ball ) and b as a first name ( blue ball ) are: ,    (   )   (   )
RBRBab
RB WBR Wab
PP a a a b b b = = + + + +
Thus , ; 11
RB
RBababRBab
PP
PP ?=?=?? (4)
The form of Equation ( 4 ) is similar to the concept of odds likelihood O ( h )  , first introduced in Duda et al ( 79 ) as a generic term to denote the ratio of the probability and converse probability in the Prospector system  , namely : ( )( )(-)1-()
PhPh Oh
PhPh == (5)
Eq .   ( 5 ) is used in a modified version of the Bayes theorem to solve the uncertainty reasoning problems  . Surprisingly , our approach of rationality ? for NE with two tokens can be deduced as the product of their odds-likelihood  . 
By linking the concept of odds-likelihood and rationality  , we can compute the probability of a sequence of tokens being a specific NE type  . 
Since the rationality values of tokens could vary from  0 to ? , it may incur over flow or underflow during the rationality evaluation  . This is especially so for unknown tokens where their rationality values will be zero  . To resolve this problem , we construct a piecewise function to map the rationality values from the range  [0  , ?] to [? min , ? max ] . Here we set the parameters ? min = 0 . 05 and ? max=50 , and ensure that most rationality values will retain their original values after transformation  . 
2.3 The Context of NEs
In addition to identifying the structural information within the NEs  , it is equally important to model the context around the NEs  . 
Context is especially pivotal to language such as the Chinese or Korean where there is no white space and capital characters among the tokens  . 
For PER type , the context tokens are likely to be person titles and action words  . 

Figure 1: ANE detection window
Thus after we have computed the rationality values of possible NEs  , we enlarge the analysis window to cover both the NE candidate and its context  . As shown in Figure 1 , the window consists of three components : prefix , suffix and the NE candidate . If the NE is at the beginning or end of a paragraph  , then the corresponding

Boundary of a possible

Suffix ?????????
NE prefix or suffix is set to void . We can extend the rationality computation for an NE to the context window by incorporating both the prefix and suffix tokens separately  . 
2.4 The Overall Procedure
The overall procedure for estimating the likelihood of an NE among a sequence of tokens is as follows  . 
a ) Convert prior probability Pr ( e ) of each tokenetorationality ? ( e )  . A tokene may have multiple Pr(e ) values , each is dependent on the role tokene plays in a possible NE  , such as the probability of being a surname , first name , prefix , suffix , general token or cue-word . 
b ) At each cue-word position , compute the rationality of a possible NE by considering one pair of tokens at a time  , and extending to the next token on the left or right depending on the NE type  . The boundaries of PERs are extended forward ; while that of ORGs and LOCs are extended backward  . Each extension will produce a new NE candidate . The scope of the extension is also determined by the type of NE  . The process terminates when the rationality value of the next token falls below a minimum threshold  . 
c ) For all possible NEs , construct the context window and compute its final rationality value within the context window  . 
The process will result in multiple possible NEs , with most NEs overlapping with one another . 
3. MultiAgent Framework for NE
Confirmation 3 . 1 Relationships between possible NEs Our greedy approach of identifying all possible NEs using the rationality model results in over segmentation of NEs  . Figure 2 shows a list of 80 possible NEs detected from a test article in the MET2 test corpus . The number of correct NEs in this case is only 13 . These possible NEs relate to each other in a complex way  . The possible relationships between them are : a . Overlapping : This is the most common case when the tokens of multiple NEs overlap each other  . Examples include ????????? and ??????????? . They are both reasonable ORGs if considered separately  . 
However , only one of them can be true.
b . Repetition : Some possible NEs may repeat themselves with same or similar tokens  . For example , the NE ???????????? is similar to ?????????? ???? in different part of the text  . It means that these NEs have same beliefs and could cooperate to enhance each other?s belief  . 
Figure 2: All possible NEs identified in a test article c . Unification : When the tokens of two NEs are adjacent to each other in a sentence  , they may be unified to become a new NE by combining their tokens  . For instance , the NEs ???? and ???? may be combined to form a new 
NE ? ? ? ? ? ? . By the way , not all neighboring NEs can be unified because the unification must satisfy the syntactic and semantic specifications of the language  . For example , two adjoining PERs cannot be unified , while it is possible for LOCs . 
d . Enumerated name list : This is a common language construct to present a list of names  . 
An example of such construct is : ?????(??) ??? ,  ????????? , and ??????????? . 
If we knew the relationships between possible NEs , we can use this knowledge to modify the rationality values of possible NEs  . The first relationship ( overlapping ) is of type competition while the other three are of type supporting  . In a competition relationship , the rationality values of losing NEs are decremented  , whereas in a supporting relationship , the rationality of the winning NE can be used to reinforce other NEs  . 
?????????????????????????? ???????? ?? ??????????? ????? ??????????????????????? ???????????????????? ? team  3  . 2 Agent-based Reasoning & Negotiation There is a need to modify the rationality values of possible NEs in order to identify the best possible NEs  . One way to achieve this is to employ a decision tree  ( Sekine 98 ) to select the best possible candidates . However , it is difficult to use the decision tree to handle multiple relationships between conflicting NEs  , and to perform incremental updates of rationality values in situations where the number  , distribution and relationships in possible NEs are uncertain  . In this work , we adopt a multiagent approach to refine the rationality of possible NEs and vote the best potential NEs  . 
Agents are software entities that perform some operations on behalf of their users or another programs with some degree of autonomy  , and in so doing , employ some knowledge or representation of the user?s goals or desires  ( Don et al 96 )  . In our system , we map every possible NE detected to an agent , which acts as the deputy of the NE and depicts all its attributes  . 
Following the approach taken in the DBI system , we use the rationality of the NE as the belief , denoted by Br(A ) , of agent A . Agents are divided into Teams ( Decker & Lesser 95 ) according to their contents and positions in the corpus  . The division of agents into teams facilitates the negotiation of agents ? beliefs  . 
The negotiation between agents aims to eliminate underlying conflicts and uncertainty among them  . The process of multiagent negotiation is carried out as follows  . 
a . We identify agents involved in an unification relationship  . These agents will be unified if the constraints of unification are fulfilled  . The new agents would inherit the evidences , including the rationality values , of its child agents . 
b . We divide the resulting agents into teams.
Agents with overlapping tokens will be grouped into same teams  , while independent agents will be assigned to different teams  . 
c . We perform negotiation between agents based on the type of their relationship  . For agents that are in competition relationship ( i . e . those overlapping agents within the same team ) , we select the agent with the maximal belief ( said ai ) as the winner , and decrement the beliefs of the rest of Nt agents in the same team by ?  ( ai )  , i . e . 
Br(aj ) = Br(aj)-?(ai ), for j = 1, . . Nt , and j ? iF or agents involved in the supporting relations  , we again select the agent with the maximal belief  ( of say a k ) as the winner , but increment the rest of agents in the same set Sk by ?  ( ak )  , i . e . 
Br(aj ) = Br(aj ) + ?( ak) , for all j in Sk & j ? k d . Repeat step cuntil the predefined rounds of negotiations have been reached  . 
In order to ensure fairness in the negotiation process  , we limit the amount of belief adjustment , ?( ai ) , during each round of negotiation . If the desired rounds of negotiation is NR , then the amount of adjustment in each round should be limited to ?  ( ai ) /NR . NR should be set to allow all agents to have a fair chance to participate in the negotiation process  . Here we set NR to 10 . 
At the end of negotiation , only agents whose beliefs are greater than the threshold are selected  . 
Figure 3 shows the resulting set of NEs derived from the list given in Figure  2  . 

Fig . 3: NEs after agents-based modification 4 . The Overall Process of NE Recognition Since there is no white space between words in Chinese  , the first essential step is to perform preliminary segmentation  . Here , we adopt a greedy approach of generating all possible segmentation from the input text by performing the dictionary-based lookup using a common word dictionary  . The common word dictionary is generated from the PKU corpus  ( Yu 99 )   ( see
Section 5.1).
Second , we compute the rationality value of each token in the context of being a keyword  , general word , or as boundary ( prefix or suffix ) of a specific NE type . 
???????????????????????? ?????????? ?? ??????????  ??????????????????????? ??????????????????????? ?? ???????????? ???????? ????????????????????? Third  , we identify all possible NE cue-words and use them as seeds of NE candidates  . We construct all possible NEs from the cue-word positions through boundary extension and context inclusion  . 
Forth , we modify the rationality values of all possible NEs using the agent-based negotiation methodology  . The conflicts between possible
NEs will disappear.
Fifth , we select NEs with the labels of its corresponding seed if their rationality values are above a predefined limit ?  . The value ? affects the balance between recall and precision  . 
5 . Experimental Results and Discussions 5 . 1 The Datasets Used in Our Experiments We use a number of openly available datasets for our training and testing  , including the PKU-corpus ( Yu 99) , Hownet ( Dong & Dong 00) , MET2 Chinese resources ( Chinchor02) , and two name lists ( for foreign and ORG names ) collected from the web by using a bootstrapping approach  . The PKU is a manually tagged corpus containing one-month of news report from China?s People Daily  . It uses over 30 POS tags including separate tags for surname and first name  . It contains about 37 , 000 sentences with over 106 tokens . From these resources , we generate the following dictionaries and statistics  . 
a . We use the PKU corpus to build a common word dictionary by removing all words that are tagged as NE  . The resulting dictionary contains 37 , 025 common words . 
b . From the PKU corpus , we compute each token?s distribution information based on its POS tags  , and if it is an NE , its NE type and its role with respect to the NE . Altogether , we obtain the distribution information of about 37  , 000 different tokens . 
c . We maintain a list of LOCs found in the MET2 test corpus . We do not maintain the
PER and ORG lists , because their reoccurrence probabilities are low . 
d . We supplement the distribution information derived in step  ( b ) by incorporating tokens obtained from other resources stated above  . 
The resources we derived are available for down loading at http://www  . pris . nus . edu . sg/ie . html 5 . 2 The Experiment and Results We test our resulting model on the  MET2 test corpus . Table 3 tabulates the results of our system in terms of recall  ( Rc )  , precision ( Pr ) and F1 measures . In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach  , we perform the tests under 3 different test configurations . 
a . We perform the baseline test by simply performing name-dictionary lookup  . Notice that we do not use PER dictionary , and hence the performance under PER is left blank  ( * )  . 
b . We extract all possible NEs by using only the rationality-based approach where the threshold ? is set to  1  . 1 . If there are conflicts between possible NEs , we simply select the
NE with the maximal rationality.
c . We employ the agent-based modification in conjunction with the rationality-based approach to select the best possible NEs  . 
For comparison purpose , we also list in Table 3 the corresponding results reported in Yu et al ( 98 ) and Chen et al ( 98 ) for the MUC7 tests . 
Type NC NP NW NM NS Rc Pr F1
Baseline test ( a )


LOC 79   3   0   295   0  * * * * *  363   84   0   303   26   21   98   35  . 0 * * * 54 86 66 . 0
Config ( b)


LOC 309   5   28   35   47   154   2   7   11   87   618   0   29   103   112   83   79   81  . 0 89 62 73 . 4 82 81 81 . 7
Config(c )


LOC 356   2   5   14   21   167   1   2   4   9   703   0   18   29   52   95   93   93  . 7 96 93 94 . 7 94 91 92 . 3
Results of Chenet (98)


LOC 393   0   7   77   44   159   0   0   25   56   583   0   65   102   194   78   83   81  . 3 91 74 81 . 6 78 69 73 . 2
Results of Yu et al . (98)


LOC 331   0   14   32   25   160   0   7   7   74   682   0   1   67   83   88   89   88  . 5 92 66 76 . 7 91 89 0 . 0 where Pr = ( NC + 0 . 5* NP)/(NC+NW+NP+NS ); Rc=(NC+0 . 5* NP)/(NC+NW+NP+NM ); F1=2* Pr*Rc/(Pr+Rc) . 
and NC gives the number of NEs correctly recognized  ; NP denotes the number of NEs partially recognized  ; NW gives the number of NEs incorrectly recognized  ; NM denotes the number of NEs missed ; and finally NS gives the number of NEs found by the system but not in the tagged list  . 
Table 3: Results of MET2 under different configurations Table 3 shows that as we apply the rationality model ( Config . b ) followed by multiagent framework ( Config . c ) , the performance of the system improves steadily until it reaches a high performance of over  92% in F1 value . In fact Configc results in significant improvements over Conigb in both precision and recall for all NE types  . This shows that the agent-based modification could significantly reduce spurious and missing NEs  . The performance of our overall system is significantly better than both reported systems as listed in Table  3  . 
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on general webbased documents  , we perform another informal test to recognize NEs on the  100 randomly collected headline news articles from the wellknown Chinese websites  ( www . sina . com . cn , www . sohu . com , www . 
zaobao . com , www . Chinese times . com ) . The topics covered in these articles ranging from politic  , economic , society to sports . The informal test shows that our approach could perform well on general webbased articles with 
F1 measures of over 90%.
6. Conclusion
Chinese NE recognition is a difficult problem because of the uncertainty in word segmentation  . 
Many existing techniques that require knowledge of word segmentation  , and syntactic and semantic tagging of text cannot be applied  . 
In this paper , we propose a new approach of employing a rationality model in a multiagent framework  . We employ a greedy strategy and use the NE rationality measures to detect all possible NEs in the text  . We then treat the process of selecting the best possible NEs as the multiagent negotiation problem  . The resulting system is robust and is able to handle different NE models  . Our test on the MET2 test corpus indicates that we could achieve high F1 values of above 92% on all NE types . 
We plan to further test our system on a largescale test corpus  . We will refine our techniques on a wide variety of text corpuses  , and apply the bootstrapping technique to tackle the data sparseness problem  . Finally , we will extend our research to perform relation and information extraction in multilingual text  . 

Bikel D . M . , Schwartz R . & Weischedel R . M . (1999) An Algorithm that Learns What?s in a Name . 
Machine Learning , 34(1-3), 211-231
Borthwick A .   ( 1999 ) A Maximum Entropy Approach to Named Entity Recognition  . Ph . D . Thesis , New
York Univ.
Chen H . H . , Ding Y . W . Tsai S . C . & Bian , G . W .   ( 1998 ) Description of the NTU System used for MET2 . In
MUC7 Proc.
Chinchor N . A . (2002), http://www . itl . nist . gov/iaui / 894 . 02/related_projects/muc/ . 
Cucerzan S . & Yarowsky D . D .   ( 1999 ) Language Independent Named Entity Recognition Combining Morphological and Contextual Evidence  . In Proc of 1999 Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in NLP & Very Large Corpora  ,  90-99 . 
Decker K . , & Lesser V .   ( 1995 ) Designing a Family of Coordination Algorithm , In Proc Of 1st Int?l Conf . 
on Multiagent Sys , 73-80, Menlo Park , CA , AA AI

Don Gilbert , Manny Aparicio , et al ( 1996 ) White paper on intelligent agents ( IBM )  , http://activist . 

Dong Z . D . & Dong Q . (2000) HowNet , available at http://www . keenage . com/zhiwang/e_zhiwang . html . 
Duda R . , Gaschnig J . , & Hart P .   ( 1979 ) Model design in the prospect or consultant system for mineral exploration  . In Expert systems in the micro-electronicage , Michie D . Ed . , Edinburgh Univ . 
Press , Edinburgh , England.
Isozaki H . (2001) Japanese Named Entity
Recognition Based on a Simple Rule Generator and Decision Tree Learning  , In ACL ?01 ,  306-313 . 
Lin D .   ( 1998 ) Using collocation statistics in information extraction  . In MUC7 Proc . 
Luo Z . Y . & Song R .   ( 2001 ) An Integrated and Fast Approach to Chinese Proper Name Recognition in Chinese Word Segmentation  , In Proc . of Int?l Chinese Computing Conf . , Singapore 323-328 . 
Palmer D . D .   ( 1997 ) A Trainable Rule-Based Algorithm for Word Segmentation  , In Proc of 35th of ACL&8th conf . of EACL , 321-328 . 
Sproat R . , Shih C . , et al ( 1996 ) A Stochastic Finitestate Word Segmentation Algorithm for Chinese  . Computational Linguistics , 22(3), 377-404 . 
Yu S . H . , Bai S . H . & WuP .   ( 1998 ) Description of the Kent Ridge Digital Labs System Used For  MUC7  ,  1998 , In MUC7 Proc . 
Yu S . W .   ( 1999 ) The Specification and Manual of Chinese Word Segmentation and Part of Speech 
Tagging . http://www.icl.pku.edu.cn/
Sekine S .   ( 1998 ) NYU : Description of The Japanese NE System Used for  MET2  , in MUC7 Proc . 
