A Transitive Model for Extracting Translation Equivalents of Web 
Queries through Anchor Text Mining

Wen-Hsiang Lu
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica;
Dept . of Computer Science and
Information Engineering
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu 300, Taiwan , ROC

Lee-Feng Chien
Institute of Information
Science , Academia Sinica
Nangang 115, Taiwan , ROC

Hsi-Jian Lee
Dept . of Computer Science and
Information Engineering
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu 300, Taiwan , ROC



One of the existing difficulties of
cross-language information retrieval ( CLIR ) and Web search is the lack of appropriate translations of new terminology and proper names  . Different from conventional approaches , in our previous research we developed an approach for exploiting Webanch or texts as live bilingual corpora and reducing the existing difficulties of query term translation  . Although Webanch or texts , undoubtedly , are very valuable multilingual and wide-scoped hypertext resources  , not every particular pair of languages contains sufficient anchor texts in the Web to extract corresponding translations in the language pair  . For more generalized applications , in this paper we extend our previous approach by adding a phase of transitive  ( indirect ) translation via an intermediate ( third ) language , and propose a transitive model to further exploit anchor-text mining in term translation extraction applications  . 
Preliminary experimental results show that many query translations which cannot be obtained using the previous approach can be extracted with the improved approach  . 
1. Introduction
Crosslanguage information retrieval ( CLIR ) , addressing the special need where users can query in one language and retrieve relevant documents written or indexed in another language  , has become an important issue in the research of information retrieval  ( Dumais et al , 1996; Davis et al , 1997; Ballesteros & Croft , 1998; Nie et al ,  1999) . However , its application to practical Web search services has not lived up to expectations  , since they suffer a major bottleneck that lacks up-to-date bilingual lexicons containing the translation of popular query terms  1 such as proper nouns ( Kwok ,  2001) . 
To enable capability of CLIR , existing IR systems mostly rely on bilingual dictionaries for crosslingual retrieval  . In these systems , queries submitted in a source language normally have to be translated into a target language by means of simple dictionary lookup  . These dictionary-based techniques are limited in realworld applications  , since the queries given by users often contain proper nouns  . 
Another kind of popular approaches to dealing with query translation based on corpus-based techniques uses a parallel corpus containing aligned sentences whose translation pairs are corresponding to each other  ( Brown et al . , 1993; Dagan et al , 1993; Smadja et al , 1996) . Although more reliable translation equivalents can be extracted by these techniques  , the unavailability of large enough parallel corpora for various subject domains and multiple languages is still in a thorny situation  . 
On the other hand , the alternative approach using comparable or unrelated text corpora were studied by Rapp  ( 1999 ) and Fung et al ( 1998 )  . 
This task is more difficult due to lack of parallel correlation between document or sentence pairs  . 
contain only one or two words , so we use query term , query or term interchangeably in this paper . 
In our previous research we have developed an approach to extracting translations of Web queries through mining of Webanch or texts and link structures  ( Lu , et al ,  2001) . This approach exploits We banch or texts as live bilingual corpora to reduce the existing difficulties of query translation  . Anchor text sets , which are composed of a number of anchor texts linking to the same pages  , may contain similar description texts in multiple languages  , thus it is more likely that user?s queries and their corresponding translations frequently appear together in the same anchor text sets  . The anchor-textmining approach has been found effective particularly for proper names  , such as international company names , names of foreign movie stars , worldwide events , e . g . , ? Yahoo ?, ? Anthrax ?, ? Harry Potter ?, etc . 
Discovering useful knowledge from the potential resource of Webanch or texts is still not fully explored  . According to our previous experiments , the extracted translation equivalents might not be reliable enough when a query term whose corresponding translations either appear infrequently in the same anchor text sets or even do not appear together  . 
Especially , the translation process will be unavailable if there is a lack of sufficient anchor texts for a particular language pair  . Although Webanch or texts , undoubtedly , are live multilingual resources , not every particular pair of languages contains sufficient anchor texts  . 
To deal with the problems , this paper extends the previous anchor-text-based approach by adding a phase of indirect translation via an intermediate language  . For a query term which is unable to be translated  , our idea is to translate it into a set of translation candidates in an intermediate language  , and then seek for the most likely translation from the candidates  , which are translated from the intermediate language into the target language  ( Gollins et al , 2001; Borin ,  2000) . We therefore propose a transitive translation model to further exploit anchor text mining for translating Web queries  . 
A series of experiments has been conducted to realize the performance of the proposed approach  . Preliminary experimental results show that many query translations which cannot be obtained using the previous approach can be extracted with the improved approach  . 
2 The Previous Approach
For query translation , the anchor-text-based approach is a new technique compared with the bilingual-dictionary-and parallel-corpus-based approaches  . In this section we will introduce the basic concept of the anchor-text-based approach  . 
For more details please refer to our initial work ( Lu , et al ,  2001) . 
2.1 Anchor-Text Set
An anchor text is the descriptive part of an out -link of a Web page  . It represents a brief description of the linked Web page  . For a Web page ( or URL ) ui , its anchor-text set is defined as all of the anchor texts of the links  , i . e . , ui's in links , pointing to ui . In general , the anchor-text set records ui's alternative concepts and textual expressions such as titles and headings  , which are cited by other Web pages . 
With different preferences , conventions and language competence , the anchor-text set could be composed of multilingual phrases  , short texts , acronyms , or even ui's URL . For a query term appearing in the anchor-text set  , it is likely that its corresponding translations also appear together  . The anchor-text sets can be considered as a comparable corpus of translated texts  , from the viewpoint of translation extraction . 
2.2 The Probabilistic Inference Model
To determine the most probable target translation t for source query terms  , we developed a probabilistic inference model ( Wong et al ,  1995) . This model is adopted for estimating probability value between source query and each translation candidate that cooccur in the same anchor-text sets  . The estimation assumes that the anchor texts linking to the same pages may contain similar terms with analogous concepts  . Therefore , a candidate translation has a higher chance to be an effective translation if it is written in the target language and frequently cooccurs with the source query term in the same anchor-text sets  . In the field of Web research , it has been proven that the use of link structures is effective for estimating the authority of Web pages  ( Kleinberg , 1998; Chakrabarti et al ,  1998) . The model further assumes that the translation candidates in the anchor-text sets of the pages with higher authority may have more reliability in confidence  . The similarity estimation function based on the probabilistic inference model is defined below :   ( 1 )   . 
) ( ) (   ) ( ) (  ) ) ( (  ) (  ) (  ) ( ) ( ? ? ? ? = = = = ? ? = ?? ?? = ? ? =? n i n i n i n i i i i i i i i i i i i i i P u t s P u P u t s P u t s P u t s P t s P t s P The above measure is adopted to estimate the degree of similarity between source terms and target translation t  . The measure is estimated based on their cooccurrence in the anchor text sets of the concerned Web pages U =  u1  , u2 ,   . . . 
un , in which ui is a page of concern and P ( ui ) is the probability value used to measure the authority of pageui  . By considering the link structures and concept space of Web pages  , P ( ui ) is estimated with the probability of uibeing linked  , and its estimation is defined as follows : P ( ui ) = L ( ui ) /?j=1 , nL(uj ) , where L(uj ) = the number of in links of page uj . Such estimation is simplified from HITS algorithm  ( Kleinberg ,  1998) . 
In addition , we assume that s and t are independent given ui , then the joint probability P ( s?tui ) is equal to the product of P ( sui ) and P ( tui )  , and the similarity measure becomes : (2) . 
) ( ] ) ( ) ([  ) (  ) ( ? ? = = ?+ ? =? n i n i iiiii iii uP ) u ) P ( tuP ( sutPus Pu ) Pu ) P ( tuP ( s ts P The values of P ( sui ) and P ( tui ) are defined to be estimated by calculating the fractions of the numbers of ui?s in links containing s and t over 
L(ui ), respectively.
Therefore , a candidate translation has a higher confidence value to be an effective translation if it frequently cooccurs with the source term in the anchor-text sets of the pages with higher authority  . 
2.3 The Estimation Process
For each source term , the probabilistic inference model extracts the most probable translation that maximizes the estimation  . The estimation process based on the model was developed to extract term translations through mining of realworld anchor-text sets  . The process contains three major computational modules : anchor-text extraction  , term extraction and term translation extraction . The anchor-text extraction module was constructed to collect pages from the Web and build up a corpus of anchor-text sets  . On the other hand , for each given source terms , the term extraction module extracts key terms as the translation candidate set from the anchor -text sets of the pages containing s  . At last , the term translation module extracts the translation that maximizes the similarity estimation  . For more details about the estimation process , please refer to our previous work ( Lu et al ,  2001) . 
To make a difference from the translation process via an intermediate language  , the above process is called direct translation , and the adopted model called direct translation model hereafter  . Meanwhile , we will use function P direct in Equation ( 3 ) for the estimation of the direct translation . 
(3) ) . ( log ) , ( tsPtsP direct ? = 3 The Improved Approach 3 . 1 The Indirect Translation Model As mentioned above  , for those query terms whose corresponding translations either appear infrequently in the same anchor text sets or do not appear together  , the estimation with equation ( 2 ) is basically unreliable . To increase the possibility of translation extraction especially for the source terms whose corresponding translations do not cooccur  , we add a phase of indirect translation through an intermediate language  . For example , as shown in Fig .  1 , our idea is to obtain the corresponding target translation ???? in simplified Chinese by translating the source term ???? in traditional Chinese into an intermediate term ? Sony ? in English  , and then seek for translating ? Sony ? into a target term ???? in simplified Chinese  . 
For both the source query and the target translation  , we assume that their translations in the intermediate language are the same and can be found  . 

The above assumption is not unrealistic.
For example , it is possible to find the Chinese translation of a Japanese movie starthrough submitting his/her English name to a search engine and browsing the retrieved Chinese pages containing the English name  . The Web contains large amounts of multilingual pages  , and English is the most likely intermediate language between other languages  . Based on this assumption , we extend the probabilistic inference model and propose an indirect translation model as the following formula:  ( 4 )   )  . ( log ) ( log )]()( log[) , ( log ) , ( tmPmsPtmPmsPtmmsPtsP indirect ?+?=??????= , where m is the transitive translation of s and t in the intermediate language  , P ( s?m ) and P ( m?t ) are the probability values obtained with the direct translation model which can be calculated by Equation  ( 2 )  . 
3.2 The Transitive Translation Model
The transitive model is developed to combine both the direct and indirect translation models and improve the translation accuracy  . By combining Equation (3) and (4) , the transitive translation model is defined as follows : ? ? ? > =  ( 5 ) otherwise .  ) , ,( if ) , ,( ) , ( tsP indirect ? t)P direct(s , tsP direct tsP trans , where ? is a predefined threshold value . 
4 Experimental Results 4 . 1 Analysis of Anchor-Text Sets and
Query Logs
In the initial experiments , we took traditional Chinese and simplified Chinese as the source and target language respectively  , and used English as the intermediate language . We have collected 1 , 980 , 816 traditional Chinese Web pages in Taiwan . Among these pages ,  109 , 4 16 pages whose anchor-text sets contained both traditional Chinese and English terms were taken as the anchor-text set corpus  . We also collected 2 , 179 , 1 71 simplified Chinese Web pages in China and extracted  157  , 7 86 pages whose anchor-text sets contained both simplified Chinese and English terms  . In addition , through merging the two Web page collections into a larger one  , we extracted 4 , 5 16 Web pages containing both traditional and simplified Chinese terms  . The three comparable corpora provide a potential resource of translation pairs for some Web queries  . In order to realize the feasibility in translating query terms via transitive translation  , we aim at finding out the corresponding simplified Chinese translations of traditional Chinese query terms via English as the intermediate language  . 
Fig .  1 . An abstract diagram showing the concepts of direct translation and indirect translation  . 
mts
Sony(English )?? ( Traditional
Chinese ) s : source term t : target translation m : intermediate translation ??  ( Simplified

We also collected popular query terms with the logs from two realworld Chinese search engines in Taiwan  , i . e . , Dreamer and GAIS2 . 
The Dreamer log contained 228 , 5 66 unique query terms from a period of over 3 months in 1998  , and the GAIS log contained 114 , 1 82 unique query terms from a period of two weeks in 1999  . There were 9 , 7 09 most popular query terms whose frequencies were above  10 in both of the logs and 1  , 230 of them were English terms . After filtering out the terms which were used locally  , we obtained 258 terms . These query terms were taken as the major test set in the term translation extraction analysis  . The traditional Chinese translations of the test query terms were determined manually and taken as the source query set in the following experiments  . 
According to our previous work ( Lu et al ,  2001) , there were three methods for term extraction , which is a necessary process step in extracting translations from anchor-text corpus  . 
Since we have not yet collected a query log in simplified Chinese  , in the following experiments we adopted the PAT -tree-based keyword extraction method  , which is an efficient statistics-based approach that can extract longer terms without using a dictionary  ( Chien ,  1997) . 
To evaluate the achieved performance of query translation  , we used the average topn inclusion rate as a metric  . For a set of test query terms , its topn inclusion rate is defined as the percentage of the query terms whose effective translation  ( s ) can be found in the top n extracted translations . 
4.2 Performance with the Direct
Translation Model
In order to realize the feasibility of the transitive translation model  , we carried out some experiments based on the direct translation models and the three different anchor-text set corpora in the first step  . Table 1 shows the results of the obtained top5 inclusion rates , Taiwan , whose logs have certain representatives in the Chinese communities  , and whose URL?s are as follows : http://www . dreamer . com . tw / and http://gais . cs . cu . edu . tw/ . 
where terms ? TC ? , ? SC ? and ? ENG ? represent traditional Chinese , simplified Chinese and English terms respectively  . The performance of translating TC into SC is worse than that of the other two since the size of the anchor-text set corpus containing both TC and SC is relatively small in comparison with the others  . This is why we are pursuing in this paper to integrate the direct translation with the indirect translation via a third language  . However , the performance of the direct translation from TC to SC is used as a reference in comparison with our proposed models in the following experiments  . 

Table 1 . Top-n inclusion rates obtained with the direct translation model and the three specific language pairs corpora  . 
Type Top 1 Top 2 Top 3 Top 4 Top 5
TC=>SC 35.7% 43.0% 46.9% 49.6% 51.2%
TC=>ENG 68.6% 82.2% 85.7% 88.0% 88.8%
ENG=>SC 45 . 3% 55 . 8% 59 . 3% 61 . 6% 64 . 0% 4 . 3 Performance with the Indirect and
Transitive Translation Models
To realize the improvement using the transitive translation model  , some further experiments were conducted . As shown in Table 2 , the indirect and transitive translation models outperform than the direct translation model  . As mentioned above , the size of the anchor-text corpus that contains both TC and SC is small  . 
The indirect translation model is , therefore , helpful to find out the corresponding translations for some terms with low-frequency values in the corpora  . For example , the traditional Chinese term ????? was found can obtain its corresponding translation equivalent ? ???? in simplified Chinese via the intermediate translation ? Siemens ?  , which cannot be found only using the direct translation  . 
By examining the top1 translations obtained with the three different models  , it was found that the inclusion rates can be from  44  . 2% using the indirect translation to 49 . 2% using the transitive translation model . Table 3 illustrates some of the translations extracted using the transitive translation model  . 

Table 2 . Top-n inclusion rates obtained with different models  . 
Model Top 1 Top 2 Top 3 Top 4 Top 5

Translation 35.7% 43.0% 46.9% 49.6% 51.2%

Translation 44.2% 55.1% 58.0% 59.7% 60.5%

Translation 49.2% 58.1% 60.9% 61.6% 62.0%
Combination of Transitive
Translation and Lexicon 55 . 8% 60 . 8% 64 . 0% 65 . 9% 67 . 8% 4 . 4 Performance with an Integration of
Lexicon Lookup
An additional experiment was also made to compare with the use of a translation lexicon for query translation  . The lexicon contained more than 23 , 9 48 word/phrase entries in both traditional Chinese and simplified Chinese  . It was found the top1 inclusion rate that using the lexicon lookup was 12  . 4% which is obviously lower than the 49 . 2% that using the proposed transitive translation model  . In addition , the top1 inclusion rate can reach to 55 . 8%  ( see the last row of Table 2 ) if both of the approaches are combined . With the combined approach , the translation ( s ) of a query term is picked up from the lexicon if such a translation is already in the lexicon  , otherwise it is obtained based on the transitive translation model  . 
5 Concluding Remarks
Anchor-text set corpus is a valuable resource for extracting translations of Web queries  . How to exploit such kind of corpora in query translation is a challenging and potential research task  . In this paper , we extend our previous approach by proposing a transitive translation model and achieve some improvements on translating those queries whose translations cannot be extracted using the previous approach  . The improved approach has been proven particularly useful for the specific language pairs whose anchor texts are insufficient  . However , there are still some problems need to be further investigated in the future  . 


Ballesteros , L . and Croft , W . B .   ( 1997 ) Phrasal Translation and Query Expansion Techniques for 
CrossLanguage Information Retrieval,
Proceedings of ACM SIGIR ?97, pp . 84-91.
Borin , L .   ( 2000 ) You?ll Take the High Road and I?ll Take the Low Road : Using a Third Language to Improve Bilingual Word Alignment  , Proceedings of the 18th COLING , pp .  97-103 . 
Brown , P . , Pietra , S . A . D . , Pietra , V . D . J . , Mercer , R . 
L . (1993) The Mathematics of Machine Translation , Computational Linguistics ,  19(2) , pp .  263-312 . 
Chakrabarti , S . , Dom , B . , Gibson , D . , Kleinberg , J . , Raghavan , P . , Rajagopalan , S .   ( 1998 ) Automatic Resource List Compilation by Analysing Hyperlink Structure and Associated Text  , Proceedings of the seventh World Wide Web Conference  . 
Chien , L . F .   ( 1997 ) PAT-Tree-Based Keyword Extraction for Chinese Information Retrieval  , Proceedings of ACM SIGIR ?97 , pp .  50-59 . 
Dagan , I . , Church , K . W . , Gale , W . A ( 1993 ) Robust Bilingual Word Alignment for Machine Aided Translation  . Proceedings of the Workshop on Very
Large Corpora , pp . 18.
Davis , M . and Ogden , W . C .   ( 1997 ) Quilt : Implementing a largescale cross-language text retrieval system  , Proceedings of ACM-SIGIR ?97
Conference , pp . 92-98.
Dumais , S . T . , Landauer , T . K . , Littman , M . L .   ( 1996 ) Automatic Crosslinguistic Information Retrieval Using Latent Semantic Indexing  , SIGIR ?96 Workshop on Cross-Linguistic Information
Retrieval , pp . 16-24.
Fung , P . and Yee , L . Y .   ( 1998 ) An IR Approach for Translating New Words from Nonparallel  , Comparable Texts , Proceedings of The 36th Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp .  414-420 . 
Gollins , T . , Sanderson , M .   ( 2001 ) Improving Crosslanguage Information with Triangulated Translation  , Proceedings of ACM-SIGIR 2001
Conference , pp . 9095.
Kleinberg , J .   ( 1998 ) Authoritative Sources in a Hyperlinked Environment  , Proceedings of 9th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms . 
Kwok , K . L . (2001) NTCIR2 Chinese , CrossLanguage Retrieval Experiments Using PIRCS , Proceedings of NTCIR workshop meeting . 
Lu , W . H . , Chien , L . F . , Lee , H . J .   ( 2001 ) Anchor Text Mining for Translation of Web Queries  , Proceedings of The 2001 IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining.
Nie , J . Y . , Isabelle , P . , Simard , M . , and Durand , R . 
(1999 ) Crosslanguage Information Retrieval Based on Parallel Texts and Automatic Mining of Parallel Texts from the Web  , Proceedings of
ACM-SIGIR ?99 Conference.
Rapp , R .   ( 1999 ) Automatic Identification of Word Translations from Unrelated English and German Corpora  , Proceedings of The 37th Annual Conference of the Association for Computational 

Smadja , F ., McKeown , K ., Hatzivassiloglou , V.
(1996 ) Translating Collocations for Bilingual Lexicons : A Statistical Approach  , Computational
Linguistics , 22(1), pp . 138.
Wong , S . K . M . , Yao Y . Y .   ( 1995 ) On Modeling Information Retrieval with Probabilistic Inference  , ACM transactions on Information Systems , Vol . 13, pp .  38-68 . 

Table 3 . Some examples of extracted target translations with the three different models  .   ( the asterisk indicates the correct translation )   Top5 extracted target translations in simplified Chinese Source terms in traditional Chinese Direct Translation 

Indirect Translation

Transitive Translation Model ??? ( Siemens ) Not available ???* ( Siemens )  ?? ( Company )  ?? ( China )  ?? ( website )  ?? ( cooperation )  ???*  ( Siemens )  ?? ( Company )  ?? ( China )  ?? ( website )  ?? ( cooperation )  ?? ( Compaq ) Not available ??* ( Compaq )  ???? ( computer company )  ?? ( company )  ?? ( America )  ?? ( computer )  ??*  ( Compaq )  ???? ( computer company )  ?? ( company )  ?? ( America )  ?? ( computer )  ?? ( Sony )  ??*  ( Sony )  ??? ( our company )  ??*  ( Sony )  ?? ( record )  ??? ( Chinese version )  ??*  ( Sony )  ??*  ( Sony )  ??? ( movie site )  ?? ( entertainment )  ???? ( record company )  ??*  ( Sony )  ??*  ( Sony )  ??? ( movie site )  ?? ( entertainment )  ???? ( record company ) 
