ADAML + OIL-Compliant Chinese Lexical Ontology

Yu-Sheng Lai , Ren-Jr Wang and Wei-Tek Hsu
Advanced Technology Center,
Computer & Communications Research Laboratories /Industrial Technology Research Institute  , 
E000, 195-11, Sec . 4, Chung Hsing Rd . Chutung , Hsinchu , Taiwan310, R . O . C . 
laiys , rjwang , whsu@itri.org.tw


This paper presents an ongoing task that will construct a DAML+OIL-compliant Chinese 
Lexical Ontology . The ontology mainly comprises three components : a hierarchical taxonomy consisting of a set of concepts and a set of relations describing the relationships among the concepts  , a set of lexical entries associated with the concepts and relations  , and a set of axioms describing the constraints on the ontology  . It currently contains 1 , 075 concepts ,  65 , 961 lexical entries associated with the concepts ,   299 relations among the concepts excluding the hypernym and hyponym relations  ,  27 , 0 04 relations between the lexical entries and the concepts  , and 79 , 7 23 relations associating the lexical entries with the concepts  . 

The Semantic Web relies heavily on formal ontologies to structure data for comprehensive and transportable machine understanding [ Maedche and Staab  2001]  . Therefore , constructing applicable ontologies influences the success of Semantic Web largely  . An ontology mainly consists of a set of concepts and a set of relations that describe relationships among the concepts  . An upper ontology is limited to concepts that are abstract  , generic , domain-broad , and articulate . Cy corp constructed an upper ontology ? Upper Cyc ? Ontology  . It consists of approximately 3, 000 terms , i . e . concepts and relations . It has been used for organizing the upper structure of a knowledge base ? the Cyc?KB  . A working group of IEEE ( P1600 . 1 ) is also trying to standardize the specification of the upper ontology  . An upper ontology , called IEEES UO ( Standard Upper Ontology ) , is expected to enable computers to utilize it for applications  , such as natural language understanding and generation  , information retrieval and extraction , Semantic Web services [ McIlraith et al2001] , etc . It is estimated to contain between 1 , 000 and 2 , 5 00 terms plus roughly ten definitional statements for each term  . 
This paper presents an ongoing task that will construct an upper-ontology-like ontology for Chinese research and applications  . We refer to it as CLO ( Chinese Lexical Ontology )  . In addition to the structural portion , the CLO will contain Chinese lexicons associated with the concepts and relations  . A pure ontology containing concepts only ( without lexicons ) is abstract . A lexicon-associated ontology makes the substantiation of abstract concepts easier  . 
HowNet defines 65 , 9 61 Simplified Chinese lexical entries by a set of predefined features including  6 categories of primary features and 100 secondary features , and several symbols , in which the primary features are in a taxonomy with single inheritance  . The taxonomy is essentially regarded as the taxonomy of the CLO  . 
However , the Chinese lexical entries defined in HowNet are simplified version  . They are not suitable for Traditional Chinese research and applications  . A traditional version of Chinese dictionary released by Sinica of R  . O . C . is frequently used for Traditional Chinese NLP . By combining the Traditional Chinese dictionary and the HowNet  , we attempt to construct the CLO and represent it in the semantic markup language DAML+OIL since DAML+OIL is currently a basis of Web ontology language  . 
The task of constructing the CLO can be divided into three portions  . Firstly , a hierarchical taxonomy of concepts including relations among the concepts is required  . In our case , we utilize the hierarchical primary features of HowNet to form the structure  . Secondly , a set of lexical entries should be associated with the concepts and relations  . Thirdly , a set of axioms that describe additional constraints on the ontology are required  . This paper addresses the ongoing construction task and a brief introduction of 
Web ontology languages.
1 An Overview of Ontology and Its Languages This section will describe the definition of ontology from different viewpoints and several semantic markup languages frequently used for representing ontologies  . 
1.1 What is Ontology ?
In WordNet , the word ? ontology ? has a sense of ? the metaphysical study of the nature of being and existence  . ? The term has a long history in philosophy . It refers to the subject of existence . 
For AI community , it seems to generate a lot of controversy . One definition by Gruber ( 1993 ) is that ? an ontology is an explicit specification of a conceptualisation  . ? He considered that every knowledge base , knowledge-based system , or knowledge-level agent is committed to some conceptualization explicitly or implicitly  . The conceptualization includes the objects presumed or hypothesized to exist in the world and their interrelationships [ Genesereth and Nilsson  1987]  . 
According to Gruber?s definition , an ontology basically consists of a set of concepts  , i . e . the socalled objects , which represent classes of objects , and a set of relations , i . e . the socalled interrelationships , which are binary relations defined on concepts . A special transitive relation ? subClassOf ? represents a subsumption relation between concepts and structures a taxonomy  . In addition to the taxonomy , an ontology typically contains a set of inference rules  . The inference rules enhance the ontology?s power in reasoning  . 
Maedche and Staab ( 2001 ) proposed an ontology-learning framework for the Semantic Web  . In their case , they formally defined an ontology as an 8-tuple < L , C , CH , R , RH , F , G , A > , in which the first primitive L denotes a set of strings that describe lexical entries for concepts and relations  , the middle 6 primitives structure the taxonomy of the ontology  , and the last primitive A is a set of axioms that describe additional constraints on the ontology  . Staab and Maedche ( 2001 ) considered that the axioms make implicit facts more explicit  . The ontology is actually a lexical ontology since it comprises a set of lexical entries  . We adopt the ontology?s definition for constructing the CLO  . 
1 . 2 Ontology Languages for the Semantic Web The Semantic Web is not a separate Web but an extension of the current one  , in which information is given well-defined meaning  , better enabling computers and people to work in cooperation [ Berners-Lee et al  2001]  . The goal of developing the Semantic Web is to facilitate the communications of people-to -machine  , machine-to-people , and machine-to-machine . A way to achieve this goal is to give the information the Web provided a well-defined meaning  . Several markup languages are developed for this purpose  . Fig .   1 shows the layer language model for the Web [ Fensel  2000]  . 

HTMLXML
XHT MLR DF


Fig . 1 The layer language model for the Web.
HTML is the most popular markup language for structuring documents  . Its simplicity enabled fast growth of the Web , but also resulted in information overload and that knowledge could not be shared conveniently and efficiently  . An extensible metalanguage ? XML was born for this reason  . One of its instances ? XHTML redefined from HTML is more extensible than HTML  , but is still not powerful enough for the
Semantic Web.
RDF ( Resource Description Framework ) developed by the W3C ( World Wide Web Consortium ) is also an instance of XML . It is a foundation of Web metadata processing and used for describing relationships between resources  . In general , any Web resource could be described in RDF . The formal model for RDF can be represented as triples : < predicate  , subject , object > . The instances of the model can be also viewed as directed labeled graphs  , which resemble semantic networks [ Quillian 1968] . It also provides interoperability among applications  , which enables applications to exchange and share machine-understandable information on the Web  . 
RDFS stands for RDF Schema . It is an extensible , object-oriented type system , which is introduced as a layer on top of the basic RDF model [ Brickley and Guha  2000]  . RDFS can be viewed as a set of ontological modeling primitives on top of RDF [ Fensel  2000]  . For example , two semantic modeling primitives ? rdfs:Class ? and ? rdfs:subClassOf ? can be used for defining the taxonomy of an ontology  . 
A semantic markup langauge ? DAML+OIL , derived from RDF and RDFS , defines more primitives , such as daml : complement Of for complement relation  , daml : same Class As for equivalence relation , etc . , to represent more relationships among resources . DAML+OIL was built originally from the DAML ontology language ? DAML-ONT  . It combines many language components of the OIL with the formal seamtics and reasoning services provided by description logic  . Summarily , compared to other languages , such as XML DTD , XML Schema , and RDF(S ) , DAML+OIL possesses richer language features , such as class expressions , defined classes , formal semantics , inference , local restrictions , and qualified constraints ( see more at www . daml . org/language/features . html) . 
It is currently the basis of W3C?s Web ontology language . Therefore , we also follow this specification for the CLO . 
2 Construction of the Chinese Lexical Ontology As mentioned above  , the CLO mainly consists of three components : a hierarchical taxonomy of concepts  , a set of lexicons associated with the concepts and relations  , and a set of axioms . We do not intend to explore the axioms in this paper  . 
In the following , we will describe how to construct the hierarchical taxonomy and how to associate lexicons with the concepts  . 
2.1 Conversion of HowNet
The hierarchical taxonomy is actually a conversion of HowNet  . One of the important portions of HowNet is the methodology of defining the lexical entries  . In HowNet , each lexical entry is defined as a combination of one or more primary features and a sequence of secondary features with prefixed symbols  . The primary features indicate the entry?s category  , which are in a hierarchical taxonomy as shown in Fig  .  2 . Based on the category , the secondary features make the entry?s sense more explicit  , but they are non-taxonomic . Some of the secondary features are prefixed with symbols  . 
The symbols describe the relationships among the lexical entry  , the primary feature , and the secondary features . 
entity ? ? thing ? ? phisical ?? animate ??
Animal Human ? ? human ? time ? ? space ? ? component ? ? Fig  . 2 Taxonomy of partial primary features in

For example , HowNet defines the lexical entry ??????? ( stock broker ) as follows: ( D . 1) ? Human ? ,  #occupation ?? , commercial ? , * buy ? , * sell ? ,  #fund ? ? ? The first term ? Human ?? is the socalled primary feature  . The remaining terms are the socalled secondary features  , in which the secondary feature ? buy ?? is prefixed with the symbol ?*  . ? It indicates that ??????? ( stock broker ) can be an agent of ? buy ? . ? In the following , we will describe how to extract hierarchically structured concepts  , relations among the concepts , and relations between the lexical entries and the concepts  , and how to associate the lexical entries with the concepts  . 
Hierarchically Structured Concepts
Totally 1 , 5 21 primary features are divided into 6 upper categories : Event , Entity , Attribute Value , Quantity , and Quantity Value . After eliminating replica , we obtain 1 , 075 distinct primary features . These primary features are well organized into a hierarchical taxonomy  . 
Each primary feature can be viewed as a concept for an ontology  . By the taxonomy , we construct a fundamental ontology that consists of a set of concepts and a special relation ?? subClassOf  . ? The ? subClassOf ? relation realizes the hypernym and hyponym relationships among the concepts  . 
Relations among the Concepts
In the two categories , Event and Entity , some primary features have auxiliaries for describing the relationships to other primary features  . For example , the primary feature ? human ? ? has auxiliaries : [! name ??  , ! wisdom ? ? , ! ability ?? , ! occupation ? ? , * act ??] . It means that ? human ? ? has attributes : ? name ??  , ? ? wisdom ? ? , ? ? ability ?? , ? ? occupation ?? , ? and can be an agent of ? act ?? . ? For the CLO , these auxiliaries are used for constructing the relations among the concepts  . 
Relations between the Lexical Entries and the

A noticeable thing is that , in HowNet , many primary features appear in the secondary features of many lexical entries to assist describing the senses of those lexical entries  . 
That is , they play the roles of secondary features . 
For example , in(D . 1) , the fourth term ? buy ?? is a secondary feature for the lexical entry ???????  ( stock broker )  . And it is also a primary feature of the taxonomy . In other words , these secondary features are concepts for the ontology  . 
For each of them , its prefixed symbol provides a relation between the lexical entry and the concept to which it corresponds  . 
Associating the HowNet Lexical Entries with the Concepts As mentioned before  , a lexical entry in HowNet is defined as a combination of one or more primary features and a sequence of secondary features with prefixed symbols  . Its primary features being taxonomic indicate its category  . 
And we took the taxonomy as the taxonomy of the CLO  . Therefore , each HowNet lexical entry can be well associated with one or more concepts according to its primary features  . 
2.2 Classification of the Lexicons
From HowNet , we constructed the ontology taxonomy and obtained Simplified Chinese lexical entries  . It is still lack of Traditional Chinese lexical entries  . For the completeness of
CLO , we need a dictionary supporting
Traditional Chinese.
A Traditional Chinese dictionary compiled by Academia Sinica of R  . O . C . ( www . sinica . edu . t  w ) was released for computational processing of Chinese natural language  . It consists of 78 , 322 words ; each is associated with one or more parts-of -speech  ( POS )  . Taking into account the POS , there are totally 80 , 491 lexical entries . The dictionary is an available and necessary complement to Traditional Chinese?s research and applications  . We will refer to it as Sinica
Dictionary for short.
Associating the lexical entries in Sinica Dictionary with the concepts is equivalent to classifying them into the ontology taxonomy  . In order to ensure the correctness of the classification task  , we proceed in a semiautomatic approach . Fig .   3 illustrates the flow diagram of semiautomatically classifying the lexical entries into the ontology taxonomy  . 

A Traditional
Chinese lexical entry
Code Conversion Searching








Chinese Lexical





Mapped ? YES





Fig .   3 The flow diagram of manually classifying the Sinica lexical entries into the CLO  . 

Sinica entries (80, 491)
HowNet entries (65,961)
Unmatched (39,899)
Unmatched (25,369) Completely Matched (26, 916)
Incompletely matched (13, 676) ( A ) ( B)
Fig .   4 A diagram matching Sinica?s lexical entries with HowNet?s  . 
For each lexical entry in Sinica Dictionary , we search it in a pool of Big5-coded HowNet lexical entries , which are transformed from the HowNet originally encoded in GB code  . If it can be found and its POS is the same as its corresponding HowNet lexiclentry?s  , then we associate it with the concepts which the HowNet lexical entry belongs to  . There are totally 26 , 916 completely matched entries . The remaining Sinica lexical entries contains 39 , 899 unmatched entries and 13 , 6 76 incompletely matched entries whose characters are matched but POSs are not matched  . ( see Fig . 4) Observing the incompletely matched entries , in fact , all of them are multi-conceptual . To classify each of them into the ontology taxonomy according to its primary feature in HowNet is resonable  . For example , the lexical entry ?????? ( exciting ) is classified into the adjective category in HowNet  , but has a POS ? VH11 ? in Sinica Dictionary . It is a verb in ( S . 1) and an adjective in ( S . 2) . 
(S . 1) ??????????? ( The movie excited everybody . )( S . 2) ?????????????? ( Isaw an exciting movie . ) Since the incompletely matched entries are multi -conceptual  , they must be classified into other concepts . Totally 53 , 575 lexical entries ( unmatched and incompletely matched ) should be classified yet . It is very hard to manually classify such a large number of lexical entries into the largescale ontology consisting of  1  , 075 concepts . Therefore , an efficient approach is still required . 
Traditional and Simplified Chinese languages are originated from the same people  . The languages should not be much different . An assumption is that most of the lexical entries in the two unmatched groups  , i . e . regions ( A ) and ( B ) in Fig .  4 , should be almost identical in semantics and syntax  . Under this assumption , we can produce a mapping table between the two groups of unmatched entries according to their POSs  . Thus , we can shorten the time for manual classification  . This task , i . e . the dash-blocked area in Fig . 3, is ongoing . 
Conclusion and Future Work The CLO currently contains  1  , 075 concepts ,  65 , 961 lexical entries associated with the concepts ,   299 relations among the concepts excluding the ? subClassOf ? relations  ,  27 , 0 04 relations between the lexical entries and the concepts  , and 79 , 7 23 relations associating the lexical entries with the concepts  . 
We are working toward the classification of the unmatched Tradictional Chinese lexical entries into the CLO  . Besides , the relations are not associated with lexical entries yet  , therefore we will research into this problem in the future  . 

This paper is a partial result of Project
A 311XS1211 conducted by ITRI undersponsorship of the Ministry of Economic Affairs  , 


Berners-Lee T . , Hendler J . and Lassila O . (2001) The Semantic Web , Scientific American . 
Brickley D . and Guha R . V . (2000) Resource
Description Framework ( RDF ) Schema
Specification 1.0, W3C Candidate
Recommendation 27 March 2000.
Chinese Knowledge Information Processing Group ( 1993 ) Analysis of Chinese Part-of-Speech , Technical Report no .  93-05 , Institute of Information Science , Academia Sinica , R . O . C . 
Fensel D . (2000) The Semantic Web and Its Languages , IEEE Intelligent Systems , vol . 15, no . 
6, pp . 67-73.
Genesereth M . R . and Nilsson N . J .   ( 1987 ) Logical Foundations of Artificial Intelligence , Los Altos , California : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc . ,
Chap . 2, pp . 913.
Gruber T . R .   ( 1993 ) A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Specifications  , Knowledge Acquisition , vol . 5, no . 2, pp .  199-220 . 
Maedche A . and Staab S . (2001) Ontology Learning for the Semantic Web , IEEE Intelligent
Systems , vol . 16, no . 2, pp . 7279.
McIlraith S . A . , Son T . C . and Zeng H . (2001) Semantic Web Services , IEEE Intelligent Systems , pp .  4653 . 
Quillian M . R . (1968) Semantic Memory , Semantic Information Processing , The MIT Press , pp . 

Staab S . and Maedche A . (2001) Knowledge Portals ? Ontologies at Work , AI Magazine , vol . 
21, no . 2.

