Disambiguation of FiniteState Transducers
N . Smaili and P . Cardinal and G . Boulianne and P . Dumouchel
Centre de Recherche Informatique de Montre?al.
nsmaili , pcardinal , gboulian , Pierre . Dumouchel@crim . ca

The objective of this work is to disambiguate transducers which have the following form : T = R ? D and to be able to apply the determinization algorithm described in  ( Mohri ,  1997) . 
Our approach to disambiguating
T = R ? D consists first of computing the composition T and thereafter to disambiguate the transducer T  . We will give an important consequence of this result that allows us to compose any number of transducers R with the transducer D  , in contrast to the previous approach which consisted in first disambiguating transducers D and R to produce respectively D ? and 
R ?, then computing T ? = R ? ? D ? where
T ? is unambiguous . We will present results in the case of a transducer 
D representing a dictionary and R representing phonological rules  . 
Keywords : ambiguity , deterministic , dictionary , transducer . 
1 Introduction
The task of speech recognition can be decomposed into several steps  , where each step is represented by a finite-state transducer  ( Mohri et al ,  1998) . 
The search space of the recognizer is defined by the composition of transducers T = A?C?R?D ? M  . Transducer A converts a sequence of observations O to a sequence of context-dependent phones  . 
Transducer C converts a sequence of context -dependent phones to a sequence of context -independent phones  . Transducer R is a mapping from phones to phones which implements phonological rules  . Transducer
D is the pronunciations dictionary.
It converts a sequence of context-independent phones to a sequence of words  . Transducer M represents a language model : it converts sequences of words into sequences of words  , while restricting the possible sequences or assigning a score to the sequences  . 
The speech recognition problem consists of finding the path of least cost in transducer O?T  , where O is a sequence of acoustic observations . 
The pronunciations dictionary representing the mapping from pronunciations to words can show an inherent ambiguity : a sequence of phones can correspond to more than one word  , so we cannot apply the transducer determinization algorithm  ( an operation which reduces the redundancy , search time and possibly space ) . This problem is usually handled by adding special symbols to the dictionary to remove the ambiguity in order to be able to apply the determinization algorithm  ( Koskenniemi ,  1990) . Nevertheless , when we compose the dictionary with the phonological rules  , we must take into account special symbols . This complicates the construction of transducers representing these rules and leads to size explosion  . It would be simpler to compose the rules with the dictionary  , then remove the ambiguity in the result and then apply the determinization algorithm  . 
2 Notations and definitions
Formally , a weighted transducer over a semiring K = ( K , ? , ? ,  0? , 1?) is defined as a 6-tuple T = ( Q , I , ?1 , ?2 , E , F ) where Q is a finite set of states , I?Q is a finite set of initial states , ?1 is the input alphabet , ?2 is the output alphabet , E is a finite set of transitions and F?Q is a finite set of final states  . 
A transition is an element of Q??1??2 ? Q?K.
Transitions are of the form t = ( p(t ) , i(t ) , o(t ) , n(t ) , w(t )) , t ? E where p ( t ) denotes the transition?s origin state , i(t ) its input label , o(t ) its output label , n ( t ) the transition?s destination state and w ( t ) ? K is the weight of t . The tropical semiring defined as ( R+?? , min , + , ? , 0) is commonly used in speech recognition , but our results are applicable to the case of general semirings as well  . 
A path pi = t1 ??? tn of T is an element of E?verifying n ( ti?1 ) = p ( ti ) for 2 ? i ? n . 
We can easily extend the function sp and n to those paths : p  ( pi ) = p ( t1 )  , (1) n(pi ) = n(tn) .  (2)
We denote by P(r , s ) the set of paths whose origin is stater and whose destination is states  . We can also extend the function P to the sets R ? Q an d 
S ? Q :
P ( R,S ) = ? r?R,s?S
P ( r , s)
We can extend the function si and o to the paths by taking the concatenations of the input and output symbols : i  ( pi ) = i ( t1 ) ??? i ( tn )  , (3) o(pi ) = o(t1) ? ? ? o(tn) .  (4)
Definition 1 ( unambiguous transducer , ( Berstel ,  1979))
A transducer T is said to be unambiguous if for each w ?  ??1  , there exists at most one path pi in T such that i ( pi ) = w . 
Definition 2 ( ambiguous paths )
Two paths pi and ? are ambiguous if pi 6= ? and i ( pi ) = i ( ? )  . 
Remark 1 : To remove the ambiguity between two paths pi and ?  , it suffices to modify i ( pi ) by changing the first input label of the path pi . This is done by introducing an auxiliary symbol such that : i  ( pi ) 6= i ( ? )  . 
Figure 1a shows an ambiguous transducer . It is ambiguous since for the input string?s e [ z ] ?  , there are two paths representing the output string sces  , ses . In this figure , ? eps ? stands for epsilon or null symbol . 
To disambiguate a transducer , we first group the ambiguous paths ; we then remove the ambiguity in each group by adding auxiliary labels as shown in Figure  1b   . Unfortunately , it is infeasible to enumerate all the paths in a cyclic transducer  . However , in ( Smaili ,  2001 ) it is shown that cyclic transducers of the type studied in this work can be disambiguated by transforming to a corresponding acyclic sub -transducer such that T ? ? T  . This ( a )   3s:ces   5a:amis   4E:eps   6m:eps   8a:eps #:#[ z ]: epsi:eps 9d:eps o:eps ( b )   3s-2:ces   5a:amis   4E:eps   6m:eps   8a:eps #:#[ z ]: epsi:eps 9d:eps o:eps
Figure 1: ( a ) Ambiguous transducer ( b ) Disambiguated transducer fundamental property is described in detail in section  2  . 1 . Accordingly , we apply the appropriate transformation to the input transducer  . 
2.1 Fundamental Property
We are interested in the transducer
T = ( Q , I ,  ? ,  ? , E , F ) with ? = ?0  ]  ?1 verifying the following property :
Any cycle in T contains at least a transition t such that i  ( t )  ? ?1 . 
We denote by E0 and E1 the following sets : E0 = t?E : i ( t ) ??0 and E1 = t?E:i ( t )  ? ?1 . Notice that E = E0] E1 . 
We can give a characterization of the ambiguous paths verifying the fundamental property  . Before , let?s make the following remark :
Remark 2 Any path pi in T has the following form : pi = f0   pi0   f1   pi1  ? ? ?  pin?1 fnp in with pii ? E+0   , fi?E+1 for 1 ? i ? n , f0 ? E?1 and pi0 ? E ? 0 if n?1 . 
If n = 0 then pi = f0pi0.
Proposition 1 ( characterization of ambiguous paths ) 
Let pi and ? be two paths such that : pi = f0   pi0   f1   pi1  ? ? ?  pin?1 fnp in and ? = g0   ?0   g1   ?1  ? ? ??  k?1 gk?k . 
pi and ? are ambiguous if and only if ??? k = n ? i and pii are ambiguous  ( 0 ? i ? n )  . 
fi and gi are ambiguous (0 ? i ? n).
We will assume that the first transi-tion?s path belongs to  E0  , i . e . f0 =  . 
Recall that if we want to avoid cycles , we just have to remove from T all transitions t ?   E1  . According to
Proposition 1 , ambiguity needs to be removed only in paths that use transitions t ?  E0  , namely the path piit hat performs the decomposition given in Remark  2  . Disambiguation consists only of introducing auxiliary labels in the ambiguous paths  . We denote by Asrc the set of origin states of transitions belonging to  E1 and by Adst the set of destination states of transitions belonging to  E2  . 
Asrc = p(t):t ? E1
Adst = n(t):t ? E1
According to Proposition 1 and what precedes , it would be equivalent and simpler to disambiguate an acyclic transducer obtained from T in which we have removed all  E1 transitions . 
Therefore , we introduce the operator ?: T in ?? T out which accomplishes this construction  . 
Let T = ( Q,I , ?2, E , F) . Then ?( T ) = ( Q , I1, ?2, ET , F1) where : 1 . I 1=I ? Adst?i , with i 6? Q . 
2. F1 = F?Asrc?f , with f6?Q.
3. ET = E\E1 ?( i , q , , , 0), q ?
I 1?(q , f , , , 0), q ? F1.
The third condition insures the connectivity of ? ( T ) if T is itself connected . 
It suffices to disambiguate the acyclic transducer  ?  ( T )  , then reinsert the transitions of E1 in ?( T ) . The set of paths in ?( T ) is then P(I1, F1) . 
2.2 Algorithm

T = ( Q , i , X , Y , E , F ) is an ambiguous transducer verifying the fundamental property  . 

T1=(Q , i , X ? X1 , Y , ET , F ) is an unambiguous transducer , X1 is the set of auxiliary symbols . 
1. Tacyclic ??( T).
2. Path ? set of paths of Tacyclic.
3 . Disambiguate the set Path ( creating the set X1) . 
4 .   T0 ? build the unambiguous transducer which has unambiguous paths  . 
5 . T1???1 ( T0 )   ( consists of rein-serting in T0 the transitions of T which where removed )  . 
6. return T1
Now , we will study an important class of transducers verifying the fundamental property  . This class is obtained by doing the composition of a transducer D verifying the fundamental property with a transducer R  . The composition of two transducers is an efficient algebraic operation for building more complex transducers  . We give a brief definition of composition and the fundamental theorem that insures the invariance of the fundamental property by composition  . 
3 Composition
The transducer T created by the composition of two transducers R and D  , denoted T = R ? D , performs the mapping of word x to word z if and only if R maps x to y and D maps y to z  . 
The weight of the resulting word is the ?- product of the weights of y and z  ( Pereira and Riley ,  1997) . 
Definition 3 ( Transitions ) Let t = ( q , a , b , q1 , w1) and e = ( r , b , c , r1 , w2) be two transitions . We define the composition t with e by : t ? e = ( ( q , r ) , a , c , ( q1 , r1) , w1?w2) . 
Note that , in order to make the composition possible , we must have o(t ) = i(e ) . 
Definition 4 ( Composition )
Let R = ( QR , IR , X , Y , ER , FR ) and S = ( QS , IS , Y , Z , ES , FS ) be two transducers . The composition of R with S is a transducer
R?S = ( Q,Q,X,Z,E,F ) defined by : 1 . i = ( iR,iS ), 2 . Q = QR ? QS , 3 . F = FR ? FS , 4 . E = eR ? eS : eR?ER , eS?ES . 
Let D = ( QD , ID , Y , Z , ED , FD ) be a transducer verifying the fundamental property  . We can write Y = Y0]Y1 where Y0 = i ( t ) : t?E0 and
Y 1 = i(t ) : t ? E1 .
Theorem 1 ( Fundamental ) Let
R = ( QR , IR , X , Y , ER , FR ) verifying the following condition : ( C ) ? t?ER , o(t ) ? Y1 ? i(t ) ? Y1 . 
Then the transducer T = R ? D verifies the fundamental property  . 
Proof:
Let X1 = i(t ): t?ER and o(t ) ?
Y1?Y1 and X0 = X\X1 . We will prove that any path in T contains at least a transition t such that i  ( t ) ? X1 . 
Let pi be a cycle in T . Then , there exists two cycles piR and piD in R and in D respectively such that pi = piR?piD  . The paths piR and piD have the following form : piD =  g1 ? ? ? g n , with gi ? ED for 1 ? i ? n ; piR = f1 ? ? ? fn , with fi ? ER for 1 ? i ? n ; pi = piR ? piD = ( f1 ? g1) ? ? ?( fn?gn) . 
There is an index k such that i(gk )?
Y1 since D verifies the fundamental property . We also necessarily have i(gk ) = o(fk ) . According to condition ( C ) of Theorem 1 , we deduce that i(fk ) ? Y1 . Knowing that fk?ER , we deduce that i(fk ) ? X1 , which implies i(fk?gk ) = i(fk ) ? X1 . 
3.1 Consequence
The restriction to the case X = Y allows us to build a large class of transducers verifying the fundamental property  . In fact , if two transducers
R = ( QR , IR , Y , Y , ER , FR ) and S = ( QS , IS , Y , Y , ES , FS ) verify the condition ( C ) of Theorem 1 , then S ? R verifies the condition ( C ) , associativity of ? implies :
S?(R?D ) = ( S?R)?D .
Suppose that we have m transducers
Ri ( 1 ? i ? m ) verifying the condition ( C ) of Theorem 1 and that we want to reduce the size of the transducer : 
Tm = Rm ? Rm?1 ? ? ? R1?D .
To this end , we proceed as follows : we add the auxiliary symbols to disambiguate the transducer  ; then we apply determinization and finally we remove the auxiliary labels  . These three operations are denoted by ? . 
Ti = ?( D ) if i = 0.
?( Ri ??( Ti?1)) if i?1.
The size of transducer Tm can also be reduced by computing : 
Tm = ?( Rm ? Rm?1 ? ? ? R1 ? D).
The old approach :
T ? m=R ? m?R ? m?1 ? ? ? R?1 ? D?.
has several disadvantages . The size of
R ? i for 1 ? i?m increases considerably since the auxiliary labels introduced in each transducer have to be taken into account in all others  . This fact limits the number of transducers that can be composed with D  . 
4 Application and Results
We will now apply our algorithm to transducers involved in speech recognition  . Transducer D represents the pronunciation dictionary and possesses the fundamental property  . The set of transitions of D is defined as
E = E0] ( f , # , x ,  0 , w ) where f is the unique final state of D , 0 is the unique initial state of D , x is any symbol and  #is a symbol representing the end of a word  . All transitions t ? E0 are such that i(t ) 6= # . Any path pi in E ? 0 is acyclic . The transducer
R representing a phonological rule is constructed to fulfill condition  ( C ) of the fundamental theorem . The transducer D represents a French dictionary with  20000 words and their pronunciations . The transducer R represents the phonological rule that handles liaison in the French language  . This liaison , which is represented by a phoneme appearing at the end of some words  , must be removed when the next word begins with a consonant since the liaison phoneme is never pronounced in that case  . However , if the next word begins with a vowel , the liaison phoneme may or may not be pronounced and thus becomes optional  . 
0 p:p#:#p:p#:#v:v#:#
Figure 2: Transducer used to handle the optional liaison rule  . 
Figure 2 shows the transducer that handles this rule . In the figure , p denotes all phonemes , v the vowels and [ x ] the liaison phonemes . 
Table 1 shows the results of our algorithm using the dictionary and the phonological rule previously described  . 
Transducer States Transitions
D 115941 136001 ?( D ) 1760 742 140
R?D 115943 151434 ?( R?D ) 1795 550769
R??(D ) 1761 153 209?(R ? ?( D )) 17 58 74 96 20
Table 1: Size reduction on a French dictionary
As we can see in Table 1 , the operator ? produces a smaller transducer in all the cases considered here  . 
5 Conclusion and future work
We have been able to disambiguate an important class of cyclic and ambiguous transducers  , which allows us to apply the determinization algorithm  ( Mohri ,  1997) ; and then to reduce the size of those transducers . With our new approach , we do not have to take into account the number of transducers Ri and their auxiliary labels as was the case with the approach used before  . Thus , new transducers Ri such as phonological rules can be easily inserted in the chain  . 
The major disadvantage of our approach is that disambiguating a transducer increases its size systematically  . 
Our future work will consist of developing a more effective algorithm for disambiguating an acyclic transducer  . 

J . Berstel . 1979. Transductions and
ContextFree Languages . Teubner
Studienbucher , Stuttgart , Germany.
G . Boulianne , J . Brousseau , P . Ouel-let , and P . Dumouchel .  2000 . French large vocabulary recognition with cross word phonology transducers  . 
In Proceedings ICASSP 2000, June.
Istanbul , Turkey.
S . Eilenberg . 1974-1976. Automata,
Language and Machines , volume A-
B . Academic Press , New York.
R . Kaplan and M . Kay .  1994 . Regular models of phonological rule systems . Computational linguistics , 20(3):331?378 . 
K . Koskenniemi .  1990 . Finite state parsing and disambiguation . In Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING ?90 )  , volume 2 . 
Helsinki , Finland.
M . Mohri , M . Riley , D . Hindle,
A.L jolje , and F . Pereira . 1998.
Full expansion of context-dependent networks in large vocabulary speech recognition  . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics  , Speech , and Signal
Proceesing ( ICASSP?98). Seattle,

M . Mohri .  1997 . Finitestate transducers in language and speech processing  . Computational linguistics , 23(2) . 
F . Pereira and M . Riley , 1997.
Speech recognition by composition of weighted finite automata  . Emmanuel Roche and Yves Schabes,
Cambridge , Massachusetts , a brad-ford book , them it press edition . 
Nasser Smaili . 2001.
De?sambigu??sation de transducteurs en reconnaissance delapa role  . 
Universite ? du Que?beca ` Montre?al.
