Reasoning in Metaphor Understanding :
The ATT Meta Approach and System
John Barnden , Sheila Glasbey , Mark Lee , Alan Wallington
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham B152TT
J . A . Barnden , S . R . Glasbey , M . G . Lee , A . M . Wallington@cs . bham . ac . uk

A detailed approach has been developed for core aspects of the task of understanding abroad class of metaphorical utterances  . The utterances in question are those that depend on known metaphorical mappings but that nevertheless contain elements not mapped by those mappings  . A reasoning system has been implemented that partially instantiates the theoretical approach  . The system , called ATTMeta , will be demonstrated . The paper briefly indicates how the system works , and outlines some specific aspects of the system , approach and the overall project . 

The sentence In the far reaches of her mind , Anne believed that Kyle was having an affair1 can be analyzed as depending on metaphorical views of MINDASPHYSICAL SPACE and 
IDEASASPHYSICAL OBJECTS ( see Barnden 2001a) . These views are , plausibly , familiar to typical users of English . However , it is reasonable to assume that typical users do not already have a mapping into the mental domain of the physical notion of " far reaches "  . Our approach to metaphor is predicated on the notion that one should  , when possible , avoid constructing source-to-target mappings for such elements of a metaphorical utterance that transcend the already known mappings in the metaphorical views underlying the utterance  . 
Instead , we advocate the use of metaphor-pretence " cocoons "  ( reasoning spaces ) where the utterance is taken as literally true . Within-co coon reasoning will attempt to connect these " map-transcending " elements to aspects of the source using a set of specified conversion rules  . 
The far-reaches qualification in the sentence implies by source-domain reasoning that Anne could only to a very low degree physically manipulate the idea that Kyle was having an affair  . Then , if we can appeal to a conversion rule , i . e . a known mapping of ability to physically manipulate an idea to ability to consciously process it  , we can draw the reasonable conclusion that Anne only had a very low degree of ability to consciously process the idea  . In our presentation , we shall demonstrate how the ATTMeta system deals with this example  . 
Note that the rules of reasoning are given a qualitative certainty level  , and that predicates can be graded , using a scale of qualitative degrees . For instance , someone can be represented as understanding a situation to a " medium " degree  . 
Our approach also makes heavy use of " view -neutral mapping adjuncts "  ( VNMAs )  . These are general mapping principles ( inspired by the work of Carbonell 1982 ) that apply , though only by default , no matter what metaphorical views are in play . For instance , the ability to do things and the degrees with which states of affairs hold are automatically mapped by VNMAs  . In many examples of metaphor , most of the real mapping work is done by VNMAs . 
Much of the approach has been implemented in the ATTMeta system  , which is an uncertain rule-based system operating by backchaining  ( see also Barnden 1998 , Barnden 2001 , Lee &
Barnden , 2001a ) . ATTMeta performs reasoning , but does not yet interface directly to natural language  . Instead , hand-constructed logical forms couching the source-domain meaning of metaphorical sentences are passed to it  . In the above example , the source-domain meaning is that Anne?s believing was literally physically located in the physical far reaches of her mind  . 
The following sections summarize various abilities of the system  , principles of the approach , and aspects of ongoing theoretical work aimed at further extensions to the system  . 
A major item of current implementational work is a fuller realization of VNMAs  . 
1 Uncertainty
Although reasoning conflict and uncertainty are intricately involved in metaphor  , very few approaches attempt to grapple with the issues  . 
Propositions and reasoning within both the target and source domains  , being largely of common sense varieties , are typically uncertain . 
It can be uncertain what metaphorical views are involved  ; information transferred from the source domain can conflict with target-domain information  ; and transfers can even conflict with each other . The ATTMeta system handles all these types of uncertainty and conflict  . Its uncertainty handling is based on fairly crude qualitative uncertainty annotations on rules and propositions  , but there is a sophisticated conflict-resolution mechanism  . 
The uncertainty-handling and conflict-resolution are almost entirely orthogonal to the provisions for metaphor  . This leads to clean design and helps to address longstanding issues about metaphor  . One such issue is the conflict between information transferred from the source domain and the target information  . ATT Meta allows either side to win , depending on standard specificity principles . This goes against a naive assumption in most of the literature that target information should automatically override transfers  . But , this is only convincing when the target information is certain  . Indeed , we claim that metaphor is often used precisely to describe an exception to a target-domain default  . 
2 Mixed Metaphors
Issues such as reasoning about uncertainty are particularly important in the processing of mixed metaphors  . Mixed metaphors need not feature obvious cases of conflict but can include graceful combinations of metaphors  , such as the following sentence to be examined below : One part of John hotly resented the verdict  . This combines a view of John as made up of subagents and a view of agents ? emotional states as things that can have temperature  . It is possible to distinguish two types of mixed metaphor : parallel mixes and serial mixes  . In a parallel mixed metaphor , the target ( A ) is seen partly through an A-as-B metaphor and partly through another metaphor  , A-as-B ? . B and B ? are in general different domains , but may overlap . 
Also , different aspects of A may be involved in the two metaphors  . In a serial mixed metaphor ( commonly called a chained metaphor )  , the target ( A ) is seen as a source ( B ) , which is in turn then seen as a different source ( C )  . 
Previous work on the understanding of metaphor has assumed that mixing is a relatively rare phenomenon that can be handled once a more theory of simple metaphor is developed  . We argue that this assumption is detrimental to progress since mixed metaphors rely on the same conceptual knowledge as simple metaphors and can  , therefore , provide valuable insight into the processes and representations underlying metaphorical reasoning  . Moreover , we claim that the reasoning processes and data structures involved in understanding mixed metaphors are identical to those used in understanding simple metaphors  . Therefore , any current theory of metaphor should ( at least in principle ) be extensible to deal with mixing . To this end , ATTMeta handles mixed metaphor in a manner consistent with the way it handles simple metaphors  . The two types of metaphor are processed in subtly different ways  . Parallel mixed metaphors create separate pretence -cocoons that are mapped in parallel to the target domain where their respective contributions are understood  . Serial mixed metaphors create nested pretence cocoons where the metaphorical view of B as C is nested within a pretence cocoon with the view of A as B  . 
3 Reverse Transfers in Metaphor
The use of metaphor involves a flow of effects of some kind from the source domain to the target domain  , where effects can include insights into the target  , hypotheses about the target , or the highlighting of parts of the target . However , although the overall effect flow is always from source to target  , in many cases , this does not preclude a reverse flow where a literal proposition  , command , or question is mapped onto an equivalent within the current metaphorical domain  . 
The ATTMeta system allows conversion rules to map from propositions in the source domain to propositions in the target domain and also in the opposite direction  . So a source domain proposition such as " Socrates was the mid wife for an idea " might be mapped onto the target domain proposition " Socrates helped in the production of the idea "  . However , the rules would equally allow the proposition " So crates helped in the production of the idea " to be mapped to the source domain proposition " So crates was them id wife for an idea "  . We argue that there are at least three reasons why 
ATTMeta should have this ability : ( 1 ) Given that metaphors are ultimately used to have an effect on the target domain  , the use of a metaphorical utterance can be seen as answering  , in some sense , a target domain query . This sets up a choice between taking the metaphorical utterance and applying all conversion rules to it in the hope that one of the resulting propositions might provide a suitable answer  , or taking the question and converting it into a question in terms of the current metaphor  . 
We argue that the latter is often more efficient.
(2 ) Certain source domain propositions would allow ATTMeta to draw a tentative conclusion  , which would , were it more strongly supported , provide an argument via a chain of reasoning for some other  , target level , proposition or query . A target-level statement might give the added support  , but for this to be the case it would first need to be converted into its source-level equivalent  . 
(3 ) The combination of source and target domain information within a discourse that only intermittently maintains a metaphorical view of the target domain may best be done in the source domain after the target domain information has been " metaphorized "  . This would be especially so if the source domain was information-rich compared to the target domain  , so allowing much more reasoning to be carried out than would be possible in the target domain  . 
4 Non-Declarative Metaphor
Almost all examples of metaphorical language discussed in the literature are of declarative utterances rather than questions  , commands , ejaculations , etc . However , these other forms of utterance can obviously occur  . For instance , just as one can state " John is a steam roller ?? one can ask " Is John a steam roller ?? ? Just as one can state " The champion knocked the cream -puffout ?? one can issue the command " Knock that cream-puffout !? ? The observation that questions  , in particular , can be metaphorical , plays a significant role in our theoretical approach  . This is because their processing is contiguous with that of implicit queries generated within the metaphorical pretence coco on  ( see Introduction ) during ATT-Meta?s goal-directed reasoning . 
However , the theoretical significance of non-declarative metaphorical utterances is even greater  , because such utterances call into question accounts of metaphor that assume the task of understanding is to work out what claim about the target domain the metaphorical utterance is making  . 
Compiling such examples is an additional goal of our corpus work  ( see section 6 )  . 
5 Time and change
Work is ongoing which addresses the temporal , aspectual and causal facets of metaphor . A survey of metaphors in the ATT MetaDatabank reveals  , unsurprisingly , that the metaphorical expressions therein volve a wide range of tense and aspectual constructions in English  , including past , present and future tenses , simple and progressive aspects , and the full set of aspectual classes . A wide variety of temporal adverbials is also present  . A key topic under investigation is the mapping of temporal and aspectual information between source and target domains  . 
For example , if an event is telic in the source domain , to what extent does that telicity carry over to the target domain ? Preliminary investigations confirm the expectation that such aspectual information is preserved in the majority of cases  . Exceptions exist , however , and the semerit further study . 
The mapping of temporal duration between domains is also being investigated  . In some cases , a mapping appears to exist whereby an event of long duration relative to the source domain maps to an event with long duration relative to the target domain  . This can be captured by an appropriate VNMA , which maps relative durations between domains . The logic of ATT Metaise pisode-based , which means that it is relatively straightforward to express this kind of constraint and employ it in reasoning  . 
Currently underway is a detailed examination of metaphorical expressions involving both explicit and implicit temporal durations  . This will result in a set of VNMAs covering a wide range of tense/aspect/temporal-adverbial constructions  . 
A second strand of the work on time involves a detailed study of the metaphors used to describe times  , states and events , including spatial metaphor for time ( Lakoff 1994 )  . 
6 Corpus Studies of Metaphor
As an adjunct to the development of the ATT-
Meta approach and system , we have been conducting corpus studies of metaphor  , mainly using the British National Corpus but also using the Bank of English and  , to a limited extent , web search engines . We have used both hand-annotation of small numbers of documents from the BNC and automated search for particular types of metaphorical phraseology  ( mainly relatively fixed metaphorical phrases concerning mental states  ) over the whole of corpora . 
Current objectives are ( a ) to develop large databanks of examples of various types of metaphorical utterance  , for the benefit of metaphor researchers in general  ,   ( b ) to demonstrate more extensively and objectively the importance in discourse of " map-transcending " metaphorical utterances  ( see Introduction )  , ( c ) relatedly , to reveal the degree to which relatively conventional metaphor phraseology can be varied in real discourse  ( cf . 
Moon 1998) , and ( d ) to uncover ( in small numbers of documents ) the degree to which metaphorical utterances relate to context : how much their understanding depends on context and how much the understanding of the context depends in turn on them  . We are interested in ( d ) because in the ATT Meta approach the process of metaphorical understanding is partially guided by discourse goals setup by context  . 
This feature goes along way to sidestepping problems of apparent in determinacy of meaning of metaphorical utterances when taken in isolation  . 
We also have the methodological objectives of developing a good annotation regime for metaphor and better-automated search techniques for metaphor  . As part of the latter , we plan to investigate the usefulness of a large set of morphological  , lexical , syntactic and phraseological clues to the presence of metaphor  , inspired by the clues discussed by Goatly (1997) . These clues are only present in a minority of metaphorical utterances but could nevertheless for mauseful weapon in the automated search armoury  . 
Metaphor detection techniques developed for corpus study should also help with developing a means for an understanding system to notice the presence of metaphor  . Such noticing is not currently performed by ATT Metabut is an important topic for future research  . 

The ATTMeta project is making headway in showing how metaphorical utterances can be computationally processed  . It is based on a distinctive set of principles as to how to understand metaphor  , some of which are original and some related to those of previous researchers  . In particular , it seeks to avoid expensive computation of new analogical mappings between domains as a regular part of metaphorical understanding  . This is inspired partly by the observation that genuinely novel pairings of domains are relatively rare in real discourse  . What are more common are novel extensions of familiar metaphorical views  , and novel mixes of views . This is true even in poetry ( Lakoff and Turner 1989 )  . The project is also seeking to take full account of the important role that uncertainty  , gradedness and dynamism of situations plays in metaphor  . 
The approach and system have been evaluated in a number of ways  . We have applied the implemented system or the theoretical approach to  ( simplified versions of ) selected real-discourse examples from an existing databank  ( http://www . cs . bham . ac . uk/~jab/ATT-Meta/Databank ) : see Barnden ( 2001a )  , Barnden & Lee (2001a ) and Barnden & Lee (2001b ) . We have applied the implemented system to examples of all the metaphors of mental states listed in the Master Metaphor List  ( Lakoff 1994 , Lee & Barnden 2001a ) . The examples here were found by search over the Bank of English  . Finally , we have applied the theoretical approach to various real-discourse examples included in Goatly  ( 1997 ) : see
Barnden (2001b).

This research is supported by grant GR/M64208 from the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council of the UK.

Barnden , J . A .   ( 1998a ) Combining uncertain belief reasoning and uncertain metaphor-based reasoning  . In " Procs . Twentieth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society "  , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , N . J , pp . 114-119 . 
Barnden , J . A .   ( 2001a ) Application of the ATT MetaMetaphor-Understanding Approach to Various Examples in the ATTMeta Project Databank  . 
Technical Report CSRP-01-02, School of
Computer Science , The University of Birmingham,

Barnden , J . A .   ( 2001b ) Application of the ATT Metametaphor-understanding approach to selected examples from Goatly  . Technical Report CSRP-01-01 , School of Computer Science , The University of
Birmingham , U.K.
Barnden , J . A ( 2001c ) Uncertainty and conflict handling in the ATTMeta context-based system for metaphorical reasoning  . In ? Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence ? , J . G . Carbonell and J . Siekmann , eds , Springer Verlag , Berlin . 
Barnden , J . A . and Lee , M . G .   ( 1999 ) An implemented context system that combines belief reasoning  , metaphor-based reasoning and uncertainty handling  . In " Modelling and Using Context ", P . 
Bouquet , P . Brezillon , L . Serafinied . , Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence , No .  1688,
Springer-Verlag , pp . 28-41.
Barnden , J . A . and Lee , M . G .   ( 2001a ) Understanding open-ended usages of familiar conceptual metaphors : An approach and artificial intelligence system  . Technical Report CSRP-01-05 , School of Computer Science , The University of Birmingham , 

Barnden , J . A . and Lee , M . G .   ( 2001b ) Application of the ATT Metametaphor-understanding system to an example of the metaphorical view of MINDPARTS ASPERSONS  . Technical Report CSRP-01-09 , School of Computer Science , The University of
Birmingham , U.K.
Carbonell , J . G .   ( 1982 ) Metaphor : a nines capable phenomenon in natural language comprehension  . 
In " Strategies for Natural Language Processing " , W . Lehnert & M . Ringleed . , Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale , N.J , pp . 415-434.
Goatly , A . (1997) The language of metaphors.
Routledge , London and New York.
Lakoff , G . (1994) The Master Metaphor List.
http://cogsci.berkeley.edu /, University of
California , Berkeley.
Lakoff , G . and Turner , M .   ( 1989 ) More than cool reason : a field guide to poetic metaphor  . 
University of Chicago Press , Chicago.
Lee , M . G . and Barnden , J . A .   ( 2001a ) Reasoning about mixed metaphors within an implemented AI system  . Metaphor and Symbol 16, 1& 2, pp .  29-42 . 
Lee , M . G . and Barnden , J . A .   ( 2001b ) Mental Metaphors from the Master Metaphor List : Empirical Examples and the Application of the ATT Meta System Technical Report  CSRP-01-03  , School of Computer Science , The University of
Birmingham , U.K.
Moon , R . (1998) Fixedidioms and expressions in
English . Clarendon Press , Oxford , U.K.
