Analysis of Titles and Readers
? For Title Generation Centered on the Readers
Yasuko Senda ?? and Yasusi Sinohara ?
? Communication & Information Research Laboratory
Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry  , Japan
?Department of Computational Intelligence and Systems Science 
Tokyo Institute of Technology , Japan
senda , sinohara@criepi.denken.or.jp

The title of a document has two roles , to give a compact summary and to lead the reader to read the document  . Conventional title generation focuses on finding key expressions from the author?s wording in the document to give a compact summary and pays little attention to the reader?s interest  . To make the title play its second role properly , it is indispensable to clarify the content ( ? what to say ? ) and wording ( ? how to say ? ) of titles that are effective to attract the target reader?s interest  . In this article , we first identify typical content and wording of titles aimed at general readers in a comparative study between titles of technical papers and headlines rewritten for newspapers  . Next , we describe the results of a questionnaire survey on the effects of the content and wording of titles on the reader?s interest  . The survey of general and knowledgeable readers shows both common and different tendencies in interest  . 
1 Introduction
The title is expected to play two roles . One is to give the reader a very compact summary of the document  , and the other is to attract the target reader?s interest and lead the reader to read the document  . It is preferable that a title plays both roles , because the reader may be disappointed with a gap between the title and the document if the title plays the former role poorly  , and the reader may not read the document if the title plays the latter role poorly  . Therefore , it is very important what title is attached to a document  . 
Several techniques have been reported on generating titles  ( Jin and Hauptmann , 2000) ( Berger and Mittal ,  2000) , and they focus on the former role , that is , to give a compact summary . The main approach is to find a few keywords from the document by calculating the importance of each word in the document  . 
This approach , incidentally , is similar to most text summarization techniques . The selected keywords or title strongly reflect the author?s wordings  . In other words , this approach is an ? author-centered approach ? . In some cases , the title generated by this approach might play the latter role poorly and fail to get the reader ?s interest  . 
To make generated titles play their latter role properly  , it is not sufficient to look into only the author ?s document  . It is important to also pay more attention to the reader  . It is necessary in the ? reader-centered approach ? to clarify the features of the reader?s attention  , that is , the relationship between the reader?s attention and the content and wording of the title  . 
Based on this knowledge , it will be possible to extract information from the document that is more attractive to the reader than the author?s key expressions and to include it in the generated title  . 
Our first goal is to clarify the kind of content and wording that are key to getting the reader?s comprehension  , interest in , and positive feeling toward the document . For this purpose , we first conducted a comparative study on the titles of technical papers and headlines rewritten for newspapers to identify the typical content and wording of titles aimed at general readers  . 
We then conducted a questionnaire survey on the effects of different content and wording of titles on different kinds of readers ? interest  . 
The following sections are as follows : section 2 describes the comparative study and its results , section 3 and 4 explain the details and the results of our questionnaire survey  , and section 5 relates our conclusion and future work . 
2 Comparison between Paper Titles and Newspaper Headlines To identify the typical content and wording of titles aimed at general readers  , we conducted a comparative study on the Japanese titles of research papers and the headlines of Japanese newspaper articles describing the corresponding technology  . 
We first divided the titles and headlines into several syntactic components  ( text segments ) and assigned each component a syntactic function tag  , such as ? P ( urpose of development ) ? and ? M ( ethod for realization ) ? , and then comparatively analyzed the expression of paper title and headlines on the basis of each component  . 
2.1 Overview of Collected Documents
Table 1 shows the outlines of collected documents , including research papers ( articles and technical reports ) and newspaper articles ( from three trade newspapers and one general newspaper  )  . The Japanese titles and headlines were retrieved from a document database at a research institute  . They cover science and technology at large . 
We identified one or a few technical papers closely related to about  90% of the headlines . 
2.2 Syntactic Function Tags
We found that most text segments of the collected titles and headlines could be classified into the following syntactic function tags  . Here , we define each syntactic function tag and describe the tagging process we used in the analysis  . 
 B ( ehavior ) : Behavior is expressed by a verbal noun or verb . For example , in the title ? Development of an Exploration System of Buried Cables ?  , the word ? exploration ? describes the main behavior or action of the developed technology and is assigned the tag ? B ?  . 
 O ( bject ) : The object is a noun phrase in the objective case of the verbal noun of behavior ? B ?  . In the above example , the compound noun ? buried cables ? is assigned the tag ? O ?  . 
 T ( echnology type ) : The words assigned the tag ? T ? ( echnology type ) are very restricted and include such words as ? system ?  , ? model ? and ? method ? . They express the form of the developed technology . 
 P ( urpose ) : The purpose of development is usually expressed by a noun phrase following a preposition  , such as ? for ? (? no tame-ni/no ? in Japanese) . ( e . g . , ? for power distribution cables under pavements  ?  )  M ( ethod ) : The tag ? M ? stands for the method for realization and is expressed by a noun phrase following a preposition  , such as ? by ? (? niyori ? in Japanese) . ( e . g . , ? by un-derground radar ? )  S ( trong point ) : ? S ? stands for the advantage or merit of the developed technology  . It is usually expressed by an adjective or adverb phrase  . ( e . g . , ? highly accurate ?) . 
 D ( evelopment ) : ? D ? stands for the expression that frequently appears in paper titles and headlines  , such as ? the development of ? , ? the evaluation of ? , and ? a study on ? . 
 E ( talia ) : There are several text segments that do not fall into the aboves even categories  . They appear mainly in newspaper headlines . Two examples are names of development organizations and descriptions of the issue for practical use of the technology  . 
We excluded the two tags ? D ? and ? E ? in a comparative analysis because they do not directly relate to the content of the developed technology  . 
2.3 Tagging Process
As for paper titles ( in Japanese) , we divided them semiautomatically according to the following pattern 
P?M?S?OS?BS?T?D ? ( Each alphabet means syntactic function tag . 
? ? ? means ? either zero times or one time ? . ) using the ? ChaSen ? Japanese morphological analyzer  ( Asahara and Matsumoto , 2000) and syntactic clues ( such as word order , syntactic category and specific prepositions ) . The results are reviewed and errors are manually corrected  . 
As for headlines , automatic tagging is difficult because of the frequent use of verbal omissions and inversion  . Therefore , we manually divided the headlines . In order to improve the precision of human tagging as highly as possible  , the human tagger divided them according to the following procedure  . 
1. Find the verbs ( or verbal nouns).
Table 1: Features of Documents Used in the Comparison of Their Titles or Headlines Kind of Target Author Publication Number of 
Documents Reader Date Documents 1 Article Researcher Researcher ?89??00   1464   2 Technical Report General Researcher ?80??00   2861 ? Reader 3 Trade on the Power Industry 531   4 Newspaper on Technology General Newspaperman ?88??98   313   5 on the Economy Reader 203   6 General Newspaper 364 Table 2: Components Included in the Title of Technical Papers 
Each Syntactic Compo-nent?s Function
Syntactic Category
Specific Expression or


B Behavior of the Technology Verbal Noun -> 80% O Object of the Behavior Noun Phrase Japanese particle ? wo ? >  80% M Method for Realizing Noun Phrase Japanese expression ? niyor i ?  , etc . 
<30% ( such as ? by ? in English )
S Strong Point Adjective/Adverb
Phrase-<30%
P Purpose of Development Noun Phrase Japanese expression ? not a meni/no ?  , etc . 
<30% ( such as ? for ? in English )
TTechnology type Noun-58%
D Development Noun Japanese expression ? no kai -hatsu ?  , etc . 
( such as ? development of ?) 2 . Determine the verb ( or verbal noun ) which corresponds to ? B ? using syntactic and semantic clues  ( such as special prepositions and semantic modification relations  )  . 
3 . Identify the other components which modify ? B ? using the clues used in the above step  2  . 
2.4 Comparative Analysis
We analyzed the results of the above tagging in the following two ways  . 
1 . The difference in the frequency of the six main components with tag B  ( ehavior )  , O(bject ) , M ( ethod ) , S(trong point ) , P ( urpose ) and T ( echnology type ) in paper titles and headlines . 
2 . The difference in the expression of the same syntactic components in paper titles and headlines  . 
2.5 Obligatory and Optional

The last column in Table 2 indicates the frequency of the occurrence of each tag in titles and headlines  . The components ( text segments ) with tags ? B ? , ? O ? , and ? T ? appear more than 80% ,  80% , and 58% , respectively , in titles and headlines 1 . We call these high-frequency components ? obligatory component ? and the other components with ? P ?  , ? M ? , and ? S ? , ? optional components ? . 
2.5.1 Obligatory Components
Obligatory components are important because they are essential in reporting the substance of the technology to the reader  . 
By comparing the expression of the obligatory components  ( labeled ? T ? , ? B ? , and ? O ?) , we categorized the difference of the expression into two points  . One is that technical jargons are used in paper titles while plain terms are used in headlines to express the same thing  . The other is that in the obligatory component the title explains the concrete content of the  tech-1?B ? and ? O ? appear 100% in the paper titles and 80% in the headlines because verbal omissions sometimes occur in newspaper headlines  . 
no logy while the headline expresses the purpose of the technology  , which general readers can understand . 
In other words , we identified two expressing techniques of newspaper men  . 
 Instead of using technical jargons , the plain synonymous terms are used . 
 Instead of expressing what the technology does , they express what the purpose of the technology is  . 
An example of the former in English is as follows : Title : Method to Shorten Radio active Half-life Headline : Method to Shorten the Duration of Radiation An example of the latter is as follows : Title : Method to Shorten Radio active Half-life Headline : Method to Shorten Storage Period of 
Radioactive Waste
The expression patterns typical in obligatory components are summarized in Table  3  . It is arranged from the two viewpoints of ? what to say ? and ? how to say ?  . 
2.5.2 Optional Components
By comparing the expression of the optional components  , in the ? M ? component we found that technical jargons are frequently used in paper titles while plain terms are used in headlines  . Moreover , by analyzing the frequency of component combinations  , we found that the combination of optional components with ? M ? and ? S ? is seldom used in any title or headline  . 
We also found that the use of ? M ? in titles is more frequent than in headlines while the description of the advantages  ( ? S ? ) in headlines is five times more frequent than in titles  . The analysis suggests that the description of ? M ? found in paper titles are omitted in headlines and the description of advantages  ( ? S ? ) are used in headlines . 
The expressing techniques we identified are as follows :  Instead of using technical jargons  , the plain synonymous terms are used in the ? M ? component  . 
 Instead of expressing the method of realizing the technology  , they express the advantage ( ? S ? ) of the technology . 
An example of the former in English is as follows.
Title : Method to Shorten Storage Period of Ra -dioactive Waste by Metallic Fuel FBR Headline : Method to Shorten Storage Period of 
Radio active Waste by Burnout
An example of the latter is as follows:
Title : Method to Shorten Storage Period of Ra -dioactive Waste by Metallic Fuel FBR Headline : Method to Shorten Storage Period of 
Radio active Waste by 1/10000
The expression patterns typical in optional components are summarized in Table  4  . The table is also arranged from the two viewpoints of ? what to say ? and ? how to say ?  , as in Table 3 . 
3 Questionnaire Survey
In this section , we explain the details of our questionnaire survey  . 
3.1 Viewpoint of the Survey
We assume that the factors which affect the reader ?s impression of a title which expresses newly developed technology are the following :  F1 Mode of expression for titles ( in other word , the expression patterns )   F2 Whether or not the reader has an interest in the technical field  F3 The reader?s level of expertise in the technical field Therefore  , in order to clarify what kind of impression the title based on each expression pattern  ( F1 ) gives the reader , we should investigate how the impressions that each reader who differs in  F2 and F3 receives change with each expression pattern . We then prepared our questionnaire survey according to the following procedures  . 
1 . Select the technical fields for the survey ( we selected three fields : electric transmission , architectural engineering , and environmental science ) . 
2 . Categorize the respondents by their interest in each technical field and their expertise in that field  . 
3 . Generate titles describing new technologies in the three technical fields by using expression patterns Table  3: Expression Patterns in Obligatory Components
What to Pattern 1 Pattern 2 say ( What the technology does )   ( What the purpose of the technology is ) How to Pattern 1 . 1 Pattern 1 . 2 Pattern 2 . 0 say ( Using technical jargon )   ( in plain terms )   ( in plain terms ) 
T ( yp e ) Method Method Method
B ( ehavior ) to Shortento Shortento Shorten O ( bject ) Radioactive Half-life the Duration of Radiation Storage Period of Ra-dio active Waste Table  4: Expression Patterns in Optional Components
What to Pattern 3 Pattern 4 say ( What the method of realizing the technology is )   ( What the strong point of the technology is ) How to Pattern 3 . 1 Pattern 3 . 2 Pattern 4 . 0 say ( Using technical jargon )   ( in plain terms )   ( in plain terms ) 
T ( yp e ) Method Method Method
B ( ehavior ) to Shortento Shortento Shorten
O(bject ) Storage Period of Ra-dio active Waste
Storage Period of Ra-dio active Waste
Storage Period of Ra-dio active Waste
M ( ethod ) by Metallic Fuel FBR by Burnout
S(trongPoint ) by 1/100004 . Draw up a questionnaire which asks the respondents what kind of impression they had when they read each generated title  . 
In the following three subsections , we explain the details of the above procedures step  2  , 3 and 4 , in order . 
3.2 Categorization of Respondents
In order to categorize the respondents by their interest in each technical field and their expertise of that field  , we asked the respondents two questions in the preliminary questionnaire  . 
One asked them if they were con-cerned/unconcerned with one of the three technical fields  , and the other asked them about their main source of information  ( three options : general newspaper , trade newspaper , and academic journal , were given , if they were concerned ) . 
We categorized them into two types ( ? Un-concerned ? and ? Concerned ? ) by the former question . We then categorized ? Concerned ? into three types  ( ? Commoner ? , ? Engineer ? and ? Researcher ? , whose main sources of information are general newspaper  , trade newspaper and academic journal in turn . ) by the latter question . We labeled ? Unconcerned ? and three types of ? Concerned ?  ( ? Commoner ? , ? En-gineer ? and ? Researcher ?) as readership . Table 5 shows the number of respondents by reader-ship . 
3.3 Titles Prepared for Our

In this section , we explain the method for composing the titles used in the questionnaire  . The procedure for composing the titles follows . 
1 . Select three new technologies in each of the three technical fields  , which were developed in a research institute . 
2 . Retrieve the phrases of titles and headlines concerning each technology  , from the document database of the institute , that correspond to each expression pattern . 
3 . Combine the phrases to compose twelve titles per each technology  , using three types of obligatory component expression pattern of by four types of optional component expression pattern  ( including a pattern without optional components )  . The total number of the titles per one field is 36   ( twelve titles by three fields )  . 
Table 5: Number of Respondents
Unconcerned Concerned
Commoner Engineer Researcher
Electric Transmission 1511 1469 48
Architectural Engineering 1681 1562 45
Environmental Science 108 1537 153
We divided thirty six titles per each field into four groups  ( each group consists of ninetitles )  . 
The breakdown of the nine titles is three types of obligatory component expression pattern by three types of optional component expression pattern  . We randomly divided the respondents of each readership into four groups and then asked four groups of the respondents about the impression of four groups of the titles respectively  . 
3.4 Contents of Our Questionnaire
In order to investigate whether each prepared title is effective in getting each readership?s comprehension  , positive feelings , and interest , we asked the respondents the following questions in turn  . 
 Do you think the title is comprehensible ?  Do you feel positive toward the technology after reading this ?  Do you want to know more about the technology ?  3  . 5 Method Respondents to the questionnaire were the staff of a research institute and monitors of a marketing research firm  . We asked them to answer our questionnaire on a Web page which is prepared for this survey  . 
4 Difference in Impression
According to Obligatory
Component Expression Pattern
In this section , we report on the analysis of the correlation between the obligatory component expression pattern in titles and each read-ership?s impression of the titles  . 
Figure 1 shows the graph of the percentage of titles regarded as ? comprehensible ? by the respondents with each readership using each expression pattern  . Figure 2 and 3 also show the ones regarded as ? evoked positive feelings ?  , ? interesting ? respectively . We also made a 3x2 100% 80% 60% 40% 20% 1 . Unconcerned 2 . Commoner 3 . Engineer 4 . Researcher 0% 1 . 1 1 . 2 2 . 0
Content of
Technology using Technical Jargon
Content of
Technology in Plain

Purpose of
Technology in Plain

What to say
How to say
Figure 1: Percentage of Titles That Re-spondents Regard as Comprehensible  100%   80%   60%   40%   20%   0%   4  . Researcher 1 . Unconcerned 2 . Commoner 3 . Engineer 1 . 1 1 . 2 2 . 0
Content of
Technology using Technical Jargon
Content of
Technology in Plain

Purpose of
Technology in Plain

What to say
How to say
Figure 2: Percentage of Titles That Re-spondents Regard as Able to Evoke Positive Feelings  100%   80%   60%   40%   20%   4  . Researcher 1 . 1 1 . 2 2 . 0 0% 1 . Unconcerned 2 . Commoner 3 . Engineer
Content of
Technology using Technical Jargon
Content of
Technology in Plain

Purpose of
Technology in Plain

What to say
How to say
Figure 3: Percentage of Titles that Re-spondents Regard as Interesting Table  6: Results of the Chi-square Test and Cramer?s V ( In this table , ? Chi-square ? means the significant level tested by the Chi-square  , and ? Cramer?s ? means the value calculated by Cramer?s V  . )
Unconcerned Concerned
Commoner Engineer Researcher
Comprehensible Chi-square 1% 1% 1% 1%
Cramer?s 0.62 0.59 0.38 0.43
Able to Evoke Chi-square 1% 1% 1% 1%
Positive Feelings Cramer?s 0.45 0.45 0.22 0.24
Interesting Chi-square 1% 1% 1% 5%
Cramer?s 0 . 27 0 . 35 0 . 22 0 . 1 contingency table ( expression patterns ? yes/no answer on impressions  ) for each impression and each readership and calculated the significance level of the  ?2-test and the Cramer?s V 2  . 
Because all significance levels in Table 6 are under 5%  , it is confirmed that there exists associations among expression patterns and impressions for each readership  . 
However , the strength of the associations is low as for the respondents with readership ? engineer ? or ? researcher ?  , who have expertise , because of lower values of Cramer?s V , while the strength of the association is high as for those who has readership ? unconcerned ? or ? com-moner ? because of higher values of V  . 
Because all graphs slope up from left to right in Figures  1  , 2 and 3 , the expression pattern 2 . 0  ( expressing what the purpose of the technology is ) is the most effective to make a title impressive ( more precisely , regarded as ? comprehensible ? , ? evoked positive feelings ? and ? interesting ? ) for readers with most of readership , especially the ? unconcerned ? readers or ? com -moner ?  . As for the readers with expertise , other types of expression patterns such as 1 . 1 or 1 . 2 should also be considered because of their flatter slopes  . 
5 Conclusion and Future Work
We emphasized the need for title generation centered on the reader and identified the typical content and wording of titles aimed at general readers by conducting a comparative study on paper titles and headlines  . Moreover , we ver-?
X2/N ( k ? 1 ) where N = total number of cases in the table ; k = number of rows or columns , whichever is smaller . Cramer?s Vranges 0 to 1 where 0 means that the two value variables are perfectly unrelated and  1 means that they are perfectly related . 
ified the effects of different content and wording of titles  . As a result , titles using expression pattern 2 . 0  ( expressing what the purpose of the technology is ) in obligatory component is the most effective in getting the general reader?s comprehension  , positive feelings , and interest . 
However , the more expertise in a technical field the reader has  , the less the reader tends to be influenced . 
In future work , we will verify the difference in impression according to optional component expression patterns by analyzing the results of our questionnaire survey  . We plan to establish the method for generating a title by extracting phrases from the body text and combining them  , which correspond to the expression pattern which is effective in getting target reader?s interest  . 

The authors would like to express our gratitude to Dr  . Manabu Okumura of Tokyo Institute of Technology for his valuable suggestions to improve our research and anonymous reviewers for their suggestions to improve our paper  . 

Masayuki Asahara and Yuji Matsumoto .  2000 . Extended models and tools for high-performance part-of-speech tagger  . In Proceedings of COLING 2000, pages 113?120 . 
A . L . Berger and V . O . Mittal .  2000 . Ocelot : A system for summarizing web pages . In Proc . of the 23rd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval  , pages 144?151 . 
Rong Jin and Alex G . Hauptmann .  2000 . Title generation for spoken broadcast news using a training corpus  . In Proc . of the 6th International conference on Spoken Language Processing  ( ICSLP )  . 
