Linking syntactic and semantic arguments in a dependency-based formalism 
Christian Korthals and Ralph Debusmann
Computational Linguistics
Universita?t des Saarlandes , Geb . 17
Postfach 15 11 50
66041 Saarbu?cken , Germany


We propose a formal characterization of variation in the syntactic realization of semantic arguments  , using hierarchies of syntactic relations and thematic roles  , and a mechanism of lexical inheritance to obtain valency frames from individual linking types  . 
We embed the formalization in the new lexicalized , dependency-based grammar formalism of Topological Dependency Grammar  ( TDG )   ( Duchier and Debusmann ,  2001) . We account for arguments that can be alternatively realized as a NP or a PP  , and model thematic role alternations . We also treat auxiliary constructions , where the correspondance between syntactic and semantic argument hood is indirect  . 1  1 Introduction This paper deals with the mapping ( or linking ) of semantic predicate-argument structure to surface syntactic realizations  . We present a formal architecture in the framework of a multidimensional  , heavily lexicalized , efficiently parsable dependency formalism ( Duchier and Debusmann ,  2001) , which uses lexical inheritance as a means to explicitly model syntactic variation  . We concentrate on variation between prepositional phrases and nominal phrases which realize verbal arguments  , and remedy problems that occur with this kind of variation in recent approaches like the HPSG linking architecture proposed by  ( Davis ,  1998) . 
Section 2 presents and analyses some of the problematic data we can model  , English dative shift , optional complements and thematic role alternations  . 
Section 3 compares the HPSG account with less formal valency or dependency based approaches and comments on the shortcomings  , focusing on the treatment of PP complements . We then present a new account in the formal framework of  Topologi-1The authors wish to thank Denys Duchier and Geert-Jan Kruijff for lots of helpful comments on this paper  . 
cal Dependency Grammar ( TDG ) by adding a new representational level ( thematic structure additionally to ID structure ) to the framework in Section 4 . 1 and introducing the concept of a valency frame in the TDG inheritance lexicon  ( Sections 4 . 2 and 4 . 3) . We then show how we use syntactic role hierarchies to account for the data in a linguistically concise way and define admissibility conditions for a TDG derivation  . Section 5 contrasts our analysis of the dative shift construction with the analysis of thematic role alternations  . 
2 Linguistic Data
Insights from corpus studies ( e . g . the NEGRA treebank for German ( Skut et al ,  1998) , or the material annotated in the Framenet ( Baker et al ,  1998 ) project on the basis of The Bank of English ( Cobuild ,  2001 ) show that the syntactic patterns specific verbs occur with varystongly  . Not only do we observe different patterns for different verbs  , but also alternative patterns with the same verbs  .   ( 1 ) to ( 6 ) illustrate the wellknown dative shift ( Levin , 1993):45 phenomenon , which occurs with a restricted class of verbs only  . While the distinction between ( 2 ) and ( 4 ) can be explained in terms of lexical semantics , even semantically closely related verbs as English give and deliver can differ in their syntactic behaviour  , as the contrast between (1) and (5) shows . 
(1) [ The postman ] gave [ him ] [ a package].
(2) [ The postman ] gave [ a package ] [ to him].
(3) [ The postman]charged[him][5 Euros].
(4)* [ The postman ] charged [5 Euros ] [ to him].
(5 ) * [ The postman ] delivered [ him ] [ a package] . 
(6 ) [ The postman ] delivered [ a package ] [ to him] . 
In contrast to ( Davis , 1998):3:562 for instance , we do not assume a difference in meaning between ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  . 3 Therefore , in order to compute a semantics from this data without spurious ambiguity  , we must be able to express the semantic generalisation that to him and him realize the same semantic argument  . It is useful to employ thematic roles in the lexicon and ingrammatical descriptions for this purpose  . 4See e . g . ( Tarvainen ,  1987) , ( Helbig ,  1989) , ( Sgall et al , 1986) or the Framenet project ( Baker et al ,  1998 ) for different application-oriented sets of thematic roles  ( or ? frame elements ? )  . For discussion see e . g . ( Helbig , 1995) or ( Kruijff ,  2001) , for criticism see ( Dowty ,  1991) . We can also use thematic roles to structure verbs into an ontology  , as e . g . attempted by ( Helbig ,  1995) , ( Davis , 1998) or ( Baker et al ,  1998 ) in order to make semantic predictions for syntactic valency patterns  . For instance , it is a regularity in English that verbs of charging do not show the dative shift  ( Levin ,  1993) , while verbs of change of possession sometimes do . 
Now consider the set of German examples in ( 7 ) to ( 11 )  , which all roughly express the proposition Peter robsher of her money  . All of the patterns are attested in the NEGRA corpus  ( Skut et al ,  1998) , but (10) cannot be found . 
(7) [ Peter ]
Peterber aubtrobs[sie]her+ACC [ ihresher+GEN

cash+GEN ? Peter robs her of her cash . ? (8) [ Peter ]
Peterber aubtrobs [ sie]her+ACC [ umo fihr her

cash ? Peter robs her of her cash . ? (9) [ Peter ] beraubt[sie ] . 
(10)* [ Peter ] beraubt.
(11) [ Peter ]
Peterraubt.
robs ? Peter steals.?
The data illustrates that it can be a lexical property of verbs to allow or prohibit omission of their  2We cite the chapter and the page number of the online postscript version at http://www-csli  . stanford . edu/?t davis / 3We expect English give to have at least two separate meanings  ( a ) cause someone to physically have something and ( b ) to cause someone trouble , pain , etc . with different lexical entries , following established lexicographic practice . While the lexical entry for meaning ( b ) will exhibit the syntactic pattern illustrated by  ( 1 ) only ( * To give head a cheto someone )  , the entry for meaning ( a ) exhibits both the patterns in ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  . 
4Note that we do not commit ourselves to a specific set of thematic roles in this paper  . 
complements ( Levin ,  1993):33 , ( Helbig ,  1995):99 . 
Therefore , we will analyse syntactic arguments in terms of optionality and obligatoriness  . Note that this distinction is not predictable from the thematic roles realized by the syntactic elements  ( e . g . by distinguishing inner and outer roles in ( Sgall et al . , 1986) and ( Tarvainen ,  1987 ) ) nor by the syntactic form or even function of the syntactic elements  . Neither is the distinction between obligatory and optional elements the same as the comple-ment /adjunct distinction  . 
We analyse ( 1 ) to ( 6 ) as alternative realizations of a thematic role , because one semantic argument ( the PATIENT ) can either be realized as indirect object or PP , while the THEME is always realized as a direct object NP  . Compare this data to alternations as in ( 12 ) and ( 13 )  . Here , additionally , one syntactic function ( direct object ) is open for either of two thematic roles ( Levin ,  1993) . 
(12) [ He ] cleared [ the dirt ] [ from the table] . 
(13) [ He ] cleared [ the table ] [ of the dirt].
We will show in Section 4 how we can account for the data illustrated in this section in a lexicalized dependency grammar formalism and show that the linguistic view taken above helps to reduce redundancy in the lexicon  . 
3 Alternative approaches
The approach taken in this paper formalizes notions that have only been informally employed in dependency grammar  . ( Helbig ,  1995 ) : 167 defines valency frames on a formal syntactic and functional syntactic level  , a thematic role level and a logical level in his 6-level-model   , but only informally and for the purpose of learners ? dictionaries  . There is a long tradition in German lexicography which has produced a number of valency dictionaries  ( e . g . ( Helbig and Schenkel ,  1975) , ( Fischer ,  1997) , ( Engel and Schumacher ,  1976)) . The syntactic analyses in these dictionaries are compatible with our model  , but they do not provide a thematic role level . 
( Melcuk ,  1988 ) characterizes valency frames in a similar fashion  ( 94 )  , but uses informal additions in natural language to constrain the possible patterns  . Also ( Melcuk , 1988) assumes different levels of representation . A shortcoming of the syntactic level in ( Melcuk , 1988) is , though , that his syntactic classes are dependent on the specific lexical item  , and therefore problematic to define . The approach we will take resembles LFG ( Kaplan and Bresnan , 1982) ( Bresnan , 2001) in that it assumes syntactic relations . 
( Davis ,  1998 ) has recently proposed a linking theory in the formal framework of HPSG  . He separates syntax and semantics by postulating thematic roles under the CONTENT feature of his HPSG architecture  ( Pollard and Sag ,  1994) , and syntactic characterizations of the arguments under CAT-EGORY ARG-ST and CATEGORY SUBCAT  . He has separate hierarchies of syntactic patterns  ( in trans , trans , ditrans ,  5:32 ) and semantic classes ( subtypes of RELATION ,  5:72) . These hierarchies interact by a set of linking constraints and yield a hierarchy of predicators  ( 5:41 )  , which specifies possible linkings of thematic roles to syntactic arguments  . While ( Helbig , 1995) obviously employs a large role set , ( Davis , 1998) has only 6 roles , and moves thematic roles further down into semantics than we assume by postulating them on an event level  , which ? effectively amounts to a limited amount of semantic decomposition ?  ( 5:39 )  . The shortcoming of the model is that the syntactic patterns assumed are very sparse indeed with only three transitivity classes  . 
Due to this , semantic predictions can be made only for NP -complements  , while PPs must be treated by a separate mechanism  ( ? content sharing account ? )  . 
Thus , there is no specific prediction for the prepositional complement in English dative shift constructions  . The advantage of Davis?s model , in contrast , is the lexical inheritance architecture which is a formal means to capture generalizations  . 
4 Formalization
We formalize our idea of linking and valency frames as an extension of the new lexicalized  , dependency-based grammar formalism of Topological Dependency Grammar  ( TDG )   ( Duchier and Debusmann ,  2001) , ( Debusmann ,  2001) . So far , TDG is only concerned with syntax : every TDG analysis consists of an unordered dependency tree  ( ID tree ) and an ordered and projective topology tree ( LP tree )  . 
We only describe a subset of the full TDG grammar formalism  ( e . g . completely ignoring any issues concerning word order  ) and extend it with the notion of a thematic graph  ( TH graph )  . We call the version of
TDG described in this paper TDGTH.
4.1 Thematic graphs
Peter will live in Taipe is ubj vbsepp in pcomp ( 14 ) What is a ? thematic graph ?? We illustrate this notion by an example  .   ( 14 ) is an ID tree analysis for the sentence Peter will live in Taipei : We show the corresponding TH graph in  ( 15 )  . Here , Peter is the patient of will live and in Taipei the locative  . Note that we collapsed the auxiliary will and its verbal complement live into a single node  , and also the PP in Taipei:
Peter will live in Taipeithloc (15) 4 . 2 The lexicon This section deals with the TDGTH -lexicon  . We assume a finite set of syntactic roles R and a finite set of thematic roles T  . We write ? for a syntactic role in R and ? for a thematic role in T  . ? = ! , ? is the set of optionality flags pi . A = valID , val TH , link is the set of lexical features ? , and E the set of lexical entries e , having the following signature:5 ? ? valID : 2R ? ? valTH : 2T ? ? link : 2T ? R ? ? E is a lattice of TDGTH-lexicon entries ; lexical entries either correspond to words or to lexical types which can be inherited  ( see below )  . 
The value of feature val ID is a set of pairs (? , pi ) of syntactic roles and an optionality flag modeling the concept of syntactic valency  . The value of v al TH a set of pairs (? , pi ) of thematic roles and an optionality flag ( thematic valency )  . For convenience , we write ? pi for (? , pi ) , and ? pi for (? , pi ) . The value of link is a set of pairs (? , ?) of thematic and syntactic roles , expressing the mapping between them . We call a pair in this set a linking . 
5 We write ? ( e ) to denote the value of feature ? at lexical entry e  . 
eat:???valID:subj ! , objd ? valTH:ag ! , th ? link : ( ag , subj ) , ( th , objd ) ? ? ? (16) As an example ,   ( 16 ) is a lexical entry for finite eat : eat has an obligatory subject  ( subj ) and an optional direct object ( objd ) in its syntactic valency . Its thematic valency contains an obligatory AGENT and an optional THEME  . The link-feature defines two linkings : one links the AGENT to the subject and the THEME to the direct object  . 
4.3 Lexical inheritance
We introduce a mechanism of lexical inheritance.
We write e = e1 u .   .   . uen for ? lexical entry e inherits from lexical entries  e1  ,   .   .   .   , en ? , and define inheritance as the set union of the individual features ? values :  e1 u .   .   . uen=??valID:valID(e1)? .   .   . ? valID(en ) valTH:valTH(e1)? .   .   . ? valTH(en ) link : link(e1)? .   .   . ? link ( en ) ? ? We can now use lexical inheritance to model our notion of valency frames  . We introduce the notion of a linking type as a lexical entry that does not specify any other lexical attributes besides val ID  , valTH and link . Such linking types specify a partial valency frame from which we can build complete valency frames by inheritance  . For instance , consider the following two linking types : lag subj:??valID:subj!valTH:ag ! link :  ( ag , subj )  ? ?  ( 17 ) lthobjd:??valID:objd?valTH:th ? link :  ( th , objd )  ? ?  ( 18 ) The linking type lags ubj maps the agent to the subject  , and l thobj d the theme to the direct object . 
Out of the two , we can construct our lexical entry for eat by lexical inheritance : eat = lag subjulth objd  ( 19 ) which amounts precisely to the lexical entry displayed in  ( 16 ) above . We call the values of the three features val ID , valTH and link in a lexical entry obtained by inheriting from linking types a valency frame  . 
4.4 Role hierarchies
We arrange the set R of syntactic roles in a role hierarchy modeled as a meet semilattice  . Here is an example cut-out of the role hierarchy : dative shift pp directional pp spatial objipp to pp in top p in p p under  ( 20 ) We write ? v ? ? for ? is a specialization of ?? ( i . e . 
? is below ?? in the hierarchy).
We employ the role hierarchy to model alternative realizations in the sense of section  2: e . g . using the hierarchy above , dative shift can be realized as either objior pp to but not by either pp directional  , pp into or pp in . Note that certain roles ( pp to , pp into , etc . ) will be realized by only two lexical entries , viz . the prepositions to and into respectively , while other roles like subj , objior objd can be realized by a large set of lexical entries  . 
In the same fashion , we arrange the set T of thematic roles in a role hierarchy  , but in this article we keep this hierarchy completely flat  . 
Lexical entry constraint . To forbid that different thematic roles are mapped to the same syntactic role realization  , we add a condition for wellformed lexical entries : for every lexical entry e  , the value of its link-feature , link(e ) = (?1 , ?1) ,   .   .   . (? n , ? n ) must not include two syntactic roles ? i , ? j (1 ? i 6= j ? n ) such that ? iv ? j . 
4.5 TDGTH analyses
We can now define a TDGTH-analysis as a tuple ( V , EID , ? , ? , ETH ) . It consists of the finite set V of nodes w , the finite set EID of ID edges EID?V?V?R , where R is the set of syntactic roles , and the lexical assignment function ? : V ? E assigning lexical entries to nodes  . We write w1???IDw2 for an ID edge from node w1 to node w2 labeled with syntactic role ? . 
Collapsing nodes . As in the example ID tree and TH graph-analyses in  ( 14 ) and ( 15 ) above , we would like to be able to collapse sets of nodes in the ID tree into single nodes in the TH graph  . We introduce a collapsing principle into the grammar formalism  , according to which the node of an auxiliary verb , a preposition or a determiner will collapse with its daughter  . 
To capture this idea , we posit an equivalence relation ? , and write V /? for the set of equivalence classes over V  . An equivalence class directly corresponds to a ? collapsed node ? in the TH graph  . 
ETH ? ( V / ? ) ?  ( V / ? ) ? T is the finite set of of TH edges , and we write w for the equivalence class containing w  .   w1???THw2 is a TH edge from node w1 to node w2 labeled with ? . 
When we collapse nodes , we also collapse their lexical entries : the value of the lexical feature ? of a collapsed node  w1  =   w1  ,   .   .   .   , wn is the set union of the values assigned to the individual nodes : ?  ( w1 )  = ? ( w1 ) ?  .   .   . ?? ( wn )   ( 21 ) In the example TH graph in ( 15 ) above , the two nodes will and live are collapsed into the equivalence class will live  . We assume that will is mapped to the following lexical entry : will : ? ? valID : subj !  , vbse!valTH:link:??(22) Here , we use the independent definition of the val ID , valTH and link features in order to express that function words like auxiliaries or prepositions realize syntactic arguments which are semantically dependent on different lexical items  . This also allows for an elegant treatment of semantically void syntactic arguments as fake -reflexives and nonreferential it  . 6 Infinitive live has this lexical entry : live : ? ? ? valID :  ppspatial ! valTH :  ag !  , loc ! link : ( ag , subj)(loc , pp spatial )  ? ? ?  ( 23 ) When the two nodes collapse into one ( will live )  , these are the values of valTH and link : 7 valTH ( will live ) = ag ! , loc ! link(will live ) = ( ag , subj) , (loc , pp spatial ) Valency constraints . The wellformedness conditions of a TDGTH-analysis are stated in terms of lexicalized constraints of syntactic valency  , thematic valency and linking . The syntactic valency 6Fake-reflexives occur in German and are reflexive pronouns that do not have any semantic content  , as e . g . the German verb sich fu?rchten ( be afraid , sich is the reflexive pronoun ) . The linking type for a fake reflexive will only specify valID:refl pronoun  , but emptyval TH and link . 
7We omit those features that are not relevant to the TH graph according to its wellformedness conditions  . In particular , the value of the valID feature is not relevant to the TH graph  . 
constraint restricts the number of outgoing edges of each node in the ID tree : if  ( ? , !) ? valID(w ) , then w must have precisely one outgoing edge labeled with ? ? v ?  , at most one if (? , ?) ? valID(w ) , and none otherwise . Thus ,  (? ,  ! ) stands for an obligatory ?- complement of w and ( ? , ?) for an option alone . The thematic valency constraint is defined analogously  . 
Linking constraint . An edge in the TH graph is only licensed if it satisfies the lexicalized linking constraint  . It states that an edge w1???THw2 in the TH graph is licensed only if there is a linking  ( ?? , ?? ) ? link ( w1 ) and an edge w?1???IDw?2 in the ID tree such that w1?  =  w1  , w2? = w2 , ? v ?? and ? v ?? . 
Consider the example ID tree and TH graph analyses in  ( 14 ) and ( 15 ) above . The edge will live ? loc ? TH in Taipei is mandated by the thematic valency of will live  , but it must also be licensed by the linking principle : indeed there is a linking  ( loc , pp spatial ) in link ( will live ) and an ID edge live ? pp in ? ID in such that live = will live and in = in Taipei  , and locvloc and pp inv pp spatial . 
5 Application
This section describes the linguistic examples from section  2 within the framework developed above . 
We define a linking type for the English dative shift construction as follows  , realizing our notion of an alternative realization from section  2  . 
lp at dative shift : ? ? valID : dative shift ! valTH:pat!link :  ( pat , dative shift )  ? ?  ( 24 ) As can be seen from the role hierarchy in ( 20 )  , the syntactic role dative shift can either be realized as objior pp to  . This linking type will be inherited by all English verbs that exhibit the dative-shift alternative realization  . For instance , it is inherited by the lexical entry for the English verb give  ( cf . examples (1) and (2)) . Additionally , give inherits from the linking type lags ubj defined in  ( 17 )  . lagsubj will be shared among a large set of other verbs which realize their agents as subjects  , thus reducing redundancy in the lexicon . 
gives = lag subjulp at dative shift ulthobj d ( 25 ) The lexicon entry for deliver ( (5 ) and ( 6 ) ) will differ from the one for give by inheriting from lpat obji instead of lp at dative shift and thus not allow for a dative shift  . 
For the German data in examples ( 7 ) to ( 11 ) we define a syntactic role hierarchy in the same fashion  , where genitive and ppum are below a roleppum gen . 
Then , the lexical entry for be rauben inherits from a linking typel themeppumgen  . 
In contrast to alternative realizations , alternations as in examples ( 12 ) and ( 13 ) realize two different thematic roles ( pat and th ) as the same syntactic role ( objd )  . By the lexical entry constraint in section 4 . 4 , there cannot be a single lexical entry for both alter-nants of clear  . We therefore model finite forms of clear by two separate valency frames  ( we skip the definitions of some of the linking types  )  . 
clears = lag subjulp at obj dulthpp of ( 26 ) clears = lag subjult hobj dulp at pp from ( 27 )   6 Conclusion We proposed an architecture that abstractly captures reocurring patterns in the way in which different lexical items syntactically realize their semantic arguments  . We focused on interchangeability between prepositional phrases and nominal phrases  . We therefore defined a hierarchy of thematic roles  , and a separate hierarchy of syntactic functions , clearly separating between syntax and semantics . 
We enriched the framework of Topological Dependency Grammar  ( Duchier and Debusmann ,  2001 )   ( TDG ) with a third level of representation , thematic structure , and defined wellformedness conditions on the thematic structure and on the relation between thematic structure  ( TH ) and syntactic dominance ( ID ) structure . This enabled us to present a formal definition of the concept of multilevel valency frames  . We demonstrated how such valency frames can be assembled using the lexical inheritance model of TDG  , in order to reduce lexical redundancy . We also proposed a treatment of auxiliary constructions using a notion of node collapsing  . 
We applied our formalism to English dative shift constructions  , variation between NP and PP in German , optional complements , semantically empty elements , and thematic role alternations . 
Our approach makes weaker theoretical predictions about ? alternations ? as opposed to ? alternative realizations ? than the approach in  ( Davis ,  1998) , but is more powerful in the treatment of PPs . This is partly due to the choice of an underlying dependency formalism  , because dependency structures lead to concise and semantically flat parse trees  . 
Our approach is datadriven in the sense that a wider range of syntactic patterns can be mapped to semantic arguments  . Thus , it lends itself easy to techniques of automatically acquiring lexica from syntactically and semantically annotated corpora  , which start developing at present (( Baker et al ,  1998) , ( Skut et al ,  1998)) . 
It is possible to include a mechanism that makes stronger predictions about alternations of the clear type  , or about passivization . Another phenomenon we would like to tackle in this framework are raising and control constructions  . We think we can use a concept similar to node collapsing for them  . 

Collin F . Baker , Charles J . Fillmore , and John B . 
Lowe . 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project.
In Christian Boitet and Pete Whitelock , editors , 36th ACL and 17th ICCL Proceedings , pages 86?90 , San Francisco , California . Morgan Kaufmann

Joan Bresnan . 2001. Lexical Functional Syntax.

Cobuild . 2001. The bank of english.
http://titania . cobuild . collins . co . uk/boeinfo . html . 
Tony Davis .  1998 . Linking as constraints in the hierarchical lexicon  . Chicago UP . 
Ralph Debusmann .  2001 . A declarative grammar formalism for dependency grammar  . Master?s thesis , University of the Saarland . 
David Dowty .  1991 . Thematic proto-roles and argument selection . Language , 67(547?619) . 
Denys Duchier and Ralph Debusmann . 2001.
Topological dependency trees : A constraint-based account of linear precedence  . In ACL 2001
Proceedings , Toulouse , France.
Ulrich Engel and Helmut Schumacher . 1976.
Kleines Valenz lexik on deutscher Verben.
Forschungsbericht IDS Mannheim.
Klaus Fischer .  1997 . German-English Verb Valency . Narr . 
Gerhard Helbig and Wolfgang Schenkel . 1975.
Wo?rterbuch zur Valenz und Distribution deutscher Verben  . VEB Bibliographisches

Gerhard Helbig . 1989. Deutsche Grammatik . VEB

Gerhard Helbig . 1995. Problemeder Valenz-und
Kasustheorie . Narr.
Ron Kaplan and Joan Bresnan .  1982 . Lexical functional grammar : A formal system for grammatical representation  . In Themental representation of grammatical relations  . MIT Press . 
Geert-Jan Kruijff .  2001 . A categorial-modal logical architecture of informativity  . Ph . D . thesis,
Charles University , Prague.
Beth Levin .  1993 . English verb classes and alternations . Chicago UP . 
Igor Melcuk .  1988 . Dependency syntax : Theory and practice . Albany : State Univ of NY . 
Carl Pollard and Ivan A . Sag . 1994. Head Driven
Phrase Structure Grammar . Chicago UP.
Petr Sgall , Eva Hajicova , and Jarmila Panenova.
1986 . The Meaning of the Sentence in its Semantic and Pragmatic Aspects  . Reidel . 
Wojciech Skut , Thorsten Brants , Brigitte Krenn , and Hans Uszkoreit .  1998 . A linguistically interpreted corpus of German newspaper text  . In Proceedings of the ESSLLI Workshop on Recent
Advances in Corpus Annotation.
Kalevi Tarvainen .  1987 . Cases in the framework of dependency grammar . In Concepts of Case . Narr . 
