Machine Translation by Interaction
between Paraphraser and Transfer
Kazuhide Yamamoto
ATR Spoken Language Translation Research Laboratories 
2-2-2 , Hikaridai , Seikacho , Sorakugun , Kyoto , 619-0288 Japan


A machine translation model has been proposed where an input is translated through both source -language and target-language paraphrasing processes  . We have implemented our prototype model for the Japanese-Chinese language pair  . This paper describes our core idea of translation  , wherea source language paraphraser and a language transfer cooperates in translation by exchanging information about the source input  . 
1 Introduction
Humans generally have language capability , mostly for their mother tongue and to a lesser extent for foreign languages  . This leads us to making the most of our mother language  , even in conducting translation . That is , when we translate our language into a foreign one unfamiliar to us  , we may try to paraphrase the source input into easier expressions we can translate  . 
In contrast , there is no such machine translation ( MT ) model so far proposed where the source language module is biased over the bilingual language module  . All of the MT models are either those where the bilingual processor takes the initiative over the source language analyzer  ( conventional analyze-transfer-generate model ) or integration models of analyzer and transfer , such as example-based or statistical models . Although some MT models have a paraphraser ( also called a ? pre-editor ? )  , such as that of Shirai et al (1993) , paraphrasing is performed in these models because it is necessary to prepare for the subsequent bilingual process  . In other words , the paraphraser operates as a submodule for successful transfer  . 
We have proposed a new MT model that is more similar to the human translation process than other MT systems  ( Yamamoto et al . , 2001) . This model , called the S and glass model , is designed so that the system can generate a translation through source language paraphrasing  , even if the system does not have sufficient bilingual knowledge  . In this sense , our model design can be considered a non -professional translator?s model  . 
From the engineering point of view , our model has an advantage in language portability  ; it is easy to construct an MT for a new language , since our model depends only on source language and thus can reduce dependence on bilingual knowledge  . Moreover , the better source language paraphraser we make , the easier the implementation of other language MT becomes  . 
Another advantage is task portability , since all of the paraphrasing knowledge , except for lexical paraphrasing knowledge , is independent of the task , so we do not need to fit most of the paraphrasing knowledge to the required task  . It is also significant that this model?s paraphraser can be employed not only for MT but also for most natural language processing  ( NLP ) applications . This is possible because both the input and output of a paraphraser is the same natural language  . 
We have been building the Sandglass MT system for the Japanese-Chinese  , Chinese-Japanese language pairs ( Yamamoto et al , 2001; Zhang and Yamamoto ,  2002) . We have already constructed a prototype for Japanese-Chinese  . In this paper , we report the core concepts of this prototype and discuss issues of both our principle and our implementation  . 
2S and glass Translation Model
Figure 1 shows our paradigm for a translation model . In the conventional MT model , the process load and the information used to deal with 
Conventional paradigm
S and glass paradigm translation process load maximum load in a bilingual transfer process maximum load in a monolingual process by paraphrasing Figure  1: Comparison of the two MT paradigms it are maximized in the transfer module  ; however , we propose that they be minimized in the transfer in consideration of language portability and task portability  . 
This translation approach is effective in MT where neither the source-nor target-language is English  . Although there are a large number of bilingual corpora currently available  , most of them are between English and other language  . 
This suggests that it is not useful to apply bilingual-corpus-based approaches to situations not involving English  . Moreover , conventional approaches based on handwritten rules are also unsuccessful due to lack of bilingual speakers of non-English pairs  . 
We also assume that reduction of bilingual processing costs is crucial for multilingual MT construction  . Although both interlingual MT and MT with controlled language satisfies this request  , our MT paradigm has an advantage in that it does not require design of interlin-gua/controlled language  , which can be a critical problem . 
2.1 Modularity and paraphrasing strategy
The S and glass translation model has a source language paraphraser  ( hereafter the paraphraser ) and a bilingual language transfer ( hereafter the transfer )  , which have high modularity with each other in order to develop them as independently as possible  . One of our aims in this model is to develop a general-purpose paraphraser that can also be used in other NLP applications  . 
When the system has modularity , the paraphraser does not need to consider the knowledge or translation capability of the transfer  . 
However , the paraphraser has trouble in planning a paraphrasing strategy  , since the purpose of paraphrasing in this model is to help small-knowledge transfer  . One may think of it as a solution to generate all possible paraphrases  , transfer them into the target language , and select the best one among the successful outputs  . 
We believe that , although this strategy works , it is not practical due to the computation cost . 
In many cases , there are local paraphrases possible for one input  , which may result in combinatorial explosion for generating paraphrases  . 
Moreover , this strategy leads to a more serious problem in speech translation that requires realtime computation  . 
As an alternative , we propose the following strategy for planning paraphrases  . We first put the controller between the paraphraser and the transfer  . The controller communicates with both the paraphraser and the transfer and exchanges information between them on the target sentence be translated  . As opposed to the one-way information path from the paraphraser to the transfer  , a bidirectional information flow enables cooperation by allowing each module to provide its counterpart with information on what is possible and what is impossible  . 
This kind of process is not necessary in the typical MT model  , since each process has the responsibility to perform its mission successfully and giving up is never allowed  . If one of the processes gives up its mission , the entire translation process also gives up and fails  . On the contrary , our model ( sometimes ) allows the transfer to give up generating the target language  . Although this responsibility continuously enlarges the transfer knowledge  , it is one of the critical problems of the typical MT  . In general , in order to avoid a fatty transfer , we propose shifting the responsibility of generating the target language from the transfer process to monolingual processes  . 
< 1>  "  W1   W2   W3   W4"   <2>   W3  ->  W3+  ?  <3>  "  W1   W2   W3+   W4" 
W3->W3+
W5->W5+W6
W10W11->W12 ...
W1W2W3+W4->...
W1W5W3->...
W7W8W9W10->...





Controller Transfer Paraphraser


To Target

Paraphrase r < 5 > < 4 >

Figure 2: Translation strategy by interaction of the two modules  2  . 2 Interaction between paraphrasing and transfer Figure  2 illustrates our translation strategy . 
The translator mainly consists of the paraphraser and the transfer  , where a controller is located between the two modules in order to control the information  flow1  . This model has the following characteristics : ( 1 ) the paraphraser and the transfer are equivalent in terms of process sequences  , i . e . , the process flow is not an assembly line type , and ( 2 ) the knowledge for paraphrasing and that for transferring are separated so that the paraphraser and the transfer are responsible for monolingual and bilingual processing  , respectively . 
The translation process is achieved as follows.
The output of word segmentation and part-of -speech  ( POS ) tagging is first attempted to transfer to the target language through the controller  . Assume that a sequence of morphemes W1W2W3W4 , where W i is each morpheme , fails to transfer ( process ?1? in the figure ) . 
In this case , the transfer may obtain information on the failed input morphemes that is useful for the paraphrasing strategy  , such as similar morpheme sequences that can be transferred or  1For simplicity , other parts of the translator are hidden in the figure  . 
parts of the input that are impossible to transfer  . Our transfer can obtain expressions similar to the input  , if any exists , when the transfer fails . In this example , the transfer found that the morpheme sequence W1W2W3+W4 is similar to one in its knowledge , i . e . , it understands that the input can be transferred if  W3 can be paraphrased into W3+  . Accordingly , the transfer provides this information to the paraphraser as a paraphrasing hint  ( process ?2? )  . 
Then the paraphraser attempts to use this suggestion prior to other paraphrasing trials  . It judges whether W3 is replaceable by W3+ , and if it has such knowledge , it paraphrases based on the transfer hint and returns this paraphrase to the transfer  ( process ?3? )  . Again , the transfer carries out a new trial and it succeeds in translation this time  ( process ?4? )  . Finally , the target language expression is passed to the subsequent processes  ( process ?5? )  . 
Among the possibilities other than those shown in the figure  , if the transfer cannot find any similar expression  , the paraphraser then attempts to rewrite the input by utilizing its own paraphrasing knowledge  . Similarly , if the paraphraser cannot accept the rewriting hint that the transfer suggests  , the paraphraser also thinks by itself . 
2.3 Paraphraser
Currently , our paraphraser can deal with six paraphrasing types :  ( 1 ) verification of the transfer?s suggestion , (2) input segmentation ,   ( 3 ) reduction of honorific expressions ( Oh take and Yamamoto ,  2001) ,   ( 4 ) simplification of functional words ( Yamamoto ,  2001) , (5) chunking of noun phrases , and (6) deletion of minor elements . Paraphrasing is conducted in this order . If one of the pattern conditions in this paraphrasing knowledge is matched  , the paraphraser then finishes and returns its paraphrase  ; no other paraphrase is pursued . 
(1) As the first type of the paraphrasing , the paraphraser verifies the paraphrasing hint that the transfer suggests  , if any . In our model , all of the suggested paraphrasing rules are formed as single-morpheme replacements  , most of which are functional words . Therefore , the paraphraser has a list of these types of rephrasing rules in advance to verify the suggestion  . We have built a list that contains 175 replacement patterns . 
Ex . 1 ? ( It seems interesting.)
Ex . 2  ?   ( Until what time is it ? ) In the above two examples , a sentence-final particle and an auxiliary verb are replaced  , respectively . These slight differences should be merged before bilingual processing in order to restrict unnecessary combinations in the target language  . 
(2) If the verification fails , the paraphraser then attempts to split the input utterance according to the predefined segmentation rules  . 
This is necessary because we are dealing with spoken language  , which has no clear sentence boundaries . The segmentation rules , consisting of 30 rules , are defined by checking sequences of either word or POS  . For example , in many cases , if there is a sentence-final particle , then the input is segmented after that word . In the following example , a segmentation border is described by the symbol  ?  ; ? . 
Ex .3 ? ;( So , see you !)
Ex . 4   ?  ;( How much ? That one . ) It is possible to regard the above two examples as single sentences  , so it is difficult in general in Japanese speech to determine whether to segment them or not  . However , this is not a problem in the proposed method because our segmentation is conducted only if the transfer fails to deal with the input as a single sentence  . 
(3 ) Honorific expressions are seen in Japanese speech very frequently  . These expressions involve many variations for expressing one sense  , so they should be unified before the transfer to avoid the great amount of increase in unnecessary bilingual knowledge that would be expected  . Our paraphraser for honorifics , which was proposed by Ohtake and Yamamoto (2001) , reduces such variations to as few as possible . We have 212 paraphrasing patterns for honorific expressions . 
Ex . 5   ?   ( Then how should we do ? ) 
Ex . 6  !"?  #!"( Unfortunately , there isn?t . ) (4) Similarly to honorifics , there are also many variations in Japanese verbal expressions  , so we again need to reduce variations . Spoken-style expressions are targets of paraphrasing here  , and they are replaced by written - or normal -style expressions  . The target phenomena and the effects of this paraphraser have been discussed in Yamamoto  ( 2001 )  . The paraphraser we use involves 302 patterns . 
Ex . 7 $%&'" (  ?$%  ( I think it may be a cold . )  ( 5 ) Noun phrases are chunked here according to simple pattern matching by lexicon or POS : if two or more nouns are consecutive with or without a possessive-like particle ?  )  , ? we then regard them as one noun phrase . This process is necessary because we parse input utterances in neither the paraphraser nor the transfer  , and the transfer only see POS sequences . We expect that this chunking would help to make our template-based poor transfer more robust against input variations  . However , we place this process at a low priority in the paraphrasing order because an unconditional operation of this process is considered to be trouble some  , especially in spoken language . A chunk is illustrated as ? ? ? below:
Ex . 8 *+,)- . / " ?*+,)- . /" ( It?s Tuesday , at five p . m . ) (6) As the final paraphrasing measure , the paraphraser deletes relatively unimportant parts of the input expressions  , such as adverbs of manner and degree , as well as particles expressing topical markers . Changing POS sequences of the input changes the searching space in the transfer knowledge  . In the following two examples , two particles and an adverb are deleted , respectively . Currently , we have 22 patterns in this type . 
Ex . 9 0 ,  12  ?0 ,  12 ( It will be ready by tomorrow . )
Ex . 10 3"456&'  ?456&'   ( Perhaps it takes ten minutes . ) 2 . 4 Transfer knowledge construction Our transfer knowledge is constructed as follows  . Because our principle requires that the bilingual processing and its efforts should be reduced as much as possible  , our bilingual knowledge is primitive and easy to construct automatically  . Our knowledge sources are a sentence-aligned text corpus between Japanese and Chinese  , a Japanese-Chinese dictionary where one source word may correspond to many target words  , and a Japanese analyzer . Note that we used neither a Chinese analyzer nor tagging in the Chinese corpus  . 
Our transfer process is based on a word-template transfer technique  , and we conducted automatic word alignment for its knowledge  . 
We first analyzed all Japanese sentences in the corpus by the free-to-use morphological analyzer  JUMAN2  . We then checked , by string matching , whether each source language content word has a corresponding target word  . If this alignment succeeds , both source and target language words are tagged with the same ID number  . When more than one translation in the dictionary can be aligned  , the longest word in the target side is selected for alignment  . 
One source language word may correspond to a target word that appears more than once  . 
For example , a translation of the Japanese question ?78 !" ? is ? ? . We can deal with this result by accepting multiple correspondences  , e . g . ,  ??#538?   ?#538?? where ????? is a word boundary and #538 is an ( example ) ID number . 
Hereafter , we call these sentence sets templates and the aligned parts in a sentence variables  . 
2.5 Transfer
The transfer module converts the source language input into the corresponding target language expressions by using the templates  . The 2http://www-nagao . kuee . kyoto-u . ac . jp/nl-resource/juman-e . html process consists of two parts , i . e . , template retrieval and template matching . 
The process first searches for templates satisfying similarity to the input expression  . In order to judge similarity between the input and the templates  , we only use the POS sequences of the input . If the retrieval succeeds , i . e . , templates are found that have the same POS sequence  , we then compare , word by word , the input and each retrieved template . If a word is a variable in the template , this comparison always succeeds . If there is no template retrieved , the transfer reports to the paraphraser ( through the controller ) that the retrieval process has failed . 
In this case , the paraphraser is required to somehow change the input sentence in terms of POS sequences  . 
Suppose that some templates are retrieved but matching fails  , implying that some lexicons are different . Although this case is a transfer failure as well , the transfer has information on which parts of the input sentence failed to transfer  , and such information could be a key for paraphrasing  . Therefore , information on unmatched parts is also returned to the paraphraser with the result of the transfer failure  . If multiple templates are retrieved and all of them fail in matching  , all of the unmatched parts are returned in parallel  . 
If both the template retrieval and the template matching succeeds  , this indicates that the transfer process has finished successfully  . The input sentence is converted to the target language  , and the transfer throws it to the controller for the following process  . If more than one target language expression is returned due to the multiple successes in template matching  , all of them are returned in parallel , and the following processes determine the best results  . 
3 Preliminary Experiment
We conducted a preliminary experiment to evaluate the translation capability under the current paraphrasing skills  . Although there are many items that should be evaluated in MT  , our first interest in the prototype is how much the paraphraser supports poor transfer knowledge and how small the acceptable transfer knowledge can be  . 
The transfer knowledge contains a bilingual dictionary of approximately  51  , 000 source language lexical entries , as well as up to 233 , 000
Output Performance (%)
Transfer Knowledge ( templates ) partial whole no paraphrasing Figure 3: Changes in output ratios by amount of transfer knowledge utterances  , in the domain of travel situations , and their translations . For evaluation , we use 1 , 000 utterances , each of which is 10 or fewer morphemes long , selected at random and unseen by the transfer . 
The prototype is programmed in Perl language , and the running time at the maximum transfer knowledge is  0  . 5 55 second per utterance with a Pentium III 600 MHz processor . The ratios of the fully-and partially -translated utterances to several transfer knowledge sizes are plotted in figure  3  . For comparison purposes , translation performance without the paraphrasing process is also illustrated in the figure  . The experiments were conducted three times under each condition  . 
We can understand the importance of paraphrasing by observing the approximately  20%-40% performance gaps between full output and no paraphrasing  . The paraphraser improves performance regardless of the knowledge size  . 
The gaps are not trivial , so the experiments confirmed that the paraphraser plays an important role in the interaction process  . 
The figure also shows the fact that only 30% of the unseen input is translated using POS -sequence-based maximum templates  . Considering that all inputs are 10 morphemes or fewer , this low performance implies the necessity to acquire  70% knowledge by somehow generalizing the existing 30% knowledge . The current paraphrasing knowledge ? a collection of human intuition ? can cover  40% of the inputs , while it seems difficult to cover the same or higher 
Number of trials ( times )
Transfer Knowledge ( templates)
Figure 4: Changes in number of paraphrasing trials by the amount of transfer knowledge level by only automatically-acquired information from corpora  . 
Figure 4 shows the average number of paraphrasing trials . It would be a major problem in this design if there were many interaction loops between the paraphraser and the transfer  , but we found that such worries are unwarranted in the current system  . However , it is necessary to be careful in this measure , since we need to add more functions to the paraphraser in order to avoid zero output  . 
4 Related Works
It is important to reduce the burden of transfer to realize multilingual MT  . In this sense , MT using a controlled language , such as the KANT system ( Mitamura et al ,  1991) , has similar principles to our approach . We believe that multilingual MT systems should not place the obligation of transferring the target language on the transfer module  . Difficult or ambiguous input should be checked in document translations  , while it should somehow be resolved before the transfer module in speech translation  , since realtime dialog conversation is a requirement  . 
Although we cannot find an MT model where an interactive  ( that is , feedback ) approach between the two submodules is implemented  , several types of interactive models have been discussed in natural language generation systems  . 
In the Igen system ( Rubinoff ,  1992) , which has a similar interactive operation , the Formulator module provides feedback to the Conceptualizer module with information on how much of the content can be encovered by a particular word choice  . The Conceptualizer can then determine which choice satisfies its secondary goals with these annotations  . 
Two similar works paraphrase source input for MT . One is the work of Shirai et al (1993) , where they proposed a pre-editing approach for a JapaneseEnglish MT system ALT-J/E  . The other is the work of Yoshimi and Sata (1999) , where they presented an approach to rewriting English newspaper headlines for the English -Japanese MT system Power E/J  . The significant difference between their approaches and ours is the model design  , i . e . , whether the paraphraser and the transfer are sequential or integrated  . Moreover , the purposes of paraphrasing are also different : in the pre-editing system it is for expediting the transfer and in the newspaper headline system it is for reducing peculiarities in the headline  ; on the other hand , our para-phraser?s purpose is to support poor transfer knowledge  . 
5 Conclusions
We have proposed that many MT problems can be resolved if we have two paraphrasers  , in both the source - and target-language . We have also proposed that bilingual knowledge be minimized in order to increase portability to other languages or other tasks  . 
This paper explained details of our MT system design and discuss edits advantages  . One feature of our design is that the translation process is achieved by interaction between the source language paraphraser and the transfer  , unlike the conventional sequential MT model . 
We illustrated this advantage concretely by showing examples of the information exchanged between the two modules  . 
It is obvious that the bilingual burden is drastically eased in this model  , while the importance of the monolingual process ( i . e . , paraphrasing ) is increased . Although we did not illustrate many problems , such as ambiguity reduction for syntax or semantics  , we will explore these issues in the future . Also , we need to evaluate the quality of the translation outputs after the target paraphraser is implemented  . 

The research reported here was supported in part by a contract with the Telecommunications Advancement Organization of Japan entitled  , ? A study of speech dialogue translation technology based on a large corpus  . ?

Teruko Mitamura , Eric Nyberg , and Jaime Carbonell .  1991 . An efficient interlingua translation system for multilingual document production  . In Proc . of MT Summit III , pages 55?61 . 
Kiyonori Ohtake and Kazuhide Yamamoto.
2001. Paraphrasing honorifics . In Proc . of
N LPRS2001 Workshop on Automatic Paraphrasing : Theories and Applications  , pages 13?20 . 
Robert Rubin off .  1992 . Integrating text planning and linguistic choice by annotating linguistic structures  . In R . Dale , E . Hovy , D . Rosner , and O . Stock , editors , Aspects of automated natural language generation , pages 45?56 . Berlin : Springer . 
Satoshi Shirai , Satoru Ikehara , and Tsukasa Kawaoka .  1993 . Effects of automatic rewriting of source language within a Japanese to 
English MT system . In Proc . of TMI?93, pages 226?239 . 
Kazuhide Yamamoto , Satoshi Shirai , Masashi
Sakamoto , and Yujie Zhang .  2001 . Sand-glass : Twin paraphrasing spoken language translation  . In 19th International Conference on Computer Processing of Oriental Languages  ( ICCPOL 2001 )  , pages 154?159 . 
Kazuhide Yamamoto .  2001 . Paraphrasing spoken Japanese for untangling bilingual transfer  . In Proc . of NLPRS 2001, pages 203?210 . 
Takehiko Yoshimi and Ichiko Sata . 1999.
Automatic preediting of English newspaper headlines and its effects in a English-to -Japanese MT system  . In Proc . of Natural Language Processing Pacific-Rim Symposium  ( NLPRS ?99 )  , pages 275?279 . 
Yujie Zhang and Kazuhide Yamamoto . 2002.
Paraphrasing of Chinese utterances . In Proc.
of COLING 2002.
