Varying Cardinality in Metonymic Extensions to Nouns 
Helmut Horacek
Universit?t des Saarlandes
F.R . 6.2 Informatik
Postfach 15 11 50
D-66041 Saarbr?cken , Germany
email : horacek@cs.uni-sb.de

Meaning shifting phenomena such as metonymy have recently attracted increasing interest of researchers  . Though these phenomena have been addressed by plenty of computational methods  , the impacts of cardinalities of metonymically related items have been widely ignored in all of them  . Motivated by this lack of analysis , we have developed a method for representing expectations and knowledge about the cardinalities of metonymically related entities and for exploiting this information to build logical forms expressing metonymic relations  , the entities related , and their cardinalities . The representation of lexically motivated knowledge is realized as an enhan-cement to Pustejovsky's Generative Lexicon  , and the process of building logical forms takes into account over writing of default information and mismatch of cardinality requirements  . Our method enables a precise attachment of sentence complements  , and it supports reference resolution in the context of metonymic expressions  . 
1 Introduction
Meaning shifting phenomena such as metonymy have recently attracted increasing interest  . Computational approaches to these phenomena aim at inferring implicitly represented relations  , predicting meaning shifts of nouns or verbs , expressing restrictions on these meaning shifts in dependency of context-or language-specific factors  , and facilitating reference resolution . Measures to achieve these issues include representation of default knowledge and various sorts of inference methods and constructive procedures  . However , the entities in the texts examined almost always appear in singular form so that issues of cardinality of metonymically related items have been widely ignored by the approaches mades o far  . 
Motivated by this lack of analysis , we have examined metonymic expressions by varying cardinalities of the items appearing explicitly or implicitly  , to analyze effects of these alternations . 
The results have inspired us to build increasingly explicit versions of logical forms  , and to formul-ate conditions on pronominal accessibility  . The insights gained improve analysis methods for relating contextual specifications to the appropriate entity  , and for supporting reference resolution to entities related implicitly  . 
This paper is organized as follows . We review computational approaches to metonymy . Then we illustrate the phenomena investigated . We elaborate suitable techniques to deal with these phenomena  , that is , an enhancement to entries in the Generative Lexicon  , and a procedure for building a logical form . Finally , we discuss impacts of our analysis on pronominal resolution  . 
2 Approaches to Metonymy
Metonymy is a natural language phenomenon that contributes to expressing information in an effective and economic way  . It involves what has been termed'transfers of meaning ' by  ( Nunberg 1995 )  , i . e . , the meaning of some constituent does not correspond to what can be expected according to the syntactic and semantic environment ? the speaker is " using one entity to refer to another that is related to it "  ( Lakoff and Johnson 1980 )  . For example , in the utterance " The hams and wich is waiting for his check "  , it is not literally the hams and wich , which wants to pay , but the person who order edit . 
Computational approaches such as the NL database interface TEAM  ( Grosz et al 1988 ) are concerned with inferring implicitly expressed metonymic relations  , mostly in English ; some analyses consider German ( Horacek 1996 ) and French ( Kayser 1988 , Pustejovsky and Bouillon 1995) . Prominent representatives include Fass'program met *  ( 1991 )  , which makes use of formal definitions of several kinds of metonymic relations  , Sowa's conceptual graphs (1992) , in which an a priori unspecific relation is inserted between a concept of the type expected and the concept appearing on the surface  , and the TACITUS system ( Hobbs et al 1993 ) which treats metonymy as a special case of reference resolution  , in a uniform abduction process to ? find the best explanation for the observables ?  . 
Altogether , these approaches have two characteristic properties :  ( 1 ) The conditions expressing when leaving a metonymic relation implicit or not is possible are too unconstrained to cover a larger number of examples in several languages  , or to generate sentences with metonymic expressions systematically  .   ( 2 ) The intended and the literal referent always appear in singular definite form  . There are only three approaches which in some aspects deviate from this characterization  . 
Pustejovsky's Generative Lexicon ( 1991 ) addresses the first aspect . He proposes a Theory of Qualia , with an explanation of systematic polysemy . Applying type coercion enables one to arri-veat cases of ordinary metonymy which can be grounded in terms of the semantics of lexemes  , as well as at word senses which Pustejovsky has termed logical metonymy  , like the reading of a book in the sentence ? Mary enjoyed the book ?  . 
Such contexts reflect prototypical knowledge derived from AGENTIVE or TELIC roles of the lexical entry for ' book '  , which are prominent roles in the Qualia Structure of nouns  . Particular-ities of the Qualia Structure of nouns regulate the acceptability of leaving a metonymic relation implicit  ( Pustejovsky and Bouillon 1995 )  . 
Stallard ( 1993 ) indirectly addresses the second aspect by taking into account scoping relations and impacts on pronominal reference  . He introduces a distinction between referential and predicative metonymy  , depending on whether the intended or the literal argument is accessible for subsequent pronominal reference  . This distinction manifests itself in different scope relations that hold between these arguments in the corresponding logical forms  . We will argue against his usage of scoping and the resulting strict distinction of pronominal accessibility  . 
Markert and Hahn ( 1997 ) address interactions of metonymic relation extension and anaphora resolution  , which enables them to handle textual ellipsis references  . They apply extensive language independent conceptual definitions with relational path classifications and preference rules  . 
In their corpus , there are also cases of indefinite metonymic NPs , which is an indication for metonymic relations to several objects  . 
Though neither Pustejovsky's nor Stallard's approach address cardinalities  , we show that both can be extended accordingly : we augment the Generative Lexicon by representing cardinality information  , and techniques for building logical forms are enhanced to yield more precise specifications of the metonymically related entities  . 
3 Phenomena Investigated
For a number of metonymic relations , such as PRODUCER for PRODUCT ( ? I bought a Ford ? )  , ARTIST for ARTWORK (? He plays Bach?) , as well as eventualities involved in logical meto -nymy  , cardinalities are not a problem because the literal referents are expressed as proper names  . For other metonymic relations , especially ORGANIZATION for MEMBER and PAR T for WHOLE  , several complications may arise , as the following examples demonstrate . Let us start with two contrastive sentences ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  , taken from ( Lakoff and Johnson 1980) , and ( Hobbs et al 1988) , respectively ( see also ( Horacek 1994 ) ):  ( 1 ) The hams and wich is waiting for his check . 
(1a ) He is getting impatient.
(1b ) It is 2$.
(2) The Boston office called.
?(2a ) He was angry.
(2b ) It is our head quarter.
(2c ) They want us to organize a meeting.
Following Stallard ,   ( 1 ) is interpreted as an example of referential reading  , while ( 2 ) as an example of predicative reading : ( 1 ) can be rephras-ed more explicitly by Theman x who has eaten a hams and wich y is waiting for his x check  , while ( 2 ) in a similar way gets expanded to The Boston office x represented by one of its x employeesy call-ed  . These reformulations suggest that the man in ( 1 ) and the Boston office in ( 2 ) have wider scope in Stallards representation than the hams and wich in  ( 1 ) and the employee in ( 2 )  , which predicts pronominal accessibility in ( 1a ) and ( 2b )  , as opposed to (1b ) , (2a ) and (2c ) . We challenge this analysis with evidence from the examples above  . 
Pronominal reference in (1b ) is also possible , but may be less common than in (1a ) . (2c ) seems even more natural than (2b ) , only (2a ) is unclear . 
Further complications arise when variations of cardinality in sentence  ( 1 )   ( see sentences ( 3 ) to ( 6 ) and their follow-ups )  , and variation of circumstances in sentence ( 2 )   ( see the follow-ups of sentences ( 7 ) and ( 8 ) ) are considered . For dishes made of animals (' the mussels') , complications arise through interference between animals and persons as pronominal referents  . Because we want to study the effects of cardinality variations per se  , we avoid such examples . 
(3) The pizzas are waiting for their checks.
?(3a ) He/she is getting impatient.
(3b ) They are getting impatient.
(4 ) The fruit dumplings is/a rewaiting for his/her /their check  ( s )  . 
(4a ) He/she/they is/a regetting impatient.
(5 ) The meatplate is/a rewaiting for his/her/their check  ( s )  . 
(5a ) He/she/they is/a regetting impatient.
(6 ) Table 7 is/a rewaiting for his/her/their check ( s )  . 
(6a ) He/she/they is/a regetting impatient.
These sentences demonstrate that both intra- ( (1 ) and ( 3 ) ) and intersentential ( (1a ) and ( 3b ) ) pro-nonminal reference work fine , if the literal referents ( here , various sorts of food ) and the real referents ( here , the persons ) agree in number . 
Otherwise , a variety of complications arise in intrasentential reference  , which also demonstrate a specificity of English . Whereas pronouns agree with the literal referent in most languages  , it is the intended referent that determines verb agreement and pronominal reference in the same sentence in English  . For example , metonymic extension to the expression ' fruit dumplings ' is ambiguous in the sense that it can refer to one plate of dumplings to be eaten by a single person  , or to several plates , each for another person ( see the variants in ( 4 ) ) . Conversely , metonymic extension to the expression ' meat plate ' can also be interpreted as a reference to several persons sharing that dish  ( see the variants in ( 5 ) ) . Finally , metonymic extension to the expression ' table ' seems to be more neutral with respect to the number of persons sharing it  ( see the variants in ( 6 ) ) . Thus , the syntactic subject and the verb would not agree in number in English  , when the default situation concerning these dishesis present  . Hence , English is , in principle , more informative than other languages when the cardinality of the intended referent differs from the number of the literal referent  . However , those expressions without subject/verb agreement are unlikely to occur in practice  , since they appear to be strange . 
Unlike with intrasentential reference , intersentential pronominal reference with number feat-ures deviating from the referent that is pronomi-nally accessible intrasententially is possible due to default expectations about the cardinality of the real referents  ( compare complementary variants in ( 4a ) and ( 5a ) ) . It is more problematic in other cases ( see ( 3a ) ) . In the less precise referen-ce by the table , all variants in (6a ) are felicitous . 
(7 ) The Boston office is represented in the meeting . 
?(7a ) He/she is an expert in marketing.
(7b ) They are experts in marketing.
(7c ) They always send someone to meetings.
(8 ) The Boston office will meet for an excursion today  . 
* (8a ) He/she likes to walk.
(8b ) They will make a lunch break at 2pm.
(8c ) They like to organize social events.
The following sentences ((2) ,  (7) ,  (8) , and their follow-ups ) involve slightly harder restrictions . 
Plural pronominal references as in sentences (7b ) , (7c ) , (8b ) and (8c ) are felicitous , but there is a difference between the sets of entities the plural pronouns refer to  . While in (7c ) and (8c ) , the pronouns refer to the entire set of employees of the Boston office  , they more plausibly refer to the representatives in the meeting in  ( 7b ) and to the excursion participants in ( 8b )  . These examp-les indicate an additional demand on the treatment of cardinalities and referential accessibility of metonymic expressions : a distinction is to be made between the entities referred to metonymically  ( here : employees of the Boston office )  , and those of its members involved in the event expressed by the sentence  ( here : the meeting and the excursion )  . For the restaurant scenario , these sets of persons are mostly identical except to those cases where one person out of a group of person seating together and referred to metony -mically is the one who intends to pay  . 
(9) Which airlines serve food from Boston to
New York ?(9a ) In the first class ?
As a further aspect of metonymic expressions , the last two examples demonstrate chaining of metonymic relations and the relevance of each set of items involved for the associated analysis  . 
In sentence (9) , the airlines are the literal , and the persons the real referents . However , relating these two entities directly by an employment relation is problematic  , since it is impossible to connect the locality information  ( from Boston to New York ) and the first class restriction to either of them . 
Linking this information appropriately requires explicit elaboration of the relation between the airlines and their employees to include the implicitly referred flights  . 
The consideration exposed so far primarily hold for English  . Apart from the partitive construction , which seems to be a specificity of English in comparison to many other languages  , the results can widely be transferred to other langu-ages  . However , there are a lot a language-specific subtleties which may influence the felicity or non-felicity of some of the expressions discussed in one particular language  . In order to find out , to what extent other languages behave similar to English  , we have asked native speakers of German , French , Italian , Spanish , Russian , and Vietnamese about the transferabillity of the English sentences to these languages  . Though the results are subjective to a certain extent  ( only one speaker was available for most of these langu-ages  )  , some tendencies became apparent . Even sentence ( 1 ) was considered unacceptable in some languages , in which there is more emphasis on referring to persons explicitly  . In Spanish , this seems to be caused syntactically , by the absence of personal pronouns , while the reasons seem to be more pragmatically or culturally related in French and Vietnamese  , respectively . 
Moreover , references to objects ( (1b ) and ( 2b ) ) appeared unusal in some languages , including Vietnamese and Italian . Also in German , a demonstrative pronoun seems to be preferable to a personal pronoun  . Finally , (2) is quite weird in Spanish , since the alternative ' From the Boston office_ called ' exists  ( unlike in ( 7 ) and ( 8 ) ) . In constrast , precisely (2) is acceptable in Vietname-se , because only ' calling ' is considered technical . 
food(x )
CONST = ingredients , ?
FORMAL = eatable(x)
TELIC = eat(eT , y , x)
AGENTIVE = cook(e'T,z,x ) s and wich(x)
CONST = ham , bread,?
FORMAL = eatable(x)
TELIC = eat(eT , y , x)
AGENTIVE = prepare(e'T,z,x ) pizza(x)
CONST = dough , tomato , ?
FORMAL = eatable(x)
TELIC = eat(eT , y , x)
AGENTIVE = bake(e'T,z,x)
Fig .  1 . Some ' standard ' examples of Qualia Structures , for ' food ' , ' s and wich ' , and ' pizza ' 4 Expressing Lexical Knowledge In order to capture distinctions between the varying interpretations of metonymic expressions  , knowledge about the lexical items involved plays a crucial role  . For adequately expressing this knowledge , we make use of entries in the Generative Lexicon ( see Figure 1 )  . Since the information represented there is insufficient for reasoning about cardinalities  , we extend the entries in the Generative Lexicon , prominently the TELIC role , by quantifier specifications . In the original form , the entities involved ( typically , the lexical item itself and some related entity ) are implicitly quantified , and a typed event variable is used ( an event may be a state ( S )  , a process ( P ) , or a transition ( T )) . A similar exploitation of taxonomic knowledge in terms of cardinality restrictions has been undertaken for scope disambiguation in  ( Fliegner ,  1988) . 
In the extended form , we introduce explicit quantifiers and scoping , and we optionally add sort restrictors to variables referred to by event predicates  . We introduce new quantifiers to cover the cases elaborated in the previous section  , in addition to the usual NL quantifiers EXIST and WH:SINGLE and MULTIPLE for a single resp  . 
multiple objects without defaults , DEFSINGLE and DEFMULTIPLE for the same with defaults  . 
Figures 2 and 3 show entries in the Generative Lexicon with extended TELIC roles  . The same extensions also apply to the AGENTIVE roles  , but we do not elaborate this aspect here . Figure 2 , for example , shows some sorts of food associated with different expectations about how many persons typically eat them  . Fruit dumplings appear assets ( quantified by DEF MULTIPLE )  , to be eaten as a dish by a single person ( quantified by DEF-SINGLE )  . For theme at plate , cardinality relations are inverted . For a table in a restaurant , relations to food eaten at that table are not specified  . 
Unlike in the restaurant scenario , cardinality relations are less vague for some relations in organizations  . Each office and each airline are supposed to employ several persons  , and each person is working for one organization only  , at least in his/her individual activities ( this is expressed by the quantifiers SINGLE and MULTIPLE in the lexical entries in Figure  3  )  . Each flight carries some set of people , each of which parti-cipates in one flight only ( at the same time )  . 
These extensions allow us to derive cardina-lities for the referents involved in a metonymic expression ? compare the entries for FRUIT -DUMPLING and MEAT-PLATE  , as contrasting examples . To achieve this goal , the knowledge represented in the lexicon entries is used for building logical forms in which metonymic relations are made entirely explicit  . The event predicates in the TELIC ( or AGENTIVE ) roles are exploited to infer the relation involved  . Moreover , the new quantification specification yields crucial information to build an explicit logical form with cardinality specifications from concise surface expressions in a precise manner  . 
5 Building Logical Forms
Based on entries in the Generative Lexicon and on the context given by a sentence to be interpreted  , logical forms can be built that represent the semantic relations involved more explicitly than this is the case with previous approaches  . In a nutshell , metonymic extensions are tried according to specifications found in the lexicon  , as long as the sort of an NP and the sort of the referring case role are incompatible  . In addition , agreement between syntactic number and seman -fruit-dumpling  ( x ) 
CONST = dough , fruit,?
FORMAL = eatable(x)
TELIC = ( DEFSING LE y ( DEF MULTIPLEx ( eat ( eT , y , x ))))
AGENTIVE = cook(e'T , z , x ) meat-plate(x )
CONST = pork , beef,?
FORMAL = eatable(x)
TELIC = ( DEFSINGLE x ( DEFMULTIPLE y ( eat ( eT , y , x ))))
AGENTIVE = prepare(e'T,z,x ) table(x)
CONST = legs , plate,?
FORMAL = physobj(x )
TELIC = ( DEFSINGLE x ( DEFMULTIPLE y ( sit-at ( eS , y , x ))))
AGENTIVE = build(e'T,z,x)
Fig .  2 . Some ' extended'examples of Qualia Structures , for special food sorts and ' table ' office ( x ) 
CONST = employees , ...
FORMAL = organization(x)
TELIC = ( SINGLEx ( MULTIPLE y
PERSON(work(eP , y , x))))
AGENTIVE = establish(e'T , z , x ) airline(x )
CONST = planes , office , ...
FORMAL = organization(x)
TELIC = ( SINGLEx ( MULTIPLE y
FLIGHT ( organize(eT , y , x)))
AGENTIVE = found(e'T , z , x ) f light(x ) CONST = place , source ,   . . . FORMAL = loc-change ( x ) TELIC = ( SINGLE x ( DEFMULTIPLE y PERSON ( carry ( eT , y , x ))))
AGENTIVE = organize(e'T,z,x)
Fig .  3 . Some ' extended'examples of Qualia Structures , for ' office ' , ' airline ' , and ' flight'tic cardinality specifications is achieved  , which may require over writing defaults or introducing a new set of entities as a subset of a known set  . In concrete , logical forms are built by pursuing the procedure in Figure  4  . Logical forms appear as ( QxS < P >) , where Q is a quantifier , x and Sits associated variable and sortal restrictor  , and < P > the predication related . In step 2a , metonymic extensions are carried out , which can potentially be chained , and in step 2c a final extension is performed in case of a cardinality mismatch  . In the following , we illustrate the procedure by some examples . For sentence (4) , ? The fruit dumplings wants to pay ? , the initial logical form ( MULTIPLExFRUIT-DUMPLING ( WANT-PAYx ) ) contains a sortal incompatibility . Using the lexical entry for ' fruit dumplings ' and expanding the expression according to the TELIC role yields  ( SINGLE y PERSON ( MULTIPLExFRUIT-DUMPLING ( AND ( EAT yx )   ( WANT-PAYy ) ) ) ) where the sortal incompatibility is removed . 
Note , that the cardinality of PERSON is singular , due to the inflection of the predicate ' wants ' . In German , the quantifier is unspecific concerning the cardinality  , because the sentence predicate would not give the same indication as this is the case in English  . For another predicate , such an ambiguity may not be present , as in the example ( SINGLEx OFFICE ( AND ( BOSTONIAN x )   ( CALL x ) ) ) Making use of the TELIC role in the lexical entry of ' office '  , as exposed in Figure 3 , yields ( SINGLEx OFFICE ( AND ( BOSTONIAN x )   ( MULTIPLE y PERSON ( AND ( WORKyx )   ( CALL y ) ) ) ) )  1 . Build an initial logical form out of the surface expression  . 
The representation is composed as an expression of the form  ( QExESE < P > ) : xE being the variable whose representation is to be extended  ( initially x , the literal referent ) , QE being its quantifier , and SE its sort ( initially Q and S , associated with the literal referent ) , and < P > being a structured representation of the sentence predicate and its modifiers  . 
SR is the sort required in the referring case frame  , and QR the quantifier of its case slot restrictions  . 
2 . Extend the meaning of noun phrases which are involved in a sortal incompatibility  . 
2a . Build a metonymically extended expression by consulting lexical knowledge  . 
Merge the partial expression ( QExESE < P > ) with the extended lexicon representation for SE :   ( Q1 x1 S1 ( AND < P1 > ( Q2 x2 S2 < P2 > ) ) ) ? from the lexicon , < Q1 , x1 , S1>=<QE , xE , SE > and < Q2 , x2 , S2>=<QN , xN , SN > if the referent with the same sort as xE has wider scope in the lexicon  , or with inverted equalities . 
< P > is partitioned according to sortal compatibility of its components : if  x1 = xE then < P1> contains parts that refer to xE , sortally compatible with SE , otherwise < P2> . 
The remaining parts of < P > become < P2> , if x1 = xE , and < P1> otherwise . 
2b . Test the compatibility of the newly inserted sort with the restrictions to be met  . 
If SN(SN =  S2 , if S1 = SE , and SN =  S1 otherwise ) is incompatible with SR , then repeat step 2 a with xN , SN , QN and < PN > as xE , SE , QE and , < P > , respectively ; else QR over writes QN if QN is a default quantifier compatible with QR  . 
2c . Test the cardinality compatibility of the new sort with the restrictions to be met  . 
If SN is compatible with SR , but QN is incompatible with QR , insert MEMBER between xE and xN . 
If not the whole set of entities bound to xE participates in the eventuality  , insert SUBSET instead . 

Fig .  4 . The procedure for building logical forms with extended metonymic relations which still contains a cardinality incompatibility  . 
Further expanding this form by performing step 2c in the procedure leads to the insertion of a
MEMBER relation , yielding ( SINGLEx OFFICE ( AND ( BOSTONIAN x )   ( MULTIPLE y PERSON ( AND ( WORKyx )   ( SINGLE z PERSON ( AND ( MEMBER zy )   ( CALL z ) ) ) ) ) ) ) in which all incompatibilities are resolved . Proceeding in the same manner , the analysis of the sentence ? The Boston office makes an excur-sion ? yields a similar result  , with only two minor deviations , partially grounded in the semantic difference between ' calling ' and ' excursion making':  ( 1 ) The variable z is quantified by MULTIPLE instead of SINGLE  , and ( 2 ) the expression ( SUBSET zy ) replaces ( MEMBER zy )  . 
However , obtaining precisely this representation , that is , performing the insertion of the SUBSET relation , additionally requires some sort of pragmatic knowledge : typically not all members of an organization participate in events such as excursions  . Nevertheless , suitable ways to represent such domain-dependent pieces of knowledge adequately are delicate  . 
Finally , sentence (9) , ? Which airlines serve food from New York to Boston ??  , shows how chained metonymic extensions are handled :  ( WHx AIRLINE ( AND ( SERVExFOOD )   ( SOURCE xNEWYORK )   ( GOAL xBOSTON ) ) ) The first metonymic extension , based on the lexicon entry for ' airline ' ( see Figure 3 )  , tentatively inserts ' flights ' linked to ' airline ' via an 
ORGANIZE relation , and yields ( WHx AIRLINE ( MULTIPLEyFLIGHT ( AND ( ORGANIZE x y )   ( SERVE y FOOD )   ( SOURCE y NEWY ORK )   ( GOALyBOSTON ) ) ) ) and the final operation based on the lexicon entry for ' flight '  ( see Figure 3 ) leads to a similar extension , inserting'person'related to ' flight'via a CARRY relation :  ( WHx AIRLINE ( MULTIPLEyFLIGHT ( AND ( ORGANIZE x y )   ( SOURCE y NEWY ORK )   ( GOALyBOSTON )   ( MULTIPLE zPERSON ( AND ( CARR Yyz )   ( SERVE zFOOD ) ) ) ) ) ) Note the distinguished treatment of the predications containing the variable which represents the phrase to be extended  , as opposed to the previous examples . In all cases discussed so far , appearances of this variable are replaced by the new variable introduced in the course of an extension  . Here , replacing y by z in the second extension step is only carried out in  ( SERVE y FOOD )  , while y remains unchanged in ( SOURCE y NEWY ORK ) and ( GOALyBOSTON )   . This is because SOURCE and GOAL can be established as properties of flights  , while CARRY needs a further extension to ' person ' to be connected appropriately  . Building explicit logical forms in this way demonstrates a number of achievements over other methods : ? Scoping of variables reflects their dependencies in the event they are involved in  . 
? More referents than just the real and the literal referent may be introduced  , through chained metonymic extensions or through member-ship/subset insertions  . 
? An additional referent may provide a proper place to relate sentence complements  . 
Note , that there is a scoping difference between ? one and the same person eating several fruit dumplings ? and ? several persons sharing a meat plate ?  , which contrasts Stallard's approach . 
Finally , we have to admit that this procedure is overgenerating  , as it does not take into account the restrictions imposed on the use of metonymic expressions discussed in Section  3  . The procedure is cooperative in the sense that it attempts to interpret a given metonymic expression  , but it is not strong enough to distinguish felicity or infe-licity of a metonymic expression  , which may be due to various lexical and pragmatic factors  . 
6 Impacts on Reference Resolution
Empirically supported by the considerable number of examples discussed in section  3  , our approach is able to explain more pronominal references to metonymic expressions than others : ? Reference to literal and intended referents is possible in an increasing number of cases  . 
? Pronominal reference in plural form may ha-ve as antecedents distinguished sets of entities  . 
? Crosslanguage differences in the treatment of intersentential pronominal reference exist  . 
In order to express scoping relations among sets properly  , the logical forms representing metonymic expressions with entities of cardinality greater than one must deviate from Stallard's methods  . According to Stallard , pronominal reference to literal and real referents is regulated by their scope  , which distinguishes referential from predicative kinds of metonymy  . Unfortunately , this realization of metonymic extension is incompatible with the common use of scoping  . 
However , we believe that Stallards distinction is in some sense artificial  , because the felicity of pronominal reference seems to be more complex and influenced by other factors than scoping  . 
For example , the sentence ? the hams and wich is waiting for his check ? can be followed by some information useful to a novice waiter : ? It costs  2$  . ? Moreover , the message ? The Boston office called ? can be followed by the remark ? He spo-keangrily ? in some plausible contexts  . Hence , it does not seem to be referential in accessibility which makes many similar examples sound odd  , but the rare occurrence and the low coherence in neutral contexts  . For example , it is usually of minor interest whether the person calling on behalf of the Boston office is angry himself  ; it is the attitude of the responsible representatives at the office that is usually more interesting  . 
Given these pieces of evidence , reference resolution is supported by the explicit logical form built through our techniques  , and it is additionally guided as follows:
Intrasentential reference
Possessive pronouns always relate to the intended referent  . Since possessive pronouns in the same sentence agree with the real referent in English  , while they agree with the literal referent in most other languages  , only English sentences contain information about cardinality and gender of the intended referent  . For example , the sentence ' the fruit dumplings is waiting for his check ' carries the additional implication that there is one male person who wants to pay  . 
Intersentential reference
Reference through personal pronouns is possible to the literal and to the real referent  , and to referents of the same sort but with possibly different cardinality as the real referent  . Thus , all entities involved in a metonymic expression in its appearance in the explicit logical form are potential antecedents  , except to internal elements of a metonymic chain . For example , following the sentence ? The Boston office called  ?  , pronominal reference is possible to the office ( the literal referent )  , to the caller ( the real referent ) , and to the people at the office ( differing from the caller by number only )  . However , ' the flights ' appearing in the logical form representing the sentence ? Which airlines serve dietfood from New York to Boston ?? are not pronominally accessible  . 
7 Conclusion
In this paper , we have presented an approach to deal with cardinality aspects of metonymic extensions to nouns  . We have discussed a variety of constellations with pronominal references to implicitly related items  , sometimes associated with subtle conditions , focusing on English , also including some language specificities . In order to build explicit logical forms with cardinality specifications  , we have extended entries in Pustej-ovsky's Generative Lexicon by default quantifier specifications  . Through exploiting these entries , metonymic extensions are introduced on the basis of events represented in the roles of the Qualia structure  , and member or subset relations are introduced on the basis of the associated quantifier specification  . Our method for building explicit logical forms challenges Stallard's distinction of predicative and referential readings of metonymic expressions : it produces scopings that reflect proper quantifier dominance relations rather than pronominal accessibility conditions  , and it allows for additional cases of pronominal reference  . In addition , our method enables a more precise attachment of contextual specifications to related entities  , and it supports reference resolution to metonymically related entities  . 
References ( Fass , 1991) Dan Fass . met *: A Method for Discrimina-ting Metonymy and Metaphor by Computer  . 
Computational Linguistics 17(1), pp . 49-90, 1991.
( Fliegner , 1988) Michael Fliegner . HOKUS KOPUS-Verw endung terminologischen Wissens beider Ana-lysevon Quantorenskopus und Distributivit?t  . In
Proc . of GWAI-88, pp . 112-117, 1988.
( Grosz et al1988) Barbara Grosz , Doug Appelt , Paul Martin , and Fernando Pereira . TEAM : An Experiment in the Design of Transportable Natural-Langu-age Interfaces  . Artificial Intelligence 32, pp .  173-243, 1987 . 
( Hobbs et al1993) Jerry Hobbs , Mark Stickel , Doug Appelt , and Paul Martin . Interpretation as Abduction . Artificial Intelligence , pp .  69-142, 1993 . 
( Horacek 1994) Helmut Horacek . Some Issues in Dealing with Metonymy . In Proc . of KONVENS-94, pp . 171-180, Vienna , Austria , 1994 . 
( Horacek 1996) Helmut Horacek . On Expressing Meto-nymic Relations in Multiple Languages  . Machine
Translation 11, pp . 109-158, 1996.
( Kayser 1988) Daniel Kayser . What Kind of Thing is a Concept . Computational Intelligence 4(2), pp .  158-165, 1988 . 
( Lakoff and Johnson 1980) George Lakoff and M.
Johnson . Metaphors We Live By . Univ . of Chicago
Press , 1980.
( Markert and Hahn 1997) Katja Markert and Udo Hahn . 
On the Interaction of Metonymies and Anaphora . In Proc . of IJCAI97, pp . 1010-1015, Nagoya , Japan , 1997 . 
(Nunberg 1995) Geoffrey Nunberg . Transfers of Meaning . Journal of Semantics 12, pp .  109-132,
Oxford University Press , 1995.
( Pustejovsky 1991) James Pustejovsky . The Generative Lexicon . Computational Linguistics 17(4), pp .  409-441, 1991 . 
( Pustejovsky and Bouillon 1995) James Pustejovsky , and P . Bouillon . Aspectual Coercion and Logical Polysemy . Journal of Semantics 12, pp .  133-162,
Oxford University Press , 1995.
( Sowa 1992) John Sowa . Logical Structures in the Lexicon . In J . Pustejovsky , S . Bergler ( eds . ): Lexical Semantics and Knowledge Representation , pp . 39-60, Springer , 1992 . 
( Stallard 1993) David Stallard . Two Kinds of Meto-nymy . In Proc . of ACL93, pp . 87-94, Columbus,
Ohio , USA , 1993.
