Computation of modifier scope in NP by a language -neutral method 

Richard CAMPBELL
Microsoft Research
1Microsoft Way
Redmond , WA , USA 98052



The relative logical scope of multiple modifiers within NP is often semantically significant  . This paper proposes a structurally based method for computing the relative scope of such modifiers  , based on their order , type , and syntactic complexity . The algorithm is language-neutral , in that it works with minimal errors for a wide range of languages without language-specific stipulations  . 


Noun phrases quite commonly have multiple modifiers  , including quantifiers , attributive adjective phrases , relative clauses , possessors , appositives and the like . As frequently noted in the literature ( e . g . , Shaw and Hatzivassiloglou ,  1999) , the linear order of modifiers can signify their logical scope  ( though other factors are involved , too ) , as in the English examples ( 1 ) and ( 2 )   ( bracketing indicates logical scope ) :  ( 1 ) my [ favorite [ new movie ]] ( 2 ) my [ new [ favorite movie ]] In ( 1 ) favorite modifies the phrase new movie ; hence the NP refers to my favorite among the new movies  ( there may be an old movie I like better )  ; in (2) new modifies favorite movie ; hence the NP refers to my favorite movie , which has just become my favorite . 
The computation of the scope of modifiers is of inherent linguistic interest : it is necessary for determining the correct interpretation of NPs like  ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  . It follows that it is potentially useful in any application that may depend on such an interpretation  . In addition , for multilingual applications such as transfer -based machine translation  ( MT )   ( as discussed for example by Richardson et al ( 2001 ) ) modifier scope may itself be used as an abstract  , language-neutral representation of their surface configuration  , including linear order . The generation component of the MT application could then make use of scope information  , perhaps in addition to scope-independent ordering conventions  ( Malouf ,  2000) , to generate the modifiers in the correct order . 
The focus of the current paper is a method for computing the relative scope of modifiers based on structural information  , which works independently of any particular language  ; that is , the same algorithm that computes the scope of the modifiers in the English NP  ( 3 ) also correctly computes modifier scope in ( 4 )  , its French translation , even though the two examples do not have exactly parallel surface structures :  ( 3 ) the [ twenty-ninth [ American state ]] ( 4 ) le[vingt-neuvi?me [? tatam?ricain ]] the twenty-ninth state American The proposed algorithm considers several structural factors in addition to linear order  , including the type and internal structure of the modifiers themselves  . The algorithm described here is currently implemented in the NLP W in system at Microsoft Research  ( Heidorn ,  2000) . 
The paper is organized as follows : Section 1 examines the various structural factors that determine modifier scope  , and a preliminary algorithm for modifier scope assignment is proposed  ; in Section 2 , we compare the predictions of the algorithm to a diverse set of examples from six languages  , and propose a revised algorithm ; Section 3 considers some related work ; and
Section 4 is a conclusion.
1 Modifier scope
English examples like ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) seem to show that linear order is a principal factor in determining the scope of modifiers  . Examination of a wider range of examples from a variety of languages makes it clear that matters are not that simple  . In this section , we explore some ways in which strict linear order is not sufficient to determine the scope of modifiers  . 
1.1 Order of postnominal modifiers
Strictly speaking , linear order plays only an indirect role in scope assignment  , the relevant ordering factor being distance from the head noun : all else being equal  , modifiers that are farther from the head noun in the surface structure have scope over modifiers that are closer to the head  . 
Linear order plays a different role in determining scope  , depending on whether the modifiers precede or follow the head noun  ; this is illustrated by the Spanish examples ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) :  ( 5 ) una[[monedaamericana]falsa]acoinAmerican counterfeit ? a counterfeit American coin ?  ( 6 ) una [[ moned a falsa]americana ]? an American counterfeit coin ? The NPs in  ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) differ only in modifier order and indeed this reflects their relative scope  ; but unlike the prenominal modifiers in ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  , the postnominal modifiers in ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) have a scope order that is the reverse of their linear order :  ( 5 ) refers to an American coint hat is counterfeit , e . g . a fake half-dollar , perhaps produced in Canada ; (6) refers to a counterfeit coin from America , e . g . a fake Canadian dollar produced in the U . S . 
The difference in the way that linear order of pre - and postnominal modifiers determines scope makes it clear that in a multilingual application such as MT  , it is not sufficient merely to record the order of modifiers  , since the order must be reversed going e . g . from Spanish to English . A more straightforward way to record the information stored in the linear order of modifiers in the source language would be to record their relative distance from the head noun  . Given the frequent occurrence in many languages of NPs with both pre - and postnominal modifiers  , as in (4) , above , this can only be accomplished by recording the logical scope of the modifiers  . 
1.2 Quantifier-like adjectives
Relative distance from the head is only obvious in cases of multiple prenominal or multiple postnominal modifiers  . In many languages , however , it is relatively common for an NP to contain both pre - and postnominal modifiers  , as in (4) . In such a case , the notion of relative distance from the head is unavailable as a guide to relative scope  . The following examples illustrate the problem : ( 7 ) the [ heaviest [ isotope found in nature ]] ( 8 ) a [[ new domain ] devoted to insects and worms] The prenominal adjective in  ( 7 ) has wider scope than the postnominal participial phrase  ; thus the NP refers to the heaviest member of the set of isotopes of some element that are found in nature  , and note . g . to the heavies ti so tope over all of that element . In (8) on the other hand , the postnominal participial phrase has wider scope than the prenominal adjective : the NP refers to a new domain or classification  ( invertebrates )  , which is devoted to insects and worms , and not , e . g . , to a new member of the set of domains so devoted . 
The relevant difference between these examples is the prenominal modifier : superlatives  , along with comparatives , ordinals , certain other adjectives that are quantifier - or determiner-like  , such as another , certain , numerous , and only ( all the preceding are henceforth referred to as ? q-like adjectives ?  )  , along with quantifiers take widerscope than most postnominal modifiers  , while everyday modifiers like new generally take narrower scope when prenominal  . Assuming that the class of q-like adjectives can be identified  , a scope assignment algorithm needs to take this into account as well  . 
1 . 3 Nonrestrictive postnominal modifiers Nonrestrictive modifiers generally take very wide scope  , typically having wider scope than any restrictive modifiers or quantifiers  ; compare (7) , above , with (9): (9) the [[ heavies tisotope] , which is found in nature]Unlike (7) , this NP does refer to the heavies ti so top e ( of some element )  , and not just to the heavies tiso tope found in nature  , because the nonrestrictive relative clause has wider scope than the prenominal adjective  . 
In English and other languages , nonrestrictive postnominal relative clauses , adjective phrases , and participial clauses are easily identifiable by the preceding comma or other structural cues  . 
Whether a modifier is restrictive or nonrestrictive is clearly relevant to the computation of its scope relative to other modifiers  ; however in some languages , notably German and Japanese , there are often no reliable structural cues to whether a relative clause is restrictive or not  . This part of the scope computation algorithm can therefore only be expected to work in languages where this information is available in the input  . 
1 . 4 Competing principles of scope assignment In most cases  , the various principles of scope assignment outlined in this section are not in conflict  . For instance , q-like adjectives , when prenominal , typically precede other prenominal adjectives . In some cases this is not true , however , and in many such cases , relative distance from the head noun is a principle of last resort only  . A good illustration of this fact comes from Japanese  , where all relative clauses are prenominal , and often precede other prenominal modifiers , such as adjective phrases and quantifiers ; this is illustrated by the following examples : ( 10 )   higai-nia-ttashuyou-natoshidamage -DAT encountered major-ADN cities ' major cities that were damaged ?  ( 11 )   sakana-gataberuara yuruesafish-NOM eat-PRES all bait ' all bait which fisheat ' In  ( 10 ) the relative clause has wider scope than the following adjective  , but in ( 11 ) the quantifier arayuru ? all ? has widerscope than the preceding relative clause  . The principle that such adjectives and quantifiers are assigned widerscope takes precedence over the principle that assigns scope on the basis of relative distance from the head noun  . 
1 . 5 Algorithm for computing modifier scope ? First pass Based on these observations  , a simple , language-neutral algorithm can be formulated to compute modifier scope based on structural factors  . 
As a first step , we factor all modifiers into three categories : nonrestrictive modifiers  , quantifiers and q-like adjectives , and other modifiers . For practical purposes , nonrestrictive modifiers are limited to postnominal relative clauses  , adjective phrases , and participial clauses , that have some structural indication of their nonrestrictiveness  , such as being preceded by a comma ; in principle , however , any nonrestrictive modifier should fall into this category  . Q-like adjectives include comparatives , superlatives , ordinals , and modifiers ( e . g . only ) that are marked in the dictionary as being able to occur before a determiner  . Also , if a q-like adjective is prenominal , then any other adjective that precedes it is treated as if it were q-like  ; if the q-like adjective is postnominal , then any other adjective that follows it is treated as if q-like  . In this paper , PPs , possessors and appositive NPs are not treated . The algorithm is described in ( I):
I . Computation of modifier scope 1 . nonrestrictive modifiers have widerscope than all other groups  ;  2 . quantifiers and q-like adjectives have wider scope than other modifiers not covered in  ( I . 1); 3 . within each group , assign wider scope to postnominal modifiers over prenominal modifiers  ;  4 . among postnominal modifiers in the same group , or among prenominal modifiers in the same group , assign wider scope to modifiers farther from the head noun  . 

Consider the NP in (12) , which , though awkward , will serve as illustration of how ( I ) works : ( 12 ) [[ two [ other [[ counterfeit [ American coins ]] produced here ]]]  , which I saved]The nonrestrictive ( set off by commas ) relative clause which I save d is assigned widest scope by  ( I . 1) ; the quantifier two and the q-like adjective other have wider scope than the remaining modifiers  ( I . 2), and two has wider scope than other ( I . 4) ; the participial clause produced here has wider scope than counterfeit and American  ( I . 3); finally , counterfeit has wider scope than American ( I . 4) . 
For a more realistic illustration , consider again (3) and (4) , repeated here: ( 3 ) the [ twenty-ninth [ American state ]] ( 4 ) le[vingt-neuvi?me [? tatam?ricain ]] the twenty-ninth state American In both  ( 3 ) and ( 4 )  , the ordinal is assigned widerscope than American /am?ricain  , regardless of the latter?s position in the NP , by principle ( I . 2) . 
Finally , consider again (5) , repeated here: ( 5 ) una[[monedaamericana]falsa]acoinAmerican false By  ( I . 4), falsa is assigned wider scope than american a . 
2 Examination of broader range of examples The algorithm in  ( I ) is motivated by a small set of examples ; a broader range of examples is needed to really determine whether  ( I )  , and especially its claim to language-neutrality , is viable . The purpose is not to provide a statistical measure of the accuracy of the algorithm  , but simply to provide a set of examples that is larger  , more diverse and more realistic than could have been devised by introspection  . 
2.1 Testing ( I)
Initial sets of examples from six languages , Chinese , English , French , German , Japanese and Spanish , were collected ; the Chinese examples were taken from DuZhe ( ? Reader ? )  , for all other languages , the examples were taken from Encarta Encyclopedia  . To be selected , sentences had to contain an NP with exactly one prenominal and one postnominal modifier  ( thus ( I . 4) was not directly tested ) . Several hundred such examples were then given to teams of two native speaker linguists per language to determine  ( a ) whether it made any difference which modifier was assigned wider scope  , and ( b ) if so , which one had wider scope ; for an NP to make it into the final set of examples  , both annotators had to agree on both ( a ) and ( b )  . Annotators aimed for approximately 100 examples for which the answer to ( a ) was positive ; in practice , between 50 and 100 examples for each language made it into the final set  . 
The annotated examples were then analyzed using the NLP W in system  , which incorporates this algorithm , the results manually compared to the annotations , and differences ( errors ) examined . In some cases , errors could be attributed to misanalysis or other deficiencies of the system  , independently of the scope assignment algorithm ; these might include syntactic errors ( e . g . English court favorite analyzed with court as the head noun and favorite as a postnominal adjective  )  , or lexical/morphological problems ( e . g . Sp . 
numeroso ? numerous ? not recognized as a quantifier  , failure to treat Fr . Premier ministre as a single noun , etc . ) . Overall , the results were quite good for English ( 3 errors in 97 examples , including system errors ) , German (6/81) and Chinese (2/66) , mediocre for Spanish (13/60) and Japanese (15/59) , and poor for French (46/78) . 
In addition to system errors , certain patterns emerged . The most obvious one was that , in many languages , prenominal adjectives meaning ? same ? or ? different ?  , which should take widerscope than a nonrestrictive postnominal modifier  , were assigned narrower scope according to ( I . 3) ; a good example from Spanish is given below : ( 13 ) el [ mismo [ a?o que contrajo matrimonio con
Carmen Polo ]] ? the same year that he contracted marriage with Carmen Polo ? Adjectives meaning ? same ?  , ? different ? and ? other ? have much in common with comparatives  ; for example , English same , different , and other can take as - or than-complements . Our system does not currently encode this similarity in any systematic way  , but if it did so , examples like ( 13 ) would be handled correctly by ( I . 2) . 1 2 . 2 Syntactic complexity An unexpected pattern among the errors  , however , had to do with the internal structure of postnominal modifiers  . The French examples ( 14 ) and ( 15 ) have the same prenominal adjective : ( 14 ) de [ nouvelles [ valeurs culture lles ]] new values cultural ? new cultural values ?  ( 15 ) un [[ nouveau domaine]consacr ? aux insecte set aux vers ]? a new domain devoted to insects and worms ? The relevant difference in this case is in the postnominal modifier : in  ( 14 )  , the postnominal adjective is syntactically simple  , containing no syntactic dependents of its own , while in ( 15 ) the postnominal participial clause is complex , containing a complement prepositional phrase . 
(I . 3 ) incorrectly assigns wider scope to the postnominal modifier than to the prenominal modifier in  ( 14 )  ; an unexpectedly large proportion of the French and Spanish errors from this example set were of this type  . 
This leads to a revision of the scope assignment algorithm that treats syntactically simple  ( unmodified ) postnominal modifiers as a special case , getting assigned narrower scope than regular prenominal modifiers : II  . Computation of modifier scope , revised 1 . nonrestrictive modifiers have widerscope than all other groups  ;  2 . quantifiers and q-like adjectives have wider scope than other modifiers not covered in  ( II . 1); 3 . syntactically complex postnominal modifiers that are not relative clauses have  1 The special status of such adjectives has been noted in other contexts : For example  , Hawkins ( 1978 ) groups same together with superlatives into a class of ? unexplanatory ? modifiers  ; Vieira and Poesio (2000) , extending this class to include only and a few others  , make use of them in identifying discourse-new definite descriptions  . 
wider scope than other modifiers not covered by ( II . 1-2); 4 . prenominal modifiers not covered by ( II . 1-3 ) have wider scope than other modifiers not covered by  ( II . 1-3); 5 . otherwise , within each group , assign wider scope to postnominal modifiers over prenominal modifiers  ;  6 . among postnominal modifiers in the same group , or among prenominal modifiers in the same group , assign wider scope to modifiers farther from the head noun  . 

The difference between ( I ) and ( II ) is in ( II . 3) and ( II . 4) , which ensure that syntactically complex postnominal modifiers have widerscope than non -quantificational prenominal ones  , and that prenominal modifiers have widerscope than syntactically simple postnominal ones  . In this case , ? syntactically complex ? means ( a ) if not a coordinate structure , then there are nonhead constituents ; and ( b ) if a coordinate structure , then at least one of the conjuncts is syntactically complex  . 
Implementing the revised algorithm ( II ) into the system reduced the number of French and Spanish errors in the example set considerably : French went from  46 errors in 78 examples to 2  ; Spanish went from 13/60 to 5 ; all other languages remained essentially the same . 
To ensure that the revision from ( I ) to ( II ) was not tailored specifically to the example set , a second set of randomly selected examples were annotated as before  ; the examples were then analyzed using the system incorporating  ( II )  , and the results compared to the annotation . 
2.3 Discussion
The results bear out the essential correctness of ( II )  , while at the same time highlighting areas in which further refinement is possible  . For each language there were just a handful of errors in this example set : Chinese had  3 in 57 total examples , English 10/98 , French 4/55 , German 4/45 , Spanish 8/96 and Japanese 8/55 . Since the test is not meant to be a statistical measure of accuracy  , it is important to examine the errors . Two English and two Spanish errors were system errors of the kind described in Section  2  . 1 . The problem of identifying nonrestrictive relative clauses arose as well  , accounting for one English and one German error , and possibly all the Japanese errors . 
Of the remainder , both the French and Spanish sets contained errors which suggest simple modifications to  ( II )  , e . g . where both the prenominal and postnominal modifiers were q-like  , and for which ( II . 5 ) incorrectly assigns wider scope to the postnominal  . Another error that could be handled by a simple refinement of  ( II ) is Sp . losgrandes reba?os de ovej as no estabula dos , ? the large unstabled herds of sheep ? ; in this case the postnominal adjective phrase no estabula dos is treated as syntactically complex  , and incorrectly assigned scope wider than grandes by  ( II . 3); it seems simple enough to modify ( II . 3 ) to take account of negative morphemes and the like  . 
Another category of error that suggests a further refinement is suggested by the Spanish example  ( 16 ) and by English ( 17 ) :  ( 16 ) una[[quintacl?usula]que notuvoefecto]a fifth clause that not took effect  ( 17 ) [[ longer poems ] written from 1789 on ] In both cases , ( II . 2 ) incorrectly assigns widerscope to the prenominal adjective than to the postnominal one  . Examples such as these suggest that q-like adjectives  , or at least comparatives and ordinals , should be treated as in ( II . 2) ( i . e . , as taking wider scope than other modifiers ) only in NPs that are definite . One Spanish , one English , and two German examples of this kind occurred in this example set  ; since there are not many errors of this kind , it is not clear how much would be gained from this modification  . 
Aside from such systematic errors , the French set contained only one error that is irrede emable  ; i . e . , which ( II ) could not handle even with perfect input , without being supplemented by lexically specific , and hence language-specific , rules ; the Spanish set contained only three irrede emable errors  ; English had three , and German one . 
While it is worth noting that ( II ) is not without counterexamples , it is significant that true counterexamples are evidently rare enough in actually occuring text  , at least when compared to examples for which ( II ) predicts the correct scope assignment , that ( II ) appears to be very promising as a means for computing modifier scope in arbitrary languages  . 
2.4 Why complexity ?
It is not clear exactly why the syntactic complexity of a postnominal modifier affects its scope relative to other modifiers in NP  . It may be significant that postnominal modifiers that are themselves modified tend to be participial or relative clauses  , rather than adjective phrases . Participial and relative clauses are always intersecting in their interpretation  , meaning that the denotation of the noun + modifier construction is the intersection of the set denoted by the noun and the set denoted by the modifier  ; adjectives , on the other hand , are often non-intersecting ( Keenan and Faltz ,  1985) . 
It is possible then that a deeper principle underlies  ( II . 3) , namely that intersecting modifiers take wider scope than non-intersecting ones  . 
It remains to be explained why prenominal adjectives typically take widerscope than syntactically simple postnominal ones  . One possible explanation is that N+un modified Adj combinations  , such as Fr . valeurs culture lles in (14) , are often analyzed by native speakers as a kind of compound  ; i . e . , as though the Adj were incorporated into the N to form a complex word  . 
Typically the parts of a complex word cannot be individually syntactically modified  . It is to be expected , then , that a prenominal modifier such as nouvelles in ( 14 ) would be unable to modify valeurs by itself , but must modify the whole compound . Moreover , it is to be expected that the adjective in the N + Adj compound could not have modifiers  . Consequently , a noun+[adjective+PP] construction , such as Fr . huiles originaires desr?gionsm ? diterran?ennes ? oils originating from mediter rane an regions ?  , could not be analyzed as a compound ; instead the postnominal adjective phrase would have to be a true phrasal modifier  , taking wider scope than a prenominal modifier such as c?l ? bres ? famous ?  , according to the general principles in ( II ) . 
This account is purely speculative , of course , and thus far untested . Other kinds of explanation for ( II . 3) are possible as well , but limitations of space preclude substantial discussion of this issue  . 
3 Related work
Copestake et al ( 1995 ) briefly address the issue of adjective scope in an NP such as a fierce black cat  . 
Since both adjectives are intersecting in this case  , their relative scope is semantically irrelevant ( a black fierce cat , though in felicitous , would mean the same thing ) . Since a translation of this NP might have a different structure  , e . g . Spanish gat of erozy negrol it . ? cat fierce and black ? , Copestake et alargue that the logical form ( LF ) for such an NPought to be flattened ( i . e . , no scope assigned to the adjectives ) , so as to ensure that the NP and its translation do not have syntactically different LFs  , which is required for system-internal reasons . 
If this conclusion is justified , it poses a problem for the approach taken in this paper  , since ( II ) assigns widerscope to fierce . Most dictionaries do not mark adjectives according to whether they are intersecting or not  , nor do we know of any large corpora that are annotated in this way  ; therefore , it seems unlikely that ( II ) could be reliably turned off just in those cases where scope assignment is logically unnecessary  . 
Copestake et al?s conclusion is based on the system-internal assumption that transfer-based MT requires the LF of the input  ( e . g . ga to ferozy negro ) to have the same syntactic structure as the LF of the output  ( e . g . fierce black cat ) . However , a transfer-based MT system in which transfer rules are learned from aligned corpora  , such as described by Richardson et al (2001) , does not have this requirement ; hence the problem Copestake et aldiscuss does not arise  . 
4 Conclusion
The fact that ( II ) works so well across a variety of languages is of inherent linguistic interest  , as it suggests that the crosslinguistic variation in word order within NP  , while considerable , is nevertheless subject to universal principles that enable the relative scope of modifiers to be recovered  . These principles take account primarily of the type of modifier  , but also of their placement relative to one another and  , at least in the case of postnominal restrictive modifiers  , their internal structure , assigning wider scope to modifiers that are themselves modified  , perhaps because they are intersecting . Application of the algorithm to more languages would of course be required to fully substantiate this claim  . 
The success of ( II ) is of substantial practical interest , as well , since it does not make unreasonable demands on the  . For example , although ( II . 3 ) may ultimately derive from a deeper principle that assigns widerscope to intersecting modifiers  , it is not necessary to identify modifiers as ( non- ) intersecting for ( II . 3) to work , since syntactic complexity works well enough . To work correctly ,   ( II ) requires quantifiers to be distinguished from adjectives  , adjectives to be identified as superlative , comparative , ordinal or as able to occur before a determiner , and postnominal modifiers to be marked as nonrestrictive  . The first two requirements are reasonable things to expect of any parser  ; the third requirement is not easily met in all languages  , but even in those languages where nonrestrictives are not easily identifiable  , ( II ) works reasonable well . 


I would like to thank my colleagues in the NLP group at MSR  , especially Mike Carlson and
Hisami Suzuki , for their help.


Copestake A . , Flickinger D . , Malouf R . , Riehemann S . 
and Sag I .   ( 1995 ) Translation using Minimal Recursion Semantics . In ? Proceedings of TMI6, ?
Leuven , Belgium.
Hawkins J . (1978) Definiteness and Indefiniteness . 
Croom Helm , London , 316p.
Heidorn G . E . (2000) Intelligent Writing Assistance . In ? Handbook of Natural Language Processing ?, R . 
Dale et al , ed ., Marcel Dekker , New York , pp.

Keenan E . L . and Faltz L . M . (1985) Boolean Semantics for Natural Language . D . Reidel Publishing Co . ,
Dordrecht , 387p.
Malouf R .   ( 2000 ) The order of prenominal adjectives in natural language generation  . In ? Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the ACL , ? p p .  85-92 . 
Richardson S . , Dolan W . , Menezes A . and Pinkham J . 
(2001 ) Achieving commercial-quality translation with example-based methods  . In ? Proceedings of the VIII th MT Summit ? , Santiago de Compostela , Spain . 

Shaw J . and Hatzivassiloglou V . (1999) Ordering among premodifiers . In ? Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the ACL , ? p p .  135-143 . 
Vieira R . and Poesio M .   ( 2000 ) An Empirically Based System for Processing Definite Descriptions  . 
Computational Linguistics 26/4, pp . 539-593.
