The Chinese Aspect System and its Semantic Interpretation 
Guowen Yang and John A . Bateman
FB10, Sprachund Literaturwissenschaften
Bremen University , 28334 Germany
gwyang@uni-bremen.debateman@uni-bremen.de

Abstract : Motivated by a systematic
representation of the Chinese aspect forms that explores their intrinsic semantics and temporal logical relations  , we are constructing a Chinese aspect system network based on systemic functional grammar and implemented using the multilingual generator KPML  . In this paper , we introduce the basic simple primary aspect forms and a set of secondary types of the unmarked-durative aspect in our Chinese aspect system  , describe the semantic temporal relations of complex aspect in terms of temporal logic theories  , and propose principled semantic conditions for aspect combination  . Finally , we give a brief explanation of the system implementation  . 
1. Motivation
Chinese aspect is a traditional area of research that has always brought up questions and confusion for both theoretical and computational linguists  . Our own practical motivation for exploring this are a addresses two concerns  . First , most existing research achievements in Chinese aspect have interpreted the semantics of Chinese aspect in intuitive and general terms rather than in terms of temporal logic  theories1  ; the latter is however crucial for computational implementation  . Second , Chinese linguists traditionally focus their attention on simple primary aspect  ( simple aspect ) forms , but make no efforts either theoretically or computationally to deal with the large variety of complex aspects  . Although the frequency of appearance of complex aspects is not as high as that of simple primary aspect types  , they nevertheless play an important role in the Chinese aspect system and cannot be ignored  . 
To meet these problems , we are constructing a complete Chinese aspect system in which  1 Exception to this are Smith ( 1991 ) and Dai Y J ( 1997 ) who have investigated Chinese aspect in terms of temporal logic theories  . Their studies have focused particularly on simple aspect forms however  . 
all aspect expressions , including both simple primary aspect forms and complex aspect forms  , are systematically organized . We are implementing the system using the KPML multilingual generator  ( Bateman ,  1997) , interpreting the intrinsic semantics of each aspect form in terms of existing temporal logic theories  . In this paper we focus on the generation of complex aspect  . 
2. The overview of Chinese complex aspect
Both Chinese and English have complex aspect forms  . Halliday ( 1976 ) describes for tyeight possible forms of English tense and elaborates the ways in which the complex tense forms are combined  . In Halliday?s tense theory , the complex tense forms of English are recursively built up from primary tense to secondary tense  , toter tiary tense , etc . 
Compared with English , the Chinese aspect system 2 is rather different . In the Chinese aspect system , the combination of individual aspects is much more semantically restricted and much less grammatically regular than that in English  . As a consequence , it gives rise to more difficulties in both theoretical explanation and practical implementation  . 
We look into the details of this below.
We propose that the Chinese aspect system has basically seventeen simple primary aspect  forms3  . They are shown diagrammatically in
Figure 1.
2 Chinese has no morphological tense markers.
Tense in Chinese is realized lexically.
3 It is our opinion that the Chinese aspect system is actually composed of both aspect morphemes  ( - le , - zhe , - guo 4 , etc . ) and aspect adverbials ( Yang , 1999, 2001) . 
name form name form unmarked-perfect ?? ( yi3jing1 ) +V+? ( le ) unmarked-realized V + ? ( le ) marked-perfect ?? ( yi3jing1 ) + Vunmarked-remote-experiential ?? ( ceng2jing1 ) +V+? ( guo ) unmarked-experiential
V+? ( guo ) marked-remote-experiential ?? ( ceng2jing1 ) + V recent-past-existing V + ( N )  + ??  ( lai2zhe ) unmarked-durative V + ? ( zhe ) activity-durative ? ( zai4 ) + V long-durative ?? ( yi1zhi2 ) + V activity-progressive ?? ( zheng4zai4 ) + Vunmarked-progressive ? ( zheng 4 ) + V start-and-continue V+?? ( qi3lai2 ) continue-to-future V+?? ( xia4qu4 ) written-imminent-future-existing ??/?? ( jiang1yao4/ji2jiang1 ) + Vunmarked-future-existing ? ( jiang1 ) + V spoken-imminent-future-existing ??/? ( jiu4yao4/kuai4 ) + V Figure 1 . The simple primary aspect forms name & form example long-and-unmarked-durative ??  ( yi1zhi2 ) +V+? ( zhe )  ??????????  nuo4ke4si1   hao4   yi1zhi2   hang2xing2 zhe ( The Knox has been sailing all along . ) marked-remote-experiential-unmarked-durative ?? ( ceng2jing1 ) +V+? ( zhe )  ???????????  na4   fu2   hua4   ceng2jing1   zai4   zhe4er   gua4 zhe ( That picture was once hanging here . ) recent-past-existing-unmarked-durative
V+? ( zhe ) +?? ( lai2zhe )  ?????????????  na4   fu2   hu4   gang1cai2   zai4   zhe4er   gua4 zhe lai2zhe   ( That picture was hanging here just now . ) unmarked-realized-unmarked-durative
V+? ( zhe ) +? ( le )  ?????????????  ming2tian1   na4   fu2   hua4   jiu4   zai4   zhe4er   gua4 zhele ( That picture will be hanging here from tomorrow . ) unmarked-perfect-unmarked-durative ?? ( yi3jing1 ) +V+? ( zhe ) +? ( le )  ??????????????  na4   fu2   hua4   xian4zai4   yi3jing1   zai4   zhe4er   gua4 zhele ( That picture is already hanging here now . ) unmarked-future-existing-unmarked-durative ? ( jiang1 ) +V+? ( zhe )  ????????????  ming2tian1   na4   fu2   hua4   jiang1   zai4   zhe4er   gua4 zhe ( That picture will be hanging here tomorrow . ) unmarked-progressive-unmarked-durative ? ( zheng 4 ) +V+? ( zhe )  ????????????  na4   fu2   hua4   xian4zai4   zheng4   zai4   zhe4er   gua4 zhe ( That picture is hanging here now . ) Figure 2 . The secondary types of unmarked-durative aspect The ? V ? in the aspect forms denotes ? verb ?  ; the ?/? shows disjunction ; the name of each individual aspect was chosen based on its intuitive semantic function  . The unmarked-perfect aspect ??+ V + ? ( yi3jing1+V+le ) is regarded as a simple aspect because it has the same function as the marked-perfect aspect ??+ V  ( yi3jing1+V )  . They differ only lexically . The situation is the same for the unmarked-remote -experiential aspect ?? + V + ?  ( ceng2jing1+V+guo ) and the marked-remote-experiential aspect ??+ V ( ceng2jing1+V )  . The seventeen simple primary aspect forms belong to the three subsystems of perfective  , imperfective ( Comrie ,  1976 ) or future-existing 4 according to the semantic properties in individual cases  . Some simple primary aspect forms can combine to form various kinds of complex aspect  . We call a combination involving two types of simple primary aspect an aspect of secondary type  ; the combination with three types of simple primary aspect is an aspect of tertiary type  . 
By analogy , we also have an aspect of quaternary type ; this is the maximum possibility : no further types are attested  ( Yang ,  1999 ,  2001) . The combination capacities of different simple primary aspect forms differ  . 
For example , the simple primary aspect unmarked-durative V+ ?   ( V + zhe )  , which belongs to the subsystem of imperfective , combines with several other types of simple primary aspect to construct complex aspect forms as shown in Figure  2  . Some simple primary aspect forms , e . g . the simple primary aspect unmarked-experiential V  +?   ( V+guo )  , have a very restricted capacity to combine with other simple aspect forms to build complex aspect forms  . 
3. The semantic interpretation of
Chinese complex aspect
We briefly look into the profile of tense , aspect , and situation type , before examining closely the semantic temporal relations of complex aspect forms  . We adopt Comrie?s theoretical framework of tense and aspect  . 
? As far as tense is concerned , then , the reference point is typically the present moment  , and tenses locate situations either at the same time as the present moment  , or prior to the present moment , or subsequent to the present moment ?? ( Comrie ,  1985 , p . 14) . 
? Aspects are different ways of viewing the 4 It is controversial whether to include ? futurity ? within the aspect category  . We favor Halliday?s tense theory ( Halliday ,  1976) . We also agree with Bache?s viewpoint ? it seems to me not only convenient but also legitimate to accept future TEMPORALITY as a genuine member of the metacategory of tense ?  ( Bache ,  1995 , p .  266) . 
Compatible claims are also made by Dahl ( Dahl ,  1985 , p . 102-112) . Also see Gong Q-Y (1995) . 
internal temporal constituency of a situation ?.
( Comrie , 1976, p . 3 ) Aspect is determined by the type of process 5 ( in terms of systemic linguistics )  , the type of object , and the specific allocation of event initial time  , speaking time and reference time . The aspectual properties of different kinds of event may be generalized in terms of Vendler?s four situation types : states  , activities , accomplishments , and achievements ( Vendler ,  1967) . Situation types have nothing to do with the referential time of the event and are influenced only by process  , object , and the time point or time interval over which the event holds  . 
We define several predicates to be used to express temporal relations based on and slightly altering those of Allen  ( 1984 )  . The important ones are:
PRECEDE(t1, t2) ?( t1 < t2)
SAME(t1, t2) ?( t1 = t2)
FAR-PRECEDE(t1, t2) ?( t1?t2)
SHORTLY-PRECEDE(t1, t2) ?( t1^t2)
NEARLY-EQUAL(t1, t2) ?( t1?t2)
The predicates PRECEDE(t1, t2) and
SAME(t1 , t2) correspond to Allen?s predicates BEFORE(t1 , t2) and EQUAL(t1 , t2) respectively . The difference between Allen?s predicates and ours is that we use time points for definitions rather than time intervals  . The reason for this slight change is that when the system is going to generate an aspect expression  , either a simple aspect or a complex aspect , the break down into the relevant time points is often needed  . 
The predicate PRECEDE(t1 , t2 ) indicates that the time point t1 precedes the time point t2 on the time axis . The predicate SAME(t1 , t2 ) indicates that the time point t1 equals the time point t2 on the time axis . Three additional predicates are defined to meet the particular needs of expressing the temporal relations entailed by Chinese aspects  . The predicate FAR-PRECEDE(t1 , t2 ) indicates that the time point t1 precedes the time point t2 considerably on the time axis . The predicate SHORTLY-PRECEDE(t1 , t2 ) indicates that 5 ? A process consists potentially of three components :  ( i ) the process itself ; ( ii ) participants in the process ;   ( iii ) circumstances associated with the process . ? ( Halliday , 1985, p . 101 ) the time point t1 only shortly precedes the time point t2  . The predicate NEARLY-EQUAL(t1 , t2 ) indicates that the time point t1 lies close to the time point t2  . We define ti , tf 6 , tr , and ts as the event initial time , the event finishing time , the reference time , and the speaking time respectively . 
From a theoretical point of view , to generate complex aspect forms not only must the temporal relations of individual aspect forms and the complex aspect forms be correctly represented  , but the semantic requirements for the combination must also be met  . What determines the combining possibility between different aspect forms is their own intrinsic logical temporal attributes  . When the intrinsic logical temporal attributes of each aspect type are in harmony  , the two aspect forms can combine ; otherwise they cannot . We have observed the following principled conditions for this  . First , it is feasible to express the process in each individual aspect form before the combination is made  . Second , each individual aspect form has its own semantic function which is different from that of others  . 
Third , in a specific situation , when two different aspect forms combine , the reference time points of each aspect type may move according to the temporal attributes of the combined aspect ? however  , no matter how reference time points change , the event initial time must remain unique , i . e . there must only be a single event initial time to which the complex aspect refers  . If there is any conflict over this , the two aspects are incompatible with each other and the combination cannot be made  . Finally , the combination must be in a proper order . This means that the selection of the aspect which is to serve as primary aspect has important consequences  . We take two complex aspect forms as examples to illustrate these points  . 
The first example is the secondary aspect long-and -unmarked-durative ?? + V + ?  ( yi1zhi2+V + zhe )  . The combination is composed of two simple primary aspect forms : the unmarked-durative aspect V+?  ( V + zhe )   6 The tfhere not only refers to the event intrinsic terminating point  , which an event of accomplishment situation type usually has  , but it also refers to the time point at which an event of other situation types is terminated by some kind of outside force  . 
(UDR ) and the long-durative aspect ??+ V ( yi1zhi2+V )   ( LDR )  . Examples 1 ,   2 and 3 illustrate the two simple primary aspect forms and the complex aspect respectively  . 
1 ??? ? ?? ?  nuo4ke4si1   hao4   hang2xin2 zhethe Knox number sail UDR ( The Knox is sailing . )
The simple primary aspect of unmarked-durative is realized lexically by the marker ??  ( zhe ) ? . The unmarked-durative aspect indicates either a dynamic or static durative state of the situation  ; it means that the situation begins before the reference time and is continuing at the reference timepoint  . The temporal relations of the unmarked-durative aspect V + ?  ( V + zhe ) are : ti < tr and tr < tf . We presume further here , for present purpose , that tr = ts . Both ti and tf are unspecific time points : ti can be any time point before tr  , and tf can be any time point after tr . This is represented graphically in Figure 3 . 
titr = ts , tf Figure 3 . The temporal relations of the unmarked-durative aspect V + ?  ( V + zhe )   2  ??? ? ?? ??  nuo4ke4si1   hao4   yi1zhi2   hang2xing2 the Knox number LDR sail ( The Knox kept sailing until now . ) The simple primary aspect long-durative , which is realized lexically by the marker ??? ( yi1zhi2 ) ? , indicates a relatively long durative state of the situation  ; it means that the process holds over a relatively longtime duration from the event initial time to the event finishing time and that the event finishing time equals the reference time  . The temporal relations of the long-durative aspect ? ? + V  ( yi1zhi2+V ) are : ti?tf , and tr = tf = ts . 
This is represented graphically in Figure 4.
The dotted line denotes the long duration.
titr = ts = tf Figure 4 . The temporal relations of the long-durative aspect ? ? + V  ( yi1zhi2+V )   3  ??? ? ??  nuo4ke4si1   hao4   yi1zhi2 the Knox number LDR ??? hang2xing2 zhesail UDR ( The Knox has been sailing all along . ) In example 3 , because the event initial time ti of the unmarked -durative aspect V + ?  ( V + zhe ) precedes the reference time point and it is an unfixed time point which can at any point precede the reference time  , it can also be identical to the event initial time of the long-durative aspect ??+ V  ( yi1zhi2+V )  . 
The two individual aspect forms can share a unique event initial time so that a specific framework of temporal relations for the complex aspect can be established  . In this case , we say that the two individual aspect forms are compatible  ; the combination can be made . The complex aspect indicates along existing and continuing state of affairs with respect to the reference time  . The temporal relations of the long-and-unmarked -durative ?? + V + ?  ( yi1zhi2+V + zhe ) are then : ti?tr , tr = ts and tr < tf . This is represented graphically in Figure 5 . 
titr = tstf Figure 5 . The temporal relations of the complex aspect long -and-unmarked-durative ?? + V + ? Comparing Figure  5 with Figure 3 and Figure 4  , we can see that for the unmarked-durative aspect V + ?  ( V + zhe )  , the event initial time after the combination comes to ? far precede ? the reference time  . For the long-durative aspect ? ? + V ( yi1zhi2+V )  , the event finishing time does not equal the reference time any more  , which means that the situation is continuing . 
The simple aspect forms differ in terms of how restricted they are in their usage with particular situation types or process types  . In the design of the system network , it is necessary to arrange the logical dependencies such that less restricted aspect forms are made dependent on more restricted aspect forms  . 
This avoids potentially incompatible logical conditions being required  . For example , compared with other simple primary aspect forms , the unmarked-durative aspect V+? ( V + zhe )   ( Figure 3 ) has more restricted requirements in its usage , therefore , it should be selected first ; then it combines with the long-durative aspect ?? + V  ( yi1zhi2+V ) to form the complex aspect long-and-unmarked -durative ?? + V + ?  ( yi1zhi2+V + zhe )  . 
The secondary aspect long-and-unmarked-durative ?? + V + ?  ( yi1zhi2+V + zhe ) can further combine with another primary aspect , e . g . the unmarked-future-existing aspect ( UFT ) which is realized lexically by ? ( jiang1 )  , to formatertiary aspect type : ? + ? ? + V + ? ( jiang1+yi1zhi2+V + zhe )  . We take this as another example to illustrate the aspect combining conditions  ; see example 4 below . 
4 .  ??? ? ? ??  nuo4ke4si1   hao4   jiang1   yi4zhi2 the Knox number UFTLDR ??? hang2xing2 zhesail UDR ( The Knox will keep sailing all along . ) The unmarked-future-existing aspect ? + V ( jiang1+V ) means that the process will hold some time in the future  . The temporal relations of the unmarked-future -existing aspect are : tr < ti  , ( ti < t for ti ? tf ) . In example 4 , the temporal relation between ti and tf is ti < tf but not ti?t f which corresponds to an achievement situation  . This is represented graphically in Figure 6 . 
tr = t stitf Figure 6 . The temporal relations of the unmarked-future -existing aspect ? + V  ( jiang1+V ) When any aspect form combines with the unmarked -future-existing aspect  , its own internal temporal relations as a whole will not be modified  . The only change is that the event initial time may move  . So when the long-and-unmarked-durative aspect ??+ V + ?  ( yi1zhi2+V + zhe ) combines with the unmarked-future-existing aspect ? + V  ( jiang1+V )  , the temporal relations of the long-and-unmarked -durative aspect ?? + V + ?  ( yi1zhi2+V + zhe )   ( Figure 5 ) become : ts < ti , ti ? tr , and tr < tf . This is represented graphically in Figure 7 . 
t s t i t r t f Figure 7 . The temporal relations of the long-and-unmarked -durative aspect Compared with Figure  5  , we can see that the reference time of the long -durative-unmarked-durative aspect ??+ V + ?  ( yi1zhi2+V + zhe ) has moved , from tr = ts to ts < tr , and the event initial time correspondingly changes from ti < ts to ts < ti  . 
Because the event initial time ti , which is inherited from the long-and-unmarked -durative aspect ?? + V + ?  ( yi1zhi2+V + zhe )  , is unique , and the reference time trequals the speaking time ts  , the tertiary aspect ? + ? ? + V + ? ( jiang1+yi1zhi2+V + zhe ) has the following temporal relations : ti?tf and tr < ti and tr = ts  . This is represented graphically in Figure 8 . 
tr = t stitf Figure 8 . The temporal relations of the tertiary aspect unmarked-future-existing-long-durative-unmarked -durative ? + ? ? + V + ?  ( jiang1+yi1zhi2+V + zhe ) We can see from Figure 8 that although the viewpoint of the situation changes after the combination  , a unique event initial time can nevertheless be established  . The event initial time of the long-and-unmarked -durative aspect ?? + V + ?  ( yi1zhi2+V + zhe ) still functions in the complex aspect . 
Now let us look into one further example to see the situation when two aspect forms cannot combine  . The simple primary aspect long-durative ??+ V ( yi1zhi2+V ) and the simple primary aspect activity -progressive  ( APG )  , which is lexically realized by the marker ?? ( zheng4zai4 )  , are not compatible . 
The two aspect forms cannot combine.
Example 5 is unacceptable.
5 .  * ??? ? ??  nuo4ke4si1   hao4   yi1zhi2 the Knox number LDR ???? zheng4zai4   hang2xing2 APG sail ( * The Knox has been being sailing all along . ) The activity-progressive aspect ? ? + V ( zheng4zai4+V ) indicates a dynamic progressive state of the situation holding since a specific time point  ( event initial time ti )  . Its temporal relations are : ti = tr and ti < tf . This is represented graphically in Figure 9 . 
ti = tr = tstf Figure 9 . The temporal relations of the unmarked -progressive aspect ?? + V  ( zheng4zai4+V ) Comparing the temporal relations of the long -durative aspect ? ? + V  ( yi1zhi2+V ) in Figure 4 with the temporal relations of activity -progressive aspect ?? + V  ( zheng4zai4+V ) in Figure 9 , we can see that the two aspect forms have obviously different event initial time points  . One has an event initial time which precedes the reference time  ; another has an event initial time which equals the reference time  . A unique event initial time cannot be found . Therefore the two types of aspect are incompatible and cannot combine  . 
4. The implementation of the system
To generate a specific aspect expression , temporal relations as described in the last section must be taken  . Semantic inputs representing the temporal relations are a set of time points ti  , tf , tr , and ts . Each of the time points is expressed in a specific concept  , which could correspond to a specific time value , showing its relative position on the time axis ; e . g . at-past , at-present , or at-future . 
The semantic inputs are represented in the form of a set of examples making up a test suite  . Using the predicates described in section 3 , appropriate temporal relations can be automatically built by the system  . Then the system traverses a grammar network and chooses appropriate grammatical features by use of relevant inquiries and choosers  ( Matthiessen & Bateman ,  1991 , Teich & Henschel ,  1991) . The main function of choosers is to guide traversal of the grammar and choose grammatical features by asking the relevant inquiries and testing all the required conditions that they give  . An inquiry contains a set of conditions to test whether the given inputs meet some set of semantic requirements  . For example , the inquiry used to test the unmarked-durative aspect V + ?  ( V + zhe ) contains the following conditions : ti precedes tr  , tr precedes tf , tr same as ts , the process is not of intensive-relational type with verbs like ?  ( shi4 , be ) or adjectives describing properties , and not of possessive type with verb ?( you 3 , have ) . Once a feature is chosen , realization rules attached to the feature place constraints on lexical selection and syntactic structure  . Following traversal of the grammar the combined lexical and grammatical constraints are resolved in order to give the final lexicalized grammatical structure  . 
5. Conclusion
In this paper , we have introduced the basic simple primary aspect forms and a set of secondary types of the unmarked-durative aspect V + ?  ( V + zhe ) in our Chinese aspect system , described the semantic temporal relations of complex aspect forms in terms of temporal logic theories  , and proposed principled semantic conditions required for aspect combination  . In respect of aspect , English and Chinese are semantically rather different  . As future work we are now investigating potential applications of our description in several areas  . In addition to the generation of Chinese texts per se  , we are also considering the use of multilingual generation in  , for example , contrastive reference grammars , and language teaching . 
References Allen , J . F .   ( 1984 ) Towards a General Theory of Action and Time , Artificial Intelligence ,  1984 ,  23 , p . 123-154 Bache , C . (1995) The Study of Aspect , Tense and Action : Towards a Theory of the Semantics of Grammatical Categories  . Frankfurt/M . : Lang . 
Bateman , J . A .   ( 1997 ) Enabling technology for multilingual natural language generation : the 
KPML development environment , Natural
Language Engineering , 3(1), p . 15-55
Comrie , B . (1976) Aspect , Cambridge , England:
Cambridge University Press.
Comrie , B . (1985) Tense , Cambridge , England:
Cambridge University Press.
Dahl , ? . (1985) Tense and Aspect Systems , Oxford :

Dai , YJ . (1997) ???????? ( A Study of
Chinese Aspect ), Zhejiang Education Publisher.
Gong , Q-Y . (1995) ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ( Phase , Tense and Aspect in Chinese) , Beijing:
Commercial Press.
Halliday , M . A . K . (1976) System and Function in
Language , Oxford University press.
Halliday , M . A . K .  (1985 , first edition ) (1994 , second a dition ) An Introduction to Functional
Grammar , Edward Arnold , London.
Matthiessen , M . I . M . & Bateman , John A .   ( 1991 ) Text Generation and Systemic-Functional Linguistics  , Pinter Publishers , London Smith , C . S . (1991) The Parameter of Aspect,
Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic.
Teich , E . & Henschel , R .   ( 1991 ) Aspect choice in a fragment of a systemic grammar of Russian  , 
GMD-IPSI , Germany.
Vendler , Z . (1967) Linguistics in Philosophy,
Ithaca : Cornell University Press.
Yang , G-W .   ( 1999 )  ???????????? ??????????  ( The semantic relation types of complex aspect and the directional requirements in generation  )  , in Proceedings of the 5th Chinese Conference on Computational Linguistics , Tsinghua University Press , Beijing , p . 21-26
Yang , G-W .   ( 2001 )  ???????????? ?  ( The Generation of Chinese Complex Aspect )  , Zhong1 Guo2Yu3 Wen2 , 2001 No 5 , p . 418-427
