Several directions for minority languages computerization 

Vincent BER MENT
GETA , CLIPS , Joseph Fourier University
385 avenue de la Biblioth?que
Saint-Martin-d'H?res , France , 38400



Less than 1% of the languages spoken in the world are correctly ? computerized ?: spellcheckers  , hyphenation , machine translation are still lacking for the others  . In this paper , we present several directions that may help the computerization of minority languages as well as two projects where we apply some of these directions to the Laolanguage  . 

During the last ten years , research has been driven and products have been developed to provide efficient linguistic tools for many languages  . For example , Unicode is more and more a reality intoday's operating systems and Microsoft Office XP contains proofing tools for more than  40 languages . However , for most of the world's people , the Information Era is still limited to using hardware and software that do not meet their needs in terms of language and script resources  . Following the SALT MIL1 terminology , we will call a minority language a language which has a smaller resource base than the major languages  . 
1 The available and the needed
According to the Ethnologue 2 , more than 6800 different languages are spoken in the world . This number of languages shows that we are still far from having a software answer for all of them  . 
1 : Speech And Language Technology for MInority Languages  ( http://isl . ntftex . uni-lj . si/SALTMIL / ) is a Special Interest Group of the International Speech 
Communication Association.
2: http://www.ethnologue.com/.
1.1 Commercial tools
First , we will notice that a trend in operating systems design and standardization allows the recent multilingual evolution  . Windows ( since Windows NT 3 . 1), MacIntosh ( since MacOS8 . 5 ) and Unix/Linux now support Unicode and many fonts are available  , especially True Type fonts3 such as Arial Unicode MS which contains a large part of Unicode  ( 51 , 1 80 glyphs but also 23 Mb that may slow our computers )  . 
If we look now at Microsoft Office 4 , one of the most widespread business suite , we observe that linguistic tools are available for  48   languages5  . 
1.2 Research on minority languages
Though we may find that the coverage of several tens of languages in tools such as a word processor is a significant evolution because it covers most of the languages in terms of number of speakers  , we also have to notice that it still covers less than  1% of them in terms of number of languages . 
This question has been increasingly discussed in the recent years  . The SALT MIL group was 3 : True Type fonts can be used under Windows , MacOSX and Linux as well as , with limitations , under previous versions of MacOS . 
4: http://www . microsoft . com/office/evaluation/indepth/multilingual /prooftools  . htm 5: These languages are : Arabic , Basque , Brazilian Portuguese , Bulgarian , Catalan , Chinese Simplified , Chinese Traditional , Croatian , Czech , Danish , Dutch , English , Estonian , Finnish , French , Galician , German , Greek , Gujarati , Hebrew , Hindi , Hungarian , Indonesian , Italian , Japanese , Kannada , Korean , Latvian , Lithuanian , Marathi , Norwegian , Polish , Portuguese ( Portugal ) , Punjabi , Romanian , Russian , Serbian , Slovakian , Slovenian , Spanish , Swedish , Tamil , Telugu , Thai , Turkish , Ukrainian , Vietnamese and Welsh . 
created to ? promote research and development in the field of speech and language technology for lesser-used languages  , particularly those of Europe ? . Since 1998 , it has organized specific workshops at the LREC conferences  . 
Another definition of ? minority language ? is used to talk about non-indigenous minority languages  . This definition may differ from the SALT MIL one . The Lancaster University ( UK ) has two ongoing projects related to such ? minority languages ?  . The Minority Language Engineering ( MILLE ) project 1 , ? jointly based in the Department of Linguistics at Lancaster University and Oxford University Computing Services  , seeks to investigate the development of corpus resources for UK non-indigenous minority  languages2   ( NIMLs ) ? . The Enabling Minority Language Engineering ( EMILLE ) project 3 , a joined project of Lancaster and Sheffield Universities  , plans to ? build a 63 million word electronic corpus of South Asian languages  , especially those spoken in the UK ? . 
Here , the considered languages are Bengali , Gujarati , Hindi , Punjabi , Singhalese , Tamil and Urdu which are , for some of them , already widely studied languages . 
2 Difficult issues
After having verified that the need of script is covered by Unicode or at least by a de facto standard or simply by a font  , one of the first difficulties generally met when starting with a new language is the lack of texts and dictionaries  . This prevents , in particular , classical machine translation solutions from being immediately applied  . Here raises a major problem : such resources are time consuming  , in other terms expensive . So we need to find away , in line with the often limited means of the minority languages populations  , forgetting resources or , alternatively , to build new methods , based on smaller linguistic resources . 
1: http://www . ling . lancs . ac . uk/monkey/ihe/mille/1fra1 . htm 2 : A census done in the UK in 1991 stated that non-indigenous ethnic minorities formed about  6% of the Great Britain population ( Somers 1997 )  . 
3 : Enabling Minority Language Engineering http:/ /www  . emille . lancs . ac . uk/ . 
3 Directions 3 . 1 Generalized Linguistic Contribution Our point of view is that linguistic resources can be efficiently obtained by a collaborative work on the web  ( Boitet 1999 )  , replacing a local development team with a free and potentially much bigger distributed team  . This idea of a ? generalized linguistic contribution ? on the web  , already present in a nearly Montaigne project ( 1996 )  , has recently been implemented at GETA for the Lao language in a revisited version  ( see ?4 . 2) . It has also been applied by Okito the Japanese language4   ( Shimohata 2001 ) and by NII/NECTEC to a Japanese-Thai dictionary 5 . At another ( a meta-)level , the Open Language
Archives Community 6 ( OLAC ) provides a collaborative platform for " creating a worldwide virtual library of language resources  "  . Founded in December 2000 , this recent project already gathers more than twenty participants  ( data providers ) which resources can be accessed by using a service provider such as " the  Linguist"7  . 
3.2 Dictionary recycling
An alternative solution for building electronic dictionaries is to reengineer the document files made with a word processor to produce a paper lexicon or dictionary  . When the files are not available , Optical Character Recognition ( OCR ) can sometimes be used to create it . There , recycling tools have to be applied to transform the original irregular format into a format that is suitable for automated tasks  ( Nguyen 1998 )  . 
3.3 Using analogy between languages
Another interesting direction is to take party of the similarities between languages  , in particular in machine translation projects ( Paul 2001 )  . 
Here are several recent examples in the minority languages area  . 
In Europe , machine translation projects between Spanish and two languages closely related to Spanish ? Catalan  ( Canals-Marote et al 2001 ) and Galician ( Diz 2001 ) ? are already working . 
4: http://www.yakushite.net/.
5: Saikam project , http://saikam.nii.ac.jp/.
6: http://www.language-archives.org/.
7: http://www.linguistlist.org/olac/.
In Asia , an example with languages from different families1 such as Japanese and Uighur shows that syntactical closeness can be sufficient to obtain good results  ( MAJO system , 
Mahsut et al 2001).
These machine translation projects based on analogy generally use a relatively low level transfer module and present satisfying response times thanks to the use of finite state algorithms  . 
3.4 International pivot-based projects
The achievement of good quality machine translation for minority languages can be boosted by the adoption of a pivot approach  . In such an approach , the development of one interface ( with a pivot ) gives access to all languages . International pivot-based projects such as Papillon2 and UNL3 provide examples of such pivot-based projects including minority languages  . For example , after an initial period where only major languages were involved  , less computerized languages such as Mongolian and Latvian have been looked at in the UNL project  . 
3.5 CMU approach
The Language Technologies Institute of the Carnegie Mellon University developed an original approach of machine translation for the AVENUE project  ( Probst & Levin 2002 )  . This multi-engine system , based on a corpus-based machine translation ( CBMT )  , uses both EBMT and SMT4 as well as an elicitation tool5 that learns transfer rules from a small and controlled corpus  . This elicitation tool , currently being applied to Mapudungun , a language from Chile , seems to be well suited to the minority languages because of its low need of linguistic resources  . 
4 Ongoing projects at GETA
Hereafter are presented two developments we currently undertake at GETA in Grenoble to apply the ideas presented  here6  . Both are 1 : Uighur is a Turkic language and Japanese is considered as independent  ( Katzner 1995 )  . 
2: http://vulab.ias.unu.edu/papillon/.
3: http://www.unl.ias.unu.edu/.
4: Example-Based and Statistical MT.
5: CallediRBMT = instructible Rule-Based MT.
6: In our works , we focus on ? minority languages ? applying these ideas to the Laolanguage  . Laois spoken in Laos by about 4 million people and in Thail and by more than 10 million people7  . 
4.1 PapiLex 84.1.1 Principles
Papi Lex , a Lao lexical base developed in the context of the pivot-based Papillon project  , follows the fundamental rules of this project : ? lexical base in XML format  , ? use of the explanatory and combinatorial lexicology  ( ECL ) concepts 9 ( from which the core monolingual Papillon XML schema is directly derived  )  , ? use of Unicode for the characters encoding . 
PapiLex is a mockup aimed at giving a help in evaluating the Papillon project difficulties  . The dictionary structure contains eight fields , derived from the ECL : ? Lexical item , ? Part of speech , ? Semantic formula , ? Government pattern , ? Lexical functions , ? Examples , ? Idioms , ? Interlingual meaning . 
4.1.2 Architecture
PapiLex has been developed using HTML and Perl . The Perl scripts handle the interaction with the XML base  . The interface with this base relies on DOM , the Document Object Model standardized by the W3C   . We used a DOM package for Perl which can be found on the perl  . comsite . The parsing set used on the web server is the one which is included in Active Perl  5  . 6 . 1 for Windows . It is made out of the Larry taken in the SALT MIL definition sense  . 
7 : In the Isan area of Thailand where Lao is spoken  , Thai scripts are used and also the language itself is somehow different from Laospoken in Laos  . There is also an important Laodi as pora in France  , Australia and USA . See www . geocities . com/lao_thai2000 . 
8: http://cams-atid.ivry.cn rs.fr/papilex/.
9: On this matter , see Andr ? Clas , Igor Mel'?uk and Alain Polgu?re's book , Introduction ? la lexico-graphie explicative et combinatoire  , Duculot 1995 Wall and Clark Cooper ? XML::Parser ? package and of ? Expat ?  , the James Clark's XML parser . 
4 . 2 Montaigne project 14 . 2 . 1 Initial specifications Basically , the Montaigne project?s idea is to offer a free collaborative work facility on the web for development of linguistic resources and machine translation tools  . Though its ambition is generic , the project started with an application to

In this early form , the website mainly offers three kinds of services : ? Lao-French translations  , ? Transcriptions of Lao , ? Lexicographic creation . 
Contrarily to the two first items ( translations and transcriptions ) which are open to all visitors , the lexicographic creation access is limited to registered skilled users  . Each registered user has his own space where he can save his private words and texts  . 
The linguistic structure of the dictionary follows the ECL concepts so it can easily be exported toward Papillon  . However , additional fields have also been added in order to derive other applications from the database as for example paper dictionaries or machine translation  . 
In order to start the process , a first dictionary of 1038 words has been entered , simply deriving from a paper dictionary done by Lamvieng Inthamone in Word format  . So this initial dictionary does not meet yet the ECL concept of lexical item required for exporting the dictionary toward Papillon  . An ? ECLization ? of this base dictionary is then currently being handled by a group of Lao students from  Inalco2   ( Institut National des Langues et des Civilisations Orientales  , located in Paris ) . This team will produce an ECL-compliant dictionary that will replace the current one at the end of their task  . 
4.2.2 Architecture
The architecture is based on HTML , SSI , PHP , JavaScript and compiled C code used as CGI . 
The dictionary is stored as a MySQL database table as well as the contributors ? profiles  . C code 1: http://cams-atid . ivry . cnrs . fr/montlao/ . 
2: http://www.inalco.fr.
is used for segmenting Laotexts into words3 and for sorting the dictionary4  . It uses a syllable recognition technology ( Berment 1998 ) and a longest matching algorithm ( e . g . Meknavin et al 1997) . Unlike Papi Lex , the Montaigne Lao project uses non-Unicode fonts . This is mainly due to the unavailability of Unicode fonts for Lao that would actually work  . Text input is possible with the two currently used Laokeyboardlay outs thanks to JavaScript and to TextArea or Input HTML forms controls  . 
4.2.3 Several views
Translation service
Original text input page ( Lao)
Word for word translation page ( French )   3 : Lao is written from left to right with an alphabet deriving from Indian scripts  . A major characteristics of Lao writing is that words are not separated with spaces  , like Khmer , Thai or Burmese writings . 
4 : Another important characteristics of Lao writing is that some vowels are placed before the consonant  . 
This contributes to make the automatic sort of Lao dictionaries more complex  . 
Lexical items input page
Ordered list of lexical items

In the close future , we plan to develop the
Montaigne project in two directions.
First , the current prototype will become a fullscale production tool  . For that , the Lao-French translations and the lexicographic creation will be linked together so that a registered user can modify a translation  . This will update his private dictionary and the altered word will be submitted to the Linguistic Management Team for updating the common dictionary  . Analogy between Lao and Thai languages will also be looked at  . 
The second anticipated milestone is to develop the project toward its initial generic aim : a free collaborative work facility on the web for development of linguistic resources and machine translation tools for any minority language  . This includes : ? gathering a free and structured set of generic tools  ( lemmatizers , segmenters , speech tools ,   . . . ) and making them available on the website , ? offering a collaborative environment for each candidate language  , derived from the
Lao experiment alone.

Berment Vincent . ( DEA dissertation , In alco 1998 ) Prol?gom?nesgrapho taxiques dulaotien . 160 p . 
Boitet Christian .   ( MT Summit 1999 ) A research perspective on how to democratize machine translation and translation aids aiming at high quality final output  . 10 p . 
Canals-Marote R . , Esteve-Guill?n A . , Garrido-Alenda A . , Guardiola-Savall M . I . , Itturaspe-Bellver A . , Montserrat-Buendia S . , Ortiz-Rojas S . , Pastor-Pina H . , P?rez-Ant?n P . M . , Forcada M . L .   ( MT Summit 2001 ) The Spanish-Catalan machine translation system inter NOST RUM  . 4 p . 
Diz Gamallo In?s .   ( MT Summit 2001 ) The importance of MT for the survival of minority languages : Spanish-Galician MT system  . 4 p . 
Katzner Kenneth . ( Routledge 1995, 3rd edition ) The
Languages of the World .378 p.
Mahsut Muhtar , Ogawa Yasuhiro , Sugino Kazue , In agaki Yasuyoshi .   ( MT Summit 2001 ) Utilizing Agglutinative Features in Japanese -Uighur 
Machine Translation .6p.
Meknavin Surapant , Charoen porns a wat Paisarn , Kijsirikul Boonserm ( Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium  1997  ) Featured-based
Thai word segmentation .. pp 41-46.
Nguyen Hai Doan . ( PhD dissertation , UJFG renoble 1998 ) Techniques g?n?riques d?accumulation d?ensembles lexicaux structur?s ? partirderes sources dictionnairi ques in format is ? es multi-lingues h?t ? rog?nes  . 168 p . 
Paul Michael ( MT Summit 2001 ) Translation Knowledge Recycling for Related Languages  . 5 p . 
Probst Katharina , Levin Lori ( Proceedings of TMI 2002 ) Challenges in Automated Elicitation of a
Controlled Bilingual Corpus . 11p.
Shimohata Sayori , Kitamura Mihoko , Sukehiro Tatsuya , Murata Toshiki .   ( MT Summit 2001 ) Collaborative Translation Environment on the
Web .4p.
Somers Harold . ( Translating and the Computer 19 , Papers from the ASLIB Conference 13/14 November 1997  ) Machine Translation and
Minority Languages.

