Controlling Gender Equality with Shallow NLP Techniques 
M . Carl , S . Garnier , J . Haller
Institut fu?r Angew and te Informations for schung
66111 Saarbru?cken


A . Altmayer and B . Miemietz
Universita?t des Saarlandes
66123 Saarbru?cken , Germany



This paper introduces the ? Gender check
Editor ? , a tool to check German texts for gender discriminatory formulations  . It re-lays on shallow rule-based techniques as used in the Controlled Language Authoring Technology  ( CLAT )  . The paper outlines major sources of gender imbalances in German texts  . It gives a background on the underlying CLAT technology and describes the marking and annotation strategy to automatically detect and visualize the questionable pieces of text  . The paper provides a detailed evaluation of the editor  . 
1 Introduction
Times of feminist ( language ) revolution are gone , but marks are left behind in the form of a changed society with a changed consciousness and changed gender roles  . Nevertheless language use seems to oppose changes much stronger than society does  . As the use of non-discriminatory language is nowadays compulsory in administration and official documents  , a number of guidelines and recommendations exist , which help to avoid gender imbalance and stereotypes in language use  . Although in some cases men may be concerned ( as for example most terms referring to criminals are masculine nouns  ) the main concern is about adequate representation of women in language  , especially in a professional context . Psychological tests demonstrate that persons reading or hearing masculine job titles  ( socalled generic terms allegedly meaning both women and men  ) do not visualize women working in this field . 
In order to avoid this kind of discrimination two main principles are often suggested  ( e . g . as in ( Ges , 1999; Uni , 2000)):1 . use of gender-neutral language , which rather ? disguises ? the acting person by using impersonal phrases  . 
2 . explicit naming of women and men as equally represented acting persons  . 
Using and applying these guidelines in a faithful manner is time-consuming and requires a great amount of practice  , which cannot always be provided , particularly by unexperi-enced writer . Moreover these guidelines are often completely unknown in non-feminist circles  . 
A tool which checks texts for discriminatory use of language is thus mandatory to promote written gender equality  , educate and remind writer of unacceptable forms to avoid  . 
In this paper we describe the project ? Gen -dercheck ? which uses a controlled-language authoring tool  ( CLAT ) as a platform and editor to check German texts for discriminatory language  . 
In section 2 we introduce three categories of gender discrimination in German texts and provide possibilities for their reformulation  . 
Section 3 introduces the technology on which the Gender check editor is based  . The linguistic engine proceeds in two steps , a marking and filtering phase where gender discriminatory formulations are automatically detected  . A graphical interface plots the detected formulations and prompts the according messages for correction  . 
Section 4 then goes into the detail of the marking and filtering technique  . We use the shallow pattern formalism kurd ( Carl and Schmidt-Wigger , 1998; Ins ,  2004 ) first to mark possible erroneous formulations and the to filter out those which occur in ? gendered ? context  . 
Section 5 evaluates the Gender check editor on two texts . 
2 Gender Inequality in German

Most prominent to achieve gender equality on a linguistic level in German texts is to find solutions and alternatives for the socalled generic masculine : the masculine for mistaken as the generic form to designate all persons of any sex  . The major problem is to figure out whether or not a given person denotation refers to a particular person  . For instance , in example ( 1a ) ? Beamter ? ( officer ) is most likely used in its generic reading and refers to female officers  ( Beamtinnen ) and masculine officers ( Beamten )  . To achieve gender equality an appropriate reformulation is required as shown in example  ( 1b )  . 
(1a ) Der Beamte muss den An for derungen
Genu?geleisten.
(1b ) Alle Beamten und Beamtinnen mu?s senden
Anforderungen Genu?geleisten.
Since we tackle texts from administrative and legal domains we principally assume unspecified references  . That is , a masculine ( or feminine ! ) noun will not denote a concrete person but rather refers to all persons  , irrespectively of their sex . 
A second class of errors are masculine relative , possessive and personal pronouns which refer to a generic masculine or an indefinite masculine pronoun  . 
(2a ) Der Beamte muss seine Wohnung in der
Na?hedes Arbeitsplatzes suchen.
(2b ) Jeder muss seinen Be it ragdazule is ten.
(2c ) Wer Rechtehat , derhatauch Pflichten.
The possessive pronoun ? seine ? ( his ) in example ( 2a ) refers to the preceeding ? Beamte ? ( of-ficer )  . The generic masculine use of ? Beamte ? and the referring pronoun will be marked  . The same holds for sentence ( 2b ) where the possessive pronoun refers to the in definite pronoun ? jeder ?  ( every masc )  . The indefinite pronouns ? jemand ? ( someone ) and ? wer ? ( who ) count as acceptable . However , masculine pronouns referring to it will be marked  . In example (2c ) , the mascul in relative pronoun ? der ? can be omitted  . 
A third class of gender in equality is lack of agreement between the subject and the predicative noun  . Example ( 3a ) gives an example where the masculine subject ? Ansprech partner ?  ( partner masc ) occurs with the afemale object ? Frau Mu?ller ? ( Mrs . Mu?ller ) . 
(3a ) I hrAnsprech partnerist Frau Mu?ller.
(3b ) Ihre Ans prech partner in is tFrau Mu?ller.
A solution for this class of errors is shown in example  ( 3b ) where the subject ( Ansprech part-ner in ) is adapted to the female gender of the predicate . 
Suggestions to reformulate gender imbalances as shown in examples  ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) can be classified in two main categories : 1 . Whenever possible , use gender neutral formulations . These include collectiva ( e . g . Lehrko?rper ( teaching staff ) or Arbeit nehmers chaft ( collective of employees ) ) as well as nominalized participles ( Studierende ( scholar ) ) or nominalized adjectives ( Be rechtigte )  . 
2 . Use both forms if gender neutral formulations cannot be found  . That is , the feminine and the masculine form are to be coordinated with ? und ?  , ? oder ? or ? bzw . ? . 
A coordination with slash ?/? will also be suggested but should only be used in forms  , ordinance and regulations . 
Amendments should accord to general German writing rules  . The socalled ? Binnen-I ? , an uppercase ? I ? as in ? Student Innen ? will not be suggested and also naming of the female suffix in parenthesis should be avoided  . The same holds for the indefinite pronoun ? frau ?   ( woman ) which was occasionally suggested to complement the pronoun ? man ?  . 
3 The Gender check Editor
Controlled-Language Authoring Technology ( CLAT ) CLAT has been developed to suit the need of some companies to automatically check their technical texts for general language and company specific language conventions  . Within CLAT , texts are checked with respect to : ? orthographic correctness ? company specific terminology and abbreviations ? general and company specific grammatical correctness ? stylistic correctness according to general and company specific requirements The orthographic control examines texts for orthographic errors and proposes alternative writings  . The terminology component matches the text against a terminology and abbreviation database where also term variants are detected 
Figure 1: The Gender check Editor ( Carl et al ,  2004) . Grammar control checks the text for grammatical correctness and disambiguates multiple readings  . Stylistic control detects stylistic inconsistencies  . 
The components build upon each other?s output . Besides the described control mechanisms , CLAT also has a graphical frontend which makes possible to mark segments in the texts with different colors  . Single error codes can be switched of for on and segments of text can be edited or ignored according to the authors need  . CLAT also allows batch processing where XML -annotated text output is generated  . 
Figure 1 shows the graphical interface of the editor . The lower part of the editor plots an input sentence  . The highlighted SGML codes are manually annotated gender ? mistakes ?  . The upper part plots the automatically annotated sentence with underlined gender mistakes  . 
As we shall discuss in section 5 , gender im-balances are manually annotated to make easier automatic evaluation  . In this example , the highlighted words ? Deutscher ? ( German ) and ? EG-Bu?rger ? ( EU-citizen ) are identical in the manually annotated text and in the automatically annotated text  . The user can click on one of the highlighted words in the upper window to display the explanatory message in the middle part of the screen  . Further information and correction or reformulation hints can also be obtained by an additional window as shown on the right side of the figure  . The messages are designed according to main classes of gender discriminatory formulations as previously discussed  . 
4 Gender Checking Strategy
Gender check uses a marking and filtering strategy : first all possible occurrences of words in an error class are marked  . In a second step ? gendered ? formulations are filtered out  . The remaining marked words are assigned an error code which is plotted in the Gender check editor  . 
According to the classification in section 2 , this section examines the marking and filtering strategy for generic masculine agents in section  4  . 1 , pronouns which refer to generic masculine agents ( section ?? ) and errors in agreement of predicative nouns ( section ?? )  . 
Marking and filtering is realized with kurda pattern matching formalism as described in  ( Carl and Schmidt-Wigger , 1998; Ins ,  2004) . Input for kurd are morphologically analyzed and semantically tagged texts  . 
4 . 1 Class 1: Agents 4 . 1 . 1 Marking Agents Two mechanisms are used to mark denotations of persons : a  ) The morphological analysis of mpro ( Maas ,  1996 ) generates not only derivational and inflectional information for German words  , but also assigns a small set of semantic values . Male and female human agents such as ? Sold at ? ( soldier )  , ? Bu?rger meister ? ( may or masc ) , ? Beamte ? ( officer masc ) , ? K ranken-sch wester ? ( nurse fem ) etc . are assigned a semantic features = agent . Words that carry this feature will be marked style = agent  . 
b ) Problems occur for nouns if the base word is a nominalized verb  . For instance ? Ge wich the ber ? ( weight lifter ) und ? Busfahrer ? ( bus driver ) will not be assigned the features = agent by m pro since a ? lifter ? and a ? driver ? can be a thing or a human  . Gender in equalities , however , only apply to humans . Given that the tool is used in a restricted domain  , a special list of lexemes can be used to assign these words the style feature style=agent  . The kurd rule Include shows some of the lexemes from this list  . The list contains lexemes to cover a maximum number of words  . For instance the lexeme absolvier en ( graduate ) will match ? Absolvent ? ( alumnusmasc )  , ? Absolvent in ?( alumnusfem ) , ? Absolventen ? ( alumniplu , masc ) and ? Absolvent innen ? ( alumniplu , fem) . 
1Include=2Aec=noun , 3 ls : absolvieren $ ; 4 dezernieren $ ; 5 richten $ ; 6 fahren $ ; 7 administrieren $ ; 8 vorst and $9: Agstyle=agent . 
Lines 3 to 8 enumerate a list of lexemes separated by a semicolon  . The column in line 3 following the attribute namels tells kurd to interpret the values as regular expressions  . 
Since the dollar sign$matches the end of the value in the input object  , each lexeme in the list can also be the head of a compound word  . 
Thus , the test ls : fahren $ matches all lexemes that have fahren as their head words  , such as ? Fahrer ? ( driver) , ? Bus fahrer ? ( bus driver) , etc . The action Agstyle = agent marks the matched words as an agent  . 
4.1.2 Filtering ? gendered ? Agents
The text then undergoes several filters to delete marks in words if the appear within gendered formulations  . 
a ) Excluded are marked agents which preceed a family name  . The marking of ? Beamte ? in example ( 4 ) will beer ased since it is followed by the family name ? Meier ?  . ? Beamte Meier ? is likely to have a specific reference  . 
(4 ) DerBeamte Meierhatge gen die Vorschrift versto ?en  . 
In terms of kurd this can be achieved with the rule Agent MitFname : if a family name  ( s = f name ) follows a sequence of marked agents ( style = agent ) the marks in the agent nodes are removed ( rstyle=nil )  . 
1 Agent MitFname=2+Aestyle=agent , 3 Aec=noun , s = f name 4: Arst yle = nil . 
b ) Also excluded are nominalized plural adjectives and participles since they are well suited for gender neutral formulations  . In example (5) , the nominalized plural adjective ? Sach versta ? n dige ?  ( experts ) is ambiguous with respect to gender . The mark will thus be removed . 
(5 ) Sind bereits Sach versta?n dige bestell t?c ) Marked words in already gendered formulations are also erased  . Pairing female and male forms by conjunction is a recommended way to produce gender equality  . In example ( 6 ) the subject ? Die Beamtino der der Beamte ? ( the officer femor the officer masc ) as well as the pronouns which refer to it ? sie oderer ?  ( sheorhe ) and ? ih reroder seiner ? ( her or his ) are gender equal formulations . 
(6 ) Die Beamtino der der Beamteauf Lebens-zeito der auf Zeitistin den Ruhest and zuversetzen  , wennsie oderer in folge eines ko ? rperlichen Gebrechenso derwegen Schwa ? cheih reroder seiner ko ? rperliche noder geistigen Kra?fte zur Erfu ?llungih reroder seiner Dienstpflicht endauernd unfa?hig  ( dienstunfa ? hig ) is t . 
The kurd rule gendert removes these marks . The description in lines 2 to 5 matches a conjunction of two marked agents ( style = agent ) which share the same lexemels =_L but which are different in gender  . This latter constraint is expressed in two variables ehead=g=_G and ehead=g ~=_G which only unify if the gender features ? g ? have nonidentical sets of values  . 
1gegendert=2Aestyle=agent , ls=_L , e h e a d = g =_G , 3 elu = oder ; und ; bzw . ;/ , 4* a style ~= agentec = w , 5 Aestyle=agent , ls=_L , ehead = g~=_G6: Arstyle=nil . 
The rule allows the conjunctions ? und ? , ? oder ? , ? bzw . ? and ?/? . 
d ) Some nouns are erroneously marked even if no gender equal formulation is possible  . For instance words such as ? Mensch ? ( human being )  , a ? Gast ? ( guest ) , ? Flu?chtling ? ( refuge e ) are masculine in gender , yet there is no corresponding female form in German  . These words are included in an exclude list which works similar to the include list previously discussed  . 
1 exclude=2Aastyle=agent , 3 lu:mensch$ ; 4 flu?chtling $ ; 5 sa?ugling $ ; 6 gast $ ; 7 rat $ 8: Arstyle = nil . 
4 . 1 . 3 Nonmarked Expressions a ) Currently , we do not mark compound nouns which have an agent as their modifier and a non-agent as their head  . However , also words such as ? Redner pult ? ( talker desk = lectern ) and ? Teilnehmer liste ? ( participants list = list of participants ) are suitable for gender main-streaming and should be spelled as ? Redepult ?  ( talk desk ) and ? Teilnehmen deliste ? ( participating list )  . 
b ) We do not mark articles and adjectives which preceed the marked noun  . This would be troublesome in constructions like example  ( 7 ) where the article ? der ? ( the ) and the corresponding noun ? Dezernent ? ( head of department ) are separated by an intervening adjectival phrase . 
(7) Den Vorsitz fu?hrt der je weils fu?r die
Auf gaben zusta?n dige Dezernent.
c ) It is currently impossible to look beyond the sentence boundary  . As a consequence , the reference of a agent cannot be detected if it occurs in the preceeding sentence  . For instance ? Herr Mu?ller ? is the reference of ? Beamte ? in the second sentence in example  ( 8 )  . 
(8 ) Herr Mu?ller hat die Dienst vorschrift ver-let zt . DerBeamteist somitzuent lassen . 
The word ? Beamte ? will be erroneously marked because information of the preceeding sentence is not available to resolve the reference  . 
4.2 Class 2: Pronouns
Also personal pronouns , possessive pronouns , relative pronouns and indefinite pronouns are marked  . The strategy is similar to the one for agents above : first all pronouns are marked and in a second step markings incorrect formulations are erased  . 
With the exception of indefinite pronouns ( ? Mancher ? , ? Jemand ? , ? Niem and ? etc . ) , a marked referent agent must be available in the same sentence  . Three different rules are used to mark relative pronouns  , personal pronouns and possessive pronouns . 
1 Mark Relativ Pronomen=2estyle=agent , e h e a d = g =_G , 3* alu ~= & cm , 4 elu = & cm , 5 Aelu=d_rel , ehead=g=_G6: Agstyle=agent . 
a ) The rule Mark Relativ Pronomen detects a marked agent in line  2  . Lines 3 and 4 search the next comma1 that follows the marked agent and line 5 matches the relative pronoun2 that immediately follows the comma . The relative 1commas are coded as ? & cm ? in the formalism . 
2relative pronouns are assigned the lexeme ? d rel?  . 
Size of Test Classes of errors
Text  #sent .  #words Errors/sent . Class 1Class 2Class 3?
ET 195 1062 1,839 762 15174
TT 225 164 730 , 4 6   95   21  ?  116 pronoun must agree in gender with the agent ( e h e a d = g =_G )  . As we shall see in section 5 , this is an error prone approximation to reference solution  . 
b ) Personal and possessive pronouns are only marked if they refer to a male agent  . 
The two rules Mark Personal Pronomen and
Mark Possesiv Pronomen work in a similar fashion : in line  2 the marked masculine reference is matched . Lines 3 and 4 match the following personal pronoun ( c = w , sc = pers ) and possessive pronoun(c = w , sc = poss ) . In lines 5, the pronouns are marked . 
1 Mark Personal Pronomen=2estyle=agent , e h e a d = g = m , 31 Aelu = er ; er_es , c=w , sc = pers4es ~= agent , sc ~ = punct5:Arstyle=agent . 
1 Mark Possesiv Pronomen=2estyle=agent , e h e a d = g = m , 31 Aelu = sein , c=w , sc = poss4es~=agent , sc ~ = punct5:Arstyle=agent . 
After the marking step , pronoun marks are filtered . Filtering of pronouns is similar to the previously discussed rule gegender t  . 
4.3 Class 3: Predicative Noun
Missing agreement between subject and predicative noun is detected with the following kurd rule :  1 Praedikats nomen = 2 + Aemark = np , style=agent , e h e a d = g =_G , 3* Aemark = np , 4 els = sein , c = verb , 5* Aestyle ~= agent , 6 Aemark = np , style=agent , ehead = g~=_G , 7* Aemark = np 8: Arb style = Gen 3 , estyle=Gen3 . 
Lines 2 and 3 detect the marked subject . Notice that noun groups are marked with the feature mark = np by a previous chunking module  . 
Lines 5 to 7 match the predicative noun . Both parts of the sentence are connected by the copula ? sein ?  ( be )  . Similar to the rule gender t , the rule only applies if both parts are different in gender  . 
5 Evaluation of Gender check
We evaluated the Gender checked it or based on two texts :  ET1 A collection of unconnected negative examples taken from the  ( Ges , 1999) and ( Sch ,  1996) . 
T T2 The deputy law of the German Bundestag Gender imbalances were manually annotated with a SGML code  , where each different code refers to a different rewrite proposal to be plotted in the editor as in the lower part in figure  1  . Table 4 . 1 . 3 shows the distribution of error classes in the two texts  . Each error class had several subtypes which are omitted here for sake of simplicity  . 
In ET1 every sentence has at least one error ; on average one word out of six is marked as ? ungendered ?  . Since ET1 is a set of negative examples , errors are uniformly distributed . Distribution of errors in text TT2 is different from ET1  .   TT2 does not contain a single occurrence of a class 3 error . On average , only one word out of 60 is manually marked and ? due to the long size of sentences ? there are  0  . 46 errors per sentence on average . 
Text ET1 was used to develop and adjust the kurd rule system for marking  , filtering and error code assignment . We iteratively compared the automatically annotated text with the manually annotated text and computed precision and recall  . Based on the misses and the noise , we adapted the style module as well as the error annotation schema  . Thus , in a first annotation schema we assigned more than  30 different error codes literally taken from ( Ges , 1999) and ( Uni ,  2000) . However , it turned out that this was too fine a granularity to be automatically reproduced and values for precision and recall were very low  . We than assigned only one error class and achieved very good values for precision of over  95% and recall over more than 89%  . Based on these results we carefully refined a number of subtypes of the three error classes  . 
Final results are shown in table 5 . Results for the test text TT2 are slightly inferior to those of
Text ET 1
Error hit misses noise precision recall
Class 185 121 0.988 0.876
Class 2557 50.91 70.887
Class 3150 10.93 71.000 ?155 197 0.957 0.891
Text TT2
Class 1869 50.94 50.905
Class 2 1 4 7 4 0 . 778 0 . 667 ? 100 16 9 0 . 917 0 . 862 the development text ET 1 . We briefly discuss typical instances of misses and noise  . 
a ) Noise in class 1 ( generic use of masculine ) are mainly due to ?- ling ?- derivations such as ? Abko?mmling ?  ( descendant ) which are masculine in German and for which no female equivalent forms exist  . These words could be included in the exclude lexicon  ( see section 4 )  . 
b ) In some cases nominalized participles such as ? Angestellte ?  ( employee ) and ? Hin-terbliebene ? ( surviving dependant )  , which are usually very well suited for gendered formulations due to their ambiguity in gender  , were erroneously disambiguated . These instances produced noise because filters did not apply  . 
c ) Misses in class 1 can be traced back to some words which have not been detected as human agents such as ? Schrift fu ? hrer ?  ( recording clerk ) and ? E hegatte ? ( spouse )  . These words could be entered into the include lexicon  . Both lexicon should be made user-adaptable and user extendible in future versions of the system  . 
d ) Many of the misses in class 2 are due to a reference in the preceeding sentence  . Since the system is currently sentence based , there is no easy solution in enhancing this type of errors  . 
The possessive pronoun ? seiner ? in the second sentence of example  ( 9 ) refers to ? Bewerber ? ( applicant ) in the first sentence . This connection cannot be reproduced if the system works on a sentence basis  . 
(9 ) Einem Bewerberumeinen Sitzim Bun-destagist zur Vorbereitungseiner Wahlin-nerhalb der letz tenz wei Monatevordem Wahltagauf Antrag Urlaubvonbiszuzwei 
Monatenzuge wa?hren . Ein Ans pruch auf
Fortzahlung seiner Bezu?ge besteht fu?r die
Dauerder Beurlaubungnicht.
e ) An example for noise in class 2 is shown in example ( 10 )  . The relative pronoun ? der ?( who , which ) was detected by Gender check but erroneously been linked to ? Beamte ? instead of ? Antrag ?  ( application ) which are both mascul in in German . 
(10) Der Beamteistauf seinen Antrag , derbin-nendrei Mona tense it der Been digung der
Mitglied schaft zustellenist , ...
Much more powerful mechanisms are required to achieve a breakthrough for this kind of errors  . 
6 Conclusion
This paper describes and evaluates the ? Gen -dercheck Editor ? a tool to check German administrative and legal texts for gender equal formulations  . The tool is based on the Controlled Language Authoring Technology  ( CLAT )  , a software package to control and check technical documents for orthographical  , grammatical and styptic correctness . A part of the Style component has been modified and adapted to the requirements of linguistic gender main-streaming  . 
The paper outlines a shallow technique to discover gender-imbalance and evaluates the technique with two texts  . Values for precision and recall of more than 90% and 85% respectively are reported . 

Michael Carl and Antje Schmidt-Wigger.
1998 . Shallow Postmorphological Processing with KURD . In Proceedings of NeM-
LaP3/CoNLL98, pages 257?265, Sydney.
Michael Carl , Mary line Hernandez , Susanne Preu ? , and Chantal Enguehard .  2004 . English Terminology in CLAT . In LREC-
Workshop on Computational & Computer-assisted Terminology  , Lisbonne . 
Gesellschaft fu?r Informatik ( Hg .), Bonn , 1999.
Gleich behandlung imS prachgebrauch : Reden und Schreibenfu?r Frauen und Ma?nner  . 
Institut fu?r Angew and te Informations for schung , Saarbru?cken ,  2004 . Working paper 38 . to appear . 
Heinz-Dieter Maas .  1996 . MPRO-E in System zur Analyse und Synthese deutscher Wo?rter  . In Rol and Hausser , editor , Linguistische Verifikation , Sprache und Information . 
Max Niemeyer Verlag , Tu?bingen.
Schweizerische Bundeskanzlei ( Hg . ), Bern , 1996 . Leitfaden zurs prach lichen Gleich be-handlungim Deutschen  . 
Universita?t Zu?rich(Hg . ), Zu?rich , 2000 . Leit-faden zurs prach lichen Gleichbe handlung von
Frauund Mann.
