Resolving Individual and Abstract Anaphora in Texts and 

Costanza Navarretta
Center for Sprogteknologi , University of Copenhagen
Njalsgade 802300 Copenhagen Scostanza@cst.dk

This paper describes an extension of the dar -algorithm  ( Navarretta ,  2004 ) for resolving intersentential pronominal anaphors referring to individual and abstract entities in texts and dialogues  . Indar individual entities are resolved combining models which identify high degree of salience with high degree of givenness  ( topicality ) of entities in the hearer?s cognitive model , e . g . ( Grosz et al , 1995), with Hajic?ova ? et al . ? s ( 1990 ) salience account which assigns the highest degree of salience to entities in the focal part of an utterance in Information Structure terms  , which often introduce new information in discourse  . An aph-ors referring to abstract entities are resolved with an extension of the algorithm presented by Eckert and Strube  ( 2000 )  . The extended dar-algorithm accounts for differences in the resolution mechanisms of different types of Danish pronouns  . Manual tests of the algorithm show that dar performs better than other resolution algorithms on the same data  . 
1 Introduction
Although most pronominal anaphora resolution algorithms only account for anaphors referring to individual entities  , anaphors referring to abstract entities evoked by verbal phrases  , clauses or discourse segments ( henceforth APAs ) are quite common in English see i . a . ( Byron and Allen , 1998) and even more in Danish ( Navarretta ,  2004) . Recently , two algorithms for resolving APAs and individual pronominal anaphors  ( henceforth IPAs ) in specific English dialogues have been proposed Eckert and Strube?s  ( 2000 ) es00 and Byron?s ( 2002 ) phora . Furthermore Strube and Mu?ller ( Strube and Mu?ller ,  2003 ) have presented a machine learning approach for resolving APAs in spoken dialogues  . 1 Both es00 and phora 1We do not discuss this approach further in this paper  . 
recognise IPAs and APAs on the basis of semantic constraints on the argument position occupied by the anaphors and account for differences in reference between personal and demonstrative pronouns  . In es00 demonstrative pronouns preferentially refer to abstract entities  , while personal pronouns preferentially refer to individual ones  . es00 resolves IPAs applying Strube?s ( 1998 ) algorithm . In phora the antecedents of personal pronouns are searched for looking at their degree of salience which is implemented by word order as in  ( Grosz et al ,  1995) . Demonstratives , instead , are searched for in the list of activated entities  ( Gundel et al , 1993) containing nonNP antecedents , which are assumed to be less salient . In phorademon stratives can also refer to Kinds . 
e s00 requires that the structure of dialogues has been marked  . Byron?s phora-algorithm does not rely on predefined dialogue structure  , but only searches for abstract antecedents of APAs in the sentence preceding the anaphor  . 
Thus it does not account for APAs referring to larger discourse segments  . phora relies on both semantic knowledge and a model of speech acts and accounts for more phenomena than  es00  . 
Differing from es00, phora has been implemented.
To resolve IPAs and APAs in Danish texts and dialogues Navarretta  ( 2004 ) has proposed the socalled dar-algorithm ( Navarretta ,  2004) . 
In dar APAs are resolved following the es00 strategy , but daraccounts for the Danish abstract anaphors which occur in much more contexts than the English ones  . Individual anaph-ors are resolved in dar following a novel strategy which combines models which identify high degree of salience with high degree of givenness  ( topicality ) of entities in the hearer?s cognitive model , e . g . ( Grosz et al ,  1995) , with Hajic?ova ? et al?s ( 1990 ) salience account which assigns the highest degree of salience to entities in the focal part of an utterance in Information Structure terms  . These entities often introduce new information in discourse  . 
In the present paper we describe an extended version of the dar-algorithm accounting for differences in the reference of various types of Danish demonstratives which we found analysing the uses of pronouns in three text collections  ( computer manuals , novels and newspaper articles ) and three corpora of recorded naturally-occurring dialogues  ( the sl ( Duncker and Hermann ,  1996) , the bysoc ( Gregersen and Pedersen , 1991) and the pid corpora ( Jensen ,  1989)) . 
In the following we first discuss the background for our proposal  ( section 2 ) then we describe the extended dar-algorithm ( section 3 )  . In section 4 we evaluate it and compare its performance with that of other known algorithms  . Finally we make some concluding remarks . 
2 Background for DAR
In most applied approaches resolving pronominal anaphors mainly consists in the following steps :   1: determining the anaphoric antecedent domain ;   2: choosing the most prominent or salient antecedent among possible candidates  . 
Thus determining the degree of salience of discourse elements  , henceforth DEs , is essential to anaphor resolution . Although there is not always an identity relation between linguistic antecedents and referents  , we also follow this strategy , well aware that it is particularly problematic for resolving APAs  ( see specially ( Webber ,  1991)) . Nearly all salience-based algorithms identify high degree of salience with high degree of givenness of DEs  . In fact , although different criteria are used for ranking DEs  , such as linear order , hierarchy of grammatical roles , information structure , Prince?s Familiarity Scale ( Prince ,  1981) , all algorithms assign the highest prominence to the DEs which are most topical  , known , bound , familiar and thus given , e . g . 
( Grosz et al , 1995; Brennan et al , 1987; Strube ,  1998) . Analysing the Danish data we found a restricted number of cases where high degree of salience did not correspond to high degree of topicality  , as it is the case in example (1) .  (1)
A : hvem . . . hvemar bej de de [ dinmor]imed ? ( with whom . . . whom did [ your mother ] i work )
B:[Hun]iarbej de demed [ voresnabo]k ( [She]i worked with [ our neighbour]k ) [ Hun]k varenke . . . havdetres?nner [ bysoc ] ( [ She]k was a widow . . . had three sons ) In ( 1 ) the antecedent of the second occurrence of the pronoun hun  ( she ) is the object vores nabo ( our neighbour ) which provides the information requested in the preceding question  . This nominal is assigned lower prominence than the subject pronoun hun  ( she ) in most salience models . 
The only salience model which departs from the givenness2 assumption has been proposed by Hajic?ova ? et al  ( 1990 )  . Hajic?ova ? et al , in fact , assign the highest degree of salience to DEs in the focal part of an utterance in information structure terms  ( Sgall et al ,  1986) . These entities often represent new information . Hajic?ova ? et al?s approach is original and can account for the data in  ( 1 )  , but it is problematic from an applied point of view  . In the first place it is difficult to determine the information structure of all utterances  . Secondly , focal candidate antecedents are ranked highest in Hajic?ova ? et al?s model  , but they still compete with given candidate antecedents in their system  . Finally the data does not confirm that all entities in the focal part of an utterance have the highest degree of accessibility  . 
We agree with Hajic?ova ?? s insight , but in order to operationalise the influence of focality in a reliable way propose the following  . Accessi-bility by default is connected with givenness as assumed in most algorithms  . However , when speakers explicitly change the degree of accessibility of entities in discourse by marking the massalient with information structure related devices  , these entities get the highest degree of salience and are proposed as the preferred antecedents of anaphors  . In cases of explicit focus marking the shift of focus of attention is as coherent as continuing speaking about the same entities  , because it is preannounced to the addressee . On the basis of the data we propose a list of identifiable constructions in which explicit focus marking occurs  . 3 Examples from the list are the following : a : Entities referred to by NPs which in Danish are focally marked structurally  ( clefts , existential and topicalised constructions ) . 
b : Entities referred to by NPs that follow focusing adverbs  . 
c : Entities focally marked by the prosody ( if this information is available ) and/or entities providing information requested in questions  , as in (1) . 
2Giveness subsumes here concepts such as topicality and familiarity  . 
3Many of these constructions are also studied in the Information Structure and in some anaphora resolution literature  , e . g . ( Sidner , 1983) . 
Givenness preference in Danish can be modelled by the hierarchy of verbal complements  . 
In addition to salience preferences we found that parallelism can account for numerous uses of Danish anaphors  . 4Inspired by the work of ( Kameyama ,  1996 ) we have defined a preference interaction model to be used in resolution  . 
Our model is given in figure 1 . 5 The interac-Parallel . ? Focality ? Pronom . chain ? Givenness
Figure 1: Interaction of preferences tion model states that givenness preferences are overridden by focality preference  , when in conflict , and that they all are overridden by parallelism . 
dar also accounts for reference differences between Danish demonstrative and personal pronouns  . Weak ( cliticised and unstressed ) pronouns usually refer to the most salient entity in the utterance  . Strong ( stressed and demonstrative ) pronouns emphasise or put in contrast the entities they refer to and/or indicate that their antecedents are not the most expected ones  . 6 Demonstratives preferentially refer to abstract entities  , while personal pronouns preferentially refer to individual entities in ambiguous contexts  . All these differences are also accounted for in the literature on anaphora  . However we also found more language-specific peculiarities in our data  . Two examples of these pecular-ities are the following  . The Danish demonstratives denne/dette/disse ( this common gen-der/this neuter gender/these ) never corefer with a subject antecedent intrasententially  . In the few cases where they have a subject antecedent in a preceding clause  , there are no other antecedent competitors . The abstract anaphor dette , furthermore , is often used to refer to the last mentioned situation in the previous sentence  , often expressed in a subordinated clause , and not to the whole sentence or to an abstract anaphor in the preceding sentence  . The partic-4According to parallelism in adjacent utterances with parallel grammatical complements  , the preferred antecedent of an anaphor in the second utterance is the linguistic expression in the first utterance with the same grammatical function  . 
5Commonsense preferences which override all the other preferences are not implemented  . 
6The most frequent Danish third person singular gender pronoun det can both be a personal pronoun  ( corresponding to it ) and a demonstrative pronoun ( corresponding to this/that )  . In the latter case it is always stressed . 
ular phenomena are also accounted for indar.
Approx . half of the APA occurrences in our dialogues refer to entities evoked by larger discourse segments  ( more turntakings )  . Thus we follow Eckert and Strube?s approach of marking the structure of dialogues and searching for APA antecedents in the right frontier of the discourse tree  ( Webber ,  1991) . darp resupposes different discourse structures for texts and dialogues  . dar follows the es00 and phora strategy of discriminating between IPAs and APAs by rules looking at the semantic constraints on the predication contexts in which the anaphors occur  . dar relies on more discriminating rules thanes00 , which were defined on the basis of large amounts of data and of the encodings of a large computational lexicon  . 
daruses language-specific rules to account for Danish APAs  . These occur in much more contexts than in English where elliptical constructions or other anaphors such as too and so are used  . Examples of Danish-specific uses of abstract anaphors are given in  ( 2 ) - ( 3 )  . 
(2) Hanvarsulten . Detvarjegikke . [ pid](lit . He was hungry . That was I not ) ( My friends were hungry . I wasn?t . ) (3) Hankunnes v?mme , mendetkunne hunikke(lit . He could swim , but it could shenot ) ( He coulds wim , but she couldn?t ) A language-specific rule recognising APAs is the following : constructions with modal verbs and an object  , such as x skalman ( lit . x shallone ) ( oneshall ), xvilman(lit . x will one ) ( one will ) . 
3 The DAR Algorithm 3 . 1 Search Space and DE lists dar presupposes the discourse structure described by Grosz and Sidner  ( 1986 )  . The minimal discourse unit is the utterance U . Paragraphs correspond to discourse segments in texts  . In dialogues discourse segments were manually marked  ( sesection 4 )  . The dialogues were structured with Synchronising Units  ( SU ) according to the definitions in ES00 . 
The immediate antecedent search space of a pronoun x in utterance Un is the previous utterance  , Un?1 . If Un is the first component in SU min dialogues the immediate search space for x is 
SUm?1 . dar assumes two antecedent domains depending on whether the pronoun has or has not been recognised as an IPA  . The antecedent domain for IPAs is first U n?1 and then the preceding utterances in the right frontier of the discourse tree searched for in recency order  . 7 The antecedent domain for APAs or anaphors which can both be IPAs and APAs is U  n?1   . 
daroperates on two lists of DEs , the Ilist and the Alist . The I list contains the NPs referred to in U n?1 ranked according to their degree of salience and enriched with information on gender  , number , animacy and other simple semantic types necessary to implement selectional restrictions  . In the I list information about the grammatical role of nominals is provided and strongly focally marked elements are indicated  . The leftmost element in the I list is the most salient one  . Givenness and focality preferences are accounted for in the I list  , as illustrated in figure 2 . Focally marked entities are put in front of the list while the remaining DEs are ordered according to verbal complement order  . Inside verbal complements nominals are ordered according to their occurrence order as illustrated in the second row of the figure  . The abstract entities which are referred to by an APA in U  n?1 or SU m?1 are encoded in the Alist . They are removed from the list after a new utterance  ( SU in dialogues ) has been processed if they have not been mentioned in it  . 
The context ranking for abstract entities is that proposed by Eckert and Strube  ( 2000 )  . 
3 . 2 The Algorithm and Its Functions dar consists of two different functions Re-solve Det and Resolve Ipa  . The former is applied if the actual pronoun x is third person singular neuter  , while the latter is applied in all the remaining cases : if x is singular & neuter then go to Resolve Det  ( x ) else go to Resolve Ipa ( x ) The main steps of Resolve Ipa are given in figure 3  . The Resolve Ipa approach of indicating possible reference ambiguities resembles that proposed by Kameyama  ( 1996 )  . The main structure of the function Resolve Det is inspired by  es00  . Resolve Dettests the pronoun x using the IPA and APA discriminating rules discussed in section  2  . Resolve Det is simplified in figure 4 . Resolve Ipa-neu is like Resolve Ipa except that it returns if no NP antecedents are found in U  n?1   ( case A ) so that
Resolve Apa can be applied . Resolve Apa 7The search space in es00 is the preceding utterance for all pronouns . 
distinguishes between types of pronoun . If x is weak , the preferred antecedent is searched for among the elements indicated in the context ranking  , unless it is the object of the verb g?re(do ) , modals , have ( have ) or the abstract subject in copula constructions . In these cases the pronoun is resolved to the VP of the element in the A-list or in the context ranking  . 
If x is strong Resolve Apa attempts to resolve or classify it as vague depending on the type of pronoun  . This part of the algorithm is specific to Danish and accounts for the fact that different strong pronouns preferentially refer to different abstract entities in the data  . Resolved APAs are inserted into the Alist . In case of failure Resolve Apare turns so that Resolve Ipa-neu can be applied  . If both functions fail , the pronoun is classified as vague . 
3.3 Some Examples
In the following we look at the resolution of example  ( 1 ) from section 2 . The simplified Ilists and Alists after each utterance has been processed are given in figure  5  . (1) contains three
SUs . U chronising units ( SU
Udinm or ( your mother) . In U pronoun hun ( she ) occurs , thus Resolve Ipa is applied . It resolves hunto the compatible NP in the I list  , dinmor . After U cessed the I list contains two elements in this order : the focal marked entity vores nabo  ( our neighbour ) and the pronoun hun ( = dinmor )  . 
Resolve Ip are solves the occurrence of the pronoun hun  ( she ) in Udidate NP in the Ilist , vores nabo . Here focal preference overrides pronominal chain preference  . Example (4) contains the APA det . 

U ( with whom . . . whom did your mother work)
Ilist : [ dinmor]
A list : [] ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

U ( She worked with our neighbour )
Ilist : [ voresnabo , hun=dinmor]
A list : [] ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?

U(She was a widow ... had three sons)
Ilist : [ hun = voresnabo , tres?nner]
Alist : []
Figure 5: I lists and A lists for example ( 1 )   ( 4 ) : Duharsv?rtved at semuse mark?renp?ask?rmen . Hv or dank larer dude t ? [ edb] ( You have difficulties seing the mouse-cursor FOCAL MARKED > SUBJECT > OBJECT/PrepOBJECT > OBJECT  2 >OTHERCOMPLS > ADJUNCTS ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?????????????????????????- 
NCOMPL prec
NCOMPL prec ...> prec
NCOMPLn
Figure 2: Order of DEs in the Ilistantecedent in I list for U  n?1 or S m?1 ? no antecedent 1 anteced . more anteced . 
look in prec.
I lists apply preferences (1) parallelism ? ant . found ant . not found return it yes no return it x = inferable return y = return y = parallelleftmost candidate and c and  . in I list can did . list and c . list x is weak ? yes no return y return second and candidate and list ambig  . list ambig . 
Figure 3: Resolve Ipa ( common-gend ) on the screen ( common-gend )  . 
How do you manage it/this ( neuter gender ) )? The simplified Ilists and Alists after the two utterances in  ( 4 ) have been processed are presented in figure 6 . After U

Ilist : [ muse mark ? ren , sk?rmen]
A list : [] ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?



Figure 6: I lists and A lists for example ( 4 ) cessed there are two common gender singular NPs in the I list  , muse mark ? ren ( the mouse cursor ) and sk?rmen ( the screen )  . In Usingular neuter gender pronoun det ( it ) occurs , thus Resolve Det is applied . The pronoun is neither IPA nor APA according to the discriminating rules  . Resolve Det attempts to find an individual antecedent of the weak pronoun  , applying the function Resolve Ipa-neu . 
Resolve Ipa-neufails because the two DEs in the I list do not agree with the pronoun  . Then the function Resolve Apare solves x looking at the context ranking  . Being the Alist empty , U is proposed as antecedent . The resolved APA is added to the Alist . 
4 Tests and Evaluation
We have manually tested daron randomly chosen texts and dialogues from our collections  . 
The performance of daron dialogues has been compared with that of  es00  . The function for resolving IPAs ( Resolve Ipa ) has similarly been tested on texts , where APAs were excluded . We have compared the obtained results with those obtained by testing bf p  ( Brennan et al , 1987) and str98 ( Strube ,  1998) . 
In all tests the intrasentential anaphors have been manually resolved and expletive and cataphoric uses of pronouns have been marked and excluded from the test  . Dialogue act units were marked and classified by three annotators following  ( Eckert and Strube ,  2000) . The reliability for the two annotation tasks ( ?- statistics ( Carletta , 1996)) was of 0 . 94 and 0 . 90 respectively . Pronominal anaphors were marked , classified and resolved by two annotators . The ?- statistics for the pronoun classification was  0  . 86 . 
In few cases ( one in the texts and two in the dialogues ) where the annotators did not agree upon resolution  , the pronouns were marked as ambiguous and were excluded from the test  . The results obtained for bfp and str98 are given in table 1  , while the results of dar?s Resolve Ipa are given in table  2  . In the tables CR stands for ? correctly resolved  ?  , HR stands for ? resolved by humans ? , RA stands for ? resolved overall ? , P stands for precision and R stands for recall . 
Becaused arboth classifies and resolves an aph -ors  , both precision and recall ( respect to human resolution ) are given in table 2 . The results indicate that Resolve Ipa performs significantly better than bfp and  str98 on the type of x ?
IPAAPAIPA/APA ?
Resolve IPA-new Resolve APAx weak ? x weak ? yes no yes no Resolve Ipa-new Resolve Apalook in Alist x = detx = dettex = dether resolve look in Alist look in A list mark as  es00 as es00 prefer subclause as vague
Figure 4: Resolve Det
Danish texts . The better performance of dar was due to the account of focal and parallelism preferences  , of the different reference mechanisms of personal and demonstrative pronouns and to the enlarged resolution scope  . Furthermored arrecognises some generic pronouns and inferable pronouns and excludes them from resolution  , but often fails to recognise antecedent-less and inferable plural pronouns  , because it finds a plural nominal in the preceding discourse and proposes it as antecedent  . The lack of common sense knowledge explains many incorrectly resolved anaphors  . The results of the test of algorithm CRHRP bf p 513   645   79  . 53 str 985 246 458 1 . 24 Table 1: Results of bfp and str98 on texts
CRRAHRPR 5756 51645 88.33 89.14
Table 2: Results of Resolve I paon texts the dar algorithm on written texts are in table  3  . These results are good compared with the results of the function Resolve Ipa  ( table 2 )  . 
The discriminating rules identify correctly IPAs and APAs in the large majority of the cases  . 
Recognition failure often involves pronouns in contexts which are not covered by the discriminating rules  . In particular dar fails to resolve singular neuter gender pronouns with distant antecedents and to identify vague anaphors  , because it always ? finds ? an antecedent in the context ranking  . Correct resolution in these cases requires a deep analysis of the context  . The results of applying dar and es00 on Danish dialogues are reported in table 4  . 8 The results of the tests indicate that dar resolves IPAs significantly better than  es00   ( which uses str 98 )  . 
8We extended es00 with the Danish-specific identification rules before applying it  . 
resolution IPA
CRR AHRPR 5606 516 4586 . 02 86 . 82 resolution APA
CRRAHRPR 688777 78.16 88.31
Table 3: Results of daron texts dar correctly resolves more Danish demonstrative pronouns than  es00  , because it accounts for language-specific particularities  . In general , however , the resolution results for APAs are similar to those obtained for  es00  . This is not surprising , becaused aruses the same resolution strategy on these pronouns  . dar performs better on texts than on dialogues . This reflects the more complex nature of dialogues  . The results indicate that the IPA/APA discriminating rules also work well on dialogues  . The cases of resolution failure were the same as for the texts  . As an experiment we applied daron the resolution IPA 
Algorithm CRR AHRPR
ES0025 841 1414 62.77 62.31
DAR 289 3864 1474.87 68.81 resolution APA
Algorithm CRR AHRPR
ES00179286 2696 2.596 6.54
DAR 1992 77269 71.84 73.98
Table 4: Results of es00 and daron dialogues dialogues without relying on the predefined dialogue structure  . In this test the recognition of IPAs and APAs was still good  , however the success rate for IPAs was of 60 . 1% and for APAs was of only 39 . 3% . Many errors were due to the fact that antecedents we researched for in the preceding discourse in linear order and that ungrounded utterances were included in the discourse model  . 
5 Concluding Remarks
In this paper we presented dar , an algorithm for resolving IPAs and APAs in Danish texts and dialogues  . Indard ifferences between the referential characteristics of Danish weak and strong pronouns are accounted for and a novel strategy for resolving individual anaphors is proposed  . This strategy combines givenness with focality preferences to model salience and also accounts for parallelism preferences  . dar performs significantly better on IPAs than algorithms which only rely on givenness-based salience models  . 
darextends the es00 strategy of classifying and resolving ( some types of ) APAs . The tests of dar indicate that the es00?s approach of recognising APAs is also promising for texts and other languages than English  . 
dar has not been compared with phora which is the only abstract anaphora algorithm implemented  . We find the algorithm very interesting because it addresses many of the same phenomena  , but with different strategies . It would be useful to combine some of these strategies with the approaches proposed in dar and  es00 to improve the still problematic resolution of abstract anaphors  . 

S . F . Brennan , M . W . Friedman , and C . J . Pollard .  1987 . A Centering Approach to Pronouns . In Proceedings of the ACL?87, pages 155?162, CA . 
D . Byron and J . Allen .  1998 . Resolving demonstrative pronouns in the trains93 corpus . In
Proceedings of DAARC2, pages 68?81.
D . K . Byron .  2002 . Resolving Pronominal Reference to Abstract Entities  . In Proceedings of the ACL 2002 . 
J . Carletta .  1996 . Assessing agreement on classification tasks . The kappa statistic . In Computational Linguistics , 22(2):249?254 . 
D . Duncker and J . Hermann .  1996 . Patien-tor dogl ? geord-s ? rordeller f?lles or d ? M?aneds skrift for Praktisk L?gegerning  , pages 1019?1030 . 
M . Eckert and M . Strube .  2000 . Dialogue acts , synchronising units and anaphora resolution . 
Journal of Semantics , 17:51?89.
F . Gregersen and I . L . Pedersen , editors .  1991 . 
The Copenhagen study in urban sociolinguistics . Reitzel . 
B . J . Grosz and C . L . Sidner .  1986 . Attention , Intentions , and the Structure of Discourse . 
Computational Linguistics , 12(3):175?284.
B . Grosz , A . K . Joshi , and S . Weinstein .  1995 . 
Centering : A Framework for Modeling the Local Coherence of Discourse  . Computational
Linguistics , 21(2):203?225.
J.K . Gundel , N . Hedberg , and R . Zacharski.
1993 . Cognitive status and the form of referring expressions in discourse  . Language , 69(2):274?307 . 
E . Hajic?ova ?, P . Kubon ?, and V . Kubon ? .  1990 . 
Hierarchy of Salience and Discourse Analysis and Production  . In H . Karlgren , editor , Proceedings of COLING ?90 , volume III , pages 144?148 , Helsinki . 
K.A.Jensen . 1989. Projekt in van drer dansk.
Technical report , Copenhagen University.
M . Kameyama .  1996 . In defeasible Semantics and Defeasible Pragmatics . In M . Kanazawa , C . Pin?on , and H . de Stwart , editors , Quanti-fiers , Deduction and Context , pages 111?138 . 
CSLI , Stanford , CA.
C . Navarretta .  2002 . Combining Information Structure and Centering -based Models of Salience for Resolving Intersenten-tial Pronominal Anaphora  . In A . Branco , T . McEnery , and R . Mitkov , editors , Proceedings of the 4th DAARC , pages 135?140 . 
Edic ? oes Colibri.
C . Navarretta .  2004 .   . In Proceedings of Reference Resolution and Its Applications Workshop at ACL  2004  , Barcelona , Spain . 
E . F . Prince .  1981 . Toward a taxonomy of givennew information . In P . Cole , editor , Radical Pragmatics , Academic Press , pages 223?255 . 
C . Sidner .  1983 . Focusing in the Comprehension of Definite Anaphora  . In M . Brady and R . Berwick , editors , Computational Models of
Discourse , MIT Press , pages 267?330.
P . Sgall , E . Hajic?ova ?, and J . Panevova ? .  1986 . 
The Meaning of the Sentence in its Semantic and Pragmatic Aspects  . Reidel , Dordrecht . 
M . Strube .  1998 . Never Look Back : An Alternative to Centering . In Proceedings of
COLING-ACL?98, II , pages 1251?1257.
M . Strube and C . Mu?ller .  2003 . A machine learning approach to pronoun resolution in spoken dialogue  . In Proceedings of the
ACL?03, pages 168?175.
B . L . Webber .  1991 . Structure and Osten-sion in the Interpretation of Discourse Deixis  . 
Natural Language and Cognitive Processes ,  6(2):107?135 , January . 
