Evaluating CrossLanguage Annotation Transfer in the MultiSemCor Corpus 
Luisa BENTIVOGLI , Pamela FORNER , Emanuele PIANTA

Via Sommarive , 18
38050 Povo ? Trento

bentivo , forner , pianta@itc.it


In this paper we illustrate and evaluate an approach to the creation of high quality linguistically annotated resources based on the exploitation of aligned parallel corpora  . This approach is based on the assumption that if a text in one language has been annotated and its translation has not  , annotations can be transferred from the source text to the target using word alignment as a bridge  . The transfer approach has been tested in the creation of the MultiSemCor corpus  , an English/Italian parallel corpus created on the basis of the English SemCor corpus  . In MultiSemCor texts are aligned at the word level and semantically annotated with a shared inventory of senses  . We present some experiments carried out to evaluate the different steps involved in the methodology  . The results of the evaluation suggest that the cross-language annotation transfer methodology is a promising solution allowing for the exploitation of existing  ( mostly English ) annotated resources to bootstrap the creation of annotated corpora in new  ( resource-poor ) languages with greatly reduced human effort . 
1 Introduction
Large-scale language resources play a crucial role for a steady progress in the field of Natural Language Processing  ( NLP )  , as they are essential for carrying out basic research and for building portable and robust systems with broadcoverage  . 
More specifically , given the advances of machine learning statistical methods for NLP  , with supervised training methods leading the way to major improvements in performance on different tasks  , a particularly valuable resource is now represented by large linguistically annotated corpora  . 
Upuntil some years ago , linguistically annotated corpora were only produced through manual annotation  , or by manual check of automatically produced annotations  . Unfortunately , manual annotation is a very difficult and time -consuming task  , and this fact has led to a shortage of manual -quality annotated data  . The scarcity of large size annotated corpora is more acute for languages different from English  , for which even minimal amounts of data are still missing  . This state of affairs makes it clear that any endeavour aiming at reducing the human effort needed to produce manual-quality labelled data will be highly beneficial to the field  . 
Recent studies have shown that a valuable opportunity for breaking the annotated resource bottleneck is represented by parallel corpora  , which can be exploited in the creation of resources for new languages via projection of annotations available in another language  . This paper represents our contribution to the research in this field  . We present a novel methodology to create a semantically annotated corpus by exploiting information contained in an already annotated corpus  , using word alignment as a bridge . The methodology has been applied in the creation of the MultiSemCor corpus  . MultiSemCor is an English/Italian parallel corpus which is being created on the basis of the English SemCor corpus and where the texts are aligned at the word level and semantically annotated with a shared inventory of senses  . 
Given the promising results of a pilot study presented in  ( Bentivogli and Pianta ,  2002) , the MultiSemCor corpus is now under development . In this paper we focus on a thorough evaluation of the steps involved in the transfer methodology  . We evaluate the performance of a new version of the word alignment system and the final quality of the annotations transferred from English to Italian  . In Section 2 we lay out the annotation transfer methodology and summarize some related work  . In Section 3 we discuss some problematic issues related to the methodology which will be extensively tested and evaluated in Section  4  . In Section 5 we report about the state of development of the MultiSemCor corpus and  , finally , in Section 6 we present conclusions and our thoughts on future work  . 
2 The Annotation Transfer Methodology
The MultiSemCor project ( Bentivogli and Pianta ,  2002 ) aims at building an English/Italian parallel corpus  , aligned at the word level and annotated with PoS , lemma and word sense . The parallel corpus is created by exploiting the SemCor corpus  ( Landes et al ,  1998) , which is a subset of the English Brown corpus containing about  700  , 000 running words . In SemCor all the words are tagged by PoS , and more than 200 , 0 00 content words are also lemmatized and sense -tagged with reference to the WordNet lexical  database1   ( Fellbaum ,  1998) . 
The main hypothesis underlying this methodology is that  , given a text and its translation into another language  , the semantic information is mostly preserved during the translation process  . 
Therefore , if the texts in one language have been semantically annotated and their translations have not  , annotations can be transferred from the source language to the target using word alignment as a bridge  . 
The first problem to be solved in the creation of MultiSemCor was the fact that the Italian translations of the SemCor texts did not exist  . Our solution was to have the translations made by professional translators  . Given the high costs of building semantically annotated corpora  , requiring specific skills and very specialized training  , we think that manually translating the annotated corpus and automatically transferring the annotations may be preferable to hand-labelling a corpus from scratch  . Not only are translators more easily available than linguistic annotators  , but translations may be a more flexible and durable kind of annotation  . Moreover , the annotation transfer methodology has the further advantage of producing a parallel corpus  . 
With respect to a situation in which the translation of a corpus is already available  , a corpus translated on purpose presents the advantage that translations can be ? controlled  ?  , i . e . carried out following criteria aiming at maximizing alignment and annotation transfer  . Our professional translators are asked to use , preferably , the same dictionaries used by the word aligner , and to maximize , whenever possible , the lexical correspondences between source and target texts  . The translators are also told that the controlled translation criteria should never be followed to the detriment of a good Italian prose  . 
Controlled translations cost the same as free translations  , while having the advantage of at Princeton University  , in which nouns , verbs , adjectives , and adverbs are organized into sets of synonyms ( synsets ) and linked to each other by means of various lexical and semantic relationships  . In the last years , within the NLP community WordNet has become the reference lexicon for almost all tasks involving word sense disambiguation  ( see , for instance , the Senseval competition ) . 
enhancing the performances of the annotation transfer procedure  . 
Once the SemCor texts have been translated , the strategy for creating MultiSemCor consists of  ( i ) automatically aligning Italian and English texts at the word level  , and ( ii ) automatically transferring the word sense annotations from English to the aligned Italian words  . The final result of the MultiSemCor project is an Italian corpus annotated with PoS  , lemma and word sense , but also an aligned parallel corpus lexically annotated with a shared inventory of word senses  . More specifically , the sense inventory used is MultiWordNet ( Pianta et al ,  2002) , a multilingual lexical database in which the Italian component is strictly aligned with the English WordNet  . 
2.1 Related Work
The idea of obtaining linguistic information about a text in one language by exploiting parallel or comparable texts in another language has been explored in the field of Word Sense Disambiguation  ( WSD ) since the early 90? s , the most representative works being ( Brown et al ,  1991) , ( Gale et al ,  1992) , and ( Dagan and Itai ,  1994) . 
In more recent years , Ide et al ( 2002 ) present a method to identify word meanings starting from a multilingual corpus  . A byproduct of applying this method is that once a word in one language is word sense tagged  , the translation equivalents in the parallel texts are also automatically annotated  . 
Crosslanguage tagging is the goal of the work by Diab and Resnik  ( 2002 )  , who present a method for word sense tagging both the source and target texts of parallel bilingual corpora with the 
WordNet sense inventory.
Parallel to the studies regarding the projection of semantic information  , more recently the NLP community has also explored the possibility of exploiting translation to project more syntax-oriented annotations  . Yarowsky et al ( 2001 ) describe a successful method consisting of ( i ) automatic annotation of English texts ,   ( ii ) cross-language projection of annotations onto target language texts  , and ( iii ) induction of noise-robust taggers for the target language  . A further step is made in ( Hwa et al , 2002) and ( Cabezas et al ,  2001) , which address the task of acquiring a dependency treebank by bootstrapping from existing linguistic resources for English  . Finally , in ( Riloff et al ,  2002 ) a method is presented for rapidly creating Information Extraction  ( IE ) systems for new languages by exploiting existing IE systems via cross-language projection  . 
The results of all the abovementioned studies show how previous major investments in English annotated corpora and tool development can be effectively leveraged across languages  , allowing the development of accurate resources and tools in other languages without comparable human effort  . 
3 Quality Issues
The MultiSemCor project raises a number of theoretical and practical issues  . For instance : is translational language fully representative of the general use of language in the same way as original language is ? To what extent are the lexica of different languages comparable ? These theoretical issues have already been presented in  ( Pianta and Bentivogli , 2003) and will not be discussed here . In the following , we address the issue of the quality of the annotation resulting from the application of the methodology  . 
As opposed to automatic word sense disambiguation tasks  , the MultiSemCor project specifically aims at producing manual-quality annotated data  . Therefore , a potential risk which needs to be faced is represented by the possible degradation of the Italian annotation quality through the various steps of the annotation transfer procedure  . A number of factors must be taken into account . First , annotation errors can be found in the original English texts  . Then , the word aligner may align words incorrectly , and finally the transfer of the semantic annotations may not be applicable to certain translation pairs  . 
SemCor quality . The EnglishSemCor corpus has been manually annotated  . However , some annotation errors can be found in the texts ( see Fellbaum et al ,  1998 , for SemCor taggers ? confidence ratings ) . As an example , the word pocket in the sentence ? He put his hands on his pockets ? was incorrectly tagged with the WordNet synset pouch  , sac , sack , pocket--an enclosed space instead of the correct one pocket--a small pouch in a garment for carrying small articles  . 
Word alignment quality . The feasibility of the entire MultiSemCor project heavily depends on the availability of an English /Italian word aligner with very good performance in terms of recall and  , more importantly , precision . 
Transfer quality . Even when both the original English annotations and the word alignment are correct  , a number of cases still remain for which the transfer of the annotation is not applicable  . An annotation is not transferable from the source language to the target when the translation equivalent does not preserve the lexical meaning of the source language  . In these cases , if the alignment process puts the two expressions in correspondence  , then the transfer of the sense annotation from the source to the target language is not correct  . 
The first main cause of incorrect transfer is represented by translation equivalents which are not cross-language synonyms of the source language words  . For example , in a sentence of the corpus the English word meaning is translated with the Italian word motivo  ( reason , grounds ) which is suitable in that specific context but is not a synonymic translation of the English word  . In this case , if the two words are aligned , the transfer of the sense annotation from English is not correct as the English sense annotation is not suitable for the Italian word  . A specific case of non-synonymous translation occurs when a translation equivalent does not belong to the same lexical category of the source word  . For example , the English verb to coexist in the sentence ? the possibility forman to coexist with animals ? has been translated with the Italian noun coesistenza  ( coexistence ) in ? le possibilit ? dicoesistenza tragli uominieglianimali ?  . Even if the translation is suitable for that context  , the English sense of the verb cannot be transferred to the Italian noun  . Sometimes , non-synonymous translations are due to errors in the Italian translation  , as in pull translated as spingere ( push ) . 
A second case which offers challenge to the sense annotation transfer is phrasal correspondence  , occurring when a target phrase has globally the same meaning as the corresponding source phrase  , but the single words of the phrase are not cross -language synonyms of their corresponding source words  . For example , the expression adreamer sees has been translated as unapers on a sogna  ( a person dreams )  . The Italian translation maintains the synonymy at the phrase level but the single component words do not  . 
Therefore , if the single words were aligned any transfer from English to Italian would be incorrect  . 
Another example of phrasal correspondence , in which the semantic equivalence between words in the source and target phrase is even fuzzier  , is given by the English phrase the days would get shorter and shorter translated a simminente fine de item pi  ( imminent end of times )  . 
Another controversial cause of possible incorrect transfer is represented by the case in which the translation equivalent is indeed a cross-language synonym of the source expression but it is not a lexical unit  . This usually happens with lexical gaps , i . e . when a language expresses a concept with a lexical unit whereas the other language expresses the same concept with a free combination of words  , as for instance the English word successfully which can only be translated with the Italian free combination of words consucces so  ( with success )  . However , it can also be the result of a choice made by the translator who decides to use a free combination of words instead of a possible lexical unit  , as in empirically translated as in modo empirico ( in an empirical manner ) instead of empiricament e . In these cases the problem arises because in principle if the target expression is not a lexical unit it cannot be annotated as a whole  . On the contrary , each component of the free combination of words should be annotated with its respective sense  . 
In the next Section we will address these quality issues in order to assess the extent to which they affect the cross-language annotation transfer methodology  . 
4 Evaluation of the Annotation Transfer

A number of experiments have been carried out in order to test the various steps involved in the annotation transfer methodology  . More precisely , we evaluated the performances of the word alignment system and the quality of the final annotation of the Italian corpus  . 
4.1 Word Alignment
Word alignment is the first crucial step in the methodology applied to build MultiSemCor  . The word aligner used in the project is KNOWA ( KNO wledge-intensive Word Aligner )  , an English/Italian word aligner , developed at ITC-irst , which relies mostly on information contained in the Collins bilingual dictionary  , available in electronic format . KNOWA also exploits a morphological analyzer and a multiword recognizer for both English and Italian  . For a detailed discussion of the characteristics of this tool  , see ( Pianta and Bentivogli ,  2004) . 
Some characteristics of the MultiSem Corscenario make the alignment task easier for KNOWA  . First , in SemCor all multiwords included in WordNet are explicitly marked  . Thus KNOWA does not need to recognize English multiwords  , although it still needs to recognize the Italian ones  . Second , within MultiSemCor word alignment is done with the final aim of transferring lexical annotations from English to Italian  . Since only content words have word sense annotations in SemCor  , it is more important that KNOWA behaves correctly on content words  , which are easier to align than functional words . 
To evaluate the word aligner performance on the MultiSemCor task we created a gold standard composed of three English unseen texts  ( br-f43 , br-l10 , br-j53) taken randomly from the SemCor corpus . For each English text both a controlled and a free translation were made  . Given the expectation that free translations are less suitable for word alignment  , we decided to test KNOWA also on them in order to verify if the annotation transfer methodology can be applied to already existing parallel corpora  . 
The six resulting pairs of texts were manually aligned following a set of alignment guidelines which have been defined taking into account the work done in similar word alignment projects  ( Melamed ,  2001) . Annotators were asked to align different kinds of units  ( simple words , segments of more than one word , parts of words ) and to mark different kinds of semantic correspondence between the aligned units  , e . g . full correspondence ( synonymic ) , nonsynonymic , changes in lexical category , phrasal correspondence . Interannotator agreement was measured with the Dice coefficient proposed in  ( V?ronis and Langlais ,  2000 ) and can be considered satisfactory as it turned out to be  87% for free translations and 92% for controlled translations . As expected , controlled translations produced a better agreement rate between annotators  . 
For assessing the performance of KNOWA , the standard notions of Precision , Recall , and Coverage have been used following ( V?ronis and Langlais ,  2000) . See ( Och and Ney , 2003) and Arenberg et al , 2000) for different evaluation metrics . The performance of KNOWA applied to the MultiSemCor gold standard in a full text alignment task is shown in Table  1  . These results , which compare well with those reported in the literature  ( V?ronis , 2000) show that , as expected , controlled translations allow for a better alignment but also that free translations may be satisfactorily aligned  . 
The evaluation of KNOWA with respect to the English content words which have a semantic tag in SemCor is reported in Tables  2 and 3  , for both free and controlled translations and broken down by Part of Speech  . 
Precision Recall Coverage
Free 83.5 57.9 60.0
Controlled 88.4 67.5 74.9
Table 1: KNOWA on Full-text Precision Recall Coverage
Nouns 93.7 81.1 86.5
Verbs 85.6 70.3 82.1
Adjectives 95.6 64.7 67.7
Adverbs 88.4 38.5 43.5
Total 91.2 68.2 74.8
Table 2: KNOWA on sense-tagged words only ( Free translations ) Precision Recall Coverage
Nouns 95.9 82.5 86.1
Verbs 90.7 76.8 84.7
Adjectives 95.2 69.9 73.5
Adverbs 90.4 51.6 57.1
Total 93.9 74.6 79.5
Table 3: KNOWA on sense-tagged words only ( Controlled translations ) We can see that ignoring function words the performance of the word aligner improves in both precision and recall  . 
4.2 Italian Annotation Quality
As pointed out in Section 3 , even in the case of a perfect word alignment the transfer of the annotations from English to the correctly aligned Italian words can still be a source of errors in the resulting Italian annotations  . In order to evaluate the quality of the annotations automatically transferred to Italian  , a new gold standard was created starting from SemCor text  br-g11  . The English text , containing 2 , 153 tokens and 1 , 054 semantic annotations , was translated into Italian in a controlled modality  . The resulting Italian text is composed of 2 , 351 tokens , among which 1 , 085 are content words to be annotated . The English text and its Italian translation were manually aligned and the Italian text was manually semantically annotated taking into account the annotations of the English words  . Each time an English annotation was appropriate for the Italian corresponding word  , the annotator used it also for Italian . Otherwise , the annotator did not use the original English annotation for the Italian word and looked in WordNet for a suitable annotation  . 
Moreover , when the English annotations were not suitable for annotating the Italian words  , the annotator explicitly distinguished between wrong English annotations and English annotations that could not be transferred to the Italian translation equivalents  . The errors in the English annotations amount to 24 cases . Non-transferable annotations amount to 155 , among which 143 are due to lack of synonymy at lexical level and 12 to translation equivalents which are not lexical units  . 
The differences between the English and Italian text with respect to the number of tokens and annotations have also been analysed  . The Italian text has about 200 tokens and 31 annotated words more than the English text . The difference in the number of tokens is due to various factors  . First , there are grammatical characteristics specific to the Italian language  , such as a different usage of articles , or a greater usage of reflexive verbs which leads to a higher number of clitics  . For example , the English sentence ? ascells coalesced ? must be translated into Italian as ? quandolecellule siunirono ?  . Then , we have single English words translated into Italian with free combinations of words  ( ex : down translated as versoil basso ) and multiwords which are recognized in English and not recognized in Italian  ( e . g . one token for nucleic_acid in the English text and two tokens in the Italian text  , one for acido and one for nucleico ) . As regards content words to be annotated , we would have expected that their number was the same both in English and Italian  . 
In fact , the difference we found is much lower than the difference between tokens  . This difference is explained by the fact that some English content words have not been annotated  . For example , modal and auxiliary verbs ( to have , to be , can , may , to have to , etc . ) and partitives ( some , any ) where systematically left unannotated in the English text whereas they have been annotated for 

The automatic procedures for word alignment and annotation transfer were run on text  br-g11 and evaluated against the gold standard . The total number of transferred senses amounts to  879  . 
Among them ,   756 are correct and 123 are incorrect for the Italian words . Table 4 summarizes the results in terms of precision , recall and coverage with respect to both English annotations available  ( 1 , 054) and Italian words to be annotated (1 , 085) . 
We can see that the final quality of the Italian annotations is acceptable  , the precision amounting to 86 . 0% . The annotation error rate of 14 . 0% has been analyzed in order to classify the different factors affecting the transfer methodology  . Table 5 reports the data about the composition of the incorrect transfer  . 
Comparing the number of annotation errors in the English source  , as marked up during the creation of the gold standard  ( 24 )  , with the number of errors in the Italian annotation due to errors in the original annotation  ( 22 )  , we can see that almost all of the source errors have been transferred  , contributing in a consistent way to the overall
Italian annotation error rate.
As regards word alignment ,   br-g11 was a relatively easy text as the performance of KNOWA  ( i . e .  96 . 5% ) is higher than that obtained with the test set ( see Table 3 )  . 
Precision Recall Coverage
Wrt English 86.0 71.7 83.4
Wrt Italian 86.0 69.7 81.0
Table 4: Annotation evaluation on text br-g11 #%
English annotation errors 222.5
Word alignment errors 313.5
Non-transferable annotations 70 8.0
Total incorrect transfers 123 14.0
Table 5: Composition of the incorrect transfer The last source of annotation errors is represented by words which have been correctly aligned but whose word sense annotation cannot be transferred  . This happens with ( i ) translation equivalents which are lexical units but are not cross-language synonyms  , and ( ii ) translation equivalents which are cross-language synonyms but are not lexical units  . In practice , given the difficulty in deciding what is a lexical unit and what is not  , we decided to accept the transfer of a word sense from an English lexical unit to an Italian free combination of words  ( see for instance occhial idasole annotated with the sense of sunglasses  )  . Therefore , only the lack of synonymy at lexical level has been considered an annotation error  . 
The obtained results are encouraging . Among the 143 non-synonymous translations marked in the gold standard  , only 70 have been aligned by the word alignment system , showing that KNOWA is well suited to the MultiSemCor task  . The reason is that it relies on bilingual dictionaries where non-synonymous translations are quiter are  . This can be an advantage with respect to statistics-based word aligners  , which are expected to be able to align a great number of non-synonymous translations  , thus introducing more errors in the transfer procedure  . 
A final remark about the evaluation concerns the proportion of non-transferable word senses with respect to errors in the original English annotations  . It is sometimes very difficult to distinguish between annotation errors and non-transferable word senses  , also because we are not English native speakers . Thus , we preferred to be conservative in marking English annotations as errors unless in very clear cases  . This approach may have reduced the number of the errors in the original English corpus and augmented the number of non-transferable word senses  , thus penalizing the transfer procedure itself . 
Summing up , the cross-language annotation transfer methodology produces an Italian corpus which is tagged with a final precision of  86  . 0% . 
After the application of the methodology 19 . 0% of the Italian words still need to be annotated  ( see the annotation coverage of 81 . 0%) . We think that , given the precision and coverage rates obtained from the evaluation  , the corpus as it results from the automatic procedure can be profitably used  . 
However , even in the case that a manual revision is envisaged  , we think that hand-checking the automatically tagged corpus and manually annotating the remaining  19% still results to be cost effective with respect to annotating the corpus from scratch  . 
5 The MultiSemCor Corpus Up to Now
We are currently working at the extensive application of the annotation transfer methodology for the creation of the MultiSemCor corpus  . Up to now , MultiSemCor is composed of 29 English texts aligned at the word level with their corresponding Italian translations  . Both source and target texts are annotated with POS  , lemma , and word sense . More specifically , as regards English we have 55 , 935 running words among which 29 , 655 words are semantically annotated ( from SemCor )  . As for Italian , the corpus amounts to 59 , 726 running words among which 23 , 0 95 words are annotated with word senses that have been automatically transferred from English  . 
MultiSemCor can be a useful resource for a variety of tasks  , both as a monolingual semantically annotated corpus and as a parallel aligned corpus  . As an example , we are already using it to automatically enrich the Italian component of MultiWordNet  , the reference lexicon of MultiSemCor . As a matter of fact , out of the 23 , 095 Italian words automatically sense-tagged ,  5 , 2 92 are not yet present in MultiWordNet and will be added to it  . Moreover , the Italian component of MultiSemCor is being used as a gold standard for the evaluation of Word Sense Disambiguation systems working on Italian  . Besides NLP applications , MultiSemCor is also suitable to be consulted by humans through a Web interface  ( Ranieri et al , 2004) which is available at : http://tcc . itc . it/projects/multisemcor . 
6 Conclusion and future directions
We have presented and evaluated an approach to the creation of high quality semantically annotated resources based on the exploitation of aligned parallel corpora  . The results obtained from the thorough evaluation of the different steps involved in the methodology confirm the feasibility of the MultiSemCor project  . The crosslingual annotation transfer methodology is going to be applied also to the remaining  157 SemCor texts , which are currently being translated into Italian . 
As regards future research directions within the transfer annotation paradigm  , it would be interesting to extend the methodology to other languages  , e . g . Spanish , for which a WordNet exists and can be aligned with MultiWordNet  . 
Moreover , as the Brown Corpus , used to create SemCor , has been syntactically annotated within the English Penn Treebank  , the syntactic annotations of the SemCor texts are also available  . 
We are planning to explore the possibility of transferring the syntactic annotations from the English to the Italian texts of MultiSemCor  . 

L . Ahrenberg , M . Merkel , H . Sagvall and A . J . 
Tiedemann .  2000 . Evaluation of word alignment systems . In Proceedings of LREC 2000, Athens,

L . Bentivogli and E . Pianta .  2002 . Opportunistic Semantic Tagging . In Proceedings of LREC 2002 , Las Palmas , Canary Islands , Spain . 
P . F . Brown , S . A . Della Pietra , V . J . Della Pietra , and R . L . Mercer .  1991 . Word-Sense Disambiguation using Statistical Methods  . In Proceedings of ACL?91, Berkeley , California,

C . Cabezas , B . Dorr and P . Resnik .  2001 . Spanish Language Processing at University of Maryland : Building Infrastructure for Multilingual Applications  . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Spanish Language Processing and Language Technologies  , Jaen , 

I . Dagan and A . Itai . 1994. Word Sense
Disambiguation Using a Second Language
Monolingual Corpus . Computational Linguistics : 20(4):563-596 . 
M . Diab and P . Resnik .  2002 . An unsupervised method for word sense tagging using parallel corpora  . In In Proceedings of ACL 2002,
Philadelphia , USA.
C . Fellbaum , J . Grabowski and S . Landes .  1998 . 
Performance and confidence in a semantic annotation task  . In Fellbaum , C . ( ed . ) .  1998 . 
WordNet : An Electronic Lexical Database . The
MIT Press , Cambridge ( Mass.).
C . Fellbaum ( ed . ) .  1998 . WordNet : An Electronic Lexical Database . The MIT Press , Cambridge ( Mass . ) . 
W.A . Gale , K.W . Church and D . Yarowsky.
1992. Using Bilingual Materials to Develop
Word Sense Disambiguation Methods . In
Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation  . Montreal,

R . Hwa , P . Resnik and A . Weinberg . 2002.
Breaking the Resource Bottleneck for
Multilingual Parsing . In Proceedings of the LREC2002 Workshop on " Linguistic Knowledge Acquisition and Representation : Bootstrapping Annotated Language Data ''  , Las Palmas , Canary
Islands , Spain.
N . Ide , T . Erjavec , and D . Tufis .  2002 . Sense Discrimination with Parallel Corpora . In Proceedings of ACL'02 Workshop on Word Sense Disambiguation : Recent Successes and Future Directions  , Philadelphia , USA . 
S . Landes C . Leacock , and R . I . Tengi . 1998.
Building semantic concordances . In Fellbaum , C.
( ed . ) (1998) WordNet : An Electronic Lexical Database . The MIT Press , Cambridge ( Mass . ) . 
I . D . Melamed .  2001 . Empirical Methods for Exploiting Parallel Texts . The MIT Press,
Cambridge ( Mass.).
F . J . Och and H . Ney .  2003 . A systematic comparison of various statistical alignment models  . Computational Linguistics , 29(1):19-53 . 
E . Pianta and L . Bentivogli .  2004 . Knowledge intensive word alignment with KNOWA . In
Proceedings of Coling 2004, Geneva,

E . Pianta and L . Bentivogli .  2003 . Translation as Annotation . In Proceedings of the AI*IA 2003 Workshop ? Topics and Perspectives of Natural Language Processing in Italy ?  , Pisa , Italy . 
E . Pianta , L . Bentivogli and C . Girardi .  2002 . 
MultiWordNet : developing an aligned multilingual database  . In Proceedings of the First Global WordNet Conference  , Mysore , 

M . Ranieri , E . Pianta and L . Bentivogli .  2004 . 
Browsing Multilingual Information with the MultiSemCor Web Interface  . In Proceedings of the LREC2004 Workshop ? The amazing utility of parallel and comparable corpora ?  , Lisbon , 

E . Riloff , C . Schafer and D . Yarowsky . 2002.
Inducing information extraction systems for new languages via cross-language projection  . In Proceedings of Coling 2002, Taipei , Taiwan . 
J . V?ronis and P . Langlais .  2000 . Evaluation of parallel text alignment systems . In V?ronis , J . 
( ed .). 2000. Parallel Text Processing , Kluwer
Academic Publishers , Dordrecht.
J . V?ronis(ed . ) .  2000 . Parallel Text Processing . 
Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht.
D . Yarowsky , G . Ngai and R . Wicentowski .  2001 . 
Inducing Multilingual Text Analysis Tools via Robust Projection across Aligned Corpora  . In
Proceedings of HLT 2001, San Diego,
California , USA.
