Automatic Construction of Nominal Case Frames and
its Application to Indirect Anaphora Resolution
Ryohei Sasano , Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology  , University of Tokyo


This paper proposes a method to automatically construct Japanese nominal case frames  . The point of our method is the integrated use of a dictionary and example phrases from large corpora  . To examine the practical usefulness of the constructed nominal case frames  , we also built a system of indirect anaphora resolution based on the case frames  . The constructed case frames were evaluated by hand  , and were confirmed to be good quality . Experimental results of indirect anaphora resolution also indicated the effectiveness of our approach  . 
1 Introduction
What is represented in a text has originally a network structure  , in which several concepts have tight relations with each other  . However , because of the linear constraint of texts , most of them disappear in the normal form of texts  . 
Automatic reproduction of such relations can be regarded as the first step of ? text understanding ?  , and surely benefits NLP applications such as machine translation  , automatic abstraction , and question answering . 
One of such latent relationship is indirect anaphora  , functional anaphora , or bridging reference , such as the following examples . 
(1) I bought a ticket . The price was 20 dollars.
(2) There was a house . The roof was white.
Here , ? the price ? means ? the price of a ticket ? and ? the roof ? means ? the roof of a house  . ? Most nouns have their indispensable or requisite entities : ? price ? is a price of some goods or service  , ? roof ? is a roof of some building , ? coach ? is a coach of some sport , and ? virus ? is a virus causing some disease . The relation between a noun and its indispensable entity is parallel to that between a verb and its arguments or obligatory cases  . In this paper , we call indispensable entities of nouns obligatory cases  . 
Indirect anaphora resolution needs a comprehensive information or dictionary of obligatory cases of nouns  . 
In case of verbs , syntactic structures such as subject/object/PP in English or case markers such as ga  , wo , ni in Japanese can be utilized as a strong clue to distinguish several obligatory cases and adjuncts  ( and adverbs )  , which makes it feasible to construct case frames from large corpora automatically  ( Briscoe and Carroll , 1997; Kawahara and Kurohashi ,  2002) . 
( Kawahara and Kurohashi ,  2004 ) then utilized the automatically constructed case frames to 
Japanese zero pronoun resolution.
On the other hand , in case of nouns , obligatory cases of noun N h appear , in most cases , in the single form of noun phrase ? N h of Nm ? in English  , or ? Nm no N h ? in Japanese . This single form can express several obligatory cases  , and furthermore optional cases , for example , ? rug by no coach ? ( obligatory case concerning what sport )  , ? clubnocoach ? ( obligatory case concerning which institution )  , and ? kyonen ? last year ? no coach ? ( optional case )  . Therefore , the key issue to construct nominal case frames is to analyze ? N h of Nm ? or ? N m no N h ? phrases to distinguish obligatory case examples and others  . 
Work which addressed indirect anaphora in English texts so far restricts relationships to a small  , relatively well-defined set , mainly part of relation like the above example (2) , and utilized handcrafted heuristic rules or handcrafted lexical knowledge such as WordNet  ( Hahn et al , 1996; Vieira and Poesio , 2000; Strube and Hahn ,  1999) . ( Poesio et al ,  2002 ) proposed a method of acquiring lexical knowledge from ? Nh of Nm ? phrases  , but a gain concentrated on part of relation . 
In case of Japanese text analysis , ( Murata et al . , 1999 ) proposed a method of utilizing ? N m no N h ? phrases for indirect anaphora resolution of diverse relationships  . However , they basically used all ? N m no N h ? phrases from corpora  , just excluding some prefixed stop words . They con-fessed that an accurate analysis of ? Nm no N h ? phrases is necessary for the further improvement of indirect anaphora resolution  . 
As a response to these problems and following the work in  ( Kurohashi and Sakai ,  1999) , we propose a method to construct Japanese nominal case frames from large corpora  , based on an accurate analysis of ? N m no N h ? phrases using an ordinary dictionary and a thesaurus  . 
To examine the practical usefulness of the constructed nominal case frames  , we also built a system of indirect anaphora resolution based on the case frames  . 
2 Semantic Feature Dictionary
First of all , we briefly introduce NTT Semantic Feature Dictionary employed in this paper  . 
NTT Semantic Feature Dictionary consists of a semantic feature tree  , whose 3 , 000 nodes are semantic features , and a nominal dictionary containing about 300 , 000 nouns , each of which is given one or more appropriate semantic features  . 
The main purpose of using this dictionary is to calculate the similarity between two words  . 
Suppose the word x and y have a semantic feature sx and sy  , respectively , their depth is dx and dy in the semantic tree , and the depth of their lowest ( most specific ) common node is dc , the similarity between x and y , sim(x , y ) , is calculated as follows : sim(x , y ) = ( dc?2)/(dx+dy ) . 
If sx and sy are the same , the similarity is 1 . 0, the maximum score based on this criteria . 
We also use this dictionary to specify semantic category of words  , such as human , time and place . 
3 Semantic Analysis of Japanese
Noun Phrases Nm no N h
In many cases , obligatory cases of nouns are described in an ordinary dictionary for human being  . For example , a Japanese dictionary for children , Reikai Shougaku Kokugojiten , or RSK ( Tajika ,  1997) , gives the definitions of the word coach and virus as  follows1: coach a person who teaches technique in some sport virus a living thing even smaller than bacteria which causes infectious disease like influenza  1Although our method handles Japanese noun phrases by using Japanese definition sentences  , in this paper we use their English translations for the explanation  . In some sense , the essential point of our method is language -independent  . 
Based on such an observation , ( Kurohashi and Sakai ,  1999 ) proposed a semantic analysis method of ? Nm no N h  ?  , consisting of the two modules : dictionary-based analysis  ( abbreviated to DBA hereafter ) and semantic feature-based analysis ( abbreviated to SBA hereafter )  . 
This section briefly introduces their method.
3.1 Dictionary-based analysis
Obligatory case information of nouns in an ordinary dictionary can be utilized to solve the difficult problem in the semantic analysis of ? Nm no N h ? phrases  . In other words , we can say the problem disappears . 
For example , ? rug by no coach ? can be interpreted by the definition of coach as follows : the dictionary describes that the noun coach has an obligatory cases port  , and the phrase ? rug by no coach ? specifies that the sport is rug by  . That is , the interpretation of the phrase can be regarded as matching rug by in the phrase to some sport in the coach definition  . ? Kaze ? cold ? no virus ? is also easily interpreted based on the definition of virus  , linking kaze ? cold ? to infectious disease . 
Dictionary-based analysis ( DBA ) tries to find a correspondence between Nm and an obligatory case of N h by utilizing RSK and NTT Semantic Feature Dictionary  , by the following process : 1 . Lookup Nhin RSK and obtain the definition sentences of N h  . 
2 . For each word w in the definition sentences other than the genus words  , do the following steps : 2 . 1 . When w is a noun which shows an obligatory case explicitly  , like ko to g-ara ? thing ? , monogoto ? matter ? , nanika ? something ? , and Nm does not have a semantic feature of human or time  , give 0 . 8 to their correspondence 2 . 
2 . 2 . When w is other noun , calculate the similarity between Nm and w by using NTT Semantic Feature Dictionary  , and give the similarity score to their correspondence  . 
3 . Finally , if the best correspondence score is 0 . 75 or more , DBA outputs the best correspondence , which can be an obligatory case of the input ; if not , DBA outputs nothing . 
2 For the present , parameters in the algorithm were given empirically  , not optimized by a learning method . 
Table 1: Examples of rules for semantic feature-based analysis  . 
1 . Nm : human , Nh : relative ? < obligatory case ( relative ) > e . g . kare?he?nooba ? aunt?2 . Nm : human , Nh : human ? < modification ( apposition ) > e . g . gakusei?student?nokare?he ? 3 . Nm : organization , Nh : human ? < belonging > e . g . gakkou?school?noseito ? student ? 4 . Nm : agent , Nh : event ? < agent > e . g . watashi?I?no chousa ? study ? 5 . Nm : material , Nh : concrete ? < modification ( material ) > e . g . ki ? wood ? no hako ? box ? 6 . Nm:time , Nh : ?? < time > e . g . aki ? autumn ? no hatake ? field ? 7 . Nm : color , quantity , or figure , N h : ?? < modification > e . g . gray no sei huku ? uniform ? 8 . Nm : ? , Nh : quantity ? < obligatory case ( attribute ) > e . g . hei ? wall ? not a kasa ? height ? 9 . Nm : ? , Nh : position ? < obligatory case(position ) > e . g . tsukue ? desk ? no migi ? right ? 10 . Nm : agent , N h : ?? < possession > e . g . watashi?I?nokuruma ? car ? 11 . Nm : place or position , N h : ?? < place > e . g . Kyotonomise ? store ? ? ? ? meets any noun . 
In case of the phrase ? rug by no coach ? , ? technique ? and ? sport ? in the definition sentences are checked : the similarity between ? technique ? and ? rugby ? is calculated to be  0  . 21 , and the similarity between ? sport ? and ? rugby ? is calculated to be  1  . 0 . Therefore , DBA outputs ? sport ? . 
3.2 Semantic feature-based analysis
Since diverse relations in ? N m no N h ? are handled by DBA  , the remaining relations can be detected by simple rules checking the semantic features of Nm and/or Nh  . 
Table 1 shows examples of the rules . For example , the rule 1 means that if Nm has a semantic feature human and N h r e l a t i v e  , < obligatory case > relation is assigned to the phrase  . 
The rules 1 ,  2 , 8 and 9 are for certain obligatory cases . We use these rules because these relations can be analyzed more accurately by using explicit semantic features  , rather than based on a dictionary . 
3.3 Integration of two analyses
Usually , either DBA or SBA outputs some relation . When both DBA and SBA output some relations , the results are integrated ( basically , if DBA correspondence score is higher than 0 . 8 , DBA result is selected ; if not , SBA result is selected ) . In rare cases , neither analysis outputs any relations , which means analysis failure . 
4 Automatic Construction of
Nominal Case Frames 4 . 1 Collection and analysis of Nm no Nh Syntactically unambiguous noun phrases ? Nm no Nh ? are collected from the automatic parse results of large corpora  , and they are analyzed using the method described in the previous section  . 
Table 2: Preliminary case frames for his as hi ? eaves /visor?  . 
DBA result1 . aroof that stick out above the window of a house . 
[ house]hall:2 , balcony : 1 , building : 1 , ? ? ? [ window]window:2 , ceiling : 1 , counter:1 ,  ? ? ? 2 . the fore piece of a cap . 
[ cap]cap:8, helmet:1, ???
SBA result < place > parking : 3 , store : 3 , shop:2 , ??? < mod . > concrete : 1, metal:1, silver : 1, ???
No semantic analysis result < other > part : 1 , light : 1 , phone : 1 , ? ? ? By just collecting the analysis results of each head word N h  , we can obtain its preliminary case frames . Table 2 shows preliminary case frames for his as hi ? eaves /visor ?  . The upper part of the table shows the results by DBA  . The line starting with ?[ house ]? denotes a group of analysis results corresponding to the word ? house ? in the first definition sentence  . For example , ? hallnohisashi ? occurs twice in the corpora , and they were analyzed by DBA to correspond to ? house  . ? The middle part of the table shows the results by SBA  . Noun phrases that have no semantic analysis result  ( analysis failure ) are bundled and named < other > , as shown in the last part of the table . 
A case frame should be constructed for each meaning  ( definition ) of N h , and groups starting with ? [ . . . ] ? or ? < . . . > ? in Table 2 are possible case slots . The problem is how to arrange the analysis results of DBA and SBA and how to distinguish obligatory cases and others  . The following sections explain how to handle these problems  . 
Table 3: Threshold to select obligatory slots.
type of case slots threshold of probability analyzed by DBA  0  . 5% (1/200) < obligatory case > 2 . 5% (1/40) < belonging > 2 . 5%  ( 1/40 ) < possessive > 5% ( 1/20 ) < agent > 5% ( 1/20 ) < place > 5% ( 1/20 ) < other > 10% ( 1/10 ) < modification > not used < time > not used Probability =  (  #of Nm no N h )  /  (  #of N h )  4 . 2 Case slot clustering One obligatory case might be separated in preliminary case frames  , since the definition sentence is sometimes too specific or too detailed  . 
For example , in the case of hisashi ? eaves/visor ? in Table 2 , [ house] , [ window] , and < place > have very similar examples that mean building or part of building  . Therefore , case slots are merged if similarity of two case slots is more than  0  . 5  ( case slots in different definition sentences are not merged in any case  )  . Similarity of two case slots is the average of top  25% similarities of all possible pairs of examples . 
In the case of Table 2 , the similarity between [ house ] and [ window ] is  0  . 80, and that between [ house ] and < place > is 0 . 67 , so that these three case slots are merged into one case slot  . 
4.3 Obligatory case selection
Preliminary case frames contain both obligatory cases and optional cases for the head word  . 
Since we can expect that an obligatory case cooccurs with the head word in the form of noun phrase frequently  , we can take frequent case slots as obligatory case of the head word  . 
However , we have to be careful to set up the frequency thresholds  , because case slots detected by DBA or < obligatory case > by SBA are more likely to be obligatory  ; on the other hand case slots of < modification > or < time > should be always optional  . Considering these tendencies , we set thresholds for obligatory cases as shown in Table  3  . 
In the case of hisashi ? eaves/visor ? in Table 2 , [ house-window]-<place>slot and [ cap]slot are chosen as the obligatory cases  . 
4 . 4 Case frame construction for each meaning Case slots that are derived from each definition sentence constitute a case frame  . 
If a case slot of < obligatory case > by SBA or < other > is not merged into case slots in definition sentences  , it can be considered that it indicates a meaning of N h which is not covered in the dictionary  . Therefore , such a case slot constitutes an independent case frame  . 
On the other hand , when other case slots by SBA such as < belonging > and < possessive > are remaining  , we have to treat them differently . 
The reason why they are remaining is that they are not always described in the definition sentences  , but their frequent occurrences indicate they are obligatory cases  . Therefore , we add these case slots to the case frames derived from definition sentences  . 
Table 4 shows several examples of resultant case frames . Hyoujou?expression ? has a case frame containing two case slots  . Hisashi ? eaves/visor ? has two case frames according to the two definition sentences  . In case of hiki-dashi?d rawer ? , the first case frame corresponds to the definition given in the dictionary  , and the second case frame was constructed from the < other > case slot  , which is actually another sense of hikidashi , missed in the dictionary . In case of coach , < possessive > is added to the case frame which was made from the definition  , producing a reasonable case frame for the word . 
4 . 5 Point of nominal case frame construction The point of our method is the integrated use of a dictionary and example phrases from large corpora  . Although dictionary definition sentences are informative resource to indicate obligatory cases of nouns  , it is difficult to do indirect anaphora resolution by using a dictionary as it is  , because all nouns in a definition sentence are not an obligatory case  , and only the frequency information of noun phrases tells us which is the obligatory case  . Furthermore , sometimes a definition is too specific or detailed  , and the example phrases can adjust it properly , as in the example of hisashi in Table 2 . 
On the other hand , a simple method that just collects and clusters ? Nm no N h ? phrases  ( based on some similarity measure of nouns ) cannot construct comprehensive nominal case frames  , because of polysemy and multiple obligatory cases  . We can see that dictionary definition can guide the clustering properly even for such difficult cases  . 
Table 4: Examples of nominal case frames.
case slot examples hisashi:1 ? eaves/visor ? ( the edges of a roof that stick out above the window of a house etc  . ) [ house , window]parking , store , hall , ??? hisashi:2 ? eaves/visor ? ( the fore piece of a cap . ) [ cap ] cap , helmet , ? ? ? h you jou ? expression ? ( to express one?s feelings on the face or by gestures  . ) [ one ] people , person , citizen , ??? [ feelings]relief , margin , ? ? ? hiki dashi:1 ? drawer ? ( a boxlike container in a desk or achest . ) [ desk , chest ] desk , chest , dresser , ??? hikidashi:2?d rawer ? < other > credit , fund , saving , ??? coach ( a person who teaches technique in some sport . ) [ sport ] baseball , swimming , ??? < belonging > team , club , ??? kabushiki ? stock ? ( the total value of a company?s shares . ) [ company]company , corporation ,  ? ? ?  5 Indirect Anaphora Resolution To examine the practical usefulness of the constructed nominal case frames  , we built a preliminary system of indirect anaphora resolution based on the case frames  . 
An input sentence is parsed using the
Japanese parser , KNP ( Kurohashi and Nagao ,  1994) . Then , from the beginning of the sentence , each noun x is analyzed . When x has more than one case frame , the process of antecedent estimation ( stated in the next paragraph ) is performed for each case frame , and the case frame with the highest similarity score  ( described below ) and assignments of antecedents to the case frame are selected as a final result  . 
For each case slot of the target case frame of x , its antecedent is estimated . A possible antecedenty in the target sentence and the previous two sentences is checked  . This is done one by one , from the syntactically closery . If the similarity of y to the case slot is equal to or greater than a threshold ?  ( currently 0 . 95), it is assigned to the case slot . 
The similarity between y and a case slot is defined as the highest similarity between y and an example in the case slot  . 
For instance , let us consider the sentence shown in Figure 1 . soccer , at the beginning of the sentence , has no case frame , and is considered to have no obligatory case . 
For the second noun ticket , soccer , which is a nominal modifier of ticket , is examined first . 
The similarity between soccer and the examples of the case slot [ theater  , transport ] exceeds the soccer-no ticket-gatakai nedan-deurareteita  . 
expensive price be sold case slot examples result ticket [ theater  , transport ] stage , game , ??? soccerned an [ things ] thing , ticket , ??? ticket ticket a printed piece of paper which shows that you have paid to enter a the ater or use a transportned an the amount of money for which things are sold or bought Figure  1: Indirect anaphora resolution example . 
threshold ? , and soccer is assigned to [ theater , transport ] . 
Lastly , for nedan ? price ? , its possible antecedents are ticket and soccer . ticket , which is the closest from nedan , is checked first . The similarity between ticket and the examples of the case slot [ things ] exceeds the threshold ?  , and ticket is judged as the antecedent of ned an . 
6 Experiments
We evaluated the automatically constructed nominal case frames  , and conducted an experiment of indirect anaphora resolution  . 
6.1 Evaluation of case frames
We constructed nominal case frames from newspaper articles in  25 years ( 1 2 years of Mainichi newspaper and 13 years of Nih on keizai newspaper )  . These newspaper corpora consist of about Table 5: Evaluation result of case frames . 
precision recall F58/70 (0 . 829) 58/68 (0 . 853) 0 . 841 25 , 000 , 000 sentences , and 10 , 000 , 0 00 ? Nm no Nh?noun phrases were extracted from them  . 
The result consists of 17 , 000 nouns , the average number of case frames for a noun is 1 . 06 , and the average number of case slots for a case frame is  1  . 09 . 
We randomly selected 100 nouns that occur more than 10  , 000 times in the corpora , and created gold standard case frames by hand . For each test noun , possible case frames were considered , and for each case frame , obligatory case slots were given manually . As a result , 68 case frames for 65 test nouns were created , and 35 test nouns have no case frames . 
We evaluated automatically constructed case frames for these test nouns against the gold standard case frames  . A case frame which has the same case slots with the gold standard is judged as correct  . The evaluation result is shown in Table 5: the system output 70 case frames , and out of them , 58 case frames were judged as correct . 
The recall was deteriorated by the highly restricted conditions in the example collection  . 
For instance , maker does not have obligatory case slot for its products  . This is because maker is usually used in the form of compound noun phrase  , ? products maker ? , and there are few occurrences of ? products no maker ?  . To address this problem , not only ? Nm no Nh ? but also ? NmNh ? ( compound noun phrase ) and ? Nmni-kansuru ? in terms of ? N h ? should be collected  . 
6 . 2 Experimental results of indirect anaphora resolution We conducted a preliminary experiment of our indirect anaphora resolution system using ? Relevance-tagged corpus ?  ( Kawahara et al ,  2002) . This corpus consists of Japanese newspaper articles  , and has relevance tags , including antecedents of indirect anaphors . 
We prepared a small test corpus that consists of randomly selected  10 articles . The test corpus contains 217 nouns . Out of them , 106 nouns are indirect anaphors , and have 108 antecedents , which is because two nouns have double antecedents  . 49 antecedents directly depend on their anaphors , and 59 do not . For 91 antecedents out of 108 , a case frame of its anaphor Table 6: Experimental results of indirect anaphora resolution  . 
precision recall Fw dep .  40/46 (0 . 870) 40/59 (0 . 678) 0 . 762 w/o dep .  31/61 (0 . 508) 31/49 (0 . 633) 0 . 564 total 71/107 (0 . 664) 71/108 (0 . 657) 0 . 6 60 includes the antecedent itself or its similar word  ( the similarity exceeds the threshold ,  0 . 95) . Accordingly , the upper bound of the recall of our case-frame -based anaphora resolution is  84  . 3% (91/108) . 
We ran the system on the test corpus , and compared the system output and the corpus annotation  . Table 6 shows the experimental results . In this table , ? wdep . ?  ( with dependency ) is the evaluation of the antecedents that directly depend on their anaphors  . ? w/o dep . ?  ( without dependency ) is the case of the antecedents that do not directly depend on their anaphors  . 
Although the analysis of ? wdep . ? is intrinsically easier than that of ? w/o dep . ?, the recall of ? wdep . ? was not much higher than that of ? w/o dep . ? . The low recall score of ? wdep . ? was caused by nonexistence of case frames which include the antecedent itself or its similar word  . 
The antecedents that directly depend on their anaphors were often a part of compound noun phrases  , such as ? products maker ? , which are not covered by our examples collection . 
Major errors in the analyses of the antecedents that do not directly depend on their anaphors were caused by the following reasons  . 
Specific/generic usages of nouns
Some erroneous system outputs were caused by nouns that have both specific and generic usages  . 
(3 ) kogaisya-no subsidiary kabushiki-wo stock baikyaku-shita  . 
sell (? sold the stock of the subsidiary . ) In this case , kogaisya ? subsidiary ? is an obligatory information for kabushiki ? stock ?  , which is specifically used . kogaisya matches the [ kaisya ? company ?] case slot in Table  4  . 
However , kabushiki ? stock ? in the following example is used generically  , and does not need specific company information . 
(4 ) kabushiki stock souba-no price oshiagerise you in -tonaru  . 
factor become ( ? become the rise factor of the stock prices . ) Since the current system cannot judge generic or specific nouns  , an antecedent which corresponds to [ kaisha ? company ?] is incorrectly estimated  . 
Beyond selectional restriction of case frames Selectional restriction based on the case frames usually worked well  , but did not work to distinguish candidates both of which belong to Human or Organization  . 
(5) Bushbei
Americans eiken-wa administration
Russia-tono . . . Bushdaitouryou-ga presidents hut you-shit a . 
claim ( Bush American administration ... with
Russia . . . President Bush claimed ...)
In this example , daitouryou ? president ? requires an obligatory case kuni?nation ?  . The system estimates its antecedent as Russia , though the correct answer is bei ? America ? . This is because Russia is closer than beikoku . This problem is somehow related to world knowledge  , but if the system can carefully exploit the context  , it might be able to find the correct answer from ? Bushbeis eiken ? ? Bush American administration ?  . 
7 Conclusion
This paper has first proposed an automatic construction method of Japanese nominal case frames  . This method is based on semantic analysis of noun phrases ? N m no N h ? ? N h of N m ?  . 
To examine the practical usefulness of the constructed nominal case frames  , we built a preliminary system of indirect anaphora resolution based on the case frames  . The evaluation indicated the good quality of the constructed case frames  . On the other hand , the accuracy of our indirect anaphora resolution system is not satisfactory  . In the future , we are planning to make the case frames more wide -coverage  , and improve the indirect anaphora resolution by considering larger context and more various factors  . 

Ted Briscoe and John Carroll .  1997 . Automatic extraction of subcategorization from corpora  . In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , pages 356?363 . 
Udo Hahn , Michael Strube , and Katja Markert.
1996 . Bridging textual ellipses . In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pages 496?501 . 
Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi . 2002.
Fertilization of case frame dictionary for robust Japanese case analysis  . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pages 425?431 . 
Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi . 2004.
Zero pronoun resolution based on automatically constructed case frames and structural preference of antecedents  . In Proceedings of the 1st International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing.
Daisuke Kawahara , Sadao Kurohashi , and Ko?iti Hasida .  2002 . Construction of a Japanese relevance-tagged corpus  . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation  , pages 2008?2013 . 
Sadao Kurohashi and Makoto Nagao .  1994 . A syntactic analysis method of long Japanese sentences based on the detection of conjunctive structures  . Computational Linguistics , 20(4):507?534 . 
Sadao Kurohashi and Yasuyuki Sakai . 1999.
Semantic analysis of Japanese noun phrases : A new approach to dictionary-based understanding  . In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics , pages 481?488.
Masaki Murata , Hitoshi Isahara , and Makoto Nagao .  1999 . Pronoun resolution in Japanese sentences using surface expressions and examples  . In Proceedings of the ACL?99 Workshop on Coreference and Its Applications , pages 39?46 . 
Massimo Poesio , Tomonori Ishikawa,
Sabine Schulte im Walde , and Renata
Vieira .  2002 . Acquiring lexical knowledge for anaphora resolution  . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation  , pages 1220?1224 . 
Michael Strube and Udo Hahn .  1999 . Functional centering ? grounding referential coherence in information structure  . Computational
Linguistics , 25(3):309?344.
Junichi Tajika , editor . 1997. Reikai Syogaku
Kokugojiten . Sanseido.
Renata Vieira and Massimo Poesio .  2000 . An empirically based system for processing definite descriptions  . Computational Linguistics , 26(4):539?592 . 
