Emdros ? a text database engine for analyzed or annotated text 
Ulrik Petersen
Department of Communication
University of Aalborg
Kroghstr?de 3
DK?9220 Aalborg East



Emdrosis a text database engine for linguistic analysis or annotation of text  . It is applic ca-ble especially in corpus linguistics for storing and retrieving linguistic analyses of text  , at any linguistic level . Emdrosimplements the EMdF text database model and the MQL query language  . In this paper , I present both , and give an example of how Emdros can be useful in computational linguistics  . 
1 Introduction
As ( Abeille ? , 2003) points out , ? corpus-based linguistics has been largely limited to phenomena that can be accessed via searches on particular words  . 
Inquiries about subject inversion or agent less passives are impossible to perform on commonly available corpora ?  ( p . xiii ) . 
Emdrosis a text database engine which attempts to remedy this situation in some measure  . Emdros ? query language is very powerful , allowing the kind of searches which Abeille ? mentions to be formulated quickly and intuitively  . Of course , this presupposes a database which is tagged with the data necessary for answering the query  . 
Work has been done on supporting complex queries , e . g . , ( Bird et al , 2000; Cassidy and Bird , 2000; Mengel , 1999; Clarke et al ,  1995) . Em-dros complements these pieces of work , providing a working implementation of many of the features which these systems support  . 
In this paper , I present the EMd F text database model on which Emdrosrests  , and the MQL query language which it implements . In addition , I give an example of how Emdros can be useful in answering questions in computational linguistics  . 
2 History of Emdros
Emdross prings out of a reformulation and implementation of the work done by Crist-Jan Doedens in his  1994 PhD thesis ( Doedens ,  1994) . Doedens defined the MdF ( Monads-dot-Features ) text database model , and the QL query language . Doedens gave a denotational semantics for QL and loaded QL with features  , thus making it very difficult to implement . 
The present author later took Doedens ? QL , scaled it down , and gave it an operational semantics , hence making it easier to implement , resulting in the MQL query language . I also took the MdF model and extended it slightly  , resulting in the EMdF model . 
Later , I implemented both , resulting in the Emdrostext database engine , which has been available as Open Source software since October  2001  . The website1 has full source code and documentation . 
Emdros is a general-purpose engine , not a specific application . This means that Emdros must be incorporated into a specific software application before it can be made useful  . 
3 The EMdF model
The EMdF model is an extension of the MdF model developed in  ( Doedens ,  1994) . The EMdF ( Extended MdF ) model is based on four concepts : Monad , object , object type , and feature . I describe each of these in turn , and give a small example of an EMdF database . 
3.1 Monad
Amonad is simply an integer . The sequence of the integers (1, 2, 3, etc . ) dictates the sequence of the text . The monads do not impose a reading-direction ( e . g . , left-to-right , right-to-left ) , but merely a logical text-order . 
3.2 Object
An object is simply a set of monads with an associated object type  . The set is arbitrary in the sense that there are no restrictions on the set  . E . g . , 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2, 6, 7 are all valid objects . This allows for objects with gaps , or discontiguous objects ( e . g . , discontiguous clauses) . In addition , an object always has a unique integer id , separate from the the object?s monad set . 
Objects are the building blocks of the text itself  , as well as the annotations or analyses in the 1http://emdros  . org/database . To see how , we must introduce object types . 
3.3 Object type
An object type groups a set of objects into such classes as ? Word ?  , ? Phrase ? , ? Clause ? , ? Sentence ? , ? Paragraph ? , ? Chapter ? , ? Book ? , ? Quotation ? , ? Report ? , etc . Generally , when designing an Em-dros database , one chooses amonad-granularity which dictates the smallest object in the database which corresponds to one monad  . This smallest object is often ? Word ? , but could be ? Morpheme ? , ? Phoneme ? or even ? Grapheme ? . Thus , for example , Word number 1 might consist of the object set 1 , and Word number 2 might consist of the object set 2  , whereas the first Phrase in the database might consist of the set  1  , 2 . 
3.4 Feature
An object type can have any number of features . A feature is an attribute of an object , and always has a type . The type can be a string , an integer , an enumeration , or an object id . The latter allows for complex interrelationships among objects  , with objects pointing to each other , e . g . , a dependent pointing to a head . 
An enumeration is a set of labels with values . For example , one might define an enumeration ? psp ? ( part of speech ) with labels such as ? noun ? , ? verb ? , ? adjective ? , etc . Emdros supports arbitrary definition of enumeration label sets  . 
3.5 Example
Consider Figure 1 . It shows an EMdF database corresponding to one possible analysis of the sentence ? The door was blue  . ? There are three object types : Word , Phrase , and Clause . The Clause object type has no features . The Phrase object type has the feature ? phr_type  ?   ( phrase type )  . The Word object type has the features ? surface ? and ? psp ?  . 
The monad-granularity is ? Word ?, i . e . , each monad corresponds to one monad . Thus the word with id 10001 consists of the monad set 1  . The phrase with id 10005 consists of the monad set 1  , 2 . The single clause object consists of them on ad set  1  , 2 , 3 , 4 . 
The text is encoded by the ? surface ? feature on Word object type  . One could add features such as ? lemma ? , ? number ? , ? gender ? , or any other feature relevant to the database under construction  . 
The Phrase object type could be given features such as ? function ?  , ? apposition_head ? , ? relative_head ? , etc . The Clause object type could be given features distinguishing such things as ? VSO order ?  , ? tense of verbal form ? , ? illocutionary force ? , ? nominal clause/verb less clause ? , etc . It all depends on the theory used to describe the database  , as well as the research goals . 
1  2   3   4 word w : 10001 surface : The psp : article w: 10002 surface : door psp:noun w : 10003 surface : was psp:verb w : 10004 surface : blue . 
psp : adjective phrase p: 10005 phr_type:NPp : 10006 phr_type:VPp : 10007 phr_type : AP clause c : 10008 
Figure 1: A small EMdF database 4 The MQL query language MQL is based on two properties of text which are universal : sequence and embedding  . All texts have sequence , dictated by the constraints of time and the limitation of our human vocal tract to produce only one sequence of words at any given time  . In addition , all texts have , when analyzed linguistically , some element of embedding , as embodied in the notions of phrase , clause , sentence , paragraph , etc . 
MQL directly supports searching for sequence and embedding by means of the notion of top o -graphicity  . Originally invented in ( Doedens ,  1994) , a ( formal ) language is topographic if and only if there is an isomorphism between the structure of an expression in the language and the objects which the expression denotes  . 
MQL?s basic building block is the object block.
An object block searches for objects in the database of a given type  , e . g . , Word , Phrase or Clause . If two object blocks are adjacent , then the objects which they find must also be adjacent in the database  . If an object block is embedded inside another object block  , then the inner object must be embedded in the outer object in the database  . 
Consider Figure 2 . It shows two adjacent object blocks , with feature constraints . This would find two Phrase objects in the database where the first is an NP and the second is a VP  . The objects must be adjacent in the database because the object blocks are adjacent  . 
[ Phrase phrase_type=NP][Phrase phrase_type= VP ] 
Figure 2: Two adjacent object blocks
Now consider Figure 3 . This query would find a clause , with the restriction that embedded inside the clause must be two phrases  , a subject NP and a predicate VP , in that order . The ? . .? operator means that space is allowed between the NP and the VP  , but the space must be inside the limits of the surrounding clause  . All of this presupposes an appropriately tagged database  , of course . 
[Clause [ Phrase phrase_type=NP and function = Subj ]  . .
[ Phrase phrase_type=VP and function=Pred ]]
Figure 3: Examples of embedding
The restrictions of type ? phrase_type=NP ? refer to features  ( or attributes ) of the objects in the database . The restriction expressions can be any Boolean expression  ( and/or/not/parentheses )  , allowing very complex restrictions at the object -level  . 
Consider Figure 4 . It shows how one can look for objects inside ? gaps ? in other objects  . In some linguistic theories , the sentence ? The door , which opened towards the East , was blue ? would consist of one discontiguous clause  ( ? The door .   .   . was blue ? ) with an intervening nonrestrictive relative clause  , not part of the surrounding clause . For a sustained argument in favor of this interpretation  , see ( Mc-Cawley ,  1982) . The query in Figure 4 searches for structures of this kind . The surrounding context is a Sentence . Inside of this sentence , one must find a Clause . The first object in this clause must be a subject NP  . Directly adjacent to this subject NP must be a gap in the surrounding context  ( the Clause )  . Inside of this gap must be a Clause whose clause type is ? nonrestr_rel ?  . Directly after the close of the gap , one must find a VP whose function is predicate . Mapping this structure to the example sentence is left as an exercise for the reader  . 
[Sentence [ Clause [ Phrase FIRST phrase_type=NP and function=Subj][gap [ Clause cl_type = nonrestr_rel ]] [ Phrase phrase_type=VP and function = Pred ]]] 
Figure 4: An example with a gap
Lastly , objects can refer to each other in the query . This is useful for specifying such things as agreement and heads/dependents  . In Figure 5 , the ? AS ? keyword gives a name ( ? w1? ) to the noun inside the NP , and this name can then be used inside the adjective in the AdjP to specify agreement  . 
[ Phrase phrase_type=NP [ Word AS w1 psp = noun ]] [ Phrase phrase_type=AdjP [ Word psp = adjective and number =  w1  . number and gender = w1 . gender ]]
Figure 5: Example with agreement
MQL provides a number of features not covered in this paper  . For full documentation , see the website . 
The real power of MQL lies in its ability to express complex search restrictions bo that the level of structure  ( sequence and embedding ) and at the object-level . 
5 Application
One prominent example of an Emdros database in use is the Werkgroep Informatica  ( WI ) database of the Hebrew Bible developed under Prof  . Dr . EepTalstraat the Free University of Amsterdam . The WI database is a large text database comprising a syntactic analysis of the Hebrew Bible  ( also called the Old Testament in Hebrew and Aramaic  )  . This is a 420,000 word corpus with about 1 . 4 million syntactic objects . The database has been analyzed up to clause level all the way through  , and has been analyzed up to sentence level for large portions of the material  . A complete description of the database and the underlying linguistic model can be found in  ( Talstra and Sikkel ,  2000) . 
In the book of Judgeschapter 5 verse 1 , we are told that ? Deborah and Baraksang ? a song  . Deborah and Barakare clearly a plural entity , yet in Hebrew the verb is feminine singular . Was this an instance of bad grammar ? Did only Deborah sing ? 
Why is the verb not plural ?
In Hebrew , the rule seems to be that the verb agrees in number and gender with the first item in a compound subject  , when the verb precedes the subject . This has been known at least since the 19th century , as evidenced by the Gesenius-Kautzsch grammar of Hebrew  , paragraph 146 g . 
With Emdros and the WI database , we can validate the rule above . The query in Figure 6 finds 234 instances , showing that the pattern was not uncommon , and inspection of the results show that the verb most often agrees with the first member of the compound subject  . The 234 ? hits ? are the bare results returned from the query engine  . It is up to the researcher to actually look at the data and verify or falsify their hypothesis  . Also , one would have to look for counterexamples with another query  . 
[ Clause [ Phrase function = Pred [ Word AS w1 psp = verb and number=singular ]] . .
[ Phrase function = Subj[Word ( psp = noun or psp = proper_noun or psp = demonstrative_pronoun or psp = interrogative_pronoun or psp = personal_pronoun  ) and number = singular and gender = w1 . gender] . .
[ Word psp = conjunction ]]]
Figure 6: Hebrew example
The query finds clauses within which there are two phrases  , the first being a predicate and the second being a subject  . The phrases need not be adjacent . The predicate must contain a verb in the singular  . The subject must first contain a noun , proper noun , or pronoun which agrees with the verb in number and gender  . Then a conjunction must follow the noun , still inside the subject , but not necessarily adjacent to the noun . 
The WI database is the primary example of an Emdros database  . Other databases stored in Em-dros include the morphologically encoded Hebrew Bible produced at the Westminster Hebrew Institute in Philadelphia  , Pennsylvania , and a corpus of 67 million words in use at the University of Illinois at 

6 Conclusion
In this paper , I have presented the EMdF model and the MQL query language as implemented in the Emdrostext database engine  . I have shown how MQL supports the formulation of complex linguistic queries on tagged corpora  . I have also given an example of a specific problem in Hebrew linguistics which is nicely answered by an Emdros query  . 
Thus Emdros provides a solid platform on which to build applications in corpus linguistics  , capable of answering linguistic questions of a complexity higher than what most systems can offer today  . 

My thanks go to Constantijn Sikkel of the Werk -groep Informatic a for coming up with the problem for the Hebrew query example  . 

Anne Abeille ? .  2003 . Introduction . In Anne Abeille ? , editor , Treebanks ? Building and Using Parsed Corpora , volume 20 of Text , Speech and Language Technology , pages x i i i ? x x v i . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht , Boston , London . 
Steven Bird , Peter Buneman , and Wang-Chiew Tan .  2000 . Towards a query language for annotation graphs . In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation  , pages 807?814 . European Language Resources Association , Paris . 

Steve Cassidy and Steven Bird .  2000 . Querying databases of annotated speech . In Database technologies : Proceedings of the Eleventh Australasian Database Conference  , pages 12?20 . 
IEEE Computer Society.
Charles L . A . Clarke , G . V . Cormack , and F . J . 
Burkowski .  1995 . An algebra for structured text search and a framework for its implementation  . 
The Computer Journal , 38(1):43?56.
Christianus Franciscus Joannes Doedens . 1994.
Text Databases : One Database Model and Several Retrieval Languages  . Number 14 in Language and Computers . Editions Rodopi Amsterdam , Amsterdam and Atlanta , GA . 
James D . McCawley .  1982 . Parentheticals and discontinuous constituent structure  . Linguistic Inquiry , 13(1):91?106 . 
Andreas Mengel .  1999 . MATE deliverable D3 . 1 ? specification of coding work bench:3 . 8 improved query language ( Q4M ) . Technical report , Institut fu?r Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung , Stuttgart , 18 Nov . http://www . ims . uni-stuttgart . de/projekte/mate/q4m/ . 
EepTalstra and Constantijn Sikkel . 2000.
Genese und Kategorienent wicklung der WIVU -Datenbank  . In Christof Hardmeier , Wolf-Dieter Syring , Jochen D . Range , and EepTalstra , editors , AdFontes ! Quellener fassen-lesen-deuten . Wasist Computer philologie ? , volume 15 of APPLICATIO , pages 33?68 , Amsterdam . VU
University Press.
