Contextual processing of locative prepositional phrases 
Nicolas DENAND & Monique ROLBERT
Laboratoire d?Informatique Fondamentale de Marseille 
163, avenue de Luminy-Case 901
F-13288 Marseille Cedex 9



This paper deals with contextual aspects of locative preposition processing  . Firstly , accordingly to a study on the referential behavior of the pronominal adverb ? y ? in its locative uses  , we show that static locative prepositions are functions  , not only at the conceptual level ( as shown in previous studies )  , but also from a contextual point of view . Such functions introduce new objects in the discourse context  , that have to be taken into account in classical contextual processing tasks  , such as reference resolution or question answering  . Then , we show how these phenomena can fit into contextual formalisms like DRT and DPL  . 
1 Introduction
Most often , in a nominal anaphoric relation , a personal pronoun ( like ? le ? ( clitic ) / ? him ? ) is involved in an anaphoric relationship with a nominal phrase  ( NP )  , located in the same sentence as the pronoun or a previous one  . The pronoun is therefore related to the discourse individual referred to by the NP :  ( 1 ) Unhommeest venucematin . Paulle connaissait . ( Aman came this morning . 
Paulknew him.)
In this example , the pronoun ? le?/?him ? is anaphorically linked to the NP?unhomme?/?aman ?  . The pronoun refers to the discourse entity introduced by the NP  . 
The antecedent NP can be found in different syntactical configurations  , without being necessarily related to the case of the pronoun itself  . 
For instance , the personal pronoun ? elle ?/? it ? ( subject ) can be in anaphoric relation to a NP , itself embedded in a complement ( here , locative ) :  ( 2 ) J ? aipose?monportable surlatable parcequ ? elle e?tait propre  . (I put my laptop on the table because it was clean  . ) Similarly , the clitic pronoun ? y ? in its non-locative uses is anaphorically linked to a NP  . 
These uses were already studied ( see , for example , ( Ruwet ,  1990)) . 
What about locative uses of the pronominal adverb ?   y?1? That is , when it is used to replace the locative prepositional complement of a verb  ( Locative Prepositional Phrase , or LPP ) , like in : (3) Cettevilleest belle . J ? yaive ? cuautre-fois . ( This town is beautiful . I lived thereformerly . ) Here again , in a classical way , one can say that ? y ? / ? there ? refers to a ? place ? introduced by a NP preceding the pronoun  . We have a problem though , to rebuild the exact locative semantics of the pronominal sentence  ( here , something like ? in this town ?) . The situation gets even more complicated when the antecedent of the pronoun lies itself in a LPP  , like in the following : ( 4 ) J?ai passe?mes vacances dans le Gard . J ? yaive ? cuautre fois . ( I spent my holy days in the Gard . I lived thereformerly . ) In this paper , we show that the pronominal adverb ? y ? can be anaphorically linked to a LPP  , locative preposition included . This leads us to the fact that some LPPs introduce individuals in the discourse context  . We discuss the functional role played by locative prepositions in this process  . Finally , we explain how to account for these contextual functions within a discourse representation system such as DRT and DPL and its integration into processing a subset of French  . 
1?y ? is usually considered a pronoun for its non locative uses  ( Cevaseest casse ? . N?ytouchepas . ( This vase is broken . Don?t touchit . )) and an adverb elsewhere ( Paulyva . ( Paul goes there . )) . ( Grevisse ,  1975 ) notes certain uses in which the status of ? y ? is unclear  . It is then called ? pronominal adverb ? . 
2 Locative prepositions are contextual functions A lot of examples show that ? y ?  , as a pronominal adverb , may have a NP as syntactical antecedent : ( 5 ) Jevo is latable . Tuy as pose ? tesclefs . ( I see the table . Youput your keysthere . ) If we replace the pronoun with its referent , we have : (6) Jevo is latable . Tu as pose ? tesclefs surlatable . ( I see the table . You put your keys on the table . ) But , differences appear between this last example and a classical anaphoric relationship : first of all  , the preposition ? sur?/?on ? , appearing in the rebuilt LPP in ( 6 ) does not come from either the antecedent ( since this one is a NP )  , or the verb ( ?sur?/?on ? is not a mandatory preposition for the verb ? poser ?/ ? put ?  , since this one accepts other prepositions like in ? poser dans ?/? put in ? or ? poser sous ?/? put under ?  )  . 
Moreover , the coreference link between the pronoun and its antecedent  ( usually generated by the anaphoric relation ) is unclear : can we really assume that ? y?/ ? there ? refers to the object designated by the NP ? the table ? ? A first answer to these problems could be that there is a kind of metaphoric interpretation of the object designated by the antecedent NP  , which would allow it to designate also a place , for instance the location where it stands , or its interior when the name of the object clearly suggests an interiority feature  . This approach was studied and approved by ( Mackenzie ,  2004 ) and similar ideas ( though in the conceptual domain ) can be found in ( Flageul ,  1997) . Nevertheless , we can notice that it is rare for the pronoun ? y ? to designate the place defined this way  . In example (5) , one cannot say that ? y ? refers to the place occupied by the table  . Moreover , such an interpretation of the involved phenomenon does not allow to account for the following examples :  ( 7 ) Vachercher pre`s delatable , jecro is queton ballons ? y trouve . ( Golook near the table , I think your ball is there . ) (8) Jesuisal le?derrie`rel amaison . Unve?los?ytrouvait . (I went behind the house . Abicycle was there . )  ( 9 ) Qu and j?aipose?monsaca`co?te ? delatasse , to nportables ? ytrou-vait . ( When I put my bag next to the cup , your laptop was there . ) If we replace the pronoun with its antecendent , we have : (10) Vachercher pre`s delatable , jecro is queton ball onse trouve pre`s de la table  . ( Golook near the table , I think your ball is near the table . ) (11) Jesuisal le?derrie`relamaison . Unve?lose trouvait derrie`relamaison . (I went behind the house . A bicycle was behind the house . )  ( 12 ) Qu and j?aipose?monsaca`co?te ? delatasse , to nportable setrouvaita ` co?te ? delatasse . ( When I put my bag next to the cup , your laptop was next to the cup . ) The difference between these examples and ( 5 ) resides in the fact that , here , the preposition employed in rebuilt examples (10) ,   ( 11 ) and ( 12 ) is necessarily the same as the preposition involved in the LPP of the previous sentence  . We notice that the syntactical similarity between the antecedent LPP and there built one does not come from a pure syntactic relationship between the pronominal adverb and its antecedent  . In addition , there really is a coreference relationship since , in example (10) for instance , both LPPs mention the same table and , in fact , the same ? place ? . Therefore , we have to account for the coreference link between pronoun ? y ? and a ? place ?  , described by the antecedent LPP . We must then consider that ? y ? is anaphorically related to the LPP and  , hence , refers to an ? object ? introduced by this LPP and different from that designated by the NP  . 
Studying where-questions raises a valuable analogy  . For instance , let us consider a static locative question like :   ( 13 ) Ou ` set rouve monportable ? ( Where is my laptop ? ) One possible answer to this question , within a universe described by example (9) above , is : (14) A`co?te ? delatasse . ( Next to the cup . ) If we classically consider that the semantics of such questions  ( wh-questions ) is the maximal set of individuals satisfying the property corresponding to the question  ( on this subject , see ( Van Rooy ,  1999) , ( Groenendijk and Stokhof ,  1984)) , then we must admit that ? a ` co?te ? delatasse ?/? next to the cup ? is an individual  . As a matter of fact , the semantics of question ( 13 ) is : x/set rouve ( monportable , x ) 2 and one element of this set is therefore an object that can be designated by the LPP?a`co ?te?delatasse?/?next to the cup ?  ( which is clearly a different object from the one designated by the 
NP ? latasse ?/ ? the cup?).
Thus , we conclude that LPPs introduce individuals that can be viewed as answers to locative questions  . Then it appears that these individuals are precisely those that can be designated by adverb ? y ? in situations similar to the examples given above  . Other examples give support to this point of view  . The anaphoric use of locative adverb ? la`?/?there?3 or repetitions by definite descriptions how us other cases that require to assume the existence of LPPs-generated individuals :  ( 15 ) Jesuisenface ducine?ma . Onseretrouve la ` . ( I am in front of the cinema . Let?s meet there . ) (16) Jesu is a ` droite del ? arbre . L ? endroitest magnifique . ( I am to the right of the tree . 
The place is beautiful.)
Therefore , we give the following rule :
S ome4 LPPs introduce/designate two individuals : one classical  , given by the contextual interpretation of the embedded NP  , the other given by the interpretation of the LPP itself  ( that is , by the compound [ prep+NP]) . 
The pronominal adverb ? y ? may be anaphorically linked to a LPP  ( that is , precisely , to the phrase made of [ prep+NP]) , thus referring to the individual introduced by the complete LPP  . 
Then , what happens when ? y ? has a NP for an antecedent ? The NP is its antecedent but it has no coreference relationship with it  . On can think here that we are facing a relationship close to bridging anaphora  ( like ? laporte ?/? the door ? . . . ? lapoigne?e ?/? the handle ?) . But instead of having a classical part/whole relationship between the two members of the anaphora  , we have an underspecified ( the preposition is missing ) relationship of type object/place . ? y ? 2There is no way to introduce the preposition ? next to ? in this semantic formula from the surface form of the question  . 
3See the work of ( Lorentzen ,  1998 ) on the distinct behaviors of ? ici?/?here ? and ? la`?/?there ?  . 
4We will see later that determining what LPPs are involved in this rule is a difficult question  , unanswered in this paper . 
is therefore involved in a coreference relationship with another object than the one designated by its antecedent  . The semantics of this object depends on the antecedent NP and a  ( yet undetermined ) preposition . We notice that even if the antecedent NP is embedded in a LPP  , the preposition of the latter is not always referred to by the pronoun  . The following example: ( 17 ) Maxhabitelo in du parking maisj ? yai ( qu and me?me ) gare ? mavoiture . ( Maxlives far from the car park , but I(nevertheless ) left my carthere . ) can be paraphrased by : ( 18 ) Maxhabitelo in du parking mais j?aiqu and me?me laisse?mavoiture dansle park-ing  . ( Maxlives far from the car park , but I ( nevertheless ) left my car in the car park . ) In these situations , the preposition ? far from ? is not part of the anaphoric relation  . We will say that the syntactic antecedent of the pronoun is the embedded NP  ( and not the LPP ) and we will introduce a new locative preposition to calculate the referent of ? y ?/? there ?  . 
We notice that this process makes the interpretation of pronoun ? y ? potentially ambiguous when this one refers to a LPP : the pronoun can indeed refer to the LPP or have the NP  ( embedded in the LPP ) as an antecedent . The following example shows such an ambiguity : ( 19 ) J?habitea ` co?te?de Parisetj?ytravaille . ( I livenear Paris and I work there . ) There are two possible interpretations for this sentence :  ( 20 ) J?habitea ` co?te ? de Paris et jetravaillea ` co?te?de Paris  . ( I live near Paris and I work near Paris . )  ( 21 ) J?habitea ` co?te ? de Paris et jetravaillea ` Paris  . ( I livenear Paris and I work in

Finally , we notice that the behavior of relative sentences introduced by ? ou`?/? where ? is similar to the examples above  , except the fact that the antecedent is always a NP :  ( 22 ) Jevo is latable ou ` tuaspose ? ton portable . ( I see the table where you put your laptop . )  ( 23 ) Maxhabiteloindu parking ou`j?ailaisse?ma voiture  . (Max lives far from the carpark where I left my car  . )
The antecedent of the relative pronoun ? ou `?/ ? where ? is the NP which is embedded in the locative complement and its semantics must be completed by a  ( implicit ) locative preposition ( it could be replaced in surface forms by ? on which ?/? in which ?  )  . 
Now that we showed that some LPPs in-troduce /designate one discourse individual  , we must have a closer look at the underlying phenomenon  . Many studies dealt with contextual effects of NPs  ( definite/indefinite , generic/specific , etc . see , for instance , ( Cor-blin , 1987)) . A summary of these can be found in ( Salmon-Alt ,  2001) . Where do LPPs fit in there ? First of all , we notice that the situation is complicated since it depends obviously on the nature of the NP which is embedded in the LPP and  , for example , some cases of ? generic LPPs ? can be encountered  , like in: ( 24 ) Habiter pre`sd?uncre?matorium comporte e ? galement desrisques : lamortalite?nataley est pluse ? leve ? ede  4%  . (It is also risky to live near a crematorium : birth mortality is higher by  4% there . ) We will firstly focus on LPPs containing two types of NPs : in definite with specific interpretation and definite descriptions  ( or any referential expression , for instance pronominal ) . In both cases we get , after the interpretation of the embedded NP , an entity , either preexisting the interpretation of the NP or newly created  . This entity serves as a basis to determine the new entity generated by the interpretation of the LPP  . 
Clearly , the other tool allowing to determine this new entity is the locative preposition involved in the LPP : what is its status ? Several studies on space representation give definitions  ( either qualitative or quantitative ) of the part of space designated by a spatial function applied to an object or a place  . These works usually focus on explaining the conditions under which one can say that a point of space  ( or an object ) is or not within such a part of space ( see , for example ( Vieu ,  1991) , ( Schang ,  1997)) . This belonging is then most often represented by a spatial relation  ( like to be on the right of ) between objects , which will be either true or false . 
These processes do not highlight this part of space that we aim to raise as a discourse object  , but they show the matching between some locative prepositions and spatial  functions5  . Other 5 Here , again , it seems difficult to state that every locative preposition matches a spatial function  . This question will not be discussed in this paper  . But , such a study could probably rely on the classification of locative prepositions proposed in  ( Borillo , 1993) and ( Borillo , studies also highlight this role of locative prepositions  . V . Flageul ( Flageul ,  1997 ) considers locative prepositions as conceptual -level operators  , which turn a type object into a type place . 
A . Peyraube ( Peyraube ,  2003 ) describes the historical evolution of Chinese localizers and notes that ? their main function in pre-medieval Chinese is to follow nouns and transform them into place words  , tending to behave like functional words ? . We take one step further and state that locative prepositions are contextual-level operators  ( or ? functions ? , from a logical point of view ) which produce an object from another , the former being the part of space cited before . 
The work of V . Flageul allows us to specify the conceptual type of this object according to the involved preposition  . 
Concerning LPPs that contain NPs quantified by ? every ?  , the situation slightly differs : typically , such NP simply universally quantified variables . We will get back on this point when examining examples in the next paragraph  . 
As a conclusion for the current section , we state that in the situations described above : -Some locative prepositions denote contextual functions : they associate to one individual X from the context another one  , noted f(X ) . -Some LPPs produce an object f ( X ) where f is the function associated to the locative preposition and X  , the object designated or produced by the embedded NP  . 
3 Processing preposition functions with DRT and DPL We are now going to show how to integrate these functions when representing discourse and referential links  . First of all , we show on exam-ples6 how this works within DRT-like formalism . Then we show results obtained in a DPL approach . 

6The examples we use here are simple on purpose and may therefore seem odd or ill-formed  . Nevertheless , we can give many othere ? y ? refers to a LPP  . A brief search on the Internet alowed us to reveal examples of various types :  ( 25 ) Nous nous sommes promene?s pre`sd?unvol can et nousyavonstrouve ? desroches inte ? ressantes  . (We had a walk near a volcano and we found interest in grocks there  . ) (26) Lest errains primit if s , enfaisantirrruption dans lester rains primor diaux  , yontamene?uncertain nombre demine?rauxinte ?ressants  . ( Primitive terrains , when rushing into primor dialter rains , brought a certain number of interesting minerals there  . ) DRT (( Kamp ,  1981 ) ) is a theory proposing a discourse representation formalism  , essentially oriented towards ( pronominal and others ) reference problems . We show here with the cases studied in the previous section how a LPP and a referent to a LPP can be accounted for within this formalism  . 
(30) Unar bresetrouve derrie`reunemaison.
Ilyfait del?ombre7 . ( There is a treebe hind a house . It casts shadow there . ) tree x xyzhouse yz = behind(y ) is_located(x , z)
Figure 1: DRS of example (30) ( step 1)
Comments : in definite NPs ? unarbre ?/? a tree ? and ? unemais on ?/? a house ? classically introduce two new individuals in the Discourse Representation Structure  ( DRS )  . The LPP introduces a new individual z , being the result of the application of function behind on reference markery  . 
Example continuation : (27) Aumoment du projet , ladensite ? desmoulesze ? bre?es ,  .   .   .   , e?tait defaiblea`mode?re?epre`s de Burritts Rapids  , maiselley augment aitrapide-ment . ( At the time of the project , the density of zebra mussels ,  .   .   .   , was low to moderate near Burritts Rapids , but it was quickly increasing there . ) (28) Durantle projet , c?est pre`s dechaque section qu ? on a observe ? les plus niveaux debacte ? ries E  . Colide to ute la rivie`re . Lenive aud ? E . Coliye?tait assez faible pour quela baignadey so it permise presque to us les jours  . ( During the project , the lowest levels of E . Colibacteria in all the river were observed near every section  . The level of E . Coli was low enough there to permits wimming on most days  . )  ( 29 ) Lesgens pre?fe`renta cheter lo inducent reville carilsy trouvent deslogements peuchers  . (People prefer buying far from downtown because they find cheap residences there  . ) casts_shadow(v , w ) xyzvw tree xhouse yz = behind ( y ) is_located ( x , z ) v = xw = z
Figure 2: DRS of example (30) ( step 2)
Comments : classically , pronoun ? il ?/? it ? introduces a new reference marker v linked to its antecedent by the equality v = x  . ? y ? / ? there ? also introduces a new reference marker w linked to its antecedent by equality w = z  . The fact that the antecedent z is itself linked to a functional term is without consequence  . 
(31) Siunarbresetrouve derrie`reunemaison , ilyfait del?ombre . (If a tree is behind a house , it casts shadow there . ) is_located(x , z ) casts_shadow(x , v)v = zv xyz treexhouse yz = behind(y)
Figure 3: DRS of example (31)
Comments : this example is equivalent to a donkey sentence  . Thanks to its location inside the DRS , reference marker z is accessible from variable v . 
(32 ) Unarb resetrouve derrie`re chaque maisonety fait del?ombre  . (A tree is behind every house and casts shadow there  . ) casts_shadow(z , y ) xhousexyzy = behind ( x ) tree z is_located ( z , y)
Figure 4: DRS of example (32)
Comments : we chose here the interpretation in which the quantifier ? chaque ?/? every ? has a scope beyond the indefinite subject  . We notice that the quantification associated to variable y is existential  ( from its presence in the right box of the implication  ) and not universal , like it would have been the case if variable y was present in the left box  . This choice is not really important since the result of a function is  , by definition , unique . 
Through these examples , we can see that repetitions of functional terms are always done within the scope of the argument quantification : indeed  , either both terms are introduced in the same box -at the same level - or the functional term is introduced in the right box of an implication  ( it is therefore in the scope of the variable introduced in the left box  )  . To remain correct , every reference to this functional term will occur in the same context  . 
These processes are thus classical . Functional terms just have to be introduced in DRT notation  . In the ? classical ? DRT definition ( like it is presented , for instance , in ( van Eijck and Kamp ,  1997) , p .  191) , terms are either constants or variables used as reference markers or discourse referents  . We added functions in the language . We assume that a set of function letters with their arities is given  . Then the set of terms is augmented by functional terms  . Practically , these functional terms are obtained by applying functions on variables  . 
Thus , a locative preposition corresponds to a function from this language  . One can see to which typed lambda-expressions lexical items or phrases must be associated to obtain the results given above  . According to notations from ( van Eijck and Kamp , 1997) p .  217 , we can state that a locative preposition is of type < e  , e > and has a slambda-expression ? v ( behind v ) if behind is the function associated to the preposition  . The LPP causes the new individual to appear in the DRS  . It is of type < < e , T > , T > ( like a NP ) and its lambda expression is ? P ( ui ; ( NP ? v(ui = ( Loc Prepv) . P ( ui ) ) ) ) where NP denotes the lambda-expression given from the LPP-embedded NP  , LocPrep is the lambda-expression of locative preposition given above and uither eference marker introduced by the LPP  . Finally , pronoun ? y ? will be associated to lambda -expression ? P  ( Pui ) where ui is its antecedent reference marker 8 . 
8We can not detail here the lambda-expressions associated to other phrases or items required for complete DPL  ( Groenendijk and Stokhof ,  1984 ) is another discourse representation system allowing easy expression of referential links  . To account for our LPP processing , the language must be augmented with functions and functional terms  ( which raises a priori no problem )  . Here are some DPL formulas corresponding to the following examples :  ( 33 ) Unarb resetrouve derrie`reunemaison . ( A tree is behind a house . ) ? x?y [ tree(x ) ? house(y ) ? is(x , behind(y ))] (34) Ilyfait del?ombre . ( It casts shadow there . ) ? x?y [ tree(x ) ? house(y ) ? is(x , behind(y ))] ? casts shadow(x , behind ( y ) ) The occurrence of the variable in the functional term is linked by its quantifier  , like in case of pronominal repetition without function  . The wellformedness of formulas is therefore guaranteed  . 
(35) Siunarbresetrouve derrie`reunemaison , ilyfait del?ombre . (If a tree is behind a house , it casts shadow there . )[? x tree(x ) ? ? y [ house(y ) ? is(x , behind(y ))]] ? casts shadow(x , behind(y ))
In order to build these DPL formulas , we associate to locative prepositions the lambda -expression ? v  ( behind v ) of type < e , e > , and to LPPs the lambda-expression ? P [ NP ? y[P [ PrepLocy ]]] of type < < e  , T > , T >([] are used as application operator) . 
These expressions are very close to those used in DRT  , apart from the fact that they do not introduce reference markers  . In the absence of these markers , the link between pronoun ? y ? and its functional antecedent is established by using the same variable appearing in the antecedent functional term and building a new functional term from the same function  . The lambda-expression associated to ? y ? then becomes ? P [ P [ PrepLocx ]] where [ Preploc x ] is the antecedent of ? y ?  . 
4 Conclusion
In this paper , we studied the contextual consequences of the referential interpretation of locative prepositional phrases through references by pronominal adverb ? y ?  . We stated that locative prepositions are functions at a contextual level and that LPPs introduce new individuals into the discourse context  . 
processing of our examples . The approach is classical and the reader can refer  , for instance , to ( van Eijck and
Kamp , 1997)
The results described here are used within a platform  ( made by our team ) allowing to develop natural language understanding applications featuring a syntactical analysis phase  , a lambda-calculus-based representation of sentences and a contextual processing of discourse  ( proforms and definite descriptions resolution )  . 
We use DRT to resolve references , then DPL for a final discourse representation . 
Many difficult questions remain unanswered.
First of all , it seems that only some LPPs provide such a productive ability at a contextual level and that it depends on both the locative preposition and the type of the embedded NP  . 
Classifying and characterizing these types of NPs remain to be done  . Dynamic LPPs should also be studied . Besides we could study the behavior of other prepositional syntagms  ( temporal prepositions , for instance ) . 

A . Borillo .  1993 . Pre?positions delieu et anaphores . Langages , pages 27?46 . 
A . Borillo .  2000 . Formeset sens despre ? positions . In PREP-AN 2000 . University of Tel-Aviv . 
D . Corblin .  1987 . Inde?fini , de?finiet de?monstratif . Droz , Gene`ve-Paris . 
V . Flageul .  1997 . Descriptions e?mantico-cognitive despre ? positions spatiales du franc?ais  . Ph . D . thesis , Universite ? Paris IV ?

M . Grevisse . 1975. Lebon usage . Duculot.
J . Groenendijk and M . Stokhof .  1984 . Studies in the semantics of questions and the pragmatics of answers  . Ph . D . thesis , University of Amsterdam . 
H . Kamp .  1981 . A theory of truth and semantic representation . In J . Groenendijk , T . Jansen , and M . Stokhof , editors , Formal methods in the study of language , Mathematisch Cen-trum , Amsterdam . 
L . R . Lorentzen .  1998 . Jeseraila ` ou J?yserai ? ? voila ` la question  . In A . Englebert , M . Pierrard , L . Rosier , and D . van Raem-donck , editors , Actesdu X X II e Congre`s Internation alde Linguistique et de Philologie 
Romanes , Bruxelles.
L . Mackenzie .  2004 . Anaphoric reference to entities and places in literal and metaphorical contexts  . In J . Andor and P . Pelyva?s , editors , Empirical , cognitive-based studies in the semantics -pragmatics interface  , Amsterdam . 
Else vier . to be published.
A . Peyraube .  2003 . On the history of place words and localizers in chinese : a cognitive approach  . Space in languages : linguistic systems and cognitive categories  , february . 
N . Ruwet .  1990 . Enety : deux clitiques pronominaux antilogophoriques  . Langages , 97 . Larousse . 
S . Salmon-Alt .  2001 . Re?fe?rence et dialogue finalise ?: de la linguistique a ` un mode`le ope ? rationnel  . Ph . D . thesis , LORIA , Universite ? Henri Poincare ? , Nancy I . 
D . Schang .  1997 . Repre?sentatione tin-ter pre?tation de connaissances spatiales dans unsyste`me de dialogue homme-machine  . 
Ph.D . thesis , Universite ? Henri Poincare?,
Nancy I .
J . van Eijck and H . Kamp .  1997 . Representing discourse in context . In J . van Benthem and A . ter Meulen , editors , Handbook of Logic and
Language . Elsevier.
R . Van Rooy .  1999 . Questioning to resolve decision problems . In P . Dekker , editor , Proceedings of the 12th Amsterdam Colloquium , 

L . Vieu .  1991 . Se?mantique des relations spa-tiale set infe ? rences spatio-temporelles : une contribution a ` l?e?tude des structures formelles de l?espace en Langage Naturel  . Ph . D . thesis,
IRIT , Universite ? Paul Sabatier.
