Enhancing automatic term recognition through recognition of variation 
Goran Nenadi ?*
Department of Computation

Manchester , UK , M601 QD

Sophia Ananiadou *
Computer Science
University of Salford
Salford , UK , M54 WT

John McNaught *
Department of Computation

Manchester , UK , M601 QD


* Co-affiliation : National Centre for Text Mining  , Manchester , UK

Terminological variation is an integral part of the linguistic ability to realise a concept in many ways  , but it is typically considered an obstacle to automatic term recognition  ( ATR ) and term management . We present a method that integrates term variation in a hybrid ATR approach  , in which term candidates are recognised by a set of linguistic filters and termhood assignment is based on joint frequency of occurrence of all term variants  . We evaluate the effectiveness of incorporating specific types of term variation by comparing it to the performance of a baseline method that treats term variants as separate terms  . 
We show that ATR precision is enhanced by considering joint termhoods of all term variants  , while recall benefits by the introduction of new candidates through consideration of different variation types  . On a biomedical test corpus we show that precision can be increased by  20?70% for the top ranked terms , while recall improves generally by 2? 25% . 
1 Introduction
Terminological processing has long been recognised as one of the crucial aspects of systematic knowledge acquisition and of many NLP applications  ( IR , IE , corpus querying , etc . ) . 
However , term variation has been under-discussed and is rarely accounted for in such applications  . 
When naming a new concept , scientists and specialists usually follow some predefined term formation patterns  , a process which does not exclude the usage of term variations or alternative names for concepts  . Term variations are very frequent : approximately one third of term occurrences are variants  ( Jacquemin ,  2001) . They occur not only in text , but also in controlled , manually curated terminological resources ( e . g . 
UMLS ( NLM , 2004)).
The task of an automatic term recognition ( ATR ) system is not only to suggest the most likely candidate terms from text  , but also to correlate them with synonymous term variants  . In this paper , we briefly present an analysis of term variation phenomena  , whose results are subsequently incorporated into a corpus-based ATR method in order to enhance its performance  . 
The paper is organised as follows . In Section 2 , we analyse the main types of term variation , and briefly examine how existing ATR systems treat them  . Our approach to incorporating variants into ATR is presented in Section  3  . In Section 4 , we evaluate our approach by comparing it to a baseline method  ( the method without variation recognition )  , and we conclude the paper in Section 5 . 
2 Background
Terms are linguistic units that are assigned to concepts and used by domain specialists to describe and refer to specific concepts in a domain  . 
In this sense , terms are preferred designators of concepts . In text , however , concepts are frequently denoted by different surface realisations of preferred terms  , which we denote as their term variants . Consequently , a concept can be linguistically represented using any of the surface forms that are variants of the corresponding preferred term  . We consider the following types of term variation  :   ( i ) orthographic : e . g . usage of hyphens and slashes ( amino acid and a mino-acid )  , lower and uppercases ( NFKB and NF-kb ) , spelling variations ( tumour and tumor ) , different Latin/Greek transcriptions ( oestrogen and estrogen )  , etc . 
( ii ) morphological : the simplest variations are related to inflectional phenomena  ( e . g . singular , plural ) . Derivational transformations can lead to variants in some cases  ( cellular gene and cell gene )  , but not always ( activated factor vs . 
activating factor ) ; ( iii ) lexical : genuine lexical synonyms , which may be interchangeably used ( carcinoma and cancer , haem or rhage and blood loss ) ; ( iv ) structural : e . g . possessive usage of nouns using prepositions ( clones of human and human clones )  , prepositional variants ( cell in blood , cell from blood ) , term coordinations ( adrenalglands and gonads ) ;   ( v ) acronyms and abbreviations : very frequent term variation phenomena in technical sublanguages  , especially in biomedicine ; sometimes they may be even preferred terms ( DNA for deoxyribonucleic acid )  . 

Note that variation types ( i )  ?  ( iii ) affect individual constituents , while ( iv ) and ( v ) involve variation in structure of the preferred term  . In any case , they do not ? change ? the meaning as they refer to the same concept  . Daille et al (1996) and Jacquemin (1999 ,  2001 ) further identified types of variation that modified the meaning of terms  . 
Although many authors mention the problems related to term variation  , few have dealt with linking the corresponding term variants  . Also , the recognition of variants is typically performed as a separate operation  , and not as part of ATR . 
The simplest technique to handle some types of term variation  ( e . g . morphological ) is based on stemming : if two term forms share a stemmed representation  , they are considered as mutual variants ( Jacquemin and Tzoukermann , 1999; Ananiadou et al ,  2000) . However , stemming may result in ambiguous denotations related to ? over stemming ?  ( i . e . resulting in the conflation of terms which are not real variants  ) and ? under-stemming ? ( i . e . resulting in the failure to link realter m variants  )  . 
Other approaches to the recognition of term variants use preferred terms and known synonyms from existing term dictionaries and approximate string matching techniques to link or generate different term variants  ( Krauthammer et al ,  2001;
Tsuruoka and Tsujii , 2003).
Jacquemin (2001) presents a rule-based system , FASTR , which supports several hundred metarules dealing with morphological  , syntactic ( i . e . 
structural ) and semantic term variation . Term variation recognition is based on the transformation of basic term structures into variant structures  . However , the variants recognised by FASTR are more conceptual variants than terminological ones  , as non-terminological units ( such as verb phrases , extended insertions , etc . ) are also linked to terms in order to improve indexing and retrieval  . 
3 Incorporating term variation into ATR Our approach to ATR combines the Cvalue method  ( Frantzi et al , 2000) with the recognition of term variation , which is incorporated as an integral part of the term extraction process  . 
C value is a hybrid approach combining term formation patterns with corpus-based statistical measures  . Term formation patterns act as linguistic filters to a POS tagged corpus : filtered sequences are considered as potential realisations of domain concepts  ( term candidates )  . They are subsequently assigned termhoods ( i . e . likelihood to represent terms ) according to a statistical measure . The measure amalgamates four corpus-based characteristics of a term candidate  , namely its frequency of occurrence , its frequency of occurrence as a form nested within other candidate terms  , the number of candidate terms inside which it is nested  , and the number of words it contains . 
The original C value method treats term variants that correspond to the same concept as separate term candidates  . Consequently , by providing separate frequencies of occurrence for individual variants instead of a single frequency of occurrence calculated for a term candidate unifying all variants  , the corpus-based measures and termhoods are distributed across different variants  . 
Therefore , we aim at enhancing the statistical evaluation of termhoods through conflation of different surface representations of a given term  , and through joint frequencies of occurrence of all equivalent surface forms that correspond to a single concept  . 
In order to conflate equivalent surface expressions  , we carry out linguistic normalisation of individual term candidates  ( see examples in Table 1 )  . Firstly , each term candidate is mapped to a specific canonical representative  ( CR ) by semantically isomorphic transformations . Then , we establish an equivalence relation , where two term candidates are related iff they share the same CR  . 
The partitions of this relation are denoted as synterms : a synterm contains surface term representations sharing the same CR  . 
synterm canonical representative human cancers cancer in humans human?s cancer human carcinoma human cancer 
Table 1: Term normalisation examples
Our aim is to form synterms prior to the syntactic estimation of termhoods for term candidates  . 
Therefore , after the extraction of individual term candidates  , we subsequently normalise them in order to generate synterms  , where the normalisation is performed according to the typology of variations described in Section  2  . More precisely , we consider separately the normalisation of variations that affect term candidate constituents and variations that involve structural changes  . The general architecture of our ATR approach is presented in Figure  1  . 

POS tagger
Inflectional normalisation
Structural normalisation
Orthographic normalisation
Extracted synterms
Input documents
Termhood estimation
Extraction of term candidates
Acronym acquisition
Figure 1: The architecture of the ATR process 3 . 1 Normalising term constituent variation In the case of variations that do not affect the structure of terms  , the formation of CRs is based on a POS tagger ( for inflectional variation ) and simple heuristics ( for orthographic normalisation )  . 
For example , different transcriptions of neoclassical combining forms are treated by replacements of specific character combinations  ( ae?e , ph?f ) in such forms ( and only in such forms ) . Inflectional normalisation is based on POS tagging : a canonical term candidate form is a singular form containing no possessives  ( Down?s syndrome ? down syndrome )  . 
In order to address lexical variants , one can use dictionaries of synonyms where the preferred terms are used for normalisation purposes  ( hepatic microsomes , liver microsomes ? liver microsomes ) . In experiments reported here , we did not attempt to normalise lexical variation . 
3 . 2 Normalising term structure variation Variations affecting term structure are less frequent but more complex  . Here we consider two types of term variation : prepositional term candidates and coordinated term candidates  ( for a detailed analysis of these variations see ( Nenadic et al ,  2004)) . 
Prepositional term candidates are normalised by transformation into corresponding expressions without prepositions  . Using prepositions of , in , for and by a sanchors , we generate semantically isomorphic CRs by inversion  . For example , the candidate nuclear factor of activated T cell is transformed into activated T cell nuclear factor  . 
Here is a simplified example of a rule describing the transformation of a term candidate that contains the preposition of : if structure of term candidate is  ( AN ) 1* N1 Prep ( of )   ( AN ) 2* N2 then CR = ( AN ) 2*N 2 ( AN ) 1*  N1 In order to address the problems of determining the boundaries of term constituents in text  ( to the right and left of prepositions )  , for each prepositional term candidate we generate all possible nested candidates ? and their corresponding CRs  . For example , for the candidate regulation of gene expression , we generate both gene regulation and gene expression regulation  . Since this approach also generates a number of false candidates  , additional heuristics are used to enhance precision  , such as removing adverbials and determiners , using a stop list of terminologically irrelevant prepositional expressions  ( e . g . number of . . . , list of . . . , case of . . . , in presence of . . . ), etc . 
A similar approach is used for the recognition of coordinated term candidates : coordinating conjunctions  ( and , or , but not , as well as , etc . ) are used as anchors , and when a coordinating structure is recognised in text  , the corresponding CRs of the candidate terms involved are generated  . 
We differentiate between head coordination ( where term heads are coordinated , e . g . adrenalglands and gonads ) and argument coordination ( where term arguments/modifiers are coordinated , e . g . SMRT and Trip-1 mRNAs ) . 
The recognition and extraction of coordinated terms is highly ambiguous even for human specialists  , since coordinated terms and term conjunctions share the same structures  ( see Table 2 )  . Also , similar patterns cover both argument and head coordinations  , which makes it difficult to extract coordinated constituents  ( i . e . terms ) . Not only is the recognition of term coordinations and their subtypes ambiguous  , but also internal boundaries of coordinated terms are blurred  . In a separate study , we have shown that morphosyntactic features are insufficient both for the successful recognition of coordinations and for the extraction of coordinated terms : in many cases  , the correct interpretation and decoding of term coordinations is only possible with sufficient background knowledge  ( Nenadic et al ,  2004) . 
? Each constituent extracted from a nested pre -positional term candidate has to follow a pattern used for the extraction of individual candidate terms  . 
example adren alglands and gonads head coordination [ adrenal [ glands and gonads ]] term conjunction [ adrenalglands ] and [ gonads ] Table  2: Ambiguities within coordinated structures In order to address the problems of structural ambiguities and boundaries of coordinated terms  , we also generate all possible nested coordination expressions and corresponding term candidates  . 
For example , from a candidate coordination viral gene expression and replication we generate two pairs of coordinated term candidates : viral gene expression and viral gene replication viral gene expression and viral replication Patterns for the extraction of term candidates from coordinations have been acquired semi-manually for a subset of term coordinations  . For each pattern , we define a procedure for the extraction of coordinated term candidates and generation of the corresponding CRs  ( see Table 3 for examples )  . The generated candidates from coordinated structures are subsequently treated as individual term candidates  . 
3.3 Normalising acronym variation
We treat acronym extraction as part of the ATR process  ( see Figure 1 )  . In ( Nenadic et al ,  2002 ) we suggested a simple procedure for acquiring acronyms and their expanded forms  ( EFs )  , which was mainly based on using orthographic and syntactic features of contexts where acronyms were introduced  . The model is based on three types of patterns : acronym patterns  ( defining common internal acronym structures and forms  )  , definition patterns ( based on syntactic patterns which describe typical contexts where acronyms are introduced in text  ) and matching patterns ( the set of matching rules between acronyms and their corresponding EFs  )  . 
Acronyms also exhibit variation ( e . g . RARalpha , RAR-alpha , RARA , RARa , RA receptor alpha etc . 
are all acronyms for retinoic acid receptor alpha ) . 
Therefore , in addition to extracting acronyms , we further gather all acronym variants and their EFs  , and we map them into a single CR . Since in this paper acronyms are taken as term variants  , we?re place ? acronym occurrences by the CR of their EFs  . In order to bypass the problem of acronym ambiguity  , we replace/normalise only acronyms that are introduced in a given document  . 
( NA ) 1 &  ( NA ) 2  ( N + ) 3 candidate 1= ( NA ) 2  ( N + ) 3 candidate 2 = ( NA ) 1nested ( N + 3 ) e . g . B and T cell antigenT cellantige nB cell antigen  , Bantigen
N 1  &  N2   A3   N+4   candidate1  =  N2   A3   N+4   candidate2  =  N1   A3   N+4 e . g . function or surface antigenic profile surface antigenic profile function antigenic profile 
N+1N2& ( NA ) 3 candidate 1=N+1N2 candidate 2=nested ( N+1 )   ( NA ) 3e . g . breast cancer the rapy and prevention breast cancer therapy breast caner prevention  , breast prevention
N+1 ( A + ) 2 A3&A4 candidate 1=N+1 ( A + ) 2 A3 candidate 2 = N+1 ( A + ) 2 A4 e . g . RNA polymerases II and IIIRNA polymerasis IIRNA polymerasis III Table  3: Examples of patterns used for the extraction of term candidates from coordinations  ( nested denotes the generation of all possible linearly nested substrings  )  3 . 4 Calculating termhoods with variants Term variants sharing the same CR are grouped together into synterms  , and the calculation of C-values ( i . e . termhoods ) is performed for the whole synterm rather than for individual term candidates  . 
The main reason for doing this is to avoid the distribution of frequencies of occurrence of term candidates across different variants  , as these frequencies have a significant impact on estimating termhoods  . Instead of providing separate frequencies of occurrence and obtaining termhoods for individual term candidates  , we provide a single frequency of occurrence and joint termhood calculated for a synterm  , which unifies all variants . 
Similarly to the estimation of C-values for individual term candidates  ( Frantzi et al ,  2000) , the formula for calculating the term hoods for synterms is as follows : ?????????=?? nested not is CR  )  , ( lognested is CR , )) (1) (( log ) value (- C
CRfCRbfTCRfCRcCRT bCR where c denotes a synterm whose elements share a canonical representative  ( denoted as CR in the formula )  , f ( CR ) corresponds to the cumulative frequency with which all term candidates from the synterm c occur in a given corpus  , CR denotes the average length of the term candidates  ( the number of constituents )  , and TCR is a set of all synterms whose CRs contain the given CR as a nested substring  . 
This approach ensures that all term variants are naturally dealt with jointly  , thus supporting the fact that they denote the same concept  . As a consequence , we expect that precision would be enhanced by considering joint frequencies of occurrence and termhoods for all variants of candidate terms  , while recall would benefit by the introduction of new candidates through consideration of different variation types  . 
4 Evaluation and discussion
In order to assess the effectiveness of incorporating specific types of term variation into ATR  , we compared the performance of the baseline C value method  ( without considering variations ) with the approach including recognition and conflation of term variants  . Here we are not interested in an absolute measure of the ATR performance  , but rather in the comparison of results obtained through handling different variation types  . 
We conducted two sets of experiments : in the first experiment  , we analysed the incorporation of term candidates resulting from considering term variations individually  , while , in the second , we experimented with the integration of combined variations in the ATR process  . 
The evaluation was carried out using the GENIA corpus  ( GENIA ,  2004) , which contains 2 , 000 abstracts in the biomedical domain with 76 , 592 manually marked occurrences of terms . These occurrences ( which include different term variants ) correspond to 29 , 781 different , unique terms . Each occurrence of a term in the corpus ( except occurrences of acronyms ) is linked to the corresponding ? normalised ? term  ( typically a singular form )  , while coordinated terms are identified , marked and normalised with interm coordinations . A third of occurrences of GENIA terms are affected by inflectional variations  , and almost half of GENIA terms have inflectional variants appearing in the corpus  . On the other hand , only 0 . 5% of terms contain a preposition , while 2% of all term occurrences are coordinated , involving 9% of distinct GENIA terms ( for a detailed analysis of GENIA terms see ( Nenadic et al . , 2004)) . 
We used the list of GENIA terms as a gold standard for the evaluation  . Since our ATR method produces a ranked list of suggested synterms  , we considered precision at fixed rank cutoffs ( intervals ) : precision was calculated as the ratio between the number of correctly recognised terms and the total number of entities recognised in a given interval  ( where an interval included all terms from the top ranked synterms  )  . ? The baseline method ( original C value ) was treated in the same way , as term candidates suggested by the original Cvalue could be seen as singleton synterms  . In order to estimate the influence on recall , we also used all variants from suggested synterms . 
The incorporation of individual variations affecting term constituents into ATR had considerable positive effects  , especially on the most frequently occurring terms  ( see Figures 2a and 2b ) : for some intervals , inflectional variants , for example , improved precision by almost 50% . 
Similarly , the integration of acronyms improved precision , in particular for frequent terms ( up to 70%) , as acronyms are typically introduced for such terms  . As one would expect , the combined constituent-level variations further improved interval precisions compared both to the baseline method and individual variations  ( see Figure 2c )  . 
However , the incorporation of structural variants ( in particular for prepositional terms ) negatively influenced precision compared to the baseline method  , as many false candidates were introduced . 
In order to assess the quality of extracted prepositional term candidates  , we evaluated a set of the 117 most frequently occurring candidates with prepositions :  80% of suggested expressions were deemed relevant by domain experts  , although they were not included in the gold GENIA standard  ( such as expression of genes or binding of NF kappa B  )  . Still , the recognition of prepositional term candidates is difficult as they are infrequent and there are no clear morphosyntactic cues that can differentiate between terminologically relevant and irrelevant prepositional phrases  . 
The incorporation of coordinated term candidates had only marginal influence on precision  , mainly because they were not frequent in the GENIA corpus  . Furthermore , simple term conjunctions ? It was an open question whether to count the recognition of each term form  ( e . g . singular and plural forms , an acronym and its EF , prepositional and non-prepositional forms ) separately ( i . e . as two positive ? hits ? ) or as one positive ? hit ? ( see also ( Church ,  1995)) . Since the evaluation of the baseline method ( original C value ) typically counts such hits separately , we decided to follow this approach , and consequently count all positive hits from synterms  . 
were far more frequent than term coordinations , which made their extraction highly ambiguous . 
Still , using only the patterns from Table 3 , we have correctly extracted 35 . 76% of all GENIA coordinated terms , with more than a half of all suggested candidates being found among those that appeared exclusively in coordinations  . However , these patterns also generated a number of false coordination expressions  , and consequently a number of false term candidates  . 
The integration of term variants was also useful for reranking of true positive term candidates : the combined rank was typically higher than the separate ranks of term variants  . Furthermore , some terms , not suggested by the baseline method at all , were ranked highly when variants were conflated ( for example , the term T-lymphocy te was recognised only as a coordinated term candidate  , while replication of HIV-1 was extracted only by considering prepositional term candidates  )  . In order to estimate the overall influence on recall of ATR  , we used all terms from the respective synterms ( see Table 4 for the detailed results )  . In general , the incorporation of inflectional variants increased recall by ?  , while acronyms improved recall by almost ? when only the most frequent terms were considered  . It is interesting that acronym acquisition can further improve recall by extracting variants that have more complex internal structures  ( such as EFs containing prepositions ( REA = repressor of estrogen activity ) and/or coordinations ( SMRT=silencing mediator of retinoic and thyroid receptor  ) ) . Prepositional and coordination candidate terms had some influence on recall  , in particular as they increased the likelihood of some candidates to be suggested as terms  . Low recall of term coordinations may be increased by adding more patterns  ( which would probably negatively affect precision )  . 
Summarising , experiments performed on the GENIA corpus have shown that the incorporation of term variations into the ATR process resulted in significantly better precision and recall  . In general , acronyms and inflectional unification are the most important variation types  ( at least in the domain of biomedicine )  . Individually , they increased precision by 20?70% for the top ranked synterm intervals , while recall is generally improved , in some cases up to 25% . Other term variations had only marginal influence on the performance  , mainly because they were infrequent in the test corpus  ( compared to the total number of term occurrences , and not only with regard to specific individual candidates  , but also in general ) . For these variations , larger-scale corpora may show their stronger influence  . 
0  50   100   150   250   500   100   00 all prepositions inflectional acronyms Figure 2a : Comparison of interval ATR precision of the baseline method  ( =1 ) to ATR precisions with integrated recognition of individual term variants  ( terms with frequency > 5 )   00 all prepositions inflectional acronyms Figure 2b : Comparison of interval ATR precision of the baseline method  ( =1 ) to ATR precisions with integrated recognition of individual term variants  ( terms with frequency > 0 )   00 all inflectional infl & acroall Figure 2c : Comparison of interval ATR precision of the baseline method  ( =1 ) to ATR precisions with integrated recognition of combined term variants  ( terms with frequency > 0 ) term sets prep . coord . infl . acro . 
freq .  ? 5 +5 . 30% +12 . 42% +17 . 52% +60 . 49% freq .  > 0 +2 . 36% +2 . 53% +25 . 25% +8 . 5 2% Table 4: Improvement in recall when variations are considered as an integral part of ATR  5 Conclusion In this paper we discussed possibilities for the extraction and conflation of different types of variation of term candidates  . We demonstrated that the incorporation of treatment of term variation enhanced the performance of an ATR system  , and that tackling term variation phenomena was an essential step for ATR  . In our case , precision was boosted by considering joint frequencies of occurrence and termhoods for all candidate terms from candidate synterms  , while recall benefited from the introduction of new candidates through consideration of different variation types  . Although we experimented with a biomedical corpus  , our techniques are general and can be applied to other domains  . 
Variations affecting single term candidate constituents are the most frequent phenomena  , and also straightforward for implementation as part of an ATR process  . The conflation of such term candidate variants can be further tuned for a specific domain by using lists of combining forms and affixes  . The incorporation of acronyms had a significant high positive effect  , in particular on more frequent terms ( since acronyms are introduced for terms that are used more frequently  )  . 
However , more complex structural phenomena had a moderate positive influence on recall  , but , in general , the negative effect on precision . The main reason for such performances is structural and terminological ambiguity of these expressions  , in addition to their low frequency of occurrence ( compared to the total number of term occurrences )  . For handling such complex variants , a knowledge-intensive and domain-specific approach is needed  , as coordinated term candidates or candidates with prepositions need to be additionally semantically analysed in order to suggest more reliable term candidates  , and to introduce fewer false candidates . 
Apart from being useful for boosting precision and recall  , the integration of term variation into ATR is particularly important for smaller corpora  ( where linking related occurrences is vital for successful terminology management  ) as well as for many text mining tasks ( such as IR , IE , term or document clustering and classification , etc . ) . 
Finally , as future work , we plan to investigate more knowledge intensive , domain-specific treatment of prepositional and coordinated terms  , as well as pronominal term references . 
6 Acknowledgements
This research has been partially supported by the JISC-funded National Centre for Text Mining  ( NaCTeM )  , Manchester , UK . 

S . Ananiadou , S . Albert and D . Schuhmann .  2000 . 
Evaluation of Automatic Term Recognition of Nuclear Receptors from Medline  . Genome
Informatics Series , vol . 11.
K.W . Church . 1995. One Termor Two ? Proc . of
SIGIR-95, pp . 310-318.
B . Daille , B . Habert and C . Jacquemin . 1996.
Empirical Observation of Term Variation and Principles for Their Description  . Terminology 3(2), pp .  197?258 . 
K . Frantzi , S . Ananiadou and H . Mima . 2000.
Automatic Recognition of MultiWord Terms : the C /NC value method  . International Journal of Digital Libraries , vol . 3:2, pp .  115?130 . 
C . Jacquemin .  1999 . Syntagmatic and paradigmatic representations of term variation  . Proc . of 37th
Annual Meeting of ACL , pp . 341?348.
C . Jacquemin .  2001 . Spotting and Discovering Terms through NLP . MIT Press , Cambridge MA . 
C . Jacquemin and E . Tzoukermann . 1999. NLP for
Term Variant Extraction : A Synergy of
Morphology , Lexicon and Syntax , in T.
Strzalkowski ( ed .), Natural Language
Information Retrieval , Kluwer , pp . 25-74 M . Krauthammer , A . Rzhetsky , P . Morozov , and
C . Friedman .  2001 . Using BLAST for identifying gene and protein names in journal articles  . Gene , 259(1?2): pp .  245?52 . 
GENIA .  2004 . GENIA resources . Available at http://www . tsujii . is . u-tokyo . ac . jp/~Genia/G . Nenadic , I . Spasic and S . Ananiadou .  2002 . 
Automatic Acronym Acquisition and Term
Variation Management within Domain-Specific Texts . Proc . of LREC 2002, pp .  2155?2162 . 
G . Nenadic , I . Spasic and S . Ananiadou . 2004.
Mining Biomedical Abstracts : What?s in a
Term ? Proc . of IJCNLP , pp . 247-254.
NLM . 2004. National Library of Medicine , Unified
Medical Language System.
Y . Tsuruoka and J . Tsujii .  2003 . Probabilistic Term Variant Generator for Biomedical Terms  . 
Proc . of 26th Annual ACM SIGIR Conference.
