Creative Discovery in Lexical Ontologies
Tony VEALE
Dept . of Computer Science

Dublin , Ireland , D4

Nuno SECO , Jer HAYES
Dept . of Computer Science

Dublin , Ireland , D4
nuno.seco,jer.hayes@UCD.ie

Compound terms play a surprisingly key role in the organization of lexical ontologies  . 
However , their inclusion forces one to address the issues of completeness and consistency that naturally arise from this organizational role  . In this paper we show how creative exploration in the space of literal compounds can reveal not only additional compound terms to systematically balance an ontology  , but can also discover new and potentially innovative concepts in their own right  . 
1 Introduction
Broad-coverage lexical knowledge bases like WordNet  ( Miller et al ,  1990 ) generally contain a large number of compound terms  , many of which are literal in composition . These compounds are undoubtedly included for a reason  , yet the idea that literal compounds might actually be essential to WordNet?s usefulness may strike some a sheretical on at least two fronts : first  , the lexicon is a finite resource , while the space of compounds is potentially infinite  ; and at any rate , literal compounds can be created as needed from purely compositional principles  ( Hanks ,  2004) . However , these retorts are valid only if we view WordNet as a dictionary  , but of course it is much more than this . WordNet is a lexical ontology , and ultimately , ontologies derive a large part of their functionality from their structure  . 
So , while the meaning of literal compounds like Greek -deity and animal-product may well be predictable from compositional principles alone  , such concepts still serve an important organizational role in WordNet by adding much needed structure to the middle ontology  . Having conceded the importance of such compounds , one is forced to address the issues of completeness and consistency that then arise from their inclusion  . 
Completeness suggests that we strive to include as many literal compounds as a resensible  , if they enhance the organization of the ontology or if there is evidence that they are in common usage in the language  . Systematicity is a related issue that arises when a group of existing compounds suggests that another should also exist for the ontology to be consistent  . For instance , the existence of Greek-deity , Greek-alphabet and Hebrew-alphabet leads to the hypothesis that Hebrew-deity should also exist if WordNet is to be both consistent and symmetric in its treatment of different cultural groupings  . 
Indeed , because literal compounds like these arise from theyoking together of two different ontological branches into one  , compounding represents an important contextualization device in the design of ontologies  , allowing lexical elements to be logically grouped into clusters or families that share important dimensions of meaning  . This clustering facilitates both automated reasoning by machines  ( such as the determination of semantic similarity based on taxonomic distance  ) and effective browsing by humans . Sometimes this yoking results in a compound that , following Boden (1990) and Wiggins (2003) , deserves to be called ? creative ? , because it exhibits both novelty and value . Novelty can be measured along either a psychological or a historical dimension  , while utility is a reflection of the uses to which a compound can be put  . For instance , a new compound may have utility as a clustering node when added to the middle ontology if its appropriate hyponyms can be identified  . 
Alternately , a new compound may represent an alternate nominalization of an existing concept  ( e . g . , see Vendler?s ( 1967 ) insights about nominalization , and Lynott and Keane?s ( 2003 ) application of these insights to compound generation  )  . 
In this paper we present a process of ontological exploration to identify those areas of the lexicon that can contribute to  , and may in turn benefit from , the invention of new compound terms . Since the discovery of new compound terms is essentially a process of creative exploration  , we frame our discussion within the theoretical framework of creative computation  . Within this framework two approaches to validating new compounds are presented : internal validation determines whether the ontology itself provides evidence for the sensibility of a new compound  , while external validation uses web search to find evidence that the compound already exists outside the ontology  . We then go on to show how these different strategies create a validation gap that can be exploited to identify the small number of truly creative compounds that arise  . 
2 Exploring the Space of LMH Concepts
Creative discovery requires that we give structure to the space of possible concepts that we plan to explore  . This is made somewhat easier if we consider the meaning of conceptual structures to be grounded in a semiotic system of meaning-creating oppositions  . Given a starting structure , knowledge of allowable oppositions can then be used to transform this starting point into a variety of different conceivable structures  , some of which may be novel and possess value on a particular utility scale  . 
The notion of opposition employed here is much broader than that of antonymy  . For our purposes , contextual oppositions exist between terms that compete to fill a given dimension of the same concept  . For instance ,   Greek1 and Hindu can each be used to differentiate the concept deity along a culture dimension  , and so , in the context of deity , both are opposed . However , this is a contextual opposition that , unlike the role of antonymy , does not constitute part of the meaning of either concept  . WordNet is a rich source of explicit antonymous oppositions  , but contextual oppositions must be inferred from the structure of the ontology itself and from existing compounds  . 
Fortunately , WordNet contains many instances of literal modifier-head terms  , such as " pastry crust " and " Greek alphabet " . The concepts denoted by these compound terms , or LMH concepts for short , have the lexical form MH ( such as pizza-pie or prairie-dog ) and express their literality in two ways . First , they must be stored in the WordNet ontology under an existing sense of the lexeme H  ; for instance , pizza-pie is actually stored under the hypernym pie  . Secondly , the gloss for the concept MH should actually contain the lexeme Mor some synonym of it  . Thus , while Greek-alphabet is a LMH ( it literally is a kind of alphabet , and it is literally Greek ) , neither monkey-bread ( which is not literally a kind of bread ) nor Dutch-courage ( which is not literally Dutch ) is a LMH concept . 
2.1 A Framework for Creativity
We use the terminology of Wiggins ( 2003 ) to frame our discussion of creative exploration . 
Wiggins , following earlier work by Boden (1990) , WordNet senses not as synsets but as italicized terms  . 
formalizes the creative exploration process using the following abstractions : C-the realm of concepts that is being explored R-the set of rules for forming concepts and conversely  , deconstructing existing ones T-the transformational rules that generate new concepts via RE-the evaluation mechanism that ascribes value or utility to these new concepts In applying these terms to creativity in WordNet  , we introduce the following refinements : Cw-the subset of C described explicitly in 
WordNet as synsets
C*-the set of LMH concepts in Cw considered as a starting point for creative exploration R *- the subset of R needed to construct and deconstruct LMH compounds in C*T*-the subset of T needed to hypothesize new 
LMH concepts for R * to construct
So for our current purposes , we define C * as the set of LMH concepts in WordNet  , and R * as the compositional criteria used to identify and decompose existing LMH entries and to construct new ones by concatenating an appropriate M and H term pair  . However , to define T * , we first need to consider how taxonomic differentiation is used to create LMH concepts in the first place  . 
3 Domain Differentiation
LMH concepts exist in WordNet to differentiate more general concepts in meaningful taxonomic ways  . For instance , the LMH concepts Greek-alphabet , Hebrew-alphabet and Roman-alphabet each serve to differentiate the concept alphabet  . 
This is a useful ontological distinction that contributes to the definition of individual letter concepts like Alpha  , Beta and Gimel . Since we can represent this specialization pattern via a differentiation set Dalphabet as follows : Dalphabet = Greek  , Hebrew , Roman More generally , the differentiation set of a concept H comprises the set of all concepts M such that the LMH concept MH is in C *  . Thus we have : Ddeity = Hindu , Roman , Greek, . . . Darchitecture=Greek , Roman, . . . Dcalendar=Muslim , Jewish , Hebrew, . . . We use D to denote the set of all differentiation sets that are implied by C *  , allowing us to define the absolute affinity between two modifier terms  c1 and c2 in terms of differentiation as follows : A abs ( c1 , c2 ) = x?D:c1?x ? c2?x ( 1 )   ( 1 ) This simply counts the number of base concepts that  c1 and c2 can both differentiate . We thus define the relative affinity between two modifier terms  c1 and c2 as follows : Arel ( c1 , c2 ) = x?D:c1?x ? c2?x ( 2 ) / x?D : c1 ? x ? c2 ? xA relative affinity of 1  . 0 means that both terms differentiate exactly the same concepts in WordNet  . It follows that the higher the relative affinity between  c1 and c2  , then the greater the likelihood that a concept differentiated by  c1 can also be differentiated by c2  , while the higher the absolute affinity , the more reliable this likelihood estimate becomes  . Affinity thus provides an effective basis for formulating the transformation rules in T *  . 
We should naturally expect near-synonymous modifiers to have a strong affinity for each other  . 
For instance , Jewish and Hebrew are near-synonyms because WordNet compounds Jewish-Calendar and Hebrew -Calendar are themselves synonymous  . This is clearly a form of contextual synonymy , since Jewish and Hebrew do not mean the same thing  . Nonetheless , their affinity can be used to generate new compounds that add value to WordNet as synonyms of existing terms  , such as Jewish-alphabet , Hebrew-Religion , and so on . 
Recall that literal compounds represent a yoking together of two or more ontological branches  . In exploring the space of novel compounds , it will be important to recognize which branches most naturally form the strongest bonds  . Another variant of affinity can be formulated for this purpose : A domain  ( x , y ) = Dx ? Dx (3) For instance , A domain ( sauce , pizza ) = 2 , since in WordNet the modifier overlap between the pizza and sauce domains is anchovy  , cheese . 
4 Creative Exploration in the LMH Space
We consider as an exploratory starting point any LMH concept MH in C *  . We can transform this into another concept M'-H by replacing M with any M ' for which : M'?x x?D-DH ? M?x  ( 4 ) This formulation may suggest a large range of values of M '  . However , these candidates can be sorted by Arel(M , M ') , which estimates the probability that a given M'-H will later be validated as useful  . One rule in T*can now be formulated for our further consideration : T *:  M1-H1  ?  M1-H2  ?  M2-H1  ?  M2-H2   ( 5 ) This rule allows the LMH space to be explored via a process of modifier modulation  . Suppose we choose Greek-deity as a starting point  . Since M = Greek and H =  Deity , we can choose M ' from any set other than D deity that contains Greek : Dalphabet = Hebrew  , Greek , Roman Ddeity=Greek , Roman , Norse , Hindu , ? These differentiation patterns suggest that new compounds can meaningfully be created by yoking the ontological branches of alphabet and deity together  . Thus , from D alphabet we can choose M ' to be either Hebrew or Roman  , leading to the creation of the LMH concepts Hebrew-deity and Roman-deity  . One of these , Roman-deity , already exists in C * , but another , Hebrew-deity is novel in a way that Boden terms psychologically or P-Creative  , in as much as it is neither in Cw nor C * . It may thus be of some value as a hypernym for existing WordNet concepts like Yahwe and 

Rule ( 5 ) is a general principle for ontological exploration in the space of compound terms  . 
Consider the compound software-engineering , which , following (5) , is suggested by the joint existence in WordNet of the concepts software-engineer  , automotive-engineer and automotive-engineering . While this particular addition could be predicted from the application of simple morphology rules  , the point here is that a single exploration principle like  ( 5 ) can obviate the need for a patch work of such simple rules  . 
Of course , one can imagine rules other than ( 5 ) to exploit the regularities inherent in WordNet definitions  . For instance , consider the sense gasoline-bomb , which WordNet glosses as : ? a crude in cendiary bomb made of a bottle filled with flammable liquid and fitted with a ragwick ?  . By determining which definite description in the gloss conforms to the modifier ? in this case it is ? flammable liquid ?? other modifiers can be found that also match this description  . Thus , the new concepts methanol-bomb and but a nol-bomb can be generated  , and from this the creative concept alcohol-bomb can be generalized  . However , each strategy raises its own unique issues , so for now we consider a T* comprising (5) only . 
4.1 The Evaluation Mechanism E
For purposes of a scribing value or ontological utility to a new LMH concept M'-H  , the concept must first be placed into one of the following categories : a  ) M'-H already exists in C * is thus ascribed zero value as an addition to C *  . 
b ) M'-H does not exist in C * but does exist in Cw , and thus corresponds to an existing nonliteral concept  ( such as monkey-bread )  . While it may have value if given a purely literal reading  , it cannot be added to Cw without creating ambiguity  , and so has zero value . 
c ) Using R * , M'-H can be seen to describe a nonempty class of existing concepts in Cw  , and would thus have value as either a synonym ( when this set is a singleton ) or as a new organizing supertype ( when this set is a several to n )  . In this case , we say that M'-H has been internally validated against Cw  . 
d ) Using a textual analysis of a large corpus such as the World-Wide-Web  , M'-H is recognized to have a conventional meaning in Ceven if it is not described in Cw  . In this case , we say that M'-H has been externally validated for inclusion in Cw  . The fact that M'-H is novel to the system but not to the historical context of the web suggests that it is merely a psychologically or P-Creative invention in the sense of Boden  ( 1990 )  . 
e ) M'-H is recognized to have a hypothetical or metaphoric value within a comprehension framework such as conceptual blending theory  ( e . g . , see Veale et al 2000) , mental space theory , etc . In this case , M'-H may truly be a historically or H-Creative invention in the sense of Boden  ( 1990 )  . 
In general , a new compound has value if its existence is suggested by  , but not recognized by , the lexical ontology . As noted in the introduction , this value can be realized in a variety of ways , e . g . , by automatically suggesting new knowledgebase additions to the lexical ontologist  , or by providing potentially creative expansions for a user query in an information retrieval system  ( see Veale ,  2004) . 
4.2 Validating New Concepts
The evaluation strategies ( c ) and ( d ) above suggest two ways of validating the results of new compound creation : a WordNet-internal approach that uses the structure of the ontology itself to provide evidence for a compound?s utility  , and a WordNet-external approach that instead looks to an unstructured archive like the web  . In both cases , a new compound is validated by assembling a support set of precedent terms that argue for its meaningfulness  . 
4.2.1 Internal Validation
The internal support-set for a new compound MH is the set of all WordNet words w that have:  ( i ) at least one sense that is a hyponym of a sense of H  ; and ( ii ) a sense that contains M or some variant of it in its gloss  . For instance , the novel compound ? rain god ? is internally validated by the word set ? Thor ?  , ? Parjanya ? , ? Rain giver ? . 
When wis polysemous , two distinct senses may be used , reflecting the fact that MH may be metonymic in construction  . For instance , the compound ? raisin-wine ? can be validated internally by the polysemous word ? muscatel ?  , since one sense of ? muscatel ? is a kind of wine  , and another , a kind of grape , has a WordNet gloss containing the word ? rais in  ?  . From this perspective , a ? r a is in wine ? can be a wine made from the same grapes that raisins are made from  . 
Likewise , the compound ? Jewish robot ? can be validated by simultaneously employing both senses of ? Golem ? in WordNet  , which defines ? Golem ? as either a Jewish mythical being or as a robotic automaton  . 
Creative products arise when conceptual ingredients from different domains are effectively blended  ( see Veale and O?Donoghue ,  2000) . It follows that a creative product can be validated by deblending it into its constituent parts and determining whether there is a precedent for combining elements of these types  , if not these specific elements . We can thus exploit this notion of deblending to provide internal validation for new compounds  . For instance the WordNet gloss for pizzalists ? tomatos auce ? as an ingredient  . 
This suggests we can meaningfully understand a compound of the form M-pizza if there exists a compound M-sauce that can be viewed as a replacement for this ingredient  . Generalizing from this , we can consider a new compound M1-H1 to be internally validated if H has a sense whose gloss contains the compound  M2-H2  , and if the ontology additionally contains the concept  M1-H2  . It follows then that the novel compounds apple -pizza  , chocolate-pizza , taco-pizza , and curry-pizza will all be internally validated as meaningful  ( if not necessarily enjoyable ) varieties of pizza . 
4.2.2 External Validation
In contrast , the external validation set for a compound MH is the set of distinct documents that contain the compound term ? MH ?  , as acquired using a web search engine . For instance , given the WordNet concepts naval-engineer , software-engineer and naval-academy , rule ( 5 ) generates the hypothesis software-academy , which cannot be validated internally yet which retrieves over  1000 web documents to a test to its validity . 
This web strategy is motivated by Keller and Lapata?s  ( 2003 ) finding that the number of documents containing a novel compound reliably predicts the human plausibility scores for the compound  . 
Nonetheless , external validation in this way is by no means a robust process  . Since web documents are not sense tagged , one cannot be sure that a compound occurs with the sense that it is hypothesized to have  . Indeed , it may not even occur as a compound at all , but as a coincidental juxtaposition of terms from different phrases or sentences  . Finally , even if found with the correct syntactic and semantic form  , one cannot be sure that the usage is not that of a nonnative  , second language learner . 
These possibilities can be diminished by seeking a large enough sample set  , but this has the effect of setting the evidential bar too high for truly creative compounds  . However , another solution lies in the way that the results of external validation are actually used  , as we shall later see . 
4.2.3 Validating New Synonyms
Many of the compounds that are validated either by internal or external means will be synonyms of existing WordNet terms  . As such , their creative value will not represent an innovative combination of ideas  , but rather a creative use of paraphrasing . 
The nature of ( 5 ) makes it straightforward to determine which is the case  . 
In general , when M1-H1 and M2-H1 are themselves synonyms , then M2-H2 will be a synonym of M1-H2 . For instance , from the combination of applied-science , engineering-science and applied-mathematics , we can generate from ( 5 ) the new compound engineering-mathematics . This compound cannot be validated internally , but since it retrieves more than 300 , 000 documents from the web , this is enough to adequately a test to its meaningfulness  . Now , since applied-science and engineering-science are synonymous in WordNet  , we can conclude that engineering-mathematics and applied-mathematics are themselves synonymous also  . 
4.3 Creativity in the Validation Gap
The difference between internal and external validation strategies can be illuminating  . Internal validation verifies a compound on the basis that it could meaningfully exist  , while external validation verifies it on the basis that it does actually exist in a large corpus  . Therefore , if a compound can be validated externally but not internally  , it suggests that the concept may by P-Creative . In contrast , if the compound can be validated internally but not externally  , it suggests that the compound may be H-Creative and represent a genuine historical innovation  ( if only a lexical one , and of minor proportions ) . 
For instance , the new compound ? seadance ? ( analogous to ? rain dance ? ) cannot be validated internally , yet can be found in over 700 internet documents . It thus denotes a P-Creative concept . In contrast , the compound ? cranial vein ? yields no documents from a web query  ( on Alta Vista )  , yet can be internally validated by WordNet via the word-concept Diploic-Vein  , a blood vessel that serves the soft tissue of the cranial bones  . 
Likewise , the compounds ? chocolate pizza ? , ?tacopizza ? and many more from the yoking of Dpizza and Dsauce can all be validated externally via hundreds of different web occurrences  , and so represent P-Creative varieties of pizza . However , compounds like ? Newburg pizza ? ( a pizza made with lobster sauce ) and ? wine pizza ? ( a pizza made with wine sauce ) can only be validated internally and are thus candidates for H-Creative innovation  . 
5 Large-Scale Evaluation
A largescale evaluation of these ideas was conducted by exhaustively applying the T* rule of  ( 5 ) to the noun taxonomy of WordNet 1 . 7 . To better see the effect of affinity between modifiers  , Table 1 ranks the results according to the measure
Aabs from (1).
Aabs 123
No . compounds generated 941 , 841 22 , 727 2 , 175% H-Creative 0 . 49% 0 . 63% 1 . 38%% P-Creative 35 . 65% 33 . 77% 34 . 57%% Conflations 0 . 10% 0 . 10% 0 . 05%% Indeterminate 63 . 76% 65 . 49% 64 . 00% Table 1: Number of compounds created , and their assessment , for each affinity level . 
Conflations are terms that exist both as compounds and as conflated lexical atoms  . For instance , while the compound ? bull dog ? may not exist in WordNet  , its conflation ? bull dog ? does . 
Compound discovery is thus a useful means of re -expanding these conflations when it is meaningful to do so  . 
As one might expect , lower affinity levels allow greater numbers of new compounds to be created  . 
Interestingly , however , Table 1 suggests that as the affinity threshold is raised and the number of compounds lowered  , the creativity of these compounds increases , as measured by the relative proportion of H -Creative terms that are generated  . 
Generating compound terms in a lexical ontology is a creative process that demands rigorous validation if the ontology is not to be corrupted  . Of the two strategies discussed here , external validation is undoubtedly the weaker of the two  , as one should be loathe to add new compounds to WordNet on the basis of web evidence alone  . However , external validation does serve to illustrate the soundness of internal validation  , since 99 . 51% of internally validated concepts ( at Aabs = 1 ) are shown to exist on the web . It follows then that the absence of external validation yields a very conservative basis for assessing H-Creativity  . Web validation is perhaps better used therefore as a means of rejecting creative products than as a means of discovering them  . In fact , when used as a reverse barometer in this way , the inevitable errors that arise from webbased validation serve only to make the creative process more selective  . 
6 Conclusions and Future Work
We are currently considering ways of broadening the scope of internal validation while maintaining its conceptual rigour  . This should counterbalance the high rejection rate caused by an overly conservative external validation process  , and thereby allow us to identify a higher percentage of H-creative products  . As shown with the ? pizza ? examples of section 4 . 3 , we have already begun to explore the possibilities of validation latent in the WordNet ontology itself  . So while the use of web content for external validation suggests that creative discovery has a role to play in producing and expanding web queries  , internal validation remains our central thrust , leading to what we hope will be a new , more creative model of the thesaurus . 
In grounding our discussion in the creative framework of Boden  ( 1990 ) and its formalization by Wiggins ( 2003 )  , we have placed particular emphasis on the labels P-Creative and H-Creative  . 
However , the empirical results of section 5 suggest that this binary categorization may be overly reductive  , and that a more gradated system of labels is needed  . For instance , the novel compounds computer-consultant and hand writing-consultant are both created from a yoking of the domains expert and consultant  , and because each is externally validated , each is considered P-Creative . 
However , while only a handful of documents can be mars halled to support hand writing-consultant  , the amount of web evidence available to support computer-consultant is vast  . So it is wrong headed to consider both as equally P-Creative and lacking in H-Creativity  , since the dearth of existing uses suggests handwriting-consultant has far greater novelty  . Perhaps what is needed then is not a binary categorization but a continuous one  , a numeric scale with P-and H-Creativity as its poles  . 
This scale would function much like the continuum used by  ( MacCormac ,  1985 ) to separate banal metaphors ( which he dubbe depiphors ) from creative ones ( or diaphors )  . 

M . A . Boden .  1990 . The Creative Mind : Myths and
Mechanisms . New York : Basic Books.
P . Hanks .  2004 . WordNet : What is to be done ? In the proceedings of  GWC?2004  , the 2nd Global WordNet conference , Masaryk University , Brno . 
F . Keller , and M . Lapata .  2003 . Using the web to obtain frequencies for unseen bigrams  . 
Computational Linguistics.
Lynott , Dermot and Mark Keane , 2003 . The role of knowledge support in creating noun -noun compounds  . In the proceedings of the 25th Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . 
E.R . MacCormac . 1985. A Cognitive Theory of
Metaphor . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press.
G . Miller , R . Beckwith , C . Fellbaum , D . Gross and K . J . Miller .  1990 . Introduction to WordNet : an online lexical database  . International Journal of Lexicography ,  3(4):235 ? 244 . 
G . Wiggins . 2003. Categorizing Creative Systems.
In the proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Creative Systems , IJCAI?03 , Acapulco , Mexico . 
T . Veale and D . O?Donoghue .  2000 . Computation and Blending . Cognitive Linguistics , 11(3/4):253?281 . 
T . Veale .  2004 . Creative Information Retrieval . In the proceedings of CICLing 2004, A . Gelbukh , ed . LNCS 2945, Springer : Berlin . 
Z . Vendler . 1967. Linguistics and Philosophy.
Ithaca , New York : Cornell University Press.
