Lexicalisation Strategies in Cooperative Question -Answering Systems 
Farah BENAMARA , Patrick SAINT-DIZIER
IRIT , 118 route de Narbonne
31062 TOULOUSE Cedex , FRANCE
benamara , stdizier@irit.fr

In this project note , we present the main features of lexicalisation strategies deployed by humans in question -answering  ( QA ) tasks . We then show how these can be reproduced in automated QA systems  , in particular in Intelligent Cooperative Question -Answering Systems  . 
1 Motivations
The framework of Advanced Question Answering ( QA ) systems , including cooperative QA answering , as described in a recent roadmap ( Voorees 2003) , raises new challenges for language generation since answers are often produced via dedicated inference mechanisms operating over various knowledge sources  , including conceptual ontologies . Producing wellformed and informative responses gives a whole new insight to language generation  , and in particular to the difficult problem of lexicalisation  . 
For example , the question:
A bung a low in Mege`ve for 15 persons ? has the response : There are no bungalows in Mege`ve  , we can propose you 2 close-by chalets or a country cottage for 15 persons in Mege`ve , or a 15 person bung a low in les
Houches (8kms ) or in Acacias (12kms ) , where closely related alternatives are proposed on:  ( 1 ) sister concepts of bung a low ( the question focus ) : a country cottage or 2 close-by chalets ( assuming a chalet capacity does not exceed 10 persons ) in the same village or ( 2 ) sister concepts of the Mege`ve village ( the strongest constraint on the focus ) : close-by villages where bung a lows meet the 15 person constraint . The response involves evaluating village proximity and sorting responses  , e . g . 
by increasing distance from Mege`ve . The first part of the response There are no bungalows in Meg`eve is the direct response  , which corrects the user false presupposition , while the remainder of the response reflects the cooperative know-how of the responder  . Cooperative know-how involves several forms of responses that include relaxations  , intensional calculus , expression of restrictions , of warnings and conditional responses ( Benamara et al 2004 )  . 
This simple example shows that , if a direct response cannot be found , several forms of knowledge and reasoning schemas need to be used and that the NL form of the response requires adequate and subtle lexicalisations  , often directed by the reasoning schemas . 
Lexicalisation is the operation that associates a word or an expression to a concept  . It is a major parameter in response production ( Reiter et Dale ,  1997) , ( a good synthesis can be found in ( Cahill ,  1999)) . Lexicalisation is often decomposed into two different stages : lexical choice  , which occurs during content determination , where the lexical term chosen , which may still be underspecified , is dependent on reasoning procedures , the knowledge base contents , and grammatical constraints ; and lexical variation which is the choice of a particular word or form among possible synonyms or paraphrases  . 
Lexical variation occurs in the surface realizer , and may have some pragmatic connotations , for example an implicit evaluation via the language level chosen  ( e . g . argotic entails low evaluation ) . 
In this project note , we show the different facets of lexicalisation in advanced QA  , where the two stages , lexical choice and variation , play crucial and very distinct roles in the different parts of the response  . Our model is based on a detailed analysis of QA pairs  , and on annotation tasks , from which a model emerged , suitable for NLG . 
2 The WEBCOOP project and its environment This research is part of the WEB COOP system  ( Be-namara et al 2004 )  , that makes a heavy use of a rich domain ontology , which is a concept ontology structured by means of several semantic relations  ( Cruse 1986 )  . To better understand the perspective in which this work has been carried out  , let us say a few words about the WEB COOP project , a system designed to provide cooperative answers to queries on the Web  . 
2.1 Typology of the domain ontology
The ontology on which our project is based is basically a conceptual ontology where nodes are associated with concept lexicalizations and essential properties  , as it is now often the case in restricted domain ontologies  ( http://www . daml . org / ontologies /) . In our implementation , each node is represented by the predicate : onto -node  ( concept , lex , prop ) where concept has properties prop , represented as attribute-value pairs , and lexicalisations lex . 
Most lexicalisations are entries in the lexicon , where morphological and grammatical aspects are described  . For example , for hotel , we have ( coded in Prolog ): onto-node ( hotel , [[ hotel ] , [ residence , hoteliere ]] , [ night-rate = X : integer , nb-of-rooms=N : integer , facilities :
List]).
There are several well-designed public domain ontologies on the net  . Our ontology is a synthesis of two existing French ontologies  , that we customized : Tour in France ( www . tourinfrance . net ) and the bilingual ( French and English ) thesaurus of tourism and leisure activities ( www . iztzg . hr/indokibiblioteka/THESAUR . PDF ) which includes 2800 French terms . We manually integrated these ontologies in WEB COOP  ( Be-namara et al 2004a ) and added ourselves most properties by hand . We also revised slightly the ontology by removing concepts which are either too specific  ( i . e . too low level ) , such as some basic aspects of ecology or rarely considered  , as e . g . 
the economy of tourism . We also removed quite surprising classifications such as sanatorium under tourist accommodation  . We finally reorganized some concept hierarchies , so that they ? look ? more intuitive for a large public  . Finally , we found that some hierarchies are a little bit odd  , for example , we found at the same level accommodation capacity and tourist accommodation whereas  , in our case , we consider that capacity is a property of the concept tourist accommodation  . 
We have , at the moment ,   1000 concepts in our tourism ontology which describe the different aspects of accommodation and transportation and a few other satellite elements  ( geography , health , immigration ) . Besides the traditional ? is a ? relation , we also coded the ? part of ? relation and the opposition  . 
We also have a few proportional series in order to encode graduality  . In the tourism domain there is a reasonable number of part of pairs  , and a small number of opposites and proportional series  . Synonymy is encoded via the list of lexicalizations  . Encoding these relations is straightforwardly realized by introducing facts  , which operate at the concept level , not at the lexicalization one : part-of(journey , trip ) . 
As shall be seen below , this ontology is futher annotated for lexicalization tasks  . 
Finally , in ( Benamara et al 2004) , we define a conceptual metrics that determines the distance between two concepts  , evaluated in terms of distance in the hierarchy between the two concepts and property differences  ( nature of properties and values associated )  . 
2.2 Outline of WEBCOOP
Following Grice?s maxims ( Grice , 1975) and related works , e . g . ( Searle ,  1975) , in the early 1990s , a number of forms of cooperative responses were identified  . Most of the efforts in these studies and systems focussed on the foundations and on the implementation of reasoning procedures  ( Gal ,  1988) , ( Minock et al . , 1996) , while little attention was paid to question analysis and NL response generation  . An overview of these systems can be found in ( Gasterland et al , 1994) and in ( Webber et al . , 2002), based on works by ( Hendrix et al . , 1978), ( Kaplan , 1982), ( Mays et al . , 1982), among others . These systems include e . g . the identification of false presuppositions and various types of misunderstandings found in questions  . They also include reasoning schemas based e . g . on constant relaxation to provide approximate or alternative  , but relevant , answers when the direct question has no response . 
Intensional reasoning schemas can also be used to generalize over lists of basic responses or to construct summaries  . 
The framework of Advanced Reasoning for
Question Answering ( QA ) systems , as described in a recent roadmap , raises new challenges since answers can no longer be only directly extracted from texts  ( as in TREC ) or databases , but require the use of a domain knowledge base , including a conceptual ontology , and dedicated inference mechanisms . 
Such a perspective , obviously , reinforces and gives a whole new insight to cooperative answering  . 
In WEBCOOP , user questions may range from keywords to comprehensive natural language expressions  . Their parse produces a semantic logical representation that includes the question conceptual category  , the question focus and the question contents . Responses are structured in two parts . 
The first part contains explanation elements in natural language  . It is a first level of cooperativity that reports user misconceptions  , if any , in relation with the domain knowledge . The second part is the most important and the most original  . It reflects the know-how of the cooperative system  , going beyond the cooperative statements given in the first part  . It is based on intensional description techniques and on intelligent relaxation procedures going beyond classical generalization methods used in AI  . This component also includes additional dedicated cooperative rules that make a thorough use of the domain ontology and of general knowledge  . Responses provided to users are built in web style  , by integrating natural language generation ( NLG ) techniques with hypertext links to produce ? dynamic ? responses  . Hyperlinks are dynamically created at generation time  . This leaves up to the user the high-level planning tasks inherent to NLG and improves readability and information access  . The standard generation difficulties ( lexicalisation , aggregation , argumentation ) remain crucial to generate cooperative responses , but their web-style greatly reduces the overall complexity  . 
The goal of the present contribution is to clarify and model the lexicalization aspects  , which are , in fact , in close dependence with the aggregation functions  . 
3 Investigating lexicalisations from cooperative QA corpora To carry out our study  , we considered three typical sources of cooperative discourses : Frequently Asked Questions  ( FAQ )  , Forums , and email question-answer pairs ( EQAP ) , these latter obtained by sending ourselves emails to relevant services  ( e . g . for tourism : tourist offices , airlines , hotels ) . Our study was carried out on 670 cooperative question-answer pairs . We have about 50% pairs coming from FAQ , 25% from Forums and 25% from EQAP . The domains considered are basically large-public applications : tourism  ( 45% )  , health (22%) , sport , shopping and education (19%) . In all these corpora , no user model is assumed , and there is no dialogue : QA pairs are isolated , with no context , in a way similar to web search engine querying . 
4 Lexicalisation strategies deployed by humans From the analysis of these QA pairs  , we have identified the main lexicalisation strategies presented below  . Between parentheses are introduced XML-type labels  , used to annotate our corpora . 
? Identity ( ID ) : the term in the question is kept unchanged in the response  , ? Quasi-synonyms ( SYN ): under this term , we observe a large spectrum of variations : SYN ( a ) terms which are almost equivalent ( have/possess )  , SYN ( b ) usages with a specific orientation or connotation  , such as the use of commercially oriented terms to attract customers or of more technical terms  , possibly with slight nuances , on the part of the responder ( refund/financial compensation , breathing stops/respiration pauses ) , quite typical of financial or health corpora where the responder is often a professional  , SYN ( c ) transcategorial variations or short paraphrases ( international ? from the entire world , from a broad , from all the countries in the world ) . This latter subclass is much more difficult to characterize  , it often indicates a form of insistence or stress  , or the desire to make information more explicit ( e . g . international is really from all the countries in the world  )  , ? Opposites ( OPP ) : used on a limited scale to account e . g . for the differences in point of view between the questioner and the responder  ( e . g . 
lend/borrow , pay/charge , stay/leave ) ( Cruse 1986) . 
? Subtypes ( SUB ) : often subtypes in the ontology ( accommodation ? hotel , motel , bunga-low , country cottage , etc . ) or enumerations of basic terms ( e . g . different types of credit cards ) . We have the following main subtypes : SUB ( a ) lower-level elements in an ontology ( possibly terminal elements )  , SUB ( b ) focuses on subevents or sub-activities of the larger event lexicalised in the question  , or ( simple ) procedure description instead of the procedure name  , and SUB ( c ) subtyping via modification ( official guide , mountain guide ) . 
? Sisters ( SIS ) are used when the response introduces minor superficial corrections to the terms used in the question  ( not as important as false presuppositions )  , often related to ? lexical approximations ? ( e . g . bungalow used instead of hut , cabin in a camping ) , these should not be confused with SYN(b ) . SIS is also useful in negative responses , where the correct response is a sister of the concept used in the query  ( is my metrotic ket valid on the bus ? no , you need to buy a bustic ket ) . 
? Generalizations ( GEN ) : their main use is in intensional answers , where generalizations are realized to make the answer more compact  . 
Generalizations can also be used e . g . to insist on a certain facet of the term ( castle/building )  , or to provide a certain form of help ( where is the Dominican Republic ?? in the Antilles  )  . 
It is possible , in addition , to indicate the generalization level w . r . t . the ontology . 
? Metonymies ( MET ): are relatively frequent , and focus on a particular ? face t ? of the term used in the question to better emphasize a particular aspect  , such as a means or an instrument of an action , or use of make for object , container for containe e . 
? Fuzzy term interpretation ( FTI ) : close interpreted as 50 meters . 
These lexical variations are relatively well distributed over the above different categories  , roughly as follows ( all situations included ) in %:
IDSYNOPPSUBSISGEN METFTI 32%   21%   2%   21%   4%   5%   14%   2% As the reader may note it , almost none of these lexical variations are neutral  . They convey a specific connotation , point of view , focus or they may activate a concept property or facet usually in the background  . 
To have a more systematic analysis of lexicalisation  , we manually annotated lexicalisation forms in QA pairs  . The examples in Fig .  1 , on the next page , illustrate several forms frequently encountered . Terms considered are labelled as T1, T2, etc . 
( including terms within the focus ) , a special annotation is reserved for the whole structure identified as the focus  ( FOC ) and op = specifies the variation operation at stake  ( e . g . SYN(a ), SUB(b ), etc . ) .   Q1-R1 have several layers of lexicalisations : guided tour is a subtype of visit  , guided tours at fixed hours 11AM and 3 PM is a subtype of visit hours , while building is a generalization of castle , necessary to allow for the reference to town hall  , since building is the least upper bound in the ontology for castle and townhall  .   Q2-R2 stresses on and makes more explicit drinkable in water from the tap  , while Q3-R3 requires the GEN strategy , which is the simplest way to locate a country or any object  , via its relations with others . 
5 Enriching the ontology for lexicalisations tasks in NLG Let us consider again the ontology presented in section  2  . 1 . It needs some refinements so that the lexicalization situations identified can be automated  . 
Let us consider the main cases.
SYN ( a ) is based on the set of lexicalizations associated with the concept considered  . SYN ( b ) requires lexicalisations to be marked according to their language level  , in our case : slang , popular term , standard term ( the one chosen by default ) and technical term . SYN ( c ) requires another type of notation : the category of the lexicalisation : word versus expression + category  . For example , possess is marked technical ( contrasted with have )  , and from the entire world is identified as an expression of type PP  . In terms of coding , the last example is coded as : lex([from , the , entire , world ] , standard , expr:pp ) . 
Opposites are encoded via a specific set of facts in the ontology at the concept level  , same for SUB ( b ) where subactivites of an activity are considered as parts  . Treating SIS is more delicate since all the sisters of a node may not be appropriate  . At this level , we use the conceptual metrics advocated in section  2  . 1 , with a quite high threshold , that we parameterize to evaluate its best level . The metrics is highly dependent on the number of properties encoded  , but it seems hard to have another strategy , since sampling methods would require too much corpus work  . As an example , hut and cab in are considered as close sisters of bung a low  , but chalet and country cottage are more remote . This aspect is crucial when relaxing concepts to find alternative solutions  . 
Finally , metonymies will not be treated at the moment and FTI are dealt within a more or less ad ? hoc way  , using simple and naive geometrical considerations . 
6 A lexicalisation model for QA
As shown in Fig .  2 , lexicalisation strategies in QA pairs occur at five levels :  L1: between the query and the direct response ,   L2: between the question and the cooperative know-how part  , L3: within the direct response ( insistence , paraphrases , exclusions , etc . ) ,   L4: between the direct response and the know-how part  , and , finally , L5: within the know-how part , which may be composed of several components , as shown in ( Benamara et al . 2004b ) . 
It seems that L1 , L2 , L3 ,   L4 and L5 are organized hierarchically in the lexicalisation process  . 
6.1 The relation L1
Let us concentrate on the question focus , which is the term the most sensitive to lexical variation  ( variations on other terms are essentially synonyms  )  . Let us first consider L1 , the lexicalisation strategies between the question and the direct response  . The Q1: What are the < FOC > < T2 > < T 3 > visit </ T 3 > hours</T 2 > of the < T 1 > castle ? </ T 1 > </ FOC > R1: This < T 1 op = GEN > building </ T 1 > being the townhall , there are only < T 2 op = SUB > < T3 op=SUB>guidedtours</T 3 > at fixed hours: 11 AM and 3 PM </ T 2  > . 
Q 2: Iswater<FOC>drinkable</FOC > in the Dominican Republic ?  R2: No , you must not < FOCop = SYN ( c ) > drink water from the tap </ FOC > , always water from bottles . 
Q 3: < FOC > Where </ FOC > is the Dominican Republic  ?   R3: It is in the very heart of < FOCop = GEN > the Caribbean </ FOC >  , it is the second largest < FOCop = GEN > island of the Antilles </ FOC >  . 
Figure 1: Lexicalisation annotations
Figure 2: Lexicalisation relations in a QA pair main criterion turns out to be the ? conceptual ? overlap  , observed in the domain ontology , between the response elements and the question focus  . This is determined by comparing the subtree ST1 in the domain ontology whose root is the concept associated with the question focus  , with the subtree ST2 associated with the response , or , in case of an enumeration , the smallest subtree that includes all the solutions  . We basically have four situations : ? Focus adequate w  . r . t . the response : both subtrees coincide , or ST2 is a proper subtree of ST1 ,   ( Q : what kind of tourist accommodation in Chamonix ? R : we have all kinds of hotels  , bungalows , chalets and campings ) , ? Focus too large: ST2 is only a portion of a proper subtree of ST1   ( Q : what kind of tourist accomodation in La Trairie ? we have only cabins and bungalows  )  , ? Focus to on arrow : ST2 is larger than ST1 , i . e . 
S T2 dominates ST1 or has elements not included into ST1  , for example : ( Q : An express train to Marse illeat 11 . PM?R : We have an express train at 11 . 15, but also a TGV , which is much faster , at 11 . 25 . , where there is a generalization over the types of trains  , ? Shifts : ST2 is not included into ST1 ( but , in some cases , a few solutions can be common )   ( what hotel categories ? we only have camp-sites and bungalows  )  . 
The above situations are categorized in terms of the lexicalisation functions below  , percentage perfocus situation is given for L1 only , more pragmatic aspects are briefly commented :
Focus Lexicalisation Strategies (1) Adequate , ID , SYN(a )
Response SYN ( b ) specific orientation positive or SYN ( c ) for stress negative ( 40% ) SUB ( a ) ( b ) for a more refined response via enumeration ( 2 ) Too large SUB ( c )  , MET , (21%) SUB(a , b ) for enumerations ( 3 ) Too GEN restricted ( 6% ) reference to generic concepts ( 4 ) Fuzzy or FTI , needs an SYN not interpreted interpretation ( 2% )   ( 5 ) Adequate SUB ( a ) ( b ) for enumerations with conditions ( 18% )   ( 6 ) Minor SIS for adjustments shifts ( 13% ) In an NLG system , more schematic than real-life corpora , the above strategies allow for the production of adequate lexicalisations for the following situations  , which seem to cover all the cases we found for yes/no and entity  ( what is , who ) questions : illustration : Q : what kinds of hotels in Mege`ve ? ? direct response  , simple or complex , ( ID , SYN ) , we have all kinds of hotels in Mege`ve . 
? response with restrictions ( SYN , ID+SUB , GEN+SUB ) , We have all kinds of tourist accomodation except 4* hotels and huts , or simple adaptations ( SIS ) , ? responses coping on precise subtopics or subtypes  ( SUB )  , response can be negative on the query focus and then positive on a subtype : We do not have hotels  , but comfortable , high standard , chalets , ? response with some form of generalization ( as in example Q1 )  , We have all types of tourist accomodation , from the cheapest to the fanciest ( GEN , least upper bound ) , ? response with interpretation of fuzzy term ( FTI )  , ? response with conditions , or case structures ( SUB ) , we have 2* hotels at 3060 Euros , 3* hotels at 50-80 Euros , etc . 
? response with forms of stress , insistence , explicitation via enumerations or paraphrases ( SYN , SUB , OPP , GEN ) , we have all types of hotels : 2* ,  3* , 4* and even 5* hotels . 
The implementation of L1 is functionally quite straightforward . The reasoning component produces a logical formula  , from which the NLG functions ( lexicalisation , but also aggregation and microplanning ) operate . As indicated in the above array , the generator evaluates the relative overlapp between the question focus and the response  . It can then activate , for the terms to generate , the relevant lexicalisation function(s ) . The GEN function is quite specific since it has also some stylistic motivations  , it is described in depth in ( Benamara 2004) . 
There are , at this level , several choices , that we manage via preferences given a priori since we do not have any user model  . Stress and various additional enumerations have essentially a pragmatic motivation  , as indicated above . At the implementation level , these can just be parameterized . 
6.2 The relations L2,L3 and L4
Within the direct response , the most direct lexicalisation forms ( L3 , Fig .  2) , can be paired with categories like OPP , SUB , FTI or MET . OPP is used within the response to reinforce some terms by saying what they are not  . MET is in general a form of stressor focus on a particular point  . MET is produced via the concept properties of the ontology  . 
SUB(a ) ( b ) are also used as forms of elaborations , to make more explicit a term ( e . g . we accept all forms of payments : cheques , credit cards , cash , money orders , etc . ), or to give a precision , possibly using FTI . 
Such lexicalisations have a strong pragmatic basis . 
However , in NLG , the use of OPP or of SYN ( a ) ( b ) can be motivated either by the user model , or , if it does not exist , by the need of some elaboration if some concepts in the response are complex or quite remote from the original question focus  . The implementation relies on the conceptual metrics  , also used for concept relaxation ( Benamara et al 2004a ) and also on manually marked really complex concepts in the ontology  . The lexicalization programme is simply able to propose additional lexicalizations  , structured by the aggregation procedure , e . g . as a list of SUB or OPP . 
In the know-how part of the cooperative response , lexicalisation strategies ( L2) are more rigid , since they are guided by the reasoning procedures  . We observe a large number of relaxations , involving lexicalisations based on SUB , SIS or GEN , depending on how the ontology is traversed by relaxation  . 
Several intensional operations are also developed to make the response more compact  , involving lexical-isations based on GEN ( Benamara 2004 )  . Lexicalization choices totally depend on the reasoning procedures and are just direct language realizations of the concepts introduced by relaxation or generalization inference schemas  . 
There are lexicalisation relations between the direct response and the know-how part  ( L4 , which has some relations with L2 ) in particular when the direct response is negative  . The know how part involves realisations which are in :- GEN  , SUB , SIS or FTI relation with the term used in the direct response when relaxation or intentional calculus is used in the know how part  , -SYN or SUB relation when the know-how part is a warning or a restriction  . Pronominal or other forms of references are possible at this level  ( yes , we do have cabins , but they can only be rent on a weekly basis ) . 
6.3 The relation L5
The relation L5 has a specific status , it covers a large number of situations , we therefore simply evoke prototypical situations here  . Its motivation comes from the fact that the know how part of a response is composed  , in general , of several segments , called meaningful units . As explained in detail in ( Bena-mara et al . 2004b ) , the know-how part is in general composed of a response elaboration  ( related to constraint relaxation , or any other type of inference ) followed by a number of additional information under the form of justifications  , warnings , restrictions , counter-proposals , etc . 
For example , in the following example , we have several segments :
Q : How can I get to the Borme castle ?
Direct response + elaboration : You must take the
G R90 from the old castle : additional information - precision : walking distance :  30 minutes . 
warning : There is no possibility to get thereby car  . 
In this example , the warning segment uses a kind of opposite of walking  , namely driving , towarn the user e . g . about the lack of alternative . 
The following example has a know-how part based on relaxation  , and then proposes an alternative to cinemas by means of a sister concept : 
Q : Is the reacine main Borme ?
Direct response : No ,
Know-how ( relaxation on the localization ) : the closest cinemais at Londes ( 8 kms ) or at Hyeres , 
Cinema Olbia ( at 20kms).
Additional information ( counter-proposal on the activity ) : however , there is a nice open air theater in

In this latter example , we see that , again , the additional information segment introduces a sister concept of cinema  . 
Implementing L5 is largely dependent on the reasoning procedures , on the knowledge found in the database , and on the way the general form of the response is planned  . The role of lexicalisation here is essentially choosing the appropriate terms  , with the appropriate level in the ontology . 
7 Perspective
This study shows several original lexicalisation strategies in advanced  , cooperative QA forms . Lexical choice , realized in the content determination phase in conjunction with the cooperative inference schemas  , mainly involves the SIS , GEN , SUB , FTI and ID functions , whereas lexical variation , realized at the level of the surface realizer , along the five relations L1 , L2 , L3 , L4 and L5 , mainly involves SYN , OPP and MET , characterized by the production of lists of potential candidate words  . This latter level interacts also with grammatical considerations such as aggregation  ( Reiter and Dale 1997 ) or the use of alternations . 
These lexicalisations require a quite advanced domain model  , necessary for the development of cooperative functions  , in particular a rich ontology . 
These functions have been tested in the WEBCOOP prototype  , that cooperatively responds to queries on the WEB  , on the tourism domain ( accommodation and transportation )  . 
This study can be applied to open generation , on a purely conceptual representation basis , or to more restricted forms of generation , such as underspecified templates with calls to lexicalisation  . 
Acknowledgements We thank the CNRSGDR
TCAN and Ve?ronique Moriceau for providing us corpora and for helpful discussions  . We also thank the three reviewers for their useful comments  . 

Benamara , F , Saint Dizier , P . , Advanced Relaxation for Cooperative Question Answering  , in New Directions in Question Answering , Chapter 21 . 
Mark T . Maybury ( ed .), AAAI/MIT Press , 2004a.
Benamara , F ., Moriceau , V ., Saint-Dizier , P.,
COOPML : Towards Annotating Cooperative
Discourse , in Workshop on discourse annotation,
ACL?04, Barcelona , July 2004b.
Benamara , F ., AAAI.
Cahill , L . , Lexicalisation in applied NLG systems,
Research report , ITRI-99-04, 1999.
Cruse , A ., Lexical Semantics , CUP , 1986.
Gal , A . , Cooperative Responses in Deductive Databases , PhD Thesis , Univ . of Maryland , 1988 . 
Gaasterland , T . , Godfrey , P . , Minker , J . , An Overview of Cooperative Answering , Papers in nonstandard queries and nonstandard answers  , 
Clarendon Press , Oxford , 1994.
Grice , H . , Logic and Conversation , in Cole and Morgan ( eds ) , Syntax and Semantics , Academic
Press , 1975.
Hendrix , G . , Sacerdoti , E . , Sagalowicz , D . , Slocum , J . , Developing a Natural Language Interface to Complex Data  , ACM transactions on database systems ,  3(2) ,  1978 . 
Kaplan , J . , Cooperative Responses from a Portable Natural Language Query System  , in M . Brady and R . Berwick ( ed ), Computational Models of
Discourse , 167-208, MIT Press , 1982.
Lehnert , W . , The Process of Question Answering : a Computer Simulation of Cognition  , Lawrence
Erlbaum , 1978.
Mays , E . , Joshi , A . , Webber , B . , Taking the Initiative in Natural Language Database Interactions : Monitoring as Response  , EACL ?82 , Orsay , 
France , 1982.
Minock M , Chu W , Yang H , Chiang K , Chow , G and Larson , C , CoBase : A Scalable and Extensible Cooperative Information System  . Journal of Intelligent Information Systems , volume 6 , number 2/3 , pp : 223-259 ,  1996 . 
Reiter , R . , Dale , R . , Building Applied Natural Language Generation Systems  , Journal of Natural Language Engineering , volume 3 , number 1 , pp:57-87 ,  1997 . 
Searle , J . , Indirect Speech Acts , in Cole and Morgan ( eds ) , Syntax and Semantics III , Academic Press ,  1975 . 
Voorees , E . M . , Overview of the TREC 2002 Question Answering Track . Proceedings of TREC 11,
NIST , 2003.
