Improving Statistical Machine Translation in the Medical Domain 
using the Unified Medical Language System
Matthias Eck




Stephan Vogel
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh , PA , 15213, USA

Alex Waibel






Texts from the medical domain arean
important task for natural language
processing . This paper investigates the usefulness of a large medical database  ( the Unified Medical Language System ) for the translation of dialogues between doctors and patients using a statistical machine translation system  . We are able to show that the extraction of a large dictionary and the usage of semantic type information to generalize the training data significantly improves the translation performance  . 
1 Introduction
Hospitals in the United States have to deal with an increasing number of patients who have no knowledge of the English language  . It is not surprising that in this area translation errors can lead to severe problems  ( Neergard , 2003; Flores et al .  2003) . This is one of the main reasons why the medical domain plays an important role in many of the current projects involving natural language processing  . Especially many text or speech translation projects include tasks to translate texts or dialogues with medical topics  . 
The goal of this research was the improvement of translation quality in the medical domain using a statistical machine translation system  . A statistical machine translation system deduces translation rules from large amounts of parallel texts in the source and target language  . 
The general approach to gather as much training data as possible is usually complicated and expensive  . So it is necessary to make use of already available data and databases and it is reasonable to hope that some ideas and special methods could actually improve the performance in limited domains  , like the medical domain . 
The Internet and especially the WWW offers a lot of data related to medical topics  . Especially interesting and promising for us was the Unified Medical Language System ?  ( UMLS ,  1986-2004 ) available from the US National Library of Medicine  . It provides a vast amount of information concerning medical terms and we extracted information from this database to improve an existent translation system  . 
The paper will first give an introduction into the Unified Medical Language system  . We will then point out which parts could be useful for statistical machine translation and laters how how the baseline system was actually significantly improved using this data  . 
2 The Unified Medical Language System 2 . 1 Introduction The Unified Medical Language System  ( UMLS , 1986-2004) project was initiated in 1986 by the U . S . National Library of Medicine . It integrates different knowledge sources into one database  ( e . g . 
biomedical vocabularies , dictionaries).
The goal is to help health professionals and researchers to use biomedical information from these different sources  . It is usually updated about 3 or 4 times per year . 
It consists of three main knowledge repositories , the UMLS Metathesaurus , the UMLS Semantic
Network and the SPECIALIST lexicon.
Interesting facts about the UMLS , related work and further information can be found in  ( Lindbergh , 1990; Kashyap , 2003; Brown et al , 2003; Friedman et al , 2001; Zweigenbaum et al ,  2003) . 
2.2 The UMLS Metathesaurus
The UMLS Metathesaurus provides a common structure for approximately  100 source biomedical vocabularies . 
The 2003AB1 version of the Metathesaurus contains exactly 900  , 551 concepts named by 2 , 247 , 457 terms . It is organized by concept , which is a cluster of terms ( i . e . synonyms , lexical variants experiments described in this paper were executed  . The most recent version now is 2004AA , which contains certain additional and updated information  . All numbers given in this paper are according to the  2003AB version . 
and translations ) with the same meaning.
Translations are present for up to 14 additional languages besides English . It is very likely that other languages will be added in later releases  . 

Table 1 shows the distribution of the terms according to the  15 different languages . 

Language Number of Terms
English 18606 83
Spanish 731 36
German 713 16
Portuguese 691 27
Russian 44907
Dutch 38600
French 382 49
Italian 24992
Finnish 223 82
Danish 723
Swedish 723
Norwegian 722
Hungarian 718
Basque 695
Hebrew 484
Table 1: Languages in the UMLS
For example the concept ? arm ? includes the English lexical variant  , its plural form , ? arms ? and with ? bras ? , ? arm ? , ? braccio ? , ? braco ? , ? ruka ? and ? brazo ? the French , German , Italian , Portuguese , 
Russian and Spanish translations.

Some entries contain case information , too , and the entries are not limited to words but some terms are also longer phrases like ? third degree burn of lower leg ? or ? loss of consciousness ?  . 

It also includes inter-concept relationships across the multiple vocabularies  . The main relationship types are shown in Table 2:
Relationship types broader narrower other related like parent child sibling is allowed qualifier can be qualified by is cooccurring with 
Table 2: Relationship types
The synonym-relationship is implicitly realized by different terms that are affiliated with the same concept  . 
The cooccurrence relationship refers to concepts cooccurring in the MEDLINE-publications  . 

In addition each concept is categorized into semantic types according to the UMLS Semantic 

2.3 The UMLS Semantic Network
The UMLS Semantic Network categorizes the concepts of the UMLS Metathesaurus through semantic types and relationships  . 
Every concept in the Metathesaurus is part of one or more semantic types  . 
There are 135 semantic types arranged in a generalization hierarchy with the two roots ? Entity ? and ? Event ?  . This hierarchy is still rather abstract ( e . g . not deeper than six ) . 
A more detailed generalization hierarchy is realized with the child  , parent and sibling relationships of the UMLS Metathesaurus  . 

Figure 1 shows some examples for semantic types.

Entity Physical Object Organism Anatomical Structure Fully Formed Anatomical Structure Body Part  , Organ or Organ Component Manufactured Object Medical Device Drug Delivery Device Clinical Drug 
Event Activity Behavior Social Behavior Occupational Activity Health Care Activity Laboratory Procedure Phenomenon or Process Human caused Phenomenon or Process 
Figure 1: Some semantic types 2 . 4 The SPECIALIST lexicon The SPECIALIST lexicon contains over  30  , 000 English words . It is intended to be a general English lexicon including many biomedical terms  . 
The lexicon entry for each word or term records the syntactic  , morphological and orthographic information . 
base=anesthetic spelling_variant=anaesthetic entry=E0330018 cat = noun variants = regvariants = uncount
Figure 2: Example entry from the
Specialist Lexicon
Figure 2 shows the entry for ? anesthetic ? . There is a spelling variant ? anaesthetic ? and an entry number  . The category in this case is noun ( there is another entry for ? anesthetic ? as an adjective  )  . The variants-slot contains a code indicating the inflectional morphology of the entry  . ? anesthetic ? can either be a regular count noun  ( with regular plural ? anesthetics ? ) or an uncountable noun . 
3 Machine Translation Experiments 3 . 1 The Baseline System The Baseline system , which we used to test different approaches to improve the translation performance  , is a statistical machine translation system . The task was to facilitate doctor patient dialogues across languages  . In this case we chose translation from Spanish to English  . 

The Baseline system was trained using 9 , 227 lines of training data (90 , 012 English words ,  89 , 432 Spanish words ) . 3,227 lines of this data are ? in domain ? data . We collected doctor patient dialogues during ongoing research projects in our group and used this data as training data  . The 6 , 0 00 other lines of training data are out of domain data from the C-Star Project  . This data also consists of dialogues but not from the medical domain  . 

The test data consists of 500 lines with 6 , 886 words . The test data was also taken from medical dialogues between a doctor and a patient and contains a reasonable number of medical terms but the language is not very complex  . Figure 3 shows some example test sentences ( from the reference data )  . 

Doctor : The symptoms you are describing and given your recent change in diet  , I believe you may be a nemic . 
Patient : Anemic ? Really ? Is that serious ? Doctor : Anemia can be very serious if left untreated  . Being a nemic means your body lacks a sufficient amount of red blood cells to carry oxygen through your body  . 

Figure 3: Example test sentences ( reference )
The Baseline system uses IBM1 lexicon transducers and different types of phrase transducers  ( Zhang et al 2003 , Vogel et al 1996 , Vogel et al 2003) . The Language model is a trigram language model with Good-Turing-Smoothing built with the SRI -Toolkit  ( SRI ,  1995-2004 ) using only the English part of the training data . 

The Baseline system scores a 0 . 171 BLEU and 4 . 72 NIST . [ BLEU and NIST are wellknown scoring methods for measuring machine translation quality  . Both calculate the precision of a translation by comparing it to a reference translation and incorporating a length penalty  ( Doddington , 2001; Papineni et al ,  2002) . ] 3 . 2 Extracting dictionaries from the UMLS The first way to exploit the UMLS database for a statistical machine translation system naturally is to extract additional Spanish-English lexicons or phrase books  . 
The UMLS Metathesaurus provides translation information as we can assume that Spanish and English terms that are associated with the same concept are respective translations  . For example as the English term ? arm ? is associated with the same concept as the Spanish term ? brazo ? we can deduce that ? arm ? is the English translation of ? brazo ?  . 
Unfortunately the UMLS does not contain morphological information about languages other than English  . This means it cannot be automatically detected that ? brazo ? is the singular form and thus the translation of ? arm ? and not the translation of ? arms ?  . 
As most of the entries are in singular form we just extracted every possible combination of Spanish and English terms regardless of possible errors like combining the singular ? brazo ? and the plural ? arms ?  . 
The resulting ( lowercased ) Spanish-English lexicon/phrase book contains 495 , 248 pairs of words and phrases . This means each Spanish term is combined with seven English terms on average  . 
This seems to be an extremely huge amount but it has to be considered that there are terms in the UMLS and the resulting lexicon that are probably too special to be really useful for the translation of dialogues  ( e . g .  ?1 , 1 , 1-trichloropropene-2 , 3-oxide ? translating to ? oxido de tricloropropeno?  )  . 
Nevertheless there are lots of meaningful entries as the following experiments show  . 

Applying the dictionaries to the Baseline system
In the first step we just added this lexicon /phrase book as an additional transducer and did not change the language model  . 
The experiment showed a nice increase in BLEU and NIST performances and scored at  0  . 180 BLEU and 4 . 86 NIST . 
This system especially has a higher coverage , as only 302 words ( types ) are not covered by the training data compared to 411 for the baseline system . 

Adding the English side to the Language Model As the extracted dictionary contained many phrases it seemed reasonable to add the English side to the language modeling data  . This also prevents words from the extracted dictionary to be treated as ? unknown ? by the language model if they were not in the language model training data  . 
This further improved the BLEU and NIST scores to 0  . 182 BLEU and 4 . 92 NIST . 

It should not be surprising to get an improvement in these first two experiments because basically just more data was used to train the systems  . The really interesting ideas will be presented in the next sections  . 
3.3 Using the Semantic Type Information
The overall idea to use the semantic type information is to generalize the training data  . 
The training data contains for example sentence pairs like: 
Necesito examinar suca beza.
I need to examine your head.
Necesito examinar subrazo.
I need to examine your arm.
Necesito examinar surodilla.
I need to examine your knee.

If we could generalize these sentences by replacing the special body parts like ? head ?  , ? arm ? and ? knee ? with a general tage . g . 
?@ BODYPART ? and especially treat this tag we could use one sentence of training data for every body part imaginable in this sentence  . 
We would just need an additional lexicon that just translates body parts  . 

Necesito examinar su@BODY PART.
I need to examine your@BODY PART.

We could additionally correctly translate possibly unseen sentences like ? Necesito examinars u antebrazo ?  ( ? I need to examine your for earm ? ) if we could automatically deduce that ? antebrazo /forearm ? is a body part and if we just knew this translation pair  . 

Some additional similar sentences in which we could apply the same ideas are: 
Ensene meque@BODY PAR Tes.
Showme which @ BODY PART.
? Que@BODY PART le/laduele ?
Which @ BODY PAR Thurts ? ( In the last sentence it actually depends on the gender of the body part on the Spanish side if the sentence is ? ? Que@BODY PART laduele ? ? or ? ? Que@BODY PART le due le ??  . But as we are translating from Spanish to English this did not seem to be a big problem  . ) As stated before every concept in the UMLS Metathesaurus is categorized into one or more semantic types defined in the UMLS Semantic 

The two semantic types ? BodyPart , Organ , or Organ Component ? and ? Body Location or Region ? from the UMLS Semantic Network cover pretty closely what we usually affiliate with the colloquial meaning of body part  . 
[ The terminological difference is that the semantic type ? BodyPart  , Organ , or Organ Component ? is defined by a certain function  . For example ? liver ? and ? eye ? are part of this semantic type  , whereas the semantic type ? Body Location or Region ? is defined by the topographical location of the respective body part  . Examples are ? head ? and ? arm ? . The function in this case is not as clearly defined as the function of a ? liver ?  . ]
This information was used in the next experiment . We first filtered the general Spanish-English dictionary  , we had extracted from the UMLS , to contain only words and phrases from the two semantic types ? BodyPart  , Organ , or Organ Component ? and ? Body Location or Region ?  . This gave a dictionary of 11 , 260 translation entries for body parts . Again each Spanish term is combined with about seven English terms on average  . 
In the next step we replaced every occurrence of a word or phrase pair from this new dictionary in the training data  ( i . e . if it occurred on the Spanish and English side ) with a general body-part-tag . 
527 sentence pairs of the original 9 , 2 27 sentence pairs contained a word or phrase pair from this dictionary  . 
A retraining of the translation system with this changed training data resulted in transducer rules containing this body-part-tag  . 
By using cascaded transducers ( Vogel and Ney ,  2000 ) in the actual translation the first transducer , that is applied ( in this case the body part dictionary ) replaces the Spanish body part with its translation pair and the body part tag  . 
The following transducers can apply their generalized rules containing the body-part-tag instead of the realbody part  . 

E.g . translation of the sentence :
Necesito examinar suante brazo.

First step apply body part dictionary rule ( antebrazo ? for earm ) Necesito examinar su@BODY PART ( antebrazo?forearm )  . 

Apply generalized transducer rule : ( a rule could be : Necesito examinar su@BODY PART ? I need to examine your@BODY PART  ) I need to examine your@BODY PART ( antebrazo?forearm )  . 

Resolve tags :
I need to examine your for earm.

By applying this to the whole translation system the score improved to  0  . 188 BLEU/4 . 94 NIST . 
Using other semantic types
As the body part lexicon and the replacement of body parts proved to be helpful we applied two more of these replacement strategies  . Consider the following 4 sentence pairs from the training data . 
? Siente dolor cuandor espira ?
Do you feel pain when you breathe ? ? Cuandole empezolafiebre ? 
When did the fever start ? ? Podria serartritis ?
Could this bearthritis ?? Es gravela anemia , doctor ?
Is an emia serious , doctor ?
The first two sentences contain findings or symptoms with the terms ? dolor/pain ? and ? fiebre/fever ?  . The second two sentences contain diseases with ? artritis/arthritis ? and ? anemia/anemia ?  . The appropriate semantic types from the UMLS Semantic Network for these terms are ? Finding ? and ? Sign or Symptom ? for ? pain ? and ? fever ? and ? Disease or Syndrome ? for ? arthritis ? and ? anemia ? Filtering the Spanish-English dictionary resulted in  25  , 987 ? Finding/Sign or Symptom ? translation pairs ( approximately three English terms per Spanish term  ) and 116 , 793 ? Disease or Syndrome ? translation pairs ( approximately five English terms per Spanish term )  . 
1 98 sentence pairs from the training data contained a ? Finding/Sign or Symptom?-pair and  127 sentence pairs contained a ? Disease or Syndrome ? -pair from these dictionaries  . 

The final translation with those three semantic types replaced in the training data and using the three filtered dictionaries with the cascaded transducer application gave a translation performance of  0  . 190 BLEU/5 . 02 NIST . 
This shows that although less than 10% of the sentences were affected by the replacement with the appropriate tags we could nicely improve the overall translation performance  . 
Example translations
Some example translations comparing the baseline and the best system with the reference are listed in table  3  . 
1. Sentence
Reference the condition is called tenosy no vit is , which is an inflammation of the tend on sheath . 

Baseline this condici?n diagnostic , which is a inflammation from the of the tend on . 

Best System this condition is called tenosynovitis  , which is a inflammation often d on sheath . 
2. Sentence
Reference iguess your work involves a lot of repetitive movement  , huh ?
Baseline do you I guess your work require plenty baby?s  , no ?
Best Systemiguess you your work require plenty repetitive movements  , not ?3 . Sentence
Reference you need vitamin can dironiny our blood to help your body 
Baseline you need vitamin can dironiny our blood help rescue to 
Best System you need vitamin can dironiny our blood to help the body  4  . Sentence
Reference did you take anything for the pain ?
Baseline did you sleep taken anything for the pain ? 
Best System did you taken anything for the pain ? 5  . Sentence
Reference i can feel it here , behind my breast bone . 

Baselinei here , behind of the estern?n.

Best System ihere , behind of sternum.
Table 3: Example translations
The last example sentence is an interesting case.
The best system does not get more words right compared to the baseline system and so the 
BLEU/NIST-score does not improve . But ? sternum ? is a synonym of the correct ? breast bone ? and a more technical term  . This supports the claim that the UMLS tends to contain more technical terms  ( like ? teno synovitis ? in the first sentence )  . 
4 Future work
It is surely possible to use every semantic type from the semantic network in the same way like the overall five semantic types  , which were used in the experiments . We did not do this here because further semantic types occurred extremely rarely in the test and training data  . But this could easily be done for other test and training data and it is reasonable to expect similar improvements  . 
Another idea is to use a more specialized approach and to make use of the relationships in the UMLS Metathesaurus  . Each concept could be generalized by its parent -concepts instead of its semantic type  . The generalization hierarchy for the concept ? leg ? is for example : leg ? lower extremity ? extremity ? body region ? anatomy  . 
This could be especially helpful when translating to morphologically richer languages than English because the usage of extremities could differ from other body parts for example  . 

In the extracted dictionaries every translation pair was given the same translation probability  . It might be helpful to rescore these probabilities by using information from bilingual or monolingual texts to improve the translation probabilities for usually frequently used terms compared to rarely used terms  . 

As the example translations showed , the extracted dictionaries from the UMLS tend to contain technical terms instead of colloquial terms  ( translation ? sternum ? instead of ? breast bone ? )  . 
We can further assume that a doctor prefers to use the more technical terms and a patient prefers the more colloquial terms  . Therefore it could be interesting to examine if having two different translation systems for sentence suttered by a doctor and a patient would improve the overall translation performance  . 
5 Conclusion
We carried out four different experiments in order to improve a Spanish-English medical domain translation system  . After sequentially applying different ideas the final system shows an  11% improvement in BLEU and 6% improvement in
NIST score.
Table 4 compares the different experiments and scores ( the 500k dictionary refers to the dictionary that was first extracted from the UMLS with  495  , 248 word pairs ) . 

System BLEU NIST
Baseline system 0 . 171 4 . 72 + 500k dictionary 0 . 180 4 . 86 + LM improvement 0 . 182 4 . 92 + body part-tags 0 . 188 4 . 94 + sign/symptom/finding+disease/syndrome 0 . 190 5 . 02
Table 4: Experiments and improvements
With more investigation and the ongoing effort of the National Library of Medicine to extent the UMLS databases it will hopefully be possible to further improve the translation performance  . 


Allen C . Browne , Guy Divita , Alan R . Aronson , Alexa T . McGray , 2003 . UMLS Language and Vocabulary Tools , Proceedings of the American Medical Informatics Association  ( AMIA )  2003
Symposium , Washington , DC , USA.
George Doddington .  2001 . Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation Quality using nGram Cooccurrence Statistics  . NIST Washington , DC,

Glenn Flores , M . Barton Laws , Sandra J . Mayo , Barry Zuckerman , Milagros Abreu , Leonardo

Eric J . Hardt , 2003 . Errors in medical interpretation and their potential clinical consequences in pediatric encounters  , Pediatrics , 
Jan 2003.
Carol Friedman , Hongfang Liu , Lyuda Shagina , Stephen Johnson , George Hripcsak ,  2001 . 
Evaluating the UMLS as a Source of Lexical Knowledge for Medical Language Processing  , Proceedings of the AMIA 2001 Symposium , 
Washington , DC , USA.
Vipul Kashyap , 2003 . The UMLS semantic network and the semantic web , Proceedings of the AMIA 2003 Symposium , Washington , DC , 

C . Lindberg , 1990 . The Unified Medical Language System ( UMLS ) of the National Library of Medicine , Journal of the American Medical
Record Association , 1990; 61(5):40-42.
Lauren Neergard , 2003 . Hospitals struggle with growing language barrier , Associated Press , The
Charlotte Observer Sept . 2, 2003
Kishore Papineni , Salim Roukos , Todd Ward , and WeiJing Zhu ,  2002 . BLEU : a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation  , Proceedings of the ACL 2002 , Philadelphia , 

SRI Speech Technology and Research Laboratory , SRI Language Modeling Toolkit , 1995-2004 ( ongoing ) http://www . speech . sri . com/projects/srilm/
UMLS Unified Medical Language System,
National Library of Medicine , 1986-2004 ( ongoing ) http://www . nlm . nih . gov/research/umls/
Stephan Vogel and Hermann Ney , 2000.
Translation with Cascaded Finite State
Transducers . Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( ACL 2000 )  , pp .  2330 . Hongkong,
China , October 2000.
Stephan Vogel , Hermann Ney , and Christoph Tillmann ,  1996 . HMM-based Word Alignment in Statistical Translation  , Proceedings of COLING 1996: The 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pp .  836-841 . 
Copenhagen , August 1996.
Stephan Vogel , Ying Zhang , Fei Huang , Alicia Tribble , Ashish Venogupal , Bing Zhao , Alex Waibel ,  2003 . The CMU Statistical Translation System , Proceedings of MT Summit IX . New
Orleans , LA . Sep 2003.
Ying Zhang , Stephan Vogel , Alex Waibel , 2003.
Integrated Phrase Segmentation and Alignment Algorithm for Statistical Machine Translation  , Proceedings of International Conference on Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Engineering  2003  , Beijing , China , Oct 2003 . 
Pierre Zweigenbaum , Robert Baud , Anita Burgun , Fiammetta Namer , ? ric Jarrousse , Natalia Grabar , Patrick Ruch , Franck Le Duff , Beno?t Thirion , St?fan Darmoni ,  2003 . UMLF : a
Unified Medical Lexicon for French,
Proceedings of the AMIA 2003 Symposium,
Washington , DC , USA.

