Interpreting Vague Utterances in Context
David DeVault and Matthew Stone
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway NJ 08854-8019
David . DeVault@rutgers . edu , Matthew . Stone@rutgers . edu

We use the interpretation of vagues calar predicates like small as an illustration of how systematic semantic models of dialogue context enable the derivation of useful  , finegrained utterance interpretations from radically underspecified semantic forms  . Because dialogue context suffices to determine salient alternative scales and relevant distinctions along these scales  , we can infer implicit standards of comparison for vague scalar predicates through completely general pragmatics  , yet closely constrain the intended meaning to within a natural range  . 
1 Introduction
Modeling context and its effects on interpretation may once have seemed to call for an open-ended investigation of people?s knowledge of the common sense world  ( Hobbs et al ,  1993) . But research on the semantics of practical dialogue  ( Allen et al ,  2001 ) now approaches dimensions of context systematically  , through increasingly lightweight , factored models . The evolving state of realworld activity proceeds predictably according to background plans and principles of coordination  ( Rich et al ,  2001) . The status of the dialogue itself is defined by circumscribed obligations to ground prior utterances  , follow up open issues , and advance realworld negotiation ( Larsson and Traum ,  2000) . Finally , the evolving state of the linguistic context is a direct outgrowth of the linguistic forms interlocutors use and the linguistic relationships among successive utterances  ( Ginzburg and Cooper , 2001; Asher and Lascarides ,  2003) . These compatible models combine directly to characterize an aggregate information state that provides a general background for interpretation  ( Bunt ,  2000) . 
We argue in this paper that such integrated models enable systems to calculate useful  , finegrained utterance interpretations from radically underspecified semantic forms  . We focus in particular on vague scalar predicates like small or long  . These predicates typify qualitative linguistic expression of quantitative information  , and are thus both challenging and common place . Building on a multidimensional treatment of dialogue context  , we develop and implement a theoretically -motivated model of vagueness which is unique in treating vague predicates as genuinely vague and genuinely context-sensitive  , yet amenable to general processes of contextual and interpretive inference  . 
1.1 Semantic insights
We pursue our argument in the context of an implemented drawing application  , FIGLET , which allows users to give English instructions to draw a carica-ture of an expressive face  . Figure 1 shows a representative interaction with FIGLET ; the user gives the successive instructions in ( 1 ) :  ( 1 ) a . Make two small circles . 
b . Draw a long line underneath.
Like Di Eugenio and Webber (1996) , we emphasize that understanding such instructions requires contextual inference combining linguistic  , task and domain knowledge . For example , consider the response to ( 1a ) of placing circles so as to form the eyes of a new face  . To recognize the possibility of drawing eyes exploits knowledge of the ongoing drawing task  . To put the eyes where they belong in the upper part of the new face exploits domain knowledge  . The response to ( 1b ) adds the linguistic context as another ingredient  . To identify where the line goes , the user uses the objects mentioned recently in the interaction as the understood spatial landmark for underneath  . Figure 1 highlights the importance of using multidimensional representations of dialogue context in understanding instructions for quantitative domains  . 
We leverage this background context in our computational approach to vagueness  . We model a vague utterance liked raw along line as though it meant draw a line with  , you know , length . In this approach , vague predicates are completely underspecified ; linguistic knowledge says nothing about how long something long is  . Instead , vague language explicitly draws on the background knowl-Initial blank figure state  . After the user utters (1a ):
Make two small circles.
After the user utters (1b ):
Draw a long line underneath.
Figure 1: Motivating interaction : Vague instructions to draw a face  . 
edge already being applied in utterance interpretation  . The user?s motivation in using long is to differentiate an intended interpretation  , here an intended action , from alternative possibilities in context . Background knowledge already sets out the relevant ways to draw a line  ; drawing a long line means singling out some of them by the length of that new line  . This model recalls dynamic theories of vague scalar predicates  , such as the semantics of Kyburg and Morreau ( 2000 )  , Barker (2002) , or Kennedy (2003) , but it is exactly implemented in FIGLET . The implementation capitalizes on the richness of current models of context to recover content for the you know of vagueness  . 
1.2 Overview
In Section 2 , we motivate approaches to the semantics of vague scalar predicates that associate them with a presupposed standard of comparison  . We illustrate how context can be understood to supply possible standards  , and how pragmatic reasoning from utterances allows interlocutors to infer them  . 
In Section 3 , we establish abridge to the general treatment of practical dialogue  , by showing how multiple dimensions of context generally contribute to recognizing possible interpretations for underspecified utterances  . Section 4 builds on Sections 2 and 3 to show how FIGLET exploits a rich model of utterance context to respond cooperatively to vague utterances like  ( 1a ) and ( 1b )  , while Section 5 details FIGLET?s actual implementation . We conclude in Section 6 by suggesting further challenges that vagueness still poses for computational semantics  . 
2 Vague standards in context
We adopt a view of vague predicates motivated by linguistic theory  , particularly Kennedy?s approach (1999; 2003) . We assume that gradable adjectives are associated with measurement functions mapping individuals to degrees on a scale  . In FIGLET?s drawing domain , the relevant measurements pertain to spatial properties  . For long , for example , the measurement maps individuals to their spatial lengths  ; for small , it maps individuals to degrees on an inverted scale of size  . 
Positive gradable adjectives compare measured degrees against a standard on the scale which is derived from context  . For example , long says that an object?s length exceeds the threshold set by the current standard for length  . Other forms , such as comparative adjectives or adjectives with explicit measure phrases  , compare degrees differently . 
Importantly , grammar says nothing about how standards for positive gradable adjectives are derived  . In other words , contra Cress well (1977) and others , the interpretation of adjectives is not computed relative to a grammatically-specified ? comparison class ? of related objects  . And , contra Oates et al ( 2000 ) and Roy and Pentland ( 2002 )  , the interpretation of adjectives need not require statistical knowledge about how objects with different measurements on a scale tend to be described  . Instead , standards are derived directly from an evolving context by the general principles that govern pragmatic resolution of context dependence  . 
Kennedy synthesizes a range of evidence for this claim  . Here we go further , and provide a formal , implemented model . We can sketch the evidence and our model by considering two key examples  . 
First , we illustrate that vagueness depends directly on specific contextually-relevant distinctions  . 
Consider the session with FIGLET shown in Figure 2 . The user has elected to draw two objects side-by -side  . The initial context just contains a square . 
The user utters (2).
(2) Make a small circle.
To interpret ( 2 ) it doesn?t seem to help to appeal to general knowledge about how big circles tend to be  . 
(It?s quite convoluted to even frame the idea in a sensible way  . ) Graff ( 2000 ) observes that standards often implicitly appeal to what we expect about particular individuals  , not just what we know about similar individuals . In context , here , the user just seems to be asking for a circle vaguely smaller than the square  . This is the interpretation FIGLET builds ; to comply , FIGLET draws the circle an arbitrary but representative possible size  . The point is that salient objects and actions inevitably setup meaningful dis-Initial figure state  . After the user utters (2) . Initial figure state . After the user utters (3) . 
Figure 2: Taking standards from context in (2):
Make a small circle.
Figure 3: Disambiguating contextual standards in ( 3 ) : Make the small square a circle . 
tinctions in the context . Interlocutors exploit these distinctions in using vague adjectives  . 
Figure 3 illustrates that understanding vagueness is part of a general problem of understanding utterances  . Figure 3 shows FIGLET?s action in a more complex context , containing two squares of different sizes . We consider the user?s instruction ( 3 ) :  ( 3 ) Make the small square a circle . 
FIGLET?s action changes the smaller of the two squares  . The standard behind this interpretation is implicitly set to differentiate the contextually -salient objects from one another  ; the natural resolution of ( 3 ) does not require that either square be definitely small  ( Kyburg and Morreau ,  2000) . In Figure 3 , for example , there are different potential standards that would admit either both squares or neither square as small  . However , we can rule out these candidate standards in interpreting  ( 3 )  . The user?s communicative intention must explain how a unique square from the context can be identified from  ( 3 ) using a presupposed small standard . If that standard is too big , both squares will fit . If that standard is too small , neither square will fit . Only when that standard falls between the sizes of the squares does  ( 3 ) identify a unique square . 
The examples in Figures 2 and 3 show two ways new standards can be established . Once established , however , standards become part of the evolving context ( Barker ,  2002) . Old standards serve as defaults in interpreting subsequent utterances  . Only if no better interpretation is found will FIGLET goback and reconsider its standard  . This too is general pragmatic reasoning ( Stone and Thomason ,  2003) . 
3 Dimensions of context in interpretation To cash out our account of contextual reasoning with vagueness  , we need to characterize the context for practical dialogue  . Our account presupposes a context comprising domain and situation knowledge  , task context and linguistic context . In this section , we survey each of these dimensions of context , and show how they converge in the resolution of underspecification across a wide range utterances  . 
Domain and situation knowledge describes the common sense structure of the realworld objects and actions under discussion  . Practical dialogue restricts this otherwise open -ended specification to the circumscribed facts that are directly relevant to an ongoing collaboration  . For example , in our drawing domain , individuals are categorized by a few types : types of shape such as circles and squares  ; and types of depiction such as eyes and heads . These types come with corresponding constraints on individuals  . 
For example , the shape of amouth may be a line , an ellipse , or are ctangle , while the shape of a head can only be an ellipse . These constraints contribute to interpretation . For instance , a head can never be described as a line , for example , since heads cannot have this shape . 
Task context tracks collaborators ? evolving commitment to shared goals and plans during joint activity  . In FIGLET?s drawing domain , available actions allow users to build figure parts by introducing shapes and revising them  . Our experience is that users ? domain plans organize these actions hierarchically into strategic patterns  . For example , users tend to complete the structures they begin drawing before drawing elsewhere  ; and once they are satisfied with what they have , they proceed in natural sequence to a new part nearby  . Task context plays a powerful role in finding natural utterance interpretations  . By recording a plan representation and keeping track of progress in carrying it out  , FIGLET has access to a set of candidate next actions at each point in an interaction  . Matching the user?s utterance against this candidate set restricts the interpretation of instructions based on the drawing already created and the user?s focus of attention within it  . 
For example , if the user has just drawn the right eye onto an empty face  , they are likely to turn to the left eye next . This context suggests making a winking leftey e in response to draw a line  , an interpretation that might not otherwise be salient  . 
Linguistic context records the evolving status of pragmatic distinctions triggered by grammatical conventions  . One role of the linguistic context is its contribution to distinguishing the prominent entities Initial figure state  . After the user utters (4):
Draw a line underneath.
Figure 4: Context in instructions.
that can serve as the referents of pronouns and other reduced expressions  . To see this , note that , as far as domain knowledge and task context go , the instruction make it bigger could apply to any object currently being created  . If the figure is hierarchical , there will be many possibilities . Yet we typically understand it to refer specifically to an object mentioned saliently in the previous utterance  . The linguistic context helps disambiguate it . 
Figure 4 illustrates how the three different dimensions of context work together  . It illustrates an interaction with FIGLET where the user has just issued an instruction to create two eyes  , resulting in the figure state shown at the left in Figure  4  . The user?s next instruction is ( 4 ) :  ( 4 ) Draw a line underneath . 
We focus on how the context constrains the position and orientation of the line  . 
Linguistic context indicates that underneath should be understood as underneath the eyes  . This provides one constraint on the placement of the line  . 
Task context makes drawing them outhaplausible candidate next action  . Domain knowledge shows that them outh can be a line  , but only if further constraints on position , orientation and length are met . In understanding the instruction , FIGLET applies all these contextual constraints simultaneously  . 
The set of consistent solutions ? drawing a horizontal line at a range of plausible mouth positions below the eyes ? constitutes the utterance interpretation  . FIGLE Tacts to create the result in Figure 4 by choosing a representative action from this set . 
4 Interpreting vague utterances in context In our approach  , the linguistic context stores agreed standards for vague predicates  . Candidate standards are determined using information available from domain knowledge and the current task context  . In FIGLET?s drawing domain , possibilities include the actual measurements of objects that have already been drawn  . They also include the default domain measurements for new objects that task context says could be added  . Setting standards by a measurement is our shorthand for adopting an implicit range of compatible standards  ; these standards remain vague , especially since many options are normally available  ( Graff ,  2000) . 
We treat the use of new candidate standards in interpretation as a case of presupposition accommodation  ( Bos ,  2003) . In presupposition accommodation , the interpretation of an utterance must be constructed using a context that differs from the actual context  . When speakers use an utterance which requires accommodation  , they typically expect that interlocutors will update the dialogue context to include the additional presumptions the utterance requires  . We assume that all accommodation is subject to two Gricean constraints  . First , we assume whenever possible that an utterance should have a uniquely identifiable intended interpretation in the context in which it is to be interpreted  . Second , we assume that when interpretations in alternative contexts are available  , the speaker is committed to the strongest one ? compare Dalrymple et al  ( 1998 )  . 
Inferring standards for vague predicates is a special case of this general Gricean reasoning  . 
The principles articulated thus far in Sections 2?4 allow us to offer a precise explanation of FIGLET ?s behavior as depicted in Figure  1  . The user starts drawing a face with an empty figure  . In this domain and task context , make two circles fits a number of possible actions  . For example , it fits the action of drawing around head and its gaping mouth  . However , in (1a ) , what the user actually says is make two small circles  . The interpretation for ( 1a ) must accommodate a standard for small and select from the continuum of size possibilities two new circles that meet this standard  . 
The standards in this context are associated with the size distinctions among potential new objects  . 
The different qualitative behavior of these standards in interpretation can be illustrated by the standards set from possible new circular objects that are consistent with the face-drawing task  . We can set the standard from the default size of an eye  , from the default size of amout h(larger ) , or from the default size of a head ( larger still )  . 1 Because each standard allows all smaller objects to be created next  , these standards lead to 1 ,  3 , and 6 interpretations , respectively . So we recover the standard from the eye , which results in a unique interpretation . 2  1Since the default sizes of new objects reflect the relative dimensions of any other objects already in the figure  , FIGLET?s default sizes are not generally equivalent to static comparison classes  . 
2Note that there are many potential sources of standards for small that FIGLET does not currently pursue  . E . g . the average size of all objects already in the figure  . We believe that general In tandem with its response  , FIGLET tracks the changes to the context . The task context is updated to note that the user has drawn the eyes and must continue with the process of creating and revising the features of the face  . The linguistic context is updated to include the new small standard  , and to place the eyes in focus . 
This updated context provides the background for ( 1b )  , the user?s next instruction draw along line underneath  . In this context , as we saw with Figure 4 , context makes it clear that any response to draw a line underneath must draw them outh  . 
Thus , unlike in (1a ) , all the interpretations here have the same qualitative form  . Nevertheless , FIGLET?s Grice an reasoning can still adjust the standard for length to differentiate interpretations quantitatively  , and thereby motivate the user?s use of the word long in the instruction  . FIGLET bases its possible standards for length on both actual and potential objects  . It can set the standard from an actuale ye or from the two eyes together  ; and it can set the standard from the default mouth or head  . The mouth , of course , must fit inside the head ; the largest standard is ruled out . All the other standards lead to unique interpretations  . Since the length of the two eyes together is the strictest of the remaining standards  , it is adopted . This interpretation leads FIGLET to the response illustrated at the right in Figure  1  . 
5 Implementation
We have implemented FIGLET in Prolog using CLP ( R ) real constraints ( Jaffar and Lassez , 1987) for metric and spatial reasoning . This section presents a necessarily brief overview of this implementation  ; we highlight how FIGLET is able to exactly implement the semantic representations and pragmatic reasoning presented in Sections  2?4  . We offer a detailed description of our system and discuss some of the challenges of building it in DeVault and Stone  ( 2003 )  . 
5.1 Semantic representation
In FIGLET , we record the semantics of user instructions using constraints  , or logical conjunctions of open atomic formulas , to represent the contextual requirements that utterances impose  ; we view these constraints as presuppositions that speakers make in using the utterance  . We assume matches take the form of instances that supply particular domain representations as suitable values for variables  . Stone (2003) motivates this framework in detail . 
methods for specifying domain knowledge will help provide the meaningful task distinctions that serve as candidate standards for vague predicates on our approach  , but pursuing this hypothesis is beyond the scope of this paper  . 
In (5a-d ) , we show the presuppositions FIGLET assigns to an utterance of Make two small circles  , arranged to show the contributions of each individual word  . In (5e ) , we show the contribution made by the utterance to an evolving dialogue  ; the effect is to propose that an action be carried out  . 
(5) a . simple(A ) ? target(A , X ) ? fits plan(A ) ? holds ( result(A , now) , visible(X )) ? holds(now , invisible ( X )) ? b . number(X , 2) ? c . standard ( small , S ) ? holds ( result(A , now) , small ( X , S )) ? d . number(X , multiple ) ? holds ( result ( A , now) , shape(X , circle )) e . propose ( A ) We formulate these constraints in an expressive ontology  . We have terms and variables for actions , such as A ; for situations , such as now and result ( A , now ); for objects , such as X ; for standards for gradable vague predicates ( scale-threshold pairs )  , such as S ; and for quantitative points and intervals of varying dimensionality  , as necessary . 
5.2 Pragmatic reasoning
Constraint networks such as ( 5 a-e ) provide a uniform venue for describing the various contextual dependencies required to arrive at natural utterance interpretations  . Thus , the contextual representation and reasoning outlined in Sections  3 and 4 is realized by a uniform mechanism in FIGLET : specifications of how to reason from context to find solutions to these constraints  . 
For example , Section 3 described domain knowledge that links particular object types like eyes and heads with type -specific constraints  . In our implementation , we specify real and finite constraints that individuals of each type must satisfy  . In order for an individuale of type t to serve as part of a solution to a constraint network like  ( 5 a-e )  , emust additionally meet the constraints associated with type t  . In this way , FIGLET requires utterance interpretations to respect domain knowledge  . 
Solving many of the constraints appearing in ( 5 a-e ) requires contextual reasoning about domain actions and their consequences  . Some constraints characterize actions directly ; thus simple ( A ) means that A is a natural domain action rather than an abstruse one  . Constraints can describe the effects of actions by reference to the state of the visual display in hypothetical situations  ; thus holds ( result ( A , now) , shape(X , circle ) ) means that the individual X has a circular shape once action A is carried out  . Constraints can additionally characterize causal relationships in the domain  ; thus target ( A , X ) means that action A directly affects X , and the constraints of ( 5a-d ) together mean that carrying out action A in the current situation causes two small circles to become visible  . These constraints are proved in FIGLET by what is in effect a planner that can find complex actions that achieve specified effects via a repert oir e of basic domain actions  . 
Task context is brought to bear on interpretation through the fits plan  ( A ) constraint of ( 5a )  . FIGLET uses a standard hierarchical , partially ordered plan representation to record the structure of a user?s task  . We specify the solutions to fits plan ( A ) to be just those actions A that are possible next steps given the user?s current state in achieving the task  . 
Since these task-appropriate actions can factor additional constraints into interpretation  , enforcing the fits plan ( A ) constraint can help FIGLET identify a natural interpretation  . 
As discussed in Section 4 , FIGLET records a list of current standards for vagues calar adjectives in the linguistic context  . The constraint standard ( small , S ) of ( 5c ) connects the overall utterance interpretation to the available standards for small in the linguistic context  . FIGLET interprets utterances carrying semantic constraints of the form standard  ( vague-predicate , S ) in one or two stages . 
In the first stage , the constraint is solved just in case S is the prevailing standard for vague-predicate in the linguistic context  . If there is no prevailing standard for an evoked vague property  , or if this stage does not yield a unique utterance interpretation  , then FIGLET moves to a second stage in which the constraint is solved for any standard that captures a relevant distinction for vague -predicate in the context  . If there is a strongest standard that results in a unique interpretation  , it is adopted and integrated into the new linguistic context  . 
5.3 Parsing and Interpretation
Language understanding in FIGLET is mediated by a bottom-up chart parser written in Prolog  . As usual , chart edges indicate the presence of recognized partial constituents within the input sequence  . In addition , edges now carry constraint networks that specify the contextual reasoning required for understanding  . In addition to finite instances ( Schuler ,  2001) , these networks include real constraints that formalize metric and spatial relationships  . Interpretation of these networks is carried out incrementally  , during parsing ; each edge thus records a set of associated candidate interpretations  . Since domain reasoning can be somewhat time -intensive in our current implementation  , we adopt a strategy of delaying the solution of certain constraints until enough lexical material has accrued that the associated problem-solving is judged tractable  ( DeVault and Stone ,  2003) . 
6 Assessment and Conclusion
In our approach , we specify a genuinely vague semantics : vague words evoke a domain-specific scale that can differentiate alternative domain individuals  . 
To find a unique interpretation for a vague utterance  , we leverage ordinary inference about the domain , task , and linguistic context to recover implicit thresholds on this scale  . 
We believe that further methodological advances will be required to evaluate treatments of vagueness in indefinite reference  , such as that considered here . 
For example , obviously the very idea of a ? gold standard ? for resolution of vagueness is problematic  . We believe that the best argument for a theory of vagueness in a language interface would show that naive users of the interface are  , on the whole , likely to accept its vague interpretations and unlikely to renegotiate them through clarification  . But the experiment would have to rule out confounding factors such as poorly-modeled lexical representation and context tracking as sources for system interpretations that users reject  . 
We intend to take up the methodological challenges necessary to construct such an argument in future work  . In the meantime , while our current implementation of FIGLET exhibits the promising behavior discussed in this paper and illustrated in Figures  1?4  , some minor engineering unrelated to language understanding remains before a fruitful evaluation can take place  . As alluded to above , the tight integration of contextual reasoning and interpretation that FIGLET carries out can be expensive if not pursued efficiently  . While our initial implementation achieves a level of performance that we accept as researchers  ( interpretation times of between one and a few tens of seconds  )  , evaluation requires us to improve FIGLET?s performance to levels that experimental participants will accept as volunteers  . Our analysis of FIGLET indicates that this performance can in fact be achieved with better -regimented domain problem-solving  . 
Nevertheless , we emphasize the empirical and computational arguments we already have in support of our model  . Our close links with the linguistic literature mean that major empirical errors would be surprising and important across the language sciences  . Indeed , limited evaluations of treatments of vague definite reference using standards of differentiation or very similar ideas have been promising  ( Gorniak and Roy , In Press ) . The computational appeal is that all the expensive infrastructure required to pursue the account is independently necessary  . 
Once this infrastructure is in place the account is readily implemented with small penalty of performance and development time  . It is particularly attractive that the approach requires minimal lexical knowledge and training data  . This means adding new vague words to an interface is a snap  . 
Overall , our new model offers three contributions . Most importantly , of course , we have developed a computational model of vagueness in terms of underspecified quantitative constraints  . But we have also presented a new demonstration of the importance and the feasibility of using multidimensional representations of dialogue context in understanding descriptions of quantitative domains  . And we have introduced an architecture for resolving underspecification through uniform pragmatic mechanisms based on context-dependent collaboration  . 
Together , these developments allow us to circum-scribe possible resolutions for underspecified utterances  , to zero in on those that the speaker and hearer could adopt consistently and collaboratively  , and so to constrain the speaker?s intended meaning to within a natural range  . 

We thank Kees van Deemter and our anonymous reviewers for valuable comments  . This work was supported by NSF grant HLC0308121 . 

J . Allen , D . Byron , M . Dzikovska , G . Ferguson , L . Galescu , and A . Stent .  2001 . Towards conversational humancomputer interaction . AI Magazine , 22(4):27?37 . 
N . Asher and A . Lascarides .  2003 . Logics of Conversation . Cambridge . 
C . Barker .  2002 . The dynamics of vagueness . Linguistics and Philosophy , 25(1):1?36 . 
J . Bos .  2003 . Implementing the binding and accommodation theory for anaphora resolution and presupposition  . Computational Linguistics , 29(2):179?210 . 
H . Bunt .  2000 . Dialogue pragmatics and context specification . In H . Bunt and W . Black , editors , Abduction , Belief and Context in Dialogue , pages 81?150 . Benjamin . 
M . Cress well .  1977 . The semantics of degree . In B . H . Partee , editor , Montague Grammar , pages 261?292 . Academic . 
M . Dalrymple , M . Kanazawa , Y . Kim , S . Mchombo , and S . Peters .  1998 . Reciprocal expressions and the concept of reciprocity  . Linguistics and Philosophy , 21(2):159?210 . 
D . DeVault and M . Stone .  2003 . Domain inference in incremental interpretation . In Proc . ICoS . 
B . Di Eugenio and B . Webber .  1996 . Pragmatic overloading in natural language instructions  . Int . 
Journal of Expert Systems , 9(2):53?84.
J . Ginzburg and R . Cooper .  2001 . Resolving ellipsis in clarification . In Proc . ACL . 
P . Gorniak and D . Roy . In Press . Grounded semantic composition for visual scenes . Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research . 
D . Graff .  2000 . Shiftings and s : An interest-relative theory of vagueness  . Philosophical Topics , 28(1):45?81 . 
J . Hobbs , M . Stickel , D . Appelt , and P . Martin . 
1993 . Interpretation as abduction . Artificial Intelligence , 63:69?142 . 
J . Jaffar and J . -L . Lassez .  1987 . Constraint logic programming . In Proc . POPL , pages 111?119 . 
C . Kennedy .  1999 . Projecting the adjective : The syntax and semantics of gradability and comparison  . Garl and . 
C . Kennedy .  2003 . Towards a grammar of vagueness . Manuscript , Northwestern . 
A . Kyburg and M . Morreau .  2000 . Fitting words : Vague words in context . Linguistics and Philosophy , 23(6):577?597 . 
S . Larsson and D . Traum .  2000 . Information state and dialogue management in the TRINDI dialogue move engine toolkit  . Natural Language
Engineering , 6:323?340.
T . Oates , M . D . Schmill , and P . R . Cohen .  2000 . 
Toward natural language interfaces for robotic agents  . In Proc . Agents , pages 227?228 . 
C . Rich , C . L . Sidner , and N . Lesh .  2001 . COLLAGEN : applying collaborative discourse theory to humancomputer interaction  . AI Magazine , 22(4):15?26 . 
D . Roy and A . Pentland .  2002 . Learning words from sights and sounds : A computational model  . 
Cognitive Science , 26(1):113?146.
W . Schuler .  2001 . Computational properties of environment-based disambiguation  . In Proc . 
ACL , pages 466?473.
M . Stone and R . H . Thomason .  2003 . Coordinat-ing understanding and generation in an abductive approach to interpretation  . In Proc . Dia Bruck , pages 131?138 . 
M . Stone .  2003 . Knowledge representation for language engineering  . In A . Farghaly , editor , A Handbook for Language Engineers , pages 299?366 . CSLI . 
