Computational Cognitive Linguistics
Jerome A . Feldman
ICSI & UC Berkeley
1947 Center Street
Berkeley , CA , 94704


1 The talk will describe an ongoing project ( modestly named the Neural Theory of
Language ) that is attempting to model language behavior in a way that is both neurally plausible and computationally practical  . The cornerstone of the effort is a formalism called Embodied Construction 
Grammar ( ECG) . I will describe the formalism , a robust semantic parser based on it , and a variety of applications of moderate scale . These include a system for understanding the ( probabilistic and metaphorical ) implications of news stories , and the first cognitively plausible model of how children learn grammar  . 
2 Introduction
Computational Linguistics is sometimes narrowly identified with statistical corpus studies  , but is much broader . The learning and use of language are inherently information processing tasks and any systematic description of them must be computational  . If we want to understand how human brains acquire and exploit language  , we are driven to computational theories and models that link neural structure to linguistic behavior  . 
Cognitive Linguistics provides the basic mechanisms for explaining human language processing  , but has traditionally been informal and non -computational  . Recent work suggests that a formally grounded computational cogn it velinguistics can be quite productive  . 
3 The Neural Theory of Language
For some sixteen years , an interdisciplinary group at ICSI and UC Berkeley has been building a theory of language that respects all experimental findings and is consistent with biological and computational constraints  . The intellectual base for the project is a synthesis of cognitive linguistics and structured connectionist modelling  . This involves work from neurobiology through politics and philosophy  ( Lakoff 1999 )  . An accessible overview of the goals and methodology of the project can be found in  ( Regier 1996 ) and further information is available at :

The focus of this talk is computational ; how can an embodied theory of language support scalable systems for language learning and use  . The key to scalability in any paradigm is compositionality  ; our goal in modeling language understanding is to systematically combine the heterogeneous structures posited in cognitive linguistics to yield overall interpretations  . We have identified four conceptual primitives that appear to capture the suffice for building scalable language understanding systems : SCHEMA  , MAP , ( MENTAL ) SPACE , and CONSTRUCTION . 
Schemas are language-independent representation of meanings and constructions are form-meaning pairs  . Constructions are form-meaning mappings as depicted in Figure  1  . Maps and mental spaces are discussed in ( Mok 2004 )  . The ECG formalism has , in addition to the usual inheritance hierarchy , an EVOKES relation that makes an outside structure accessible to a schema through a local name  . 
As shown in Figure 1 , langauge understanding is implemented as having distinct analysis and simulation phases  . During analysis , a Semantic Specification ( SemSpec ) is created from the meaning poles of the constructions  , and is essentially a network of schemas with the appropriate roles filled in  . . Unification of constructions requires compatability of their embodied semantic scehemas as well as form matching  . Crucially , within this network of schemas are executing schemas  ( or x-schemas Narayanan 1999 )  , which are models of events . 
They are active structures for eventbased a synchronous control that can capture both sequential flow and concurrency  . 
Simulation is a dynamic process which includes executing the x-schemas specified in the SemSpec and propagating belief updates in a belief network  ( Jensen 1996 , Narayanan 1999) . This will be discussed further in Section 5 . 
Figure1 . Overview of the Comprehension Model 4 Embodied Construction Grammar The cornerstone of the effort is the formalism called Embodied Construction Grammar  ( ECG )  . In traditional terms , ECG resembles a unification grammar like HPSG or LFG and many of the computational insights carry over  . But the central task of grammar is taken to be accounting for the full range of language learning and use rather than the specification of acceptable forms  . 
Grammars in ECG are deeply cognitive , with meaning being expressed in terms of cognitive primitives such as image schemas  , force dynamics , etc . The hypothesis is that a modest number of universal primitives will suffice to provide the core meaning component for the grammar  . Specific knowledge about specialized items , categories and relations will be captured in the external ontology  . 
As a linguistic formalism , ECG combines the idea of Construction Grammar as form-meaning pairings  ( Croft 2001 , Fillmore & Kay 1999 , Goldberg 1995 , etc . ) with the embodied semantics of the Cognitive Linguistics tradition  ( Fauconnier 1997 , Lakoff 1999 , Langacker 1991 , etc . ) . 
Computationally , the central ideas involve probabilistic relational models  ( Pfeffer and Koller 2000 , etc . ) and active knowledge ( Bailey 1998 , Narayanan 1999 , etc . ) along with their reduction to structured connectionist form and thus to neural models  ( Shastri 2002 )  . 
A grammar specification in ECG should simultaneously fill three distinct functions : capturing linguistic insights  , specifying the analysis phase of a computational system  , and serving as the high level description of the neural embodiment of the grammar  . This has been achieved in some simple cases and serves as a major constraint in all ECG efforts  . 
The deep semantic construction grammar of ECG also supports a novel style of general robust parsing  . The first phase of analysis is an modified chunk parser  ( Abney 1996 )  . 
The chunker generates a set of semantic chunks stored in a chart  . The second phase of analysis extracts the smallest number of chunks that span the utterance from the chart  , and performs semantic integration . Their common semantic structures are merged , and the resulting analyses are ranked according to the semantic density metric Without a complete analysis of an utterance  , the system must infer exactly how a set of local , partial semantic structures fit together into a coherent  , global analysis of the utterance . The approach taken is an abductive one in that it assumes compatible structures are the same and merges them  . This has been shown to work quite well in a system for modeling the learning of new constructions  ( Bryant 2004 , Chang 2004) . 
5 Applications
Narayanan ( Narayan 1999 ) has built a biologically plausible model of how such metaphorical uses can be understood by mapping to their underlying embodied meaning  . We assume that people can execute x-schemas with respect to structures that are not linked to the body  , the here and the now . In this case , x schema actions are not carried out directly , but instead trigger simulations of what they would do in the imagined situation  . 
This ability to simulate or imagine situations is a core component of human intelligence and is central to our model of language  . The system models the physical world as other x -schemas that have input/output links to the x schem are presenting the planned action  . 
In the computational implementation , the spatial motion domain ( source domain ) is encoded as connected x-schemas . Our model of the source domain is a dynamic system based on inter-x-schema activation  , inhibition and interruption . In the simulation framework , whenever an executing x schema makes a control transition  , it potentially modifies state , leading to a synchronous and parallel triggering or inhibition of other x-schemas  . 
The notion of system state as a graph marking is inherently distributed over the network  , so the working memory of an x-schema-based inference system is distributed over the entire set of x-schemas and source domain feature structures  . The KARMA system has been tested on narratives from the abstract domain of international economics  . The implemented model has about 100 linked x-schemas , and about 50 metaphor maps from the domains of health and spatial motion  . 
These were developed using a database of 30   23 phrase fragments from newspaper stories all of which have been successfully interpreted by the program  . Results of testing the system have shown that a surprising variety of fairly subtle and informative inferences arise from the interaction of the metaphoric projection of embodied terms with the topic specific target domain structure  ( Narayanan ,  1999) . Among the inferences made were those related to goals  ( their accomplishment , modification , subsumption , concordance , orthwarting ) , resources ( consumption , production , depletion , level ) , aspect ( temporal structure of events ) frame-based inferences , perspectival inferences , and inferences about communicative intent . 
The ECG formalisms as well as the analyzer described above play a crucial role in a computational model of how language comprehension may drive the acquisition of early phrasal and clausal constructions  ( Chang ,  2004) . 
This model takes ECG as the target representation to be learned from a sequence of utterances in context  . Learning is usage-based in that utterances are first analyzed using the existing set of constructions  , typically resulting in only a partial analysis that neither provides complete coverage of the richer background context nor exploits all the potential input forms and relations in the utterance  . 
This incomplete analysis prompts the formation of new constructions that take up the slack  . 
Constructions can also be formed on the basis of similarity  ( two constructions can merge into a more general construction  ) and cooccurrence ( two constructions can compose into a larger construction  )  . 
Besides specifying the means for forming new ECG constructions  , the acquisition model provides an overarching computational framework for converging on an optimal set of constructions  , based on a minimum description length principle ( Rissanen 1978 ) that favors compactness in describing both the grammar and the statistical properties of the data  . This framework extends previous work in Bayesian model merging for lexical acquisition  ( Bailey ,  1997 ) and the induction of contextfree grammars ( Stolcke 1994 ) to handle the relational structures and usage -based considerations made possible with ECG  . 
Specifically , the criteria employed favor constructions that have simple descriptions  ( relative to the available meaning representations and current set of constructions  ) and are frequently employed . 
The model has been applied to learn simple English motion constructions from a corpus of child -directed utterances  , paired with situation representations . The resulting learning trends reflect cross linguistic acquisition patterns  , including the incremental growth of the constructional inventory based on experience  , the prevalence of early grammatical markers for conceptually basic scenes  ( Slobin ,  1985 ) and the learning of lexically specific verb island constructions before more abstract grammatical patterns  ( To masello ,  1992) . For current purposes , the systems described demonstrate the utility of the ECG formalism for supporting computational modeling and offers a precisely specified instantiation of the simulation-based approach to language  . 
Conclusion For current purposes , the systems described above demonstrate the utility of the ECG formalism for supporting computational modeling and offer a precisely specified instantiation of the simulation-based approach to language  . 
Cognitive Linguistics has developed many profound insights  , but these had not been formalized and made computationally tractable  . 
Recent results like these suggest that a Computational Cognitive Linguistics is both scientifically productive and a semantic basis for a wide range of natural language understanding applications  . 
6 Acknowledgements
The NTL project has always been a team effort.
Special thanks for this presentation go to John Bryant  , Nancy Chang , Eva Mok , and Srini


S . Abney .  1996 . Partial parsing via finite-state cascades . In Workshop on Robust Parsing , 8th European Summer School in Logic , Language and Information , pages 815 , Prague , Czech Republic . 
D . Bailey , N . Chang , J . Feldman and S.
Naryanan .  1998 . Extending embodied lexical development . In Proceedings of the twentieth annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society 
COGSCI-98, Madison.
B . Bergen and N . Chang .  2002 . Embodied construction grammar in simulation-based language understanding  . Technical Report TR-02-004, ICSI , 2002 . To appear in Oestman and Reid , eds . , Construction Grammar ( s ) : Cognitive and Cross-Linguistic Dimensions . John Benjamins . 
B . Bergen , N . Chang and S . Narayan . 2004.
Simulated Action in an Embodied Construction Grammar  . Proc . 26th Cognitive Science Society

J . Bryant . 2003. Constructional analysis.
Master?s thesis , UC Berkeley.
J . Bryant . 2004. Towards Cognitive,
Compositional Construction Grammar . ROMAND 2004: RO bust Methods in Analysis of Natural language Data  , Geneva . 
G . Buccino , F . Binkofski , G . R . Fink , L . Fadiga , L . Fogassi , V . Gallese , R . J . Seitz , K Zilles , G . 
Rizzolatti and H . -J . Freund .  2001 . Action observation activates premotor and par et al areas in a somato topic manner : An fMRI study  . European
Journal of Neuroscience , 13: 400-404.
N . Chang . 2004a . Constructing Grammar : A computational model of the emergence of early constructions  . PhD thesis , University of California at Berkeley . 
N . Chang . 2004b . Putting Meaning into
Grammar Learning . In Proc . Psycho computational Models of Human Language
Acquisition . Geneva.
N . Chang , J . Feldman , R . Porzel and K . Sanders . 
2002 . Scaling cognitive linguistics : Formalisms for language understanding  . In Proceedings of the 1 st International Workshop on Scalable Natural Language Understanding  , Heidelberg , Germany . 
N . Chang and O . Gurevich . Context driven construction learning . Proc . 26th Cognitive
Science Society Conference.
N . Chang , S . Narayanan and M.R.L . Petruck.
2002. Putting frames in perspective . In
Proceedings of the nineteenth international conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING 2002 )  , Taipei . 
W . Croft . 2001. Radical Construction Grammar.
Oxford University Press.
G . Fauconnier .  1997 . Mappings in Thought and Language . New York : Cambridge University

J . Feldman .  2002 . The meaning of reference in embodied construction grammar  . Technical Report , International Computer Science Institute , 
ICSITR-02-11, Berkeley , CA.
J . Feldman .  2004 . From Molecule to Metaphor : A Neural Theory of Language  . Forthcoming J . Feldman and S . Narayanan .  2003 . Embodied meaning in a neural theory of language . Brain and
Language , 89:385-392.
C . Fillmore and P . Kay . 1999. Construction
Grammar . CSLI , Stanford , CA to appear.
A.E . Goldberg . 1995. Constructions : A
Construction Grammar Approach to Argument Structure  . University of Chicago Press . 
F . Jensen . 1996. An Introduction to Bayesian
Networks . Berlin : Springer Verlag.
G . Lakoff and M . Johnson .  1999 . Philosophy in the flesh : The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought  , 2nd ed .  202-251 . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
R . Langacker .  1991 . Concept , Image , Symbol : The Cognitive Basics of Grammar . Mouton de

B . MacWhinney .  1991 . The CHILDES project : Tools for analyzing talk . Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah , New Jersey.
E . Mok , J . Bryant , J . Feldman .  2004 . Scaling up to Mental Spaces . In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Scalable Natural 
Language Understanding , Boston.
S . Narayanan .  1999 . Moving right along : A computational model of metaphoric reasoning about events  . In Proceedings of the national Conference on Artificial Intelligence  AAAI99  . 
Orlando , FL.
S . Narayanan and S . Harabagiu (2004) . Question Answering Based on Semantic Structures ,   21 st International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING 2004 )  , Geneva , Switzerland ( to appear) . 
F . Pulvermueller .  2001 . Brain reflections of words and their meaning . Trends in Cognitive
Science , 5(12).
T . Regier . 1996. The Human Semantic Potential.
MIT Press , Cambridge , MA.
A . Pfeffer and D . Koller . Semantics and
Inference for Rewcursive Probability Models.
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence ( AAAI )  ,  2000 . 
J . Rissanen .  1978 . Modeling by shortest data description . Automatica , 14:465-471 . 
L . Shastri .  2002 . episodic memory and cortico-hip pocampal interactions  . Trends in Cognitive
Science , 6:162-168.
D . I . Slobin .  1985 . Crosslinguistic evidence for the language-making capacity  . In Slobin , D . I . , editor , Theoretical Issues , volume 2 of The Crosslinguistic Study of Language Acquisition  , chapter 15 . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah , New Jersey.
A . Stolcke 1994 Bayesian Learning of
Probabilistic Language Models . Doctoral thesis,
UC Berkeley.
M . To masello .  1992 . First verbs : A case study of early grammatical development  . Cambridge
University Press , Cambridge , UK.
M . To masello .  2003 . Constructing a Language : A usage-Based Theory of Language Acquisition  . 
Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA.
