Coling 2010: Poster Volume , pages 463?471,
Beijing , August 2010
Learning to Annotate Scientific Publications
Minlie Huang
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Technology and Systems,
Dept . Computer Science and Tech-
nology , Tsinghua University
aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Zhiyong Lu
National Center for Bio-
technology Information ( NCBI),
U.S . National Library of Medi-
cine , National Institutes of Health
luzh@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov


Abstract
Annotating scientific publications with
keywords and phrases is of great
importance to searching , indexing , and
cataloging such documents . Unlike
previous studies that focused on user-
centric annotation , this paper presents our
investigation of various annotation
characteristics on service-centric annotation . Using a large number of publicly available annotated scientific publications , we characterized and compared the two different types of annotation processes . Furthermore , we developed an automatic approach of annotating scientific publications based on a machine learning algorithm and a set of novel features . When compared to other methods , our approach shows significantly improved performance . Experimental data sets and evaluation results are publicly available at the supplementary website1.
1 Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet , the online document archive is increasing quickly with a growing speed . Such a large volume and the rapid growth pose great challenges for document searching , indexing , and cataloging . To facilitate these processes , many concepts have been proposed , such as Semantic Web ( Berners-Lee et al , 2001), Ontologies ( Gruber , 1993), Open Directory Projects like Dmoz2, folksono-1 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Lu/indexing 2 http://www.dmoz.org / mies ( Hotho et al , 2006), and social tagging systems like Flickr and CiteULike . Annotating documents or webpages using Ontologies and Open Directories are often limited to a manually controlled vocabulary ( developed by service providers ) and a small number of expert annotators , which we call service-centric annotation . By contrast , social tagging systems in which registered users can freely use arbitrary words to tag images , documents or webpages , belong to us-er-centric annotation . Although many advantages have been reported in user-centric annotation , low-quality and undesired annotations are always observed due to uncontrolled user behaviors ( Xu et al , 2006; Sigurbj?rnsson and Zwol , 2008).
Moreover , the vocabulary involved in user-centric annotation is arbitrary , unlimited , and rapid-growing in nature , causing more difficulties in tag-based searching and browsing ( Bao et al ., 2007; Li et al , 2007).
Service-centric annotation is of importance for managing online documents , particularly in serving high-quality repositories of scientific literature . For example , in biomedicine , Gene Ontology ( Ashburner et al , 2000) annotation has been for a decade an influential research topic of unifying reliable biological knowledge from the vast amount of biomedical literature . Document annotation can also greatly help service providers such as ACM/IEEE portals to provide better user experience of search . Much work has been devoted to digital document annotation , such as ontology-based ( Corcho , 2006) and semantic-oriented ( Eriksson , 2007).
This paper focuses on service-centric annotation . Our task is to assign an input document a list of entries . The entries are predefined by a controlled vocabulary . Due to the data availability , we study the documents and vocabulary in the notation behaviors in two millions previously annotated documents . When compared to user-centric annotation , we found that the two annotation processes have major differences and that they also share some common grounds . Next , we propose to annotate new articles with a learning method based on the assumption that documents similar in content share similar annotations . To this end , we utilize a logistic regression algorithm with a set of novel features . We evaluate our approach with extensive experiments and compare it to the state of the art . The contributions of this work are twofold : First , we present an indepth analysis on annotation behaviors between service-centric and user-centric annotation.
Second , we develop an automatic method for annotating scientific publications with significant improvements over other systems.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows : We present several definitions in Section 2 and the analysis of annotation behaviors in Section 3. In Section 4, we presented the logistic regression algorithm for annotation . Benchmarking results are shown in Section 5. We surveyed related work in Section 6 and summarized our work in Section 7.
2 Definitions
A controlled vocabulary : V , a set of prespecified entries for describing certain topics.
Entries in the vocabulary are organized in a hierarchical structure . This vocabulary can be modified under human supervision.
Vocabulary Entry : an entry in a controlled vocabulary is defined as a triplet : VE = ( MT , synonyms , NodeLabels ). MT is a major term describing the entry , and NodeLabels are a list of node labels in the hierarchical tree . An entry is identified by its MT , and a MT may have multiple node labels as a MT may be mapped to several nodes of a hierarchical tree.
Entry Binary Relation : ISA(VEi , VEj ) means entry VEj is a child of entry VEi , and SIB(VEi , VEj ) meaning that VEj is a sibling of entry VEi . A set of relations determine the structure of a hierarchy.
Entry Depth : the depth of an entry relative to the root node in the hierarchy . The root node has a depth of 1 and the immediate children of a root node has a depth of 2, and so on . A major term may be mapped to several locations in the hierarchy , thus we have minimal , maximal , and average depths for each MT.
Given the above definitions , a controlled vocabulary is defined as {< VEi , ISA(VEi,VEj ), SIB(VEi,VEj)>|any i , j }. The annotation task is stated as follows : given a document D , predicting a list of entries VEs that are appropriate for annotating the document . In our framework , we approach the task as a ranking problem , as detailed in Section 4.
3 Analyzing Service-centric Annotation
Behavior
Analyzing annotation behaviors can greatly facilitate assessing annotation quality , reliability , and consistency . There has been some work on analyzing social tagging behaviors in user-centric annotation systems ( Sigurbj?rnsson and Zwol , 2008; Suchanek et al , 2008). However , to the best of our knowledge , there is no such analysis on service-centric annotation . In social tagging systems , no specific skills are required for participating ; thus users can tag the resources with arbitrary words ( the words may even be totally irrelevant to the content , such as ? todo ?). By contrast , in service-centric annotation , the annotators must be trained , and they must comply with a set of strict guidelines to assure the consistent annotation quality . Therefore , it is valuable to study the differences between the two annotation processes.
3.1 PubMed Document Collection
To investigate annotation behaviors , we downloaded 2 million documents from PubMed3, one of the largest search portals for biomedical articles . These articles were published from Jan . 1, 2000 to Dec . 31, 2008. All these documents have been manually annotated by National Library Medicine ( NLM ) human curators . The controlled vocabulary used in this system is the Medical Subject Headings ( MeSH?)4, a thesaurus describing various biomedical topics such as diseases , chemicals and drugs , and organisms . There are 25,588 entries in the vocabulary in 2010, and there are updates annually . By comparison , the vocabulary used in user-centric annotation is re3 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed / 4 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh / and more dynamic ( may be updated every day).
3.2 Annotation Characteristics
First , we examine the distribution of the number of annotated entries in the document collection.
For each number of annotated entries , we counted the number of documents with respect to different numbers of annotations . The number of annotations per document among these 2 million documents varies from 1 ( with 176,383 documents ) to 97 ( with one document only ). The average number of annotations per document is 10.10, and the standard deviation is 5.95.

Figure 1. The original distribution and simulated normal distribution . Each data point denotes the number of documents ( y-axis ) that has the corresponding number of entries ( x-axis).

As illustrated in Figure 1, when there are more than 4 annotations , the distribution fits a normal distribution . Comparing with user-centric annotation , there are three notable observations : a ), the maximal number of annotations per document (97) is much smaller ( in social tagging systems the number amounts to over 104) due to much less annotators involved in service-centric annotation than users in user-centric annotation ; b ), the number of annotations assigned to documents conforms to a normal distribution , which has not yet been reported in user-centric annotation ; c ), similar to user-centric annotation , the number of documents that have only one annotation accounts for a large proportion.
Second , we investigate whether the Zipf law ( Zipf , 1949) holds in service-centric annotation.
To this end , we ranked all the entries according to the frequency of being annotated to documents . We plotted the curve in logarithm scale , as illustrated in Figure 2. The curve can be simulated by a linear function in logarithm scale if ignoring the tail which corresponds to very infrequently used entries . To further justify this finding , we ranked all the documents according to the number of assigned annotations and plotted the curve in logarithm scale , as shown in Figure 3. Similar phenomenon is observed . In conclusion , the Zipf law also holds in service-centric annotation , just as reported in user-centric annotation ( Sigurbj?rnsson and Zwol , 2008).

Figure 2. The distribution of annotated entry frequency . X-axis is the rank of entries ( ranking by the annotation frequency ), and y-axis is the frequency of an entry being used in annotation.

Figure 3. The distribution of the number of annotated entries . X-axis is the rank of a document ( in log10 scale ), and y-axis is the number of annotations assigned to documents ( in log2 scale).

Furthermore , as mentioned in Section 2, the vocabulary corresponds to a hierarchy tree once a set of binary relations were defined . Thus we can easily obtain the minimal , maximal , and average depth of an entry . The larger depth an entry has , the more specific meaning it has.
Therefore , we investigate whether service-centric annotation is performed at very specific level ( with larger depth ) or general level ( with smaller depth ). We define prior depth and annotation depth for this study , as follows : ( )
PriorDepth (1) | | VE V
Dep VE
V ? =? original normal
Number of annotated entries
Num ber of docum ents 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000
Rank of the document
Num ber of annotations
VE V
VE Dep VE ?=? ( )
Pr ( ) (3) ( )
VE V f VE
VE f VE ? =? where Dep(VE ) is the minimal , maximal , or average depth of an entry , f(VE ) is the usage frequency of VE in annotation , and | V | is the number of entries in the vocabulary . The two formulas are actually the mathematical expectations of the hierarchy?s depth under two distributions respectively : a uniform distribution (1/|V |) and the annotation distribution ( formula (3)). As shown in Table 1, the two expectations are close . This means the annotation has not been biased to either general or specific level , which suggests that the annotation quality is sound.
Dep(VE ) PriorDepth AnnoDepth
MAX 4.88 4.56
MIN 4.25 4.02
AVG 4.56 4.29
Table 1. Annotation depth comparison.

Figure 4. The imbalance frequency ( y-axis ) of annotated categories ( x-axis).
3.3 Annotation Categorization Imbalance
We investigate here whether service-centric annotation is biased to particular categories in the hierarchy . We define a category as the label of root nodes in the hierarchy . In our vocabulary , there are 11 categories that have at least one annotation . The complete list of these categories is available at the website5 . Three newly created categories have no annotations in the document collection . The total number of annotations within a category was divided by the number of en-5 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/2010/mesh_browser/MeSHtree.Z.html tries in that category , as different categories may have quite different numbers of entries . If an entry is mapped to multiple locations , its annotations will be counted to corresponding categories repeatedly.
From Figure 4, we can see that there is imbalance with respect to the annotations in different categories . Category ? diseases ? has 473.5 annotations per entry ( totally 4408 entries in this category ). Category ? chemicals and drugs ? has 423.0 annotations per entry ( with 8815 entries in total ). Due to the fact that diseases and chemicals and drugs are hot scientific topics , these categories are largely under-annotated . The most frequently annotated category is : ? named groups ? (7144.4 annotations per entry ), with 199 entries in total . The issue of imbalanced categorization may be due to that the topics of the document collection are of imbalance ; and that the vocabulary was updated annually , so that the latest entries were used less frequently . As shown in ( Si-gurbj?rnsson and Zwol , 2008), this imbalance issue was also observed in user-centric annotation , such as in Flickr Tagging.
4 Learning to Annotate
As shown in Section 3, there are much fewer annotations per document in service-centric annotation than in user-centric annotations . Service-centric annotation is of high quality , and is limited to a controlled vocabulary . However , manual annotation is time-consuming and labor intensive , particularly when seeking high quality.
Indeed , our analysis shows that on average it takes over 90 days for a PubMed citation to be manually annotated with MeSH terms . Thus we propose to annotate articles automatically . Specifically , we approach this task as a ranking problem : First , we retrieve k-nearest neighboring ( KNN ) documents for an input document using a retrieval model ( Lin and Wilbur , 2007). Second , we obtain an initial list of annotated entries from those retrieved neighboring documents . Third , we rank those entries using a logistic regression model . Finally , the top N ranked entries are suggested as the annotations for the target document.
4.1 Logistic Regression
We propose a probabilistic framework of directly estimating the probability that an entry can be used to annotate a document . Given a document at om y [ A ]
Or ga ni sm s [
B]
Di se as es [ C ]
Ch em ica ls an d
Dr ug s [
D]
An al yt ica l,
Di ag no st ic an d ?
Ps yc hi at ry a nd P sy ch ol og y [ F ]
Ph en om en a an d
Pr oc es se s ?
Di sc ip lin es a nd ?
An th ro po lo gy , E du ca tio n , ?
Te ch no lo gy , I nd us try , ?
In fo rm at io n
Sc ie nc e [ L ]
Na m ed G ro up s [
M ]
He al th C ar e [ N ]
Pr(R(VE)|D ) directly using a logistic regression algorithm . R(VE ) is a binary random variable indicating whether VE should be assigned as an annotation of the document . According to this probability , we can rank the entries obtained from neighboring documents . Much work used Logistic Regression as classification : Pr(R=1|D ) >? where ? is a threshold , but it is difficult to specify an appropriate value for the threshold in this work , as detailed in Section 5.5.
We applied the logistic regression model to this task . Logistic regression has been successfully employed in many applications including multiple ranking list merging ( Si and Callan , 2005) and answer validation for question answering ( Ko et al , 2007). The model gives the following probability : 1 1 Pr ( ( ) | ) exp ( * ) 1 exp ( * ) (4) m m i i i i i i
R VE D b w x b w x = = ? ?= + + +? ?? ?? ? where x = ( x1, x2, ?, xm ) is the feature vector for
VE and m is the number of features.
For an input document D , we can obtain an initial list of entries { VE1,VE2,?,VEn } from its neighboring documents . Each entry is then represented as a feature vector as x = ( x1, x2, ?, xm ). Given a collection of N documents that have been annotated manually , each document will have a corresponding entry list , { VE1, VE2,?,VEn }, and each VEi has goldstandard label yi=1 if VEi was used to annotate D , or yi=0 otherwise . Note that the number of entries of label 0 is much larger than that of label 1 for each document . This may bias the learning algorithm.
We will discuss this in Section 5.5. Given such data , the parameters can be estimated using the following formula : ( )* * , 1 1 , argmax log Pr ( ( ) | ) (5) jLN i j w b j i w b R VE D = = = ??   where Lj is the number of entries to be ranked for Dj , and N is the total number of training documents . We can use the Quasi-Newton algorithm for parameter estimation ( Minka , 2003). In this paper , we used the WEKA6 package to implement this model.
4.2 Features
We developed various novel features to build connections between an entry and the document 6http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka / .
text . When computing these features , both the entry?s text ( major terms , synonyms ) and the document text ( title and abstract ) are tokenized and stemmed . To compute these features , we collected a set of 13,999 documents ( each has title , abstract , and annotations ) from PubMed.
Prior probability feature . We compute the appearance probability of a major term ( MT ), estimated on the 2 million documents . This prior probability reflects the prior quality of an entry.
Unigram overlap with the title . We count the number of unigrams overlapping between the MT of an entry and the title , dividing by the total number of unigrams in the MT.
Bigram overlap with the document . We first concatenate the title and abstract , then count the number of bigram overlaps between the MT and the concatenated string , dividing by the total number of bigrams in the MT.
Multinomial distribution feature . This feature assumes that the words in a major term appear in the document text with a multinomial distribution , as follows : #( , ) Pr ( | )
Pr ( | ) | | !* (6) #( , )! w MT w MT w Text
MT Text MT w MT ? = ? #( , )
Pr ( | ) (1 ) Pr ( ) (7) #( , ) i c iw w Text w Text w w Text ? ?= ? +? where : #( w,MT ) - The number of times that w appears in
MT ; Similarly for #( w,Text ); | MT | - The number of single words in MT ; Text - Either the title or abstract , thus we have two features of this type : Pr(MT|Title ) and
Pr(MT|Abstract);
Prc(w ) - The probability of word w occurring in a background corpus . This is obtained from a unigram language model that was estimated on the 13,999 articles ; ? ? A smoothing parameter that was empirically set to be 0.2.
Query-likelihood features . The major term of an entry is viewed as a query , and this class of features computes likelihood scores between the query ( as Q ) and the article D ( either the title or the abstract ). We used the very classic okapi model ( Robertson et al 1994), as follows : ( ) 0.5 ( , )* log ( ) 0.5 ( , ) (8) | | 0.5 1.5* ( , ) (| |) q Q
N df q tf q D df q
Okapi Q D
D tf q D avg D ? ? ?? +? ?+? ?= ? ?+ +? ?? ? ? tf(q,D ) - The count of q occurring in document D ; | D | - The total word counts in document D ; df(q ) - The number of documents containing word q ; avg(|D |) - The average length of documents in the collection ; N - The total number of documents (13,999).
We have two features : okapi(MT , Title ) and okapi(MT , Abstract ). In other words , the title and abstract are processed separately . The advantage of using such query-likelihood scores is that they give a probability other than a binary judgment of whether a major term should be annotated to the article , as only indirect evidence exists for annotating a vocabulary entry to an article in most cases.
Neighborhood features . The first feature represents the number of neighboring documents that include the entry to be annotated for a document . The second feature , instead of counting documents , sums document similarity scores.
The two features are formulated as follows , respectively : { }( | ) | , (9)i i i kfreq MT D D MT D D = ? ?? ; ( | ) ( , ) (10) i i k i
MT D D sim MT D sim D D ? ?? = ? where ? k is the k-nearest neighbors for an input document D and sim(Di,Dj ) is the similarity score between a target document and its neighboring document , given by the retrieval model.
Synonym Features . Each vocabulary entry has synonyms . We designed two binary features : one judges whether there exists a synonym that can be exactly matched to the article text ( title and abstract ); and the other measures whether there exists a synonym whose unigram words have all been observed in the article text.
5 Experiment 5.1 Datasets
To justify the effectiveness of our method , we collected two datasets . We randomly selected a set of 200 documents from PubMed to train the logistic regression model ( named Small200). For testing , we used a benchmark dataset , NLM2007, which has been previously used in benchmarking biomedical document annotation7 ( Aronson et al , 7http://ii.nlm.nih.gov/.
2004; Vasuki and Cohen , 2009; Trieschnigg et al ., 2009). The two datasets have no overlap with the aforementioned 13,999 documents . Each document in these two sets has only title and abstract ( i.e ., no full text ). The statistics listed in Table 2 show that the two datasets are alike in terms of annotations . Note that we also evaluate our method on a larger dataset of 1000 documents , but due to the length limit , the results are not presented in this paper.
Dataset Documents
Total annotations
Average annotations
Small200 200 2,736 13.7
NLM2007 200 2,737 13.7
Table 2. Statistics of the two datasets.
5.2 Evaluation Metrics
We use precision , recall , Fscore , and mean average precision ( MAP ) to evaluate the ranking results . As can be seen from Section 3.2, the number of annotations per document is about 10.
Thus we evaluated the performance with top 10 and top 15 items.
5.3 Comparison to Other Approaches
We compare our approach to three methods on the benchmark dataset - NLM2007. The first system is NLM?s MTI system ( Aronson et al , 2004).
This is a knowledge-rich method that employs NLP techniques , biomedical thesauruses , and a KNN module . It also utilizes handcrafted filtering rules for refinement . The second and third methods rank entries according to Formula (9) and (10), respectively ( Trieschnigg et al , 2009).
We trained our model on Small200. All feature values were normalized to [0,1] using the maximum values of each feature . The number of neighbors was set to be 20. Neighboring documents were retrieved from PubMed using the retrieval model described in ( Lin and Wilbur , 2007). Existing document annotations were not used in retrieving similar documents as they should be treated as unavailable for new documents . As the average number of annotations per document is around 13 ( see Table 2), we computed precision , recall , Fscore , and MAP with top 10 and 15 entries , respectively.
Results in Table 3 demonstrate that our method outperforms all other methods . It has substantial improvements over MTI . To justify whether the improvement over using neighbor-Paired ttest ( Goulden , 1956). When comparing results of using learning vs . neighborhood similarity in Table 3, the pvalue is 0.028 for top 10 and 0.001 for top 15 items . This shows that the improvement achieved by our approach is statistically significant ( at significance level of 0.05).
Methods Pre . Rec . F . MAP
Top
Frequency .635 .464 .536 .598
Similarity .643 .469 .542 .604
Learning .657 .480 .555 .622
Top
Frequency .512 .562 .536 .598
Similarity .524 .574 .548 .604
Learning .539 .591 .563 .622
Table 3. Comparative results on NLM2007.
5.4 Choosing Parameter k
We demonstrate here our search for the optimal number of neighboring documents in this task.
As shown in Table 4, the more neighbors , the larger number of goldstandard annotations would be present in neighboring documents.
With 20 neighbors a fairly high upperbound recall ( UBR ) is observed ( about 85% of goldstandard annotations of a target document were present in its 20 neighbors ? annotations ), and the average number of entries ( Avg_VE ) to be ranked is about 100.

Figure 5. The performance ( y-axis ) varies with the number of neighbors ( x-axis).
Measure
The number of neighboring documents 5 10 15 20 25 30
UBR .704 .793 .832 .856 .871 .882
Avg_VE 38.8 64.1 83.6 102.2 119.7 136.4
Table 4. The upperbound recall ( UBR ) and average number of entries ( Avg_VE ) with different number of neighboring documents.

To investigate whether the number of neighboring documents affects performance , we experimented with different numbers of neighboring documents . We trained a model on Small200, and tested it on NLM2007. The curves in Figure 5 show that the performance becomes very close when choosing no less than 10 neighbors . This infers that reliable performance can be obtained.
The best performance ( Fscore of 0.563) is obtained with 20 neighbors . Thus , the parameter k is set to be 20.
5.5 Data Imbalance Issue
As mentioned in Section 4.1, there is a data imbalance issue in our task . For each document , we obtained an initial list of entries from 20 neighboring documents . The average number of goldstandard annotations is about 13, while the average number of entries to be ranked is around 100 ( see Table 4). Thus the number of entries of label 0 ( negative examples ) is much larger than that of label 1 ( positive examples ). We did not apply any filtering strategy because the goldstandard annotations are not proportional to their occurring frequency in the neighboring documents . In fact , as shown in Figure 6, the majority of goldstandard annotations appear in only few documents among 20 neighbors . For example , there are about 250 goldstandard annotations appearing in only one of 20 neighboring documents and 964 appearing in less than 6 neighboring documents . Therefore , applying any filtering strategy based on their occurrence in neighboring documents may be harmful to the performance.

Figure 6. The distribution of annotations . X-axis is the number of neighboring documents in which goldstandard annotations are found.
5.6 Feature Analysis
To investigate the impact of different groups of features , we performed a feature ablation study.
The features were divided into four groups . For each round of this study , we remove one group of features from the entire feature set , retrain the model on Small200, and then test the performance on NLM2007 with top 15 entries . We divided the features into four independent groups : 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 5 10 15 20 25 30
MAP
Recall
Fscore
Precision
G oldstandard annotations synonym features , and other features ( including unigram/bigram feature , query likelihood feature , etc ., see Section 4.2). Results in Table 5 show that neighborhood features are dominant : removing such features leads to a remarkable decrease in performance . On the other hand , using only neighborhood features ( the last row ) yields significant worse results than using all features.
This means that combining all features together indeed contributes to the optimal performance.
Feature Set Pre . Rec . F . MAP
All features .539 .591 .563 .622 - Prior probability .538 .590 .563 .622 - Neighborhood features .419* .459* .438* .467* - Synonym features .532 .583 .556 .611 - Other features .529 .580 .553 .621 Only neighborhood features .523* .573* .547* .603* Table 5. Feature analysis . Those marked by stars are significantly worse than the best results.
5.7 Discussions
All methods that rely on neighboring documents have performance ceilings . Specifically , for the NLM2007 dataset , the upper bound recall is around 85.6% with 20 neighboring documents , as shown in Table 5. Due to the same reason , this genre of methods is also limited to recommend entries that are recently added to the controlled vocabulary as such entries may have not been annotated to any document yet . This phenomenon has been demonstrated in the annotation behavior analysis : those latest entries have substantially fewer annotations than older ones.
6 Related Work
Our work is closely related to ontology-based or semantic-oriented document annotation ( Corcho , 2006; Eriksson , 2007). This work is also related to KNN-based tag suggestion or recommendation systems ( Mishne , 2006).
The task here is similar to keyword extraction ( Nguyen and Kan , 2007; Jiang et al , 2009), but there is a major difference : keywords are always occurring in the document , while when an entry of a controlled vocabulary was annotated to a document , it may not appear in text at all.
As for the task tackled in this paper , i.e ., annotating biomedical publications , three genres of approaches have been proposed : (1) k-Nearest Neighbor model : selecting annotations from neighboring documents , ranking and filtering those annotations ( Vasuki and Cohen , 2009; Trieschnigg et al , 2009). (2) Classification model : learning the association between the document text and an entry ( Ruch , 2006). (3) Based on knowledge resources : using domain thesauruses and NLP techniques to match an entry with concepts in the document text ( Aronson , 2001; Aronson et al , 2004). (4) LDA-based topic model : ( M?rchen et al , 2008).
7 Conclusion
This paper presents a novel study on service-centric annotation . Based on the analysis results of 2 million annotated scientific publications , we conclude that service-centric annotation exhibits the following unique characteristics : a ) the number of annotation per document is significant smaller , but it conforms to a normal distribution ; and b ) entries of different granularity ( general vs.
specific ) are used appropriately by the trained annotators . Service-centric and user-centric annotations have in common that the Zipf law holds and categorization imbalance exists.
Based on these observations , we introduced a logistic regression approach to annotate publications , with novel features . Significant improvements over other systems were obtained on a benchmark dataset . Although our features are tailored for this task in biomedicine , this approach may be generalized for similar tasks in other domains.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH , National Library of Medicine . The first author was also supported by the Chinese Natural Science Foundation under grant No . 60803075 and the grant from the International Development Research Center , Ottawa,
Canada IRCI.
References
Alan R . Aronson . Effective mapping of biomedical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus : the metamap program . In Proc AMIA Symp 2001. p . 1721.
Alan Aronson , Alan R . Aronson , James Mork , James G . Mork , Clifford Gay , Clifford W . Gay , Susanne Humphrey , Susanne M . Humphrey , Willie Rogers , Willie J . Rogers . The NLM Indexing Initiative's form . 2004;107(Pt 1):268-72.
Michael Ashburner , Catherine A . Ball , Judith A.
Blake , David Botstein , Heather Butler , et al Gene Ontology : tool for the unification of biology . Nat
Genet . 2000 May ; 25(1):25-9.
Shenghua Bao , Xiaoyuan Wu , Ben Fei , Guirong Xue , Zhong Su , and Yong Yu . Optimizing Web Search Using Social Annotations . WWW 2007, May 8?12, 2007, Banff , Alberta , Canada . Pp 501-510.
Tim Berners-Lee , James Hendler and Ora Lassila.
The Semantic Web . Scientific American Magazine.
(May 17, 2001).
Oscar Corcho . Ontology based document annotation : trends and open research problems . International Journal of Metadata , Semantics and Ontologies , Volume 1, Issue 1, Pages : 47-57, 2006.
Henrik Eriksson . An Annotation Tool for Semantic Documents . In Proceedings of the 4th European conference on The Semantic Web : Research and Applications , pages 759-768, 2007. Innsbruck,
Austria.
Cyril Harold Goulden . Methods of Statistical Analysis , 2nd ed . New York : Wiley , pp . 5055, 1956.
Thomas R . Gruber (1993). A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Specifications . Knowledge Acquisition , 5(2), 1993, pp . 199-220.
Andreas Hotho , Robert Jaschke , Christoph Schmitz , Gerd Stumme . Information Retrieval in Folksonomies : Search and Ranking . In ? The Semantic Web : Research and Applications ?, Vol . 4011 (2006), pp.
411-426.
Xin Jiang , Yunhua Hu , Hang Li . A Ranking Approach to Keyphrase Extraction . SIGIR?09, July 19?23, 2009, Boston , Massachusetts , USA.
Jeongwoo Ko , Luo Si , Eric Nyberg . A Probabilistic Framework for Answer Selection in Question Answering . Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, pages 524?531, Rochester , NY , April 2007.
Rui Li , Shenghua Bao , Ben Fei , Zhong Su , and Yong Yu . Towards Effective Browsing of Large Scale Social Annotations . In WWW ?07: Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide
Web , 2007.
Jimmy Lin and W . John Wilbur . PubMed related articles : a probabilistic topic-based model for content similarity . BMC Bioinformatics 8: (2007).
Thomas P . Minka . A Comparison of Numerical Optimizers for Logistic Regression . 2003. Unpublished draft.
Gilad Mishne . AutoTag : A Collaborative Approach to Automated Tag Assignment for Weblog Posts.
WWW 2006, May 22?26, 2006, Edinburgh , Scotland . pages 953?954.
Fabian M?rchen , Math?us Dejori , Dmitriy Fradkin , Julien Etienne , Bernd Wachmann , Markus Bundschus . Anticipating annotations and emerging trends in biomedical literature . In KDD '08: pp.
954-962.
Thuy Dung Nguyen and Min-Yen Kan . Keyphrase Extraction in Scientific Publications . In Proc . of International Conference on Asian Digital Libraries ( ICADL ?07), pages 317-326.
Stephen E . Robertson , Steve Walker , Susan Jones , Micheline Hancock-Beaulieu , and Mike Gatford.
Okapi at TREC3. In Proceedings of the Third Text REtrieval Conference ( TREC 1994). Gaithersburg,
USA , November 1994.
Patrick Ruch . Automatic assignment of biomedical categories : toward a generic approach . Bioinformatics . 2006 Mar 15;22(6):658-64.
Luo Si and Jamie Callan . 2005 CLEF2005: Multilingual retrieval by combining multiple multilingual ranked lists . In Proceedings of CrossLanguage
Evaluation Forum.
B?rkur Sigurbj?rnsson and Roelof van Zwol . Flickr Tag Recommendation based on Collective Knowledge . WWW 2008, April 21?25, 2008, Beijing,
China . Pp . 327-336.
Fabian M . Suchanek , Milan Vojnovi?c , Dinan Guna-wardena . Social Tags : Meaning and Suggestions.
CIKM?08, October 26?30, 2008, Napa Valley , California , USA.
Dolf Trieschnigg , Piotr Pezik , Vivian Lee , Franciska de Jong , Wessel Kraaij , Dietrich Rebholz-Schuhmann . MeSH Up : effective MeSH text classification for improved document retrieval . Bioinformatics , Vol . 25 no . 11 2009, pages 1412?1418.
Vidya Vasuki and Trevor Cohen . Reflective Random Indexing for Semiautomatic Indexing of the Biomedical Literature . AMIA 2009, San Francisco,
Nov . 1418, 2009.
Zhichen Xu , Yun Fu , Jianchang Mao , and Difu Su.
Towards the Semantic Web : Collaborative Tag Suggestions . In WWW2006: Proceedings of the Collaborative Web Tagging Workshop (2006).
George K . Zipf . (1949) Human Behavior and the Principle of Least-Effort . Addison-Wesley.
471
