Coling 2008: Paraphrases and Applications?Tutorial notes , pages 1?87,
Beijing , August 2010
Paraphrases and Applications
Shiqi Zhao
Baidu , Inc.
Haifeng Wang
Baidu , Inc.
Outline
? Part I
? Introduction
?Paraphrase Identification
?Paraphrase Extraction
? Part II
?Paraphrase Generation
?Applications of Paraphrases
?Evaluation of Paraphrases
?Conclusions and Future work
1
? Paraphrase
?Noun
Definition
? Alternative expressions of the same meaning
?Verb
? Generate paraphrases for the input expression
? ? same meaning??
?Quite subjective
?Different degrees of strictness
?Depend on applications
Paraphrase ( noun ): Alternative expressions of the same meaning
Korean Kim Yuna won gold
with a world-record score in
women's figure skating at the
Vancouver Olympics Thursday.
Korean figure skater Kim
Yuna has won the gold
medal of women?s figure
skating at the Winter
Olympics in Vancouver
Kim Yu-Na (19) is a South
Korean ice skater who took
the gold medal at the
Vancouver Olympics.
Kim Yuna , a South Korean
figure skater has won the
gold medal at the on-
going Winter Olympics
2010.
Yuna Kim of South Korea
won the women's figure
skating gold medal at the
Vancouver Olympics in
record fashion.
2
Paraphrase ( verb ): Generate paraphrases for an input S.
Automatic
S
paraphrase
generation
T1 T2 T3 T4
Classification of Paraphrases
? According to granularity
?Surface paraphrases
? Lexical level
? Phrase level
? Sentence level
? Discourse level
?Structural paraphrases
? Pattern level
? Collocation level
3
Examples
? Lexical paraphrases ( generally synonyms)
? solve and resolve
? Paraphrase phrases
? look after and take care of
? Paraphrase sentences
? The table was set up in the carriage shed.
? The table was laid under the cart-shed.
? Paraphrase patterns [ X ] considers [ Y ]? ? [ X ] takes [ Y ] into consideration ? Paraphrase collocations ? ( turn on , OBJ , light ) ? ( switch on , OBJ , light ) ? According to paraphrase style ? Trivial change
Classification of Paraphrases ? Phrase replacement ? Phrase reordering ? Sentence split & merge ? Complex paraphrases ? Trivial change ? all the members of and all members of ? Phrase replacement ? He said there will be major cuts in the salaries of high-level civil servants.
? He said there will be major cuts in the salaries of senior officials.
? Phrase reordering ? Last night , I saw Tom in the shopping mall.
? I saw Tom in the shopping mall last night.
? Sentence split & merge ? He bought a computer , which is very expensive.
? (1) He bought a computer . (2) The computer is very expensive.
? Complex paraphrases ? He said there will be major cuts in the salaries of high-level civil servants.
? He claimed to implement huge salary cut to senior civil servants.
Applications of Paraphrases ? Machine Translation ( MT ) ? Simplify input sentences ? Summarization ? Sentence clustering ? Alleviate data sparseness ? Parameter tuning ? Automatic evaluation ? Question Answering ( QA ) ? Question reformulation ? Information Extraction ( IE ) ? IE pattern expansion ? Automatic evaluation ? Natural Language Generation ( NLG ) ? Sentence rewriting ? Others ? Changing writing style ? Text simplification ? Information Retrieval ( IR ) ? Query reformulation ? Identifying plagiarism ? Text steganography ? ?? ? Paraphrase identification ? Identify ( sentential ) paraphrases ? Paraphrase extraction ? Extract paraphrase instances ( different granularities ) ? Paraphrase generation ? Generate ( sentential ) paraphrases ? P h li tiarap rase app ca ons ? Apply paraphrases in other areas Textual Entailment ? A Similar Direction ? Textual entailment : ? A directional relation between two text fragments ? T : the entailing text ? H : the entailed hypothesis ? T entails H if , typically , a human reading T would infer that H is most likely true.
?Compare entailment with paraphrase ? P h i bidi i l ilarap rase s rect ona enta ment ? Recognizing Textual Entailment Track ( RTE ) ? RTE 1 (2004) to RTE 5 (2009)- -? RTE6 (2010) is in progress ? Example : ? T : A shootout at the Guadalajara airport in May , 1993, killed Cardinal Juan Jesus Posadas Ocampo.
?H : Juan Jesus Posadas Ocampo died in 1993 .
Outline ? Part I ? Introduction ? Paraphrase Identification ? Paraphrase Extraction ? Part II ? Paraphrase Generation ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work ? Specially refers to sentential paraphrase identification ? Given any pair of sentences , automatically identifies whether these two sentences are paraphrases ? Paraphrase identification is not trivial Susan often goes to see movies with her boyfriend.
Susan never goes to see movies with her boyfriend.
He said there will be major cuts in the salaries of high-level civil servants.
He claimed to implement huge salary cut to senior civil servants.
Overview ? Classification based methods ? Reviewed as a binary classification problem i e , . ., input s1 and s2 to a classifier and output 0/1 ? Compute the similarities between s1 and s2 at different levels , which are then used as classification features ? Alignment based methods ? Align s1 and s2 first , and score the sentence pair based on the alignment results ? Alignment based on ITG ? Alignment based on quasi-synchronous dependency grammars ? Brockett and Dolan , 2005 ? Features : ? String similarity features ? Sentence length , word overlap , edit distance , ? ? Morphological variants ? Word pairs with the same stem ? WordNet lexical mappings ? Synonym pairs / word-hypernym pairs from WordNet orbit | orbital operation | procedure ? Word association pairs ? Automatically learned synonym pairs ? Classifier ? SVM classifier vendors | suppliers
Classification based Methods ( cont ?) ? Finch et al , 2005 ? Using MT evaluation techniques to compute sentence similarities , which are then used as classification features ? WER , PER , BLEU , NIST ? Feature vector vec(s1, s2) ? vec1(s1, s2): s1 as reference , s2 as MT system output ; ? vec2(s1, s2): s2 as reference , s1 as MT system output ; ? vec(s1, s2): average of vec1(s1, s2) and vec2(s1, s2): ? Classifier ? SVM classifier ? Malakasiotis , 2009 ? Combining multiple classification features ? String similarity ( various levels ) ? Tokens , stems , POS tags , nouns only , verbs only , ? ? Different measures ? Edit distance , JaroWinkler distance , Manhattan distance ? ? Synonym similarity ? Treat synonyms in two sentences as identical words ? Syntax similarity ? Dependency parsing of two sentences and compute the overlap of dependencies ? Classifier ? Maximum Entropy classifier
Alignment based Methods ? Wu , 2005 ? Conduct alignment based on Inversion Transduction
Grammars ( ITG ) ? Sensitive to the differences in sentence structures ? Without using any thesaurus to deal with lexical variation ? Performance is comparable to the classification based methods Al f ll i i i t t l t il t ? so per orms we n recogn z ng ex ua en a men ? Das and Smith , 2009 ? Conduct alignment based on Quasi-Synchronous
Dependency Grammar ( QG ) ? Alignment between two dependency trees ? Assumption : the dependency trees of two paraphrase sentences should be aligned closely ? Why does it work ? About 120 potential jurors were being asked to complete a lengthy questionnaire .
Align words that are not identical ? Performs competitively with classification based methods The jurors were taken into the courtroom in groups of 40 and asked to fill out a questionnaire .
A Summary ? Classification based method is still the mainstream method since : , ? Binary classification problem is well defined ; ? Classification algorithms and tools are readily available ; ? It can combine various features in a simple way ; ? It achieves state-of-the-art performance.
11
References ? Brockett and Dolan . 2005. Support Vector Machines for Paraphrase Identification and Corpus Construction.
? Fi h t l 2005 U i M hi T l ti E l ti T h i tnc e a . . s ng ac ne rans a on va ua on ec n ques o Determine Sentence-level Semantic Equivalence.
? Wu . 2005. Recognizing Paraphrases and Textual Entailment using
Inversion Transduction Grammars.
? Malakasiotis . 2009. Paraphrase Recognition Using Machine Learning to
Combine Similarity Measures.
? Das and Smith . 2009. Paraphrase Identification as Probabilistic Quasi-
Synchronous Recognition.
Outline ? Part I ? Introduction ? Paraphrase Identification ? Paraphrase Extraction ? Part II ? Paraphrase Generation ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work
Three Elements for Paraphrase
Extraction ? thesauri ? monolingual parallel corpora ? monolingual comparable corpora ? bilingual parallel ? Different translation versions preserve the meaning of the original source ? Comparable news articles may contain distinct descriptions ? cotraining ? classification ? logistic regression ? clustering ? word alignment ??? corpora ? large web corpora ? search engine query logs ? dictionary glosses ??? of the same facts ? Multiple phrases that align with the same foreign phrase may have the same meaning ? Distributional hypothesis ???
Outline ? Part I ? Introduction ? Paraphrase Identification ? Paraphrase Extraction ? From Thesauri ? From Monolingual Parallel Corpora ? From Monolingual Comparable Corpora ? F Bili l P ll l Crom ngua ara e orpora ? From Large Web Corpora ? From Other Resources ? Extract words with specific semantic relations as paraphrases ? Most common : synonyms ? Other relations : hypernyms , hyponyms ? ? Widely used thesauri ? In English ? WordNet ? In other languages ? E.g ., HowNet , Tongyici Cilin in Chinese
Pros and Cons ? Pros ? Existing resources ? High quality ? Thesauri are hand crafted ? Cons ? Language limitation ? Thesauri are not available in many languages ? Difficult to update ? Part I ? Introduction ? Paraphrase Identification ? Paraphrase Extraction ? From Thesauri ? From Monolingual Parallel Corpora ? From Monolingual Comparable Corpora ? F Bili l P ll l Crom ngua ara e orpora ? From Large Web Corpora ? From Other Resources
Method Overview ? Corpus ? Multiple translations of the same foreign literary work ? Assumption ? Different translation versions preserve the meaning of the original source , but may use different expressions ( in French)
Example 20000 Leagues Under the Sea ( different English translation versions ) ??
Sentence Alignment and Preprocessing ? Barzilay and McKeown , 2001 ? Collected 11 English translations for 5 foreign novels ? E.g ., Madame Bovary , Fairy Tale , Twenty Thousand
Leagues under the sea ? ? Sentence alignment ? A dynamic programming algorithm ? Produced 44,562 pairs of parallel sentences ? Precision is 94 5% .
?Other preprocessing ? POS tagging and chunking ? Phrases are the atomic units in paraphrase extraction ? Barzilay and McKeown , 2001 ( cont ?) ? Extracting paraphrase phrases ? Assumption : phrases in aligned sentences which appear in similar contexts are paraphrases ? Method : cotraining ? Iteratively learn contexts and paraphrases
Left context right contextparaphrases
My imagination melted into hazy drowsiness , and I soon fell into an uneasy slumber .
My imagination wandered into vague unconsciousness , and I soon fell into a deep sleep .
Pros and Cons ? Pros ? Easy to align monolingual parallel sentences ? Cons ? Domain limitation ? Limited in literary works ? Scale limitation ? Th i f th i l ti l lle s ze o e corpus s re a ve y sma ? Context dependence ? E.g ., ? John said ? and ? he said ? ? Part I ? Introduction ? Paraphrase Identification ? Paraphrase Extraction ? From Thesauri ? From Monolingual Parallel Corpora ? From Monolingual Comparable Corpora ? F Bili l P ll l Crom ngua ara e orpora ? From Large Web Corpora ? From Other Resources
Method Overview ? Corpus ? News articles that report the same event within a brief period of time ? Produced by different news agencies ? Assumption ? Comparable news articles may contain distinct descriptions of the same facts
Comparable documents d1 d2
Procedure
News corpus
Paraphrase phrases
Paraphrase patterns
Paraphrase generation
Identify comparable documents
Extract paraphrase phrases
Extract paraphrase patterns
MT-based paraphrase generation model
Extract parallel sentences
Comparable documents
Parallel corpus ? Input ? News articles from different news agencies ? E.g ., CNN , New York Times , Washington Post ? ? Processing ? Method1: Retrieve documents on a given topic or event ? Needs predefined topics or events ? Method2: Cluster documents ? Content similarity ; time interval ? Output ? Corpus of comparable documents Extract Parallel ( Paraphrase ) Sentences ? Input ? Corpus of comparable documents ? Processing ? Sentence clustering ? Method1: based on an assumption : first sentences of a news article usually summarize its content ? Method2: based on computing the content similarity ? Output ? Corpus of parallel ( paraphrase ) sentences ? Using NEs as anchors ? Shinyama et al , 2002 ? Basic idea : paraphrase sentences should contain comparable NEs
Comparable NEs
Slots of the same type paraphrases
Extract Paraphrase Patterns ? Multiple-sequence alignment ? Barzilay and Lee , 2003 backbone slot ? Pros ? Language independent -? Comparable news can be found in many languages ? Cons ? Domain-dependent ? Paraphrases are extracted from specific domains or topics ? Sentence clustering ? Either too strict or too loose
Outline ? Part I ? Introduction ? Paraphrase Identification ? Paraphrase Extraction ? From Thesauri ? From Monolingual Parallel Corpora ? From Monolingual Comparable Corpora ? F Bili l P ll l Crom ngua ara e orpora ? From Large Web Corpora ? From Other Resources ? Corpus ? A parallel corpus of the source language and a foreign language ? Assumption ? Multiple phrases that align with the same foreign phrase may have the same meaning ? The method is also termed as ? pivot approach?
Example source language foreign language ( pivot language)
Alignment ?? different parts ?? different places ?? ???? ?? ???? ei ej cm cn ?? various locations ?? ?? ek ? Takao et al , 2002 ? Basic idea : ? Generating lexical paraphrases using 2way dictionaries ? English word e1 can be translated to a Japanese word j with an EJ dic . D1, and then j can be translated back to an English word e2 with a JE dictionary D2. e1 and e2 are extracted as paraphrases
Extracting Paraphrase Phrases ? Bannard and Callison-Burch , 2005 ? Word alignment and phrase extraction ? Basic assumption : ? If two English phrases e1 and e2 can be aligned with the same foreign phrase f , e1 and e2 are likely to be paraphrases.
?Paraphrase probability : 2 1 2 2 1? arg max ( | ) e ee p e e ?= Pivot in a foreign language 2 1 1 2arg max ( | ) ( | ) e e f p f e p e f ? = ?
Translation probability ?????????? take the matter into consideration Bannard & Callison-Burch (2005) ? s results : ? must take the matter into account ? ??????????
The consideration of this matter will ? ???????? take the matter into account take the matter into consideration the consideration of this matter the consideration of this matter take the matter into account He?ll take the matter into consideration ????????
We need to consider this matter ?????????? consider this matter take the matter into consideration
Add Syntactic Constraints ? Callison-Burch , 2008 ? Basic idea : ? Two paraphrase phrases should have the same syntactic type.
?Paraphrase probability : 2 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 1 : ( ) ( ) ? arg max ( | , ( )) arg max ( | ( )) ( | ( )) e e e s e s e e p e e s e p f e s e p e f s e ? ? = = = ? given the syntactic type ? Syntactic constraints are also used when substituting paraphrases in sentences 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 1 : ( ) ( ) , , e e e s e s e f ? ? = ?????????? take the matter into consideration take the matter into account
Callison-Burch (2008) ? s results : ? must take the matter into account ? ??????????
The consideration of this matter will ? ???????? take the matter into consideration the consideration of this matter the consideration of this matter take the matter into account He?ll take the matter into consideration ????????
We need to consider this matter ?????????? consider this matter take the matter into consideration
Learning Paraphrases from Graphs ? Kok and Brockett , 2010 ? Basic idea : ? Convert aligned phrases into a graph , extract paraphrases based on random walks and hitting times ?????????? take the matter into consideration
Kok and Brockett (2010) ? s results : ? must take the matter into account ? ??????????
The consideration of this matter will ? ???????? take the matter into account consider this matter take the matter into account He?ll take the matter into consideration ????????
We need to consider this matter ?????????? consider this matter take the matter into consideration
Extracting Paraphrase Patterns ? Zhao et al , 2008 ? Basic idea : ? Generate paraphrase patterns that include part-of-speech slots.
?Paraphrase probability : 2 1 1 2
N i i c i score e e h e e c ? = =? ? 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 3 1 2 1 4 1 2 2 ( , , ) ( | ) ( , , ) ( | ) ( , , ) ( | ) ( , , ) ( | )
MLE
MLE
LW
LW h e e c score c e h e e c score e c h e e c score c e h e e c score e c = = = =
Based on maximum likelihood estimation
Based on lexical weighting demand into take market demand into consideration Inducing English patterns Inducing Chinese patterns
Example market consideration take into considerationNN NN take into considerationNN ? ?? ?? ?? take NN into consideration ?? ? ? NN consider NN ? ?? ? NN
Extract paraphrase patterns take NN into consideration & consider NN ? should take the matter into consideration ? ?????????? take [ NN ] into consideration take [ NN ] into account
Zhao et al(2008) ? s results : ? must take the matter into account ? ??????????
The consideration of this matter will ? ????????
H ? ll t k th tt i t id ti take [ NN ] into consideration the consideration of [ NN ] the consideration of [ NN ] take [ NN ] into account e a e e ma er n o cons era on ????????
We need to consider this matter ?????????? consider [ NN ] take [ NN ] into consideration ? Pros ? The method proves effective hence it?s widely used , ? High precision ? Large scale ? Cons ? Language limitation ? Cannot work where the largescale bilingual parallel corpora are not available
Outline ? Part I ? Introduction ? Paraphrase Identification ? Paraphrase Extraction ? From Thesauri ? From Monolingual Parallel Corpora ? From Monolingual Comparable Corpora ? F Bili l P ll l Crom ngua ara e orpora ? From Large Web Corpora ? From Other Resources ? Corpus ? Large corpus of web documents ? Or directly based on web mining ? Assumption ? Distributional hypothesis ? If two words / phrases / patterns often occur in similar contexts , their meanings tend to be similar
Example
Shakespeare
Chekhov Merchant of Venice
War and Peace
X wrote Y
Maupassant
Hugo Gorky
Tagore
Murakami Tolstoy
Yasunari
Notre Dame de Paris
Romeo and Juliet
Madame Bovary
Madame Bovary similar similarparaphrases
X is the author of Y
Shakespeare
Maupassant
Hugo
Gorky
Hemingway
Balzac
Merchant of Venice
Notre Dame de Paris
The Old Man and Sea
Romeo and Juliet ? Lin , 1998 ? Basic idea ? Measure words ? similarity based on the distributional pattern of words ? Corpus ? A ( dependency ) parsed corpus ? Word similarity
Mutual information 1 2 1 2 1 2( , ) ( ) ( ) 1 2 1 2( , ) ( ) ( , ) ( ) ( ( , , ) ( , , )) ( , ) ( , , ) ( , , ) r r r r r w T w T w r w T w r w T w
I w r w I w r w sim w w
I w r w I w r w ? ? ? ? += + ? ? ?
Extracting Syntactic Paraphrase Patterns ? Lin and Pantel , 2001 ? Basic idea : extended distributional hypothesis ? Corpus : a large corpus of parsed monolingual sentences ? pattern pairs
X solves
Y
X finds solution toa ? Pattern similarity 1 2 1 2 1 2( , ) ( , ) ( , ) sim p p sim SlotX SlotX sim SlotY SlotY = ?
Y
Similarity of the slot fillers ? Bhagat and Ravichandran , 2008 ? Basic idea is the same as the above work ? Corpus : ? a large corpus of monolingual sentences without parsing ?150GB , 25 billion words ? Surface paraphrases ? Pairs of ngrams E g ? X acquired Y ? and ? X completed the acquisition of Y ?? . ., ? Techniques ? Apply locality sensitive hashing ( LSH ) to speed up the computation
Learning Unary Paraphrase Patterns ? Szpector and Dagan , 2008 ? Binary paraphrase patterns ( most of the previous work ) ? Each pattern has two slots at both ends ? E.g ., ? X solves Y ? and ? X found a solution to Y ? ? Unary paraphrase patterns ? Each pattern has a single slot ? E.g ., ? X take a nap ? and ? X sleep ? ? Method sleep kids in room ? The same with the above works ? Based on distributional hypothesis the
X sleep ? Ravichandran and Hovy , 2002 ? Basic idea ? Learn paraphrase patterns with search engines ? Corpus ? The whole internet ? Method ? Extract paraphrase patterns for each type , e.g ., ? BIRTHDAY ? ? Provide handcrafted seeds , e.g ., ? Mozart , 1756? ? Retrieve sentences containing the seeds from the web with a search engine ? Extract patterns , e.g ., ? born in < ANSWER > , < NAME > ?< NAME > was born on < ANSWER > , ???
Pros and Cons ? Pros ? Language independent ? Cons ? For methods based on large web corpora ? Computation complexity is high ? Needs to process an extremely large corpus ? Needs to compute pairwise similarity for all candidates ? For methods based on web mining ? Extract paraphrase patterns type by type ? Needs to prepare seeds beforehand ? Part I ? Introduction ? Paraphrase Identification ? Paraphrase Extraction ? From Thesauri ? From Monolingual Parallel Corpora ? From Monolingual Comparable Corpora ? F Bili l P ll l Crom ngua ara e orpora ? From Large Web Corpora ? From Other Resources Paraphrasing with Search Engine Query Logs ? Zhao et al , 2010 ? Corpus ? Query logs ( queries and titles ) of a search engine ? Assumption ? If a query q hits a title t , then q and t are likely to be paraphrases ? If queries q1 and q2 hit the same title t , then q1 and q2 are likely to be paraphrases ? If a query q hits titles t1 and t2, then t1 and t2 are likely to be paraphrases ??????? ??????? q1 t1 ??????? q2
Paraphrases : < q1, t1> < q1, t2> < 2 t1> query-title ??????? ?? ?? t2 q , < q1,q2> < t1,t2> query-query title-title
Method ? Step1: extracting < q , t > paraphrases ? Extracting candidate < q , t > pairs from query logs ? Paraphrase validation based on binary classification ? Combining multiple features ? Step2: extracting < q , q > paraphrases ? Extracting candidate < q , q > from < q , t > paraphrases ? Paraphrase validation based on binary classification ? Step3: extracting < t , t > paraphrases ? Extracting candidate < t , t > from < q , t > paraphrases ? Paraphrase validation based on binary classification ? Pros ? No scale limitation ? Query logs keep growing ? A large volume of paraphrases can be extracted ? Query logs reflect web users ? real needs ? Cons ? Query logs data are only available in IR companies ? User queries are noisy ? Spelling mistakes , grammatical errors ? Extracting Paraphrases from Dictionary Glosses ? Corpus ? Glosses of dictionaries ? Assumption ? A word and its definition ( gloss ) in the dictionary have the same meaning hurricane severe storm high wind fast and force person or thing
Method ? Prune and reformulate the definitions ? For a verb v extracts the head of the definition ( h ) , and h?s adverb modifier m as v?s paraphrase ? Kaji et al , 2002 ? Rule based method for extracting the appropriate part from the definition ? Higashinaka and Nagao , 2002 ? E g w should not be in def ; ignore contents in parentheses . ., in def ; avoid double negation ? ? Pros ? Explain unfamiliar words with simpler definitions ? Cons ? Transformation of person , number , tense president head of company presidents heads of company head of companies
E.g ., heads of companies
References ? From monolingual parallel corpora ? Barzilay and McKeown . 2001. Extracting Paraphrases from a Parallel
Corpus.
? From monolingual comparable corpora ? Yusuke Shinyama , Satoshi Sekine , Kiyoshi Sudo . 2002. Automatic Paraphrase Acquisition from News Articles.
? Regina Barzilay and Lillian Lee . 2003. Learning to Paraphrase : An Unsupervised Approach Using Multiple-Sequence Alignment.
? Bill Dolan , Chris Quirk , and Chris Brockett . 2004. Unsupervised Construction of Large Paraphrase Corpora : Exploiting Massively
Parallel News Sources.
38
References ( cont ?) ? From bilingual parallel corpora ? Takao et al 2002. Comparing and Extracting Paraphrasing Words with 2-Way Bilingual Dictionaries.
? Bannard and Callison-Burch . 2005. Paraphrasing with Bilingual Parallel
Corpora.
? Callison-Burch . 2008. Syntactic Constraints on Paraphrases Extracted from Parallel Corpora.
? Kok and Brockett . 2010. Hitting the Right Paraphrases in Good Time.
? Zhao et al 2008. Pivot Approach for Extracting Paraphrase Patterns from bilingual corpora .
References ( cont ?) ? From large web corpora ? Lin . 1998. Automatic Retrieval and Clustering of Similar Words.
? Lin and Pantel . 2001. Discovery of Inference Rules for Question
Answering.
? Bhagat and Ravichandran . 2008. Large Scale Acquisition of Paraphrases for Learning Surface Patterns.
? Szpector and Dagan . 2008. Learning Entailment Rules for Unary
Templates.
? Ravichandran and Hovy . 2002. Learning Surface Text Patterns for a
Question Answering System .
39
References ( cont ?) ? From other resources ? Zhao et al 2010. Paraphrasing with Search Engine Query Logs.
? Kaji et al 2002. Verb Paraphrase based on Case Frame Alignment.
? Higashinaka and Nagao . 2002. Interactive Paraphrasing Based on
Linguistic Annotation.
C ffee B eak!o r ? Part 2 ? Paraphrase Generation ? Rule based Method ? Thesaurus based Method ? NLG based Method ? MT based Method ? Pivot based Method ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work
Rule based Method ? Two types : ? Based on hand crafted rules -? Widely used in early studies of paraphrase generation ? McKeown , 1979; Zong et al , 2001; Tetsuro et al , 2001;
Zhang and Yamamoto , 2002?? ? Based on automatically extracted rules ? Extract paraphrase patterns from corpora ? Barzilay and Lee 2003 Zhao et al2009 , , ., ??
Sentence analysis - morphological - syntactic - semantic - ?
Rule matching &
Paraphrase generation
S T
Paraphrase rule base
Compile paraphrase rules ? Examples of paraphrase rules ? Change the positions of adverbials
Based on Handcrafted Rules ? He booked a single room in Beijing yesterday . => ? Yesterday , he booked a single room in Beijing.
? Split a compound sentence into a group of simple sentences ? He booked a single room in Beijing yesterday => ? He booked a single room in Beijing.
? He booked a single room yesterday.
? He booked a room.
? Rewrite a sentence using handcrafted patterns ? Can I have a cup of tea ? => ? May I have a cup of tea ? ? I would like a cup of tea , please.
? Give me a cup of tea.
42
Based on Automatically Extracted Rules ? Studies on paraphrase patterns extraction has been introduced above ? Some of them have tried to apply the extracted paraphrase patterns in paraphrase generation ? Complex paraphrase patterns ? Barzilay and Lee , 2003 ? E.g ., ? Short and simple paraphrase patterns ? Zhao et al , 2009 ? E.g ., consider [ NN ] and take [ NN ] into consideration
Pros and Cons ? Methods based on handcrafted rules ? Pros ? Can design paraphrase rules for specific applications and requirements ? Cons ? It is time-consuming to construct paraphrase rules ? Problem of rules conflict ? Coverage of paraphrase rules is limited ? Methods based on automatically extracted rules
P ? ros ? Can generate paraphrases with structural changes ? Cons ? Coverage of paraphrase rules is limited ? McKeown . 1979. Paraphrasing Using Given and New Information in a
QuestionAnswer System.
? Z t l 2001 A h t S k Chi P h i B dong e a . . pproac o po en nese arap ras ng ase on
Feature Extraction.
? Tetsuro et al . 2001. KURA : A Transfer-Based Lexico-Structural
Paraphrasing Engine.
? Zhang and Yamamoto . 2002. Paraphrasing of Chinese Utterances.
? Barzilay and Lee . 2003. Learning to Paraphrase - An Unsupervised Approach Using Multiple-Sequence Alignment.
? Zhao et al 2009. Application-driven Statistic Paraphrase Generation.
Outline ? Part 2 ? Paraphrase Generation ? Rule based Method ? Thesaurus based Method ? NLG based Method ? MT based Method ? Pivot based Method ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work ? Also known as lexical substitution ? Substitute words in a sentence with their synonyms that fit in the given context ? SemEval2007: English lexical substitution task ? SemEval2010: Crosslingual lexical substitution ? Example : ? There will be major cuts in the salaries of high level civil - servants.
? There will be major cuts in the wages of high-level civil servants.
Thesaurus based Method ? Include two stages ? Stage 1: extract candidate substitutes from-predefined inventories.
? E.g ., WordNet ? Stage-2: find substitutes that fit in the given context ? Using language model or web data ( e.g ., Google 5gram ) for evaluating the fitness in the context ? Disambiguation may also be useful ? Various thesauri have been tried ? WordNet : ? the most commonly used ? Others : ? Encarta , Roget , Oxford American Writer?s Thesaurus ? ? Extracting different information as candidates ? Synsets ( all synsets vs . best synset ) ? Hypernyms , similar-to , alsosee ? ? Words in glosses
Example:
WordNet different synsets
Encarta definition of the synset synset
Stage-2: Substitute Selection ? Rank the candidates and select the one fits best in the given context ? Context constraints ? Semantic constraints ? Select substitutes with the correct meaning wrt the given context ? Syntactic constraints ? The sentence generated after substitution should keep grammatical ? SubFinder ? University of North Texas ? Performs well in SemEval2007 English lexical substitution task ? Candidate extraction ? WordNet ? Encarta ? Others ? Prove to be useless SubFinder : A Lexical Substitution System ? Substitute selection (5 ranking methods R1~R5) ? Language model ? Google 1T 5gram ( R1) ? Query search engine ( R2) ? Latent semantic analysis ( LSA ) ( R3) ? Rank a candidate by its relatedness to the context sentence ? Word sense disambiguation ( WSD ) ( R4) ? Disambiguate the target word and select the synset of the right sense ? Pivot approach ( R5) ? Check whether a candidate substitute can be generated via a 2way translation ? Combine R1~R5: ? Voting mechanism ? Contribution of each ranking method is not analyzed / i i m m m rankings c score c r ? ? = ?
Ranks according to R1-R5
Pros and Cons ? Pros ? Based on existing inventories ? Cons ? Cannot generate structural paraphrases ? Language limitation ? Question H t diff t th i ?? ow o merge eren esaur ? Thesauri have different forms of synset clustering ? McCarthy and Navigli . 2007. SemEval2007 Task 10: English Lexical
Substitution Task.
? H t l 2007 UNT S bFi d C bi i K l d S fassan e a . . : u n er : om n ng now e ge ources or
Automatic Lexical Substitution.
? Yuret . 2007. KU : Word Sense Disambiguation by Substitution.
? Giuliano et al 2007. FBK-irst : Lexical Substitution Task Exploiting Domain and Syntagmatic Coherence.
? Martinez et al 2007. MELB-MKB : Lexical Substitution System based on
Relatives in Context.
? Kauchak and Barzilay . 2006. Paraphrasing for Automatic Evaluation.
Outline ? Part 2 ? Paraphrase Generation ? Rule based Method ? Thesaurus based Method ? NLG based Method ? MT based Method ? Pivot based Method ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work ? Two steps ?(1) analysis and (2) generation
NLU NLG
R s t paraphrases
NLG based Methods ? Kozlowski et al , 2003 ? Generate single sentence paraphrases -? Input : predicate/argument structure ? Not natural language sentences / ? Based on lexicogrammatical resources ? Map elementary semantic structures with syntactic realization ? Power and Scott , 2005 ? Concerning larger-scale
Rhetorical structure tree paraphrases ? Paraphrases of multiple sentences or even the whole text ? Paraphrases vary not only at lexical and syntactic levels , but also in document structure and generator
Different realizations layout ? Problem : ? The input is not natural language texts / t1 t2 t3 tn
NLG based Methods ( cont ?) ? Power and Scott , 2005 ( cont ?) ? Example : reason
NUCLEUS : recommend(doctors , elixir)
SATELLITE : conjunction 1: quick-results(elixir ) 2: few-side-effects(elixir)
Rhetorical structure tree
Doctors recommend Elixir since it gives quick results and it has few side effects.
solution1 (1) Elixir gives quick results.
(2) Elixir has few side effects.
(3) Therefore , it is recommended by doctors.
solution2 ? Fujita et al , 2005 ? Paraphrase light verb constructions ( LVC ) in - sentences ? LVC : consists of a light-verb that syntactically governs a deverbal noun ? Semantic representation ? LCS : Lexical Conceptual Structure ? Procedure ? Semantic analysis ? Semantic transformation ? Surface generation
Pros and Cons ? Pros ? It simulates human being?s behavior when generating paraphrases : ? Step1: understand the meaning of a sentence ? Step2: generate a new sentence expressing the meaning ? Cons ? Both deep analysis of sentences and NLG are difficult to realize ? Kozlowski et al 2003. Generation of single-sentence paraphrases from predicate/argument structure using lexicogrammatical resources.
? P d S tt 2005 A t ti ti f l l hower an co . . u oma c genera on o arge-sca e parap rases.
? Fujita et al 2005. Exploiting Lexical Conceptual Structure for Paraphrase
Generation.
Outline ? Part 2 ? Paraphrase Generation ? Rule based Method ? Thesaurus based Method ? NLG based Method ? MT based Method ? Pivot based Method ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work
Translations t
Language L1 Language L2
Paraphrasings
Language L1 t
For both machine translation and paraphrase generation : (1) t should preserve the meaning of s (2) t should be a fluent sentence Paraphrase Generation as Machine Translation ? Quirk et al , 2004 ? First recast paraphrase generation as a monolingual machine translation task
Paraphrase generations t
A typical MT model ( source channel model)
PT paraphrase table
From comparable news articles ( cont ?) ? Model ? Source channel model * arg max ( | ) arg max ( | ) ( ) t t t p t s p s t p t = =
Language model ? Translation ? model ( based on a phrasal paraphrase table ) ? Paraphrase table ? Monolingual parallel sentences Paraphrase Generation as Machine Translation ( cont ?) ? Extracted from comparable news articles ? 139K pairs ? Word alignment & phrase pair extraction ? With Giza ++ ? Limitation ? Lack of monolingual parallel corpora to train the paraphrase table !!! ? Combine multiple resources to train the paraphrase Paraphrase Generation as Machine Translation ( cont ?) table
Paraphrase generations t
Loglinear model
PT1
Multiple paraphrase tables
PT2 PTn?
From various resources
Paraphrase Generation as Machine Translation ( cont ?) ? Model ? Log linear model-_ _
N
TM i TM i LM LMt i t h t s h t s ? ? = = +?
N paraphrase tables , each feature corresponds to a paraphrase table
Language model _ iK
TM i i k k k h t s score t s = = ? ( cont ?) ? Paraphrase tables ? PT1: from word clusters ? Volumes of the PTs : ( Lin , 1998) ? PT2: from monolingual parallel corpora ? PT3: from monolingual comparable corpora ? PT4: from bilingual parallel corpora ? PT5: from Encarta dictionary glosses ? PT6: from clusters of similar user queries
Proves most useful ! ? Differences between machine translation and paraphrase generation ( Zhao et al2009): Paraphrase Generation vs . Machine Translation ., MT has a unique purpose PG has distinct purposes in different applications Machine Translation ( MT ) Paraphrase Generation ( PG)
In MT , all words in a sentence h ld b t l t d
In PG , not all words need to be h ds ou e rans a e parap rase
In MT , the bilingual parallel data are easy to collect
In PG , multiple resources need to be combined
In MT , automatic evaluation metrics ( e.g ., BLEU ) are available
In PG , automatic evaluation metrics are not available
Generation ? Zhao et al , 2009 ? Propose a statistical model for paraphrase generation ? Generate different paraphrases in different applications
Paraphrase plannings t
Sentence preprocessing
Paraphrase generation
A The given application
PT1
Multiple paraphrase tables
PT2 PTn?
Also combine multiple resources
Self-paraphrase PT : allows words to keep unchanged in paraphrasing ? Paraphrase planning ? When an application A is given only the paraphrase Application-driven Statistical Paraphrase
Generation ( cont ?) , pairs that can achieve A are kept Paraphrase application : sentence compression The US government should take the overall situation into consideration and actively promote bilateral high-tech trades.
Example:
The US government
The US administration
The US government on overall situation overall interest overall picture overview situation as a whole whole situation ?? take [ NN_1] into consideration consider [ NN_1] take into account [ NN_1] take account of [ NN_1] take [ NN_1] into account take into consideration [ NN_1] ?? < promote , OBJ , trades > < sanction , OBJ , trades > < stimulate , OBJ , trades > < strengthen , OBJ , trades > < support , OBJ , trades > < sustain , OBJ , trades > ? Log linear model Application-driven Statistical Paraphrase
Generation ( cont ?) - log ( | ) i i i
K k k k k k k
J lm j j j j p s t p t t t ? ? ? = ? ? = = + ? ? ? t s Paraphrase model
Language model
I um i i i s t ? ? = + ? Usability model ( defined for each application)
References ? Lin . 1998. Automatic Retrieval and Clustering of Similar Words.
? Quirk et al 2004. Monolingual Machine Translation for Paraphrase
G tienera on.
? Finch et al 2004. Paraphrasing as Machine Translation.
? Zhao et al 2008. Combining Multiple Resources to Improve SMT-based
Paraphrasing Model.
? Zhao et al 2009. Application-driven Statistical Paraphrase Generation.
60
Outline ? Part 2 ? Paraphrase Generation ? Rule based Method ? Thesaurus based Method ? NLG based Method ? MT based Method ? Pivot based Method
A li ti f P h ? pp ca ons o arap rases ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work
Overview ? Basic idea ? We can generate a paraphrase t for a sentence s by translating s into a foreign language , and then translating it back into the source language.
s t Source language
MT1 p
MT2
Pivot language
MT engines
Overview ( cont?)
What toxins are most hazardous to expectant mothers?English ? Single-pivot Che tossine sono pi ? pericolose alle donne incinte?
Italian
What toxins are more dangerous to pregnant women?English ? Using a single pivot language ? Multi-pivot ? Using multiple pivot languages
Pivot based Methods ? Duboue and Chu-Carroll , 2006 ? Applied in QA systems ? Paraphrase the input questions so as to improve the coverage in answer extraction ? Pivot languages ? 11 ? MT engines ? 2: Babelfish ( B ) and Google MT ( G ) ? 4 combinations : B+B , B+G , G+G , G+B ? Duboue and Chu-Carroll , 2006 ( cont ?) ? Given a list of automatically generated paraphrases , we need to select a best one.
? For QA , we need to select the paraphrase that can find the answer more easily than the original question.
Features for paraphrase selection ( in a classification framework ) SUM IDF The sum of the IDF scores for all terms in the original question and the h ( f h ith i f ti t ) parap rase . pre er parap rases w more n orma ve erms Lengths Number of query terms for each of the paraphrase and the original question . ( prefer shorter paraphrases)
Cosine
Distance
The distance between the vectors of both questions , IDF-weighted.
(filter paraphrases that diverge too much from the original)
Answer
Types
Whether answer types , as predicted by the question analyzer , are the same or overlap . ( the answer type should be the same)
Pivot based Methods ( cont ?) ? Max , 2009 ? Paraphrasing sub sentential fragments -? Allows the exploitation of context during both source-pivot translation and pivot-source back-translation context constraints context constraints paraphrase ? Max , 2009 ( cont ?) ? Application ? Text revision ? Pivot language ? English ? Paraphrases are acquired for French subsentences ? MT engine ? S t t SMT ( St t l 2007)ource con ex aware roppa e a .,
Pivot based Methods ( cont ?) ? Zhao et al , 2010 3 MT engines : (1) Google translator ( GG ), (2) Microsoft translator ( MS ), (3) Systran translator ( ST ) 6 pivot languages : (1)
French ( F ) (2) German ( G ) , , (3) Spanish ( S ), (4) Italian ( I ), (5) Portuguese ( P ), (6)
Chinese ( C ) 54 combinations ? Zhao et al , 2010 ( cont ?) ? Produce a high quality paraphrase using the list of - candidates Source he said there will be major cuts in the salaries of high-level civil servants ( GG , G , MS ) he said there are significant cuts in the salaries of high-level officials ( GG , F , GG ) he said there will be significant cuts in the salaries of top civil level ( GG , P , GG ) he said there will be big cuts in salaries of high-level civil ( MS , C , MS ) he said that there will be a major senior civil service pay cut ( MS , S , GG ) he said there will be significant cuts in the salaries of senior officials ( MS , F , ST ) he said there will be great cuts in the wages of the high level civils servant ( ST , G , GG ) he said that there are major cuts in the salaries of senior government officials ?? ??
Good paraphrases Bad paraphrases ? Zhao et al , 2010 ( cont ?) ? Two techniques for producing high quality
Pivot based Methods ( cont ?) - paraphrases using the candidates ? Selection-based technique ? Select a best paraphrase from the 54 candidates based on
Minimum Bayes Risk ( MBR ) ? Decoding-based technique ? Train a MT model using the 54 candidates , and generates a h i h inew parap rase w t t ? Duboue and Chu-Carroll . 2006. Answering the Question You Wish They Had Asked : The Impact of Paraphrasing for Question Answering.
? St t l 2007 E l iti S Si il it f SMT i C t troppa e a . . xp o ng ource m ar y or us ng on ex - informed Features.
? Max . 2009. Subsentential Paraphrasing by Contextual Pivot Translation.
? Zhao et al 2010. Leveraging Multiple MT Engines for Paraphrase
Generation.
Outline ? Part 2
P h G ti ? arap rase enera on ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Paraphrasing for MT ? Other Applications ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work ? Applications : ? Translate unknown terms ( phrases ) ? Expand training data ? Rewrite input sentences ? Improve automatic evaluation ? Tune parameters
Translate Unknown Terms ( Phrases ) ? Basic idea : ? In SMT when encountering an unknown source term , ( phrase ), we can substitute a paraphrase for it and then proceed using the translation of that paraphrase f1 -> f1? f2 -> f2? paraphrase table f1 -> e1 f2 -> e2
SMT phrase table new phrase pair ? fi -> fj ? fm -> fm ? ? fj -> ej ? fn -> en unknown phrase fi fi -> ej ? Callison-Burch et al , 2006 ? Paraphrases are extracted from bilingual parallel corpora using the pivot approach ? New phrase pairs generated through paraphrasing are incorporated into the phrase table ? The paraphrase probability is added as a new feature function : paraphrase 2 1 1 1 2 ( | ) If phrase table entry ( , ) ( , ) is generated from ( , ) 1 Otherwise p f f e f h e f e f ??= ??? probability Translate Unknown Terms ( Phrases ) ( cont ?) ? Marton et al , 2009 ? Paraphrases are extracted from monolingual corpora , based on distributional hypothesis f
Unknown phrase
L1__R1
L2__R2 ? contexts paraphrase phrases f1 f2 ? ? Combine the new phrase pairs in the phrase table 1 2 1 1 2 ( , ) If phrase table entry ( , ) ( , ) is generated from ( , ) 1 Otherwise f fpsim DP DP e f h e f e f ??= ???
Context similarity ? Use not only paraphrases but also entailment rules Translate Unknown Terms ( Phrases ) ( cont ?) ? From WordNet ? Paraphrases : synonyms in WordNet ? Entailment rules : hypernyms in WordNet paraphrase generation paraphrase selection s generated para . list top-k para.
SMT t topn tran . translation selection
WordNet synonyms hypernyms context model language model ? Onishi et al , 2010 ? Using paraphrase lattices for SMT Translate Unknown Terms ( Phrases ) ( cont ?) ? Step1: Paraphrase the input sentence , and generate a paraphrase lattice ? Paraphrases are extracted from bilingual parallel corpora based on the pivot approach ? Step2: Give the paraphrase lattice as the input to the lattice decoder ? When the training data of SMT is small Translate Unknown Terms ( Phrases ) ( cont ?) ? Effective ? ? Problem of unknown terms is more serious when the training data is small ? When the training data of SMT is large ? Ineffective / ? Unknown terms can be covered by adding more training data
Expand Training Data ? Enlarge training data via paraphrasing the source-side sentences in the parallel corpus
Original training data e1 e2 ? en f1 f2 ? fn
English Foreign expanded training data e1 e2 ? f1 f2 ? f
English Foreign e1? e2? ? en ? paraphrasing en e1? e2? ? en ? n f1 f2 ? fn ? Paraphrase the sentence to be translated , so as to make it more translatable ? Yamamoto , 2002; Zhang and Yamamoto , 2002 ? Rulebased Paraphraser for simplifying the source sentences ? Shimohata et al , 2004 ? Shorten long sentences and sentences with redundant information in a speech translation system
Improve Automatic Evaluation ? Automatic evaluation of MT ? Based on counting the overlaps between the references and machine outputs ? E.g ., BLEU , NIST ? ? Only computing the surface similarity is limited ? A meaning may be expressed in a way that is not included in the references ? Human references are expensive to produce ? Solution : paraphrase the references so as to include as many correct expressions as possible ! ? Kauchak and Barzilay , 2006 ? Find a paraphrase of the reference that is closer in wording to the system output ? Extract candidates from WordNet synonyms It is hard to believe that such tremendous changes have taken place for those people and lands that I have never stopped missing while living abroad.
For someone born here but has been sentimentally attached to a foreign country far
Correct Wrong
Reference
System output ? Filter the invalid substitution given the context ? Binary classification ? Features : context ngrams and local collocations from home , it is difficult to believe this kind of changes.
Improve Automatic Evaluation ( cont ?) ? Zhou et al , 2006 ? ParaEval : Compute the similarity of reference and system output using paraphrases ? Paraphrases are learned from bilingual parallel corpora with a pivot approach ? Two-tier matching strategy for SMT evaluation ? First tier : paraphrase match ? Second tier : unigram match for words not matched by paraphrases ? Madnani et al 2007 ? Similar to the studies using paraphrases to improve automatic evaluation of MT ? Parameter tuning in SMT also needs references ? Parameter estimation of SMT : ? optimize BLEU on a development set ? Expand the references automatically via paraphrasing ? P h tiarap rase genera on ? Paraphrase resources are acquired based on a pivot approach ? Recast paraphrase generation as a monolingual MT problem and decode with a typical SMT decoder
References ? Translate unknown terms ( phrases ) ? Callison-Burch et al 2006. Improved Statistical Machine Translation
Using Paraphrases.
? Marton et al 2009. Improved Statistical Machine Translation Using
Monolingually-Derived Paraphrases.
? Mirkin et al 2009. Source-Language Entailment Modeling for
Translating Unknown Terms.
? Onishi et al 2010. Paraphrase Lattice for Statistical Machine
Translation.
? Expand training data ? Nakov . 2008. Improved Statistical Machine Translation Using
Monolingual Paraphrases.
? Bond et al 2008. Improving Statistical Machine Translation by
Paraphrasing the Training Data.
73
References ( cont ?) ? Rewrite input sentences ? Yamamoto . 2002. Machine Translation by Interaction between
Paraphraser and Transfer.
? Zhang and Yamamoto . 2002. Paraphrasing of Chinese Utterances.
? Shimohata et al 2004. Building a Paraphrase Corpus for Speech
Translation.
? Improve automatic evaluation ? Kauchak and Barzilay . 2006. Paraphrasing for Automatic Evaluation.
? Zhou et al 2006. Re-evaluating Machine Translation Results with
P h S tarap rase uppor .
? Tune parameters ? Madnani et al 2007. Using Paraphrases for Parameter Tuning in
Statistical Machine Translation.
Outline ? Part 2
P h G ti ? arap rase enera on ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Paraphrasing for MT ? Other Applications ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work ? Goal : ? Alleviate the problem of word mismatch between questions and answers ? Two directions : ? Paraphrase questions ? Rewrite a question into a group of paraphrases , so as to improve the coverage in answer extraction ? Paraphrase answer extraction patterns ? Generate answer extraction patterns as many as possible
Paraphrasing for QA ? Ravichandran and Hovy , 2002.
?Mining paraphrase patterns from the web ? Using handcrafted seeds ( e.g ., ( Mozart , 1756) for BIRTHDAY ) ? Mining patterns containing the seeds
Question taxonomy
BIRTHDAY 1.00 < NAME > ( < ANSWER > - ) 0.85 < NAME > was born on < ANSWER >, 0.60 < NAME > was born in < ANSWER > scores Paraphrase patterns 0.59 < NAME > was born < ANSWER > 0.53 < ANSWER > < NAME > was born 0.50 ? < NAME > ( < ANSWER > 0.36 < NAME > ( < ANSWER > -
Given seed ( Mozart , 1756) ? Improve automatic evaluation of summaries ? Zhou et al2006 ., ? Similar to the automatic evaluation of MT ? Measure the similarity between references and system outputs using paraphrase match as well as exact match ? Improve sentence clustering ? Barzilay et al , 1999 ? Considering paraphrase match when Computing sentence similarity
Other Applications ? Paraphrasing for NLG ? Text revision and transformation ? Dras , 1997 ? Text transformation in order to meet external constraints , such as length and readability ? Paraphrasing for IR ? Query rewriting ? Z k d R k tti 2002u erman an as u . .
?Paraphrase user queries with WordNet synonyms ? Writing style transformation ? Kaji et al2004 ., ? Paraphrasing predicates from written language to spoken language ? Text simplification ? Carroll et al 1999 ? Simplifying texts for language-impaired readers or nonnative kspea ers ? Identify plagiarism ? Uzuner et al 2005 ? Using paraphrases to better identify plagiarism
References ? Paraphrasing for QA ? Ravichandran and Hovy . 2002. Learning Surface Text Patterns for a
Question Answering System.
? Duboue and Chu-Carroll . 2006. Answering the Question You Wish They Had Asked : The Impact of Paraphrasing for Question Answering.
? Paraphrasing for summarization ? Barzilay et al 1999. Information Fusion in the Context of Multi-
Document Summarization.
? Zhou et al 2006. ParaEval : Using Paraphrases to Evaluate Summaries
Automatically.
? Paraphrasing for NLG ? Dras . 1997. Reluctant Paraphrase : Textual Restructuring under an
Optimisation Model.
77
References ( cont ?) ? Paraphrasing for IR ? Zukerman and Raskutti . 2002. Lexical Query Paraphrasing for
Document Retrieval.
? Writing style transformation ? Kaji et al 2004. Paraphrasing Predicates from Written Language to
Spoken Language Using the Web.
? Text simplification ? Carroll et al 1999. Simplifying Text for Language-Impaired Readers.
? Identify plagiarism ? Uzuner et al 2005. Using Syntactic Information to Identify Plagiarism.
Outline ? Part 2
P h G ti ? arap rase enera on ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Paraphrasing for MT ? Other Applications ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work ? No widely accepted evaluation criteria / ? Problem 1: Researchers define various evaluation-methods in their studies ? Difficult to make a direct comparison among different works ? Problem-2: Human evaluation is commonly used ? Human evaluation is rather subjective ? Difficult to replicate Evaluation of Paraphrase Identification ? Human evaluation ? A tomatic e al ationu v u ? Brockett and Dolan , 2005 ? Alignment Error Rate ( AER ) ? AER is indicative of how far the corpus is from providing a solution under a standard SMT tool | | | | A P A S ? + ? | |
AER
A S = +
Automatic alignment
POSSIBLE + SURE alignment in the gold standard
SURE alignment in the gold standard ? Automatic evaluation ? McCarthy and Navigli 2007 , ? Construction of gold standard data ? Five annotators , who are native speakers ? For each test word , each annotator provides up to three substitutes ? Evaluation : ? Precision and Recall
Evaluation of Paraphrase Phrases ? Human evaluation ? Ask judges : ? Whether paraphrases were approximately conceptual equivalent ? Whether the paraphrases were roughly interchangeable given the genre ? Whether the substitutions preserved the meaning and remained grammatical ? ?? ? The criteria above are vaguely defined and not easy to reproduce ? Automatic evaluation ? Callison Burch et al2008- ., ? Data : ? Parallel sentences , in which paraphrases are annotated through manual alignment ( gold standard ) ? Two fashions of evaluation ? Calculate how well an automatic paraphrasing technique can align the paraphrases in a sentence pair ? Calculate the lowerbound precision and relative recall of a paraphrasing technique ( which extracts paraphrases from other resources)
Evaluation of Paraphrase
Phrases ( cont ?) ? Alignment precision and recall ? Lower-bound precision and relative recall
Manual alignment 1 2 1 2
Pr 1 2 1 2, 1 2, | ( , , ) ( , , ) | | ( , , ) | ec e e C e e C
Align
PP e e S PP e e M
PP e e S < >? < >? = ?? ?
System alignment
R 1 ,
Pr | ( , ) ( , , ) | | ( , ) |
MET EF s G C p s MET
LB ecision para p s para p s G para p s < >? ? ? = ?? ?
Paraphrase acquired with a method MET
Paraphrase in the gold standard set 1 2 1 2
Re 1 2 1 2, 1 2, | ( , , ) ( , , ) | | ( , , ) | call e e C e e C
Align
PP e e S PP e e M
PP e e M < >? < >? = ?? ? R 1, 1
Re Re | ( , ) ( , , ) | | ( , , ) |
MET EF s G C p s REF l call para p s para p s G para p s G < >? ? ? = ?? ? ? Human evaluation ? Paraphrase patterns cannot be evaluated without context information ? E.g ., X acquire Y , X buy Y ? Correct or not ? It depends on what fill in slots X and Y ? Common view : ? A pair of paraphrase patterns is considered correct if the judge could think of contexts under which it holds ? Problem : ? Different judges may think of totally distinct contexts , thus the agreement among the judges could be low Evaluation of Paraphrase Patterns ( cont ?) ? Szpektor et al , 2007 ? Evaluate paraphrase patterns ( and entailment rules ) with instances rather than directly evaluate patterns ? Judges are presented not only with a pair of patterns , but also a sample of sentences that match its lefthand side ? Judges assess whether two patterns are paraphrases under each specific example ? A pair of paraphrase patterns is considered as correct only when the percentage of correct examples is high enough ? Human evaluation ? Similar to human evaluation of SMT ? Criteria ( Zhao et al , 2009, 2010) ? Adequacy : If the meaning of the source sentence is preserved in the paraphrase ? ? Fluency : if the generated paraphrase is wellformed ? ? Usability ( Zhao et al , 2009): If the paraphrase meets the requirement of the given application ? ? Paraphrase rate ( Zhao et al , 2009): How different the paraphrase is from the source sentence ? Evaluation of Paraphrase Generation ( cont ?) ? Three scales for adequacy , fluency , and usability ( Zhao et al , 2009)
Adequacy 1 The meaning is evidently changed.
2 The meaning is generally preserved.
3 The meaning is completely preserved.
Fluency 1 The paraphrase t is incomprehensible.
2 t is comprehensible.
3 t is a flawless sentence.
1 t is opposite to the application p rpose ? Five scales for adequacy and fluency ( Zhao et al , 2010)
Usability u .
2 t does not achieve the application.
3 t achieves the application.
83
Evaluation of Paraphrase Generation ( cont ?) ? Paraphrase rate ( Zhao et al , 2010): ? PR 1: based on word overlap rate-?PR-2: based on edit distance ( , ) 1( ) 1 ( )
OL S T
PR T
L S = ? Word overlap rate
Number of words in the source sen.
( , ) 2( ) ( )
ED S T
PR T
L S = Edit distance
Evaluation of Paraphrase Generation ( cont ?) ? Two questions : ? Q1: Why not adopt automatic MT methods here e g , . .,
BLEU , NIST , TER ?? ? Reason-1: It is much more difficult to construct human references in paraphrase generation than MT ? Reason-2: Paraphrases that change less will get larger scores in criteria like BLEU ? Q2: How to combine the evaluation of paraphrase quality and paraphrase rate ? ? They seem to be incompatible ? Evaluate the role of a paraphrasing module within a certain application system ? E.g ., in MT , examine whether a paraphrasing module helps to alleviate the unknown term problem ? E.g ., in QA , whether paraphrasing the answer patterns can improve the coverage of answer extraction ? Problems : ? Whether the result can hold for a different application ? ? How to evaluate the role of the paraphrase module independently ( not influenced by other modules)?
References ? Brockett and Dolan . 2005. Support Vector Machines for Paraphrase
Identification.
? S kt t l 2007 I t b d E l ti f E t il t R lzpe or e a . . ns ance - ase va ua on o n a men u e
Acquisition.
? McCarthy and Navigli . 2007. SemEval2007 Task 10: English Lexical
Substitution Task.
? Callison-Burch et al 2008. ParaMetric : An Automatic Evaluation Metric for
Paraphrasing.
? Zhao et al 2009. Application-driven Statistical Paraphrase Generation.
? Zhao et al 2010. Leveraging Multiple MT Engines for Paraphrase
Generation.
85
Outline ? Part 2
P h G ti ? arap rase enera on ? Applications of Paraphrases ? Paraphrasing for MT ? Other Applications ? Evaluation of Paraphrases ? Conclusions and Future work
Conclusions and Future Work ? Conclusions ? Paraphrasing is important in various research areas ? Many different kinds of corpora and data resources have been investigated for paraphrase extraction ? Paraphrase generation is a task similar to MT , but not the same ? Paraphrase evaluation is problematic . Automatic evaluation methods are in need ? Future work ? Paraphrase extraction ? Improve the quality of the extracted paraphrases ? Paraphrase generation ? Application-driven paraphrase generation ? Paraphrase application ? Apply paraphrasing techniques in commercial NLP systems , rather than merely in labs ? Paraphrase evaluation ? Come up with evaluation methods that can be widely accepted
Thanks!
QA
