Coling 2010: Poster Volume , pages 36?44,
Beijing , August 2010
Robust Sentiment Detection on Twitter from Biased and Noisy Data
Luciano Barbosa
AT&T Labs - Research
lbarbosa@research.att.com
Junlan Feng
AT&T Labs - Research
junlan@research.att.com
Abstract
In this paper , we propose an approach to automatically detect sentiments on Twitter messages ( tweets ) that explores some characteristics of how tweets are written and metainformation of the words that compose these messages . Moreover , we leverage sources of noisy labels as our training data . These noisy labels were provided by a few sentiment detection websites over twitter data . In our experiments , we show that since our features are able to capture a more abstract representation of tweets , our solution is more effective than previous ones and also more robust regarding biased and noisy data , which is the kind of data provided by these sources.
1 Introduction
Twitter is one of the most popular social network websites and has been growing at a very fast pace.
The number of Twitter users reached an estimated 75 million by the end of 2009, up from approximately 5 million in the previous year . Through the twitter platform , users share either information or opinions about personalities , politicians , products , companies , events ( Prentice and Huffman , 2008) etc . This has been attracting the attention of different communities interested in analyzing its content.
Sentiment detection of tweets is one of the basic analysis utility functions needed by various applications over twitter data . Many systems and approaches have been implemented to automatically detect sentiment on texts ( e.g ., news articles , Web reviews and Web blogs ) ( Pang et al , 2002; Pang and Lee , 2004; Wiebe and Riloff , 2005; Glance et al , 2005; Wilson et al , 2005). Most of these approaches use the raw word representation ( ngrams ) as features to build a model for sentiment detection and perform this task over large pieces of texts . However , the main limitation of using these techniques for the Twitter context is messages posted on Twitter , socalled tweets , are very short . The maximum size of a tweet is 140 characters.
In this paper , we propose a 2-step sentiment analysis classification method for Twitter , which first classifies messages as subjective and objective , and further distinguishes the subjective tweets as positive or negative . To reduce the labeling effort in creating these classifiers , instead of using manually annotated data to compose the training data , as regular supervised learning approaches , we leverage sources of noisy labels as our training data . These noisy labels were provided by a few sentiment detection websites over twitter data . To better utilize these sources , we verify the potential value of using and combining them , providing an analysis of the provided labels , examine different strategies of combining these sources in order to obtain the best outcome ; and , propose a more robust feature set that captures a more abstract representation of tweets , composed by metainformation associated to words and specific characteristics of how tweets are written . By using it , we aim to handle better : the problem of lack of information on tweets , helping on the generalization process of the classification algorithms ; and the noisy and biased labels provided by those websites.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows . In Section 2, we provide some context about messages on Twitter and about the websites used as label sources . We introduce the features used in the sentiment detection and also provide a deep analysis of the labels generated by those sources in Section 3. We examine different strategies of experimental evaluation in Section 4. Finally , we discuss previous works related to ours in Section 5 and conclude in Section 6, where we outline directions and future work.
2 Preliminaries
In this section , we give some context about Twitter messages and the sources used for our datadriven approach.
Tweets . The Twitter messages are called tweets.
There are some particular features that can be used to compose a tweet ( Figure 1 illustrates an example ): ? RT ? is an acronym for retweet , which means the tweet was forwarded from a previous post ; ?@ twUser ? represents that this message is a reply to the user ? twUser ?; ?# obama ? is a tag provided by the user for this message , socalled hashtag ; and ? http://bit.ly/9K4n9p ? is a link to some external source . Tweets are limited to 140 characters . Due to this lack of information in terms of words present in a tweet , we explore some of the tweet features listed above to boost the sentiment detection , as we will show in detail in Section 3.
Data Sources . We collected data from 3 different websites that provide almost realtime sentiment detection for tweets : Twendz , Twitter Sentiment and TweetFeel . To collect data , we issued a query containing a common stopword ? of ?, as we are interested in collecting generic data , and retrieved tweets from these sites for three weeks , archiving the returned tweets along with their sentiment labels . Table 1 shows more details about these sources . Two of the websites provide 3-class detection : positive , negative and neutral and one of them just 2-class detection . One thing to note is our crawling process obtained a very different number of tweets from each website . This might be a result of differences among their sampling processes of Twitter stream or some kind of filtering process to output . For instance , a site may only present the tweets it has more confidence about their sentiment . In Section 3, we present a deep analysis of the data provided by these sources , showing if they are useful to build a sentiment classification.
RT @ twUser : Obama is the first U.S . president not to have seen a new state added in his lifetime.
http://bit.ly/9K4n9p # obama
Figure 1: Example of a tweet.
3 Twitter Sentiment Detection
Our goal is to categorize a tweet into one of the three sentiment categories : positive , neutral or negative . Similar to ( Pang and Lee , 2004; Wilson et al , 2005), we implement a 2-step sentiment detection framework . The first step targets on distinguishing subjective tweets from non-subjective tweets ( subjectivity detection ). The second one further classifies the subjective tweets into positive and negative , namely , the polarity detection.
Both classifiers perform prediction using an abstract representation of the sentences as features , as we show later in this section.
3.1 Features
A variety of features have been exploited on the problem of sentiment detection ( Pang and Lee , 2004; Pang et al , 2002; Wiebe et al , 1999; Wiebe and Riloff , 2005; Riloff et al , 2006) including unigrams , bigrams , part-of-speech tags etc . A natural choice would be to use the raw word representation ( ngrams ) as features , since they obtained good results in previous works ( Pang and Lee , 2004; Pang et al , 2002) that deal with large texts.
However , as we want to perform sentiment detection on very short messages ( tweets ), this strategy might not be effective , as shown in our experiments . In this context , we are motivated to develop an abstract representation of tweets . We propose the use of two sets of features : metainformation about the words on tweets and characteristics of how tweets are written.
Meta-features . Given a word in a tweet , we map it to its part-of-speech using a part-of-speech dictionary1. Previous approaches ( Wiebe and Riloff , 2005; Riloff et al , 2003) have shown that the effectiveness of using POS tags for this task . The intuition is certain POS tags are good indicators for sentiment tagging . For example , opinion messages are more likely containing adjec-1The pos dictionary we used in this paper is available at : http://wordlist.sourceforge.net/pos-readme.
37
Data sources URL # Tweets Sentiments
Twendz http://twendz.waggeneredstrom.com / 254081 pos/neg/neutral Twitter Sentiment http://twittersentiment.appspot.com / 79696 pos/neg/neutral TweetFeel http://www.tweetfeel.com / 13122 pos/neg Table 1: Information about the 3 data sources.
tives or interjections . In addition to POS tags , we map the word to its prior subjectivity ( weak and strong subjectivity ), also used by ( Wiebe and Riloff , 2005), and polarity ( positive , negative and neutral ). The prior polarity is switched from positive to negative or viceversa when a negative expression ( as , e.g ., ? don?t ?, ? never ?) precedes the word . We obtained the prior subjectivity and polarity information from subjectivity lexicon of about 8,000 words used in ( Riloff and Wiebe , 2003)2. Although this is a very comprehensive list , slang and specific Web vocabulary are not present on it , e.g ., words as ? yummy ? or ? ftw?.
For this reason , we collected popular words used on online discussions from many online sources and added them to this list.
Tweet Syntax Features . We exploited the syntax of the tweets to compose our features . They are : retweet ; hashtag ; reply ; link , if the tweet contains a link ; punctuation ( exclamation and questions marks ); emoticons ( textual expression representing facial expressions ); and upper cases ( the number of words that starts with upper case in the tweet).
The frequency of each feature in a tweet is divided by the number of the words in the tweet.
3.2 Subjectivity Classifier
As we mentioned before , the first step in our tweet sentiment detection is to predict the subjectivity of a given tweet . We decided to create a single classifier by combining the objectivity sentences from Twendz and Twitter Sentiment ( objectivity class ) and the subjectivity sentences from all 3 sources.
As we do not know the quality of the labels provided by these sources , we perform a cleaning process over this data to assure some reasonable quality . These are the steps : 1. Disagreement removal : we remove the 2The subjectivity lexicon is available at http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa / tweets that are disagreed between the data sources in terms of subjectivity ; 2. Same user?s messages : we observed that the users with the highest number of messages in our dataset are usually those ones that post some objective messages , for example , advertising some product or posting some job recruiting information . For this reason , we allowed in the training data only one message from the same user . As we show later , this boosts the classification performance , mainly because it removes tweets labeled as subjective by the data sources but are in fact objective ; 3. Top opinion words : to clean the objective training set , we remove from this set tweets that contain the topn opinion words in the subjectivity training set , e.g ., words as cool , suck , awesome etc.
As we show in Section 4, this process is in fact able to remove certain noisy in the training data , leading to a better performing subjectivity classifier.
To illustrate which of the proposed features are more effective for this task , the top5 features in terms of information gain , based on our training data , are : positive polarity , link , strong subjective , upper case and verbs . Three of them are metainformation ( positive polarity , strong subjective and verbs ) and the other two are tweet syntax features ( link and upper case ). Here is a typical example of a objective tweet in which the user pointed an external link and used many upper case words : ? Starbucks Expands Pay-By-IPhone Pilot to 1,000 Stores?Starbucks customers with Apple iPhones or iPod touches can .. http://oohja.com/x9UbC?.
38 3.3 Polarity Classifier
The second step of our sentiment detection approach is polarity classification , i.e ., predicting positive or negative sentiment on subjective tweets . In this section , first we analyze the quality of the polarity labels provided by the three sources , and whether their combination has the potential to bring improvement . Second , we present some modifications in the proposed features that are more suitable for this task.
3.3.1 Analysis of the Data Sources
The 3 data sources used in this work provide some kind of polarity labels ( see Table 1). Two questions we investigate regarding these sources are : (1) how useful are these polarity labels ? and (2) does combining them bring improvement in accuracy ? We take the following aspects into consideration : ? Labeler quality : if the labelers have low quality , combine them might not bring much improvement ( Sheng et al , 2008). In our case , each source is treated as a labeler ; ? Number of labels provided by the labelers : if the labels are informative , i.e ., the probability of them being correct is higher than 0.5, the more the number of labels , the higher is the performance of a classifier built from them ( Sheng et al , 2008); ? Labeler bias : the labeled data provided by the labelers might be only a subset of the real data distribution . For instance , labelers might be interested in only providing labels that they are more confident about ; ? Different labeler bias : if labelers make similar mistakes , the combination of them might not bring much improvement.
We provide an empirical analysis of these datasets to address these points . First , we measure the polarity detection quality of a source by calculating the probability p of a label from this source being correct . We use the data manually labeled for assessing the classifiers ? performance ( testing data , see Section 4) to obtain the correct labels of
Data sources Quality Entropy
Twendz 0.77 8.3
TwitterSentiment 0.82 7.9
TweetFeel 0.89 7.5
Table 2: Quality of the labels and entropy of the tweets provided by each data source for the polarity detection.
a data sample . Table 2 shows their values . We can conclude from these numbers that the 3 sources provide a reasonable quality data . This means that combining them might bring some improvement to the polarity detection instead of , for instance , using one of them in isolation . An aspect that is overlooked by quality is the bias of the data . For instance , by examining the data from TwitterFeel , we found out that only 4 positive words (? awe-some?,?rock?,?love ? and ? beat ?) cover 95% of their positive examples and only 6 negative words (? hate?,?suck?,?wtf?,?piss?,?stupid ? and ? fail ?) cover 96% of their negative set . Clearly , the data provided by this source is biased towards these words . This is probably the reason why this website outputs such fewer number of tweets compared to the other websites ( see Table 1) as well as why its data has the smallest entropy among the sources ( see Table 2).
The quality of the data and its individual bias have certainly impact in the combination of labels.
However , there is other important aspect that one needs to consider : different bias between the labelers . For instance , if labelers a and b make similar decisions , we expect that combining their labels would not bring much improvement . Therefore , the diversity of labelers is a key element in combining them ( Polikar , 2006). One way to measure this is by calculating the agreement between the labels produced by the labelers . We use the kappa coefficient ( Cohen , 1960) to measure the degree of agreement between two sources . Table 3 presents the coefficients for each par of data source . All the coefficients are between 0.4 and 0.6, which represents a moderate agreement between the labelers ( Landis and Koch , 1977). This means that in fact the sources provide different bias regarding polarity detection.
39
Data sources Kappa
Twendz/TwitterSentiment 0.58
TwitterSentiment/TweetFeel 0.58
Twendz/TweetFeel 0.44
Table 3: Kappa coefficient between pairs of sources.
From this analysis we can conclude that combining the labels provided by the 3 sources can improve the performance of the polarity detection instead of using one of them in isolation because they provide diverse labels ( moderate kappa agreement ) of reasonable quality , although there is some issues related to bias of the labels provided by them . In our experimental evaluation in Section 4, we present results obtained by different strategies of combining these sources that confirm these findings.
3.3.2 Polarity Features
The features used in the polarity detection are the same ones used in the subjectivity detection.
However , as one would expect the set of the most discriminative features is different between the two tasks . For subjectivity detection , the top5 features in terms of information gain , based on the training data , are : negative polarity , positive polarity , verbs , good emoticons and upper case.
For this task , the metainformation of the words ( negative polarity , positive polarity and verbs ) is more important than specific features from Twitter ( good emoticons and upper case ), whereas for the subjectivity detection , tweet syntax features have a higher relevance.
This analysis show that prior polarity is very important for this task . However , one limitation of using it from a generic list is its values might not hold for some specific scenario . For instance , the polarity of the word ? spot ? is positive according to this list . However , looking at our training data almost half of the occurrences of this word appears in the positive set and the other half in the negative set . Thus , it is not correct to assume that prior polarity of ? spot ? is 1 for this particular data . This example illustrates our strategy to weight the prior polarities : for each word w with prior polarity defined by the list , we calculate the prior polarity of w , pol(w ), based on the distribution of w in the positive and negative sets . Thus , polpos(w ) = count(w , pos)/count(w ) and polneg(w ) = 1? polpos(w ). We assume the polarity of a word is associated with the polarity of the sentence , which seems to be reasonable since we are dealing with very short messages.
Although simple , this strategy is able to improve the polarity detection , as we show in Section 4.
4 Experiments
We have performed an extensive performance evaluation of our solution for twitter sentiment detection . Besides analyzing its overall performance , our goals included : examining different strategies to combine the labels provided by the sources ; comparing our approach to previous ones in this area ; and evaluating how robust our solution is to the noisy and biased data described in
Section 3.
4.1 Experimental Setup
Data Sets . For the subjectivity detection , after the cleansing processing ( see Section 3), the training data contains about 200,000 tweets ( roughly 100,000 tweets were labeled by the sources as subjective ones and 100,000 objective ones ), and for polarity detection , 71046 positive and 79628 negative tweets . For test data , we manually labeled 1,000 tweets as positive , negative and neutral . We also built a development set (1,000 tweets ) to tune the parameters of the classification algorithms.
Approaches . For both tasks , subjectivity and polarity detection , we compared our approach with previous ones reported in the literature . Detailed explanation about them are as follows : ? ReviewSA : this is the approach proposed by Pang and Lee ( Pang and Lee , 2004) for sentiment analysis in regular online reviews . It performs the subjectivity detection on a sentence-level relying on the proximity between sentences to detect subjectivity . The set of sentences predicted as subjective is then classified as negative or positive in terms of polarity using the unigrams that mentation provided by LingPipe ( LingPipe , 2008); ? Unigrams : Pang et al ( Pang et al , 2002) showed unigrams are effective for sentiment detection in regular reviews . Based on that , we built unigram-based classifiers for the subjectivity and polarity detections over the training data . Another approach that uses unigrams is the one used by TwitterSentiment website . For polarity detection , they select the positive examples for the training data from the tweets containing good emoticons and negative examples from tweets containing bad emoticons . ( Go et al , 2009). We built a polarity classifier using this approach ( Unigrams-TS).
? TwitterSA : TwitterSA exploits the features described in Section 3 in this paper . For the subjectivity detection , we trained a classifier from the two available sources , using the cleaning process described in Section 3 to remove noise in the training data , TwitterSA(cleaning ), and other classifier trained from the original data , TwitterSA(no-cleaning ). For the polarity detection task , we built a few classifiers to compare their performances : TwitterSA(single ) and Twit-terSA(weights ) are two classifiers we trained using combined data from the 3 sources.
The only difference is TwitterSA(weights ) uses the modification of weighting the prior polarity of the words based on the training data . TwitterSA(voting ) and Twit-terSA(maxconf ) combine classification outputs from 3 classifiers respectively trained from each source . TwitterSA(voting ) uses majority voting to combine them and Twit-terSA(maxconf ) picks the one with maximum confidence score.
We use Weka ( Witten and Frank , 2005) to create the classifiers . We tried different learning algorithms available on Weka and SVM obtained the best results for Unigrams and TwitterSA . Experimental results reported in this section are obtained using SVM.
4.2 Subjectivity Detection Evaluation
Table 4 shows the error rates obtained by the different subjectivity detection approaches . TwitterSA achieved lower error rate than both Unigrams and ReviewSA . As a result , these numbers confirm that features inferred from metainformation of words and specific syntax features from tweets are better indicators of the subjectivity than unigrams . Another advantage of our approach is since it uses only 20 features , the training and test times are much faster than using thousands of features like Unigrams . One of the reasons why TwitterSA obtained such a good performance was the process of data cleansing ( see Section 3). The label quality provided by the sources for this task was very poor : 0.66 for Twendz and 0.68 for TwitterSentiment . By cleaning the data , the error decreased from 19.9, TwitterSA(no-cleaning ), to 18.1, TwitterSA(cleaning ). Regarding ReviewSA , its lower performance is expected since tweets are composed by single sentences and ReviewSA relies on the proximity between sentences to perform subjectivity detection.
We also investigated the influence of the size of training data on classification performance . Figure 2 plots the error rates obtained by TwitterSA and Unigrams versus the number of training examples . The curve corresponding to TwitterSA showed that it achieved good performances even with a small training data set , and kept almost constant as more examples were added to the training data , whereas for Unigrams the error rate decreased . For instance , with only 2,000 tweets as training data , TwitterSA obtained 20% of error rate whereas Unigrams 34.5%. These numbers show that our generic representation of tweets produces models that are able to generalize even with a few examples.
4.3 Polarity Detection Evaluation
We provide the results for polarity detection in Table 5. The best performance was obtained by TwitterSA(maxconf ), which combines results of the 3 classifiers , respectively trained from each source , by taking the output by the most confident classifier , as the final prediction . TwitterSA(maxconf ) was followed by Twit-terSA(weights ) and TwitterSA(single ), both cre-that computing the prior polarity of the words based on the training data TwitterSA(weights ) brings some improvement for this task . Twit-terSA(voting ) obtained the highest error rate among the TwitterSA approaches . This implies that , in our scenario , the best way of combining the merits of the individual classifiers is by using a confidence score approach.
Unigrams also achieved comparable performances . However , when reducing the size of the training data , the performance gap between TwitterSA and Unigrams is much wider . Figure 3 shows the error rate of both approaches3 in function of the training size . Similar to subjectivity detection , the training size does not have much influence in the error rate for TwitterSA . However for Unigrams , it decreased significantly as the training size increased . For instance , for a training size with 2,000 tweets , the error rate for Unigrams was 46% versus 23.8% for our approach . As for subjectivity detection , this occurs because our features are in fact able to capture a more general representation of the tweets.
Another advantage of TwitterSA over Unigrams is that it produces more robust models . To illustrate this , we present the error rates of Unigrams and TwitterSA where the training data is composed by data from each source in isolation.
For the TweetFeel website , where data is very biased ( see Section 3), Unigrams obtained an error rate of 44.5% whereas over a sample of the same size of the combined training data ( Figure 3), it obtained an error rate of around 30%. Our approach also performed worse over this data than the general one , but still had a reasonable error rate , 25.1%. Regarding the Twendz website , which is the noisiest one ( Section 3), Unigrams also obtained a poor performance comparing it against its performance over a sample of the general data with a same size ( see Table 5 and Figure 3). Our approach , on the other hand , was not much influenced by the noise (22.9% on noisy data and around 20% on the sample of same size of the general data ). Finally , since the data quality provided by TwitterSentiment is better than the 3For this experiment , we used the TwitterSA(single ) configuration.
Approach Error rate
TwitterSA(cleaning ) 18.1
TwitterSA(no-cleaning ) 19.9
Unigrams 27.6
ReviewSA 32
Table 4: Results for subjectivity detection.
Approach Error rate
TwitterSA(maxconf ) 18.7
TwitterSA(weights ) 19.4
TwitterSA(single ) 20
TwitterSA(voting ) 22.6
Unigrams 20.9
ReviewSA 21.7
Unigrams-TS 24.3
Table 5: Results for polarity detection.
Site Training Size TwitterSA Unigrams
TweetFeel 13120 25.1 44.5
Twendz 78025 22.9 32.3
TwitterSentiment 59578 22 23.4
Table 6: Training data size for each source and error rates obtained by classifiers built from them.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000 140000 160000 180000 200000Error Rate Training Size UnigramsTwitterSA Figure 2: Influence of the training data size in the error rate of subjectivity detection using Unigrams and TwitterSA.
previous sources ( Table 2), there was not much impact over both classifiers created from it.
From this analysis over real data , we can conclude that our approach produces (1) an effective polarity classifier even when only a small number of training data is available ; (2) a robust model to bias and noise in the training data ; and (3) combining data sources with such distinct characteristics , as our data analysis in Section 3 pointed out , is effective.
42 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000 140000 160000Error Rate Training Size UnigramsTwitterSA Figure 3: Influence of the training data size in the error rate of polarity detection using Unigrams and TwitterSA.
5 Related Work
There is a rich literature in the area of sentiment detection ( see e.g ., ( Pang et al , 2002; Pang and Lee , 2004; Wiebe and Riloff , 2005; Go et al , 2009; Glance et al , 2005). Most of these approaches try to perform this task on large texts , as e.g ., newspaper articles and movie reviews . Another common characteristic of some of them is the use of ngrams as features to create their models . For instance , Pang and Lee ( Pang and Lee , 2004) explores the fact that sentences close in a text might share the same subjectivity to create a better subjectivity detector and , similar to ( Pang et al ., 2002), uses unigrams as features for the polarity detection . However , these approaches do not obtain a good performance on detecting sentiment on tweets , as we showed in Section 4, mainly because tweets are very short messages . In addition to that , since they use a raw word representation , they are more sensible to bias and noise , and need a much higher number of examples in the training data than our approach to obtain a reasonable performance.
The Web sources used in this paper and some other websites provide sentiment detection for tweets . A great limitation to evaluate them is they do not make available how their classification was built . One exception is TwitterSentiment ( Go et al ., 2009), for instance , which considers tweets with good emoticons as positive examples and tweets with bad emoticons as negative examples for the training data , and builds a classifier using unigrams and bigrams as features . We showed in Section 4 that our approach works better than theirs for this problem , obtaining lower error rates.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented an effective and robust sentiment detection approach for Twitter messages , which uses biased and noisy labels as input to build its models . This performance is due to the fact that : (1) our approach creates a more abstract representation of these messages , instead of using a raw word representation of them as some previous approaches ; and (2) although noisy and biased , the data sources provide labels of reasonable quality and , since they have different bias , combining them also brought some benefits.
The main limitation of our approach is the cases of sentences that contain antagonistic sentiments.
As future work , we want to perform a more fine grained analysis of sentences in order to identify its main focus and then based the sentiment classification on it.
References
Cohen , J . 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales . Educational and psychological measurement , 20(1):37.
Glance , N ., M . Hurst , K . Nigam , M . Siegler , R . Stockton , and T . Tomokiyo . 2005. Deriving marketing intelligence from online discussion . In Proceedings of the eleventh ACM SIGKDD , pages 419?428.
ACM.
Go , A ., R . Bhayani , and L . Huang . 2009. Twitter sentiment classification using distant supervision . Technical report , Stanford Digital Library
Technologies Project.
Landis , J.R . and G.G . Koch . 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data . Biometrics , pages 159?174.
LingPipe . 2008. LingPipe 3.9.1.
http://alias-i.com/lingpipe.
Pang , B . and L . Lee . 2004. A sentimental education : Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization based on minimum cuts . In Proceedings of the ACL , volume 2004.
43
Pang , B ., L . Lee , and S . Vaithyanathan . 2002. Thumbs up ?: sentiment classification using machine learning techniques . In Proceedings of the ACL , pages 79?86. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Polikar , R . 2006. Ensemble based systems in decision making . IEEE Circuits and systems magazine , 6(3):21?45.
Prentice , S . and E . Huffman . 2008. Social Medias New Role In Emergency Management . Idaho National Laboratory , pages 1?5.
Riloff , E . and J . Wiebe . 2003. Learning extraction patterns for subjective expressions . In Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 105?112.
Riloff , E ., J . Wiebe , and T . Wilson . 2003. Learning subjective nouns using extraction pattern bootstrapping . In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Natural Language Learning , pages 25?32.
Riloff , E ., S . Patwardhan , and J . Wiebe . 2006. Feature subsumption for opinion analysis . In Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 440?448. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sheng , V.S ., F . Provost , and P.G . Ipeirotis . 2008. Get another label ? Improving data quality and data mining using multiple , noisy labelers . In Proceeding of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , pages 614? 622. ACM.
Wiebe , J . and E . Riloff . 2005. Creating subjective and objective sentence classifiers from unannotated texts . Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing , pages 486?497.
Wiebe , J.M ., RF Brace , and T.P . O?Hara . 1999. Development and use of a goldstandard data set for subjectivity classifications . In Proceedings of the ACL , pages 246?253. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Wilson , T ., J . Wiebe , and P . Hoffmann . 2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis . In EMNLP , page 354. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Witten , Ian H . and Eibe Frank . 2005. Data Mining : Practical machine learning tools and techniques.
Morgan Kaufmann.
44
