Coling 2010: Demonstration Volume , pages 45?48,
Beijing , August 2010
E-HowNet and Automatic Construction of a Lexical Ontology
Wei-Te Chen , Su-Chu Lin , Shu-Ling Huang , You-Shan Chung , and Keh-Jiann Chen
Institute of Information Science , Academia Sinica
weitehchen@gmail.com,
{jess , yosieh , yschung , kchen}@iis.sinica.edu.tw
Abstract
In this paper , we propose a lexical senses representation system called E-HowNet , in which the lexical senses are defined by basic concepts . As a result , the meanings of expressions are more specific than those derived by using primitives . We also design an ontology to express the taxonomic relations between concepts and the attributes of concepts . To establish the taxonomic relations between word senses , we introduce a strategy that constructs the
E-HowNet ontology automatically . We then implement the lexical ontology as a Web application1 to demonstrate the taxonomy and the search functions for querying keyterms and E-HowNet expressions in the lexicon , which contains more than 88,000 lexical senses.
1 Introduction
E-HowNet , an evolution and extension of HowNet ( Dong & Dong , 2006), is an entity-relation representation model for lexical senses . Under the framework , word senses are defined by basic concepts as well as conceptual relations called attribute-values . The following is an example of lexical sense representation in E-HowNet.
(1) ?? ?| carefully choose ? is expressed ( or defined ) by the expression ?{ choose |? ?: manner={cautious|?}}?.
In the representation , the meaning of ???? is comprised of two primitive concepts , ? choose |? ?? and ? cautious |??, and the conceptual rela-1available at http://ckip.iis.sinica.edu.tw/?wtchen/taxonomy / tion between the primitives is explained by the semantic role ? manner ?. For further details , readers may refer to the E-HowNet technical report ( CKIP 2009).
With a well-established entity-relation model , semantic composition is applicable from the morphological level to the sentential level in E-HowNet . Semantic compositionality , together with syntactic information , contributes enormously to natural language understanding.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows . We describe the major features of E-HowNet in Section 2 and introduce the E-HowNet ontology in Section 3. Then , we present our online E-HowNet system in Section 4. Section 5 contains some concluding remarks.
To achieve the goal of semantic compositionality and to extend the advantage from HowNet , the following features are implemented in E-HowNet.
a ) Multilevel definitions and semantic decomposition : Word senses ( concepts ) can be defined ( expressed ) by primitives as well as by any well-defined concepts and conceptual relations . However , using only primitives to express word senses , as in HowNet , causes information degradation and important ontological relations between concepts may be missed.
b ) Uniform sense representation and semantic compositionality : To achieve semantic compositionality , it is necessary to encode the senses of both content words and function words in a uniform framework . HowNet performs well for defining content words , but it does not provide a well-form representational framework for expression the sense of function words , which indicate semantic relations . In contrast , E-HowNet of content/function words and the senses of sen-tences/phrases . For example , the passive sense of the preposition ?? by ? introduces an agent role ( relation ) and the conjunction ??? because ? links the relation of reason between two events.
The functional representation and semantic compositionality are illustrated by the following example : (2) Because of the rain , the clothes are all wet.
???????????
Table 1: The function representation and semantic compositionality for example sentence
Word POS E-HowNet
Definition ?? Cb reason ={ }( conjunction ) ?? VA { rain|??}(intransitive verb ) ?? Na { clothing|??}(common noun ) ? Da Quantity=(adverb ) { complete |?} ? VH { wet|?}(state verb ) ? Ta aspect=(particle ) { Vachieve |??} Suppose that the following dependency structure and semantic relations are derived by parsing sentence (2) as follows : (3) S(reason:VP(Head:Cb:??|dummy:VA :? ?)| theme:NP(Head:Na :??) | quantity : Da :? |
Head:Vh:?|particle:Ta:?)?
The semantic composition in (4) is the result of unifying the features of the lexical representations shown in the above table . The dependency daughters have become feature attributes of the sentential head ? wet|??.
(4) def:{wet |?: theme={clothing |??}, aspect={Vachieve |??}, quantity={complete |?}, reason={rain|??}}.
c ) Taxonomy for both entities and relations : To achieve automatic feature unification , E-HowNet organizes entities and relations ( attributes ) in a hierarchical structure that relates entities taxonomically . Further details are provided in the next section.
2 Ontology
We adopt and extend approximately 2,600 primitives from HowNet to form the toplevel ontology of E-HowNet , which includes two types of subtrees : entities and relations . The entities are comprised of events , objects , and attribute-values ; while the relations are comprised of semantic-roles and functions . Entities indicate concepts that have substantial content , whereas relations link the semantic relations between entities ( Chen et al ., 2004; Chen et al , 2005; Chen et al , 2005; Huang et al 2008). The taxonomic structure is organized by hypernym-hyponym relations ; therefore , it forms an inheritable system , i.e ., the hyponym concepts inherit the properties of hypernym concepts . The proposed approach facilitates the adoption of knowledge represented by other frameworks , such as FrameNet , and HowNet ; and it allows concepts to be represented with varying degrees of specificity . Another advantage is that conceptual similarities can be modeled by their relational distances in the hierarchy ( Resnik , 1999), and the taxonomic relations between lexical senses can be captured from their E-HowNet expressions automatically.
2.1 Automatic Construction of Ontology
With E-HowNet expressions , lexical senses are defined as entities and relations . Thus , all the taxonomic relations of lexical senses can be identified according to their E-HowNet definitions.
Synonyms are identified by their identical E-HowNet expressions , and hyponymy relations are identified by the subsumption of attribute-values.
(Note that only near-synonym classes are identified due to the coarse-grained expressions of the lexical senses in the current version of E-HowNet .) Furthermore , new categories are identified by common attribute-values . For instance , pandas and zebras can be categorized as animals with the same feature : black and white markings.
To construct a complete lexical taxonomy , we use a strategy that categorizes concepts automatically.
Starting with a manually created toplevel ontology of primitive concepts , the following strategy classifies the lexicon into hierarchical subcategories : (1) Attach lexical senses . Words and associated sense expressions are first attached to the toplevel ontology nodes according to their head concepts . For instance , the head concept of the expression ?{ choose|??:manner={cautious |?}}? is?choose|???.
(2) Subcategorization by attribute-values . Lexical concepts with the same semantic head are further subcategorized according to their attribute-values . Lexicons that have the same attribute-values share specific characteristics ; therefore further subcategorization is performed based on the distinct attribute-values of the lexicons.
(3) Repeat step (2) if there are too many lexical concepts in one category . Although the lexicons are classified after step (2), some subcategories might still contain too many lexicons . In this situation , we further classify the lexicons in the subcategory with other attribute-values until all subcategories contain fewer members than a predefined threshold , or all members of a category are synonyms.
3 Overview of the Online System
The current E-HowNet ontology is an online version of the automatically constructed taxonomic structure of E-HowNet expressions , which contain more than 88,000 lexical senses . This section provides an overview of the ontology and the functions of the online web browsing system.
Figure 2: Key-Term Search Box
Figure 1 shows the E-HowNet ontology system and tree structure.
The tree structure of hyponymy relations allows users to browse the entire tree by expanding and hiding subtrees . Although the classification strategy enables the number of entities under each node to be limited and viewed easily , a more effective function is essential for exploring more than 88 thousand items of data in E-HowNet . Therefore , we provide a search function that allows users to query lexical senses in two ways : Key-Term Search : The first way is key-term search , which is shown in Figure 2. The syntax of the query interface is like that used by conventional search engines . By inputting the key-term ???? , the system will search all the taxonomy nodes , subcategories , and lexical nodes . Then , the results for the taxonomy node ? object |??? and the lexical word ???? will be displayed in the respective columns.
E-HowNet Expression Search : To search a class of words with specific attribute-values , we provide another query syntax for exploring data in E-HowNet Expression . For instance , to find all expressions about wooden objects involves finding E-HowNet data items containing the entity ? object ???? and the attribute-value ? material={wood |?}?. The expressions are entered on the form shown in Figure 3 and submitted to the system . The results of word senses denoting wooden objects are then returned.
4 Conclusion
E-HowNet sense representations are incremental.
Hence , lexical sense expressions can be updated and refined at anytime . In addition , logical relations and the taxonomic structure can be rebuilt automatically based on the refined expressions.
New categories in the taxonomy can be identified and characterized by their specific attribute-values . Uniform representations of function words and content words facilitate semantic composition and decomposition , and allow users to derive sense representations of phrases/sentences from the composition of lexical senses . Furthermore , because of E-HowNet?s semantic decomposition capability , the primitive representations for surface sentences with the same deep semantics are nearly canonical . We have implemented the E-HowNet ontology online to demonstrate the taxonomy , subcategories , and lexicons in a hierarchical tree structure . In addition , we provide search functions for querying keyterms and E-
HowNet expressions.
References
Keh-Jiann Chen , Shu-Ling Huang , Yueh-Yin Shih and Yi-Jun Chen . 2004. Multilevel Definitions and Complex Relations in Extended-HowNet . In Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Chinese Lexical Semantics 2004, Beijing University . ( in Chinese ) Keh-Jiann Chen , Shu-Ling Huang and Yueh-Yin Shih , Yi-Jun Chen . 2005. Extended-HowNet - A Representational Framework for Concepts . In Proceedings of OntoLex 2005, Jeju Island , South Korea.
Yi-Jun Chen , Shu-Ling Huang , Yueh-Yin Shih and Keh-Jiann Chen . 2005. Semantic Representation and Definitions for Function Words in Extended-HowNet . In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Chinese Lexical Semantics 2005, Xiamen University.
Z . D . Dong and Q . Dong 2006. HowNet and the Computation of Meaning . World Scientific Publishing
Co . Pte . Ltd.
Shu-Ling Huang , Shih Yueh-Yin and Keh-Jiann Chen 2008. Knowledge Representation for Comparison Words in Extended-HowNet . Language and Linguistics , vol . 9(2), pp . 395-414.
Philip Resnik . 1999. Semantic similarity in a Taxonomy : An information-based measure and its application to problems of ambiguity in natural language.
Journal of Artifical Intelligence Research , vol . 11, pp . 95-130.
CKIP . 2009. Lexical Semantic Representation and Semantic Composition : An Introduction to E-HowNet ( E-HowNet Technical Report ). Academia Sinica,
Taipei.
48
