
"  196   5 International Conference on Computational Linguistics " 
SUBCLASSIFICATION OF PARTS OF SPEECHIN RUSS IAN : VERBS ~ 
A . Andreyewsky
Internatlonal Business Machines Corporation
Thomas3. Watson Research Center
P . O . BoxZ 18
Yorktown Heights , New York , 10598

? Thls work was partly sponsored by the Information Processing Laboratory  , Rome Air Development Center , United States Air Force , under Contract
AF30(60Z)-3301
Andreyewsky I
Abstract
In a trial study , about 500 Russian verbs were coded using 44 potential classificatory criteria . Through sorting and the introduction of a metric  , numerous groupings were obtained . Initial results suggest that , with proper refinements , the approach described cab provide useful info rmation that may be employed in syntactic an a lysis and certain information retrieva lapplications  . 
0.0 Introduction
As part of a broader effort to extend the ex isting traditional part-of-speech c lassification in modern Russian  , this study of verbs is oriented toward deve loping an improved basis for syntactic an a lysis  . Moreover , it is hoped that the refinements introduced will be of interest in content analysis  . To this end , an extensive set of potential classifica to rycri-teria has been selected  , in the hope that eventually this categoriza tion can be optimized and extended to other parts of speech  . 
I .0 The Experiment
The 514 verbs analyzed came from two sources : ( a ) a randomized sample of 370 entries ( I ) and ( b ) a list of the most frequently used Russian verbs  ( Z ) from which the first 144 entries were selected . 
The classificatory criteria , subdivided into two groups , are discussed in Section I . 1 below . Generally , each verb was taken in a particular mean ing  ( stirat ' , for instance , as " to erase " and not as " to la under " ) and English equivalents used solely for purposes of identifica-tion  . At the same time , for reasons of convenience , provisions were made in coding to allow for coexisting alternatives  . Thus , for proper-ties A and B there can be four pos Bibilities which are represented by the following numerical codes : i -" A "  , Z -" B " , 3 -" AB " ,   0 -" neither applles " After the verbs and appropriate codes were punched on cards  , verbs with identical codes were compared . To obtain additional cluster-ing , a program , written by R . F . Hubbard for the IBM 7040 , compared the code vector of each card against those of the rest of the sample  . 
The distance between any two entries was ca lculated by taking the square root of the sum of the squares of distance between cor responding positions in their code vectors as defined by the following table: 
Andreyewsky 2   0-   -0  =  0   0  -  -2=   4 I ~ i: 0   I~3 = i 2~3 = i 0  - -  I=40-   -3   :6   l~Z=2 Z - -2=03~3:0 i . i Tests Since one of the main objectives of this study has been to estab-lish there levance of various classificatory crite ria  , these were tested in two groups as described be low  . The selection of criteria , based on studies of existing grammars of Russian  , was directed toward discov-ering solut ions for problems arising or likely to a rise in machine-assisted syntactic an a lysis  . 
I . i . i Test I
In this test , the verbs were coded according to their a bil ity to combine with selected preposition a l phrases  , certain adverbs , and the chto-introduced object clauses . Most of the examples are derived from the d is cussion of slovo so chetaniy e  ( grammatically bound word group ) problem in the Academy Grammar (  3  )  . While the English meanings supplied dore flect certain semantic differences the main objective has been to test not only the ability of a given verb to co-occur with certain types of phrases  ( examples are used solely for illustrat ion  ) or classes of adverbs but to trace whatef fect the verb has on their syntactic func- tion  , if any . 
i . i . I . i Classificatory Criteria 1) .   .   . domenya 4) .   .   . kmttin ~ u 7) .   .   . u Zin)r(A)\]~e foreme(A ) for the .   .   .   ( A ) at Ztna's ( B ) as far as me ( B ) to the . . . ( B ) from Z in a Z ) .   .   . dorass vetameeting 8) . . . podk a pust u(A ) before dawn 5) . . . knam ( A ) for ca-bbage ( B ) until dawn ( A ) to us ( B ) under cab-3 )   . . . iz-zastola ( B ) toward us bage ( A ) because of .   .   .  6)  .   .   . zaobedom9) .   .   . zastol(B ) from behind(A ) after ( to get ) . . .   ( A ) at the the table ( B ) during dinner table ( B ) behind the table
Andreyewsky 310) .  ?  . zabratal Z ) .   .   . yash chtk15) .   .   . chtonapishet*(A ) in brother'siz-pod , u ~ lyat hat + ( subject ) + place ( A ) coalcrate will write ( B ) for brother's ( B ) crate from 16 ) nadvoe * sake under the coal "'" in two ( as in 11 )   .   .   . poosh ibke 13) .   .   . ostol * cutting )   ( A ) a mistake against the table 17 )   .   .   . ochen ' * a piece 14) .   .   . povodu * very much ( B ) by mistake to get water 18 )   . . . osest re * about the sister 1 .  1 .  1 . Z Results of Sorting Sorting revealed some of the following groupings with identical codes:  A1 zakip et ' name knut ' A8 v be z hat ' ( to boil )   ( to hint )   ( to run in ) prosolit'syaA4 raznuz dat'yavit'sya ( to turnsalty )   ( to let become ( to appear ) A2vz drog nut ' undisciplined ) A9 podumat ' ( to think )   ( to flinch ) vospitat ' bredit ' ustavat ' ( to educate )   ( to rave )   ( t0 become A5 vychest'okhat'tired )   ( to subtract )   ( tomoan ) ustat ' I z derz hat ' ( to become ( to spend ) AI0 ~ or dit's ) ratired )   ( to be proud ) izz~rabnut'A6 otrubit'vesellt'sya ( to become ( to chopoff )   ( to enjoyself ) chilled ) vskryt ' vosk hish chats ya ( tO open up ) \[ to admire ) 
A3 sovrat ' ( to tellalie ) A7 nabryz ~ at ' All verlt ' soobrazlt ' ( to sprinkle on )   ( to believe )   ( to grasp ) rasprostranit\[ . toskovat'dogadat'sya ( to spread )   ( to be sad ,   ( to surmise ) top in e ) * Only testability to combine in the mean ing indicated  . 
Andreyewsky 4


AI4
AI 5 grust it ' ( to be sad , to yearn ) skuchat ' ( to be bored ) fantazl rovat ' ( to dream ) volnovat'sya ( to worry ) opasat'sya ( to be afraid ) zapryat ~ at ' ( to hide ) vovle kat ' ( to draw in ) be rech'to save ) poberech ' ( to save ) uder zhat ' ( to with hold ) vz gromoz dit'sya ( to perchselfug lubit's ) ra ( to go deep into ) rassaz hivat ' ( to seat ) 
AI6

AI8
AI9
AZ0 nast roit ' ( to incite ) be spokoit ' ( to dist t ~ r b ) obizhat ' ( to offend ) proklinat ' ( to damn ) portit ' ( to spoil , ruin ) bakhvalit's Ta ( to brag ) llkovat ' ( to rejoice ) razr ) rkhlyat ' ( to loosen ) raz droblt ' ( to pulverize ) besedovat ' ( to converse ) so resh chat's ya ( to confer ) razod rat ' ( to tear ) rasshibit ' ( to break , bust )






AZ7 morosit ' ( to drizzle ) nakrapy vat ' ( to sprinkle ) poroshit ' ( to snow ) farshirovat ' ( to stuff ) slntezirovat ' ( to synthesize ) klass lfitsirovat ' ( to classify ) razbivat ' ( to break ) begat ' ( to run ) prikhodit ' ( to come ) nest i ( to carry ) vezti ( to cart ) volochit ' ( to drag ) tash chit ' ( to pull )   ( to reach , ( walking )) doletet ' ( to reach ( flying )) 1 .  1 .  1 .   3 l ~ e sudts of the Introduction of the Metric On the basis of preliminary results  , the maximum distance con-sidered was set at 10  . Given this arbitrary limitation , the metric produced various groupings . The majority of them contained some " noise " - i  . e .   , apparently incorrect entries were brought together or several distince groupings turned out insufficiently differentia ted  . Partly responsible for this are : the method employed  , the distances selected , and the occasional errors that crept in dur ing the analysis and subsequent processing  . These factors are discussed in greater detai l below  (  1 .  1 .  1 .  4) . 
Andreyewsky 5








Some of the more interesting outcomes were as follows : Groups All  ( verlt ' , toskovat ' , srust it ' , skuchat ' , and fantazirovat ') , A17 ( bakhvallt's ya and likovat') , A1Z ( volnovat's ya and op as at's ya) , and the verb bespokoit'sya ( to worry ) Group AI6 ( nast roit ' , be spokoit ' , obizhat ' , proklinat ' , port it ') and the verb nenavide t ' ( to hate ) . 
Group A10 ( vosk hishchyat'sya , veselit'sya , ~ ordlt's ya ) and verbs vozmutlt'sya ( to become disgusted ) and boyat's ) ra ( to be afraid )  . 
Group A8 ( yavit'sya , v be z hat ') , the following verbs : vernut'sya ( to return ) , prlkhodit ' ( AZ4) , begat ' ( AZ4) , ~( to step out ) , pod yezz hat ' ( to drive up ) ,  ) , ezd it ' ( to ride ) , vyekhat ' ( to go away ) , kinut'say ( tolunge ) , vypolzti ( to crawl out ) , doletet ' ( AZ7) , and do yti(AZ7) . 
sarantirovat ' ( to guarantee ) , pokazyvat ' ( to show ) , demonstrirovat ' ( to demonstrate ) sovrat ' ( to lie )  , pover it ' ( to believe ) , uverlt ' ( to assure ) znat ' ( to know ) , oz hl dat ' ( to expect ) , videt ' ( to see ) . 
na ~ ryanut ' ( to come unexpectedly ) , zaekhat ' ( to stop by ) , probezhat'sya ( to run ) , ot stup it ' ( to retreat ) . 
i.i.I.4 Comments
The problems stemming from the application of the metric  ( th " numbers game " ) mentioned in I . I . I .   3 reflect a characteristic of statistical inference jocularly compared by an anonymous author to a bikinibathing suit : being sufficiently suggestive  , but not revealing . In this regard , alternative approaches have been considered and will be tried in the near future  . As it turned out in practice , however , the metric did provide useful insights which can point the way toward developing a more powerful set of classificatory criteria  . This , in turn , can foster increased reliance on simples or ting procedures based on proper ranking and grouping of the criteria themselves  . 
While not unexpectedly , the verbs of motion in the broad sense of the term came out more clearly in the classification than did any other groups  , interesting subclasses of abstract verbs , exhibiting unexpected shades of valuation also emerged  . 
Andreyewsky 61.1. Z Test II
In contrast to Test I , this test placed a relatively lesser emphasis on syntagmatlc relationships and stressed a mixture of formal and semantic properties  . On the whole , except where noted , the two tests were developed independently of one another  . While Test I was based on mater-ials derived f rom the Academy Grammar of Russian  (  3  ) 0 Test II benefited f rom experience gained in dealing with the problems encountered in machine translation output and from studies conducted preparatory to launching syntactic analysis  . 
1.1. Z.1 Classtficato , ry Criteria
In view of the extensive nature of this test , the description of vari-our criteria used is given here in abbreviated notation  . 
I ) ( A ) imperfective ( B ) perfective
Z ) verb ( I/3) or " verb oid "( Z/0) ; " concrete " ( I /0 ) or " abstract " ( Z/3 ) : when " yes " answer is possible under I . i . I . I .  17 . 
3 ) is ~ form ( A ) reflexive ( B ) nonreflexive 4 ) generally : ( A ) nonreflexive ( B ) reflexive 5 ) when reflexive , meaning : ( A ) active ( B ) passive 6 ) participial forms : ( A ) active ( B ) passive 7 ) passive participle : ( A ) past ( B ) present 8 ) gerundial forms : ( A ) present ( B ) past 9 ) action ( gerund ) :  ( A ) parallel ( B ) sequential
I0) deverbal nouns : ( A ) in-enle , -ks(B ) other forms
II ) deverbal nouns : ( A ) concrete ( B ) abstract 1Z ) verb used : ( A ) personally ( B ) impersonally 13 ) verb function : ( A ) link , auxillary ( B ) other 14 ) meaning affected by ( A ) governed infinitive ( B ) object ( s )  15 ) subject preference : ( A ) inanimate ( B ) animate 16 ) verb governs : ( A ) infinitives ( B ) objects 17 ) object preference : ( A ) animate ( B ) inanimate 18 )   ( A ) motion verb ( broad sense )   ( B ) action perceived 19 ) verb describes : ( A ) action ( B ) state
Z0) ( A ) beginning ( B ) end of action
Andreyewsky 721 ) verb is one of : ( A ) being ( B ) becoming
ZZ . action described : ( A ) outward- ( B ) in ward-directed 23 ) action directed : ( A ) downward ( away )   ( B ) upward ( toward )  24 ) action in respect to object : ( A ) contacts ( B ) permeates
ZS ) reference to : ( A ) duration ( B ) intensity
Z6 ) action produces : ( A ) decrease ( B ) increase g7 ) action describes : ( A ) gain ( B ) lossi . i . Z . Z Results of Sortln ~ The following groupings had identical codes : 
BIskuchat ' ( All )   ( to be bored ) toskovat ' ( A1I )   ( to be sad ) 
BZ morosit 4 ( AZI ) B 5 ( to drizzle ) poroshit ' ( Agl )   ( to snow ) 
B3 nakrap ) rvat ' ( AZI )   ( to sprinkle ) merts at ' B6 ( to twinkle ) 
B4 iz derz hat ' ( to expend)
I stratitt ( to spend ) nosit ' ( to carry ) tash chit ' ( to pull ) volochit ' ( to drag ) podshivat ' ( to attach ) 
B7 navy azy vat ' ( to tie on ) skladyvat ' ( to put together ) oz hivit ' ( to v v f y ) uverlt ' ( to assure )  1 .  1 . Z .   3 Results of the Introduction of the Metri c Comments made in I  . I . I . 3 above , apply . Because of a greater number of classifica to ry criteria the results of introduc ing the metric were more important in this test  . Numbers in parentheses preceding each verb in d icate distances from the first verb in the group  . 
B8pr , idavl t'B9 vosstat'BI0 prlchesat ' ( to squeeze )   ( to riot )   ( to comb )   ( I ) prish chemlt ' ( I ) vystup it ' ( I ) zaputat ' ( top in ch )   ( to appear )   ( to tangle ) 
Andreyewsky 8
BIIv be zhat ' B17 otkry t ' B23 nest ls ' ( to run in )   ( to open )   ( to dash )   ( I ) vT polztl ( 5 ) ubavlt ' ( 7 ) bezhat ' ( to crawl out )   ( to decrease )   ( to run ) B12 napevat ' B18 vynest lB24 vy delit ' ( to hum )   ( to carry out )   ( to single out )   ( P . ) veshchat ' ( 5 ) vypust it ' ( 7 ) vypisat ' ( to speak with ( to let out )   ( to write out ) authority ) BI9 zheltet ' BZ5 potusknet ' BI 3temnet '' ( to turn yellow )   ( to dull )   ( to grow : dark )   ( 5 ) umirat ' ( 7 ) zatver det ' ( 2 ) teplet ' ( to die )   ( to harden )   ( to grow warm )   B20 terrorizirovat ' B26 prikrep it ' B l4 vyrabot at ' ( to terrorize )   ( to fasten )   ( to develop )   ( 5 ) khvalit ' ( 8 ) nav ' yuchit ' ( 3 ) vyuchlt ' ( to praise )   ( to pack on )   ( to learn ) BZI vise t ' BZ 7 vozvratit ' BI5 k h murit's ya ( to hang )   ( to return )   ( to frown )   ( 6 ) lezhat ' ( 8 ) do polnlt ' ( 3 ) tuman it's ya ( to lie )   ( to augment )   ( to growgloom y ) B22 podognat ' BZ8 vvestiB16 razbushevat'sya ( to drive up )   ( to introduce )   ( to start raging )   ( 6 ) navest it ' ( 9 ) do bavlt ' ( 4 ) uchastlt's ) ra ( to visit )   ( to add )   ( to become more frecluent ) In addition to shorter groups described above , longer groupings were observed . Thus , ot dok hnut ' ( to rest )   ( 8 ) utikhnut ' ( to quiet down )  , and ( 10 ) ugasnut ' ( to become extinguished or nabry z~at ' ( to sprinkle on )  , ( Z ) nakinut '( . to throw on ) , (3) vzvalit ' ( topile on ) , and ( 4 ) nast rocit ' ( to sew on ) are some of the examples . 
In other cases , apparently in congruous groups llke the following : strekotat '  ( to chirr )  , (1) mosh ennl cat ' ( to swlndle ) , (5) fokus nl chat ' ( to juggle ) , (5) nakrapy vat ' ( to sprinkle ) ,   ( 5 ) merts at ' ( to twinkle )   ( 6 ) zvenet ' ( to ring ) emerged . However , upon closer examination it became apparent that nakrapy vat '  , merts at ' , and zvenet'fall in a group clearly distinguishable from the one containing the other verbs  . Further , fokus nlchat ' and zvenet's howed sufficient distance within respective groups suggesting at least four different basic groups in all  . 
Andreyewsky 91.1. Z .4 Comments
Aside from the problems traceable to statistics , the sets of criterla selected for Test II are more open to debate than those found in Test I  . However , correlations between both tests indicate that some of the criteria are relevant and that others are  , at least , redundant . As observed from minor differences in two versions of coding of nine verbs introduced six months apart  , the results of Test II are less reliable . 
I .  1 . 3 Comparison of Test I and Test IIAs noted in 1 .  1 . 2 above , the two tests differ in the base from which they were derived  . Accordingly , the results obtaining from Test I are both intuitively and actually more reliab le  . Yet , as suggested in 1 .  1 .  1 . 4 , to the extent that the results of the appli cation of the metric tend to supplements or ting  , the results of Test II tend to backup many of the findings of Test I  . 
Given a small sample , it is difficult to make any generalizations . At the same time , the evidence emerging so far suggests some subtle differences in the two tests  . Basically , in both cases the results of the metric applications how little or no discrimination between antonyms  . However , the group = Ings resulting from Test II tend to be  , if at all , held together by similarity of content , the results of Test I , in contras % have a peculiar sort of outward  , formal similarity in the manifestation of processes described by the verbs in quest ion  . 
Z .0 The Outlook
In the months ahead , it is hoped that the small corpus can be increased and the time required to code each entry reduced to reasonable proportions  . 
While in many respects the results of : both tests are self-proving  , rigorous evaluation criteria will have to be formulated in detail  . 
As far as potential application of the results obtained is concerned  , especially the information derivable from Test I could be immediately put to use to improve  ( together with classification of nouns currently in progress  ) the translation of verb-governed preposit ional phrases  . It is likely that this syntagmatic pattern ing will extend to larger structures dominated by the verb  . Further , if the apparent rends persist , some framework of semantic classific at ion can be anticipated  . To what extent this will be possible to accomplish by computers alone and the degree to which such~t classification 
Andreyewsky 10 will satisfy the needs of computer process ing remains to be established  . 
While it can be argued that any classific at ion is likely to produce some classes  , we take solace in the fact that the methodology employed even in such classics as Roget's Thesaurus remains unknown to this day  . 
Sources . This sample was selected from the Daum and Schenck Dictionary in another connection and was generally random in its intent more than its methodology  . 
. A . K . Demidova , O . G . Motovilova , G . D . Shevchenko , E . P . Chaplygln , Naiboley eupotrebltel'nyye ~ lagoly sovre mennogo russko ~ oyazyka  ( The Most Frequently Used Verbs in Modern Russian )  , Moscow , USSR Academy of Sciences Publishlng House ,  1963 . 
. V . V . Vinogradov , ed .   , Grammatikarussko goyazyra ( Grammar of the Russian Language ) Moscow , USSR Academy of Sciences Publishing House ,  1960 , Vol . II , Part I , pp . I 13-2B 0 . 
