, C .. ~
1 965 International Conference on Computational Linguistics 
SOMECO ~ ONENTS OF APROGRm' , \[FORDYNAMIC MODELLING
OFHISTORICAL CHANGEIN ' LANGUAGE
Sheld on Klein
Carnegie Institute of Technology
Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania 15213


System Development C . Orporation
Santa Monica , California


~ o0.",0 <> ..\

Kleini.
SOME COMPONENTS OF APROGRAM FOR DY Ng . MIC MOD ELLING
OF HISTORICAL CHANGE IN LANG UAGE
Sheld on Klein

A system that is to serve as a vehicle for testing models of language change is being programmed in jOVIAL  . Inherent in the design of the system is the requirement that each member of a speech community be represented by a generation grammar and a recognition grammar  . The units of interaction in a simulation are conversations  . Grammar rules may be borrowed or lost by individuals during the course of a simulation  . The rules themselves need not be limited to those suggested by a particular theory of lanquaqe  ; also , they may refer to any or all levels of linguistic phenomena  . Extral in quistic factors pertinent to language change may be incorporated in simulations  . 
Klein I.
1.0 The Simulation System
A general simulation system which is to serve as a device for testing of hypotheses about language change through time is being program ~ nedin JOVIAL  , an ALGOL language , and is partially operation-1 a ! on the Philco computer ( 4 )  . The basic assumptions about the nature of language change inherent in the design of the Program include the notion of generation grammar  , Bloomfield's concept of speech community ( i ) , and Sapir's concept of genetic drift (5) . 
Aside from these builtin concepts , the program is designed as a vehicle for testing models of language change as a function of variables selected at the discretion of an experimenter  . It is intended that the simulation system be sufficiently flexible to work with either transformational or stratificational models of language  ; to simulate the interaction of members of a speech community among themselves and with members of other communities  ; to model special relations among particular members  , e . g . family groups and social classes ; to simulate multilanguage acquisition ; and to model the transmission of language from generation to generation  . 
A basic assumption of the simulation system is that the interaction among members of a speech community is the prime  1This research is supported in part by Grant ~4-07722  , National Institutes of Health , United States Public Health Services ( to the Carnegie Institute of Technology )  . 
Klein 2.
focal point of language change . Each member of a speech community or sample from a speech community is represented by bo Zha generation grammar and a recognition grammar  . Members of a community who are familiar with more than one language may be represented by additional gray  , mars . The contents of the grammars may vary among individuals  . 
Grammars of new born children would be empty . An adultentering a new community as a speaker of an alien language might acquire an empty recognition and generation grammar to supplement the nonempty ones representing the languages he knows  . 
The basic units of interaction are speech forms produced in response to other speech forms  . ~ primary function of the system is to simulate conversations among members of a speech community  . 
During the course of a conversation , one individual will generate a form and another will attempt to parse it  . Should the parser's rules be inadequate for the task  , he may borrow the necessary rules from the generation grammar of the speaker  , and perhaps use it when it is his turn to speak . Note that a bilingual speaker might attempt parsings with rules from all of his grammars  . 
Many decisions within the simulation system are made with the use of random numbers and functions governing the transition from one state of events to another  . Monte Carlo techniques will be used in conducting simulations  . Basically , the term refers to the use of random elements to solve essentially deterministic problems which may be too complicated to solve by deterministic methods  . Accordingly , to evaluate the predictions of such a system , it is essential to determine the effects of different choices of 
Klein 3.
random numbers numbers upon the results , if the model is deterministic , the results of repeated trials relying on different inputs of random numbers should be similar  . 
2.0 Components
The basic components of the the simulation system consist of a table containing the grammar rules and parameters associated with each individual in the simulation  ; a generation and parsing device that makes use of the grammars of interacting individuals  ; a table of functional relationships containing the rules of interaction pertinent to a particular simulation model  ; and , finally , a monitor program thai determines the flow of the simulation and the passage of time  , and that periodically takes a census to inform the experiment-er of the changes occuring at various stages of the simulation  . 
The first version of the simulation system is being constructed around the author's automatic essay paraphrasing system  ( 2 ) which produces essay like paraphrases of an input consisting of a restricted English text and an outline of the desired output essay  . The syntactic style of the output is controlled by manipulation of parameters pertain in q to the frequency of usage of specific generation grammar rules  ( 3 )  . 
The table of functional relationships thai contains the definition of a particular model of language change might include rules expressing such features as : i  . Members of the same social group are more likely to speak to each other than  . to members of other groups . 
2 . Each time an individual interacts with a particular member of the community the probability of future interactions with thai 
Klein 4.
member increases.
More complex functions pertaining to particular sociocultural conditions might also be used  . 
Other functions might control the deletion of infrequently used grammar rules  , or the shift of a grammar rule from a recognition qrammar to a qeneration qrammar  . 
The monitoring system is designed to work with a mixed assortment of functional relationships pertaining to very different phenomena  . At a given decision point the monitor scans the table of functions sequentially until it finds an applicable item  . 
3.0 AH and Simulation
The nature and function of the basic components can be illustrated by a hand simulation of the flow of an extremely simple language model  . 
Let the population contain six members : JOHN , ~4 ARY , HELEN , PETER , HE  ~ . ~N and BABY . Let each have a separate generation and recognition grammar  . Let each be assigned a status in the range of . Olto . 99 , and let the letters A , B , C , D , E , F represent the grammar rules exist in q in the community  . ( Seetable i . ) The content of the rules is deliberately left unspecified  . The rules may refer to semantics , syntax , morphology and/or phonology . Each rule is associated with a weighted frequency  . A rule with a frequency weight less than a specified threshold value  (  . i in this simulation ) can exist only in a recognition grammar . A rule with a frequency weight greater than or equal to the threshold must exist both in an individual's generation and recognition grammars  . A rule existing in both grammars has the same frequency weight in each  . A rule whose weight drops
Klein 5.
JOHN @

T0,0T0,1T0,2T0,3TI,0TI,I.T1,2
S .8 S.8
A .5 A .47
C .5 C .48
D .5D .53
A .5 A .47
B .04 B .02
C .5 C .48
D .5D .53



S .7 S .72 S .7 S .64
A ; 5
B .5
D .5
A .5
B .5
D .5
E . O8
Popularion
Table 1'K lein 6.



T0,0T0,1TO,2TO,3T~,0TI,1TI,2
S .4
B .5
E .5
B . S
C .02
E .5
F .06
S .4
B .48
E .5
F . iS
B .48
E .5
F .15


Rm
S .3
B .5
E .5
F .5
B .5
D .08
E .5
F .5
S .32 S .38
Table 1 Cont.
S .38
Klein 7.



S .6
B .5
C .5
B .5
C .5
D .02
TO , 1m ? 0, 2
S .6
B .53
C .48
B .53
C .48
A.07 r~=0,3Ti,OT li
S .6
C .46
B.57"46t.,.
A .05
F .05



Rm
S .4 S.4
A .07
B .07
D .07
S .4
B .16
A .05
B .16
D .05
E .05
F .05
Tablei Cont.
? Klein 8.
below a minimum value ( . i in this simulation ) is deleted from all qrammars . 
Table 1 contains a record of the various states of the speech community at time Ti  , j , where i refers to a major cycle -- a single individual's interaction with a variety of speakers  , and where j refers to a minor cycle -- the interval of an interaction with a single speaker  . At each increment in the value i , the monitor randomly selects a member as speaker for a major cycle  . " The monitor then scans the population Sequentially to determine which members are to be auditors of the speaker  . The determination follows the appropriate function contained in table  2  . Each time an auditor is selected , the minor cycle time j is incremented by i . When the monitor has scanned the entire community  , the speaker's turn is over and a new one is selected to ~ o ~ the next major Cycle  . 
At the beginning of each major cycle the jor minor cycle value is set to zero  . The data in column T0 ,   0 of table 1 are start lng data supplied by the author . The data existing at T i , j is used in comDut in q the state of events during Ti  , j ~ 1 . Blank entries in table 1 indicate that the state of events is unchanged from the previous interval  . 
Table 2 contains the list of active rules refered to by the monitor during the course of the simulation  . All computed values qreater than or equal to 1 are rounded to . 99 ; values computed at less than or equal to 0 are rounded to . 01 ~ in all cases , computed values are rounded to the second decimal place  . 
Klein 9!. Probability of x speaking to y :
Psi(X , y ) = . I/Stalust . i(x)-staiusi . !( y)/2 . Frequency weight of recognition rule m at time t after use in parsing : F t  ( m ) = Ft . l ( m )   ( F t_l ( m ) -relative frequency of m ) in ipars in q at time t
Fi(m ) = Fi . l(m)- . 02 4 . Threshold frequency weight for adding or removing a rule from a qeneration grammar :  . i5 . Threshold frequency weight for removing rule from are cognition grammar :  . 01 6 . Status of speaker x after speaking to auditory : Statust  ( x ) = Statust . i(x)-(Statust . l(x ) - ot at us ~_\](v ) 5\[

Table 2
Kleini 0.
The simulation begins at time T0 , 1 rather than at time T0 , 0 for initialization purposes:

The monitor selects & ~ R Y as speaker for the 0 cycle , and examines the list of potential auditors . The first candidate is JOHN . Accordinq to function 1 of table 2 the probability of 4ARY speak in q 9o /OHN is . i divided by the absolute value of the status difference of the pair:  . i = - . 99 ( rounded)/ . 7 VS -/" Y~RY will speak to JOHN because the random n~mber qenerator of the monitor fails to yield a value greater than  . 99 . Assume that ~ v ~ Y generates the form:
G(A , 2D ) which is to be interpreted as indicatinq tha ~ in the generation  , JO~N is able to parse the rule A was used once , rule D twice , u . -form with hiso ~~ ecoqnition ~ rules , and their frequency weights area ! tered accord in q to functions  2 and 3 in table 2  . Rule A is computed as: . 5 - ( . 5 -  . 33) :  . 47  . 5 - (  . 5 -  . 77) -  . 5 3 function 3 of table 2each of their weiqhts is decremented by . 02  . 
According to function 6 of table 2 , ~ RY's new status becomes: , 7 - (  . 7 -  . 8 ) _  . 72

The monitor searches for Y ~ , RY's next auditor . , , ~, ~ ? v ~ is skipped as a , candidate . HELEN . is next . The probability of IVLARY speaking ? io HELEN after function ! of table  2 is :'' . ! : ! 7 .  '7"2" -  .   4:/-Assume HELEN is rejected as an auditor because monitor's random number generator produces a value greater than this  . Assume that the next auditor candidate , PETER , is also rejected . The monitor then selects HERf~IAN as the next candidate  . No was sume that HER\]v~N is selected as auditor after appropriate computations  . Let f , \[ ARY's generated utterance be :@( A , 2B ) ~ . ~ , , , ~ musfib or row rule A from lYblRY's generation grammar to complete the parsing ? Rule Aenters HER ~' ~% N  , s recognition grammar , by function 2 of table 2 , with a value : 0-(0-?33): . 07""5'"' Since this value is less than . i , it does not enter HERMAN's generation grammar . The new value of B is computed as: . 5 - (  . 5 -  . 67) -  . 53 recognition rule D , accordingly , drops below the minimum retention value of ?0 ~ , and is deleted from his recognition grammar . 
Klein 12 ~ , ' ~ . RY's status is now computed as: . 72 - (,:72 -  . 6) -

BABY is the next candidate for MARY'sa'uditor . Assume that the monitor accepts BABY as a listener  , and that ~ RY tells him:

BABY must borrow every pertinent rule from MARY's grammar  , each with a frequency weight , computed by function 2 of table ? . , that is : 0-(0- . 33) -  . 07  . 7 - (  . 7 -  . 4) :  . 64 a new speaker must be selected randomly . 

Let PETER be selected as the new speaker . Assume that IOHN and ~ LiRY are rejected as auditors  , but that HELEN is accepted :
G(E , F)
Rule E is in HELEN's recognition grammar and its new weight is:  . 5 - (  . 5 -  . 5 ) -  . 5  . 06 - (  . 06 -  . 5 ) -  . 15H = LsN's unused rules are decremented by . 02  . 
PETER's new status is : .3-.(,3-.4) -.32
Klein 13.
Assume HER , t % N is picked as PETER's next auditor , and PETER says :
G(SB , F)
Rule Bisin HEF?4AN's grammar and its new frequency weight is : . 53 - (  . 53 -  . 75) -  . 57,,,,, grammar with a value : 0-(0- . 25) :  . 05 status is: . 32 - \ [  . 32 -  . 6 ) -  . 3 8 Assume the monitor determines BABY to be the next auditor  , and that PETER generates :@(2B , E , F ) Rule B is in BABY's . recognition grammar and it's new weight is : . O7-(, O7- . 5 ) -,  .   . ~65"" Accordingly , rule BentersBABY's generation grammar . 
Rules E and F must be borrowed from PETER , and each enters
Klein 14.
BABY's recognition grammar with a weight : 0- ( 0 -  . 25) :  . 0 5   '"5 ' The rules not used in the parsing are each decremented by  . 02  . 
PETER's new status is: . 38 - (  . 38 -  . 4 ) :  . 38 '5 4 . 0 Discussion The preceding hand S'imulation should be sufficient to illustrate the operation of the simulation system  . Anticipated computer simulations will involve 50 to 100 individuals , each associated with several < hundred grammar rules  , i Unique ~ parsings can be obtained by using 6xistinq frequency weights to determine preferential applicability of ' rules  . The functions contained in table 2 can be qreatly extended in number and content . One miqht wish to add special rules for interaction between : parent  , ' and Child , spouses , and among members of the same age ' group , etc . , plus a mechanism for determining the birth and death of various members  . The status factor might be divided into weights refering to social status  , a q e , geographical proximity and the like . 
The ideal test of the validity of a simulation is prediction  . 
Hopefully , one miqht predict an attested state of a language from a model of an attested earlier stage  . A major problem in such testing may be ii ~ . xlreme sensitivity of a model to the choice of parameter values and constants  . For example , the constants in the functions of table 2 seem to have the effect of making BABY learn too quickly  . One might use a higher rate of decay for unused
Klein 15.
rules to decrease the learning rate . The need for trial and error manipulation of values will increase with the complexity of a model  . Accordingly , one might start with simple models , increasing the complexity by stages . 
The author's immediate research goal is to produce a stability simulation involving about  50 members , each associated with a simple phrase structure gra ~ nar of ~ nqmish  , over a time span of 3 or 4 qenerations - - a simulation in which the language at the start of the simulation is reasonably similar to the language existing at the conclusion  . 
References i . Bloomfield , L . Lanquaqe . New York : Holt , Rinehart , 19S3 . 
2 . Klein , S . Automatic Paraphrasing in Essay Format . 
Mechanical Translation.
In press , 3 . Klein , S . Control of Style with a Generative Grammar . 

In press , 4 . Klein , S . Dynamic Simulation of Historical Change in Language Using Monte Carlo Techniques  . SP-1908 , System Develo3ment Corporation , Santa Monica , December 1984 . 
5 . Sapir , E . Language . New York : Harcourt , Brace , 1921 . 
