SEGMENTING NATURALL ANGUAGEBY ARTICULATORY FEATURES 
David Shillan
Cambridge Language Research Unit,

I . For many purposes it is necessary to segment text into units convenient for handling  . The sentence has been generally accepted as the natural unit  , since there was no obvious alternative other than the word-which by itself tells us too little- or the paragraph-which is a vague and shifting unit  , ~ unless redefined . But the sentence is not satisfactory either : it ks very variable in length  ; studies of speech show that in its conventional form it is not always recognizably present I  ; it may depend semant-ically upon its context up to at least paragraph length  ; and in any case what constitutes a sentence is not consistently defined  ( Fries 2 indicates more than 200 definitions )  . 
2 . There is another way of segmenting text , which does not suffer from these limitations , being based upon the rhythmical features of articulated speech  . 
This use of the term " articulated " results from avlew of language as basically speech  , that is as skilled bodily movement . We have found it possible to bridge the gap between spoken language and written language by using features which both the writer and the reader of language tend to adopt from speech  . 
3 . Studies of ? poken language , particularly in re-lati Qnto foreign language teaching  , show agreement on at least the terminal boundary of the " tone group " which Crystal &  Quirk3 call " the most striking proso-dicunit in English speech "  , and on which they have found experimentally a high rate of agreement by informants  . Many different teaching books * exemplify this agreed feature  , despite the lack of satisfactory instrumental evidence on continuous speech  ( into which research is now being planned )  . 
4 . Less agreement is found on the configuration of the whole unit which terminates in the " nucleus "  . 
Some authors refer to " tone groups " or " tone units "  , some to " sense groups " , some use both terms : this overlapping category oft one and sense suggested a field for further study  , which has been proceeding at C . L . R . U . for some time . Syntax is not usually brought into the treatment of this subject  , since the approach is phonological ; but among the authors * Work supported by Canadian National Research Council  . 

referred to 4 , MacOarthy do ~ ndicate that syntactic criter ia determine the s $ ~ ure of his " intonation groups "  . Our studies support the work of those who suggest that what is commonly called " stress " has a semantic function S  , and what can be an ~ ysed in terms of intonation is the syntactic feature  , -a kind of audible syntactic braketting . 
5 . It is common practice in the teaching of English as a foreign language  ( see Baird7 ) to use tone groups of two stresses ( head and nucleus ) as examples , but this configuration is not usually fo rmalized  . In my own use of such drill material for the foreign learner  , I have for many years adopted this unit , marked it with a musical p ~ rase-mark , and called it , since my 1954 publication ? , a " phrasing " . MY drill use of this unit gives a minimal context of not less than one sentence-a sentence being se~nentable into one or more phrasim ~ s  , the phrasing being thus aud it between the word and the sentence but not necessarily coterminous with the clause or grammatical phrase  .   ( The musical analogy shows phrasing as a category distinct from the note  , the bar , and the section . ) 6 . Ten years after publication of these drills , my work was called upon by Margar et Masterman9 in relation to her own semantic approach , for which the two stress-points of the phrasing were seen to correspond to two information points  . In the ~ eantime I had been led by teaching experience to  consid6r the ~ ifficulty of foreign lezrners with adequate vocabulary and adequate syntax but no adequate speech-experience of English  . They were unable to read a piece of current English  ( e . g . a " Times " leading article ) with understanding , where an the native English reader , even if momentarily puzzled by perhaps a hastily -worded sentence  , would immediately feedback into his reading of it  ( i . e . " in his mind'sear " ) the natural speech form ( i . e . the phrasing ) with which the writer had written it . 
7 . From this the conception of " stress-point " became differentiated from precise syllabic location of stress  ( which is itself a complex of amplitude , frequency , and duration ) and was defined as the word or words centred , in stress-and-tone prominence , on the nuclear tone , ~ nd the word or words centred ( in the same sense of , prominence " ) on that head t_one which predominates above anyo the rhead or heads which might follow the preced in ~ nucleus  . 

r This method of dealing with tone groups which apparently have more than one head proves to be operationally satisfactory  . It gives us a consistent phrasing of two beats , the second of which consists , in certain cases , of a " silent stress ~ ( phenomenon vouched for by many phoneticians lO )  , a It also helps to meet ~ the difficulty of differently timed lan@nla~es  , referred to in para . 13 below . 
8 . It follows from the treatment of stress-points indicated in para  . 7 above , that spread stress will occur in regular compounds  , such as " semi + readiness " , and it also occurs very frequently in cases of a noun with its qualifier  , whether true adjective or noun acting as adjective  , e . g . " political + requirements " , or " staff + planning " , and ing ~ neral where we find intimately associated words on which the stress falls with virtually equal emphasis  . 
9 . The silent beat may or may not be a perceptible pause  , but tends to occur in certain typical locations , e . g . where some expression of significant semantic content is about to follow  . It would also be possible in many cases to imagine the phrasing rewritten using relevant syllables instead of the silent beat  , e . g . 
" in a review of progress " instead of " in a review  ( ) " . 
In marking phrasings on text two symbols are used in addition to the + sign for spread stress and the  ( ) sign for silent beat . They are the wellknown to netiom ~ rker ~ ( originally representing a high falling tone ) used for the nuclear stress , and the stress-mark ' used for the head stress . These may also be referred to as primary and secondary stress-points  , the nucleus being primary because in general it indicates the ~ of the utteraace and the head being secondary because in general it indicates the cqmment  . Thus reading down all the nuclear stress-points of a text printed as a series of phrasings one below the other  , we have an index of the topic of the whole text . 
10 . A piece of text reading " Politically Canada is divided into ten provinces and two territories " can be phrased-up either as  . 3 . 
" ~ olitical l ~ (   ) " ~ Canadais " divide ~" into'ten " Prov ince6 " and ' two ~ errltorie's TM or as ~ oli tically  (   ) ' Canadais " divided into ' ten ~ province8 and ' two ~ territories . 
The " quatrain " form into which this fall s proves to be very frequent  , particularly at the bUinning of a passage  . This passage continues in two more quatrains :' Each+province is ~ sovereign in its ' own " sphere and ' administers its ~ own'natura l  ~  resource8  , and upon ' such " resources as ' related to ~ topography  , ' position and " clilate i8 ' based the " economy ? of ? the ? province . 
A straightforward text of this kind of fersif not a word  . 
for-word , at least something like a phrasing-for- phrasing possibility in translation  . But the trans-lation correspondence , for French for example , is often not direct but expanded ( e . g . 2 or more French for 1 English ) , or transposed in order . Apart from these ocns iderations , there are many cases in which the phrasing st ructure resolves syntactic or semantic un -certainty  . Here is a case where the lack of such a means o f segmentation led to a serious ml stranslat ion : 
It ' may be ? assumed that an ' international ~force on a ' stand by ~ basis will'take + shape as a ? development out of ' practice which has already " begun  . 
The published translation has turned the last two lines into " prendraune for ~ eassez singuli ~ re  , cequ'ellead6 Jhcone no6h faire " . 
1 1 . Passages of text Anvarious styles and of various lengths have been analyse ~ by hand  , and show a consistent tendency for this ~ hythm to be found  . There may be physiological reasons for thi s  . Neurological studieses how persistence of tone and rhythmin cases where normal articu lation is  impaired1   . ~ood reasons for this rhythm to be binary include the fact that the * For neurological literature I am indebted to Dr  . 
Violet MacDermot.

rhythm of the motk ~ Msheart-beat is present even to the unborn child  , and the in/out rhythm of respiration and the left/right rhythm of walking are basic to h ~an life in general  . Studies in articulatory phonetics support the belief that some form of k in aesthetic activity is involved in silent reading  , as well as in listening to livespeech , which is why we can legitimately refer to " the rhythm of the prose " in spite of the lack  , up to the present , of acoustic instrumental documentation of thi s  . 
12 . Though intonation supplies the contour on which the phrasing is founded  , the rhyth ~ of stress is the more essential fac to r  . As Tibbitts ' ~ sayss " The correct basics tressing is mandator ~ while the inton at ion is variable within a syet undefined l imits "  . This is the reason wh ~ Shephrasing hypothes is is unaffected by differences o~dia lector accent  . The question of isochromicity in English prose has a literatures tr~tch-in~back to Joshua Steelein  1775  , through Coventry Pat-more in 1856 , and onto its thorough experimental .   . 
( though not ins t rumenta l ) examination by AndrT ~ Classein 1939 and discussion by Abercrombie in 1951 o . There is evidence for at least a strong tendency towards a normal regular periodici ty of stress-points  . Our observations suggest that a speaker tends to select and order his words so as to distr ibute them about these pulsations of stress in such a way that points of emphasis fall naturally upon them  . 
13 . The question of whether the phrasing can be equally well observed in languages other than English is not included in the present paper  , except by the observation that when parallel texts in English and ~ rench are analysed in this way  , the French equivalent of the English phrasing , as clearly delimited by the French nuclear tone ( and not with standing the difference bT ~ tween a syllable-timed and a stress-t ~ed language  ) supplies a form of " translation unit " ' l with l ~ measur-able rate of cor respondence with the English  . 
13 . Examination of given phrasings in a text of 377 phrasings a followed by another of over 900 phrasings , ledDol by '9 to say : " Phrasing length , as measured by the number of syllables , appears to be a reasonably behaved statistic when viewed in isolation with routine statistical tools "  . ( See Appendix I ) 14 . A method of observing the phonological conf igura-tion of phrasings is to turn writ ten text into spoken prose on magnetic tape  , pass this through a suitable pitch detector and intensity detector  ( such as that of . 5  . 
the University of Grenoble or the University of Copenhagen  )  , and record the result on mlngographs crolls . Research now being started at C . L . R . U . is comparing the output of these two sets of apparatus with that of apparatus developed in England  , with a view to finding the best selection of acoustic data by which to observe the terminal point of the phrasing  ( frequently a steep fall or rise in pitch )  , and the two stress-points as peaks of frequency -plus-amplitude-plus-duration  . 
15 . An extension of the usefulness of this unit of segmentation can be seen in algorithmic production by computer of a form of phrasing  , based on observation of the criteria used in making articulatory p ~ asings  . 
This has beehdone at 0 . L . R . U . by J . E . Dobson = V in a form which while not in every single case identical with hand-marked phrasings nevertheless provides a new and operational segmentation of continuous text  . 
As part of the work done under contract to the National Research Council of Canada  , this programme is now being applied to the phrasing of a text of  20  , 000 words from the 0~uada Year Book of 1962 . 
16 . The normal rhythmical stress can also be provided algorithmically  . This makes possible a computerized ordering of the phrasings of a text alphabetically according to four different valuations  , i . e . 
( i ) the primary Snuclear ) stress ! ( ii ) the secondary ( = head ) stress ,   ( ill ) pendants ( = unstressed strings attached ) to primary stress ;   ( iv ) pendants ( = unstressed strings attached ) to secondary stress . 
This gives a semantic concordance ( called SE~O ) from which statistical and other information can be derived  . 
The computer can process text in this way as it could not do using the sentence as a unit  , and both more economically and with more information than it could by merely cutting the text into lines of the length of the computer print-out  . 
17 . The patterning of stressed and unstressed words , i . e . of stress-points and unstressed words can be expressed as a calculus of ordered pairs  , on which research is proceeding . 

Pmmcs
I . C . C . Fries : " The Structure of English "; Harcourt
Brace , 1952, Longmans Green , 1957.
R.Quirk , A . Dmckworth , J . Svartvik , J.P.L.
Rusiecki , A . V . T .   0olin : " Studies in the correspondence of prosodic to grammatical features in English "  ; IXth International Congress of Linguisti cs  1962  . 
2. See I.
3 . D . Crystal & R . Quirk : " Systems of prosodic and paralinguistic features in English "  ; Mouton ,  1964 ,   . Armstrong & Ward : " Handbook of English intonation "  ; 
Heffer , 1931.
W . Stannard Allen : " Living English Speech " ; Long-mans Green ,  1954 . 
0'0 on nor & Arnold : " Intonation of colloquial
English "; Longmans Green , 1961.
Arnold & Gimson : " English Pronunciation Practice "  , 
Lonaon Univ . Press , 1965.
J.T . Pring : " Colloquial English Pronunciation ",
Longmans Green , 1959.
R . A . Close : " Patterns of SpokenEnglish " ; Kenyusha ( Tokyo) ,  1954 . 
R . Kingdon : " The Ground work of English Intonation " ; 
Loh ~ mans Green , 1958.
Lado & Fries : " English Pronunciation " ; Ann Arbor ,  1954 . 
L . A . Hill : " Stress and Intonation step by step ";
Oxford , 1965.
W . R . lee : " An English intonation reader "; Macmillan ,  1963 . 
P . MacCarthy : " Endlish Pronunciation " , Heffer ,  1944/50 . 
D . Shillan : " Spoken English " , Longmans Green ,  1954/65 . 
5 . e . g . R . Gunter : in Journal of Linguistics 2, 2Oct .  1966 . 
. M . A . K . Halliday : " Some aspects of the thematic organisation of the English clause "  ; R an d
Memorandum , Jam . 1967.
. A . Baird : " Transformation and sequence in pronunciation "  , English Language Teaching X X ,  2 , J  ~ n . 

8. See 4.

9 . Margaret Masterman : " Commentaryo K the Guber in a hypothesis  . ; Methodos57-58, XV , 196310 . e . g . D . Jones : " Outline of English Phonetics ";
Cambridge , 1932.
D . Abercrombie : " Studies in Phonetics and
Lingu/stics ", Oxford , 1965.
11 . e . g . T . Ala Jouanine : " Verbal realization ia aphasia "  ; Brain 79 , part I , March 1965 . 
12 . R . H . Stets on : " Motor Phonetics "; Amsterdam , 1951 . 
13 . E . L . Tibbitte : in English Language Teaching XXI ,  1 , Oct .  1966 . 
14. A . Olasse : " The Rhythm of E~glish Prose ";
Blackwell , 1939.
15. See1 0.
16 . K . L . Pike : " The Intonation of Americ " English ";
Ann Arbor , 1946.
17 . D . Shill--: in Meta ( Montreal ) XI , 3, Sept .  1966 . 
D . Shill--: in Englieh ~ e Teaching XXI , 2,
Jan . 1967.
18. J.Y . Dolby : Reports to O.L . R . U . 1965-66.
19. See 18.
20 . J . E . Dobson : O . L . R . U . work paper ML 185, and later developments . ( see Appendix II ) . 

APPENDIXIA : Histogram of phrasing frequency versus phrasing length in words  . 
280  . ,~  1   20 o 100   3o ooo 60 og 2o o !  ! l 1   2   3   4 m
I w 56'78910
Phrasing length in words .9.
APPENDIXIB : Histogram of phrasing frequency versus phrasing length in syllables  . 
mal\[
O'lg1 PO
IO0imii . -? I ! 1   2   3 i 5   6   7   8   9   1'0 t 1'213   14151'6   1'718 ~ hrasim ~ len&~hin syllables . 
. tO-
APPENDIXII : 0omputer outpmt from phrasl ~ program . 

WHILETHEyARE WELLKNOWN ANDEST ABLISHED ,   , I THOU3HT ITWOUL?BEAPPROPiATE:ToDRA'~YOURATTE~TIO ~ TOCERTAIN OF THE DEDE PART MENT ALPROBRAM ~ ES 
THATAXE ~ ESS WELL KNE~WN
INRELATIO rJSHIP TCSER VICES
FORTHEABED,
BuTw HiCHNE vERTH~ESS
CANCONTRIBUTESIGNiFiCANTLY
TOTHEIRWELLBEI ~6.
ONEOF THESEI ~
THENATION ALWEL FAREGRANT PROGRA ~! ~ E
WHICH~ASESTABLISHED
A9LATEASNINETEENSIXTYTWO
WITHCONSIDERABLE SUPFORT ANDENT HUSIASM
FROM THE PROVINCIAL 60 VERNMENTS,
AND FROM THENATICN ALAND LOCAL VO ~ UNCARY WEL FA LF ARE

ONEMILLION DOLLARS
I ~ AVAILABLE
UNDERTHtSPROBRA~ME
OURIN6THECURRENT FISCALYEAR
AND THAT Af JOUNTI~TO iN CPE ASE
A ~ THERATEO ~ HALFA ~ ILLION DOLLAR 3
AYEAR .11.
