AUTOLING : ANAUTOMATEDLINGUISTICFIELD WORKER
by Sheld on KLEIN
+COmputer Sciences Department
University of Wisconsin
MADISON-WISCONSIN 53706
U.S.A.
Sheld on Klein , Barbara G . Davis , William Fabens , Robert G . Herriot , Bill J . 
Katke , Michael A . Kuppin and Alicia E . Towster.

A system intended to act as a linguistic field worker via teletype ' interaction with a linguistically unsophisticated informant has been designed and ls being progra  , ~med in extende ~ GOL for the Burroughs5500   and8500 computers . 
The system consists of the three major analytic components  ; a program for performing morphological analyses and deriving a segmentation algorithm for sentences in any language  ; a syntactic learning program that formulates contextfree and context sensitive phrase structure rules  ( monolingual learning component to be added later )   ; and a machine translation program that learns to translate in both directions between the query language  ( English ) and the language of the llve informant via bilingual transformations  . 
The informant may be viewed as a fourth component , and is assumed to be able to read and write English in standard graphemics  , and to be able to read and write h ~ on-English language in a phonemic notation  . 

The analytic methods used by the AUTOLIN @ are heuristic rather tha algorithmic  , and hence do not guarantee complete success . ~ he various components make use of protocols derived ~ from the experience of live field workers  . The representations of these strategies are relatively separeted from the analytic mechanisms of the program and  , accordingly , may be deleted , altered or incremented at the discretion of the system designers ~ As a partial illustration of the system's operation  , assume that the analystic process is at an intermediate stage  , i . e . some morphological , syntactic and translation rules have been posited  . Under the control of a monitor program , the system would test an exly formulated syntactic rule by : i-Generating  ( via usage of the new rule ) a form implied by the grammar but never elicited from the live informant  . 
2- Translating the Hypothetical form into the query language  ( English )  . 
3- Asking the informant via a teletype query to translate the 
En~glish output of step 2.
If the informant's reply is equivalent to the form derived from step  2  , the newly posited rule is maintened in the tenative grammar  ( although subject to later check )  . If the informant's reply deviates from the output of step  2  , the new rule is treated as suspect and subjected to further verification procedures  . If the deviating reply contains new morphological material  , the monitor program instructs the morphological analytic component to update its analysis  . The machine translation learning component would also recheck and update its rules  . 
The program as a whole continues its interaction with the informant in defini ~  . ly , using the just mentioned strategies as well as others  . At any given time the system designers may interrupt the field work process and ask the machine to list its corpus and current rules  . 

