SOMELINGUISTICARGUMENTS INFA VOUR OF MrBAR -HILLEL'S 
"NONUNIQUENESS " HYPOTHESIS
By Prof . REVEIN
Institut de Philologie Slave del'A cad~miedes Scimnces 
30 aavenue Troubnikovski


I . In his " Four Lectures " ( 1963 ) MrBar-Hillel advanced a hypothesis of " different grammars for the same languagelying peacefully side byside somewhere in our brain "  . In recent years the writer-quite independantly from Bar-Hillel  ( whose " lectures " were unknown to him ) -came across many arguments in favour of this " non-uniqueness " hypothesis  . Stylistic considerations involved were discussed in a paper read at the Semiotic Conference in Kazimlerz  ( Poland ) in September 1966 . In the following some grammatical questions are briefly sketched  ( the whole being presented in the writers book " Methods of Modelling and Typology of Slavic Languages "- to appear in summer  1967  )  ; ; 2 . There are no linguistic or logl cobstacles for producing words-out of morphs or simple syntactic groups  ( phrases ) -out of words or morphs by a FS ( finite state ) grammar . MrV auquois and his colleagues have already demonstra-ted this fact for words in their brilliant study on the use of models in mechani ~ cal translation  . 
3 . As for simple syntactic groups , one can get some insights into their structure by interpreting states on the diagramm of the FS grammar as linguistic categories  ( following in this a proposal by Bar-Hillel and Shamir from a work of  1960  )  . For this the writer considers a restricted FS grammar  ( the diagramm of such grammar does not contain two arrows labelled by the same nonempty word  )  . Under this restriction the distribution of non -elimlnable empty words provides for an adequate segmenting of the group  . It is-I-/worth mentioning that there is only on ~ restricted FS graummr for a given language  ( if abstraction is made from arrows labelled with the empty word  )  ,  4 . The described restriction must be abandoned , if homonymous constructions are investigated . Nevertheless it will be shown that even here the ~ distribution of the empty word labelling some arrows provides for an explanation of homonymity  ( e . f . there can be two different paths So they SI are $2~ S 4 flying S 5 planes So " and So they S 1 are $3 flying S6~S   5 planes So , giving the sentence they are flying planes . 
5 . It can be assumed that the units of the level of words and that of syntactic groups  ( in some cases also of simple sentences ) are generated not' only by a device equivalent to a phrase Structure grammar  ( e . f . a dependency grammar) , but may be generated by a simplifier device ( a restricted or non-restrlcted FS grammar )  , the only linguistically relevant difference being the fact that the former provides for a hierarchization of the parts  ( which can be semantically interpreted for all endocentric construction as a property -attributing relation  )  , and the latter does not . 
6 . Almost the same applies to the relation of phrase structure grammars to transformational grammars  , the latter providing for a still higher degree of hlerarchization  ( and semantic depth )  . 
7 . Following Bar-Hillel we assume that the speaker ( or the hearer ) constantly swltches , over from one to another way of production according to the needed  ( or possible ) degree of hierarchization . In one particular case-that of ? heseml -idlomatlc expressions-such a solution seems obvious  ( one can store them in the vocabulary as whole or construct them from parts  )  . But the most of human speech seems to be seml -idiomatic in a broader sense  . 
8 . The non-uniqueness of syntactic description can be compared with the non-uniqueness of phonemic solutions as described first by Yuen Ren Chao and shown in its full importance in ~ remarkable paper by Vjach  . 
-29 . On contemplating the picture of Grammatic Activity as a constant switching over from one device to another  , one is Struck by the analogy to the picture of many computing devices working in parallel  , which according to y on Neumann ( " Computers and Brain " ) explanes them ~ racle of human intuition in genral . 

