Research Group for
Quantitative Linguistics

Stockholm 40

KVALPM 337
June 19, 1967
SLANT GRAM MARCAL CULUS

HANSK ARLGREN
The work reported in this paper has been sponsored by Humanistiska for sknings r~det  , Tekniska for skningsr~det and RiksbankensJubi leums-fond  , Stockholm , Sweden , 
SLANT GRAM MARCAL CULUS

HANSK ARLGREN
KVAL , Fack , Stockholm 40, Sweden

Bar-Hillel and Lambek have outlined a syntactical description where the syntactical category symbols are written as fractions and where the analysis of a given sentence is performed according to rules very similar to common arithmetical reduction of fraction expressions with factors that cancel out  . 
Are there algorithms for applying such a calculus to normally complex natur-allanguage structures ?   1  . Aim We seek a formal recognition procedure that will enable us to decide for any g iven sequence of elements from a given language whether or not the sequence is grammatical  . 
We consider only one method , named that of a categorial grammar ( Bar-Hillel and Lambek )  . 
We make the following assumptions : ( a ) The knowledge we want to utilize for recogn ition can without residue be summarized in a list  , giving for each word the grammatical ca tegories the word belongs to  ; a set of combination rules for the category symbols  . 
( h ) A sequence of elements is grammatical if there exists at least one word-for-word t ranslation of it into grammatical ca tegory symbols which yields a symbol sequence that is permitted according to the set of combination rules  . We say that a symbol sequence which agrees wi th the combination rules is a grammatical symbol sequence  . 
Z . Shrinking Procedure
We assume that it is possible to verify the grammaticality of a symbol sequence by reduction of it to simpler and shorter sequences step by step  . In each step one or more symbols in the sequences are replaced by one new symbol  . 
The string replaced by one other symbol wi ll-to begin with without linguistic interpretation-be called a syntagrn  ; the replacing symbol will be called the name of the syntagm  . 
The work reported in this paper has been sponsored by Humanistisk a for sk-nings r ~ det  , Tekniska for sknings r ~ det and RiksbankensJub i leums fond  , Stock-holm , Sweden . 
By successive application of rewriting ru les  , the original sequence is shrunk to a no longer reducible residue j which may be just one symbol  . If this re-sidue is contained in a given l is t of permissible sentence patterns  , the sentence is grammatical . 
3. Slant Grammar Calculus
The kind of grammar under study we shalls imply call slant grammar from its sal ient trait  , the notation . It is characterized by the following proper ties : a  ) I The category symbols are all of the form a ( atomic symbols ) % or x/y ~ ( complex symbols ) \ x j where x and y in their turn have the same form ~ atomic or complex  ) as the categor--y symbols . We shall call a_and x numerators and X a denominator in such cases  . 
b ) Combinatorics is condensed to the following a ) a symbol sequence is a grammatical syntagmOf type t if and only if it can be reduced to t by successive application of one of the following t ~ o cancellation rules for contracting two neighbouring symbols of the-original or the so far reduced-sequence into one symbol : x/yy ~ xyy\x -* x where x and Z are atomic or complex symbols  . 
8 ) a grammatical sentence is a syntagm of a type which belongs to a short  1   -7 list of possible types of patterns , say types . 
The categorial notation seems helpful in establishing are cognition calculus  . 
Some programmable algorithms will be discussed in this paper  . 
It is easily seen that slant grammars of the type discussed are equivalent to context-f reephrase structure grammars  ( as far , i . e .   , as any generative grammar can be " equivalent " to a recognition grammar  )   . 
The cancellation rules presuppose that if the symbol sa/b and b are reduced to  a0 there must not stand anything between the syntagms a/b and b-i  . e .   , the ~ e must be no hole in the syntagma-al though the symbols a/b--and b may in the or iginal sequence stand widely apart  . 
A slant grammar for one given language may be written in many different ways  . 
Thus one may design the grammar so that the category symbols hav__~e at the most one ~ denominator and even so that they have only lef t denominator or only right denominator  ( Marcus )  . 
A natural way to design the grammar would be to let governed syntagms have simple symbols  ( ~ and the governing o--~complex symbols x/y , or inversely , so that the relation operator/operand would imply dependency relation  . 
However , the number of alternative symbols for each word will tend to increase if such a priori rules should apply to the whole set of symbols  . Given the algo-rithm for recognition , one may ask how the categorial grammar should be designed so as to give the minimum number of operations  , e . g .   , so as to yield on an average , the minimum number of possible word-for- word translations into grammatical symbo ls  . 
4. Reduction Procedure
To begin with , we shall inve ~ stigate some procedures for an a lysis of a given se-quence of category symbols  . Then , cf . 8 below , we turn to the practically more important p roblem when not a sequence o ~ r-symbols but a sequence of words is given  , each word having several potential categor i es  . 
5. Substituting Complex Symbols
We make a preliminary simplification of the problem by replacing every com-plex denominator in the sequence by a new  , arbitrary atomic symbol . Simul-taneously , we make corresponding substitutions of numerators : if we replace b/c by x as a denominator  , we also replace b/c by , x at some other place , where b/c appears as a numerator . 
Example : b/ ( c/a ) c/ab\a / ( b/c ) dd\ ( b/c ) = b/yya/xdd\x . 
Now , if b/c should happen to appear in numerator position more often in the given sequence than it does quade nominator  , this replacement can be per-formed in more than one way  . We then do perform it in more than one way ~ thus generating a number of alternative symbol strings to be processed  . Through this artifice , we have sequences where all denominators are certain to be atoms  , a fact which radically simplifies the analysis  . Instead we have made the symbol qelection procedure more difficult  . 
Since now all denominators are atoms and s ince b\a  ) /c is equivalent ob/ ( a/c ) and to b~a/c , the brackets are now redundant and can be omit ted  . 
The symbols , then consist of a kernel atom , possibly neighboured at one side or both by a slant__and another atom  , in its turn possibly neighboured by slant p lusatom  , and so on ,   a11 slants to the left of the kernel being til ted to the left and those to the right til ted in the opposite direction : r--a  , a/c , b\alc , g\f\e\d\alblcI .   .   .   . 
If one knows which element is the kernel . one does not even need the slants and we can proceed to simplify one step further : a  , ac , bac , gfeda_bc .   .   .   . 
where the underlined characters are numerator a toms and all others are de-nominator a toms  . 
(If the language has no ru les fo r the re la t ive o rder of syntagms  , grammatica-lity israpidly teste_~l ~ Just check that to each denominator atom corresponds one numerator atom of the same name  , leaving without a match just one numer-a t0r   , which then denotes the type of the syntagm . In this case we are permitted to treat the a to ms as numerators and denominators in the ari thmetical sense  . 
If we assign prime numbers to each atom and reduce in the standard arithme-tical way  , we end up with the numerical value of the type of the syn~agm  . This simple test may be worth considering as a first check  , even though the strUc-ture of the language be far more complex  .  ) 6 . Wanted : Non-Intersecting Vaults The two above-mentioned cancellation rules are  , rewritten in the modified ( simpler ) notation , fused into one : If in a string of characters  , an underlined character and a non-underlined character appear  , separated only by a space character and denot ing the same atom  , erase all three characters . 
Our task may also be formulated thus : Drawa connecting line from each denominator in thes tring to a numerator with the same name  , in the correct direction - i . e .   , not over the numerator of the own symbol-li kevaults over the strings  , in such a way that no two such vaults in tersect and that one numerator-say \[- remains untouched by any vault nor roofed by one  . If this succeeds , the string is a grammatical sequence of type t  . 
Example '.
ct7 . Identification of the Correct Numerator If all numerator symbols are different the task is trivial  . If several numera-toratoms carry the same name  , we have to decide which one is intended by a given denominator  . How do we do this ? The problem is in this form a purely computation alone - and no easy such problem  . 
8. Algorithm with Stacking
One algorithm can be summarized as follows : We have a given string of words and want to ascertain whether its type is one of the set T = Is  , t .   .   .   .  \ ]  . For each word we have a given set of alternat ive category symbols  . 
We first consider the simpler problem of analyzing a given string of category symbols and see if it can be reduced to s  . 
We join the ( not underlined symbol ) s followed by space to the beginning of the given symbol string  . When the reduction rules are applied the resultant string should vanish  ; we say it is reduced to unity . 
The string now contains exactly as many , say n , numerator and denominator atoms . Every numerator should be paired with one o ther denominator  ; the whole probhefn is to decide which denominator  . 
Whenever we thus pair two atoms , the intervening string of atoms should va -nish under reduction  , be reducible to unity . The same holds for the rest of the origina l string  , after the two paired atoms and everything between them has been removed : In general  , then , when one wants to test whether a pairing is a good match or not  , one is left with two simpler , isomorphic problems , those of reducing two strings to unity : s a a b f g g f _  ; d dee Normally we cannot decide beforehand which pairing to test  ; we must try alter-natives . For each arbitrary choice of procedure , we store the alternatives in an OR-stack , For each pairing we place the bracketed-outs tring in an AND-stack  , to be handled later when and if the string on our working table vanishes  . 
If we have emptied the table and the AND-s tack  , the given string was reducible to s . If we have an irreducible residue on the table  , we clear the table and try then extalte rnative if there is one in the OR-stack  , deleting what has been stored in the AND-s tack since the last arbitrary choice  ; if we cannot reduce to unity the string on the table and the OR-stack is empty  , we must give the task up . 
To minimize the number of pairings to test fo reach string we analyze  , we draw up a binary matrix M of potential matches  , with m .   . = 1, if the denomi-nator No . i and the numerator No . j are the same character and are placed in p roper order and reasonably wide a part in the string  . ( E . g .   , if i is a " non-recursive " type of syntagm  , " reasonably " placed means that , - is the nearest numerator written with the same character as i and placed on the proper side of i  . ) If any row or column in M is empty , the task is hopeless . Otherwise , we se-lect the atom whose row or column contains the least number of  1 ~ s . 
To analyze a string of words we assign to each word one symbol of the type ABCDE  , where C is the set of numerators in all the word ts category symbols  , B is the set of nominator atoms appearing immediately before the numerator in any one of the word's category symbols  , etc . On the string of these new symbols the above procedure  , mutatismut and is , is applied . Thus , instead of the condition in ( I ) above that two atoms should be the " same " characters  , it is required that one underlined atom A and a non-underlined atom B appearing separated only by space should fulfill the condition AnB ~  0  . 

I . Y . Bar-Hillel , A quasi-arithmetical notation for syntactic description  . 
Language Z 9,4758 (1953).
2 . J . Lambek , On the calculus of syntactic types , in " Structure of Language and Its Mathematical Aspects "  . Proc . 12th S , mp . Appl . Mith . , American Mathematical Society , Providence , R . I . , 1961, pp .  166-178 . 
3 . S . Marcus , Algebraic Linguistics ; Analytical Models , New York & London ,  1967 . 
