
CANOVERTSYNTACTICSTRUCTUREBE INTERPRETED
ASALOGICAL DEVICE ?
Helmut RICHTER and Georg HINCHA
University of Cologne , Germany

Attempts to reduce syntactic Structures to logical ones  , as known to the authors , tend to discover a special kind of underlying structure beyond the overt syntactic constructions  . In an alternative approach , the authors try to interpret as much as possible of overt syntactics trucoa ~  , as in ~ nediately representing the elements of a particular logical calculus  . The paper to be presented is planned to be an extension of the authors ' Syllog on Model which will be published for the first time at the Conference of the Societ as Linguistica 
Europea in Brussels , 2nd April , 1967.
It is asked whether the Syntactic elements of natural languages can be said to correspond to the elements of the calculus of multiple relations ~ i  . e . , may be identified with the particular variables , constants , and operators of that calculus . This seems to be possible not only in the general sense that relations remaining under a certain threshold of logical complexity can be verbalized  .   ( Such verbal paraphrasing may be exemplified by REICHEMBACH classifying the preposition between as a three-place relation  , obviously relying on con~nonunderstanding or alleged semantics  . This interpretation reminds of illustrative examples in textbooks of symbolic logic  . ) It should , however , also be possible to show that , regardless of content , syntactic elements organize into specific sets according to their functions as logical entities  . 
The authors tentatively start froathe axiomatic premises that the slot of the relation variables is filled by finite verb forms and combinations of the type copulative plus nominal  , whereas the slot of object variables is filled by nominals  ( at least those being granmmtical subjects and objects  )  . A sylloK on is defined as a syntactic construction when interpreted as a predicative function  . A syllog on is called an-syllog on if it is identifiable with an-place relation  . The class of the n-sylloga is then-syllogeme . 

All syntactic structures known to be universal are either !- syllogaior  2-sylloga   . ( Possibly , syllogeme ~ of higher order maY be necessary to account " for constructions with subordinate sentences  )  . In order to become a statement , generally a predicative function must be either quantified  , or its variables must be substituted by individual names  . While the constituents of the predicative function must be overtly present in natural syntax  , the explicit quantification of a syllog on is optional  . Thus , many sentences , taken in isolati0 ~ , remain mere predicative functions , which imposes serious restrictions upon any attempt to detect a peculiar covert structure  ( of separate sentences ) aimed at by some linguists under the labels of depth structure  , in nere Form , no most ructure , and the like . Rather , something-like " quantification by context of situation " must be conceived of  . 
On the other hand , many of those linguistic elements denoting a qualification are loaded with additional meaning  . It is distinguished , with regard to predicative functions in natural languages  , between the strictly extentional aspect of quantification and additional features in the production of statements  .   ( We therefore subsume both qua ~ ification and additional features under the more general label of amplification  . ) Variables in the different slots may be augmented by subordinate syntactic elements  . It is this device which provides natural languages with the possibility to hint  , within its restricted algorithm , at fairly complex relationships . Present investigation is devoted to the question how subordinate sentences can be accounted for along the lines of the present scope  . 
It is to be hoped that the syllog on model , with its emphasis on the overt structure as a restricted but clearly determined ~ mechanism  , will offer a ~ ew way of tackling with the problems of ambiguity in translation  . 
