1967 INTERNATION ALCONFERENCE
ONCOMPUTATION ALLINGUISTICS
An INTEGRATED LANG UAGE

S . Abraham
7; 13 Decembrle , Timlsoara IV , Rumania
Rumanian Mathematical Society

ABSTRACT . ? The outlines of an INTEGRATEDLANG UAGE THEORY are drawn  , with granmmr , semantics and text-theory as components . Problems of machine retrieva ! and machine translation are discussed on the basi ~ f the outlined theory  . 
At present it is unanimously agreed that no computational linguistics ? can be developed without an  ( before-hand constructed ) eX act language theory . 
(The computer - handling of such an exact4theory is innoway a transparent problem )  . The aim of the present paper is to outline such an exact integrated language theory  . 
The most promising basis for such a theory is the generative view on language  . 
Unfortunately the generative theory of language is at present unsatisfacto-rily developed  . First , this is true for generative grammars . But all other language theory constructions rely heavily on grammar  ( Katz & Fodor , Katz &
Postal , Abraham & Kiefer).
At present generative grammar consists of two components : a phrase-structure compgnent and a transformation alone  ( I do not touch upon the problems of the phonemic and morphophonemic levels  )  . In Chomaky's formula-tf on the phrase-structure component necessarily contains context-restricted rules  . But this has the unpleasant consequence that the most important decision problems are unsolvable  ( in this component )  . Besides this , no satisfactory solution is formulated for the generation of discontinous structures  . 
Chomsky's last formulation of this component has even some more in conveniences  . 
The transformational component has no exact formulation as the transformational rules are unsatisfactorily defined  . The problem of analysis is also not satisfactorily solved  . 
For these reasons I propose a generative grammar also of two components : a matrix component and a transformational component  . The matrix component consists of a regular elementary matrix ~ rammar  , containing only ( ordered ) elementary context-free rules , with Solvable main decision problems , and which generates in a natural way discontinous structures  . Within the transformational component the notion of transformational rule is exactly defined  . The problem of an adequate analysis ( of the generated sentences )  , the main problem of generative language theory , is s ~ is factor il M solved-l "" r by introducing the following analyses  ( graphs ) : morphological ( which usually is called the ( phrase-structure ) derivational graph )  , syntactical ( not considered in Chomsky's variant )  , configurational ( not considered in Chomsky's variant )  . 
At present no ( integrated ) language theory can be conceived without a ? semantic component  . In the theory which is outlined the semantic component is constructed as follows  . A finite number of semantic categories ( of the given language ) are considered . Each word of the language is characterized by a proper semantic matrix and its definition  . The dictionary of the language consists of triplets  ( word , proper semantic matrix , definition ) called lexical issues . Each word of a configuration is characterized by its Semantic matrix and its definition  . On the basis of the semantic matrices the notion of semantic regularity of configurations is defined  . The semantic regularity of a sentence is defined as the condition of the semantic regula-rity of all the configurations in the configurational analysis of the sentence  . The sense of a ( semantic regular ) sentence i ~' its configu ~ ational graph , with all the words substituted by their lexical issues  . The notion of truth is introduced ( in accordance with Tarski )  , and three types of analiticity are defined : grammatical  , semantical and deductive analit ? icity . 
On the basis of the above outlined theory an exact texteomponen ~? ~ is developed  , i . e . a component of the integrated language theory which deals with units larger than the sentence  . 
The outlined integrated language theory differs essentially from the constructions of Chomsky  , Katz & Fodor , Katzet Postal , Abraham & Kiefer . 
The exactly ( and formally ) constructed language theory permits to give a satisfactory solution to the theoretical i~based machine translation and machine retrieval  . This last is formulated in the terms of A- oriented ~ bstract  ( of a paper )  , ~- oriented abstract , N-oriented abstract , minimal N-oriented abstract , maximal N-oriented abstract and E-maximal superior N-oriented abstract  . 


I-R . C . CR05, J . C . 8 ARDIN , F . LEVY : " L ' automatisation dee recherches documen -taires  . Unmodule g~n ~ ral:le5YNTOL . "Gauthier-Villars , Paris ,  1964 , 260 p . 
2-A . BORILLO , M . COYAUD , J . VIRBEL : " Etu desurl ' indexation automatique " . 
Convention ' de recher chen ~ 65 -FR- 160 dela D~16gation   86n6rale ~ la Recherche 5c ientifique et Technique . Rapport Semeetrieln ! 1, juin 1966, 37 p . 
3-M . COYAUD : " Unem~thodes~mantiquedt indexation automatique de documents "  , International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , New York , mai 1965 , 32 p . 
4-M . COYAUDet N . 510 T-DECAUVILLE , " L ' analyse automatique des documents " , 
Mouton , Paris 1967 ( sous presee).
5 - " Un syst~me g~n~ral de documentation automat ique  , le ~ YNTOL " , Presses a cad@-miques europ 6 ennes , Bruxelles ,  1964 , 4 tomes , 588 p . 
