INSTITUTE OFG ENERAL

Groningen , March 1969.
Abstract of a paper for the Third International
Conference on Computational Linguistics to be held in 
Sanga Sg by I-4 September 1969.




Hobbes ~ Calculus of Words
Hobbes ' ( 1588-1679 ) philosophy of language transpires from his much quoted a dage : " Words are wise men's counters "  . 
( Leviathanch . IV , p .  25 , in the edition of 1885 ) Hiside as meant the rather revolutionary initiation of the preliminaries of computational linguistics  . 
Hobbes'pioneering work underwent two influences , namely : A ) a doctrinary influence from Nominalism ( e . g . Oo cam 1300-1350) , which was overlapped by B ) the disciplinary impact of contemporary Physics , more precisely of the newly established Mechanics  ( Galileo 156~-1641 )  . 
Leibniz (1646-1715) is Hobbes'mainheir ; he develops Hobbes ' ideas , together with questions of artificial languages and symbolic systems  , into the conception of Representation , which became the nuclear theorem of his philosophy  . 
Frege~ ( 1848-1925 ) and Russell ( born 1872 ) are the main participants in the last relay that took Hobbes ' initiative to our day  . )
Prof . Dr . Pieter A . Verburg
Hage preek kamp 4
Gronin ~ en-The Netherlands
HOBBES ' CALCULUSOFWORDS
Prof . Dr . P . A . V  ~ . ,-bu:g-\]agep:eekka ~, . p4
G ~ on in (', en Tel05900-~<355 ~
I . Hobbes'philosophy of language transpires from his much quoted a dage : Words are wise men's counters  . The context gives more evidence of his deeper intentions  ; the subsequent text runs as follows : " . . . . . . . . . .  , they do but reck on by them ; but they are the money of fools , that value them by the authority of an Aristotle , a Cicero , or a Thomas , or any other doctor whatsoever , if but a man . -' Subject to names ' , is whatsoever can enter into or be considered in an account  , and be added one to another to make a sum , or subtracted one from another and leave a remainder  . 
The Latins called account of money rationes , and accounting ratio cinatio ; and that which we inbills or books of account call ' items '  , they call nomina , that is ' names ' ; and then ce it seems to proceed , that they extended the word ' ratio ' to the faculty Of reckoning in all other things  . The Greeks have but one word , k 6 ~ os for both ' speech ' and ' reason ' ; not that they thought there was no speech without reason  , but no reasoning without speech : and the act of reasoning they called ' syllog is m '  , which signifieth summing up of the consequences of one saying to another  . " Hobbes'philosophy allows for the functioning of natural words as counters - or  , a she more often calls it : as marks ( in his Latin works : no tae ) -only in one respect , namely in the cognition of reality . The opposition ' cognitive versus communicative use of words ' is maintained consistently  ; the following diagram may serve to make this clear : 
DIAGRAMI : Hobbes (1588-1679)
Invention , Demonstration ( Words as )   ( Reason )   ( Words as )   ( N?t--~Marks ) e ' ~ I or I ( Si ~ Signs ) Reality ( -- (   ( c ~ i tive )   ) Mind ) -'*  ( c ~ unicative )   ) P ' @ Others -2-The inventive application of natural words puts them to a nenno-etical-i  . e . intelligence-integrated-and instrumental use , which accurately handled turns out to be a reliable procedure for attaining rational truth  . In so doing Hobbes posited the most striking and consequential linguistic theory of his time  . 
The sign-use of natural language is allowed to be weaker  ; the interhuman communicative application is not a philosopher's privilege  , but the everyday practice of ordinary people . They operate with prudence , which is the common mind as it consists of memor ~ y_~perception and imagination  . Philosophers , on the other hand , operate with their calculative reason , which is the counting and reckoning mind . 
Hobbes elaborates on his calculus of words in the sense that he demonstrates that the syntactic procedure is of an arithmetical nature in so far as we add or subtract the notions of which the common words are urged to become the bearers  . 
2 . Regarding influences Hobbes underwent from earlier theories and philosophies  , we must first remember that he was an excellent classicist  , who had acquired a thorough knowledge of all the outstanding authors of Antiquity  . We suspect that Hobbes ' opposition ' inventio versus demonstratio '  , is related to Plato's concept of the dual function of language  , namely diakrine in towards things , did aske in towards fell ow men . 
There is little basis for thinking of Hobbes as an Aristotelian  . 
In the domain of language-theory and philosophical grammar  , the ~ iddleAges had yielded are a list grammar , largely under the influence of Aristotle's theories  . The socalled Grammatica Speculativa did not appeal to Hobbes and only the fact that Leibniz  , who continued and improved on Hobbes ' work , reintroduced this theory , makes it worth mentioning at all . 

The main trends Hobbes'linguistic philosophy had to cope with  , were more topical . We can distinguish a doctrinar ~ and a discipl in ary trend  . 
A . Nominalism had been strong and dominating since Ockham  ( 1300-1350 )  . Nominaliste pistemology had taken the following basic form: 
DIAGRAMII : Nominalism
Reality(only ) ((( Intellectus , individua )) (-- Words , nominal--( concept us , intentio To the nominalist , the direct intellectual or conceptual approach to reality is primary  . From this approach he learns that reality consists of individua  . This immediate inventive intellection is fundamental and the insertion of words into it is in a way redundant and possibly even misleading since many words stand for nonexistent generalities  ; reliable nomina only refer to indivi~ua . What Hobbes evidently learned from nominalist doctrine  , was the intermediary role language could play as a means  , as a tool in inventive thought-an epistemological model  , which , however , he did not take over along with the critical and suspicious attitude towards language inherent in the nominalist view  . For that matter , a critical attitude towards common language also characterized the politician and philosopher whom Hobbes served as a secretary ~ namely Francis Bacon  ( 1561-1626 )  . Well-known are the latter's warnings against the pitfalls forming a constant danger for those who make to one gligent a use of words  . His ' i do la for i ' especially , focused attention on lineal errors and inconsistencies  . 
B . A much stronger impact on Hobbes'p ~ ilosophy came from Mechanics  , the newly established subdiscipline of Physics , founded by Galileo andolosely related to the new ideason motion of contemporary astronomers like Kepler  . The scientific nature of Mechanics is in this case of great importance  . 

Inventors and designers of all kinds of machines were numerous in the Quattrocento and Cinquecento -one of them the great artist Leonardoda Vinci  ( 1452-1519 )  . Some published their works , though in the vernacular , and Galileo was acquainted with such writings . In Galileo this tradition of practical or aftmanship and technical skill merges with the academic tradition of the Aristotelian philosophy of nature  . In other words : The practical manipulation of arithmetical and geometrical knowledge as acquired in the scholastic quadrivium on the one hand  , and theories about natural motion that were radically non-mathematical and linked up with the pseudo-explanation of a transition from potentiality to actuality on the other hand  , united in Galileo . 
His great achievement , which in hiseraplaces him in the category of outstanding scholars and inventive minds like Planck  , de Broglie , Einstein and Heisenberginourera , wash is application of mathematics to physical research  , more precisely , his analysis of macroph~sical motion by means of count in ~ and  measurin6   ( As a very simple but most significant example we point to the socalled parallelogram of forces  )  . 
Galileo himself was highly conscious of the importance of his innovation and the perspectives it opened up  . This is evidenced by statements like the following : " The book of nature is written in an alphabe ~ of triangles  , squares , parallelograms , circles , etc . " Kepler had already said that the ' caelestic machina ' was no __~ t ' in stardivinianimal is  2 sed in star horolo ~ ii ' and Galileo often expressed himself in similar terms  , especially in his famous a dage : ' universum horolo ~ iumest '  . 
The following diagram represents Galileo's position : 
DIAGRAMIII : Galileo (1564-1641)
Physics ) ( Means :) (' intellet to ,   ( Motion in Astronomy )  ~--~  ( Mathematical )   ( - - - q ( ~' and Mechanics )   )   ( Symbols )   ( ( Reason )   -5-The transition to a philosophical theory like that of Hobbes was facilitated because Galileo himself led the way by talking about the Universe as a whole instead of about Physics as the object of his science  . 
The transition from artificial mathematical symbolism to a more general concept of natural language was also expedited by Galileo himself already comparing cyphers and figures to an alphabet  . 
H . obbes ' extrapolation from Physics to Universe and the Substitution of natural language words for mathematicals ~ mbcls can be represented as follows: 
Diagram IV : from Galileoto Hobbes
Galileo: Physics4----   Symbols4---- Intellect gobbes: Reality4--- Words ~ Reason This part of Hobbes ' conception then is the left half  ( Invention ) of Diagram I . 
The inventive use of words takes the form of a calculus  . In itself the embedding of words as tools in the cognitive process corresponds to the nominalist ' ennoesis '  , i . e . inclusion into thinking , of nomina . Yet there is a decisive difference in evaluation : for the nominalist the use of words is firstly optional and secondly unreliable and full of uncertainty  . For Hobbes , however , the computational use of natural words is firstly necessary to obtain rational  , i . e . true insights , and secondly , provided the calculation is performed accurately , fully certain and reliable . The calculation can only succeed if performed by philosophers  , i . e . rationalist philosophers , -the " wise men " of his above quoted adage . 

For the calculative use of words Hobbes introduces the Latin term ratio o in ari  , i . e . reasoning and reckoning in one ! In his view it consists of addition and subtraction  , in short , of-6-arithmetical operations . He adduces all manner of evidence , for example that the Laticn ratio-a~dcome to that the Greek loges too-had alwaFs properly signified reokonlmg  , counting , calculating , etc . ; further , that ' syllogism ' properly means addition , summing up , etc . 
So Hobbes'calculus with words corresponds to grammar or syntax in natural language  , conceived of as an operation with words ; it may be mentioms d that in this view the d~namic and functional character of syntax as a kind of technical procedure is retained-this in contradistinction to its fate in Leibniz ' philosophy  . Natural words are , for philosophers , usable as counters , i . e . as premeditated artificial symbols . There is more to this mark/nor a role imparted to natural signs  . As a matter of fact , their symbolic character is , in Hobbes ' opinion , their essential nature , right from the beginning of creation . A daminvented words exarbitrio ! This theorem subsumes the concept of natural language and its units under that of artificial symbolism  . We must hold against this thesis that the drawing up of  ar4y artificial symbolism is only possible because of our human endowedness with a lingual faculty  . 
Any system of symbols is a posteriori to natural " linguality " and only possible because of the a prior i and innate human language faculty  . Hobbes'subsumption is like the statement : Look how that mother resembles her daughter !  3  . LEIBNIZ - and not Spinoza or Locke-accepted and digested the inheritance of Hobbes'philosophy of language  . Leibniz was a character averse to any sort of quarrel  , dispute , controversy , contrast , opposition , and conflict in any form . 

In religion , politics , science and philosophy heen deav-cured to achieve harmony by stressing mutualities  , agreements , similarities , gradualities , shading transition and so on . Let me examine the circumstances in which Leibniz conceived of his mathematical philosophy of representation  . 
~ . Hcbbesbegan publishing as early as 1642 and continued until the year of his death ,  1679 . In 1668 " An essay towards a real character and a philosophical language " by J  . Wilkins appeared in London . It is not fortuitous that the seventeenth century in particular was very fertile with regard to artificial language projects  . The vital point is that these artefacts are not intended to be learned as an easier means of interhuman communication-Hobbes'demonstrative use of language !- but  , quite positively ~ as " the distinct expression of all things a ~ notions "- i  . e . 
as an inventive language " which may likewise be styled philosophical  , rational and universal " as well . For Leibniz the numerous artificial language projects bridged the gap-see Diagram IV- between Hobbes'exact  , symbolic-notative , computational calculative and artificial appl ication of a natural but unfit material  , namely natural words of a natural vernacular , and the establishment of an a priori , purely artificial system of symbols , i . e . mostly written characters or figures . In the inventory of problems which Leibniz encountered in the second half of the century  , the numerous newly-constructed artificial languages proved to be very important for his elaboration of Hobbes ' initiatives  . 
B . Leibniz found that on the side of the demonstrative natural signs in interhuman discourse it was possible to operate calculat ively as well ~ This insight rendered Hcbbes '  -8-functional opposition of inventive mark versus demonstrative sign essentially invalid  . We see this where Leibniz expects in the case of interhuman disputes about matters of ethics or religion to bring about a solution through mathematically stric ~ and rationally convincing arguments  ; in such cases , claims Leibniz , we can say : Calculons ! The fact that Invention and Demonstration coincide is also significant in that the " others "  , i . e . fellow-men ,   ( right hand side of Diagram I ) now also belong to reality ( lefthand side of Diagram I )  . If with Leibnizwe further assume that nonhuman plus human reality together form a huge collection of units-in his terminology ' monads '- it is clear that e~ch human  , rational monadem its spontaneous signals to other monads  . Consequently this process must be reciprocal and any human monad must operate at once as a transmitter and a receiver  . This means that Leibnizmingles the originally nomina \] istactive mind theory with a passive mind coucept  ( tabular as a ) similar to that of the realist ~ rammatica speculativa  , which , il ~ deed , here introduces . 
~ . And he does not even stop here . Towards the end of his l~feLeibn iz taught that thei  . e is no question of any impact on the monads from outside  , for this would interfere with the pre-establ is hed progress of world history  . Monads have no windows . Their existence is representation . The following image , naturally not Leibniz ' own ~ ma ~ serve to il lust rate this point  . The monads resemble a number of cinemas , completely shut off from outside , where day and night the same endless film is being shown with perfect synchronization  . The only variation possible is ~ hen them on a dis a sleep and the light being  , as it were , somewhat weaker , illumination and clarity are reduced . The Leibniz-Janidea of representation reaches Von Humboldt via Wolff  . 
-9-~ . Hobbesbased the certainty that he would obtain true and reliable results from his reasoning on the accuracy and correctness of the computational procedure  . His calculus with words is analogous to the in traling a al operations with words that we call syntactic or grammatical procedure  . II obbes was only an arithmetician , and a poor one at that . Leibniz was a geometer as well , i . e . an all-round mathematician , and a brilliant one too . Hobbes continues to see grammar as a procedure , a computational , an arithmetical procedure , but nevertheless a process . The older Leibnize ventually arrives at a static view of the world and a geometrically conceived model of grammar  . Any language , whether natural or artificial , any mathematical symbolism , mirrors in its own system the structure of the ? universe  , the order of the world ; and this correspondence is fundamentum veritatis , ths very basis of truth . LsibrJiz'static parallelism replaces Hobbes ' dynamic-calculative approach  , which strives for the truth . For Leibniz , the truth is present a priori , in the deep structure , the " grammaire rationelle et universelle " of any sign-or symbol system  , except that in a , ratherir rational , natural language it may be somewhat obscured . To demonstrate this he uses a geometrical comparison : if for example  , a circle with inscribed figures is viewed from a point not along its vertical axis  , it will appear oval , but the inner order and proportions will be preserved in spite of the distortion  . 
In the latter case there is only less " clarity " because of the shift in " point derue " but the fundamental adequacy and truth is maintained  . 
-104 . We wanted to confine ourselves to describing and historically locating Hobbes ' arithmetical philosophy of language  . 
And we must confine ourselves to merely sketching Leibniz ' role as Hobbes'heir and successor  . Just as it may happen in architecture that the initiator of a new style is out-stripped by a successor  , so , in language philosophy , Leibnizovershadows Hobbes . In linguistics proper Leibnizinfluenced the founder of the discipline  , Bopp , though indirectly , through Wolff ; in mathematics he influenced Frege , who wanted to draft a Leibnizian " Begriffs so hrift "  ; in philosophy and mathematical logiche influenced Russell in the farter's attempt to create an ideal language  , which here commended as the goal of the philosophy of language  . 
" The ' ideal language ' would satisfy perfectly the intentions to make the relation of ' picturing ' the sole essential basis of symbolism  . . . . . Russell . . . . is unwilling to abandon the notion that language must " correspond " to the " facts "  , through one-to-one correlation of elements and identity of logical structure  . "  ( Black ) It has been said that the failure of Machine Translation was due to the absence of an adequate philosophy of language  ; I feel inclined to agree . Such a philosophy is still in its infancy and it cannot be successful without scanning the past for its origins  . 
Prof . Dr . Pieter A . Verburg
Hagepreekkamp4-Gronin~en
The Netherlands
