
ANAPPLICATION OPCOMPUTER TECHNIQUES TO ANALYSIS
OF THEVERB PHRASEIN HINDIAN DENGLISH :
A Preliminary Report
Dr , LoM , Khuboh and anl and WoW . Glover
Authors worked on the Project at ~ oon a , India with the facilities of the computer CDC 3600-160A installed at the Tats Institute for Fundamental Research  , Bombay . 
The Project uses two sets of data : a corpus of verbal phrases  drawl1 from a modern Hindi play and a oomplet@para-digm of Englisk sentences  generate6 from the kernel " he eats i % " . The computer was programmed to group into classes the words occurring in identical contexts  , and substitute in the data corpus for these words a reference to the class where they have been put  . The classification and substitution thus produced suggested phrase patterns  , with the filler class for each tag meme defined as the class represented in the particular slot of the pattern  . 
The results obtained with a criterion for classification of " identical context one-deep on both sides " were quite satisfactory  . In Hindi 25 classes were formed from the corpus of 65 phrases . At least one word was classified in each 37 ( 62% ) of the phrases and all words were classified in 3 phrases ( 15% )  . \ With an increased sample of similar data these percentages would be expected to increase  . 
In English 24 patterns were obtained and 15 classes were formed from the full paradigm of ll2 sentences . 
However , asso ~ of the classes contained grammatically dissimilar members  , the criterion was altered to " identical context two-deep on both sides "  . The results with this criterion appear less promising in Hindi  . The data sample was extended to 248 phrases of three words or more . The machine discovered 223 patterns and 13 classes , and in only 29 patterns ( 13% ) one word was replaced b ~ a class reference . This criterion , however , enjoyed some success in analysing the English paradigm which is  , of course , highly restricted data . With the full paradigm , the machine discovered 30 patterns and 19 classes .   18 of them are quite homogeneous in membership and the sentences generated by the patterns usir ~ these classes are all legitimate  . 
wou ~__ is felt a useful basis for further investigation beto refine the broad classes formed with a " one-deep " criterion in a subsequent run through the sammor new data  , 
