DIAL ECTOLOGY BY COMPUTER
Gordon R . Wood
English Faculty , Humanities Division
Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville , Illinois 6Z025 USA

A familiar postulate is that computer techn i ques offer to stu-dents of naturall anguage an opportunity to examine linguist icevi-dence far more exha : ustively than was possible in the past  . Thus the machine may be viewed as a tool used to sort and count data in the traditional ways and to introduce some new variables such as the attitudes of speakers toward their own language as their contempo-raries use i t  . 
To consider this latter possibility is to go against some scien-tificatti tudes as defined in descriptive linguist ics  . As one statement written for the popular p ress goes " all types of speech  ( literary , dia-lectal , rustic , slang , criminal argot , etc .   ) are of absolutely equal merit\[to descr iptive linguists\]  . That is to say , questions of mer-it or value just do not enter into the picture of linguistic an a lysis  , however important they may be in the study of l iterature  .   , , 1 But in the United State surban linguist i cs must not only ask what is the Eng-lish usage of representatives of the poor  , the middle class , and the very rich , but also about the social judgments which co lor the lin-guistic worlds of those separate groups  . As that branch of dialectolo-gy is prac ticed now  , the emphasis is ong a the ring the spoken pat terns of language  .   2 For these and other students of naturall anguage  , the computer promises a means for classify ing both the presence and absence of / t/in of ten and measuring that information on as ca le of at-titu des such as " right  , "" too fancy , t , and " ungrammatical " . 
This is the golden promise . The state of computeral chemy , however , is such that one can profitably examine what has been done with computers as aids in the study of American English dialects  . 
Purpose.
This paper will sketch the development of computer procedures which have been used in the analysis of regional American English outside of literary contexts  , It will note that lists of words and phrases have grown in complexity of count  , and that some larger units of spoken sentences are being described  . Having shown what has been done , it will suggest additional uses of the computer in preparing clearer displays of local variations in usage  . 

Collecting techniques.
If dialectology , defined broadly , is the collection and analysis of natural speech in a cornrnunity  , then American dialectology has gone about this endeavor is three or more ways  . One is to conduct a controlled interview during which the investigator  , guided by entries on worksheets , asks questions and writes the informant's replies in a phonetic script  . 3 A second , based on data collected by the first procedure , is to give an informant a printed questionnaire and ask him to encircle those words which he actual ~ y uses and to leave unmarked those which are foreign to hishabits  . A third , seeking to obtain only pronunciation , asks the informant to read a set passage aloud in his normal speaking voice ~  5 And the last one to be name dasks a speaker to look at a set of numbered pictures and to say something about them  ; his remarks are recorded by means of a tape recorder and are transcribed later  . 6, 7 Anal ____ . ysis and publication . 
The mid-twentieth century marks a turning po int in the sorting and publication of data about spoken American English  . Manual work was required in the entire p reparation of a  1949 study of the vocabu-lary of the Atlantic communities and of a parallel study of p ronuncia-tion the re--the latter publi shed in  1961  . B ,   9 Between those dates Atwood in Texas and Wood in Tennessee had begun to punch their lin-gu istic data on cards for later machine sort ing  , counting , and pub-lication .  10 , 11 Comparisons of the tables in Kurath ( 1949 ) with those in Atwood ( 196 Z ) will show that while both works list a common re-gional vocabulary  , the Atwood study shows an increase in the prec i-sion of measurements of occurrence  . These calculations and the mul-tiplicity of tables showing gradation in word choice among age groups are a reflection of Atwood's use of computers  . 
Problems in transcription.
If the researcher employs a printed questionnaire , he has no difficulty in converting those words chosen and conventionally spelled into acceptable punched entries which will emerge in the same spelling in a print out  . But if he has made a phonetic transcription or if he has a tape recording as his basic doqurnent  , then he faces a variety of problems in preparing the document for computer analysis  . While science fiction , reversing the computer processes which generate artifi ~ zial speech  , imagines a computer that can read a voicetape , transcribe it into its proper regional representation  , and compare it with tapes from other dialects , fact requires linguistic researchers tions or o ther restrictions that apply  . 
Let us consider the problems of a researcher who is using as basic documents a group of tape recordings which have comparable units of discussion stored on them :  1Z Conventional English spelling presents no problem  . The upper case Roman alphabet of computer prin to uts serves all of his needs : cat will be punched and printed CAT  . But he will need to alter the basice v idence in certain ways since he will re turn to the natural pattern in a different coding  . He will normalize all pronunciation so ? a word into the conventional spelling  . If , for instance , some informants say/r / and others drop i t  , he will spell it regularly : law + Jr ~ and law appear as LAW  ; car and mirror-/r \] appear as CAR and MIRROR  . And he will want to consider marking dist inctions when written conventions use ones ign for two functions : Tom's here  ( contracting is ) and Tom's hair ( in-dicating possession ) might be distinguished from each other in this way : TOM/SHERE and TOM * SHAIR  . As this audience knows all too well , such normalizing shelp when one comes to sor ting a body of evidence alphabetically by computer  . 
The pronunciation text has to be prepared separately  , a second transcription of the amount of spoken detail that the researcher wants to code and analyze  . Whether he is transcribing English or some other language  , he has to come to grips with the diffe rences between the Roman alphabet and the In ternational Phonetic Alphabet which serves most of us for phonetic transcriptions of speech  . Some let-ters match well enough . Phonetic\[b\]isadequately represented by B  . For others there is no match : phonetic\[a e \] has no immediate equivalent in the availab leletters  ; and literal Q has no literal match in IPA  . Thus if the researcher has transcribed the American English pronunciation of catas \[kaet\]  , he has K and Tath and but must de-vise something for \[ ae\]  . Two solutions are possible . Some research-ers prefer to use numerical ra ther than alphabetic codes for all of the sounds to be represented  . \[kaet\]might be coded by the number pairs 053303  , to use a code that has been employed .   13 This writer finds a codelike that hard to remember and to read  ; his preference is for codes that area l most entirely alphabetic  . Thus for the lacking \ [ ae\]one could subst it ute the otherwise unused Q  , or he could augment one of the existing vowe lsso that as A * it would stand for\[a e\] and asA for\[a \] of father  . Final choice is determined by ease of read ing rather than computer convenience  . IsKQT or KA*T the As for coded annotations about stress and juncture ~ this writer has felt obliged to leave them and other supersegment altraits out of his p reparation of the text  . Since these phonemic features will vary from sentence to sentence  , from person to person , and per-haps from dialect to dialect , it has seemed to him that if they were encoded  , a program would have to be devised to tell the computer under what circumstances to treat different codings as being ' the-same  . " Omission reduces the programming difficu lties  . 
Word geographies of American regional Engli sh syntax have not appeared  ; the nearest that one comes to that desideratum is a study of variant verb forms in the At lantic states  . 14 It is here , then , that computer processing can bring together ev idence about strings of words that will enable dialectologists to compares tandard and local patterns of sentences t ructure  . But let us dispose of a few other de-tail so fediting the spoken text before we turn to its analysis  . 
It does not seem likely that a grammar and syntax of American regional English will emerge from the phonetic evidence  . First , a part of the evidence is missing -- the supersegmental part for instance  . 
Second , the tedium of preparing and proo/reading the needed amount of text presents an almost in superable barrier  . As a consequence , regional English grammar and syntax will be constructed from sentences conventionally spelled  . 
The researcher must establish word boundaries and decide on the rr~ust suitable grammar  . Let us assume that he has chosen a slot and filler grarn lnar on the Fries model  . 15 His word boundaries , then , will allow the word to be put into files in computer memory which correspond to syntactic slots  . . That is , the researcher must decide what is " one word " and punch the text accordingly  . If the source recording has wood pecker and rail fence  , as it does , the decision can often go either way . For computer purposes it may be good to present each as " one word " in the form WOODPECKER and R ~ ILFENCE  ( or if that looks too strange , RAIL-FENCE) . Conversely , it may be more economical to present each as't ~ ro words " -- WOODPECKER and RAILFENCE  . 
Discovery procedures.
Having stored the dialectal evidence in sentences made up of strings of conventionally spelled  , words and in segments of phonetic transcription , the researcher must direct the computer to look for details which characterize that dialect and then to apply the same search techniques to hither to unexamined words  , phrases , and sen-The obvious first step for Amer i can dialectology is to search computer memory for selected words which have been used to iden-tify the major dialects of that language along the Atlanticse aboard  . 
If one has used a printed questionnaire , some words will be stored in memory with an indication that no one chose them  ; if , on the other hand , one has used a direct interview procedure , he will have pro-vided computer memory with no guide to the missing lexicon  . When the computer is directed to follow a concor  ; dance or listing program , it will ultimately report that from the printed questionnaire  0 persons chose a wendaw bread and some half dozen other words  , 10 chose car-benoil , 73 chose double single tree , and so on Let us assume that the spoken record had the same numbers of known choices --  I0 and 73  , but silence for a wendaw bread ; one cannot conclude that a wendaw bread is either used or unused among those informants  . The available raw evidence , then , helps to shape the model of a linguistic community  . 
The tabulated responses to a pictorial interview manual may give a wider range of local words  , hence a different base for the model , than do other techniques . For the dialectally distinctive faucet and spigo____~t  , Table 1 provides an illustration of the range of synonyms elicited by a picture of a device to control the flow of water  . The computer counted these according to the county in which each informant was living  . In Table I # 1 stands for counties in east Tennessee and north A labama  , and  #Z stands for those in central and south A labama  . 
Under other circumstances this code couldstand for young-old  , city-country , we althy-poor , or any other pair that was pertinent , 
Table I#1 #Z
FAUCE TlZ8
SPIGOT 34
WATERFAUCET 43
WATERSPIGOT 12
HYDRANT 11
WATERHYDRANT01
WATERTAPI 0
HANDLE 4 Z interviewer turns to histape recordings . Did the informants really mean the whole device when they said handle ? Or was their atten-tion directed to one of its par  ts2 Unless the interviewer has made field notes which let him say no jhe must accept the tabu lated re-cord as it stands  . 
Once the regional vocabulary has been ident if ied  , the research is then directed toward other words in the stored text  . As their oc-currence is matched with what has already been established  , the graded lists of local words will be extended  . Along with the tables which show the dia lect models of faucet and spigot will bes imilar tables of such diverse words as beard  , whiskers , chinw hiskers , or b and it , robber , hold-upman , or the names of numbers -- seventeen ninety two  , seventeen nine two , and seventeen hundred and nine-ty two . 
The examination of phonological variants v ~ ill probably come next  . For American English the dialectal dif ferences will hinge on variations in the sound of stressed vowels more often than not  . A familiar instance is that of pen and p in ; in some dialects the sounds of the stressed vowel contrast  , while in others they come under a common phoneme / I /  . The computer count of coded phonetic variat i on shown in two words in the same parts of Tennessee and Alabama as was shown earlier occurs in Table II  . 
BENCH =
NEST =
TABLE II #1 #Z

Es 00
IS1I
As IZ
IS 87.1
EsIS00

E  ~ l 4.
I ~5 Z
Asl 0
IS8Z1
E , I  #Z 3

This model of all ophonic variations obviously is a more complex structure than is that of synonyms in Table I  ; thus the compari-son of the geogr ~ aphic and social boundaries of these two aspects of common language habits is difficult  . At the present time it is done by inspection rather than by computer  . Of course some of the difficulty would disappear if the allophones were coded as phonemes  ; this would reduce five symbols to two--E #and I *  . For a socio-linguist or a dialectologist to do so is to lose details that may be of great importance later  . As everyone knows , social distinctions are attached to such things a ~s the presence or absence of / r /  , the separation of pen from pi___~n , and so on . 
The last stage and the newest sort of computer aided research in dialectology is in the grammar and syntax of local sentences  . As has already been said , computer research will be directed toward conventionally spelled transcriptions of the spoken sentences  . And the grammatical process itself is essentially one of building a con-cDrdanc ?  . 
The first sentences concorded are those which have in them the words which earlier were used to identify the local dialects  . For grammatical analysis , the whole sentence is much too long ; rather one selects the two slots on either side of the cnncorded word itself  , The concorded word is viewed as a base . Table II lillustrates con-cording with rna____n ( synonym of b and it and robbe_~r ) with words in numbered slots with an A or C prefix  , i . e . antecedent and complement . 
The coded areas of Tennessee and Alabama are listed at the left  . 
TABLE III /%2   A1 BASE C1 CZ # 1 ISA MANHOLDING ANOTHER # 1 GUESSTHIS MANISH OLDING # 1 STARSAMAN WITHA # 1 IT/SAMAN HEHAS# 1 AHOLDUP MANG OTA # 1 ATNIGHT MANWITHA # 1 HOLDINGUPMAN .   .   .   .   .   . 
 #ZT HEH OLD UP-MA NH ASA #2 OF HOLD UP-MAN HAS GOT #2 HOLDUPAMAN WITHA  #ZT HEH OLD UP-MAN HOLDING UP#THE HIGH WAY MAN WITH A Computer programs removed periods and similar internal punc -tuation in order that those marks would not be treated as text words  . 
This action results in run on sentences li kethe one with stars at its beginning  ; obviously at one state stars and a marked the end of one sentence and the beginning of the next  . Thus the structural slots are continuous f rom sentence to sentence  , rather like the intersentence syntax of trad itional grammars which discuss pronouns in one sentence and their antecedents in earlie r sentences  . The solution given here is not very satis factory  , but no better one comes to mind when we are faced with the analysis of syntax that goes from one utterance to the next  . 
Notice , though , that some markers are retained . The slash with its , and especially the presence or absence of the hyphen with hold up  . 
There the marker serves to set nouns ( unmarked off from modifiers of some kind ( marked by a hyphen . Again , the marker serves when the columns are searched ; it enables grammatical matchings to go in two different directions for the same word provided the matching for dialect alg rammar is extended to that degree of ref inement  . 
The grammar-syntax search does not begin with the base word  . 
Its regional dialectal characteristi cs have already been identified as part of the lexicon  . If it is some special variant--you' uns  , youse in contrast with you ___: , you-all--the concordance program will al ready have identified it in its several aspects  . The concern , then , is with other words . Since the lists of prepositions , articles , quantifiers , conjunctions , and auxiliaries -- are short , they can be put into the computer memory as shor t dictionaries  , each with its identifying label . 
Then having alphabetized the contents of each column  , the computer will seek to match column by co lumn the words there with those in the dict lonaries  . Each match in column A2 is counted according to its grammatical ca tegory  , then in colum A1 , and so onto the end . 
As grammatical categories compete regional ly  , the computer keeps a running inventory . At present these inventories are simplysta tedac-cording to the relative frequency o f occurrence of each part of speech in that co lumn whether it is pronouns  , cornjunctions , or something else . 
Inspection of the computer print out will show ma____ng_o_ot_a  , man with a , and man and a , as well as in the morning , of amorning , and mornings . 
But the present record of variables in syntaxi sfar from clear  . 

Results and possibilities.
One is not being superciliously criti cal of the computer based studies of spoken Americ an English when he says that dialec to logists have not exploited the full capabilities of computers as research too ls in linguistics  . In the published work of Atwood and Wood the tables derived from computation differ f rom those in Kurath chiefly in the ref inement of measurements that accompany the word lists  . 
The refinements are certainly needed , but they do not reflect all of the capabi lities of the machine to manipulate the data  . 
In studies that srenot intended as dialec to logy  , one finds much of the same thing . The Jones-Wepman word count of spoken Engli sh resembles on a small scale the Thorn dyke -Lorge word counts of printed English that were assembled several generations ago wi thout the aid of computers  . Perhaps the one difference is that Jones and We prn an under took a part-of-speech classification of their data  , a first step toward a grammar and syntax of spoken English  . Other related first steps have been taken toward the construction of slot and filler grammars of the main language and a few of its dialects  . It does not se ~ rn likely that transformational -generative grammar will contribute much to solving the analytical difficulties largely because that style of grammar is interested in the deep and general str~gtures rather than the surface grammar found in dialectal variations  . 
As for applicable computer programs , those that serve in the construction of concordances and lists have seemed adequate  . In a collection of essays on the use of computers in the study of natural languages  , Roger Shuy discussed in broad terms a ' retrieval program for Linguistic Atlas data once i t was in storage  .   17 Some recommen-dations seem to sacrifice the user to the machine : Why code of  , with , and from as OFWHFM for a six letters to rage of that set of responses when a sub -program cauld be written to nest OF  , WITH , FROM within each other and retrieve them separately or together when needed ? This is a detail  , rather on the order of my stated need for a quick and easy way for encoding and storing phonetic information  . 
The opportunities as I see them are within our grasp--at least some of them  . First is computer mapping of sorted records  . In some computer centers there are plotting devices which can use data about the place of origin of a record as a means of drawing maps of several kinds  . It is likely that a map of regional Engl is h based on the plotted frequencies of cho ices of local words will differ markedly from the familiar maps of the dialect a reasof our language  . 

Next and of perhaps unsuspected usefulness in u rban dialectology  ( or any dialectology for that matter ) is the capability of computers to draw graphs and to rotate these on their axes  . Further there is a way of showing measured re lationships between things that either di ffer or area like but for which nos tandard scale exists  . The researcher can plot ( or rather have the computer plot and disp lay it for him  ) the ranges of agreement and disagre . ement that the rich and poor in a community have over usages that are " good " or " bad " English  . In general form the scale could show agreement at the bottom and disagreement at the top  , thus :
Choose veloped . It remains for the dialectologists to di scover whether this sort of display is easier to understand when it is presented to general audiences which must be convinced by the evidence than are the usual maps and tabular listings  . 
And finally some attention should be given to the development of computer programs which allow us to search from vocabulary to pro- nunciation to sentence structure and back again  , In sum , the computer should be brought to a stage of serving as a very extensive search inst rument  , doing mechanically what the investigator now does by looking and mapping : That is  , it should be able to move from lexical BENCH to phonetic BI~NC ~ to syntactic ANOLD -TIMEY RAIL FENCE  . 
And having moved through this and related ev idence should be able to print out that at such and such point a group of different e lements converge  ; elsewhere they diverge and are replaced by o the r patterns of relationship  . 

REFERENCES 1 . Hall Robert A . , Jr . Linguistics and Your Language . Anchor
Books . Garden City : Doubleday , 1960.
2 . Shuy , Roger W . and others . Field Techniques in an Urban Language Study . Washington , D . C . : Center for Applied
Linguistics , 1968.
3 . Kurath , Hans and others . Handbook of the Linguistic Geo-graphy of New England  . Washington , D . C . : American Council of Learned Societies , 1939 . 
4 . Wood , Gordon R . " Word Distribution in the Interior South , " Publication of the American Dialect Society ,  35 ( 1961 ) ,  116 . Also Implicit Change : A Study of Variation in Regional 
Vocabulary ... ( forthcoming).
5 . Thomas , Charles K . An Introduction to the Phonetics of Ameri-can English  . 2nd ed . New York : Ronald , 1958 . 
6 . Sapon , Stanley M . A Pictorial Linguistic Interview Manual . Co-lumbus , O . : ( pho-o-offset ) Ohio State University , 1957 . 
7 . Jones , Lyle V . and Joseph M . Wepman . A spoken word count\[sic\] . Chicago : Language Research Associates , 1966 . 
8 . Kurath , Hans . A Word Geography of the Eastern United States . 
Ann Arbor : Univ . of Michigan Press , :-~2~-9 . Kurath , Hans , and Raven I . McDavid , Jr . The Pronunciation of English in the Atlantic States  . Ann Arbor : Univ . of Michigan
Press , 1961.
I0 . Atwood , E . Bagby . The Regional Vocabulary of Texas . Austin :
Univ . of Texas Press , 1962.
II . Wood . See 7 above.
1g . Author's data . Additional examples in his Sub-Regional Variations  . . . 
Final Report . Edwardsville : ( photo-offset ) Southern Illinois
University , 1967.
13 . Silva , Georgette . "Phontrns : An Automatic Orthographlc-to-Pho -netic Conversion System for French  , " Computers and the
Humanities , 5, no . 5(1969), 257-65.
14 . Atwood , E . Bagby . A Survey of Verb Forms in the Eastern United States  . Ann Arbor : Univ . of Michigan Press , 1953 . 
lZ15 . Fries , Charles C . The Structure of English , an Introduction to the Construction of English Sentences  . New York : Har-court , Brace and World , 195Z . Efforts to refine this system encounter difficulties : Stolz  , Walter S , " Syntactic Constraints in Spoken and Written English  . "( diss . ) Univ . of
Wisconsin , 1964.
16 . Chomsky , Noam . Syntactic Structures . Janua Linguarum . The
Hague : Mouton , 1966.
17 . Shuy , Roger W . " An Automatic Retrieval Program for the Linguistic Atlas of the United States and Canada  , " Computation in Linguistics . edd . Paul L . Garvin and Bernard Spolsky . 
Bloomington : Indiana University Press , 1966.
18 . Kruskal , J . B . " Multidimensional Scaling .   . . " and " Nonmetric Multidimensional Scaling . . . " Psychometrica , Z9(1964), 127, 115-Z9 . 
