DISCOURSEREFEREFTS
Lauri Karttunen
Universl = y of Texas at Austin
Department of Linguistics
Austin , Texas 78712
Consider an interoretive device that in some manner keeps track of individuals that have been mentioned iua discourse and what has been said about them  . One feature any such device must have is to he able to recognize wPen a novel individual aopears in so ~ e sentence  . 
For examole , in Drocess in ~ sentence (1) , it N~st recognize that the NP a car refers to some yet unmentioned object  , which in the following sentence may be referred to a ~ a in by any of tke alternative ways in  ( 2 )  . 
( a ) It is black.
(1) I have a car . (2) ( b ). The car is black.
However , the same noun phrase does not refer to any car in  ( 3 ) o Consequently , none of the alternatives in ( 4 ) is acceptable as a continuation of ( 3 )  . 
(a ) * It is black.
(3) I don't have a car . (I ~) u(b )* The car is black . 
The above examples show that sometimes the occurrence of an indefinite NP in the discourse establishes a ' discourse referent'-somethin ~ that may ' be referred back to by a pronoun or a definite noun phrase - and sometimes it does not  . There are of course many other factors involved besldes negation  . For example ,   ( 5 ) is ambiguous between two interpretations and only in one sense would it be acceptable to continue the discourse with  ( 6 )  . 
(5) Mary wants to marry a Swede . (6) H_eeist all . 
Several linguists ( e . g . LeRcy Baker , Janet Dean ) have recently studied these constraints on coreferent lallty  . They have generally investigated the problem in the framework of Noam Chomsky's Aspects of the Theory of S  . ? n tax . It has been assumed that noun phrases are assoc iated with ' re~rential indices ' and marked with respect to the feature \[~ sDec if lc\ ]   , ~ hat is relevant especially in the case of (5) . 
In this paper I will argue that Chomsky's indices and the notion of soecificity are not adequate for han~llng the problem of discourse referents and that we must adopt the more abstract analysis of noun phrases first put forth by Emmon Bach and James D  . Nc Cawley . That is , noun phrases must be considered as having an underlying variable which is bound by a quanti fier similar to those in ordinary ~ redl cate calculus  . In this framework , it is a relatively sinple matter to describe the circumstances under which an indefinite NF establishes a discourse referent  . -This happens in case the sentence bound by the ~ uantlfler is asserted or presupposed to be true by the speaker  . 
~ owever , there are some special cases that have to be recognized  . 
These involve at least the following : ( 1 ) counterfactual conditional , ( ii ) modals , and ( iii ) quantifler-like adverbs , such as always , often , etc . 
