Some Remarks on J . L . Mey's Paper for the International
Conference on Computational Linguistics , Sweden 1969
P . Sgall , E . Haji`ovi
Mey's criticism of the functional approac ~ to gene- 
rative description concerns ( 1 ) the formal properties of the system proposed by Sgalletel  . ( its weak gene-rative power , recursivit $ ~) , and ( 2 ) some it l ~ or ! ~ alque-stions connected with the mentioned approach  . 
(1) From the formal point of view , Mey's paper contains many quite unclear points and errors  , which make his cl~Jms unfounded . Some of those may be due to a me-reun preciseness and carelessness Jnformulations  ( cf . 
for instance P . 7 , where hespeaks ~ , bout " elanguage that is not CF , or may be not even regular " , w ! ich is as if one says " This mineral is not found in Europe  , not even in whole Switzerland " ) but others hsve a more consequential bearing on his further argumentation  . He confuses ( p . 3 ) the trsnsl ~ tion by the means of spushdown store transducer in Evey's sense  ( henceforth pdt ) with the question of CF-preservation in the sense of Ginsburg  ( and Rose )  ; he dose not seem to realize fully ( pp . 3-4 ) that Sgall et al use only the notion of pd t in the sense of Evey and not in that of Ginsburg  . 
Ginsburg and Rose's theorem is not identical with Evey's theorem  2  . 6 . 6 , which is based on a different definition of pdt , connected with notions of input and output languages defined by the means of the notion of computation  . 
Although the theorem of Ginsburg and Rose , partly inspi--2-red by that of Evey , needed a correction , it does not follow that Evey's theorem is wrong . Of course , it would be of interest to analyze the relationships between Evey's system of notions and that of Ginsburg  , es well as to give an explicit account of the eventual bearing of Ginsburg and Rose's result with respect to the theorems and proofs contained in Sgalletel  . But Mey does not undertake an ~ such analysis in his paper  ; without giving any proof she simply assumes that one of these results is  c0ntradicted by the others . 
Thus we can state that Mey has not shown that a system of the discussed type generates a language that is not contextfree  , to say nothing about his clearly exaggerated claim  ( P . 7 ) of having ' shown " ths ~ the lengusge generated by such a system " simply never " is contextfree  ( cf . the bottom of p . 4 , where Ginsburg and Rose's formule tions are rendered in a rather  c6nfused w~y )  . 
Further , Mey is not right in claiming that a device of the discussed type is " practically equivalent " to  ( universel ) Turing machine ( P . 5) , or that its output l~nzu ~ ge is not necessarily a recursive set  ( pp . 4, 5, 9) . As shown in ~ lha (1966) , quoted in Sgali (1967) , and asststed again in Chapter 5 , of Sgelletel . , s recognition procedure for the system under consideration does exist  ( this is ensured by the preservation of the 1 , n ~ th of the strings ) . 
b--3I ( 2~ ) The informal parts of Mey~criticism contain first/of all hls question " what about the remaining input  , where does it all come from ?"( P . 7) ; in case that the output language of a device in our system  ( or the terminal language of the grammar )   i8 a proper subset of the input language of its success or in the sequen-ce of devices  , the difference between these two languages should be taken as a formal counterpart pecific syntax of a given level  ( cf . the distinction between ftik and blik , or that between or cqmed at home and golf pla2ed John ; cf . Sections 2 . 1 . 4 and 2 . 2 . 5 in Sgalletel . ) . 
We cannot discuss herest length questions of this kind  , es well as other items , which are , under the given conditions , rather questions of taste . Certainly , the significance of the eventual possibility ( not claimed by us ) to use the existing CF-recognition routines ( May , P . 5 ) or the significance of the results obtained by European traditional and structural linguistics may be appreciated differently  . We do not take the " time-hono-red " European linguistic tradition as a linguistic argument  , but we do not want to give a mere preference to American traditional highschoolgra ~  , ar over the European one . We would like only to recall that in the development of the transformational theory there are various points showing that a more careful attitude to the " classical " linguistics could have saved some detours  ; so one would have been a blee . g . to see earlier then e-- 4 -cessity to distinguish between a deep ( or semantic ) 3 tructure and a surface one ( and not to provide the transfor ~: ~ ational component with recursive propertles  ) ~Ys it not clear that the transformational description does lose  , successively , at least some of the properties distingulsling it from a description of the stratifica-`ional or functional type ? 

R . J . Evey (1963) , The Theory and Application of Pushdown Store Machines  , Mathematical Linguistics and Automatic Translation  , Rep . No . NSF-10, Harvard
Comput . Lsb ., Cambridge , Mass.
S . Ginsburg (1966) , The Mathematical Theory of Context-
Free Grammars , New York
S . Ginsburg & G . Rose (1966) , " Preservation of Languages by Transducers " , Inf . Contr . 9, 153~176 . 
S . Ginsburg & G . Rose (1968) , "A Note on Preservation Or Languages by Transducers "  , Inf . contr . 12,549-552 . 
J . ~\[ . Mey (1969) , On the Preservation of ContextFree Languages in a Level-Based System  , Int . Conf . 
on Comp . Ling ., Sweden
A . ~ ha (1966) , On the Recognition Procedure for Pushdown Store Transduoers  , The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics 5 , Pp . 3-15~'P . S ~ ell (1967) , Generativn ~ pop is jazy k ~ a ~ esk ~ deklina - - 5 - ce ( A Generative Description of Language and the Czech Declension  )  , Praha P . Sgall et al (1969) , A Functional Approach to Syntax in a Generative Description of Language  , 
New York
