DISCOURSEREFERENTS ~
Lauri Karttunen
University of Texas at Austin
0. Introduction.
Consider a device designed to read a text in some r ~ tural language ~ interpret it  , and store the content in some manner ~ say , fop the purpose of being able to answer quest ions about it  . To accomplish this task ~ the machine will have to fulfil\[at\[eas the follow ing baster equirement  . It has to be a be to build a file that cons is ts of records of - all the individuals ~ that is ~ events ~ objects ~ etc  . ~mentioned in the text ~ and ~ for e ~ e h individual ~ record whatever is said about it  . OF couPse ~ fop the time being a t\[east ~ it seems that such a text interpreter is not a praetica\[idea ~ but this should not d is courage us from studying  . in abstPaet what kind of capabilities the machine would have to possess ~ provided that our study provides us with some insight into naturallang L ~ gein general  . 
In this paper I intend to discuss one particu lar feature a text interpreter must have : that it must be able to recognize when a novel in div idualismentioned in the input text and to sto reit atong with its characterization fop future reference  . Of course ~ in some P_~ses the problem is tri vial  . Suppose there appears in some sentence a proper name that has not been mentioned previously  . This means that a new -2-pePson is being int Poduced in the text and appPop Piate action must be taken to PecoPd the name of the pePson and what is said about him  . 
Othe Pwise , the pPopePname is used to PefeP to an individual already mentioned and the machine has to locate his file in the memory with the help of the name  . This pPoblem of identification wilt be mope difficult where a definite descPiption -- a definite noun phPase such as theman Bill saw  7estePda~  , -- is used , since the Pe will , in gene Pal , not be any simple lookup procedure fop associating the descPiption with the Pight individual  . With definite noun phrases there is also the pPob lem that it is not possible to tell just from the noun phPase itself whethe PoP not it is supposed to refer " to an individual at all  . Fop example , it is cleaP that the phPase the best student is not used PefePentia Uy in a sentence such as Bill is the best student  . -\[-here ape thus two problems with ordinary definite noun phrases :  ( i ) Is it a definite desc Piption at all ? and ( ii ) How to match a definite descPiption with an individual already mentioned in the text ? The fiPst question is clearly of the kind linguists can be expected to solve  , but it will not be discussed here . The only aspect of definite descPiptions that interests us hepe is the fact that they caPPy an existential presupposition : to call something " the  . . . " presupposes that there be some such thing . 
While it is in gene Palast Paight-for ~ vaPd matter -to decide  -3 -whether or not a . proper name in a text introduces a new indiv idual  , indefinite noun phrases pose a more diffi cult probtem  . To put the question in a general way : Given an indefinite noun phrase  , under what circumstances is there supposed to be an individual described by this noun phrase ? This need not be understood as some sort off ontological question subject to philosophical speculation  , in this paper "\[ intend to approach it from a purety linguistic point of view  . 
It is in just those cases where the appearance of an indefinite NP implies the existence of some specific entity that our hypothetic a l text interpreter shoutd record the appearance of a new individual  . 
What \[ have in mind can perhaps be made clear w ~: h the hetp of the following examples  , it is a watt-known fact about language that indefinite noun phrases cannot be interpreted as refer ' ring to expres-sions when they appear  , in the predicate nominal position . 
( l ) Bitlis not a linguist.
( l ) is obviousty a statement about one individua l  . It is not a statement about some linguist and \[ Bill  . It is also weir-known that in generic sentences singutar in definite noun phrases p layapeculiar rote  . 
(2) Ation is a might y hunter `.
In its gener'ic sense , (2) is a statement about tions in general , not about anytion in particular ,   , unless we want to postulate a -4 -hypothetical entity ' the typical lion ' of whomall generic statements about li on sape predicated  . It is clear that indefinite noun phrases have a very special Pole in  ( l ) and ( 2 ) and it is not difficult to decide that they could not introduce any new individua ls into a discourse  . It is out of question that a text in which ( 1 ) appears would contain a later " reference to ' the linguist which Bitt is not ' or that  ( 2 )  , in its generic sense , would justify a later reference to ' the lion who is a might y hunter '  . 
But consider the following example .   ( 3a ) may be followed by any of the sentences ( 3b-d ) that give us more information about a speci ficcap first mentioned in  ( 3a )  . 
(b ) It is black.
(3) ( a ) Bitt has a car ' . (c ) The car is black . 
(d ) Bill's capis black.
On the other hand ,   ( 4a ) cannot be followed by any of the alternat ives  ( 4b-d )   . 
(b ) * It is black.
(4) ( a ) Bill doesn't have a car . (c )* The cap is black . 
(d )* Bill's capis black.
The above examples show that just in case of ( 3a )  , the text interpreter has to recognize that the appearance of the indefinite NP a capirn pt ies the existence of a specific car-that can be talked about again by referring to i t with a pronoun or " a definite noun phrase  . But no cap is introduced by (4a ) . The alternative continuations ( 4b-d ) are inappropriate , since they presuppose the existence of some th ing that is not there  . To show that this is a linguistic and not an ontological  -5 -fact one only has to point out that examples ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) behave just like ( 3 ) and ( 4 )  . 
(5) Bills awaunic or n . The unicorn had a gold mane . 
(6) Bill didn't see a unicorn . * The unicorn had a gold mane . 
Let us say that the appearance of an indefinite noun phrase establishes a discourse re ferent just in case it justifies the occur rence of : a core rential pronoun or a defin ite noun phrase hater in the text  . In this paper we will try to find out under what circumstances discourse referents are established  . We maintain that the problem of corefer -- ence within a discourse is a linguistic problem and can be studied independently of any general theory of extra-linguistic reference  . 
The present study was inspired by the notion of ' referential indices ' in transform at ional grammar  . Following a suggestion by Noam Chomsky (1965) , it has generally been assumed that the base component of a transformational grammar associates with each noun phrase a referent i a l i n d e x  , say , some integer . The purpose of Chomsky's proposal was not so much to account for the meaning of sentences  , but to augment the notion of noun phrase identi t y  . It seemed that the notion of ' referential identity ' was needed in addition to the two other types of identity  , ' structural identity ' and ' morphemic identity '  , for the structural descriptions of certa in transformations  . 
According to the standard theory , referential indices are merely -6 -formal indicators of coreference with no further semantic significance  . 
They amP not meant to imply the existence of d is course referents in our sense  . This notion of cor ~ fempntiality has p layed an important role in recent syntactic a rguments  . It led to the study of pronoun-antecedent re lations  , largely ignored by traditional grammar ians  , which has revealed intricate constrain ts that have great theoretical impor~tance  . 
What we are studying in this paper can be looked at as further con-straints on compFerentiality that extend beyond the sentence level  ,  \ ]  . Case studies l .   1 A note on specificity \[ n the following we amP going to examine case by case certain aspects of sentence structure that playaro leincle termining whether an indefinite NP establishes a discourse referent  . In the examples that a pediscussed ~ there is a possible ambiguity that has to be men-tioned in advance  , although it will not be discussed until l ater  . In general , indefinite noun phrases have both a specifi c and no rr-specific interpretation  . Example ( 7 ) can be interpreted to mean either ( 8a ) or ( B b )  . 

Bill didn't see a misprint.
( a ) ' There is a misprint which Bill didn't see '  ( b ) ' Bill saw no misprints '-7-\[1 = ( 7 ) iS Understood in the sense of ( 8a )  , we say that the indefinite NP a misprint is interpreted specifically  .   ( Sb ) represents the non-specific interpret at ion  . OF course , not all indefinite noun phrases are ambiguous in this way  . We could disambiguate ( 7 ) by adding the word certain ( " a certain misprint " ) or an appositive relative clause ( " a misprint , which I had made on purpose ") . These changes would allow only the specifi cinterpretation  ( 8a )  . The addi-tion of the word ~ ( " a single misprint " ) would allow only the sense ( Sb )  . There are also cases where the verbs involved partially disambiguate the sentence by mak in gone interpretation Far more plausible to the reader than the other  . For example , the NPapiano in ( 9a ) is naturally understood non-specific all y  , that is , as meaning ' any piano ' , white the same noun phrase in ( 9b ) suggests the linter pretation ' a certain pianO ' . 
(9) ( a ) John tried to find a piano.
(b ) John tried to lift a piano.
(but he d idn ' t succeed in f ind ing one \] \ [ but he didn't succeed in lifting it \] It is something about the verb lift that suggests that a piano describes some specifi cobject  . On the other hand ,   ( 9a ) is easily understood to inform us only about the kind of object John was trying to f ind  . We note in passing that , if interpreted in the above manner ,   ( 9b ) establishes a-8-discourse referent , i . e .   , ' the piano Jo hntried to lift ' , but ( 9a ) certainly does not justify a later refe rence to ' the piano John tried to Find '  . Example ( 7 ) establishes a referent in its specific sense ' the misprint which Bitt didn't see  '   , but fails to do so in the sense , of ( Sb ) . 
I_etus forget , for the time being , that indefinite noun phrases can also be understood specifically and consider fi rst only non-spec if-ic interpret at ions  . 
1.2 Complement clauses
As pointed out above , an indefinite noun phrase does generally es tablish a discourse referent when it appears in a simple affirmative sentence  . But if the sentence is negated , a non-specific NP felts to establish a referent  . Let us , tentatively , accept this finding for simple sentences and took at cases where an indefinite NP belongs to a complement clause  . There are many other factors that play arote here besides negation  . 
\].21 Modal verbs
The following examples are anomalous in the intended sen & e  , although there is no negation involved . 
(10 )   ( a ) You must write a letter to your parents . * They are expecting the letter . 
(b ) Bill can make a kite . * The kite has a tong string . 

Tr`aditionalty ~ sentences with a modal auxiliary have been considered as simple sentences  . However ~ it has been argued convincingly by Ross  ( 1967 a ) and others that modals should be analyzed as main ver " bso ? higher ` sentences  . Therefore ~ let us assume that ~ even in the above examples ~ the indefinite NPs originate in a complement clause ~ just as they do in  ( ll )  . 
( l \]) ( a ) John want stoc ~ to hafish . * Do you see the fish from here ? ( b ) Mary expects to have a baby . * The baby's name is

There is a great number ` of verbs that behave li kewant and e_  . ~pect in this respect ~ e . g . ~try~ptan ~ ~ hope ~ etc . What is common to all of them is that the complement sentence by itself is understood to represent a yet untrue proposition at the t imespecified by the tense and time adverbia ls in the main clause  . The present pr`oblem ~ is in fact ~ another point in favor ` of the view that modals originate in a higher " sentence ~ because it enables us to acknowledge the similarity of the anomaly in  ( 10 ) and (  \ ]1  )   . The conct'usion is that non-specific indef in ites do not establish discourse referents when they appear ` in a complement of a modal verb  . 
l . 22 Implicatives
There is a class of verbs that ~ if they are not negated ~ imply the truth of the proposition represented by their " complement sentence  . 
Let us call them implicative verbs .   2 In English ~ this group includes-lO-ve Pbs such as manage  , r'emembe P , venture , seef it , etc . An indefi-nite NP in the complement of an implicative veP bestablishes a refer- ent  , as shown by the following examples . 
(12) ( a ) John managed to find an apartment . The apartment has a balcon y . 
( b ) Bill ventu Ped to ask a question . The lectuPer-answe P edit . 
But if the implicative veP b in the main sentence is negated  , a non-specific . indefinite fails to establish a Pefe Pent  . 
(13 )   ( a ) John didn't manage to find an apaPtment . * The apar't-rr . ~ nt has a balcon y . 
(b ) Bill didn't daPe to ask a , question . * The lecturer " answe P edit . 
There apeals overbs that inhe Pently have a negative implication  . In English , this type includes ver'bs such as foP~t , fail , and neglect . 
Consider " the following anomalous discour " ses  . 
(14) ( a ) John for-got to wr " iteate Pmpaper " . * He cannot show it to the teacher " . 
( b ) John failed to find an answer " . * It was wr " ong . 
These implicative ver " bs have the ver " y in teresting pr " oper " ty that  , if it here is double negation , the implication is positive , and an indefinite NP does , after " all ~ establish a referent . 
-11 - ( 14 )   ( a ) John did n't fail to find an answer . The answer was even right . 
( b ) John did n'tremember " not to bring a numbre lla  , although we had no room for " it . 
This pr`operty distinguishes clearly verbs with negative implication  , such as for ` ge . ___ , tt , fr`orn modal verbs discussed above , although both types denythetr ` uth of the proposition represented by the complement sentence  . 
1.23 Factive verbs
There is a group o ? verbs , called fact tveverbs ( Kiparsky 1968) , that presuppose the truth of the proposit ion represented by the corn-plement  . For " example , know , realty_e , and regret are factive . It is not surpr-istng to find out that an indefinite NP does establish a refer ' ent in a complement of a factive verb  , of course , provided that the com-plement itself is a ffirmative  . 
(15) John knew that aar ` y hada car ' , but he had never " seen it . 
In contr " ast to the implicative ver " bsdi scussed above  , negation in the main sentence has no effect at art  . 
( \ ]6  ) Bitldidn't realize that he had a dime . It was in his pocket The truth of the embedded preposition is presupposed even if the fac-rive ver " bitself is negated  . Oon sequently ,   ( 16 ) is quite acceptable as a continuing di scourse  . 
-12-l . 24 Non-factive verbs
The class of verbs commonly called non-fact ive  ( Kiparsky \]968 ) includes such verbs as believe , thin_~k ~ say ~ claim ~ doubt . In general ~ nothing is presupposed about the truth of the embedded prop-osition  . Notice ~ however ~ ~ ? hatl ~ e following d is course would be contradictory  . 
(17) I doubt that Mary has a car . * Bill has seen it , On the other hand , the r~ism~thing v~ong with the following example . 
(18) Bill dou ~ ts - that Mary has a car . I have seen it . 
What makes these verbs difficult ? o handle is that there are two persons involved : the ~ l ~ r and the subject of the non-factive verJo-- these roles may ~ of couPse ~ coincide  . The speaker is not committed to any view whatsoever about the truth of the L~rnbedded proposition  , although he may imply what his beliefs are as the discourse continues  . 
For exampie ~ in (18) , the speaker--unlike Bill---must hold that the complement is true  . The non-f-active verb is binding for the speaker only in case he is talking in the first person as in  (  \ ]7  )   . BUt even in case that the speaker with holds judgment or disagrees altogether ~ an indef inite NP in the complement of a non-fact ive verb that implies positive belief does establish a referent of a peculiar sort  . It can be
I referred to a gain in a complement of a simi larnon-factive verb that has the same sub ject  . 
-18-(19) Bill says hesawalion on the street . He claims the lion had escaped from the Zoo . 
What this amounts to is that a text interpreting device will have to sort out what belongs to ' the world as seen by the speaker ' and "' the world as seen by X '  . The same referents need not exist in all of these worlds  . 
A nor ~ f active ve Pb that implies positive be lief  ( clair r ~ , think , believe , say , etc .   ) allows an indefinite NP in the complement to establish a referent as far as the worl do f the subject person is corr-cer'ned but need not have the same effect in the speaker's wor ld  . A non-factive verb with negative implication ( do LLb . _ ~ t ) may still allow that a referent is added to the speaker's world  , albeit not to the world of the subject person . There is aspirited study of ' other worlds'by
Lakof ~(1968b).
l . 25 Genera\[remar'ks
We can now gene Palize the previous ' observation about single sentences to cover also complement clauses  . A non-specific in-definite NP in an af firmative sentence  ( single sentence or a comple-ment ) establishes a discourse referent just in case the proposition represented by the Sentence is assePted ~ implied or " presupposed by the speaker to be true  . A non-specific indefinite in a negative -14 -sentence establishes a referent only if the proposition is implied to be False  . This latter stipulation is needed because of negative implicatives discussed in ~  1  . 22 . In general , discourse referents exist in the realm ' world as seen by the speaker '  . However , the non-factive verbs discussed in ? I .   24 establish referents in other realms and are ambiguous as far as the speaker is concerned  . 
In order to decide whether or not a non-spec if Ec indefinite NP is to be associated with a referent  , a text interpreting device must be able to assign a truth value to the proposition represented by the sentence in which the NP appears  . It must be sensitive to the semantic proper Vcies of verbs that take sential complements  , distin ~ ish between assertion , implication , and presupposition , and f\[nally , it must distinguish what exists for the speaker f rom what exists only for some body else  . 
l . 26 An apparent counterexample
There is an interesting group of verbs that seem to provide a counter'example to the general rule  . Consder the follow-ing discourses . 
(20) ( a ) l need a caP_.* It was a Mustang.
(b ) Seymour wants a knife . * It is sharp.
-15-(c ) John pr'omised Mary a bracelet . * The brace let was very expensive . 
( d ) The casting dtmector-was rooking for-an innocent b to n d e  . * She was fr-om Bean B to ssom , Indiana Provided that the indefinite NPs ape tnterppeted non-specific atty  , art examples in (20) are anomalous , although they took super-fici attyident ical to those in  ( 2 t )  , which behave as expected . 
(2l ) ( a ) ! owned a car '. It was a Mustang.
( b ) Seymour-imagines a knife . It is shar-p . 
(c ) John bought Mar-yabr-acet et . The bracelet was very expensive . 
( d ) The casting director-was looking at an innocent blond e  . She was from Bean
E3 tossom , Indiana.
in (20) , what appear-s to be a nomdtnar-y non-specific object NP fails to estabtish a ~  , ' efer-ent , at though the ~ ntence is affirmative asser-tion  . There are many other-verbs in addition to those tn  ( 20 ) that have this peculiar " consequence , for ` exampte : ask for ` , destr'e ~ expect , hope for ` , propose , ~ quest , sugge ~ , watt for ` , yearn for- . It seems significant that most if not al l of these ver-bs  , in addition to or ` dinar ` y noun phrase objec ts  , at so take sentia I complements , as the fottowing examples show . 
i6-(22) ( a ) Seymour wanted to have a Imife.
(b ) I propose that you eat a bagel.
(c ) John promised to give Mary a bracelet.
( d ) Mary expects John to b Wherabraoel et , In fact , these are the same modal v~s discussed above (?1 . 21 ) that imply that the proposition represented by the complement is not yet true  . We can thus account fortilel ~ culiarity of ( 20 a-d ) by assuming that , in spite of the simplicity-of the su~ce structure  , the ordinary noun phrase objects of these verbs are derived from underlying r~~ons  . which contain sentential objects . This is clearly one of those cases where semantic problems can be simplified by assuming a more abstract deep structure  . But it is not entirely clear what kind of embedded sentence should underly the surface object  . There seems to be little evidence for deciding this question beyond the observation that it cer ~ cainly  . ~ uld be some type of existential or possessive construction  . This is because of many no arparaphrases of the following type  . 
(23) ( a ) John wants a car . -- John warts to heve a car . 
( b ) I suggest an immediate haltir ~ the bombing-I suggest that there be an itr wr~diate halt in the bombing  . 
- t7- ( c ) I expect no change in the situation . -I expect there to be no change in the situat ion  . 
In some cases an existential paraphrase seems more natural  , in ? other " cases one prefers a possessive in terp retation  . Qb serve the difference between ( 23 a ) and ( 24 a ) and the two kinds ol = promising in ( 24b ) and ( 24c )   . 
(24) ( a ) John wantsa-revolution . -John wants there to be a ~ evotution . 
(b ) John promised Mary a bracelet . -John promised Mary that there will be a mi r ' act e  . 
(c ) John \] gromised Mary amiracle . -John promised Mary that there will be a mirac le  . 
Whatever-the correct solution is with regard to the exact nature  o1= embedded sentence , there is no ~ eason to consider the exception a l nature of verbs such as want  , need , etc .   , as a serious counter ~- example to the general theory  o1= discourse referents . 
l . 3 Shortterm Peferents
In the preceding sections , it wastacitly assumed that discourse re ferents are ~_able entities that are estab lished once and for all  . But we have to recognize that an indefinite N P that fails to establish a perman entre ferent may never heless permit  -18 -the appearance of coPefePential noun phrases within a limited domain  . Conside P the following examples . 
(25 )   ( a ) You must write a letter to your parents and mail the letter right away  . * They ape expecting th__e_e\[etter . 
(b ) John wants to catch a fish and eat\[ . tfop supper . 
* Do you see the fish over there ? ( c ) \] don't believe that MaPy had ~ and named her " 
Sue . * The baby has mumps.
In ( 25 a ) ~ it seems that the indefinite NP a letter may serve as antecedent fop a coPef epential de finite NP the letter provided th ~ f the la tter is contained in a conjoined complement sentence ~ but not otherwise  . Outside the scope of the modal must ~' the le ttert ceases to exist  . Similarly , in ( 25b ) ~ the Pesnofish that could be talked about outside the scope of want  . Within the paiP of con-joined sentences in the complement it is a different matter  . 
In oPdeP to take cape of these phenomena ~ a text inter-p Peting device apparently has to process complex sentences i starting from the inside  . Fop example ~ in case of ( 25c ) ~ it fiPs thas to consider the pare c " tv laPy had ~ and named her Sue ~'  , On the basis of ths first member of the conjunct ~ it can stenta-lively  , setup a referent corresponding to the NP a bab ~  , and accepther " in the second senten C~as coPefePental  . Afterlbu ~- t 9 -considering the whole sentence beginning w ith "\[ don't believe that  .   .   .  "  , it then may decide that there is no such baby , after all . In short , a text interpreter must keep track of the sta tus of referents it has established and de lete them when necessary  . 
Notice also that the life-span of a short term referent is not always sone atly bound as the above examples suggest  . 
Sequences 0 f the following type are quite common . 
(26 ) You must write a letter to your " parents . It has to be sent by air ' matt . The letter must get thereby tomorrow . 
At least in case of modals ( and the future will )   , it is possible to " continue discussing a thing that actually does not yet exist  , provided that the discourse continues in the same mode  . In this case , every successive sentence is prefixed by the same type of modal  . Even the following example is possible . 
(27) Mary wants to marry a rich man . He must be a banker . 
Under the non-specific interpretation of a richman ~ there is no specific in div idual yet that Mary wants to marry -- and there may : never be one  . By continuing with another modal , however , it is possible to elaborate on the attr ibutes of this yet non-existing -  20 -individual .   3 In the following sections we will present other oases where the tile-span of a shor tterm referent may be extended  . 
I.4 Suppositions
Another way to talk about what is not is to suppose that it is  . Consider the following discourses . 
(28) ( a ) Suppose Mary had a car . She takes me to work in it . "Idrive the cartoo . 
( b ) If tv ~ ary has a oar ~ she will take me to work in it  . 
I can drive the cam too.
( c ) If Mary had a cam ~ she would take me to work in it  . 
I could drive the cartoo.
( d ) I wish Mary had a car . She would take me to work in it . I could drive the cartoo . 
( e ) When Mary has a car ~ she can take me to work in in it  . I can drive the cartoo . 
All of the above examples elaborate a hypothetical situation that is based on the  counter1:actual ordubious premise that Mary has a car . The difference between the first and the second pair is that in  ( 28 c--d ) the condition is implied to be unrealizable or hard to realize  . There are clearly several ways in which a supposition may be introduced in a discourse  . Essentially ~ however ~ all of the-Z-above examples reduce to the form IFSOTHENS l  .   $2 ? ? ? Sn " Whatever referent is introduced by SO exists fop the sequence S\[-Sn  , which apparently has no fixed length , although there obviously a pecertain cond it ions that all sentences belonging to it have to full f/l\]  . The following discourse would be anomalous . 
(29) I wish Mary had a car . * I will drive it . 
That is ~ f / ctitious individuals may be re ferred to ~ naphoPically only as long as the proper fictitious mode is sustained  , but when the illusion is broken , they cease to exist . 
As the above examples show ~ a text interpreter must also be able to cope with shortte Pr ~ referents that owe their existence to some condition that in reality is not fulfil led  . It must catch a supposition in wh cx~tever foPn3 it comes and recognize where the supposition ceases to be inforce  . Neither of the two tasks is likely to be easy  . FoP example , what looks like oommand may ~ nevertheless , be a supposition . 
(30) Lend him a book and heql never return it . 
1.5 Commands and Yes-No Questions
It is to be expected that indefinite noun phrases in commands and Yes-No questions fai l to introduce referents  . The proposition -22 . 
corresponding to an interrogative or imper at ive sentence ordinarily is not assumed to be true  . Thus there is something missing in the follow ing examples  . 
(3l )   ( a ) Does John have a car ?* It is a Mustang . 
(b ) Give meahot dog , please . * It looks delicious . 
But it is again possible to have coPeference w ith in the imperative or interrogative sequence itself  . 
(32 )   ( a ) Does John have a carandisita Mustang ? ( b ) Give me a hot dog ~ please , but don't put any must ard on it . 
There are , however , ways to interpret the following examples as acceptable  . 
(33 )   ( a ) Did you write a letter ? Let me see it . 
(b ) Give meahot dog , please . I will eat it . 
For example , the interrogative sentence in ( 88 a ) need not be taken as a true question at all , but as an expression ol = surprise prompted by a preceding assertion  . (33b ) could be understood as elliptic . What is implicit is " You will give mea hot dog  . " Discourses such as in ( 33 ) clearly a penot counterexamples , since their acceptability is not due to the appearance of an indefinite NP in a command or Yes-No question  , but to other considerations . 
-23-l . 6 Quantil = iers
IndeFinite noun phrases are generally ambiguous in sentences that contain quantifier-li ke expressions  . The Following examples can be understood at least in two ways  . 
(34 )   ( a ) Hahvey courts a girl at every convention . 
( b ) Most boys in this town are in love with a go- godancer  . 
(84 a ) can mean that , at every convention , there is some girl that Harvey courts , or that there is some girl that Harvey cour ts at every convention  . Let us call the above paraphrases the non-spec if ic and the specific interpretation of the NP a ~ r l  , respectively . ( See the note on specificity in 6 l . t . ) in the spectCt csense , Harvey always courts the same girl , in the non-specific sense , it may be a di~erent girl each time . Similarly , ago-go dancer in ( 3413 ) also has two interpretations . However , the Following discourses leaven or oom for such ambiguity  . 
(35 )   ( a ) Harvey courts a girl at every convention . 
She is very pretty.
( b ) Most boys in this town are in love with a go -godancer '  . Mary doesn't like her at all . 
- Z4-in (35) , only the specific interpretation is poss ible  . There must be a unique girl and a unique go -godancer  . This fact indicates that a non-specific indefinite fails to establish a di scourse referent in case there is a quantifie r'-like term in the sentence  , in spite of the fact that the sentence is an affirmative assertion  . 
But notice that the following example is ambiguous again  . 
(36) Harvey cOurts agirlate very convention . She always comes to the banquet with him . The girl is usually also very pretty . 
(36 ) admits both the specific and non-specifi c interpretation of a girl  . 
The reason for " the anomaly of the non-spec if ic interpretation in  ( 35 ) and its acceptability here is apparently that  , in (36) , every successive sentence continues to have as imilar quantifier--like term : " at every convention "  , " always " , " usually " . There is also nothing wrOng with ~ he non -specific interpretation of the NP a book in  ( 37 )  . 
(37) Every time Bill comes here , he picks up a book and wants to borrow it . In everleth im take the book . 
We have to say that , although a non-specific indefinite that falls into the scope of a quantifier fa ils to establish a permanent discourse re ferent  , theme may be a shortterm referent , within the scope of the quantifier and its life-span may be extended by flagging every succes-sive sentence with a quantifier " of the same type  . 4-Z5-2 . Specificity Let us now return to the prob lem of specificity that was First in t roduced in ?  1  . 1 . As we already pointed out , many of the examples above that were judged anomalous in the intended sense can also be given another interpretation that makes them perfec tly acceptable  . 

Although'non-specific ' inde Finites do not permite or e Ference in  ( 88 )  , there is nothing wrong with these examples prov ided that the indefi-nite NP is understood ' specifically '  . 
(88) ( a ) Bill didn't find a misprint . Can you Find it ? ( b ) John wants to catch a fish . You can see the fish from here . 
How should we represent this distinction ? As the terms'specific ' and ' non-spec if ic ' imply  , transformational grammarians have tradit ionally assumed that there is a feature \[+ specific \]  , just as there is a feature F + de Finite\] , and that indefinite NPs are to be marked wi th respect to specificity  . Let us call this view , that goes together with Chomsky's original proposal that Core?erence be marked with integer -- type indices  , the classical theory . There is also another approach to these , prob-lems suggested by Emmon Bach (1968) , James O . McOawley (1967), Georgel_ako ?-?, and others . The essential feature ol = their proposals is that referential indices are variab les  , bound by quantifiers that act like quant if iers in symbolic logic  . What corresponds to the indefinite- Z6 -article is , of course , something very similar to the existential quantifier in predicate calculus  . ( Bach calls it ' the some operator ' .   ) Base structures resemble formulas in symbol ic logic  . This approach to syntax has now become known as ' generative semantics '  . 
It is easy to see that in the framework of generative semantics et here is no just if i cation nor need for a feature such as \[+ specific \]  . 
The ambiguities in question apenaturally accounted fop by the fact that the quantifie r binding variable that underlies some indef inite noun phrase may be placed in diffe rent positions in the base structure  . Specificity thus becomes a ITi Etter of the scope of quantifiers  . 
As far as the problems discussed in this paper a perelevant to choosing a theo Petical f rame work ~ they seem to argue in favor of adopt ing the Bach-McOawle ~ proposals  , It is rather difficult to see , how one could achieve an adequate description of the facts in the classical theory  , FoP example ~ consider the following case . Both ( 39 a ) and ( 39 b ) are ambiguous with respect to specific i t y  . 
(39) ( a ) Bill intends to visit a museum.
(b ) Bill visits a museum every day.
In the tspecific tsense ~ both examples estab lish a discouPse referent  . 

It would make perfect sense to continue wi tha desc P~:~tion of l the museum Bill intends to visit to rf the museum Bill visit severy day '  . 

In the ' non-specific ' sense , there is no such museum at all . So far so good , we can say that the NP a museum can be r+spec if ic\]  . But what about example ( 40 ) ?  ( 40 ) Bill intends to visit a museum everyday . 
It is clear that (40) is ambiguous in many ways . For example , the quantified time adverb everyday could be assigned either to the complement or to the main clause  , let us now consider only the For-mercase . The remaining ambiguities should be attr ibutable to the indefinite NP a museum  , in Fact , we should have a two--way ambiguity between the specific and nort-specific interpretation  . But example ( 40 ) is stilt ambiguous in more than two ways . It could be interpreted to mean (41a ) ~ (41b ) , or (41c ) . 
(41 )   ( a ) ' There is a certain museum that Bill intends to visit everyday  .  '  ( b ) ' Bill intends that there be some museum that hevisits everyday  .  '  ( c ) ' Bill intends to do a museum visit everyday . ' It is easy to see why this happens . What the feature F ? specific \] accomplishes in case of  ( 39 a ) is that it clarifies the relation between the indefinite NP a museum and the verb intend in the main sentence : IsBill's intention about some particular museum or not ? In  ( 39 b )  , we employed the same device to characterize the relation between -  Z8   . 
the quantified time adverb ~ and the indefinite noun phrase : Is it the same museum everyday or not ? To do the work in  ( 40 ) we would need two features ~ one to character i zethe relation between intend and a museum  , another for the relation between a museum and everyday  . Under the interpretation (4\]b ) , for exampte , _amuseum would be non-specific with respect to the verb intend but specific wi th respect to the quantified time expr -ession  . But to say that there are several varieties of specificity is a way of saying that there is no featurer+specific \] at alt  . The ctassic at theory clearly is not suffi cient to account for the multiple meanings of  ( 40 )  . 5 On the other hand , in the Bach-McOawtey framework we are able to account for the ambiguities in a straight- for ~ Nardway  . The three senses of ( 40 ) discussed above might be represented roughly as in  ( 42 )  . 6 (42) ( a ) ( ~ x ) rmuseum(x) , intend(Bitt , ( everyday ) visit ( Bitt , x ))\] ( b ) intend(Bitt , ( ~ x ) rmuseum(x ) . ( everyday ) vtsit(Bilt , x )\]) ( c ) intend(Bill , ( everyday X ~ x)\[museum(x ) , visit ( Bill , x )  \ ]  ) Another advantage of generative semantics is that there is an explana-tionready for the fact that  ( 40 ) establishes a discourse referent under on ly one of the three interpretations we have considered  , narnely (42a ) . 

The rule is that an indefinite NP establi shesapermanent referent just in case the proposition to which the binding quant if ier is attached is -  29 -assumed ( asserted , implied , or presupposed ) to be true , provided that the quantifier is not itsel f in the scope of some higher quantifier  .   7 The First part of the rule accounts For the d ifference between  ( 42 a ) and ( 42 b-c )   , the second part is needed to explain why ( 39 b ) estab-lishes a permanent referent only under one of the two possible inter-pretations  . Notice that , in (42a ) , the quantifier underlying the NP a museum is attached to the main proposition  . Since the main proposition is asserted to be true and there are no higher quantifiers involved  ,   ( 2~2a ) establishes a referent corresponding to the NP a museum  . Now , consider the other two interpretations of ( 40 )  . The verb intend is one of the modal verbs discussed in  ( 1  . 21)  . We know that the complement of a modal verb taken by itself is not implied or presupposed to be true  . In (42b ) and (42c) , the quantifier underlying the NP a museum is attached to the complement  . Therefore ~ the above rule correctly predic ts that no referent corresponding to am museum is established under these two in terp retations  . 
From the point of view of a text interpreting device  , the classi-cal theory has tittle to recommend itself  . The problems studied above clearly argue in Favor of the Bach-McOawtey framework  , in proces-sing a sentence , a text interpreter apparently has to associate an indefinite NP with a variable and attach the binding quantifier to some sentence above the NP using whatever clues there are present to-  30 - assign the scope with as little ambigui tyas possible  . Clues that reduce scope ambiguity include the presence of an appositive relative clause or of special words such as " certain " ~" single " ~ and " some " in the noun phrase itself and the surface order of quantifiers ~ nega-t ion  , and articles in the rest of the sentence . Secondly ~ the inter-preter has to keep t rack of the truth value of the proposition repre-sented by the sentence to which the quant ifier is attached  . The following example demonstrates some of the diFFi culties that are involved  . Let us start a discourse with (43) . 
(43) Mary may want to mammy a Swede.
Highly schematicalty ~ the underlying st ructure of  ( 48 ) is something like ( 44 )  . 

NP VP
II~may
Marywant NP

Mary marry x
J The quantifier that binds the variable underlying the NPaS wede may belong to any of the three sentences  , Sl , S2 , and $3 , which causes ( 43 ) to be ambiguous at least in the following three ways  . 
/ - 31 - ( 45 )   ( a ) ' There is some Swede whom Mary may want to marry  .  '  ( b ) ' It may be the case that there is some S we de whom 
Mary wants to marry ,  '  ( c ) ' It may be the case that Mary wants her future husband to be a Swede  . ' Of the three sentences involved , only Sl is asserted by the speaker to be a true proposition  . The two other sentences , S2 and S8 , are both commanded by a modal verb ( may and want )   , therefore , their " truth is not implied or presupposed . The indefinite NP a Swede establishes ad is course referent just in case its binding quantifier is attached to S  1" This can be demonstrated easily by point ing out that  , if the speaker continues the discourse wi th  ( 46 )  , the preceding sentence ( 48 ) can only be understood in the sense of ( 4 . 5a) . 
(46 ) She introduced himtoher mother yesterday . 
However , the following continuation, . where the pronoun its ' stands for "$2 , permits both (4 , 5a ) and (45b ) . 
(47) Suppose that it is tr`ue , then she will certainly introduce him to her mother  . 
As a final example , after some thought it should be obvious that a disoourse consisting of  ( 48 ) and ( 48 ) ~ where the first\[t in ( 48 ) stands for S2 and the second . tfopS8 is three ways ambiguous just as ( 48 ) -3Z-by itself . Since all three component propositions of ( 44 ) are now either asserted or supposed to be t rue  , there is no way of resolving the inherent scope ambiguity by looking at the coPef ePent iality of a 
Swede and him.
(48 ) Suppose that it is true and that she does it , then she will certainly introduce him to her mother  . 
Although the argument against the tradit ionalfea?ure\[-+specific \] should leave no doubt about its uselessness in di scussing anything but the simplest kind of scope ambiguity  , it does not necessarily mean that the famil iar terms'specific ' and ' non-specifi c ' should be rejected  . They have proved quite useful and no harm is done  , pro-vided that they are understood in are lative sense and not as denoting some absolu teproperty inherent in indefinite noun phrases  . For example , consider interpretation (45b ) of (4 . 3) , which assigns the quantifier to S 2 ? One might , want to say that , with respect to the verb want the indefinite NP a Swede is specific  . On the other hand , if the quantifier is attached to $3 , as in (45c ) , a S we de could be called non-specific wi th respect to want  . In general ' , let us call an indefinite NP specific w ith respect to a given verb  ( or quantifier , or negation ) if the latter is in the scope of the quant ifier associated with the NP  . It is non-specific in case the verb commands the quantifier  . This kind of definition seems consis tent with the way these terms have been used -   33 -in recent literature , and there is no reason to stop using them as tong as the relative nature of specific i tyis understood  . 
3. Summary
It is time to review the situation . We started by asking the seemingly nabe question : " When is there supposed to be an individual associated with an indefini te noun phrase ?" Nak/e as it may be  , it must be answered in case there is evergoing to be a device for inter--preting writ ten texts or everyday conversation with anyth ing approaching human sophistication  . There is also another reason to be interes ted in the subject  . From a linguistic point of view , it is a problem of coreference constrain ts of a somewhat different kind than those studied under the label ' Pronominalizat ion '  . The present type of constraints are even more basic  . It would seem that the question whether two noun phrases can be coreferential at all must precede the question whether a pronoun -antecedent relation may hold between them  . 
Secondly , if relative clauses are derived trans formationally from con-joined sentences by ' Retativization '  , as many linguists believe , the constraints discussed here are also a prerequisite For that transforma-tion  . For these reasons ~ the problems studied in th is paper are of some theoretical interest quite independently from whether the result slead to any practical applications  . 

We found that , in simple sentences that do not contain certa in quantifier-like expressions  , an indefinite NP establishes a discourse referent just in case the sentence is an affi rmative assertion  . By ' establishes a discourse referent'we meant that there may be a coreferentiat pronoun or definite noun phrase tater in the discourse  , indefinite NPs in Yes-No questions and commands do not establish referents  . 
In studying more complicated examples , it was found neces-saP ) /to replace Chomsky's integer-type re ferential indices by bound variables  . In this frarnew or k ~ the traditional p roblem of specificity is treated as scope ambiguity  . We studied several types of verbs that take complements and their semantic properties  . We concluded that ~ in general ~ an indefinite NP establishes a permanent discourse re ferent just in case the quant\[fier assoc iated with it is attached to a sentence that is asserted  , implied ~ or presupposed to be true and there a peno higher quantifiers involved  . 
There ape a couple of special problems : ' o the r worlds ' and short term referents  . Although discourse referents ordinarily exist for the speaker ~ there is a class of fwo rid--cr@ating tverbs ~ such as believer that also establish PefePents of another kind  . These exist fop somebody else ~ not necessari ly for the speaker  . The PefoPe ~ we need to distinguish between the speakerts world and other real ms-  35 -and allow for the possibility that they are not populated by the same individuals  . Secondly , there are short term referents , whose life-span may be extended by cont inuing the discourse in the proper mode  . 
What this proper mode is depends on the ci rcumstances  . FoP example , every successive sentence may have to contain ( i ) a modal as the main verb , ( ii ) a quantifier of a certain type , or " ( iii ) be in the counterfactual mood . That is , it is possible to elaborate for " a ~ vhite on situations that are known not to obtain or that may or should obtain and discuss what some t imes or always is the case  . 
FOOTNOTES * This work was supported by the Nat ional Science Foundation Grant  GU-1598 to the University of Texas at Austin . 
1These examples are due to C . Le Roy Baker 1966.
2 I am indebted to Robert E . Wall for suggesting the term ' implicat ive ' tome  . 
3 What remains unexplained here is the fact ( pointed out tome by John Olney ) that must in ( 27 ) has two meanings depending on the specific i ty of the NP arichman in the preceding sentence  . If the first sentence is about a specifi cman  , then must in the second sentence is interpreted in a rather weak sense : ' It is likely that he is a banker '  . But tf the NP arichman is non-specific , the second sentence means : ' It is necessary that he be a banker '  . 
4 George Lakoff ( forthcoming ) has suggested that quantifie Ps and negation be analyzed as verbs  ( predicates ) instead of giving them a special status , as is usually done in symbolic logic . It is yet unclear tomewhether there is any st , ,bsta ,  . -tive issue involved or whether he is only propos ing another no ~-'_  . -, . 
5 There are other good aPgurr~nics against the feature \[*_ specific \] in Janet Dean  1968  . Unfortunately , they did not persuade the author herself . 
6 The complement of intend is what W . V . O . Quine calls ' opaque context ' . \] ignore here his view that one should not be permitted to quantify into such a context  . It seems tome that the objections heraises have to do with the double Pole names play in such contexts and only call fopmo Pesophisticated linguistic analysis  . Notice that Qu~neap proves of ( i ) while rejecting ( ii ) as meaningless ' ( Quine 1960 , ? p .  166 ) :  ( i )   ( ~x )   ( Tom believes x to have denounced Catiline )   ( it )   ( ~x )   ( Tom believes that x denounced O atiline ) From a linguistic point of view , however , there is nothing but a superficial differeno e between  ( i ) and ( ii ) due to ' Subject raising ' that l~s applied in ( i ) but not in ( ii )  . 
7 By ' higher " quant i f ie r " I mean quant i f ter's such as al  . ._ . t , each , many , and few , in fact , everything except the quantifier " associa ted Mth the singular " some and the indefini tearticle  . The reason for " making this distinction is the fact that  , if there are two indefinite singular NPs in the same sentence  , both establish a referent no matter what their " order ` is  . 
( i ) A dog was kitted by a car`.
The above example , of course , justifies a later reference both to the dog and the car '  . 

Bach , Emmon (1968) " Nouns and Noun Phrases . " in Bach and Harms ( eds .  )  . Universals in Linguistic Theory . New York : Holt,
Rinehart and Winston.
Baker , C . Le Roy ( 1966 ) Definiteness and Indefiniteness in Engttsh . 
Unpublished Master's thesis . University of Ittinois . 
Chomsky , Noam (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax . Cambridge,
Mass .: MIT Press.
Dean ~ Janet ( 1968 ) " Nonspecific Noun Phrases in English " in Kuno  , Susumu ( ed . ) Report No . NSF-20 . Harvard University . 
Kiparsky , Paul & Kipar Csky , Carol(\]968) " Fact . '' I in Biervvisch and Heidolph ( eds . ) Recent Advances in Linguistics . The Hague:
Mouton and Co.
Lakoff ~ George ( 1968 ) " Counterparts ~ or the Problem of Reference in Transformational Grammar  . " Paper presented at the 1968
Summer meeting of the LSA.
( forthcoming ) " Generative Semantics . "Mc Cawley , James D .   ( 1967 ) " Where Do Noun Phrases Come From ? " Unpublished paper  , to appear in Jacobs and Rosenbaum ( eds . ) Readings in Transformational Grammar . 
Quine > Willard Van Orman ( 1960 ) Word and Ob ) ect . Cambridge,
Mass .: MIT Press.
Ross , John Robert ( 1967 ) " Auxiliaries as Main Verbs . " Unpublished paper . MIT . 
