Preprint No . 5 Classification : D 1.2
ANAPPLICATION OF COMPUTER PROGRAMMING TO THE
RECONSTRUCTION OF APROTO-LANGUAGE
Stanton P . Durham and David Ellis Rogers
University of Michigan
l . Purpose . This paper illustrates the use of a computer program as a tool in linguistic research  . The program under consideration produces a concordance on words according to phonological segments and environments  . Phonological segments are defined as a predetermined aet of consonants and vowels  . An environment is defined as the locus of occurrence of any of the phonological segments  . 
The concordance facilitates the recognition of sound cor-respondances that lead to the reconstruction of a protolanguage  . 
2 . 0, Program Description . The program for production of the concordance was written in the  SNOBOL4 programming language , which was selected because of its pattern match1 ing capabilities . The summary Flow Chart of the program , found in ?7 , should be adequate for the experienced reader . Nevertheless , a few general comments are in order . 
2 . 1 . 1nitlallzation . All patterns to be used in the program are created during the Initialization  . As originally conceived , the program was composed of one long run where 1For a full exposition of SNOBOL4  , see Gris wold , R . E . , Page , J . F . , and Polonsky , I . P . , The SNOBOL4 Programming Lan_ ~ . Holmdel , New Jersey , Bell .  19~8 . 
2 all steps of the analysis were carried out . However , due to problems of internal storage caused by the numerous data  , it was decided to run the program in two passes , each of which is explained below . 
2 . 2 . Pass One . During the first pass of the program all cards of an item are read  . An item is defined as the Classical Latin dictionary form  , followed by the author's phonemicization of the Latin form according to the most conservative estimate of the maximal phonological system capable of giving rise to the various dialects of spoken Latin  . These two elements are followed optionally by the modern ~ eflexes in as many as eleven dialects from the are a commonly subsumed under the heading Franco-Proven-cal  . An optional comment concludes the item . 
As the items are read , determination is made of the largest size of each element for later column slign-ment in the print -out  . Each item is then stored as a strlmE named after the sequential number assigned to the ~ tem  , and the phonological form on which the concordance will be based is selected  . The phonological form is then analyzed , ln order to retain the generic types and specific segment-environments occurring in that  , phonological form , A generic type is defined as a consonant or vowel in a given environment  , as for example , word-initial consonant defined as one certain consonant or vowel in a given environment  , as for example , word-initial Portonic free A . 
For each specific segment-environment found , a list is created composed of the numbers of the items containing that specific segment -envlronment  . 
As all items are read and analyzed , errors in phonological form are outputted . After the analysis of all input items is completed  , a generic type list is examined for a specific segment-environment  . From the list named after that specific segment -environment the numbers of the items containing the specific segment-environment are obtained and the items are written onto tape in condensed form for accessing in Pass Two  . 
2 . 3 . Pass Two . During the second pass . the condensed lis-tings are accessed from the tape  , along with the largest size of each element , and alignment of columns is made Just prior to printing for easier reading of the print-out  . 
3 . 0 . S~eclfication . The program is designed to list all words in a dialect  ( for example , Latin or a present-day dialect of Latin ) containing a specific segment in a given environment  . The order for the production of the lists is outlined in the following paragraphs  . 
3  .  1  . ~ Consonants . All words containing single conson-mined order of those consonants and  , within that parameter , according to the fol ~ owing environments : word -initial  , ge-minate , syllable-initial , syllable-flnal , and word-flna ~ position . A geminate consonant is defined as a long consonant  , sometimes described as double , occurring across syllable boundaries . 
3 . 2 . Ciu__sters . A cluster is defined as the occurrence of two or more consonants in immediate succession in the same syllable  . All words containing clusters of two consonants are listed according to the parameters of  ~3  . 1, but in reverse order . This order of consonants is the same as the order used to list single consonants with the additional stipulation that the value of the consonant In leftmost position have precedence ever the one in rlght-most position  , as in any dictionary order . 
Lists of words containing clusters of three or more consonants follow  , according to the same parameters as those specified for two-consonant clusters  . Where there are different numbers of consonants ( three or more ) in the clusters , the words are listed giving the highest value to the consonant in the nth position  , followed by the consonant in then ~ Ith position  ( counting consonants from left to right )  , and according to the predetermined order of con -TDMNRBLJGQXZ  , listings of words having the following clu-sters in word-inltial position would appear in this order : all words containing word-lnitial KLJ " '   .   .   .   .   . KJ .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . STR "' .   .   .   .   . STRJ .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . STJ " .   .   .   .   .   .   . MJ . 
3 . 3 . Sequences . A sequence is defined as the occurrence of two or more consonants in immediate succession across syllable boundaries  , the syllable boundary always being indicated by a period  . Words containing strong sequences , composed of a geminate consonant plus at least one additional consonant  , are listed first , and the sequence is abbrevia-ted CI . CICn . The order of the listing is the same as that specified in  ~3  . 1 , except that there is only one environment , " strong . " For example , given the predetermined order KPWFSTDMNRBLJGQXZ , listings of words having the following strong sequences would appear in this orders K  . KL,
K . KJ , P . PJ , T . TJ , N . NTR , N . NTRJ.
Following the words containing strong sequences , all other sequences are listed . The first words listed are those with two -consonant sequences ! that is  , sequences with only one consonant on either side of the syllable boundary  , abbreviated C1 . C2 . Then all words containing sequences of a single consonant followed by a syllable boundary  , are listed ! followed by words containing all other sequences  , abbreviated cnc . c(cn ) , where the parentheses indicate optlonality . In each of these listings the consonant orth syllable boundary in then position has higher value than the consonant in then vith position  ( consonants being counted from left to right )  . For example ~ if the following sequences were found  , they would be listed in the following order : M . P , R . L , N . STJ , R . LJ , NT . T , NT . TJ . 
3 . 5 . Vowels . Words containing vowe\]s are listed next , according to the following ordered parameters and subpara-meters : stress  ( to nic , pre-tonlc , post-tonic ) , length ( long , non-long ) , position ( infree or checked syllable ) , and the predetermined order of vowels . For example , given the predetermined order ~ EAOU , the listings would occur fn the following order : ail words containing long to nic free I  , II ! I , III~f'E
IIIIIIg ~ If l
IIIIIg IIIIII
II , eIII ~ IIII~f and so on , through the long to nicchecked vowels , the non-long tonic free and checked vo~els , the long pre-tonlcfree and checked vowels , the non-long pre-tonic free and checked vowels , etc . , until all possible combinations of parameters have been listed  . 
3 . 6 . S~ecial Environments . Listed lastly are occurrences in the program as K , G , Q , X ) followed by a front vowel or / J/ . These lists are called " special " and are printed as a separate portion of the print-out  , because of the wellknown phenomen of the palatalization of these Latin conson-ants plus a front vowel or / J/?  3  . 7 . Errors . Toward the end of the first pass , before the condensed listings are outputted onto the tape  , certain errors are printed out . Errors may be errors in phonolo-gical form , as for example , use in the phonological form of a consonant symbol that has not been predefined  , failure to punch a syllable boundary , or failure to punch length or stress symbols ~ or the error may be the lack of occurrence of the phonological form for which the program is searching  . 
3  . 8  . Ali__~nt . The second pass is almost entirely composed of the subroutine in which the elements of an Itam are aligned in columns in the listings on the basis of the number of characters in the longest occurrence of that particular element  . 
4 . 0 . 1nstructions to User . A system of symbolization for vocalic and consonantal specific segments must be decided on  . During the processing there must be only one computer character for each segment the computer will examine  . If customary linguistic symbols as characters in the computer alphabet  ) to encode the data with two symbols for one phonological segment  , the program should have all the double symbols used and the corrseponding single computer symbols by which the program will process the data defined  . Because of peculiarities in the program it is also necessary to change any numbers  , V , or C , that may be used as conson-antal or vocalic symbols in the phonological form to be concordanced onto some other unique computer symbol  . For example , if the taa ~ d delta are encoded as TH and DH , and if the symbols C , V , and 5 are used in the input program and in the representation of a specific phonological segment  , then the following two statements should be inserted at the appropriate place in the program : 
EXT3='THDHCV ~
INT3='abcde'wherea , ~ b , c , d , and e are unique symbols belonging to the character set of the particular computer  , and different from other symbols punched in the phonological form to be concordanced on  . In the present program double symbols are freely used in the transcription of the dialect reflexes  . 

If a concordance is to be produced on the basis of one of the dialects  , the above modifications must still apply . 
~ . l . Restrictions . The present program is designed to con -representation of the spoken Latin form  . To produce a concordance on a dialect , the phonological form to be concor-danced on must be redefined  . 
A special environment may be searched for and listed separately by means of the insert at lon of a statement defining an appropriate pattern in the ~ nitialization of the program  , and by the placement of a search for that pattern in the body of the program  . If one is producing a concordance on a particular dialect  , then special environments may be defined according to symbols used in that particular dialect  . 
4 . 2, Encoding of the Data . Allcards will have information beginning in column one and may have information punched continuously through columns eventy-five  , Columns sevent y-six through eighty may be unlque \ ]y sequentially numbered for each entry  ( column sevent y-nlne having units position and column eighty being saved for insertions  )  . A linguistic unit may be split between cards ; in such cases no hyphenation will be needed . That is , in all ~ nstanees the information beginning in the first column of the second and subsequent cards of an entry will be a butted to the seven-ty -fifth column of the previous card  . 
The first card of an item will begin in column one with the dictionary entry of the Latin word  , with both
I0 vowel length and stress indicated , followed by two spaces . 
Indication of stress is redundant , stress being predictable in Classical Latin . However , stress is indicated in dictionary fashion , as an aid toward rapid recognition of the proper stress by the reader  . Though the accusative singular of Classical Latin nouns is the citation form  , with few exceptions , for the first element , the final m has in all instances been omitted . Thus , where the noun no xiscited , it is spelled NO-CTE , rather than NO-CTEM , to save space , and because texts which cite spoken Latin nouns usually cite such nouns without final  2  . The asterisk is used to indicate an unattested Classical Latin form  , in most instances taken from Wilhelm Meyer-Lubke 's Romanish cesEtZ- 
I , molo ~ isches Wortebuch , but in a few instances posited by the author . In all cases where words of Germanic or Celtic origin have been latinized in spelling  , they are also preceded by an asterisk . In Latin dictionary forms of more than one word , the words are separated by a plus , which is removed at the end of the program . 
The second linguistic information , the phonemiciza-tion of the spoken Latin word , is followed by at least one space . The dialect entries follow , each composed of , first , the identifying abbreviation enclosed in parentheses and second  , the reflex in that dialect , preceded by one space and followed by at least one space  . At least one spaces facilitate correction of an erroneously punched form  . An optional comment concludes the item ; the abbreviation for the co~Lment , ( CON ) , must precede the comment and be followed by one space  . When dialect identifying abbreviations are used in the comment  , they must not been closed in parentheses , lest the computer mistake one of these abbreviations for the actual identifier  . ~ nend-of-item slash completes the item , and a single space is obli-gatory before the slash  . 
5 . Example . The examination of one item will suffice to illustrate the working of the program  . Let us suppose the item currently under consideration by the computer is the Latin word alter u  . The data cards containing this word and its reflexes  w~11 have the followlng information : A-LTERUA-L . TRU(B ) < :- . TRE(V ) ? :- . TRO(O ) A : - . TRO(A)O-TR(R)O- . TR@(S ) > :- TR(P)O:-,TRU(N)A:- . TR > ( COM)SISPLUANDFINAL VOWOFR , P , NALL SEMI-PRONOUNCED . B,VHAVEFEM <,- . TRA , >,- . TRA . /000001 where < stands for /~/ I ? , /2%/I @ , /8/~ and > , /D / . 
After the entire item has been read into computer memory  , and determination has been made as to the size of each entry relative to the individual entries of all other on ments  , at Ci in the Flow Chart . None of these environments are applicable in the case of alter u  . Therefore , these searches will fail , and the next search will be for a word-lnitial consonant or consonants  , at C2 in the Flow Chart . In the case of alter ~ this search , too , will fail , and the next search will be for a vowel , at A8 in the Flow Chart . At on ic vowel in a checked syllable will be found at  A8  . 2 and A8 . 6 , and in the subroutine Br to nicchecked A will be queued to the string containing all to nlcchecked vowels  , and the item number will be queued to a string containing the numbers of all items having a to nicchecked A  . 
The next search will be for a consonant or consonants in all possible environments  , beginning a tAt0 in the Flow Chart . Searches for a strong sequence or a geminate con- ~ on ant will fail  . At Ai2 the search for a sequence will be successful , the sequence found being L . TR . Once more , subroutine B is entered , the sequence L . TR is queued to the string labeled " sequence C . CC"atBI . 1, if this is the first occurrence of L . TR , and the item number is queued to the string containing the item numbers of all items having the sequence L  . TR at B~2 . Next , at A131 the syllable-final L , and at A14 , the syllable-lnltial cluster TR , will be queued respectively to the strings containing syllable-final consonants and syllable -initial clhsters  , and the numbers of all items having syllable -final L's in the one case  , and to the string containing the item numbers of all items having syllable-initial TR in the other  . 
The subsequent search for a post-tonic vowel will succeed at  A8  . 3 , and the vowel U in free syllable ( in fact in word-final position ) will , In subroutine B , be queued to the string of post-tonlc vowels in free syllables  , the item number being queued to the string containing the item numbers of all items with post-tonic free U  . At this point , return is made out of subroutine B to the beginning of the program for the reading of the next item  . 
After all items have been read and operated on , the strings and their headings stored in computer memory are outputted in condensed form onto magnetic tape  . The itemalter u will be found under the following headings ~ syl-lable-final L  , syllable-initial TR , sequence L . TR , to nicchecked A , and post-tonic free U . 
In Pass Two , the tape will be read , and the listings will be printed with the elements of each item aligned in columns  . 
6 ? O?Li_~uistlcC0ncl~sions . During the course of reconstruction , one interesting question that arose was the following : do the socalled Franco-Provencal dialects the above-mentioned Latinetymon  , alteru ? With all items containing reflexes of Latin post-tonic free U in one con-venient list  , checking the possible correspondances is made much easier  . Alteru , for example , shows the following cor-respondances : dia lectBE "  0   0 " PU " N > " H ( unavailable ) " V0" D ( unavailable ) ~' Cit " A zero ? ? R @ " Szero , as do all examples of U after a consonantal sequence  . However , for most other examples of Classical Latin post-tonic free U  , all dialects show zero . On the basis of all examples under the heading " post-tonlcfree U " one may conclude that there is a reflex of Latin post-tonic U in these dialects as a support vowel after anotherwise unpronounceable sequence  . Furthermore , this support vowel keeps the quality of its phonological ancestor  . 
Such questions as this are capable of much more ra-pid  , if not surer , solution , by consultation of the listings on the computer print-out  , than simply by means of the ex-aminatlon of index cards  , where examples might be skipped over . The number of examples available for examinat ion is wlth this method  , very comprehensive analysis is required of the linguist  . 
This program is general enough to be applicable in the compilation of a concordance for any group of related dialects for which such a concordance would be useful  . For example , In a proposed reconstruction of Proto-Slavl c , pre-sent-day reflexes of a selected corpus could been coded and the concordance produced on any one of the dialects selected  . 
The chief advantages of the use of the computer to produce such a concordance are the increased facility for the exhaustive handling of a large amount of data  ( as compared to the customary handling of data on index cards  )  , and the avoidance of many time-consuming searches through many lists of forms for occurrences of a specific segment in a specific environment  , since all such lists are readily available on the prlnt-out  . 
7. Flow Chart , 16~frf ~ Mixt J
I/-h&~=S ~ I
IELw Mmurl ~' l
I$EL ~ CT
IFo~A4~'oico.co ~, ~ u?I0'~
I ~? ~ sP ~, ~ L ~
I ?
Irs ~ rVE , vV/A = " pRE.Toa'/C.)
IS ~ rIEN viR -, I
I ? ~ L ~ rEir IIV ~ TVVl ~ kFRoMFae , ~, II ~ g' . 2 ~ F_t . Er , ff , ; Tb ~\[" ENV ) I~?
S~r V~cviR = iT~fT
E~t'vf ? =
PRiN t PRINT q . ao)
V6r , ,,/ b)j Qu . uu ~1 . 13 ~ . ao ) 51 ~ g?tFJa " I5 . ?( r4f ~ NYAM ~ I~l . nl " irI
J , Ro ~ FoR ~ I\[S.r
ENI,'/R.~\['6f.MiN ~ TE,~g(p~6-e/7)

JzA?E , 2o)
SO ~" jFi ~.
SESA~EIV'r
ISE rEA/V/'R--
SE6-MB~~ql ~
I$#r=~:WViR*$Yi.L~gJ.?.
~I . IFrEiTI
IENVjR-"I(PAG?/7


EHViR = two l~p , p~-____.2
CP . ~& Eig
CP,~GatW').i : ? ?

ENViR-
P ~ iFJ c-5~~-41~Iv3t"~t'S1"
I - . , , , ? oMa ~ I"o . Ik ' ~ v i , v, . .~,~cipl( . I~J ~ r,I
