Irene R . Falrley
C.W . Post College , L.I.U.
Greenvale , New York
? Stylistic Analysis of Poetry
The Trl conprogram has been adapted as an aid to the analysis of syntax in poetry with the hope of identifying the dominant patterns that characterize a poet's style  . 
The Trlcon program ( described in Concordances from Com-~ , S . M . Lamb and L . Gould , University of Callf0~nia , ey , 1964 ) has three active lines which this research-er has used for text  , syntactic analysis ( following a phrase-str ~ cture grammar ) and a deviance indicator . The analysis for the three lines is charted and then transfered to punched cards  . Abbreviated alphabetical symbols are used for the syntactic analysis  ( AP = adJective phrase ) because of the program's 24 unlt search limitation . 
The program provides the usual textual concordances for vocabulary  , punctuation , etc . , and a concordance of syntactic patterns and deviances  . Syntactic and deviance lines may be concorded for identiSal units  ( wholes : ~- I~P-PP-P ) Or for partials ( all tokens for S or P )  . The program has a wide range of subsort possibil ities including multl-dlmens lonal cross concordance : subsorts are possible by left or right context on all three lines  . It also has the advantage of a neat multi-line centered print-out  , so that the searched token appears with left and ri~nt context  ; this is especially helpful in the analysis of poetry  . The concordances provide totals of the number of tokens for each type as well as totals of the number of types and tokens searched  . 
An extensive analysis of a poet's poems with the aid of a program llke Trlcon could provide the basis for a formulaic expression of the poet's syntactic habits  , as a set of patterns and deviances . This kind of analysis might aid in the comparison of styles by Identify lng differences in their dominant and minor syntactic patterns and deviations  ( qualitative distinctions ) and the variations in their frequencies of occurrence  ( quan-tlt at f we distinctions )  . Such a formal treatment , of course , looks far into the future , and a program llke Trl-con must be regarded as at best a breaking of ground  . 
This researcher is exploring Tricon's possibil ities in the analysis of e  . e . cummings poetry . A substantial analysis of hlspoems usln ~ Trlcon would help determine what syntactic patterms create the " cummings style " and to what extent and in what manner they are deviant from the standard grammar of English  . 
