AUTOMATED PROCESSING OF MEDICAL ENGLISH
Introduction
The present interest of the scientific community in automated 
language processing has been a wakened by the enormous capabilities of 
the high speed digltal computer . It was recognized that the computer which has the capacity to handle symbols effectively can also treat words as symbols and language as a string of symbols  . 
Automated language processing as exemplified by current research  , had its origin in machine translation . The first attempt to use the computer for automatic language processing took place in  1954  . It is known as the " IBM-Georgetown Experiment " in machine translation from Russian into English  . ( I , 2 ) The experiment revealed the following facts : a . the digital computer can be used for automated language processing  2 but b . much deeper knowledge about the structure and semantics of language will be required for the determination and semantic interpretation of sentence structure  . 
The field of automated language processing is quite broad  ; it includes machine translation , automatic information retrieval ( if based on language data )  , production of computer generated abstracts , indexes and catalogs , development of artificial languages , question answering systems , automatic speech analysis and synthesis , and others . 
Approaches to automatic information retrieval , quantitative studies of generic relations between languages and style analysis ~ have been based to a great extent on statistical considerations ~ such as frequency counts of linguistic units  ( phomemes , morphemes ~ words , fixed phrases ) . In each of these approaches linguistic analysis was considered to be a useful but insufficient method for automated information processing because of them any unresolved problems in language analysis  . 
Implementation of statistical techniques for automated indexing  , classification and abstracting has proved useful despite certain limitations caused by our lack of knowledge of language  . 
Some of the major problems in language processing are : a  . There is no method for Storing in a computer the speaker's knowledge of the universe  . 
b . Syntactic and semantic ambiguities pose severe difficulties for implementation  . 
c . Difficulties associated with the design of a general purpose formal semantic language  ( intermediate language ) into which an input natural language could be mapped by an algorithm  . 
d . Recognition and interpretation of logical inferences which are contained implicitly in natural language  . 
e . Lack of computer-oriented dictionaries and microglossaries  . 
In recent years mathematically oriented studies'of the nature of natural languages have been directed to the development of formal models of grammars  , such as contextfreer context sensitive and transformational grammars  . Formal characteristics of these models of grammars  , their generative power , and their adequacies and inadequa-cies may be found in the literature  ( 3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6 ,  7) . 
Several noted scientists , such as Bar-Hillel (8) , have expressed a pessimistic view in regard to practical implementation of machine translation  . 
Nevertheless , there is merit in continuing efforts for more fundamental research in the area of formal and applied linguistics and computer applications  . Even if we are not able to resolve all the problems in language processing at once  , limited goals can be attained and tested for validity by design of a model for language processing within a restricted language domain  , such as medicine . 
Some Characteristics of Medical English
Aware of the many problems associated with automated processing of natural language  , we have limited our efforts , for the present , to the language domain used in pathology diagnoses  , a subset of Medical

Medical diagnosis may be described as the process used by the physician to determine the nature of disease  , or as the art of distinguishing one disease from another  . The name which is assigned to a disease ~ plies the unique configuration of signs and symptoms believed to be characteristic of the condition which has been diagnosed  . The diagnosis can be regarded as a summary of the more complete medleal document in a conventionalized medical style  . 
Medical diagnoses are characteristically free of verb phrases  . 
The copulative verb " to be " is frequently implied by the use of comma  . Often ~ the pseudo sentence structures appear to be grammatically illogical  . Nevertheless ~ these structures carry semantic meaning and are generally understood by others in medicine  . Modifiers frequently occur in discontinuous sequence with the nouns they modify  . 
Anaphoric expressions are eo ~ au on place.
The terminology consists of a mixture of Latin ~ Greek and English derivatives  . Not uncommonly ~ diagnostic statements exhibit features of all three languages  . Evidence of heterogeneous linguistic origin is also found in single word forms  . The language is rich in the use of compound word forms which are segmentable into single constituents  . 
The distinctive semantic features of diagnostic statements may be categorized as follows : ? an atomic site affeeted ~ or body system involved in the disease process  ; ? disease condition , including structural changes ranging from gross observations to intracellular ultra structural changes  ; ? causative agent of the abnormality ; ? disease manifestations ~ including physiological and chemical changes ~ observable manifestations  , and symptoms reported by the patient ; ? therapeutic agents or processes used ; ? causal relationships among disease entities ; ? method or souree of diagnosis . 
Two or more of these distinctive semantic features may be com-bined  . in a single conceptual unit , e . g . , " measles " implies both the specific infectious disease manifested  , and theetiology , the rubeola virus ; while " pneumonia " describes the inflammatory disease processor condition  , as well as the anatomic site affected , , lung . 
On the other hand , the precise designation of the loeation at which a disease entity has manifested itself may require a complex statement for adequate description of the semantics relative to an a -tomic site affected  , e . g . , a lesion may be found in the " apicoposte-riot segment in the upper division of the upper lobe of the lung  . " After mentioning some of the pecularities of Medical English we will turn to the description of the system for automated processing of Medical English which is now under development at the Division of Computer Research and Teehnology  , National Institutes of Health .  (9,
I0, II , 12213)
Systematized Nomenclature of Pathology
In any type of automated language processing at least two basic components are required : a  . Lexicon b . Grammar Experience in machine translation revealed that commercial dictionaries consisting mostly of word lists are not suitable for automated language processing  . Their main disadvantages are that they are out-of -date  , incomplete and inaccurate for the purpose of morphological ~ syntactic and semantic analysis  . 
In our work we have been using as a lexicon base the System-atized Nomenclature of Pathology  ( SNOP )   ( 14 )  , the structure of which is described below : SNOP is a special purpose lexicon created by pathologists to assist them in the organization and retrieval of information  . The SNOP language consists of a relatively rich word vocabulary and a primitive grammar  . 
A term or conceptual unit is listed in only one of the four semantic categories of the vocabulary and is assigned a unique numerical code within the given information class  . 
The four semantic categories of the SNOP are : Topography  ( T ) -the body site affected Morphology ( M ) -the structural changes resulting from disease Etiology  ( E ) -the causative agents ( micro-organisms , drugs and chemicals ) Function ( F ) -the physiological manifestations associated with disease  , including symptoms and a limited number of specific infectious diseases  . 
The conceptual units in each category are information content words which are used by the pathologist to convey in a condensed form the concept being described  . The basic syntactic structures of the dictionary entries are : single nouns  , adjective phrases , attri-butive noun phrases and participial phrases . 
The code of dictionary entries is divided into four separate and independent fields T  , M , E , F . Within a given field , terms are assigned a four digit number . The first digit refers to the section of the field  , while the other three digits indicate progressively finer subdivisions  . These groupings reflect natural relations among the terms in so far as possible  . The codestructure permits selection of more specific terms by moving down the list and of more generic terms by moving up the list  ( see Appendix I )  . 
Semantic linkage pointers are also incorporated in the dictionary which enable the cross-referencing of information within the same or another category  . 
We intend to extend the semantic codes and also to allow the insertion of additional semantic information  . The individual codes will be linked together to represent the content of the messages and messages will be linked to represent the content of a diagnosis or other relevant medical document  . 

Automated processing of Medical English ( APME ) consists of a series of computer programs which given as input a body of medical text  , will produce as output ~ a linguistic description and semantic interpretation of the given utterance  . 
In the initial stage of our research , our attention was focused on patholoEy diagnoses since this domain of discourse intersects with all other medical specialty areas  . Consequently , research work in this area should be applicable to other medical specialties  . 
The APME pars in E algorithms consist of series of interrelated linguistic and programming operations which are described briefly as follows : Morphological Analysis embodies the identification and transformation of terminal morphemes and recognition of a limited set of prefixes  . The input to the morphological analysis and subsequent morphosyntactic transformations is the unedited Medical English of a pathologist  . The transformation procedure consists of a set of rules by which the adjective forming suffixes are substituted by a set of nominalizing suffixes  ( adjective to noun transforms ) or plural nominal suffixes are substituted by their singular allomorphs  ( plural to singular noun transforms ) and , finally ~ transforms of nouns to their synonymous or near-synonymous forms  ( i . e . , DIS~TERY--~DISENTERIA) .   ( 12 ) The main reason for the transformation of terminal morphemes is to provide a means for the successful retrieval of wordforms which occur in the text in a derivative form but are listed in the SNOP die-tionary in an alternative form  . 
We have been preparing rules for morphose mantie segmentation of composite wordforms which are mainly derived from Greek or Latin  . 
The decomposition implies the recognition of constitutents  , the order of constituents , how they are intertwined and the assignment of semantic value to productive components  . 
For example , the composite ' BRONCHITIS ' is segmented into two components CI-T and  C2-M   , namely : a . Terminal morpheme-ITIS ( C2-M ) which is the semantic marker of inflammation process  ( semantic category ' M' )  , and b . The stem morpheme BRONCH ( US )   ( CI-T ) ~ the site of the body where the inflammation process occurs  ( semantic category ' T ' )  . The semantic structure of the class of wordforms such as ' BRONCHITIS ' is expressed as 
W ( T , M )  -+  ( CI-T )  +  ( C2-M ) where the order of semantic components CI-T and C2-M is fixed and cannot be reversed . 
It is expected that the analysis of the semantic structure of components into their semantic constituents and the formalization of the structural and semantic relationships among them will be useful for the preparation of computer -oriented medical micro-glossaries  . 
S~ntactic and Semantic Analysis
Syntactic and semantic analysis of medical text involves the determination of sentence structure and its semantic interpretation  . 
This problem can be resolved by the implementation of transformational rules by which different types of noun Phrases will be transformed into a set of semantically equivalent phrases  . For example : NP-~N1+N2 ( muscle atrophy ) - - ~ N2 + OF + N1 ( atrophy of muscle ) ~ N2+COMMA+N 1 ( atrophy , muscle )  ~  ( N2-->A ) ? N1 ( atrophic muscle ) ~  ( NI --> A ) + N2 ( muscular atrophy )  . 
Two tree diagrams are required for the representation of cumulative derivations in an abbreviated form  . 

N/~N ( muscle atrophy )   ( A - - - + N ) N ( muscular atrophy )   ( A--~N ) of N colm ~ a2 . 
(atrophic muscle )   ( atrophy of muscle )   ( atrophy , muscle ) The problem of paraphrasing is closely related with automatic recognition of synonymous or nearly-synonymous expressions which are not found in the lexicon  . Even if we would be able to assign an approximative value to socalled " unknow ~ terms " by the implementation of deductive rules  , the physician o ~ the expert in the related field will have to make the decision about the synonymity of the term in question  . 


In both cases it is assumed that the semantic content of the message is understood  . Otherwise , if the transformational rules were based only on the formal structure of noun phrases they could generate phrases which are not compatible with the semantic content of the message  . Consequently , the transformational or paraphrasing rules should not be based only on syntactic features but also on semantic features of components of the given semantic unit ~ i  . e . , on the deep structure of the message . 
The boundaries of the semantic unit do not correspond  , necessarily , to the boundaries of the noun phrase . For this reason , we prefer the term " kernel phrase " instead of noun phrase  . However , it seems reasonable to identify first the semantic correlations within the frame of the syntactic construction  ( noun phrase , adjectival phrase , verb phrase , etc .  )  . 
The noun phrase structure grammar comprises - among others - the analysis and synthesis of adjectival phrases and attri-butive noun phrases  . 
The adjectives were classified in terms of their semantic compatibility with semantic classes of head nouns  . The following properties of adjectives and nouns were considered : 
Adj actives : ta . Feature of transform a billty ( A-#N ; A+ed--)N ; A+ing . -)
N ) b . Semantic class membership ( Topography , Morphology , 
Etiology , Function , General ) c . Admissible semantic correlations with semantic classes of head nouns NP x-->Ax+Nx where  ( x ) denotes the type correlation . 
Noun . _ . ._ . ~s : a . Feature of transform a bill ty(N-->N ; N-+A ); b . Semantic class membership ( T,M , E , G as above )
For example:
ACUTE STAPHYLOCOCCAL PNEUMDNIA
A-TR/G/M+A-TR/E/M+N-T'R/M-~(NP)M , E where A-TR/G/M(acute ) = Adjective(A) , transformable ( TR ) , ' General'(G ) , semantic correlation with N(M ) ; A-TR/E/M=Adjective , transformable , semantic class membership-'Etiology'(E ) , modifying N(M ); N-TR/M = noun , non-transformable ( TR ) , belonging to semantic category ' Morphology ' ( M )  . 
(NP)M , E = adjectival kernel phrase belonging to the semantic category ' M'  ( morphology ) and category'E' ( etiol-ogy )  . 
The semantics assigned to adjectivals reflect , to a greater or lesser extent ~ the semantic and syntactic relations between the adjectivals and the head nouns that they modify  . Rules were written for strings of adjectives which are preposed or discontinuous sequence  . Analogous criteria were used to prepare rules for recognition of attributive noun phrases  . (13) Z . Harr is suggested that it might be possible to establish  , what he calls , " classified relationships " between adjective and noun in advancer i  . e . , to have dictionary pairing of words and their classifiers for a scientific language because the metaphorical usage is highly restricted in scientific discourse  . It seems reasonable that adjectival phrases or appositional noun phrases which are perceived as single conceptual units should be listed and treated in the same way as compounds  . 
Any treatment of ~ hglish adjectives shows that the attribution and predication is far from simple  . For instance , an adjective may modify a noun whleh is not present explicitly  . An example is the phrase " parathy roid ( gl and ) a denoma " meaning " parathyroidglandade-home " where the adjective " parathyroid " is semantically related to the absent noun " gl and  . " i  The complexity of the analysis of adjectival phrases becomes apparent in attempting to semantically classify adjectives  . Many adjectives may be members of two or more classes ~ i  . e . , the given Axy can modify either Nx or Ny , e . g . ~ general adjective ' ab ~ or mal ' can be correlated semantically with NT or N ~ or NE or ~ F ' thus  , yielding multiple readings . Even further refinement of the classification of adjectives will not completely solve the difficulty  . 

Semantics
It was already mentioned before that our goal is the successful mechanical recognition  , interpretation and subsequent storage of Medical English for meaningful and timely retrieval of medical data in accordance with the needs of the user  . 
When the boundaries of kernel phrases are identified by the implementation of syntactic and semantic algorithms the next step is the establishment of semantic correlations among the major semantic units of the utterance  . The semantics of kernel phrases are conveyed by a set of relational predicates  . 
Relational predicate having a propositional function f  ( x ) describes the type of semantic relationship among the major kernel phrases as mentioned before  . 
For example , the statement : " Pneumonia ~ due to staphylococcus " can be formalized as \[  ( RI )   ( M , E )   1 where R 1 is the causative relational predicate " due to , "" pneumonia " is the kernel phrase belonging to the semantic category ' M'  ( morphology ) and " staphylococcus " being a member of the category ' E ~  ( caus-ative agent )  . The relational expression " due to " can be substituted by other equivalent expressions such as " caused by " or " resulting from  , " since they designate a similar relationship between the same semantic categories  . The notion of argument pair ( M , ~ is not limited to single constituents as in the example above but it refers to kernel phrases in which the number of constituents is variable  . For example ~ the statement mentioned above can be expanded as follows : " A cute and severe pneumonia caused by staphylococcusal bus " where the left-bound phrase " a cute and severe pneumonia "  ( M ) and the right-bound phrase " staphylococcusal bus  "   ( E ) are related by the relational predicate " caused by "  ( RI )  . Consequently , the statement \[( R1)(M , E )\] holds in both cases . 
The classification of relational predicates RI ,   R2 -- Rn will reveal different types of relations among the semantically marked kernel phrases belonging to the semantic categories T~M  , E , For perhaps to other categories which may result from further semantic analysis  . The precision of relational predicate rules may be increased by refinement of admissible cooccurrences of subclasses of the basic semantic constituents of kernel noun phrases  . 
For example , statement :\[( Rx ) ( M12"* , TII ** ) \] is to be interpreted that there is a certain relationship Rx  ( not defined here ) between the subclass MI2 ** ( fractures ) and subclass TII ** ( bones ) where ** implies any member of the respective subclass  . 
The syntactic structure of relational predicates consists either of a single functional element ~ such as the preposition ' in  , ' or compound expressions ~ such as ' due to ~' or it can be a punctuation mark such as colm ~ a ? The semantic rules can be regarded as the axioms of the system and therefore theorems derived from these axioms will describe various properties of Medical English which can be tested for truth or falsity for completeness  , and for ambiguity . 

The bodyOf theorems will constitute the grammar of a formal intermediate language having the semantic classes T  , M , E , F and others to be defined , as its vocabulary . 
The axioms of the system are based upon the distribution of semantically significant elements  . The key components consist of operators and their oper and s  . The operands ~ linguistically related to noun phrases  , are members of particular semantic categories , and the operators are theorems describing the relationship among the operands ? Relationships among syntactically connected parts of sentences will be tabulated and associated with the meaning of semantic categories in the SNOP dictionary  . The relationship between syntactic ~ nd semantic units is expressed by a set of linguistic operators which lave the function of relational predicates in the intermediate language  . 
Conceptual analysis and preparation of algorithms for translating restricted Medical English into wellformed expressions will equire definition of the functional form of relational predicates in : he intermediate language and their syntactic features as linguistic  ) perators in natural language . 
We assume that heuristic-type rules for automatic problem-solving ~ ill be expanded beyond the present logical framework and combined ~ ith linguistic techniques for automatic processing of natural lan-l  . Tuage . This will lead to the development of a more powerful theory of  ) roblem-solving , in general (15 ,  16) . 

The development of a methodology for machine encoding of diagnostic statements into a file  , and the capability to retrieve information meaningfully from data file with a high degree of accuracy and completeness is the first phase towards the objective of processing general medical text  . 
The results of morphological , syntactic and semantic analysis are translated via computer programs into the existing intermediate language which comprises four information fields : Topography  , Morphology , Etiology ~ and Function , as they are listed in the SNOP die-tionary . Once the units are identified and mapped into the intermediate language  , they could be replaced interlingually by equivalent units of another syntactic and semantic system  . The replacement could be implemented mechanically through the selection of the equivalent syntactic structure  , in our case , SNOP noun phrases in their intermediate language form  . 
The most amazing aspect of language is the fact that despite its enormous complexity human beings are able to use it with success as a communication tool  . If we are everable to discover and describe the process of human thought  , we will be closer to the resolution of many problems associated with the formalization and subsequent automatiza-tion of natural language  . It is not our intention to tackle all the problems inherent in natural language  . We believe that we will be able to refine our algorithms and further develop a system which will process medical text by applying the formalized linguistic analytic procedures for the storage of data in such a way that the users ' cequirements can be met  . 
q-Ol6lTTOPOGRAPHY-NUMERICAL(contlnuad)
SECTION 2: RES PIRATORY TRACT 20-RESP IRATORY TRACTi 2000 Respiratory tract , NOS 201-Upper Respiratory Tract 2010 Upper respiratory tract , NOS
Nose , accessory sinus and
Lower respiratory tract , NOS
Larynx , trachea , bronch i and lungs combined sites 220021-NOSE
ZlO0Nose , NOS 2101 Mucousmembrane of nose 2102 Respiratory region of nose 2102 Ol factory region of nose 2104 Nasalgland 2100 Ol factor y l and 2100 Cavernous plexus of nose 2107 Lamina proprla of nose 2100 Nasalmeatl 211-Externa lNose 2110 External nose z111 Roof ' of nose
I 2112 Dorsum of nose 2113 A pex of nose 2114 Alanasl 2115 Nasal septum , mobile portion 212 -Nasal Cartilage 2120 Nasal cartilage 2121 Greater alar cartilage 2122 Later aln as al cartilage 2123 Nasal septal cartilage 2124 Lesser alar cartilage 2125 Vomeronasal cartilage 213  , 2 14 -Internal None 2130 Internal nose 2131 Nares 2132 Nasal vestibule 2133 Nasal fossae 2134 Nasal septum , NOS 2135 Cboanae 2136 Nasal turbinate , NOS 2137 Inferiorn as alturblnate
Middlen as alturblnate
Superior nasal tnrblnate 22-ACCESSORYSINUS
Accessory sinus , NOS
Paranasal sinus
Accessory nasals in us
Mucousmembrane of accessory sinus
Accessorys in usgl and
Lamina propria of accessory sinus 221 -Maxillary Sinus
Maxillary sinus , NOS
Ma Xillaryantrum,
Bight maxillary sinus
Left maxillary sinus
Mucousmembrane of maxillary sinus
Maxillarys in usgl and
Lamina propria of maxillary
Sinus 222-Frontal Sinus
Frontal sinus , NOS
Bight frontal sinus
Left , frontal sinus
Mucousmembrane of frontals in us
Frontals in usgl and
Lamina proprla of frontal sinus 223-Ethmoid Sinus
Ethmoldsinus , NOS
Ethmoldantrum
Right ethmoids in us
Left ethmoids in us




DOSTERT , L . E . : Machine Translation and Automatic Language Processing : Vist as in Information Handling  ; Spartan Books ; Washington 1963 GAR VlN , P . L . : The Georgetown-IBM Experiment of 1954: An Evaluation in Retrospect : Papers in Linguistics in Honor of Leon Dostert  ; Ed . by W . M . Austin ; Mouton Co . ; The Hague , 1967 SEDELOW , S . Y . , SEDELOW , W . A . JR . : Stylistic Analysis ; Automated Language Processing ; John Wiley and Sons ~ Inc . ; New York
Cambridge , Mass . ~ 1965 5 . Automatic Language Processing Advisory Committee , LANGUAGE and MACHINES-COMPUTERSINTRANS LATION ANDLINGUISTICS : National  6  . 





Academy of Sciences , Washington 1966
BOBROW ~ D . G . : S~n~tactic Theory in Computer Implementations ; Automated Language Processing ; John Wiley and Sons , Inc . ;
New York 1967
Seminar on Computational Linguistics ; Edited by A . W . Pratt , A . H . Roberts and K . Lewis ; U . S . Department of Healthy Education and Welfare ; National Institutes of Health ; Public Health Service ; Publication No . 1716; U . S . Printing Office 1967 BAR-HILLEL , Y . : Language and Information ; Addison-Wesl ~ y , Reading ~ Massachusetts 1964 PRATT , A . W . , THOMAS , L . B . : An Information Processing System for Pathology Data  ; Pathology Annual-66 ; Appleton-Cen % ury-Crofts
Publishers ; 1967
DUNHAM , G . : Pathology Diagnoses Language Encoder ; Division of Computer Research and Technology ; National Institutes of Health ; 
Internal Report.
EPSTEIN , M . : AST stem for Pathology Data Processing ; Division of Computer Research and Technology ; National Institutes of Health ; 
Bethesda , Maryland 196912.




PRATT , A . W . , PACAK , M . : Identification and Transformation of Terminal Fbrphemes in Medical English  ; Methods of Information in Medicine ; Vol . 8; No . 2, April 1969; F . K . Schatauer Verlag,
Stuttgart , New York
PACAK , M . , DEFRANCESCO , H : Adjectival Phrases in Medical ~ ; Division of Computer Research and Technology ; National Institutes of Health ; Bethesda , Maryland ; in pre-paration . 
Systematized Nomenclature of Pathology ; College of American
Pathologists , Chicago ~ Illinois 1965
GARVIN , P . L . : The . , Place of Heuristics in the Fulcrum Ap . p , , . roach , to Machine Translation ; Lingua , Vol . 21; North-Holland Publishing Company ; Holland , 1968 SLAGLE , J . R . : E~eriments with a Deductive Question-Answer in ~  ~   ; Comm . ACM 8,12, 1965
