On the Use of IAn6u isti ? Quantifying 0pera~ors in the
Logico-Semanttc Structure Representation of Utterances 
Irena Bellert
Warsaw University
I . Introduction
By no with as become olee ~ to most linsuists that surface structures of utterances in natural  laD6uage are not a suf-ficient basis for the semantic interpretation  , an ~ that an abstTact ~ e ep structure representation has to be assumed in a  lin6uistlc desc~Iption , whlch lasupposed to correlate the surfaces trua ~ x rehierarchical representation of each utterance with its msani Dg  ( or meanings in case of homonimi ~ y ) ? Since the problem of what should be understood as the  meanln6 of an utterance is not clear , the question of how deep et Tuc-tures should be represented remains open for linguists  , even for those who have been known as adherents of the transformational generative  5Tammar   , where deep structures are determined in terms of generalized phrase markers  ( or some other similar concepts which get modified in the course of work  )  . 
The questions which arise in postulating deep structure representations are often due to the lack of a possible guidellne ?  oncernin6 the division between the knowledge of l~a~e and knowled6e of the world , and thus between the information which should be included in a full description of a  lan6ua~e a ~ that which shoul ~ or need not . The classical distinction between syntax , which concerns relations between lan~ua6e   -2 -signs , and semantics , uhich columns relations bergen lan-~ a6e signs and extral iD6uis % - lc " objects " ( or extraliz ~ aist-ic relations )   , has also become blurred up by the fact of in -troduc in K into the lin~uistic des~pt temabstract struc-tures which are only indirectly related to the surface signs represent in ~ the elements  t2~at actua/lyoccur in utterances . 
However , even if we reck on the abstract deep struc ture dee-crip ~ lons as pertain  in6 to syntactical relations-in spite of cex ~ ain attempts tO the contreury  3 -we will still be left with diffi culties in trying to establish ~ he scope of semant-ic relations  , that is , the relations between linguistic signs which occur in deep structure rep~esent ~ a ~ ions and extrall n- 
Kuistio " objects " or relations.
The difficulties whi = harise in establiah ln~the scope of semantics are before all due to the fact that the overhel ~ n  6 majority Of utterances contains iKns m hich are used in refer-ence to the addresser  , addressee , t ~ e time , place and situa-tion in which a given ut terance is  produced2  . Therefore , if we wanted to takes ~ to usly the requizement that semantic re-lations should consist in relat ~ S ~ DS with extTa ~ stic " objects "  , such a task woulds ~ ply be unfeasible for al in-~/ stor semanticist  , for it is cleeur that a ~ y two identical ut terances used at a different time  , place , or produced by a different speaker , should be inte:preted differently if they contain " token-reflexive " signs  , ~ obviously they are relat-ed to two dif ferent extr~stic situations  . 

It is certain ~ much more reasonable to fol lowaview held by some philosophers  , logicians and linguists , which can be briefly recalled by means of a quotation from Roman Jakobson : " the mean ln ~ of any linguistic sign is its translation into some further  , alternative sign , especially asi@u " in mhich it is more fully developed " as Peirce  , the deepest inquirer into the essence of signs , insistently stated "3 . The general idea is certainly right , but such an approach leaves much freedom with respect to various possible ways of present in ~" the alternative signs "  . Ne will not discuss here the differ- ent proposals connected with such an approach to semantics  , their assets and drawbacks , but-accepting in principle the thesis that a semantic model for natural language canon-l y be established by means of " alternat ivesigns "- we will suggest one of the possible ways of describi ~ the semantic interpretation of utterances  . 
Following a concept which has already a certain tradition in philosophy  , semantics an ~ logic ~ , but has never been taken seriously by linguists , I will accept the view that the sem-antic interpretation c ~ an utterance is the set of consequen-ces which can be derived from that utterance  ( or more strict-ly , from its deep structure description ) on the basis of certain implicatienal rules that can be established for the given language  . Accordingly , I attempt to search for such a description of deep structures for which it  , /ill be possible to formulate the rules ~ hichi call quasi implications  5  . In order to avoid confusion in using the term " deep structures "  ( which by now is employed in different senses  , but should be reserved for transformational deep structures  , for which it has been clearly defined ) , I will refer to the logi-co-semantics tructure  ( LS structure ) of utterances 6 . 
The identification of the semantic in terp retation of an utterance with the set of consequences or conclusions which can be drawn on the grounds of that utterance is very close to our intuitive understanding of how we interpret utterances  . 
To say that the addressee understands an utterance p only if he is able to d raw all the conclusions implied by the given ut-terance p seems to be compatible with the ordinary think i ~ and the estimation of a fully adequate understanding of an utterance  . The fact that certain conclusions are based on prem-isses corresponding to the addressee's beliefs which belong to his knowledge of the world precisely reflects what has been mentioned earlier about the lack of a clearcut division between the knowledge of language and knowledge of the world  . 
In fact such a division can only be arbitrarily established for a given description of language  . For instance , in des-cribing a lexicon ( or the rules of the lexicon in a theory of language  )  , we have to make a decision as to Whether certain information concerning a lexical item should be included in the lexicon ~ or treated as encyclopaedic information  , which pertains to such or other domain of science  , specialization , etc . The arbitrariness of this divisiono oncerns , lhowever , usually the boundary problems with respect to which such questions arise  , but it does not effect the fact -5-that in the majority of problems there is a general agreem-ent of  lin6uists as to what syntactical and lexical information should be included in the linguistic description in some or other way  . Once such a decision is made , and the information is included in a lin6uistic description , we should be able to define clearly what consequences can be drawn on the basis of a given utterance and linguistic quasii Mplica-tions  , and what ones require additional premisses which be-lon ~ to the knowledge of the world  . 
To give an example , we may say that a speaker or author uses appropr iately  7 the utterance : ( 1  ) ~ ix on has left the United States ( la ) there is one and only " object " which is be in ~ referred to bj himas " Nixon "  ( Ib ) there is one and only " object " which is being referred to by himas " the United States "  ( 1? ) Nixon was in the United States before and if his purported claim is that :  ( 1~ ) Nixon is not in the United States at that t ime  . 
The propositions ( la , lb , l c and l d ) can be derived formal-ly from ( I ) on the basis of certain linguistic quasii ~ pli -cations  9  , and they below , among ethers , to the set of consequences which constitutes the interpretation of  ( I )  . On the other hand , the proposition ( le ) The President of the United States has left the United 
States is a conclusion based on the premiss : " Nixon is the President Of the United States " ~ which may belong to the speaker's and heater's knowledge of the wOrld  , but if not included in the -6 -description of the lexicon , it will not be derived formal-ly as a consequence  . 
It is worth noting that the propositions ( la , Ib , ic ) concern the speaker's purported beliefs , whereas the pro-pOsition ( ld ) concerns the speaker's purported claim or assertion  . The difference is significant , for if we convert ( I ) into a ~ aestion , negation , wish , command , etc(HasNixomleft the United S ~ ates . E ~ ix on has not left the United States , I want Nixon to leave the United States , etc ) then the consequences pertaini~6 to the speaker's beliefs will remain the same , and it is only the consequence ( I d )   pertalnin6 to the speaker's assertion that will become oorrespomdln61y d/fferent . In general all the consequen-ces derived from an utterance can be accepted only as a set of p ropositions which correspond to the purpor ted at-titude of the speaker  , n . ~ as a set of propositions which hold true . The question of w ~ ether such propositions are true or not is not a linguistic question  , similarly as the problem of whether the " object " being referred to exists in reality or is to be assumed in the context of a novel  10 In terms of the approach suggested here ~ ontological consld-erations have no  beariD6 on the LS structure description of utterances , from which ~ he same consequences can bed ~ awn ~ independently of whether the speaker is  sayIn6 thelt ruthor lyin6  , whether he is relati ~ his dream , tellln 6a story or repcrtiDg facts . 
In this paper we will discuss only those aspects of the LS structure representation which concern certain liz~ist--?-ic quantify iD ~  operator2  . As in general we assume that the LSs ~ ructure could be represented in a language somehow an-a logous to that of a modified predicate calcu lus  , our aim in the present discussion is to suggest a certain w ~ y of def-ining the use of linguistic quantify i ~  , operators which would be in agreement with the in terp retation of utterances in natural language ~ the present paper is concerned with  11 English utterances only . 
The problem of defining the use of linguist ic quantifying operators in the LS struc ture description seems to be one of greats ignificance for the semantic interpret at ion of the surface syntactic relations  , for it appears that it is hardly possible to assign an adequate semantic interpreta-t ion  12 to an utterance , if its LS structure is not conceived of in terms of at least one predl cate and its ars ~ment  ( or arguments ) prefixed by some linguistic quantlfyi ~ operator . 
AD~thing we talk about ~ that is ~ any subject ( or sub~ects ) of predication , is either a particular " object " , a particul-arrelation between " objects " of some sort  , a particular si-tuatlon , event , stc ~ or else it m ~ y be a certain number 13 of ~' objects " psituations , etc which are such and such , or finally the subject of predication may be each " obJect " ~ situation  , ere , which is such and such . Generally speak i ~ , enutterance is analogous to a logical sentence or proposltion ~ rather than to a propositional function with free variables ~ and ~ hus the LS structure of an utterance may be best conceive ~ as a fo~nulain which ~ e make use of some sort of lin@~ulst ~ 
Io quantlfy in ~ operators.

The analogy with the language of predicate calculus is not very precise though  , and - as we shall try to show-the linguistic quantifying operators must be defined differently than these defined in logic  . In the first place , there is a greater number of linguistic devices which function as quantifiers of some sort  , and in the second place , even those devices which show an analogy with the operators used in logic have a slightly different semantic function and cannot be defined for our use in the same way as those defined in logic  . In the present paper we shall discuss only two linguistic quantifying operators I@  , one being analogous to theiota operator def-ined for the predicate calculus  , the other one being analog-ous to the general quantifier  . 
2-The linguisticiota operator
Theiota operator , as defined in logic 15 can he used in the expression ( ~x ) ~ ( x )   , only if the propositional function is a unit function  , that is , if it satisfies two conditions , one concerning the existence , the other the uniqueness of the " object " which is ~  . Such conditions ms2 be expressed formally as The expression ( ~x ) ~ ( x ) has the category of an argument ( not of a statement )  , and may be interpreted as the English expression of the category of a nominal phrase  , namely , : " that one and only object which is ~" . 
Now when comparing the expressions in English which have  -9-a similar semantic function as the unit function , namely , lingulst lc indices 16 , it is immediately obvious that we are not in a position to prove that they satisfy the conditions of existence and uniqueness  , on the contrary , it would be hard if not impossible to find a single  lin6ulst~c index which , as such , would satisfy such conditions . 
~evertheless , it is an empirical fact quite evlden ~~ hat whenever an addresser uses an utterance conta in iDganin-dex ~ in the normal ~ process of communicatlon  , it is always in accordance with his purported belief that there is one and only " object " which is being referred to as ~? In contradis tinction to a formal system for which we have ~ e define the rules and conditions of correct use  , the linguist works in the opposite direct ion  . For weal- rea~7 have a given system which we all use successfully for the purpose of intercommun A cation  , and the linguist's or the semanticist's job is to detect the rules that make possible the achievement of mutual understand ln  6 among ~ he competent users of the given language system ? Thus in the first place we can analyse utterances only with the assumption that they are used appropriately-otherwise no consistent analysis would have been possible  . 
The appropriate use of language , as defined for our pur-pOSeSD is nothing mere than a use which is consistent with ~ he rules of language and with the speaker's purported propositional attitudes  . It would be thus unreasonable ~ or eject such an obvious assumption  . 
- lO-
We may try t then ) to establish quasi implications ~ li ch will held truelT and thus yield the cor respondi ~ consequences for all eases of l  in6u is ticuse in the process of communication . 
Accord in 61 y , we will show that what is defined as a cond ition of correct use in a formal system  , will be derivable in our oase as a consequence of a given utterance  . 
In the second place , we take into account the fact that utte rances of natural  lan6uage are never , so to speak , hun 6 in the air , but are always interpretable in terms of what we  18 call the propositional attitude por modal frame  19 when refer-r iD6 to its explicit representation . For no utterance used in the process of communication can be fully interpreted wi thout our understand  iD6 it as a proposition which expresses , amoD 6 other things , the speaker's or author's propositional attitudes  , which may be beliefs , assertions , doubts , requests ( for oral or other responses ) or any other attitudes . 
Accord in 6 to such an argumentation , the propositions which correspond to the two conditions for the correct use of a unit function  , (a ) and ( b) , will be accepted in our case as consequences which be  loD6 to the interpretation of any utter-ance ~ contain  in8 a linguistic index . Such propositions cannot , however , be represented a so cour rin ~ in an assertorio modal frame  , but in the modal frame : " The speaker believes that  . . .  "  ( where the term " believe " is used in the sense of purported belief  )  . The quasi implicational scheme on which such consequences are drawn is roughly  speakin6 as follows : For any linguistic index ~ , the speaker uses appropriate-W~only if he believes that there is an " object " whichly-l l-is ~  , and that the " object " being referred to as ~ is unique  . 
Since the consequent of this statement can be assumed to express one of the necessary cond itions for the antecedent  20  , we ma ~ consider the whole statement as a quas ii Mplicatisn  . 
Thus in the case of any utterance which contains alin@uist-acceptic index  , we may ~ a statement correspon~ing to the antecedent as hold ~ true-by virtue of our general assumption of appropriate use-end therefore we can al-ways infer the cor responding consequent as a consequence  . 
We thus preserve the uniqueness of the purported " object " by means of inserting into the common  ( and thus intersubJee-tire ) semantic interpretation of indices a parameter which is rt token-reflex iver P and which serves its purpose  ( a ~ time an utterance is actually used ~ in relating signs to extralin-~stic " ob jects " or relations  , throug ~ h the identification of the speaker  , the time , place and situation in which ~ he given ut terance is used  . Accordingly ; the value of the argum-ent-which in the case under discussion is a linguistic in- dex ~ is understood in any particular case  , without being possibly indicated in a general linguistic description  . In refers other words ~ the fact that the speaker ~ too neam ~ only " object " ! each time he is using an imde ~ belongs to the semantic Interpret at lonpan ~ is reflected in the propose ~ LS structure representation and the corresponding consequen-ces " whichere derivable from It  , but the question of what " object " me ~ actually be identified by means of such an expression does not belong to the domain of lingaistics ?-  12 -A ~ such " object " m~y only be described in terms of linguist-ic expressions - it may either be pointed to by means of a name used as an index  , or described in terms of the lex-icali tems contained in the definite descript ion used as anject " is described or poin ted to in order to be identified  , and he ~ not be concerned with I ha___~titi s  . 
It thus appears that the lin6uistic iota operator is a close analog to theiot a operator as defined in logic  , the dif~erences lying in our treating the conditions of correct use defined in logic as the consequences of the ever-assumed appropriate use of utterances  , and in our introducing the propositional attitudes into the LS structure description  . 
As it will be argued below , the next linguistic quantify in ~ operator to be discussed in this paper  , namely , the all-op-erator , will also be defined partly by analogy to the iota operator  , for the reasons based on linguistic evidence . 
The all-operator
In the preceding section we have discussed a certain type of ars ~ Ament prefixed by theiot a operator  . Such an argum-ent will be referred to as an argument of type I  . Its explicit exponent on the surface can only be a linguistic index  , and its role is to indicate one and only " object " to which a given predicate applies  . At present we will discuss another type of argument-which will be referred to as an argument of type  2 -whose role is to indicate all the " objects " to which a given predicate applies  . The explicit exponents on the surface of English utterances are usually nominal phrases preceded by " all "  , " every " , " each " . 

However , it is not always the case that such nominal phrases are to be interpreted as arguments of type  2   ( consider phrases such as , for instance , " all the country " , every second Frenchman " , " each time " , etc ) . Let us now discuss the followln6 examples by means of which we will show the analogy between arguments of type  1 and those of type 2  . 
(2 ) John has a waken ( 3 ) JY father has a waken ( 4 ) Kyparents have awaEen ( 5 ) All the members of my family have a waken ( 6 ) All the inhabitants of this house have a waken ( 7 ) All the inhabitants of the moon have a waken Independently of other problems connected with the proper LS structure representation of utterances in which a predi ~ applies to each individual of a set determined by a given ~ es -our examples have a similar function  ; they serve to identify either a single individual  ( utterances 2 and 2 )  , or a certain number of individuals ( utterances 4 , 5 , 6 and 7) , and thus serve to indicate the values of the argument used with the predicate " has a waken "  . Thus if we compare : ( 8 ) The boystanding in the door way is tall with ( 9 ) All the boys standing in the ~ oorw~7 are tall it seems clear that the difference between the t ~ lies in that the nominal phrase in  ( 8 ) serves to indicate or identify one ind lvl dual ~ whereas the nominal phrase in  ( 9 ) serves to indicate or identify a certain number of individuals  , both n@~-inal phrases be in K used as " instructions " for identification  , and as such correspond to the argument of the predicate " tall "  . 
Such " instructions " are used approprlately ponly if the speaker believes that there is a boy standing in the door way  ( for 8 ) and that there is more than one boystand in 6 in the door-way ( for 9 )   . Consequently by virtue of our Keneral assmap -tion of appropriate use  , it is possible to infer such pseudo -existential propositions in the model frame " The speaker believes that ??  . ." One might object to this interpretation of all -statements and try  , by analogy to logical statements with a general quan-tifier  , to interpret them as implicational sta tements : For a ~ if x is ~  , then x is ~ . Under such an interpreta-xp tion the utte rance  ( 9 ) would be a paraphrase of -- ( i0 ) If anythlng is a boystanding in the door way it is tall If anybody is a boystsnding in the do or way heist all Anybody who is a boy  standin6 in the door way is tall Even if we ignore ~ he awkwardness of utterances such as  ( i0 )  , we cannot accept such utterances as paraphrases of  ( 9 ) for reasons . First , ( i0) could , then , equally well be taken as a paraphrase of ( 9 ) as that of ( 87 , as there is no uention with respect to the plurality of the individuals being referred to  . 
Thus ( i0 ) could be accepted as one of the consequences from  ( 9  )   ,   ( and this will be shown below to be the case )   , but not as an equivalent proposition . Second , , the speaker implies by ( 9 ) his purportecl belief that there are individuals who are boys standing in the  doorw~7  , whereas no such izplication b holds for (10) . To give a clearer example , if someone says ( 11 ) All the inhabitants of the moon must feel cold the heater's reaction might be expressed by ~'" ~ at are ~ ou-  15 -talk lng about . ~- There are no inhabitants on the moon . " On the other hand , no such reaction would follow if someone says : ( 12 ) If anything is an inhabitant of the moon it must feel cold The response might then be : " Right you are  , but fortunately there are no inhabitants on the moon "  . 
? nother argument support in6 this interpretation may be provid-ed by the follow  in6 test . If we consider the utterance : ( 13 ) Idoubt whether there are inhabitants on the moon  , but all inhabitants of the moon must feel cold it leaves the impression of a certain awkwardness  , ~hich is a result of the inconsistency between the expressed doubt and the i~lied be lief concerning the same proposition  . On the other hand , the utterance : ( 1~ ) Idoubt whether there are inhabitants on the moon  , but if anything is an inhabitanto Z the moon it must feel cold does not seem awkward  , since according to our argumentation implicational statements do not imply  ext7 belief or assumption concernlng existence . Evidently there are different i ~ lioa-tional rules concerning the if  . oothen-statements , and they depend on the tense used in the If -clause o If we denote the if-clause by S~the hea ~ermay infer  , for instance ~ that the speaker believes that S ~ or believes that it is not the case that S ~ or believes that it is probable that S~et coIn any case ~ it seems clear for the reasons ~ iven above that  ( I0 ) is not a paraphrase of ( 9 )  , nor (12) is a paraphrase of (11) . In spite of the fact that implicational statements can be considered as truth functionally equivalent to the corresponding all ~ statements  ( and this is the basis of the log ~ Ic-al equivalence  ) ~ yet they cannot be represented by the same- 16 -LS structure , for obviously the latter convey add it ional sem-antic information  , that is , additional consequences can be in-ferred from them  . 
A ? cord in 61 y , instead of making use of a general quant if ier  , we will introduce a quantifying operator which we mall all-op-erator  . The all-operator is assumed to be an argument-forming eperator  , not a statement-forming sperator p as in the case of a general quantifier in legic  . In other words , it is not an operator which makes as ta tement when prefixed to a proposi-tional form  , but one which makes an argument when prefixed to a function representing a nominal phrase in the plural role form  . It ~ hus has the same ~ as theiota operator , which is used to make an expression of ~ he category of an argument  23  . 
We assume here that the all-operator belongs to a speclf-ic class of modifiers which we call ~ linguistic quantl-lying operators  . Such operators will occur in the LS structure representation  ; always being prefixed to a variable x . 
A logical statement which is prefixed by a general quantifier with limited range ? is an abbreviation for the i ~ lieational statement We will  , however , use a different expression , provisionally denoted by ( Allx ) ~( x ) , which will not be interpreted as a statement equivalent to an impli'cati@nal statement  , but-by analogy to the expression bound by the iota operator-it will be interpreted as an expression of the argument type : all the " objects " which are ~  . According to our interpretation , the corresponding implicational sta tement-  17 -will be accepted as one of the consequences which follow from all-statements  . 
By analogy to the case of theiota operator , we can here also establish a quasi impli cation concerning the use of the all- operator p on the basis of ~ he empirically given conditions of appropriate use of al l-statements Consider the following propos itional schemes :  ( a ) There is more than one " object " which is , or any " objeot- . if iti , . it is The two propositional schemes correspond to propositions which may be cons idered only in terms of certain proposi-~ ionsu % attitu?es of the speaker who is ut -beriag an all-statement  . We ma~define a general quasi implication sul scaeme whi Ch  , roughly , will be as follows : A speaker uses appropr iately anal ! statement p only if his purpoz ~ ed belief is that there is more than one " object " w ~ ich is ~  , and his pu ~ orted claim is that any " ob-jec t " which is ~ is ~? Now by our general assumption that we are concerned only with those utterances which are appropriately used  , we can always derive a proposition cor responding to  ( a ) as repre-senting the speaker's belief , and a proposition correspond-tng to ( b ) as the speaker's claim or assertion , and both belong to the set of consequences of an all-statement  . 
The difference between the speaker's propos itional atti-%-ude with z~spect to  ( a ) and ( b ) is analogous ~ hen ~ e convert an all-sta~ement into a corresponding negation  , question , \ ~ ~8m request , doubt , etc , for it will appear that the proposition ~ or respoD ~ ling to  ( a ) in the ~ frame " The speaker believes that .   .   . " can be derived as a consequence , whereas the propo-sition o or respondi ~ to ( b ) lalthoug ~ a also derivable as a consequence , will occur in each ease in adlf?erent modal frame  , ~hich will express correspondingly the various propositional attitudes of the speaker  ( The speaker denies that ? .   . , q  ~ a espeaker wants to know if .  ?  .   , etc ) For instance , for the utterance which is a ~ uestion : ( 17 ) ~ e all the inhabitants of this house sick . ~ we have a set of consequences to which belong , among other propositions , the following two: ( 18 ) The speaker believes that there is more than one " object " whlch is an inhabitant of this house  ( 19 ) The speaker wants to know if eu ~" object " which is an inllabitant of this house is sick  . 
The seaon sequsnces are obtained on the basis of a very ~ ener-alquasi impll cational scheme conoerniD ~ all-stateRents converted into this type of questions  . 
In conclusion it may be ~ r themphasizin ~ that by intro-?uci Dg propositional attitudes into the lin ~ Aistic desc ~ il > - tion  , a ~ i by defining quasii ~ plications in terms of propositional attitudes  , we are able to derive the correspondlng consequences not only from declarative sentences  , but from all ~ y~es of utterances . Thus the scope of our rules of in-lference ~ is much wider than the scope of such rules in logic  . Accordln ~ ly the identification of the semantic in ~terp retation of an utterance with the set of its consequen-cesis possible for all types of utterances  .  2~ - 19 -
Footnotes 1 . See U . Wein ~ eich , Exploration in Semantic Theory , in Current Trends in Linguistics , Vol . 3, e4 . T . A . Sebeok , Mouton , The Ha6ue ,  1966 , where the author argues in favor of an approach which makes no attempt " to fence off mutually exclusive domains for syntax and semantics " and thus he is against the assumption that semantics begins where syntax ends  . Deep structures are conceived of by him in terms of both the syntactical and the semantic relations  . 
2 . Such signs have been widely discussed by logicians and llnguiets  . They are referred to as token reflexive signs ( by Hans Reichenbach )  , asego centric particulars ( by Bertr and Russell )   , and as shifters ( by Roman Jakobson ~ . 
3-Roman Jakobson , On Linguistic Aspects of Translation , in On Translation , ed . R . A . Brower , Oxford University Press,
New York , 1966, p . 232.
@ . See C . J . Lewis , The Models of HeaDing , Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , Vol . IV , No 2 ,  19~ , for his conoept of connotation or intention , which bears an in-~a n~l G . Frege ' ~ fluence of J . S . Uill ~ s?eeaso R . Carnap , Em-piricimm , semantics and ontology , in Revue Internationale de Philosophie ~ No@ ,  1950 , where the author accepts the view that the set of consequences following from a sen-fence may be identified with the meaning of that sentence  . Such an idea was also professed by H . Hi ~ during his lectures on semantics ( University of Pennsylvania ,  - 20 -? 1965) . 
5- The conoept of quasi impl icat ions was Introduced in mypapers : On a Condition of % he Coherence of Texts  , paper delivered at the International ~ mposiue on Semiotics  , Warsaw , Aueust ,   1968 j On the Semantic In-terp retation of Subjec t-Predicate Relations in Sentences of Par ticular Reference  , to appea ~ in Progress in Lln-~tistics , eds . Bie ~ rlsch and Heidol I~h , Moutonet Go . , ~ he Hague ~ Ar~mente and Pred icates in the Log ico  -8emanti @ Structure of Utterances , to appear in Studies in Syntax and Semantics , ed . F . Kiefer , Foundations of Language Supplementamy Series , D . Reidelet Go . , Dor-drecht-Hell and . 
6 . The term logico-semantic structure was used in my foa-mer papers  ( see footnote 5 ) - 7- In 5eneral I say that a speaker uses appropriately an expression or an utterance  , if he uses it consistently with the rules of langua Kean ~ with hie purported beliefs  ( see footnote 8 , for the term " purported belief ") . 
For a consistent semantic interpretation of utterances  , we have to cons i4er only those utterances which are used appropr iately  , as the appropriate use in this sense of the term is noth in ~ more than the assumption ~ hat the speaker knows the  lan6uage he is using and says only what he intends to gay  ( he makes a correct use of an utterance accor ~ i  ~  8 with what he wants to say )   . 
8 . From the point of view of the semantic interpretation  , it is irrelevant whether the speaker in fact believes -  21 -or only pretends to believe that such and such is the case  . I therefore use the term " purported belief " , and ~ nenever I use here the expression " The speaker believes that  . . . " it is only in this sense of the term . The same holds true of any other propositional attitudes  . 
9- Linguistic quasi implications can be defined for the use of lexical items and for the use of certain structures  . In our example , the consequences ( la ) and ( Ib ) ere based on a quasi implication concerning the usej of linguistic indices  ( see Section 2 , below ) , whereas the consequences ( Ic ) and ( I d ) are based on a quasi implication defined for the lexical item " to leave "  ( For more details , see the section on implicative terms in my paper On a Condition of the Coherence of 
Texts , op . cir . ) 10 . The term " object " is used here also in the sense of " purported object "  , that is , for anything namable . 
Evidently the knowledge of the type of discourse ( everyday , scientific ~ literary , etc ) may tell us whether the speaker or author believes that a given " object " exists in reality  , or it is to be assumed as in a hypothetie al theory  , or imagined as in a novel . But such n considerations have no bearing on our present discussion  . 
11 . In general , it seems that the concepts we are discus-sing concern other languages as well  . If in a given language there are no explicit exponents on the surface which would correspond to the interpretation we are assuming  , for instance , for linguistic in--22-dices used in English , the ~ eare probably some way to distinguish the utterances in terms of similar con-aepts  , for it is hard to imagine how people could manage to communicate without maklr ~ use of this rath -er general concept and others discussed here  . 
12 . By an adequate semantic interpretation I mean such an interpretation which is compatible with the lin-~alstic intuitions of coherent speakers  , and testable a ~ ainst the practice of linguistic communication  . Examples of ? such semantic tests are given below  ( p . 14,15), 13 . The number may be exactly specified by a numeral , or expressed in an indefinite way , for instance , by words such as " man ~" , " few " , " the majority of " , etc . 
14 . Seemy paper , Arguments and Predicates . . . ", op . clt . 
for a rough discussion of Other quantifying operators  . 
15 . Theiota operator was first defined and used by Peano  , then by Russell , Reichenbach , Mostowski and several other logicians . 
16 . Alin ~ ulstio index was defined in my paper , On the Sem-antic Interpretation . . :, op . cir . Rou 6hly , aliD 6 uist--ic index is a personal pronoun , a proper name or a definite description ( that is , a nominal phrase preceded by a definite determiner  , used in an identifying role ) 17 . In general the quasi implications which we define hold true by virtue of the empirically ~ iven conditions  . 
The truth of the consequent in our quasi ilpll cations always constitutes the necessary condition for the truth  -2~-of the antecedent , and thus we may consider them hole as a valid conditional  ( material implication )  . 
It may be interesting to compare the various approaches to the concept of " presupposltions "  ( as referred to in the liter at u~re )  , which we describe here as consequences . ( See G . Fre~e , Sinnund Bedeutung , Zeitschrift fur Philosophie und philosophische Kritik  , 1892 ~ P . F . Strawson , On Referring , ~ ind , 1950; O . Ducrot , Lospr ~ supposSs , conditions d'emplo ~ ou@l@ments de contenu , paper delivered at the International Symposium on Semiotics  , Warsaw , 1968 ~ A . Wierzbicka , 0 sp6j no ~ cise manty cznej tekst-u wielozd aniowego , paper delivered at the Conference on Semiotics , IBL , Warsaw , 1968 ~ C . J . Fillmore , Types of Lexical Information , Working Papers in Linguistics , i  ~ o2 , The Ohio State University , no vember 1968~? In the present approach , presuppositions are identified with those propositions which belong to the set of consequences following from a given utterance and are provided with the modal frame : " The speaker believes that  . . . ': Such propositions belong accordingly to the semantic interpretation of a given utterance  . This approach is close to that of O . Ducrot ( Lespresupposes . . . , op . cit . ) , who also treats such propositions as constituting part of the meaning of a given utterance  , rather than as the requ-ired conditions of use9 or as propositions which are presupposed to be known by the hearer  , etc . The difference be Sween the two approaches ( which have been developed independently of each other  ) consists thus in my attempt to -24 -account for this element of the mani ~ of a Given ut-terance by scans of derivin ~ such propositions as consequences baaed on the corresponding quasii ~ lications defined for partlcule ~ lexical items and particular structures  . Such a treatment is consistent with the general proposal to identify ~ hemeani ~ ~ an utter ~ ance with the set of its consequences  . 
Fillmore , on the other hand , distinguishes between " the presupposltional aspect of the semantic structure of a predicate and the " meen ln ~" proper of the predicate "  . He identifies the presuppositions of a sentence as those conditions which must be satisfied before the sentence can be used in an ~ of its functions  . 
Thus the sentence " Please open the door " according to Fillmore  ( Types of Lexl calluformation , op . cit ) " cenbe used as a command only if the TL " ( that is , the addressee ) " is in a position to know what do or has been mentioned a ~ lonl ~ if that door is not at TLA "   ( that is , the time of producing the utterance ) " open " . 
According to my approach , such an utterance will be interpreted in any case as a command  , for its inter-pretation cannot be dependent on whether the above mentioned condi tions are  , or are not psatiefied . Suppose I hear some body ringing the bell add I ask my sister Please open the door "  . I~may happen that the ~ oor is open at that t ~ me  , but the state of the door ( its bei~open or closed ) has no bea~i ~ on the in-terp retation of th is utterance-which in any case  10  . 


-25-is intende & by the addresser , and interpreted by the addressee , as a command . Thus , as it appears from the evidence of f an . age use , it is only the addresser's purported belief : " The door is not open " which may be safely assumed with respect to the given utterance  . 
The term " proposition a lattitude " is adopted from Ber-tr and Russell  , Inquiry into Meaning and Truth ( Penguin Books , Baltimore-Maryland ,  1962) . 
The term " modal frame " has been coined by A . Wierzbicka (0 sp6j no ~ cise mantycznej . . . , op . cir , and hero ~ her papers ) . I use the term " proposition a lattitud ~' when referring to the content oi " an utterance  , and the term " modal frame " , when referring to its explicit representation ( which in the present paper is only rendered in words  )  . 
This thesis is based on empirical evidence . If we seem to find apparent counterexamples , it always appears that they are cases of linguistic misuse  , and thus they do not falsify lu ~ the quasi implication  , in such oases the antecedent is false . We are concerned , of course , only with the normal use of utter-anoes in the process of communication  , not with cases in which utterances are used as examples  , when indices are not supposed to identify anything  . 
There remains one more remark to be made in connection ~ it hour quasi implicational scheme  . The copula " is " ~ aich is used in the consequent should be interpreted as  , so to speak , tenseless , for its tense is dependent- 26 -the tense of the verb in the predicate which applies to the " object " referred to by ~ in a given utter ~ a ~ lce  . 
21 . The definite description used as an index is best conceived of as an " instruction " for identl fieatic n  . 
The linguist is thus concerned with what the " instruction says  , rather than with the problem of what a given " object " is  . The " object " in our sense of the term mej be conceived of as just the value of the argument ?   22  . Notice incidentally that there is a differena e between utterances such as  ( 4 ) and , for instance , " XY parents bought a house " , where the desorlp ~ on " my parents " should be represented as a linguistic index  ( argument of type I~which has a unique value ) by means of which we identify one and only neglect "  ( a couple of individuals as a ~ hole ) to which the ~ iven predicate applies . The predicate is not used here distributively as in the case of  ( ~ )  , in here it applies to each individual referred to by the description " my parents "  . 
23 . The expression ( ~x ) ~ ( X ) is interprete ~ as " that one and only object which is ~"  , add not as " there is one and only object which is V "  . 
1 24 . Finally , I wish to excuse myseffor arathe Eloose way I amusing certain terms which are well defined in lo~ic  ( for instance , arE ~ , ment , value ) . I h op e , \-27-however , ~ at the reader will get from my rough presentation the underlying linguistic concepts which I a ~ temp ~ ed to submit for discussion  . 

