1 969 International Conference on Computational L inguistics 
5emant ica and the Syntact ic C lass i f i ca t ion of W ords 
Ernstvon Glasers feld
( Georgia Institute for Research,
and University of Georgia )

In presenting some aspects of our somewhat unusual grammar to a gathering of qomputation a l linguists  , If eel justified in taking two things for granted : first  , that most people who have taken an active interest both in computers and in natural language have come to realise that computers  , although impressively fast and reliable in many tasks  , are not very brilliant when it comas to making in-ductive decisions on the basis of insufficient or not thoroughly def ined data  ; and , second , that what we linguists know about the workings of natural ~ anguage is by no means enough to supply computers  , as they are , with a solid bas-is for the fully automatic handling of natural-language  . 

This is not meant to be a disparaging comment on previous efforts in linguistics  , for , after all , the contin-gency that has opened our eyes to these shortcomings did not exist until a few years ago  . Traditional linguists, . 
and especially grammarians , could carry on their business quite happily on the more or less explicit assumption that language-like so many things in the still w ide-spread Platonic view of the world-could be separated into two levels : the ideal  , uncontaminated one of pure structure * The research reported in this paper was sponsored by the U  . 5 . Air Force Office of Scientific Research ( OAR )  , Inform-ation 5 ciences Uirectorate ( Srant AFOSR 1319-67 ) and actively supported by the University of Georgia  , Athens , U5A . 
-  2 -or form that was inherently generalisable , and the slight-lymessy , unsystemic , and therefore far less interesting one of indiv idual content  . This dichotomy was possible and workable as long as the use of language was restricted to organisms who  , by the time they embarked on linguistic act-iv ities  , had necessarily absorbed a vast body of exper ien-tial and conceptua I knowledge  , on which , more or less con-sciously , they could draw whenevez the formulation or com -prehension of a linguistic expression required something beyond the rules of the ideal grammar  . 
With the advent of computers the situation was ~ edical-ly changed  . Suddenly linguists could and would find them-se lves committed  , for one reason or another , to transmit their know-how to a potential language user who did not possess any a priori experiential or conceptual knowledge whatsoever  . Thus there arose in numerable questions which , hither to , no one hadever been compelled to answer , and it became pain fully obvious that the appl ication of much of the linguists ' cherished theoretical knowledge to actual language mater i alpresupposed a considerable amount of as yet unexplored preprocessing of that very material  . 
I shall not try to catalogue the types of quest ion and the kinds of problem which have been thrust upon the lin-guist by the appearance of computers-everyone of you is familiar with some if not all of them  ; instead I should like to present a few examples and show the direction in which  , we believe , some solutions can be found . 
By ' linguistic activities ' or ' handling language data ' we mean  , for instance , formulating a given message in especific natural language  ; or recognising , in a given piece of language , the message intentionally formulated - 3 -in that way by an author ; or translating a formulation given in one natural language into a ' corresponding '  ( * ) form-ulation in another natural language , etc . Since the ' preprocessing ' in all these cases involves what  , summarily , is called semantics , it is necessery to stress that in our view of language there is noun bridgeable abyssor opposi-tion between semantics and syntax  . In fact , we speak of ' relational'semantics ( a term already used by Ullmann ( I ) ) when we try to define that part of an expraseion 's meaning that is determined by specific syntact ic functions  ( or Co . ~ r-relators ) ; and we call ' lexical' semantics the attempt- for instance the lexicographer's-to define the meaning of words as separate individual items  . 
In traditional grammars the lexical items of a natural language are classified as ' parts of speech ' according to their generic syntactic functions and/or their morphologic-al characteristics  ; in correlational grammar ( ** ) they are classified exclusively according to the actual roles they can play in correlat ional structures  ; moreover , while tra-ditional grammars operate with about a dozen different ge-*Note that since we are interested  , not in developing ari-gid logically formalised theory of grammar  , but in developing a flexible operational system fwr the automatic inter-pretation and handling of natural-language sentences and text  , we do not require formal instruments for the determ-ination of ' meaning '  , ' interlinguistic correspondence ' , ' synonymy ' , etc . ; for our empir ical purposes the consensus of prof ic ient language speakers is the relevant and suf-f ic ient cr iter ion  . 
** Although both theory and practice of Correlat ional Grammar have been drastically modified in our empirical appli-cations  , much of the terminology and the basic concep ~ derive from the pioneering work of Silvio Ceccato  , whom I was fortunate enough to have as friend and teache ~  . 
-4-neric syntactic functions , our correlational English grammar distingu is hes several hundred correlators  ( in the present version of our automatic parser ( 3 ) there are 350 )  . 
The list of these correlators is the result of in tuit-ive analysis of English tex~s  , continual refinement by means of insights gained in the translation of English sentence structures into other languages  ( * )  , and by experi-ments with an automatic parsing procedure whose output  , or lack of output , inevitably demonstrates the shortcomings or , as wep ~ efer to put it , the degree o~completeness reached by the system 's grammar  . In our terminology a ' cot-relator ' is a connect ive function which links two pieces-either words or word combinations - and thus forms a unit we call ' correlation '  . Correlators are divided into several types , the main distinction being made between impl ic it correlators  , which are indicated in the sentence merely by the juxtaposition of the items they link  , and explicit cot-relators , which are indicated by specific words ( mostly prepositions and conjunctions )   . 
To serve as a valid tool in the parsing or interpreta-tion of sentences  , a correlator must not only have an individual codenumber  ( ' Ic ' or correlation index ) but the particular relation itestabl is hes  , between the two items it correlates , must be characterised or explicated . This explication may be an adhoc descript ion  , an illustrative paraphrase , a suitable transform ~ la Chomsky ( 4 ) or Fill-more ( 5 )  , or a symbolic expression devised along the l in es  ( 6 ) of function symbols in logical calculus . 
* Translation frequently helps to pinpoint relational ambi-guities which  , although relevant in the disambiguation of other structures  , are not immediately perceived by the monol in gual speaker or reader  . 

As ~ mples of correlator explication , here are two ( one concerning an implicit correlator , the other an explicit one ) taken from the correlator list which has been implemented in our operational system : 
Corr . No . Description 3670 N generic type : verb phrase complemented by infinitive  ; Explication : the gram . subject is the actor of the infinitive activity ; the infinitive specifies the purpose of the subject's primary activity  . 
e . g . " He works to live " , " I braked to avoid the child " ; but not : " He began to live " (3430N ) , "I had to avoid the child " (3410N ) ; no __~r : " He was eager to live " (3350N ) , "I was clever to avoid the child " (7012N ) . 
0243 E generic type : ~ Y , temporal limitation ; Explication : the item on the right of " by " specifies the point in time after which what is asserted by the item on the left of " by " is to be considered an accomplished fact  . 
e . g . " You will be paid by Christmas " , " He had left by 186 5" ; but no __~t : " Y ou will be paid by cheque " ( ~257 E )  , " He had left by the backdoor " (0251?); no . _ ~ r : " You will be paid by the treasurer " ( 0247 E )  , " He had left by sheer determination " (0255E) . 
It should be clear that the ' Explication ' is intended to describe as univocally as possible the relation Qu are -  ( * ) lation witDout regard for the particular items that are " In practice it is  , of course , not alweye easy to formulate the explication without reference to particular items  ; but as long as the analyst remainss crupulously aware of the intention  , this is not a serious impediment and , in our experience , a sufficiently general formulation can always be found so oner or later  . 
-  6 -eligible to be linked by that relation . Correlator analysis and the explications this analytical investigations aims at are consequently what we may call ' the semantics of rela-tions '  . 
The term ' correlation ' refers to the word- combination a correlator produces  , i . e . the ternary unit consisting of one specific correlator and the two items  ( words or them-selves word-combinations ) that are linked by it ; and we represent correlations - for instance the ones operative in the first phrase sample  ) in this manner : works to live 2230 N - j 1-   -2310 N  ~
I 367L N -- J which corresponds to a conventional t ree-structure with labelled nodes : ~ I  .   . (3670N)~(2230N ) (2310N)/\
He works to live
In order to " recognise this structure in the l in earinput string of the sentence  , first each of the four word items must be characterised as a possible candidate for l in kage by correlators  2230 N and 2310 N respectively ( * ) - , and both these corzelations have then to be characterised as possible candidates for l in kage by correlator  3670 N . 
This characterisation is achieved by corre lation indices  ( or Ic's ) assigned to the individual items and speci fying  ( a ) the codenumbers of the correlaturs by means of which ? The correlator numbers we use were o ~ iginai \] y significant as to the kinds of relation  ; continual correct iLns and ad-ditions , however , have thoroughly obliterated thJ ~ signi-fi cance and the numbers are now neither consecut iven or characteristic  . 
-7-the item can be linked to other items ; and ( b ) whether the item can occupy the right-hand ( RH ) or the left-hand ( LH ) place in the specified correlation . 
( The process of assigning Ic's , obviously , is of one type when the item to which the Ic's are to be assigned is a pre-established vocabulary word  , and of quite another when the item is a correla tion formed in the course of the analysis procedure  ; in the first case the word's string of Ic's is the result of ~ priori assignation  ; in the second case it is the result of a dynamic process called ' reclas-sification '  , implemented by means of an intricate system of rules which take into account the correlator responsible for the made correlation as well as the individual character of the pieces corre lated in the particular instance  ; for a full discussion of the operational rec lassification procedure see ref  . No . 7) . 
From the sample phrases given under correlator 3670 Nit is evident that the two partial phrases constituting the right-hand piece of the l isted correlations  , i . e . " to live " and " to avoid the child " , must bear RH-Icts not only of correlator 3670 Nout also of currelators 3430 N , 3410 N , 3350 N , and 7012N , while the partial phrases constituting the left-hand piece of the two correlations  3670 N will bear only the LH-Ic of correlator 3670 N and not those re-ferring to the correlators operative in the remaining four samples  .   ( In the sample phrases given under correlator 0243 E , the situation is symmetrically inverted , i . e . the two partial phrases on the left will bear only the LH-Ic of correlator  0243 E , while the partial phrases on the right must bear RH-Ic's of ~ the other four listed correlators as well  . ) This ass ignat ion of Ic's automat ica l ly prec ludes the-  8 -formation of unacceptable phrase in terp retations  , such as:
He began to live
L 2230 N  ~ L2310 N---Jt *3670 N-jor I was clever to avoid the childi L42~0 N  ~ L2310 N ~ LSOiON ~
L2os oN-JL--4 olo N ~
I -367o NI which would be roughly equivalent to " de began in order to live " or  , respectively , " I wascle ver in order to avoid the child " ( Note that if we change the form of the LH-phrase in the second example and say " I was be in qc lever to avoid the child "  , the 3670 N interpretation becomes acceptable while the  7012 N interpretation-equivalent to " to avoid the child was clever of me "- is no longer possible !  )   . 
Traditional grammars tend to consider such interpreta-tional distinctions  ( if , indeed , they make them ) as ' se-mantic ' ; for correlational grammar they are clearly rela-tional  , beca~:se they are handled excl~sively by the mechanism of Ic-~  , ~ t ching - and thi ~ ; mechanism is the operational-ly implemented syntax of the system  . And there is another criterion as well . In dllthe ~ bove cases , the assignation of Ic's to vocabulary w~rds or correlational products emerg-in  9 in the course of the parsing procedure can be determin-ed by an examination of the indiviOual item with regard to the explication of the correlator whose Ic is being con-sidered  ( i . e . without consider in 9 comple ~ nentary items ) ; this examination , in principle , is similar to the examina-tion-intradit i on algrammar-of a morphologically de-fi cient or indefinite word with regard to the possibility of its being for instance a  vet0 or a noun ; or , to put it in another way , this examination is essentially different  -   9 -from the one required to decide whether two given items are compatible as RH and LH pieces in one particular syntactic structure  ( 8! The quest ion of pred icab i l i ty - espec ia l ly if e laborated in the way suggested in an essay by fred-  5ommers   19  ; -"" is a case in point . Whether phrases such as : " bluegrass " or " cer is eide as "  , " the indigestion of angels " or " the wings of the morning "  , are acceptable , acceptable only metaphorically , or not acceptable at all , is apparently not a relational question ; the relation-akind of ' appurtenance '- does not seem to change  , nor could we say that any of the four phrases is unacceptable because one of its items is such that it can never be related in that way  ; since we have no objection when the same relat ion is asserted in " cerise paper " oc " clear ideas "  , we can only conclude that there are certain items to which certain properties orth ings cannot be said to appertain and that  , therefore , it is a question of le__~x-ical semantics . 
If the semantic analyses initiated by Ceccato in the  ( - ) 195 O's were pusneo further , it seems likely that a re-lation such as ' appurtenance ' could be demonstrated to incorporate  ( i . e . t  ~ J have confused ) a number of specifiable subrelations ~ and , once we had isolated these subrelations , much if not all of what we now , for the lack of demonstrab-le distinctions , have to call ' lexical ambiguity ' could perhaps be resolved relatiunally in a satisfactory way  . 
* called ' operational'semantics , by which was meant the analysis uf the mental opezations that lead to the formation uf the items  ( or concepts ) designated by words ( cf . 
ref . No . IO).
- i0-
Thus it may indeed be so , that our need to resort to a static , non-relational semantic classification of items  , in order to interpret phrases and sentences , is only the measure of our ignorance concerning the basic character and composition of relations  ; and that , eventually , it will become possible to derive a comprehensive and fool proof general semantics from the investigation of relational con-dit ions as they manifest themselves in our actual use of language  . 
Let metry to make these conjectures a little less obscure  . Gnearea of English grammar that has given considerable trouble to analysts is that of a string of constituents which  , in traditional terms , would have the specification : nominal + to be + adjective + infinitive A survey of contemporary text shows that this string  , with different lexical items and ind if ferent contexts  ,   ( * ) gives rise to ten different relational interpretations Explicating the relevant relations  , we get the following listing : " John is easy toplease " 
Paraphrase : toplease John is easy
ExpIication : the gram . subject is the object of the in-finitive activity  ; the adj . specifies an ~ spect ( adverbial ) of the infinitive activity as enacted by the given subject  . 
B " John is eager to please "
Paraphrase : toplease is what John wants to do
I*I do not wish to claim that ten is all and th ~ noot  . ~ ezs are possible ; but these tenere the interpretations w , : ~ came across in one year's conscious scanning of every thi~g contemporary we happened to read  , -ll-Explication : the gram . subject is the actor of the in-finitive activity  ; the adj . specifies the subject's disposition towards the infinitive activity  , and this activity is merely envisaged . 
" John was slow to understand "
Paraphrase : John was slow abou . ___~tunderstanding Explication : the gram . subject is the actor of the in-finitive activity  ; the adj . specifies an aspect of the subject's performance . 
" John is likely to leave "
Paraphrase : that John leaves is likely
Explication : the gram . subject is the actor of the in-finitive activity  ; the adj . specifies an assessment of the activity's incidence  ( i . e . whether or not it will take place ) . 
" John is clever to leave "
Paraphrase : to leave is clevero ~ fJohn
Explication : the gram . subject is the actor of the in-finitive activity  ; the adj . specifies an assessment ( regarding the subject ) based on the subject's enacting the given activity  . 
" John is young to go to school "
Paraphrase : John is young fo_~rgoing to school Explication : the gram  . subject is the actor of the in-finitive activity  ; the adj . specifies an assessment of the subject's adequacy  ( or inadequacy ) as actor of the given activity . 
" John is heavy to lift "
Paraphrase : John is heavy with reqard to be ~ nq lifted Explication : the gram  . subject is the object of the in-finitive activity  ; the adj . specifies an aspect ( adjectival ) of the subject as object of the given activity .   ( Note : the paraphrase given for type A is impossible here  ; and if an ambiguous adjective occurs in G , the construction determines its meaning ; e . g . " mush rooms are good to eat " requires the interpretation " good "=' pleasing '  , since it does not mean " to eatmush rooms is good for you " p where -  12 -" good "=' beneficial ' )   . 
H " John is sad to go away "
Paraphrase : to go away causes John to b . ._~e sad Expl icat ion : the gram . subject is the actor of the in-finitive act ivity  ; the adj . specifies the subject's state which is a reaction to the given activity  . 
I " John was critical to upset the speaker " Paraphrase : John was critical in order to upset the speaker Explication : the gram  . subject is the actor of the in-finitive act ivity  ; the adj . specifies a deliberate attitude of the subject's  , and the infinitive spe-cifies the purpose of the subject's attitude  . 
(Note : there of ten is an i r reso lvab le ambigu ity between type I and type E  ; e . g . " the dog was clever to get the biscuit " may be interpreted as I  , ' the dog was ~ clever in order to get the biscuit '  , or as E , ' it was clever of the dog to get the biscuit '   ) 
J " It is sad to go away "
Paraphrase : to go away is sad
Explication : the nominalised in finit ive is the subject of the sentence  ; the " it " functions as subject marker ; the adj . specifies an evaluation of the given activi tyas event  . 
As far ' as relational ~ naly ~ is goes , this discrimination of types is fair \] y satisfactory  ( ~ itnough , t ~) be really solid , it would require the detailed definition , ~ n ~ coherent application of the terms used in the explications  , many of which , e . g . ' aspect ' , ' assessment ' , ' attitude ' , etc . , are still rather vague ) . ~ hen we come to a sentence-inter-pretive procedure  , however , such a listing of relational possibilit ies does not get us anywhere  , unless we are able to provide each type with some criterion by means of which we can recognise it in the input text  . 
In an attempt to discover some such criter ion  , we as -- 13 -sembled a corpus of about i00 relatively frequent adject- ( 11 ) ives from a recent compendium of ? nglish word f requency and examined their individual possib ilities to function as acceptable consti tuents in the ten types of construction  ( for a complete report on our findings , see ref . No . 12) . 
The results of this investigation were compiled in the form of a matrix  , showing for each adjective the types of construction in which it can occur  . 
5ummaris ing some of the observat ions that could be made regarding that matrix  , we can say : a ) the adjectives that fit construction type D ( viz . ce_ . _~r-talon , expected , known ,  ~  , said , sure , unknow__~n , unlike-Iv ) do not occur in any of the other constructions . 
b ) the adjectives that fit construction type H ( viz . co___nn-ten . ~ t , qlad , happy ,  ~  , sa_~d , satisfied , sorry ) do not occur in any of the other constructions -with the exception of sad  , which can occur also in type J . 
c ) the adjectives that fit construction type B ( viz .  9 . ~ h ; ~ . , afrai____~d , anxious , careful 2 , desirous ,  ~  , fi_ . _ ! t , m ~ id ____ ~ , prepared , sea_q_~ , reluctant , wild_ . _____~ ,  ~  , unable ) do not occur in any of the other constructions - with the except-ion of fit and ~  , which can occur also in type G . 
( Of the other adjectives of the corpus , approximately one quarter fits only one construction  , one halffits two con-st~uctions , and one quarter fits three ; but since many of these adjectives have more than one meaning-e  . g . ~ oodI='pleasing ' , ~=' beneficial ' , qood 3 = ' moral ' - the relational listing of the individual meanings is not an immediate help in the disambiguation of a given string  . Never-theiess , it is a step forward from the position where every adjective nanto be considered a potent i al candidate for all -  14 -ten constructions . ) The groups of adjectives given under ( a ) , b ) , and ( c ) , on page 13 , constitute extensional definitions , within the selected corpus , of ad . iective classes , and we can now examine each of these groups to see whether an intensional de-finition can be derived from it  . 
Group ( a ) obviously hase common semantic element which could be described as ' assessment of probabi lity and/or actuality '  ( of the item to which the adjective is appl ied  )  ; Group ( b ) has a common semantic element which could be described as ' a temporary state of mindusual ly associated with a specific cause '  ; Group ( c ) has a common semantic element which could be described as ' attitude or disposition towards an event '  . 
I should like to stress that we are at the beginn ing of this kind of investigation and are presumably still rather clumsy in formulat ing valid definitions of semantic elements i what is relevant in this context  , however , is not the efficiency or reiiability of the definitic ~ ns we tenta-tively formulate  , but the fact that semantic defif , itions c ~__ ~ n be derived at all from word groups compiled on the ~" rength of relation a l considerations  . What we are . in fact , ~ yingto show , is that the analysis of the relations found to obtain between the items of phrases or sentences leads  , first , to an extensional , and eventually , to an intension-al semantic classific at ion of the lexical items constitut-ing these phrases or sentences  . 
This particular sector of adjective cunstrL ~ c tion is  , of
I course , not the only area of English grammar which makes it seem plausible that semantic class if i cations of lexemes c~n be derived from empir ical grouping according to their rela --  15 -tional behaviour . The range of relations expressed in Eng-lish by prepositions is extremely fertile in this regard  , but since it is also extremely wide , we have not yet brought our survey of it to a def initive conclusion  . Partial results (13) however , indicate that , here too , relational semantics successfully absorbs a great deal of what  , hither to , was considered lexical or unsystemic . 
A comprehensive study of the verb-object relat ions  ( a still poorly defined area in our operat ional system  ) promises to yield the perhaps most convincing confirmation of our thesis  . 
Even a very suPerfici ~ lexamination of a trans itive verb and the grammatical objects that occur with it  , shows that the way in which the two are related may vary widely  . If , for instance , we take the verb " to pay " , we find that = l ) in " He paid the driver " the subject gives up something of economic value  ( e . g . a sum of money ) ; and the object specifies the receiver ;  2 ) in " He paid his bill " the subject gives up something of e con  . value ; the object implies a specific amount and that this amount is due to some not further spe-c if ied  ( but specifiable ) remote entity as the right-ful receive ~ ;  3 ) in " He paid fifty dollars " the subject gives up something of e con  . value ; the object specifies the amount . 
Leaving aside the rarer and the more metaphorica luses of the verb  ( such as = to pay attention , homage , avisit , etc . ) we can now take a corpus of nouns , try each one of them as object of " to pay " , and determine which of the three described re lations it fits  . This Will extensionally define three noun c lasses  ( not necessarily mutually exclus-ive , because some of our nouns may fit into more than one of the relations  ) for which we can then tentatively formulate intensive semantic definitions = -  16 - l ' ) items that can act as receiver of items having an economic value  ; e . g . boy , but che ___ ~ r , colleqe , cour __ . ~t , driver , ~, tax collector , tailor , etc . ; 2') item simplying a definite e con . value and the fact that the implied amount is due to someone  ; e . g . 
due . ___~s,fare , f e . _ . ~ e ; fin . ~ e , pos . taqe , ta . _ ~ x , etc . ; 3') items indicating a specifice con . value ; e . g . any numeral followed by an indication of currency  , and pronominal expressions such as " a lot n , " little " , " much " , etc . 
The verb " to pay " is also doubly transitive , i . e . it can be constructed with a dative an . _ . ~danaccusative object in one phrase , e . g .  : 4 ) " He paid the but cherten dollars " ( in which " the butcher " is the receiver )   . 
If we now test our corpus of nouns in this const : uction  , we find , first , that only the items listed in group I ' can be used as dative object and that they cannot be used as accusative object  ; second , that if items of group 2' or 3' are used as direct object , the dative object always plays the part of ' receiver '  ; third ~ we find that we have to con-side ~ su~e new items  ( occurring only in conjunction with a detive object  ) which are not members of the three iisted c lasses and which  , moreover , change the role o ~ the dative object , as for instance in : 5 ) " He paid his driver a holiday " ( where " his driver " is the beneficiary of the subject's act  )  . 
We thus get a fourth group of possible objects ; their intensional definition iS . .less obvious , but we cantent a-tively put down : 5' ) items intended for personal '" ; consumption e . g . 
dr in ____~k , a term at colleqe , amea _______~/ , atripround the world , avacation , etc . 

One point that is of special interest in theses ti ll very crude and incomplete results of relat ional analysis and semantic classific at ion  , is the fact that , although the classes of ' receiver ' and ' beneficiary ' are co-extensive in the corpus  , they do not seem to create ambiguities , since the particular role of an item that is ambivalent in this respect  , is , in any given example , determined by the classi-fication of the direct object  ; in other words , if the direct object belongs to either group 2' or 3'  , the dative object plays the part of ' receiver ' ; if the direct object belongs to group 5' , the dative object plays the part of ' be-nefic iary '  . 
This rule , incidenta Ily , seems rigid enough to deal with at least some phrases which  , on a purely experiential basis ( i . e . ' knowledge of the world ') , would have to be rated rather odd or unlikely . If , for instance , we came across the sentence "5he paid he ~ lover a week of clams " , we might be uncertain how to interpret precisely " a week of clams "  , but we would have no doubt that it had to be something her lover could personal Iy consume  . -And there is considerable reassurance to be got from the implication thot  ( at least in some cases ) the logic of relational semantics is more powerful than the statistics of factual experience  . 
~ e could adduce many more examples of transitive verbs and relevant object classification  , but at the present stage of the analysis this wouid add little : the results are in-variably suggestive  , even indicative , but they cannot be considered conclusive . Therefore , I shall merely summarise what we expect from tnese investigations  . 
On the basis of work accomplished during the last  18 months , it appears that the semantic classes derived from relational analysis are recursive and that their num--IB-bet will remain useful ly smaller than the number of classi-fied items  . There will , of course , be many more semantic classes than grammars have hither to contemplated-but given the versatility of natural language  , this should not really surprise us ; nor is there any need to be particular-ly pessimistic about the possibility of imp lementing such a voluminous and intricate database in a computer system  . 
We all have seen how the early computation all inguists ' worries concerning storage capaci ty and processing speeds have ~ been made to appear anachronistic by technologic-al progress  , and this progress does not yet seem to be anywhere near its ceiling  . 
As to the theoretical implications of our kind of language analysis  , I should like to put forward one suggest-ion . Assuming that we can derive ( and the material present-ed here does imply precisely this  ) a satisfactory semantic classific at ion of lexical items from their relational pro-perties defined in terms of an adequately differentiated syntax  , it may be more profitable ( and , perhaps , also more correct ) to view syntax and semantics , not as a pair of mutually exclusive opposi tes  , but rather as the axes of a continuum of meaning  ; every semantic element , particle , feature ( or howevec we want to call it l would , in such a frame of reference , have both a relational and a lexical coord in ate-which would not only make it possible for us to discuss one and the same item from two points of view without contradiction  , but , I believe , it would also be a useful advance towards an economical representation of lin-guistic data in computational procedures  . 
J-19-
R?ferencesi ) Stephen Ullmann , The Principles of Semantics , Blackwell , 
Cxford , 1957.
2) 5ilvio Ceccato et al .   , Linguistic Analysis end Programming for Mechanical Translation  , Feltrinelli , Milan ,  ? 1960 , and Gordon & Breach , New York ,  1962 . 
3) E . v . & lasers feld and P . P . Pisani , The Multistore System MP-2, Georgia Inst . for Research , Athens ( Georgia,
U.5. A .), 1968, and
The Multistore Parser for Hierarchical Syntactic Structures  , to be published in the Communications of the ACM ,  1969 . 
4) Noam Chomsky , Aspects of the Theory of Syntax , M . I . T . 
Press , Cambridge ( Mass .), 1965.
5) Charles J . Fillmore , Entailment Rules in a Semantic Theory , Uhio State University , Columbus ( Ohio) ,  1965 . 
6) Hans Reichenbach , Elements of Symbolic Logic , Free Press
Paperback , New York , 1966.
7) E . v . Glasersfeld , P . P . Pisani , J . Burns , B . Notarmarco , B . 
Dutton , Automatic English Sentence Analysis , Reports ILR5T-If and ILR5T-14 , IDAMI Language Research Section , ~ ilan ( Italy ) ,  1965/66 . 
8 ) Jehane Burns ? A 5cneme for Semantic Controls in Automatic Sentence Analysis  , Literary and Linguistic Computing Centre , University of Cambridge ( England) ,  1968 . 
Fred5ommers , Predicability , in MaxBlack ( editor ) , Philosophy in America , Cornell University Press ,  1965 . 
5 ilvio Ceccato , Un Tecnico frai Filosofi , vol . l and If , Marsilio Editore , Padova ( Italy ) ,  1964/66 . 
Henry Ku~era and W . N . Francis , Computational Analysis of Present-Day American English  , Brown University , Pro-vidence , R . I . , 1967 . 
E . v . Glasersfeld and B . Notarmarco , Some Adjective Clas-ses derived from Correlational Grammar  , to be published in American Speech ,  1969 . 
E . v . Glasers feld , An Approach to the Semantics of Pre-positions , Proceedings Of the Symposium on Computer-related Semantic Analysis  ( LaBVegas ,  1965) , Wayne State University , Detroit , Mich , , 1967 . 
9) 10) 1 l ) 12) 13)
Semantics and the Syntactic Classificat ion of W ords 
AB5TRACT
Traditional grammars classify words according to generic syntactic functions or morphological characteristics  . 
For teaching humans and for descriptive lingu is tics this seemed sufficient  . The advent of computers has changed the situat ion  . Since machines are devoid of experiential knowledge  , they need a more explicit grammar to handle natural language  . Correlational 5rammar is an attempt ? n that direction . The paper describes parts of correlational syntax and shows how a highly differentia ted syntax can be used to establish word c lasses for which an intensional semantic defJ  . nition can then be found . It exemplifies this approach in two ares of grammar : predicative adj  , ~c ~ ives and transi ~: ive verbs . The classification serves to eliminate ambigu  #ty and spurious computer interpret at ion ~ of natural language sentences  . 
Author's address : Ernsty on Glasers feld
Georgia ~ nstitute for Research 711 , C&5BankUldg . 
ATHENS , 5a ., 30601, U.5. ~.
