
STATISTICAL METHODSINLEXICOLOGICAL RESEARCH INTHEBAL TICSTATES 
HILDARADZIN

In this study " lexicology " refers to the d ictionary form of a text  , avocabulary , without consideration of the lexicals t ructure of an individual word and the system of its meaning : The first attempts to apply statistical methods in lexicolog ical research are connected with the computat ion of " frequency dictionaries "  , particularly various specialized lex ica aimed at mechanical exploitation  , A " frequency dictionary " is a list of words in which every word carries an ind icator or its occurence frequency in a text of a certain length  . Frequency dictionaries permit one to compare words from the standpoint of their usage frequency  . The data of frequency dictionaries are of g reat theoretical interest for studies of certain properties of the text with regard to its relation to the vocabulary  . 
In the Baltic states we find research work pertaining to compilation of frequency d ictionaries  . In Tallin , Estonia , work was started pertaining to compilat ion of Russian frequency dictionary for teaching purposes  (  1960  )  . 
The project worked on a number of texts , am'oua \] ting to 400 , 000 tokens . The completed dictionary reveals frequency d istributions according to word-classes  , government of case by verbs , prepositional phrases and also the substantival cases  . 
In other Baltic States we find linguis tsengaged in similar forms of study on the word level  . On the basis of results gained from thes tatistical/worcl count of Latvian technical-industrial texts  , the first volume ( pertaining to technical industrial fie ld  ) of a frequency dictionary of Latvian language was compiled and published in  t966  . 
The statistical approach is used in thes tudies of style  . The concept of " style " presupposes the presence of several properties inherent in a given text or texts or author  , as opposed to others . One can propose that style is a sum of stati stical characteristics describing the content properties of a particular text as distinct from others  . 
In the Baltic states we find linguists using statisical methods in the analysi s of style  . In scanning some prose texts of Latvian wri ter B ~ aumanis  , K . Karulis found that words that Blauman is uses in the direct speech ~ reshorter than those in the indirect speech  . 
St . John's University
Jamaica , New York
