MONTECARLOSIMULATION OF LANGUAGE CHANGE
INTIKOPIA&MAORI*

Sheldon Klein , Michael A . Kuppin
& Kirby A . Meives
Computer Sciences Department
1210 W . Dayton Street
University of Wisconsin
Madison , Wisconsin 53706
i . Introduction
The use of Monte Carlo Simulation with micro sociolinguistic models permits testing of many hypotheses un-verifiable by any other known method  . The methodology underlying the research described in this paper in outlined  , and , to some extent , justified in \[2022\] . Basically , the technique requires a simulation model with the following subcomponents : a  ) A stochastic socio-demographic model of a speech community for the starting date of the simulation  . 
This model governs the conversational interaction patterns among members  . 
b ) A metamodel of significant historical events and changes during the simulated time period for use in generating periodic revisions in the basic model mentioned above  . 
Sponsored in part by the National Science Foundation and the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation  . 
c ) Individual models of members of the society in the form of dynamically modifiable inputs to the parameters that serve as inputs to the rules of the basic model  . The model of each individual also includes one or more grammars that may be filled with gener at iverules for several languages  . 
d ) A language learning component , both for children and adults . This module permits the generation and parsing of sentences using rules from the grammars of specified members of the simulation  . The learning component makes it possible for a child born during the simulation to acquire the language or languages of his speech community through conversational interaction with other members of the society  , and permits an adult either to modify one of his grammars in response to some contemporary l inguistic innovation  , or to acquire a new language with rules stored in a separate list  . The learning component to be used in the system is a greatly improved version of the AUTOLING system  \[22   , 23 \]-?  . tA preliminary testing of the slmulatlon method was successfully carried out using a hypothetical speech community con-taining  15 adults and 5 children .  \[  21 \] The behavioral model was extremely simple , as were the grammars ( limited to a tiny subset of English )  . The learning model was also simplistic , involving the actual borrowing of fullfledged rules rather than their synthesis from fundamental analytic heuristics  . The goal of this test , to attain linguistic and social stability through several generations  , was attained . It was important because it demonstrated control of the model as a preliminary to innovations that might introduce linguistic or social change  .   ( The particular simulation used a different kind of phrase structure rule notation than we currently use  . ) Now our research is directed toward the testing of the methodology through simulation of language change in a real speech community  , insufficient depth and detail that the predictions of the simulation will be subject to emprical verification  . In our preliminary search for a suitable test / case we first selected the speech community on the island of Tikopia in the South Pacific  . This community seemed ideal because of the existence of excellent function a lethnological studies by Raymond Firth that took place in  1928-29  , 1951 and 1962\[711\] , and because Tikopia was virtually untouched by World War II  . Both the pertinent detail of Firth's studies and the relatively restricted and documented foreign contacts during this period seemed ideal for our work  , and we put some effort into desig~ling a simulation system that could handle Tikopian Society and yet to supply us with his linguist ic field notes for Tikopia  ( little else of a suitable nature exists % . 
We then decided to switch to a simulation of language change among the Maori of New Zealand  . The documentation for this group is voluminous and covers several centuries  . 
Of particular value is the existence of census data on the Mario dating back to the nineteenth century  . The time scale and detail level of the Maori model must be of a coarser sort than for Tikopia because of computer time and space demands  , for it must account for a popula-tion 40 to 90 times greater than that of Tikopia over a time period of perhaps  150 years . However , we found that the design of our simulation system needed little or no modification for the Maori  . 
We explicate the representation of both soci ~ l inguistic situations in Section  3 to provide the reader within sight into the methodology  . 
2. Language Learning Component
The language learning logic of the AUTOLING System will furnish the basis for the learning component of the simula-tion system  . AUTOLING is an automated linguistic field -worker capable of learning generative grammars through tele-type interaction with a live human informant  . The program been successfully tested on selected problems in English  , Latin , Roglai , Indonesian , Thai and German . The discovery methods are heuristic rather than algorithmic  , and the system is under continued modification . One subcomponent is capable of learning context free phrase structure rules in response to informant inputs consisting of sentences segmented into morphemes  . An attempt is made to parse each informant input sentence on the basis of the current tentative grammar  . If the rules are adequate , the program prints the factinatele type message  . If no ~ it posits rules that might enable the parsing process to be completed  . 
These rules , and their more general ramifications for the grammar as a whole  , are tested via productions offered to the informant for acceptability verification  . Rejected sentences cause the newly posited rules to be discarded  . 
Acceptance of false rules through incomplete testing can occur  . At the present time , the program tests for such a possibility by attempting to parse various known illegal sentences  . The most recently recorded ones are tested every time a new rule is coined  . All illegal sentences are tested at periodic intervals  . If the bad rules were coined too far in the Prel iminary programming is in ALGOL for the Burroughs  5500 computer , eventually the program will be shifted to the compatible Burroughs  6500  . 
6 past for correction , the program throws out its entire grammar , and reanalyses the entire corpus , using the illegal sentence responsible for the situation as one of the key controls on the new grammar  . A later version of AUTOLING will make a stronger attempt to determine the specific culprit rules  , and take corrective action in form of transformations or simple context-sensitive phrase structure rules  . In fact , eventually , the system will learn a transformational grammar consisting of unordered phrase structure rules plus obligatory transformations that operate whenever conditions permit during the gener at ion process  . Also , a morphology learning component will be integrated in tO the system  . 
For the simulation system , the human informant is replaced by another grammar associated with another member o ~ the community  . While the system will contain only one learning program with its associated parsing and gener at ionroutines  , each grammar associated with each member of the community might ~ on various occasions  , serve as the grammar in which learning takes place  , or as the grammar used to accept or reject the productions of an ' embryonic ' grammar  . 
Learning feedback in an adult-adult convers at i on will not occur as often as in a child -adult context  . The exact circumstances under which an indiv idual's grammar learns or teaches are determined by the socio-demographic model  . 
Special features that must be added t ~ or modif ied in the AUTOLING system include the following : a  . Multilin ~ ual Dictionary : For Tikopia , a list of Tikopian , English and Melanesian Pidgin morpheme equivalents  . 
Any individual auditing new lexical items will add a list link in his grammar  ( which references terminale ~ lements only indirectly  ) to the appropriate entries . Links to corresponding morphemes ( if any exist ) in other languages will be entered only if the person has actually been exposed to the form in conversation  . 
For specialized vocabulary , the entries will also contain markers of the context in which the item is to be used  . 
b . Sentence Generator : Both the Generator and the Parser use the same grammars  . The generator selects nonterminal rewrite rules according to relative frequency parameters that are modified during the parsing process  . Terminal elements are referred to by links to the dictionary  . Some terminals are selected on the basis of the generation context  , i . e . , special ized vocabulary referring to items of material culture  . Under some conditions , a terminal's translation equivalent in another language may be chosen  . 
In the specialized case of normative learning , e . g . , in a chi ld-parent relationship , the generator will test newly formed rules by pertinent test productions offered to the normative teacher for acceptance or rejection  . 
c . Parser : The parsing component may modify the frequency parameters pertinent to the gener at ion process as a function of a particular rule 's use in recent parsings  . 
3. Modelling Tikopia and Maori
Some generality in the system design would be necessary even if one intended to model only one society  . In particular , the rules governing the interaction of members of % he population would undoubtedly be subject to frequent revision during the course of research as it might become apparent that some variables modelled were not pertinent  , anathatom mitted ones were significant . A fully general system , capable of modelling any society , must contain , implicitly , a universal theory of socio-linguistic behavior  . 
A basic assumption of our system is that an indiv idual's group memberships constitute the major determinants of his conversation behavior  . Therefore it is essential that the system provide an efficient means of describing an individual'sage  , sex , political , k in , work and social group memberships as well as data of a purely geographic nature  . 
Specifically , for Tikopia , it seemed that age , sex , village , clan , religion , household , marital state , work groups , and social status were the key variables governing conversational interaction  . We planned to simulate a thirty or thirty-f ive year time span in a model containing a population sample of about  120-165 people distributed distributed among approximately  25 villages . 
The decision to construct the model with a few vi llages containing a large fraction of their realworld population  ( as opposed to more villages with fewer modeled people per village  ) was made on the basis of material contained in Firth\[  711 \] indicating the village as the largest pertinent unit for our purposes  . The decision to model three villages was based on the recognition of the subordinate  , but real pertinence of inter-village relations . 
The problem of representing a complete multi- generation kinship structure for each individual also set a lower bound on the number of people per village  . 
The actual method of creaing an initial populat ion state is rather complex  , and is described in Section 4 . 
The researcher attempting to model Maorisociety is faced with the problem of finding pertinent data in a vast literature of essentially non -pertinent material  . Fortunately , official government census information , dating back to the mid-ninteenth century , provide valuable demographic data . 
The population size demands a different kind of sampling than in the Tikopia model  . The population ranged from 56 , 000 in 1857-8 to 167 , 000 in 1961 . A study of the literature suggest S that the Maori -English linguistic acculturation  i0 phenomena might best be modelled in the following way : a  . Population : Sample size ranging from i00 to 300
Maoriplus English speakers.
b . Geographical Distribution : Two communities remote from white contact  , plus the graduate creation of a city population group  , and a group in an intermediate location . 
c . KeySocial Variables : Tribe , hap ~ or tribal subgroup , social class ( aristocrator commoner ~ age group ( child , young unmarried , young married to middleaged , elder ) lineag ~ work groups or occupatio ~ and religion  . The hap ~ , rather than the immediate family , appears to be the minimal significant social unit of organization for the goals of our simulation  . 
In the case of cityd welling Maori , residence in the same city constitutes another group membership  . 
d . Meta-model of Historical Change : Gradually increasing contact with English speakers  , wars , gradual migrations to urban areas . 
4 . Systgm Organization and Construction of the Data Base The learning program  , as it stands , demands an interaction between a live informant and teletype outputted questions  . It is necessary , for the purpose of reducing the enormous computer time required for the successful i isimulation of change in linguistic patterns  , to be able to break the current program into two parts--one part that can read sentences input to it without asking for immediate help  , and another which will generate sentences randomly  , based on the rules that were formulated during the input stage  . 
The portion of the program that is responsible for the generation of random sentences will also determine the context in which the sentence was spoken  . Context is determined by defining the subclass of persons who would be listening to this sentence  , and placing an indicator of this subclass in the file of sentences which are generated  . The sentences will be placed in a file , that will later be passed against all individuals in the sample in order that part icular a quaintances are able to " hear " what was said--at the same time creating rules which shall be used in the next generation pass  . 
At major points in the process , events take place that need not be thought of during the normal cyclic activity  . 
These involve the life and deathroutines , marriage ceremonies , arrival-departures , and recreation of the a quain-tance lists that describe who is listened to  . Because of the one-to-many character of speeches , it is possible to keep the a quaintance lists to a manageable size by listing only those persons who mone listens to  , and not those who Before we examine the convers at ion process further let us discuss the general problem of creating a sample for data that is available only in aggregate form  . 
4.1 Sample Generation
For many groups to be studied by the process descr ibed in this paper  , samples do not exist . If any information exists at all about these groups it is often in the form of cross-tabu lation tables published as an indication of census patterns  , and is usually not given in its raw form . 
* The problem of creating a kinship structure is not of this uype  . In the case of Tikopia it is essential to keep urack of k in relations with contemporaries that mayo we unelrorig into links with common ancesters  , perhaps 2 or 3 qenerations removed , who may be deceased at the start of the slmulation  . The best automated method we could devise involves running an accelerated  , prefatory , partial simu-ia = I on of the society beginning several generations before nhe official start date  . The only aspects modelled would he those governing birth and death  , residence change and marrlage rules . Initially , all individuals would be assumed zcDe unrelated  , and marriage would take place with rela-tlve freedom  . As the prefatory simulation progre SSes through successive generations  , k inties are created j and the free choice of spouses disappears  . By the time the presimulation is completed , the original starting populatlon is a eao , and each member of the main simulation populat ion has a complete and consistent set of kinsh ip relations  . The level of de-zail in the Maori situation does no ~ demand this micro-computation of k inship  ( see Section 3 )  . 

To model groups of people where it is impossible to collect raw data because of expense  , time , or other complications such as the passage of time rendering the sample change  ( historical groups )  , it is often necessary to create a sample of people artificially  . Since any such attempt will result in an incorrect sample  , it is important to realize this beforehand and beonguard when viewing the results of the study against arriving at conclusions which are invalid  . We can , however , obtain results that have some validity by restricting our discussion to those characteristics of the sample that we are able to insert into our sample creation process by the heuristic methods described below  . We realize that heuristic processes are just that--there is no real guarantee of success in creating a sample which is totally accurate  . But by prefacing the results of our study with this disclaimer  , and restricting our stated conclusions to those population characteristics which we know to be true  , useful research can be expected . 
We can illustrate the sample creation best by an immediate example  . 
Suppose we are interested in the study of l inguistic patterns as they are formed with respect to three variables -- age  , sex , and marital status . It is necessary first to des-cribe the catagories that are important to us for each of the variables in the model  . 

If we posit that age does not influence linguist ic patterns except in major catagories  , we can break the ages into the three groups Young  , Adult , and Elder . 
Since the other two variables Sex and Marital Status have well defined groupings  ( Male , Female ; Married , Un-married ) , we can define our task with the following table: 
Marital Percent of
AgeSe___xxStatus
Young Male Married
Adult Male Married
Elder Male Married
Young Female Married
Adult Female Married
Elder Female Married
Young Male Unmarried
Adult Male Unmarried
Elder Male Unmarried
Young Female Unmarried
Adult Female Unmarried
Elder Female Unmarried
Population ?
Defining a population artificially for the requirements of the simulation process involves the accurate choice of percentages of the total population for each of the above permuted catagories of variables  . This can be done in many ways . 
15 i . By hand . The above percentages may be chosen by the researcher after careful reading of documents descri-bing population characteristics  . 
2 . By computer algorithm . There are often published statistics on populations that can be used to create appro-pr iate percentages  . Cross-tabulation tables are the most fruitful in this attempt  , as they often contain all of the necessary information within them  . If they do not , other population statistics such as correlat ion matrices may be used ~  . g . , lacking a publ ished table displaying the rela-t ionship between Age and Income  , a correlation coefficient of . 46 is useful ) . Since some of the information may be either contradictory or of disproportionate value  , it is necessary that a decision be made on the actual ~ istribution characteristics  . If tables are available showing the rela-t ionships  , they should be used . But if tables are not available , or if the only available information about a particular relationship is in the form of another statistic  , the preferable thing to do is to create the table by hand  , based on research of the text aal material . 
For example , assume that we wish to build a file of persons asment lon~dear lier  . In reviewing the published tables , however , we cannot find a table relating Ag4~and Marital Status . We do find , on the other hand , that the correlation between Age and Marital Status is given as  . 43 . Using this possible to generate a table of the following form: 
Married Unmarried
Young 2% 28%
Adult 46% 16%
Elder 3% 5%
If we make no use of the knowledge of the corre lation coefficient of  . 43 between Age and Marital Status , we may generate a sample that has serious faults . Not making use of it in this case would be similar to creating a table of the form : 
Married Unmarried
Young 15% 15%
Adult 32% 30%
Elder 4% 4% ( approximate correlation coefficient r = 0 ) This table is clearly incorrect , Marital Status should l not be distributed evenly with respect to age  . 
If a process of random selection over the specif ied probability distributions  ( the relative frequency tables ) is used to create the persons in our sample , it should be result being that we can reproduce the tables that we started with to create that data  . 
After the process of sample creation is finished , we may produce a table of the form :
Percent of
Marital Population
AgeSe___xxStatus(rounded)
Young Male Married 0%
Adult Male Married 22%
Elder Male Married 2%
Young Female Married 2%
Adult Female Married 24%
Elder Female Married 1%
Young Male Unmarried 13%
Adult Male Unmarried 9%
Elder Male Unmarried 2%
Young Female Unmarried 15%
Adult Female Unmarried 7%
Elder Female Unmarried 3%
This table would imply the use , in part , of the marginal relative distributions :
Female 52%
Young 30%
Adult 62%
Elder 8%
Married 51%
Unmarried 59%
It can be seen that since there are few ( the number is rounded to 0% ) young married males , more information was used to arrive at these values than merely the use of the marginald istributions  . Their use alone would imply that 1 there should be approximately 6~ % young married males . 
4.2 A quaintance Lists.
To model the linguistic patterns as they occur in the real world  , it is necessary to account in some way for appro -priate dissemination of information by insist ing that each person speak for the most part wi th the same persons he spoke to in the past  . This is a tedious process if done dynamically at the time the conversations are to take place in the computer simulation  , we can show that it is par-simonious to create an " acquaintance list " of those persons who are infrequent contact with each individual  , and to changet this acquaintance list at more infrequent intervals  . The acquaintance lists may be updated together with other major actions  , such as the birth and deathroutines , arrivals and departures , and the occurance of natural phenomena such as seasonal change  . 

We may build the acquaintance list by a technique closely approximating that which occurs natural lyby the " bestfit " method in which two persons are said to be " acquaintances " if they have various attributes in common--they may livenear each other  , work together , or belong to the same social group . If many attributes are in common , then , these people will be very likely to be forced to speak to one another whether or not they might be classified correctly as " friends "  . 
More formally , we may define a person's attributes by his position in the sample space  . For a sample of n variables , a person can be defined by t : hen-tuple(?I , V2 ,  . . . , Vn ) . By a simple calculus , we can map this point from the integer n-space into the boolean m-space  , where m is greater than or equal to n , and each variable now has the value 1 if the persons can be characterized by the truth of this attribute  , and 0 otherwise . For example , the variable Ag ~ in our example a bov ~ would be changed from one variable with three values to three variables with two values each  . From Age : l = Young , 2=Adult , 3= Elder , we would construct Young in Age : l = True , 0= False ; Adult in Age : l = True , 0= False ; Elder in Age : l = True , 0= False . 
A person in our sample can now be characterized by the b~o leanm-tuple  ( BI , B2 ,  . . . , Bm ) . In order to determine which attributes that two persons have in common  , it is necessary result ant vector has l's in the positions where the two persons origion a lly both had hadl's  , and no place else are the rel's . 
To account for the disproportionate import of the fact that two attributes are in common  , and in some instances to correct for the fact that persons may be more likely to be acqua in tances if they do not have two particular a ttri-butes in common  ( e . g . , Sex ) , the resultant vector is multi-plied by a third Weight vector W  . 
The Resultant vector is summed to a scalar , and this number is compared to an externally specified " hit " value " H " to determine whether these two persons are said to be " acqua intances "  . Example := ( l , 0  , 0  , 1  , 0  , 1  , 1  , 0  , 1  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 1  , 0  , 1  , 1  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 1  , 1 ) = (0  , 1  , 1  , 1  , 1  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 1  , 1  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 1  , 0  , 1) A--B = (0 , 0  , 0  , i , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0~0 , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , i , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , i ) = (4 , 4  , 5  , 4  , 5  , 4  , 4  , 4  ,  -5  , 4  , 4  , 4  , 4  , 4  , 4  , 4  , 1  , 4  , 4  , 4  , 4  , 4  , 4) R = ABW = (0 , 0  , 0  , 4  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 4  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 0  , 4) m
X = ~ R i=1 2 i = l
H=35
In this case we see that since the value of our calcu-lation X does not exceed or equal the hit value H  , we reject these two persons as being acqua in tances  . This re-by the use of more sophisticateds to chastic methods  , such as the rejection being conditions on a random number exceeding the difference between the numbers X and H  . 
Further selection is necessary to determine one-sided relationships  . It may be possible that A is an acquaintance of B  ( Blistensto A ) but B is not an acquaintance of A ( A does not listen to B )  , for instance if A is a village chief , and B is a non-destinguished village member . 
4.3 Conversation Interaction
The flow of the generation and parsing process is as follows  ( the only exceptions are in the case of normat ive learning were immediate auditor feedback is required  ) : a . Conversation Creation : i . Generate all utterances from each grammar at one time  , bypassing the grammar fileserially . 
A . The number of utterances for each pass is set as an external parameter ?' S "  . 
B . Generate " S " sentences in context C1.
Generate " S " sentences in context C2.
Generate " S " sentences in context C3.
Generate " S " sentences in context Cn 2 . Enter conversation creation routine . 

The conversation creation routine will peruse the acquaintance lists of each persons to generate " listens " in the form of o rdered triples  ( a , b , c ) , where a = ID of listener b = ID of Acqua in tance c = Context of talk  . 
This triple ( a , b , c ) will be placed in a file called the " l isten " file  . The " listen " file , when finished , will be a stack of entries in order by the first entry ai  . 
a IbIc 1 a 2 b 2 c 2 a 3 b 3 c 3 ::: abcnnn 3  . Entertheroutine which parses the sentence produced  . 
b . The Parsing Process :
For any two persons A and B , A Can listen to sentences produced by Binon ly one context  . 
i . Bring in the grammar for person A from second -level memory  2  . Determine the address on second-level memory of the conversation specified by the trip le  ( a , b , c ) 3 . Parse , or " listen " to the sentence . 
4 . Iterate on step 2 until all sentences are parsed . 
5 . Put the new grammar for this person on second -level memory  .   .   .   .   . 
6 . Get the next grammar from second-level memory and go to step  2  . 
7 . If no next grammar , increment the time counter . 
8 . If time to recreate the acquaintance lists or other major events such as birth/deathroutines and arrivals/departures do so  . 
9 . Iterate on step 1 until finished with entire simulation process  . 
5. Interpretation of Results
The key problem is determining the successor fai lure of a simulation  . Assuming everything else has gone well , how does one compare the grammars of the populat ion members to determine their mutual similar i ties and their relation to the language situation in contemporary  , realworld Maori

The design of the system offers a uniqu ~ detai leds quan-titative method for determining the similarity of the competence of speakers  . Every legal sentence ever generated in the course of the simulation is saved by the system  . Atual must attempt to parse every legal sentence ever produced  . 
Different individuals may expect to have varying degrees of success in their parsing attempts  . Analysis of the results can offer a detaile ~ objective picture of the dialects it u-ation on the basis of common success or failure in parsing particular sentences  . These results may be correlated with any socio -demographic factors recorded in the database of the model  . 
Given thesers sults , one may then send the same list of sentences to New Zealand  , and have the analogous test performed on a sample of the Maoripopulation  , asking informants to indicate the legal and il legal sentences  . 
The results of the live testing may then be compared with the simulation results  . Thus , the Monte Carlo simu-lation approach appears to offer Linguistics a strong empirical methodology for testing otherwise unverifiab le hypotheses  . 

References and Bibliography 1 . Ausubel , David : Maori Youth , Price Milburn , Wellington ,  1961 . 
2 . Best , Elsdon : The Maori , 2 vols . , Memoirs of the Poly-nesian Society , No . 5, Wellington , 1924 . 
3 . Beagle hole , Ernest and Pearl : Some Modern Maoris , New Zeal and Council for Educational Research , Wellington ,  1946 . 
4 . Biggs , Bruce : Maori Marria@e , Polynesian Society Maori
Monographs No.i , Wellington , 1960.
5 . Biggs , Bruce : The Structure of New Zeal and Maori , Re-prlnted from Anthropological Linguistics , Vol . 3, No . 3; En~lish-Maori Dictionary , Reed , Wellington ,  1966 . 
6 . Buck , Peter : The Comin ~ of the Maori , Maori Purposes Fund Board and White combe and Tombs Ltd  . , Wellington,
First Edition 1949.
7 . Firth , Raymond : Economics of the New Zeal and Maori , Government Printer , Wellington , First Edition 1929 , 
Second Edition 1959.
8 . Firth . Ravmond : We the Tikopia , George Allen & Unwin,
London , '1936.
9 . Firth . Raymond : ' A Note on Descent-Groups in Polynesia '  , 
Man , Vol . 57, 1957, pp . 48.
i0 . Firthm Raymond : Social Chan ~ ein Tikopia , George Allen & Unwin , London ,  1959 . 
ii . Fi~thm Raymond : Primitive Polynesian Economy , 2nd Edition , Routledge & Kegan Paul , London ,  1965 . 
12 . Groube , L . M . : Settlement Pattern in Prehistoric New Zealand , M . A . Thesis , The University of Auckland , 1964 . 
13 . Hargreaves , R . P . :' Changing Maori Agriculture in Pre-Waitange New Zealand '  , J . P . S ~, Vol . 72, No . 2,1963, pp .  101-17 ; ' Maori Agriculture of the Auckl and Province in the Mid-Nineteenth Century '  , J . P . S . , Vol . 68; No . 21959, pp .  61-79 ; ' Maori Agriculture after the Wars (1871-1886)' , J . P . S . , Vol . 69, No . 4, 1960, pp .  354-67 . 
14 . Harre , John : ' The Relevance of Ancestry as a Factor in Social and Cultural Choice '  , J . P . S . , Vcl . 74, No . i , 1965, pp .  320 . 
* Journal of the Polynesian Society.
26 15 . larre , John : Maori and Pakeha , Institute of Race Relations and Oxford University Press  ,  1966 . 
16 . Hawthorn , H . B . : The Maori : A Study in Acculturation , American Anthropology Association Memoir 46 ,  1944 . 
17 . Holst , Halvor : ' The Maori Schools in Maori Education ' , Education , Vol . 7, Department of Education , Wellington,
March 1958, pp . 53-59.
18 . Hunn , J . K . : Report on Department of Maori Affiars 24 August 1960  , Government Printer , Wellington ,  1961 . 
19 . Keesing , Felix : The Changing Maori , The Board of Maori Ethnological Research , NewPlymouth ,  1928 . 
20 . Klein , S . : Some Components of a Program for Dynamic Modelling of Historical Change in Language  . Paper No . 
1 4 of Preprints of Invited Papers for 1965 International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , May 1921 , New York . \[ To appear in Russian in a book on Language
Contact edited by V . Rosentsveig\].
21 . Klein , S . : Historical Change in Language Using Monte Carlo Techniques  . Mechanical Translation , Vol . 9, Nos . 3&4, September & December , 1966 ( Pub . May 1967) . 
\[ To appear in English in an English version of the abovementioned Rosents veigbook  . \] 22 . Klein , S . : Current Research in the Computer Simulation of Eistorlcal Change in Language  . In press , Proceedings of the Xth International Congress of Linguists  ,  1968 , Romanian Government , Bucharest . ( See papers presented ) . 
23 . Klein , S . , Fabens , W . , Herriot , R . , Katke , W . , & Towster , A . : The AUTOLING System . University of Wisconsin Computer Sciences Department  . Technical Report No . 43, Sept . 

24 . Maunsell , R . : Grammar of the New Zeal and Language,
Upton & Co . Auckland , 1894.
25 . Maori Affairs , Department of : The Maori Today , ( a ) First Edition 1949 ; ( b ) Third Edition 1964 ; Government Printer , 

26 . Merge , Joan : ' Marriage in Modern Maori Society ' , Man , 
Vol . 57, 1957, pp . 166-70.
27 . Metge , Joan : A New Maori Migration : Rural and Urban Relations in Northern New Zealand  , London School of Economics Monographs in Social Anthropology No  .  27 , Athlone Press and Melbourne University Press ,  1964 . 









Metge , Joan : The Maoris of New Zealand , Rutledge and
Kegan Paul , London , 1967.
Miller , John : Egrl ~ Victorian New Zealand , Oxford
University Press , 1958.
Parr , C . J . :' A Missionary Library , Printed Attempts to instruct the Maori' , J . P . S . , Vol . 70, No . 4, 1961, pp . 429-50;' Maori Literacy 1843-1887, J . P . S . , Vol .  72,
No . 3, 1961, pp . 211-34.
Sinclair , Keith : The Ori@in of the Maori Wars , New Zealand University Press , Wellington ,  1957 . 
Sorrenson , M . P . K . :' L and Purchase Methods and their Effect on Maori Population  1865-1901'  , J . P . S . , Vol . 65, No . 3, 1956, pp . 183-99;' The Maori King Movement 1858-1885' , Studies of a Small Democracy ( edited by Robert Chapman and Keith Sinclair )  , Paul's Book Arcade for the University of Auckland  ,  1963 . 
Williams , H . W . : A Dictionary of the Maori Language , 6th edition , Revised and Augmented under the Auspices of the Polynesian Society  , R . E . Owen , Government Printer,
Wellington , 1957.
Williams W . L . & Williams H . W . , First Lessons in Maori,
Trubner , London , 1862.
Wright , Harrison M . : New Zealand 1769-1840: The Early Years of Western Contact , Harvard University Press ,  1959 . 
