Project DOC
Dictionary On Computer , hereafter DOC , is part of an overall effort
to harness an online computer for phonological research  . For certain
problems the linguist finds it necessary to organize large amounts of 
data or to perform rather involved logical tasks - -such as checking out a body of rules with intricate ordering relations  . In these situations a computer is invaluable , for it forces the linguist to analyze his problems with greater precision and it executes certain Jobs with a speed and accuracy not otherwise possible  . 
The overtaim of DOC is the reconstruction of the phonological histories of the major Chinese dialects  . ~a deeper level , our interest is to learn more about how phonological structures change in general and about the relation between these changes and the synchronic systems they lead to  . The achievement of this understanding is crucial for the formulation of a general theory of linguistic change  . 
Of the many language families in the world , Chinese offers an ideal laboratory within which to study phonological change  , due both to its unrivaled wealth of materials and to its distinctive phonology and orthography  . Thus it affords both the time depth of philological documentation and the spatial wealth of all the dialects  . Since modern linguistics was born in the hands of the Indo-Europeanists during the last century  , our conception of how language changes and how it patterns has been excessively dominated by Indo -Eur Opean studies  . Analyzing a language family with a very different structure car  , help us balance this skewed perspective . 
The challenge of ~ onetic explanations , however , can only be met when a sufficient fund of information is available  , enabling phonology to make the exciting transition from a descriptive effort into an explanatory science  . DOC is designed to facilitate the gathering of this fund of information  . In this paper , I will describe the actual organization of the DOC data and the methodology involved in applying it  . 
William SY . Wang
Department of Linguistics
University of California , Berkeley
Berkeley , California 94720
