STRUCTURAL PATTERNS OF CHINESECH ARACTERS
Osamu Fujimura
Research Institute of Logopedics and Phonia trics 
Faculty of Medicine , University of Tokyo

Ryohei Kagaya
Institute for the Study of Languages and Cul tures of Asia and Africa Tokyo University of Foreign Studies Chinese characters  , as used in Chinese and Japanese for or- thography  , * bear inherent meanings as well as sound shapes  . Apart from these aspects , the graphic patterns of the characters also vary in complex ways and they appear very dif ferent over a wide range  . 
It is obvious to native users of these characters  , however , that the graphic patterns are mostly composed of different but frequently used subuni ts  , and regularity is observed in the structures of char-acter patterns  . Quite frequently , a character is clearly composed of more than one character  ( with some minor modifications in shape )   . 
We can intuitively identify some commonly used strokes such as ver-tical and hori zontal lines as constituents of characters or their subparts  . 
These obvious structural regularities have not been studied thor-oughly  , in spite of accumulated knowledge concerning e tymology and historical developments of the characters and interpretation of the sound-mean ing association  . ** This paper describes a way of describ-ing the regularities of the Chinese characters as graphic patterns  , without any explicit reference to the sound or meaning  . The descrip-tion may be considered as given in a form of generative grammar l  ) * The authors are native Japanese , and we are primarily concerned with the Chinese characters used in the contemporary Japanese orthography  . There is obvious difference between Chinese and Japanese in the collection of character patterns used  , but difference in the structural regularity itself is not apparent and remains to be studied  . 
~:'* See e . g . B . Karlgen's classical work " Word Families in Chinese "  ( B . M . i  ~ . E . S . Vol .  5 , 1934) and Grammata Serica (1957) , and a more recent study by A . To do , Kanji-no Gogenkenkyu ( Etymological Studies of Archaic Chinese )   ( Tokyo : Gakutosha ,  1963 , in Japanese) . 
the patterns , with an important deviation from the concept of gen-ative grammar  . Namely , the system of rules given here generates a racter-like patterns  , but it does not define the actual set of Chi-se characters  , viz . the accepted vocabulary of either Chinese or panese  , but rather the set of patterns each of which could repre-nt a Chinese character as far as the structural characteristics of ~  , pattern are concerned . * The regularity described here is thus ) relike phonological regularities of lex ical items of a language in syntactic regu larities of its sentences  . Nevertheless , the for-d similarity of this rules ys tem with the transformational theory syntax is rather interesting  . 
The abstract representation of a character according to the gen-ative rules make it poss ible to specify the patterns of essential l y Chinese characters completely in terms of e lements  ( strokes ) d operators ( concatenators and compounders )   . In other words , can code Chinese characters by use of strokes and operators sed on this framework of graph ic theory of Chinese characters  . 
~ actical applications are of great import and interest  , but these ints are not of our direct concern in this paper  . 
This descriptive system was in essence proposed by one of the esent authors several years ago  . 2) Some modifications and addi- . ns have been made and are still being made , and generation of ~ ual character patterns by rules are being tried with use of a digi-? computer with a noscillo scope display as the output device and a yboard type writer as the input  . Some results are presented in spaper , and a demonstration is in schedule for the meeting  . 
Formation of Units
A unit is a separable subpart of a character . In our rule sys-m , it is represented by a string of alternat ingstrokes and con-tenators  . The form generated in this way is an underly ing formlle di-representation  , and it is interpreted into s-representation a conversion process described below in order to obtain the graph-pattern  . When no element of the string in i- representation is left interpreted  , and if the derived s-representation does not violate  , train restrictional criteria perfo rming filtering functions  ( seef r . _aa ) , the string of alternating strokes and concatenators represents In this analogy to generative grammar  , we consider the i-repre-~ntation to be fo rmed by concatenation of any alternating st rokes ~ d operators  . Restrictions may be treated by filter ing function of ansformational rules that in terpretei-representation in terms of representation  . 
a simple unit . A unit can represent a character by itself , or it may . be compounded with some other unit ( s) . 
1.1. Strokes and Operators
A set of strokes is given in the Stroke-tab le  ( Table 1 )  . Each stroke is identified by a two-place number called " stroke identifier  , " and is defined by a stroke representation pattern  . The first numeral of the stroke ident if ier represents the class of the stroke and the second the variation within the class  . For example , the stroke "21" which is the first variational stroke of class-two  , is defined by the stroke pattern as shown in Fig  .  1 . 
024 " Ir - - k / 21:0((~) x = 2, y = 0
A(~,~) x=2, y = 2
X((,O)x = 2, y = 4
Fig .   1 - Stroke representation pattern For each st roke  , three functional points ( ~ ,   ,  ~  ,   ,  ? , 9 a re def ined in te rms of the i r x - y coord inate values in the stroke pattern field covering a range of integer values  04 for both x and y . A stroke with its three functional points can be represented by the following format  ( s-representation for the stroke )  : \[21 ;  20 , 22j 24\] . 
In this representation , the first number ( 21 ) is the stroke identifier , and the following three sets of numerals represent the x  ( on the left ) and y ( on the right ) coordinates of the points ( ~ ,  ~ ~  , and U . J , respec-tively . 
Concatenators are listed in Table 2 . A concatenator defines a particular posi tional interrelation between two strokes in terms of coincidence of a pair of the functional points  . The set of strokes is divided into two funct ionally distinct groups  , one for those with odd class numbers and the other for even class numbers  , and a concate- ,   .   . 4 ,0 . 
q~t . ~ C , O successor
CDcD~Dcx
L ~ o PET
Table 2 -Concatenators defined in terms of coinc idence of the functional points of the preced ing and succeeding strokes  . 
nator can combine only a pair of strokes of d ifferent groups  . When a pair of strokes are qualified for concatenation  , the pair of strokes are said to have " aff inity " between them  . For a given concatenator in i-representation , the pertinent pair of strokes with affinity is de-fined by a general convention of this rule system as the next stroke fol lowing the concatenator and the last preceding stroke that does not belong to the same group as the following stroke  . The first member of this selected pairs hall be called the " predecessor " of the concatenator and the second member the " successor  . " For ex-ample , in the string in i-representation /21S I IP21C21XI IEII/ , the concatenator " C " operates on the fourths troke  21   ( successor ) and the second stroke ii ( predecessor ) skipping the more immediates troke 21 . Similarly ~ the last concatenator E concatenates the last stroke iito  21 rather than another ii . 
I .  2 . I-Representation vs . S-Representation A string of alternat ing strokes and concatenators which shall be called " i - representation "  ( input representation ) can represent an underlying form of a unit . The unit can be actualized as a character shape through executing some shape-adjusting rules and looking up the stroke table that s to resthestroke representation patterns for all strokes  . For example , the abovementioned string that represents a simple-unit character ~ is actualized as shown in Fig  .  2 . 
The generated pattern can be represented by giv ing the x and y coordinate values of the three functional points belonging to all the const ituent strokes  . For the example above , the stroke positions are represented as: \[21  ;  00  , 02  , 04 11; 00  , 20  , 40 21; 40  , 42  , 42 21; 20  , 22  , 24 11; 02  , 22  , 42 11; 04  , 24  , 44\ ]  . 
Fig .   2 - The pattern for the character /21SI   IP21C21XI IEII/This shall be called the " s-repre -sentation  ( stroke representation ) of the unit , " and it completely specifies the graphic pattern in terms of  ( abstract ) functional interrelations of the const it -uent strokes  , i .  3 . Degeneracy and Pseudocon cate-nators More than one stroke can coincide in position as specified in s-represent a-tion only when they are connected to each other through spec i al operators  , called pseudo concatenators . The strokes thus interrelated are called degenerate strokes  . There are two pseudo concatenators , one desig-nated by- ( hyphen ) and the other by ~ ( zero )  . ~' . -" A pseudo concatenator always selects its nearest preceding and the next following st rokes as the predecessor and the successor  , respectively , and these strokes must belong to the same st roke-class  . Any degenerate strokes must be concatenated ( or compounded by a superconcatenator , see in fr ,  . _ . _ . a ) to a stroke of the opposite group at the lat ter'sp  , in s-representation .  : '  , -'* A string in i-representation that does not meet these conditions is blocked in generation and thus is rejected as a representation of a unit  . 
The pseudo concatenators allot the same posit ion  ( in terms of their , t ( and often also ~ and u ) consequently ) coordinates in s-representation to a pair of identical or similar strokes  . The degenerate strokes in s-representation are marked for the hyphen or the zero  . The order of stroke occurrences is generally preserved in s-representation  . Degeneracy of more than two strokes are not al lowed  . In the actualization process , as discussed later , degener-acy created by the hyphen is resolved and the degenerate strokes ~'  , -" In earlier reports of our study , we assumed the hyphen and a com-maas pseudo concatenators  . The rule system is revised here . 
** There are some further restrictions about the kind of strokes to be degenerate and those to be concatenated to degener a test rokes  , and also about combination of these . Subclassifieation of strokes in this respect is still to be studied  . 
are separated into parallel positions , their spacings being determined by rule ( see Fig .  3 . 
a:/21Sl1C11-11P11T21/k__b . .  /21Sl   1Pl   lC11911/ _i_c : /21~?21E II/??d:/I IC47P I IS21C21~21 

Fig .   3 -Examples of char-acters generated by use of pseudo concatenators  . 
( degenerate vs . resolved )
In the case of the zero , the strokes are separated in the same manner , but at the same time a special stroke of the opposite class  ( horizontal line for c lass-2 degenerates trokes and vertical line for c lass-1 degenerate strokes ) is automatically introduced in s-represent at ion  . 
This additional stroke has an " in finites i -mallength  , " and this bridges the perti-nent two ( degenerate ) strokes . Where this bridge should be placed along the degenerate strokes is determined  , after the unit has been completed in s-repre- sentation  , according to a preference order that is given by convention of this rule system  . The preference order for the selected point on the degenerate strokes is Oh  , c ~? and ~ , but if a par-ticular point shows coincidence with any other stroke  ( s )   , i . e .   , when the point is used as a junction in the pat tern  , this point is avoided and the point with the next degree of preference is selected for p lacing the infinite simal stroke  . The infinite simal stroke becomes " stre tched " when the degenerates trokes separate  , giving an actual bridging between them . 
The infinite simal stroke can be placed on ly at a point where the functional points  ( of the same kind ) of the degener-atestrokes coincide . 
The zero can be used repeatedly in the same space between a pair of  ( degenerate ) strokes in i-representation . Each symbol of zero inserts an infinite simal stroke at the place of the highest preference that remains available  . Examples for the use of degenerates trokes and the pseudoeon catenators are given in Fig  .  3 . 
i.4. The Dummy Concatenator "?"
A e on catenator in general concatenates a stroke with another stroke  . We introduce a dummy concatenator "? , " so that we may concatenate a string with another string  . The "?" ini-represent a-tion marks its immediately preceding stroke as the predecessor of a eoncatenator that remains to be specified later in the string in conjunction with the selected successor stroke  . In the string following this dummy concatenator  , an extraneous concatenator must be found consecutively following another e one a tenator without a stroke identi-fier inbetween  , and the second concatenator in the sequences e lects the stroke marked previously by "?" as its predecessor stroke  . The following stroke serves as the successor for both of the concatenators in pair  , thus specifying a junction of two strings . For example , in the ease of a uniire presented by /21Cl   7?21SE I IP21T II / ( Fig . 4-e ), the pattern/21C17/(Fig . 4- a ) is a butted to the second pattern /21S I IP21T II / ( Fig . 4b ) through the concatenator E operating on the st roke  21 of the former and II of the latter . This operator "?" is convenient to form a unit according to the stroke order in the tradi-t ional handwriting  . 
a: /21C17/ b : /21S l iP21T ll/c : /21C   I7?21SE I IP21T II/Fig . 4-Concatenation of substrings by use of "? . " The example above could be generated by a str ing  /21C17E IIS 21P21T II/if only we disregard the tradition . Sometimes , however , the use of "?" is necessary for generating exist ing characters  . The pattern of Fig .  5 , for example , can be transcribed as/21727 PEIIT 27/ , but there is no way to generate it without us ing the dummy con-catena ~: ~ L % unless we defnea new concatenator filling in the space in the concatenator table with so-to-speak a con jugate concatenator  ( in this case an E : ' . -" that would selectiof the predecessor and cJ of the successor for coincidence  )   . Introduction of these conjugate con -catenators is not desirable in consideration of the generalization of the rule system  , because it expands the set of i-represent at ions considerably without resulting in any additional acceptable patterns  . 
trill m/2 1727 PEIIT 27/
Fig . 5-The use of "?.
The particular side of the diagonal in Tab le  2 is used in favor of the tradi-tional st roke order  . 
I .  5 . Restrictions on S-Representa-tions Some restrictions in terms of the generated s- representation have been stated in connection with the degener-acy and the infinites imal stroke  . There are some more restrictions of a gener-alk ind given in terms of the derived s-representation  . These restrictions may be interpreted as f iltering func-tions of the transform at ional process of actualization  ( see ~3 )  . 
One rather obvious restriction is that no strokes of the same class except degenerate ones can share the same set of coordinate va lues for any members of their functional po ints  , whether they both are of the same kind (06 ,  ~  , or ~) or different . The convention of concatenation with the not ion of affinity eliminates the possibili ty of generating two such strokes as a resul to fimmediate succession of the seini- representation  . A string , for example , like/IIC 21SII/ , however , is permissible in i-representation but must be rejected by the criterion stated above  . 
Another possible restriction that may be imposed on ans-repre-sentation of a unit is in terms of the ratio of the largest d imension of the generated pattern to the number of strokes utilized  . A threshold may be set and a pattern with a larger value of this ratio may be re-jec ted  , by use of an appropriate definition of length across a unit  . 
This would exclude along zig-zago falte rnating ii and  21  , for ex-ample , frorn the set of acceptable characters . 
A restriction of a more essential kind is probably in regard to the selection of a particular variation on the basis of contextual redundancy  . It may well be the case that this kind of restriction ~ is so strong that we can totally omits pccit'ying the variation numbers of the strokes for the input transcription of any character  . These points remain to be investigated . 
2. Compounding of Units
More than one unit can be compounded to fom-na complex unit  , which in turn as a unit can be compouiided with ~nother unit  . The derivation of a character by a sequence of compounding can be represented in i- representation by recursive use of pairs of parentheses  , each surrounding a substring as a unit , A more illustrative representation may be g iven in a form of tree diagram  , where the type of compounding is given by the compounder symbol at each node  ( see Fig .  6) . For a unit to make a subpart of a character , it is F1 . -
Hj21 ii c477 j~-~:/23SliP24/
Fig .   6 -Complex compounding by use of appositional compounders  . 
in general necessary to go through a set of t rans formational rules that adjust the enti reshape of the pattern to fit the context  , as well as some special rules that makes minor changes in variation numbers of somes t rokes  . 
2. I . Compounders
The compounder " H " can arrange more than one unit in a hori-zontal row  , and the " V " can arrange some vertically . These two compounders form a class and may be called " appositional com-pounders  . " The character in Fig . 6 exemplifies a complex use of Fig . 7 - Reduction of the last stroke . 
10 the appositional compounders . There are many cases where the left subpart ( hen ) of the H compounding can be regarded as an af fected form of a-~reeunit " whose " lasts troke " is reduced in shape  . Thus stroke 36 in Table 1 is a variation that serves as a reduced form of  32  , and the stroke i i becomes 16 in this context . ~-" Fig . 7 gives a typical example . 
As a special case , where the stroke 55 is identified as the last stroke of a unit used as the left constituent unit  ( he . __nn ) in H-compound-ing , this str~oke undergoes a process of elongation , and the right con-stituent unit ( tsukuri ) is placed above the tail of this stroke ( see Fig . 
( ( iIX21 EII ) V ( 21C 17?47 CE 35 )   ) R ( 21 CI 7 ) Fig . 8-Elongation of the last stroke inny__~o . 
8) . Traditionally , the subparts ( radicals ) of this sort are called nyo . 
In some cases similar to this , units serving as a subpart of a character cannot be identified ' as a transform of any " free unit  , " viz . , a unit that can represent a character . Typical examples are those traditionally referred to ast are  ( the " appendants " or two-side
J-F
Fig . 9 - Example soft are Fig . I0-Example ; sofkarnak . 
surrounding radicals , see Fig .  9) , q ' hes , ~ units , as well as the elon-gated unit ny_~o , have opet~space in which the other unit must beer a -~: ~ This is one of the phenomena that suggest redundancy of specifying a particu lar variation for a stroke class  . 
Iibedded . Another subclass of units that can embrace o the run its is called kamae  ( see Fig .  10) . 
These surrounding compounders are all represented by the symbol Rini-represent at ion  . The last stroke of the compounding unit ( nyo , tare , or kamae ) that follows the symbol Rini-represent at ion tells where the preceding unit should be located in s-representation  , The third class of compounders consisting of X  , C , E , S , and P is provided for cases whereas troke is superposed onto a unit in a special manner g iven by definition of the particular compounder  . 
Thus in the example given in Fig . ii , the


Fig .   11 -Supereon catenator X compounder X places the vertical stroke  22 across the unit which itself is a
V compound of two identi-calun its , leaving the two ends of the vertical st roke sticking out  . 
The compounder C concatenates the point of the compounding vertical stroke  ( typically 21 ) at the point of the uppermost horizontal st roke  , leaving the other end of the compounding st roke sticking out of the lowest  ( most large valued ) y-coordinate of ' s in the compounded unit . The compounder E , S , and Parede- ( u )   ( u ) E ( 21 )   ( u ) C ( 21 )   ( u ) X ( 21 ) u=/21 SIICIIPIIT 21/Fig .   12 -The stroke 21 with different supePconcatenators . 
fined in a similar manner reflecting the properties of the concate-nators ~ of the same names  . Some examples are given in Fig .  12 . 
In this class of compounders , which may be called " supercon-caten at ) or s , " the compounding unit is typically a singles troke constituting a unit by itself  . In some cases the succeeding unit is composed of more than one stroke  , where only one of them can be desig- t2 nated as the " major stroke " that determines the manner of compounding  . Variations 6 and 7 of all stroke classes and also all st rokes in classes  4 and 5  , and stroke 13 ( Table 1 ) cannot serve as the major stroke . The major stroke can be degenerate . The superconcate-nators act like concatenators in enabling the compounding  ( major ) aba:21SIIP21TII ) X21 EI6E27 ) b:1IP21TIIS21PIIP 26 ) X ( 23- 21 ) 
Fig .   13 -The superconcate-nator X with a compounding unit of more than one stroke  . 
strokes to be degenerate in the case of C , X , and E(cf . I .  3 .  ) . Thus the rejection of uneon catenated degenerate strokes has to be perform-ed beyond the minimal unit  , when the unit is preceded by a supercon -catenator  . Examples are given in
Fig . 13.
In the compounding of the third class , the unit to be compounded may be collapsed in s ize in one di-mension treated as though it were a degenerate group of strokes either hori zontal or vertical  . For example , in the unit (21 SIICIIPIIT 21) X(21) , the compounded unit 21 SIICIIPIIT 21 ) could be regarded as a class-Istroke , In this interpretation , it can be said that the supercone a tenator in effect acts as a concatenator of the same symbo l  . In a case like the unit ( II ) X(21C37S47) , the pattern actually can be represented by as ingle unit I  IX21C37S47  , simply by removing the parentheses . 
We may introduce another superconcatenator D , which is defined as a combination of C and E , namely a compounder that superposes a stroke wh ich is " stretched " in such a way that both ends coincide with the two strokes at the extreme positions in the compounded unit  . 
This kind of . compounded patterns can be generated in the ru le system stated above by a suceesion of compoundings by use of the supercon-catenators C and E  . 
2.2. The Point Unit
The " point " designated by an apo ~ rophe that fo llows a unit is an infinite simal unit compounded to the preceding unit  . It shows varied shapes in the actualized pattern  , and a " . et of points is distributed in space in di fferent pre~cribed maimers U~\[~e~ding on the context  . Special rules are required for taLdng calveo ; L these seemingly varied phenomena , but technical details are still to be worked out  . Typical examples are shown in Fig .  14 . The examples a ~ . etranscribed from i3 left to right as follows : upper : ( 25 )  '  ,  (25)"  ,  (25) ' "  ,  (25)  .   .   .   .   , lower : (21S11P21T11)' , ((21P11S11P63)X(11))' , ((42X 36) R(21S11P21T11)):'l'1'"1"; J:
KIN
Fig .   14 -Actualizations of points in accordance with the context and the number of the points  . 
3. Actualization
A character is transcribed as a set of units combined through compounders in any depth of complexity  . Each constituent unit is transcribed as as t ringini-representation placed in parentheses  . 
The i-representations of units determine the i rs-representations  , specifying positioning of all occurrences of strokes in a frame of the pattern field  . The franle is normalized and placed together accord-ing to the specification of the compounder to form a compound unit  , and this process of normalization and a butt ing can be recursively repeated  . The set of rules for normalization and st roke reduction  ( sees upra is thus cyclic in the sense of the cyclicity of phonological rules  . The s-representation for a unit after the normalization no longer has the quantized coordinates  . In the last stage of actualiza-tion of a character  . Strokes shapes are called inform the st roke representation pattern into this general izeds-representation  . 
3. I . Stroke Arrangement
It may be obvious intuitively that in the actua lized form of any evenly  . This fact can be accounted for by designing a later part of the actualization process to form a set of stroke distribution ru les  . 
As a general principle for this distr ibution of strokes in space  , we may assume a potential field defined in the stroke pattern of each stroke surround ing the actualized shape of the stroke  . We then may hypothesize that superposition of the potentials belonging to the dis-tr ibuted strokes in the finally actualized pattern results in a state of equilibr iumby attaining the total potential energy minimum  . In short , strokes exert repulsive force against each other  , and the strokes can translate and be compressed within a given unit frame as long as the topological interconnections are not changed  . The endpoints ~ and u9 are always rigidly related to the actual ized stroke shape  , but the midpoint \]_~ can shift along the l ine defined typically as a straight line connecting  ( Zandu J . 
3.2. Practical Approximation
A practical approximation for this princ iple of distribution may be devised as fo llows  . Each stroke has a two-dimensional measure of spacial occupancy for x and y directions  , defined in a stroke table . 
A " size normalization factor " of a unit is defined as the sum of these measures of occupancy of all the constituent strokes  . The area which is occupied by each constituent unit in a complex unit is deter-mined by the proportion in terms of the " size factor  . " Within a unit , the actualized distribution of consti tuent strokes is attained in a similar manner  , by allowing typically equal spaces between s imilar strokes in the direction perpend icular to the stroke line  . An equally weighted space is allowed at the margin between the border of the frame and the outermost stroke  . There are some details of the rules which wi ll not be discussed here  . 
Some examples of characters are illustrated in Fig  .  15 . These were actually generated on a noscill oscope display of a computer by typing in the i -representations  . The rules used for this practical approx imation of the actualization process arc only preliminary and some character patterns suggest necessary corrections of the pro-g ram which can be mostly readily done  . 
4. Concluding Remarks
Many details are still to be worked out and some are simply not described here for brevity  . It is obviously true that the same char-ac ter can be generated by different i- representations  , partly due to different stroke orders and partly due to different selection of var ia-tional shapes of strokes  . Another so ~' to famb : iguity is possible in ma-~-=~"F ~ m@ 
Mm some special cases depending on whether a compounder or a coneatenator is used  , as men-tioned in 2 . I . The use of degeneracy against compounding g ives still another sort of ambiguity  . Thus for example , the character can be gener-ated either as a simple unit/II~I  IX21/ or as a compounded form / ( 21 SIIP21TI\] ) X ( 21 ) / . 
These sorts of ambiguity have been to a large extent elim-inated by some care taken info rmulating the rule system  , but some of them are interest-ing and seem to indicate the inherent problems concerning the nature of Chinese characters  . 
The system we have given here is concrete and valid in fair details  , but it is still subject to even major changes for impr ' ove-ment  . The essential principle , however , seems to us convinc-ingly effective for description of the graphical structures of the characters  . 
Fig .   15 -Oscillo scope display examples of computer-generated Chinese characters  . All characters were generated by rule out of the input tr presentation type in throughor d in ary keyboard  . 


A system is proposed for specifying anyone of the accepted patterns of Chinese characters  , or similar patterns that could be used as Ch in ese characters  . The system may be considered as a generative grammar of the set of character patterns  . A unit is formed by concatenating strokes by operators  . A set of strokes is given in a stroke table where three abstract functional points ~  ,   ,   , u , t  ~ , as well as a typical actualization fo rm  , are defined for each stroke . Concatenators and pseudo concatenators are prov ided  , each of them defining a particular posit ional interrelation between two strokes in terms of coincidence of the functional points  . The set of strokes is divided into two funct ionally distinct groups  , and a concatenator can combine only a pair of s trokes of different groups  , a pseudo concatenator only those of the same group  . Thus a string of alternating strokes and operators  , which may be called the " i-repre-sent at ion  , " determines an underlying form of a unit , which can be actualized as a character shape through looking up the stroke table and execut ing some shape-adjusting rules  . On the level of i-repre-sentation , more than one unit can be combined to form a more complex character pattern  , by use of one or more of compounding oper-a tors that specify " transformational p rocesses " to be executed be-foretheshape ad justment process  . Preliminary results of a non-line computer experiment will be shown where the actual i zations of characters are displayed on an oscillo scope when characters are spec if ied by typing in the i-representations  . 



N . Chomsky : Syntactic Structures , The Hague : Mouton and Co .  , 1965 . 
O . Fujimura : " Some Remarks on the Character Recognition  , ' ~ Information and Control ( Institute of Electrical Communication Eng in eers  , Japan ) No . 4,27(1963) in Japanese) . 
: " Structure of Language and Coding of Chinese Characters  , " Kagaku ( Science ) 34 , 321-324 (1964) ( in Japanese) . 
" rr The University of Electro-Communic at ions  , " Current Research and Development in Scientific Documentation  ( National Science Foundation Office of Science Information Service  . U . S . A . ) No .  14, 516 (1966) . 

