ANE WAP PRO ACH TO SYNTAX

B.J . Dasher , Georgia Institute of Technology
This paper describes a new method for syntactic analysis of 
English . Instead of the conventional subject-predicate structure as a basis for analysis  , elementary sentence patterns are used . It is observed that there are two basic sentence formats in English  . 
One , using a transitive verb , consists of the sequence noun , verb , noun , noun . The other , using an intransitive verb , consists of the sequence nou_ . ._nn , verb , adjective , noun . In each of these basic forms , syntax is specified by the word order . Since there are 64 ways to arrange four words when they are taken one  , two , three , and four at a time , there are 12B elementary or can nonical sentences to be studied . The central goal of analysis is to determine the particular can nonical sentence corresponding to a given statement  . 
In order to show how any sentence can be reduced to its basic format  , certain essentially algebraic operations are proposed  , together with certain rules for transforming one structure into another  . 
Conversely , the same rules may be used to construct a generative grammar that permits a cannonical sentence to be expanded to an equivalent form in accord with prescribed requirements  . In as much as the operations are essentially algebraic  , the method is very advantageous for computer use . 
Through the use of various devices , word order can be changed without changing essential syntax  . Also , the same basic structures can be used to express a variety of semantic relationships  . For example , the two sentences , "Give the book to John " and " Save the book for John "  , have the same structure . The difference between the t__o_o and fo___~r relationship is semantic rather than grammatical  . Moreover , the two statements , "Give John the money " and " Give the money to John "  , express the same relationship between ~ ive , Joh____~n , and money , and it would be the same if an inflected form for Joh_  . __~n were used instead of the preposition , or if some other syntactic label were used . 
Thus , it should be possible to begin with a statement in one language  , find its corresponding cannonical sentence , transform this can nonical sentence into a corresponding can nonical sentence in a new language  , and then reconstruct the statement in the new language  . Thus , the method is advantageous for machine translation  . 
This paper describes the fund ~ ental concepts of the scheme and illustrates its potential  . Many details remain to be supplied in order to obtain a working system  . 
