Constructional Potentiality : Prlscian lc gra1~nar as adlsamblguatlon
technique in the automatic recognition of Latin syntax 
In most languages word order plays the major role in determining 
which words form a single phrase or constitute . A trees ? ructure can be
abstracted automatically from a sentence by linear determination of the major syntactic constitutes  . However , in certain highly-inflected languages , of which Latin is perhaps the most extreme example  , constitutes may be broken up in the word order of the sentence  . Inflectional endings form the signals for placing each constituent in its constitute  . Theoretic-ally the higher degree of syntactic explicitness provided by inflectional morphemes should make these languages easier to analyse  . mechanl cally . Yet it proves that there is a high degree of ambiguity in the morphemes or morphophonemie alternations used to mark inflection and that native speakers rely heavily on their ability to identify both ~ e semantic meaning and the inflec tional habits of a given word  . 
Recognizing this state of affairs those institutes involved with automatic parsing of Latin  , the Laboratoi repourll Analyse Statist ique des Langues Anclennes  , Liege , and the Centro Automazlone Analisi Linguistica , formerly in Gallarate but now in P is a , have constructed rather large parsing dictionaries which identify the word class and inflectional habits of lexl call enmmta  . These parsers do not , to my knowledge , produce tree structures of analysed sentences or give any deep-structure represent at if lQ  . 
An latern at lve approach to the automatic syntactic analyses of Latin is offered by the const ructional syntaxo ~ Latin developed by ? ri scian from Greek grammatical theory  . Each word is amc . , mber of at least one 2-member construction . There are two types of construct lonal relat ionship convenientia  ( agreement )  , ( a ) verb agrees with subject in number , ( b ) adjective agrees with noun ; regimen ( government ) , ( a ) verb governs object , ( b ) preposition governs noun . Several word-classes do not participate in cons -tructions  , notably connectives , some ordinal numerals , modifiers and adverbs , but these can be located in the syntax of the sentence  , usually by word order , occasionally by the reduction of all possible constituencies to one  . Prlsclan's llst of constructions must be extended in some directions such as to include the genitive  ( dependent on the nearest noun ) and the ablative . 
The deep structure of the Latin sentence can be shown to consist of a left side containing  , as in Chinese , a cluster of presentences , labels and topics , and a right side , which proceeds logically towards the speaker's comment on the main topic  . The items of the deep structure are formed into a syntax tree structure  ( slmilar to the Russlan ~- structure ) by virtue of their membership in constructions legal in Latin syntax  . 
The first word of the sentence , if inflected , has a constructional potentiality assigned to each possible inflectional segment metched in a lookup of inflectional morphemes  . Each inflectional morpheme has a code of constructional potentiality assigning to it all possible syntactic roles  . 
The probability factor is not the same for this potentiality in the first position as for this potentiality further to the right in the sentence  . 
The parsing program assigns construction ~ desto each possible constructional pair until it arrives at a series of surface-level h modes which make a well-formed ~- structure  . 
By adding to the dlctionary the construct lonal potentiality of all lexical items which are basic verbs one can assign values and sem--tic features to the words belonging to the multl-member constructions of transitive and bl-transit lve verbs  .  -2
