GERDLAU-HANS DIETERLUTZ
AUTOMATICAN ALY SISO FTHEGER MANNOUNG kOUP
AND SOME PROBLEMS
O . Introduction.
Since 1971 the research group " Maschinelle Syntax analyse " ( MasA ) has been working as a part of the project " Linguistische Datenverar-beittmg "  ( r ~ DV ) at the " Institut fiJr deutsche Sprache " , supported by the " Bundesministerf ' tir Forschung und Tectmologie " of the Federal 
Republic of Germany.
The task of the MasA is to elaborate a system for analysing simple sentences of present-day -German  . " Simple sentences " , in this case , means any type of sentence with only one finite verb in it  . 
1. The scope of the analysis.
The team works on the basis of a socalled verb grammar  . In this type of grammar the verb represents the nucleus of a sentence  , thus being opposed to the subject-predicate -grammar  . Proposals for the elaboration of such a grammar have been presented by Helbig-Schenkel  ,  1
Heringer2 and Engels
This type of grammar is based on a verb lexicon , which describes all the obligatory and facultative objects that depend on the verb  , e . g . 
treffen with two obligatory objects in
Ich treffei hn morgen 1G . HELBIG , DerBegriO " der Valenzals Mittelder strukturellen Sprach beschreibung d des Fremdsprachen unterrichts  , n ~ Deutschals Fremds prache ~> , I (1965) , pp .  10-23 . 
H . J . ~ gER , Theorieder deutschen Syntax , Miinchen 1970 . 
8 U . ENos , Bemerkungen zur Dependenz grammatik , in ~ Neue Grammatik theorien und ihre Anwendung auf dasheutige Deutsch  . Spracheder Gegenwart ~, XX (1971), pp .  111-155 . 
2 50 GERDLAU-HANSDIETERLUTZ treffen with one obligatory object and one facultative object in 
Ertrifft ( den Ball ) treffen auf with two obligatory objects in Die Mannschaft trafaufeinen schwachen Gegner  . 
After having detected the number of both the obligatory and fac-ultative objects and specified these objects according to their syntactical functions  , one can group the verbs into classes , e . g . the class of all the verbs with one obligatory object  ( this class contains for example the verb laufen )  , the class of all the verbs with two obligatory objects  ( containing for example treffen )  , the class of all the verbs with three obligatory objects  ( containing for example an bieten )  , the class of all the verbs with one obligatory and one facultative object  ( containing for example treffen )  , and so on . Each of these classes represent sao-called " Satzbauplan "  ( SBP )  . " The systematic levels of the grammar area ) the word class-level ( WK-level ) b ) the group-level ( noun group ( NG )  , verbal group ( VG ) ) c ) the complex-level ( noun complex ( NK )  , verb complex ( VX ) ) d ) the object-level ( nominative object ( 0 o )  , genitive object ( o .  )  .   .   .   .  ) . 
The following graph can be regarded as an illustration of these four systematic levels : 
Dera\[teStaatsmann
DET ~ NOM



It rfselnen Nachf , olger imAmt
VERBDET 4 NOMPRAEP NOM WK-level
IV
NGjG group-level
VKNK complex-level
II object-level O~Vol ~0~4 U . EN~L , Diedeutschen Satzbauplline , in Wirkendes Wort ~ , XX (1970) , pp .  361-392 . 
6 For the explanation f the word classes , especially DET 2B , ADJ , NOM , DET 4 , and PRAEP see section 2 ; O ~ stands for " nominative object " , O ~ for " accusative AUTOMATICANALYSISOFTHE GER MANNOUNG ROUP  251 The way of finding the word class of a given word form  , i . e . the morphosyntactical description of a wordform , is delineated in the contribution of Werner Brecht  . e2 . Description of NG-relevant word classes . 
The following word classes are relevant for the constitution of a 
NG : a ) preposition ( postposition ) PRAEP , e . g . vorb ) determinantia DET , e . g . allenc ) adverbs ADV , e . g . sehrd ) noninflected adjectives ADJU , e . g . gute ) inflected adjectives ADJ , e . g . sicht barenf ) nouns NOM , e . g . Objekteng ) pronouns PRON , e . g . uns . 
The word classes are defined by the following morphological and/or syntactical properties : Prepositions are collected in a catalogue and specified by their position  ( in front of , behind , in fronto for behind , in front of and behind the nucleus of a NG ) , by their government ( accusative , genetive , dative ) and by the sort of object that is introduced by the preposition  ( pre-positional object , situative object , directional object ) . 
Adverbs are listed , and the list only includes words that meet the following conditions : non-inflexional  ; no predicative use ; certain regularities of position . 
Non-inflected adjectives are not listed ; they are described by an algorithm , which is to find out the degree of comparison . 
Inflected adjectives are not listed , either . They , too , are described object " ; Vot stands for the verb class with the " Satzbauplan "  01   ( obligatory nominative object plus obligatory accusative object  )  . Note : The example is ambiguous , and only one interpretation is given . The example is ambiguous because of the noun group imAmt  . This noun group may be an attribute to the noun group seinen Nach folger  . It may also be a noun group without any relation to seinen Nach folger  , and therefore it must be interpreted as a separate noun complex  , which does not depend on tre ~ nasa representation of the verb class Vm  . In this case the sequence imAmt is regarded as a socalled " Angabe "  ( cf . U . ENO ) ~ L , Linguistische Studieu I Regeln zur " Satz glied folge "  . ZurStel-lung der Element eime in faehen Verbals at z  , in < ~ Sprache der Gegenwart ~ , XIX (1972) , pp . 17-75, esp . 24 ff ) . 
6In the first Volume of this book , pp . 9-21.
2 52 GERDLAU-HANSDIETERLUTZ by an algorithm with respect o case  , number , gender , degree of comparison and kind of inflexion ( strong , weak ) . 
Nouns are not listed in the present state of our work  . There exists an algorithm that provides the description of those words according to case  , number , and gender , vIn general , the definition of the several word classes i the common one  , as found in the traditional grammars . But there are two exceptions : the socalled determinantia and the pronouns  . 
The socalle determinantia are listed in a catalogue  ; they are grouped with respect to the possible arrangements of several determinantia within a NG  , e . g . 
vorallen diesen meinensch~snen Biichern . s The results of having found out certain regularities are both a number of distinct subclasses of determinantia and the formulation of context-sensitive rules for analysing arrangements of determinantia  . 
First , there are 10 subclasses , namely

DETIB




D ET2D containing containing containing containing containing containing containing 
DET3 containing
DET4 containing
DET5 containing all , all -; manch , solch , welch ; irg end , irg end welch ; dies- , jen-;d- , d-jenig ; ein-;kein- , welch- , irg en de in - , irg end wekh- , ebend- , ebend-selb- , ebendies - , d-selb ; jed- , jeglich- , jedwed ; mein- , dein- , sein- , uns(e)r- , eu ( e)r- , ihr-;einig- , et lich- , manch- , mehrer- , einpaar . ? Secondly , there are 5 rules for describing the regularities of deter -minantia arrangements within a biG having a noun as nucleus  . For 7 In future it will be possible to incorporate a more effective algorithm which reverts to an almost complete lexicon of German nouns  . This lexicon has been placed at our disposal by the research group for " Automatische Lemmatisierung " at the University of Saarbriicken  , W-Germany . 
s The subclassification f the determinantia is a modification of the one given in ENGZL  , Regetn zur Worstellung , in < ~ Forschungs be richtedes Instituts fiir deutsche Sprache  , Mannheim ~ , V (1969) , pp . 9-148, esp . 102ff . 
0 The catalogue contains all word forms of the listed stems  ( indicated by "-" )  . 
AUTOMATICAN ALY SISO FTHEGER MANNOUNG ROUP 253 the demonstration of these rules we will use a simplified NG-structure with an abbreviated notation  . 
RI:(DET1A ) ( DET2A ) ( DET4) ( ADJ ) NOM~NG
R2: ( DETIA ) ( DET2B ) ( ADJ ) NOM~NG
R3: ( DET1B ) ( DET2C ) ( ADJ ) NOM~NG
R4: ( DET1C)/(DET2D)/(DET5)(ADJ)NOM~NG
R5: ( DET2C ) ( DET3) ( ADJ)NOM ~ NG . TM
It is important hatthere can be no iteration of a subclass of de-terminantia  . 
The rules mentioned above can be illustrated by the diagram on the next page The pronouns are considered as proforms of a NG with a nominal nucleus  . A part of the pronouns can be grouped in several subclasses according to three significant features : possibility of using a preposition in front of the pronoun  , possibility of putting determinantian front of the pronoun  , possibility of using a genitive or prepositional ttribute in the post-nuclear field  . 
There are 9 subclasses , namely
PRON1 containing man ;
PRON2 containing du , er , es , ich , ih r , sie , wir ; PRON 3 containing de in ( er ) , dick , dir , einander , euch , euer , ihr(er ) , ibm , ihn(en ) , mein(er ) , reich , mir , sein(er ) , sick , sie , uns(er ); PRON4 containing all- , ebend- , ebend-selb , ebendies - , einig- , einpaar , et lich- , et was , irg en de in - , irgendet was , irg end w - , irg end welch- , jederman n- , jemand- , kein- , manck- , mekrer- , niemand- , nichts , w - , welch-;PRON5A containing d- , d-selb- , d-jenig- , dies- , jen-;
PRONSB containing e in -;
PRONSC containing jed- , jedwed- , jeglick-; PRONSD containing de in- , eu ( e)r- , ihr - , mein- , sein- , uns(e)r-;
PRON6 containing selber , selbst.
10 The brackets stand for " facultative " ; the slash stands for " exclusive or " . A full description of the structure of a noun group with a nominal nucleus will be given in section  5  . 
254 GERDLAU-HANS DIETERLUTZt~7~~47.
L qu ~? ?~ t
AUTOMATICAN ALY SISO FTHEGER MANNOUNG ROUP 255 But , there is another group of pronouns without the characteristics mentioned above  , i . e . without prenuclear field , without a preposition in front of them , without post-nuclear field . These pronouns do not differ at the NG-or NK -leve LB ut they differ at the O-level  , when you try to detect if such a pronoun is a substitute for an object  ( depending on the verb ) or a substitute for a socalled " Angabe " ( which does not depend on a verb )  , n Furthermore , pronouns that can be substitutes for an object , can be differentiated according to the kind of these objects  . 
So , there are six more subclasses , namely
PRON 7A containing
PRON7B containing
PRON7C containing
PRON 7D containing
PRON7E containing
PRON8 containing wobei , wo fiir , womit , wo nach , woraus , worum , wovon ; wo , wo hinter , woneben ; wo her , wo her au f , woheraus , wo herein , woher-iiber , wo hin , wohinaus , wohlnein , wohini ~ ber ; woran , wor auf , wor in , woriiber , wor unter ; wo gegen ; in wiefer n , in wieweit , warm , warum , we shalb , weswegen , wie , wieso , wo durch . 
Pronouns of PRON7A are substitutes for prepositional objects ( 04 )   ; pronouns of PRON7B are substitutes for situative objects ( 05 )   ; pronouns of PRON7C are substitutes for directional objects ( 06 )  ; pronouns of PRON 7D are substitutes for O4 or O5 ; pronouns of PRON7E are substitutes for O4 or O8 ; pronouns of PRON8 are substitutes for socalled " Angaben " The final division of pronouns in  15 subclasses makes it possible to setup rules for detecting and describing NGs with a pronominal nucleus  . For the demonstration of these rules we will use a simplified and abbreviated notation  . 
R6: PRON1/PRON2~NCo
R7: PRON6 ~ NG ~ ~ NG ~ , , .
R8: ( PRAEP ) ( PRON3\[PRON4-~NG ~
R9: ( PRAEP )   ( DET 1A ) PRON 5A/ ( DET 1B ) PRON 5B/ ( DET 1C ) PRONSC/ ( DETIA )   ( DET 2A/
DET 2B )   PRON5D ~ NG~n The reason for these pronouns not being included in  PRON1   ( which meets the same conditions at the first glance  ) is that man of PRON1 covers always the position of a nominative object  ( 0 o )  , in contrast to the pronouns of PRONTA to PRON8 . 
256 GERDLAU-HANS DIETERLUTZ
R10: PRON7A-+...04
Rl1:PRON 7B-+...Os
R12: PRON7C-,'-...O0
R13: PRON7D-~...O4/Os
R14: PRON7E-+...04/Oo
R15: PRON8-+...A ~.1 ~
This collection of rules shows the difference between  PRON1   . . . 
PRON6 and PRON 7A . . . PRON8 . A comparison with the rules R1 to R5 illustrates that there are less possibilities to combine determinantia in front of the nucleus of a pronominal NG  . Other differences will be discussed in section 3 . 
3. Two types of NGs.
It is no new observation that there are at least two differentypes of NGs in German  . 
The ftrst type covers all NGs having a noun as nucleus of the NG  , e . g . die Mitbestimmung , the second type covers all NGs with a pronoun as nucleus of the 
NG , e.g.sie , die unsere , woran.
The structure of the NG depends on what kind of nucleus appears  . 
In a big with a plonominal nucleus , there can be no adverbs , no noninflected adjectives , and no adjective-in opposition to a NG with a noun as a nucleus  . 
In a pronominal NG there are less possibilities of arranging deter-minantia than in a nominal NG  ( see rules R1-R15 )  . The reason is quite evident : by suppressing the noun  ( nucleus ) in a nominal NG , the last determinans turns into a pronoun , i . e . it represent she nucleus in a pronominal NG . Compare the following two examples : alle diese Bircher vs  . alle diese
D ET1A   DET2A NOM DET1A   PRON5A ttnucleus nucleus 1~ The "?" indicates that the case of the NG is not predictable in general  . " A " is an abbreviation f " Angabe " . The braces are to denote larger units belonging to each other  . For the explanation fother sign see footnote 10 . 
AUTOMATICAN ALY SISO FTHEGER MANNOUNG ROUP 257 There is another difference be ween a nominal NG and a pronominal one : in nominal NGs one can find other NGs embedded : die Ansprachen halten clen Parlamentarier  , or ( rather complex ) dienach Marxallemenschlichen Handlungen we sent lich und zu aller Zeitzum Naehteilder Mehrheit der Bev Slkerung bestim-menden Kapitatge set ze  . 
In both cases the first die belongs to the last word  , to Parlamentarier and Kapitalges et ze ; die Parlamentarier and die Kapit algesetze form the hierarchically highest NG  . If you transform the determinans of this highest NG into a pronoun such as sie  , there is no possibility of embedding other NGs in this pronominal NG  . This explains the difference between a nominal NG and a pronominal one  , too . 
4. Criteria for the analysis.
The different elements of a German NG tmderlie different kinds of syntagmatic relations  . The number of these relations varies corresponding to the two types of NGs  . 
Four kinds of relations are relevant for the nominal NG : congruity between adjectives and nouns  ( concerning case , number , and gender ) between determinantia and nouns ( concerning case , number , and gender ) between prepositions and nouns ( concerning the case of a noun and the possible government of a preposition  ) between determinantia and adjectives ( concerning case , number , and gender ) ; inflectional relation between determinantia and adjectives  ( concerning the inflexion of a determinans and the inflexion of a following adjective  ; degree of comparison of the adjective of the nominal NG  ( providing the connection with further parts of the syntactical analysis  )  ; compatibility of subclasses of determinantia ccording to the rules  R1 to R5  ; the rule of compatibility of nominal NG has the form :  ( ( det = 1 )  =~  ( ( M ( WK , I , ni ) = DET1Av(M(WK , I , ni-t-1) == DET2A , iDET 2Bv DET 4)) v , i((M(WK , I , n-i ) = DET2A^(M(WK , I , n-i+1) == DET a ))) vv((M(WK , I , ni ) = DET1B^(M(WK , I , ni--1) == DET2C ))) vv((M(WK , I , n-i ) = DET2C^(M(WK , I , n-i+1) = v((det=2)~(M(WK , I , ni ) = DET1A^(M(WK , I , ni-t-1) == DET2A^(M(WK , I , ni+2) = DET4))) .   ~8 Only two kinds of relations are relevant for the pronominal NG : congruity between determinantia and pronouns  ( concerning case , number , and gender ) between prepositions and pronouns ( concerning the case of a pronoun and the possible government of a preposition  )  ; compatibility of subclasses of determinantia according to the rules  R6 to R9  ; the rule of compatibility of a pronominal NG has the form :  ( ( det = 1 )  =~  ( ( M ( WK , I , ni ) = DET1A)^(M(WK , I , ni+1) == DET2AvDET2B ))) . 
Summing up , there are only two kinds of relations of the pronominal NG  , but four kinds of relations of the nominal NG ; the set of the various congruity relations noticeable at the nominal NG differs from the one noticeable at the pronominal NG  ; and the compatibility 13 This notation is a conglomerate of matrix -notation  , logical signs , and of pro-grammer's conventions . It can be read : " If the value of the counter " det " equals  1  , then the value of the place " WK " of the matrix " M " at the level " I " at the position " n-i " must have been "  DET1A " and the value of the place " WK " of the matrix " M " at the level " I " at the position " n - -  +   1 " must have been DET2A or DET2B or DET4  , or the villue of . . . " and so on . 
M is a three-dlmensional matrix which gets built up during the morphological na-lysis of an input sentence  , and which contains all computed information of all the words of this sentence  . " I " stands for " interpretation " and is a variable  , running from 1 to 50 . At the moment , " WK " stands for " word class " with 40 different specifications . 
" n " indicates the position of the noun in a given sentence  , and " i " is a position counter ; so , if n-3 and i = 1 , then n--i-2 , i . e . the position in question is the next to the noun on the left side  . 
AUTOMATICAN ALY SISO FTHEGER MANNOUNG ROUP 259 rule for the nominal NG si much more complex than that for the pronominal NG  . 
5. An algorithm as representation fahy per rule.
The preceding outlines displayed the complexity of contextual restrictions concerning German noun groups  . It sounds extremely clmnsy to talk about hese restrictions in a natural language  . We therefore developed a formal notation for the communication between linguists and programmers of our team  . It consists of a matrix-notation , sentential connectives , functions and flow chart conventions . The compatibility rules were a small cut-out . For more detail see our forthcoming publication . TMIn the following , we will discuss the nominal NG only , because its structure and its difficulties are more interesting than the structure of the pronominal NG  . 
At the present state of our algorithm the following constructions have been excluded : coordination of adjectives  , fusion of prepositions and certain determinantia ( i . e . ambeing an+dem ) , postponed prepositions , prepositions like um . . . willen , and embedded participle constructions . 
The reason for excluding embedded participle constructions is that  , in our opinion , complex constructions like these can be analyzed after the successful interpretation of simple sentences only  . The other restrictions mentioned above are not so important  , i . e . the solution of these problems are , more or less , not so difficult , and , in fact , one of our collegues has made a proposal for the treatment of all kinds of prepositions  . 
At the moment , we will consider the following hyperrule and we will interprete it as a statement about the word order only:  ( 1 )   ( PRAEP )   ( DET )   ( DET )   ( DET )   ( ( ( ADV * ) ADJU * ) 
ADJ)*NOM ~ NG . is 14 Aa ~ IT SCRO PPE MASA , Zurmaschinellen Syntax analyse L Morphosyntaktische Vor-auss et zungenfliteine maschindle Sprachanaty seds Deutschen  , in , ForschungsberichtedsInstitutsfLirdeutsche Sprache  , Mannheim ~) , XVI II ,  1 , XVI II ,  2 ,  1974 . 
1 5 The asterisk indicates the possibility of iterating  . For the explanation of the other signs see footnote  10  . 
260 GERDLAU-HANS DIETERLUTZ
The program that is intended to analyze nominal NGs ftrst looks for a NOM  , proceeding from the left to the right . After having found a NOM , the whole algorithm will be called up in order to search an ADJ to the left of the NOM  . ADV * and ADJU * can appear only in case an ADJ has been found  . Otherwise the algorithm turns to DET , which tests the word order and compatibility of the DETs if there exists a DET  . There are no more than three DETs admitted . PRAEP is the word class which stands at the extreme left in German NGs  ( according to our restrictions )  ; it is the last one to be looked for . 
In many cases the output of this analysis depends on homography  . 
An example may prove this as well as the fact that there remain lots of ambiguities at this level of analysis :  ( 2 ) naheso sehr griind lich vergifte tenW dl dernI PRAEPADV ADV ADJU ADJ NOMI description IVERBt ADV ADV ADJU ADJ NOM t description  2 VERBAD VIAD VADJ UADJ NOMI description 3 VERBAD VAD VIAD JU ADJ NOMI description 4 VERBAD VAD VADJU IADJ NOMI description 5 VERBAD VAD VADJU VERBINOMI description 6   ( 3 ) vorso sehr griind lich vergifte ten Wiildern I PRAEPADV ADV ADJU ADJ NOM t description  1 If PRAEP is a homograph , ADV * and ADJU * may or may not be constituents of the nominal NG  ( see ( 2 ) ) . If PRAEP is no homograph and if ' there is no DET , the whole string must be a NG ( see (3)) . 
As homographs may exist , the algorithm is constructed in the following way : in a first step the longest nominal NG possible is built up  , and in a second step this nominal NG is minimized in all possible interpretations  ( in the case of ( 2 ) there are five interpretations which cover shorter nominal NGs than the first one  )  . 
AUTOMATICANALY SISO FTHEGER MANNOUNG ROUP 2616 . Problems concerning the identification of a " nominal complex "  ( consisting of a NG or of a number of NGs )  . 
A nominal complex NK is a noun group or a string of noun groups which are part of a sentence  . Yet , this gives no information about the role the NK plays in the sentence : a NK can be either an object which depends on the finite verb  , or an " Angabe " . NKs in the nominative case can serve as objects only  , i . e . as subjects of sentences . 
The following schedule displays that any NK with an O-value between  1 and 6 can be either an object or an " Angabe ":
O Object " Angabe " 1 Er wiegtzwei Kilo Erldu fizwei Meter 2 Ergedenkt des Morgens Erldu fides Morgens 3 Ergibtmir Wein Erstelgtmirauf den ' Fu/3 
Ertrdgtmir den Koffer 4 Errechnetmit dem Vor-Er verdient mit dem Vor-tragdes Bruders tragdes Bruders  5 Er wo hn timers ten Stock Erschldftimers ten Stock  6 Ergehtins Kinohine in Erschldfi in den Taghine in Thus we cannot derive any knowledge about a NK's function from its grammatical description only  . But semantical criteria can provide some solutions at this level of analysis :  ( 4 ) Errechnet mitdem Vortragseines Bruders . 
(4 ) contains the verb rechnenmit + 1 with the " Satzbauplan " SBP 134  . But ( 4 ) contains also the verb rechnen with SBPO . As the semantic features of Vortragtellus that Vortrag is no means of calculating  , the SBP~will be excluded as an incorrect derivation  . 
262 GERDLAU-HANS DIETERLUTZ ( 5 ) Errechnetmit der Rechenmaschine . 
(5) contains the same verbs as (4) . As Rechenmaschine is a means of calculating , the NK is also an " Angabe " . Therefore both SBPO and
SBP04 are possible analyses.
But we do not yet follow semantics . We try to analyze with syntactic means as long as possible  . 
If we combine two NGs in order to build a NK , the right NG serves as an attribute : der Vertrag seines Bruders 
I-II-I
NG big
II

An attribute is a big with one of the following O -values : O =  2   . . . . genitive phrase : der Vortrag s e i n e s B r u d e r s  0=4   . . . . prepositional phrase : der Mann mi t dem Kropf O  =   5   . . . . situative phrase : der Baum i m G a r t e n O = 6   . . . . directional phrase : die Fahrt i n d i e S t a d t The rules  RR1 and RR2 define an algorithm which is to build NKs of NG -combinations  . Further on , RR3 and RR5 change a NK into an object , and RR4 an NK into an " Angabe " L ~ . . . leftmost position of a NG ~ or a NKjRi . . . rightmost position of a NG ~ or a NKi Oi . . . value of the " object class " of a NG ~ or NK ; . 


NG(L , , R , , O , ) =
NG(L , , R , , O ,) + on condition that 1) 2) 3)
N ~( L ,, R , , 03
N ~( L~,R ~ ,%) = NK ~( L ,, G0,)
R,+I = Lj ; 0 ~. = either 2 or 4 or 5 or 6;
NG  ~ does not contain a preposition behind the noun  . 
RR3:NKj(L  ~ , R  ~ , Oj ) = 0i(Lj , Rj , Oj ) ( i . e . a derivation of on condition that Oj 4: O . an object . ) AUTOMATICANALY SISO FTHEGER MANNOUNG ROUP 263

RR5:
N ~( ti,Ri,oj):Aj(L  ~ . , ~ . , 0i ) on condition that O~4: ~ . 
N  ~ . ( L ;, R ;, 0): Oj(Lj , R ~, 0) ( i . e . a derivation of an " Angabe " . )( i . e . the derivation of the subject . ) Consider an example of a possible application of  RR1-RR5 in order to combine three NGs and thus make a single NK : die Garage vor dem Haus des Freun des lyes  , s ) + NK(~ ,  7 ,  2)

NK(1,7, O)


Io (1, 7, o)
Exceptional case I : Prepositions in front of , and behind , a NG or

I ( 6 ) umdes Freun des will en ( 7 ) umdes Freundes in Paris will en Evidently ( 7 ) is no string of two NGs . Therefore ,   RR1 and RR2 are not applicable to this type of NK , and we must construct a special algorithm for the analysis of it  . 
Exceptional case H : Preposition behind a NG or a NK  . 
In German there are some prepositions which can appear in front of  , or behind , aNG , for instance nach , wegen . . .   . 
Erzitter twegendes Kampfes or Erzittert des Kampfeswegen  . 
When we consider (8) ,   ( 9 ) and ( 10 ) we see that a postposition in a NG at the same time is a postposition of a NK  . 
264 GERDLAU-HANSDIET ? RLUTZ ( 8 )   ( 9 )   ( lO ) desKampfes we gendes Kampfes in der Sporthalle we gendes Kampfes in der Sporthalle in Bonnwegen We need a special algorithm for the analysis of NKs of the type  ( 8 ) - ( 10 )  . It must provide , for instance , the following analyses of ( 11 ) :  ( 11 ) Erents in nt sich des Beifalls we gendes Ge sanges . 
I-II . I analysis a ) . . NG (4, 5, 2) NG (6, 8, 4)
III . I analysis b ) . . . NC (4 ,  6 , 4) NG (7 ,  8 ,  2 ) It is possible to unite both NGs of a ) into one NK by application of RR1 and RR2 . But in b ) this is impossible ; condition 3 . of RR2 is not met . Therefore both NGs in b ) must be changed into separate NKs by RR1 . 
Another quite complicated example : ( 12 ) analysis a )   . . . 
Erentle digtsich des Freundes des Boxens wegen des Messers 
IIIII .. I
NG (4, 5, 2) NG (6, 7, 2) NG(8, 10, 4)
I . 11 I
NK (6, ~ o , 2) 1I
NK (4 ,  10 ,  2 )   ( 12 ) Erentle digtsich des Freundes des Boxens wegen des Messers 
IIIII.-I
NG (4, 5, 2) NG (6, 8, 4) NG (9, 10, 2)
III-I analysis b ) . . . NK (4 ,  8 , 2) NK (9 ,  10 ,  2 )   RR1-RR5 and the special algorithms for exceptional case I and II are the theoretical basis to find all possible combinations of NGs and to derive objects and " Angaben " from NKs  . 
Next we check the syntax for useful hints so as to achieve a correct analysis of NKs of a given sentence  , and hints so as to decide , which NKs are objects and which are " Angaben " AUTOMATICAN ALY SISO FTHEGF  . RMANNOUNG ROUP 265 In ( 13 ) and ( 14 ) we find NGs of the same structure . But the correct analysis of ( 13 ) differs completely from that of ( 14 )  . 
(13 ) well der Mannmit der Verletzung der Elleim linken Arm schliift 
IIIII . . . . . II.
NK(2,11, O)

O(2 ,  11 , O )   ( 14 ) wellder Mannmit der Fraudes Morgensimal ten Carltanzt 
IIIIII.
NK (2 ,  3 , O ) NK (4 ,  6 , 4) NK (7 ,  8 , 2) NK (9 ,  11 ,  5)
IIII
O(2 , 3  , ~) A(4 , 6 , 4) A(7 ,  8 , 2) A(9 ,  11 , 5) As long as we do not find any hints , the rules must be applied in a systematic order , so as to have all possible analyses as a result . A semantic component then can choose the subset of reasonable analyses out of the whole set  . Thus the analysis of ( 13 ) would have to be an analysis of ( 14 )  , and vice versa . 
It would need too much space to print the set of theoretically possible analyses of  ( 15 ) here . The reader easily sees , in how many different ways RR1-RR5 can be applied . The whole set of possible analyses is greater than  100! We just show a single analysis . We note the rule being applied in the leftmost column  . Now we try to use the " Satz-bauplan " as a means of improving the exhaustive analysis-procedure  . 
In (15) wartete is the single finite verb . It has the SBP f~4 au fq-1 . 
That means , it takes both an object in the nominative case and a pre-positional object  . Having found a certain SBP , our algorithm runs as follows : 1 . Look for a NG ( , , O ) and make it an object . ( According to RR1, RR 5 . ) 2 . Look for a NG ( ,   , 4) which contains the preposition auf , and make it an object . ( According to RR1, RR3 . ) 3 . Apply R R1 , RR2 and RR4 to the NGs which are not objects . 
4 . Try to analyze one of the NGs which are not objects as an attribute of an object  . If this is possible , restart at 3 . ; if not , stop!266 GERDLAU-HAI~SDIETERLUTZ ,  . 2, . 2 $ AUTOMATIC ANALYSIS OP THE GERMAN NOUN GROUP 267 i ~' ~ v 0   0   0   0 
O0 0 0 0 ov 0 o
In the case of (15) , this algorithm produces no more than 8 analyses . 
That means that the unshorten end result of more than  100 analyses can be reduced to 8 by using an improved version of analysis . This shows that the SBP gives us the syntactical information which is necessary to make the correct analysis  . 
On the opposite page we show that all 8 analyses are possible with the SBP 0   4 auf + 1 and the structure of NGs as in ( 15 )  . 
Sometimes one can find more than one finite verb in a sentence :  ( 16 ) Er lie be bestimm tena he verb1 verb ~ verb3 adj ~ adj ~ adj3   prep1 adju  ~

In these cases one has to find out which of the verbs is the actual finite verb  . In German the finite verb can appear at the first position in the sentence  , at the second position , and at the end . It is easy to fill up the following matrix according to the verbs in  ( 16 ) : verb lie be bestimm tenahe 1 " t position w 2nq posizion ++ + endNeither verb1  , verbs or verbs is standing at the first position or at the end of the sentence  . From that we can conclude that each of them must beat the second position of the sentence  . We still know another criterion to find the right verb : The string in front of it  , at position 1 , must be an NK . In (16) only verb 1 meets this condition . Therefore liebe is the finite verb . 
Only if one knows a lot of syntactical heuristics like these  , one is able to decide at which level of sentence -analysi semantic should be employed  . We think there will be need for an interaction between a syntactical and semantical component  . 
