PETERKOMMEI,
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX
BASEDONL ANGUAGEUNIVERSALS

Hundreds of differentiated syntactic rules as well as all kinds of phrase structures and conventions are dispersed over more than fifty still existing natural anguage systems  . On the contrary meanings , represented by nouns , verbs and adjectives are internationally identical  . 
Only the way they are carried and expressed by various national languages differs  . Thus a fundamental division into two parts represents the main feature of the ALCO~ITH MOF  IMITEDSYN lrAX  ( A ~ S )  . This A~S-Division of naturalanguage systems provides two groups of words : a  ) words representing nouns , verbs and adjectives as so called ~ content words  ) ) or more easily nominated as RADICALS and b ) words expressing syntactic features and functions  , the SYN-
TAX-PARTICLES.
While the human treasure of knowledge in form of meanings expressed by content-words is innoway curtailed by ALS-Rules  , the vast . jungle of still existing syntactical features and syntagms will be drastically cooked down to the essentials  . Thus the A~s-Rules comprehend severalaws to limit syntagms  , which are made clear by algorithms or verbal definitions  . Still the limitations enforced by A~S-Rules are based on language universals and thuskeep all information-expressions and-performances in the scope of a natural language system  . 
1 . 0 . Aims and the unconventional character of approach . 
Significance and necessity to solve the problems concerning Automatic Translation between different national anguages as well as fact retrieval  , justifies all possible approaches . Worldwi depessimism ( M . 
15226 PnT ~ RKOM MI~L
L . MmsxY , 1968, p . 24 f ) relating to this enterprise tentot wenty years ago  ( N . CHOMSXY , 1965, p . 163) has been innoway without foundation (3( . BAR-HILL ~ L , 1940, p . 271 and G . SALTON , 1968, p . 156 f ) . A Forma-lization of natural anguage systems seems for the ftrst step unavoidable  , if the three fundamental goals : 1 . AUTOMATICTRANSLATION 2 . AUTOMATICF ACTI~ETRIEVAL and 3 . ARCHIVAL HARDSTORAGE , a once and for good storage of human information in form of facts  , are aimed at . 
In the thirties L . BLOOMPmLD published a very significant idea (1935 , p .  208 ) of dividing natural anguage systems among others into those of a  ) agglutinated morphologies and b ) those of isolated morphologies . 
While English , French , German and R . milan belong to systems of agglutinated morphologies - the morphological structures are glued together-Chinese  , ideographic- , pictographic - and gesture language systems bear an isolated one  . When dealing especially with phenomena of isolated morphologies  , two points become very clear : 1 . The multitude of syntagms i . e . syntactic features and patterns coming with agglutinated systems are considerably reduced to the very important ones  . 
2 . The mostly visually to perceiv expression units- permanent as well as a cute-  ( grams and gestures )  , are highly content related , thus helping to look behind the scenery of language x pressions into the material of content -phenomena and semantic relations  . 
Up to fifty or more existing different language systems can be considered as morphologically and syntactically differentiated expression - and carrier-systems for only one and the very same information treasure  , the treasure of human knowledge . So it is necessary to unify expression - and syntax-habits  . In order to unify and subsequently limit especially the number of existing syntagms  , it pays off to be very careful when making artificial curtailments  . The best way still is to lean on natural prototypes  , which lead back to the Bloom-fieldian division ( L . BLOOMn ~ . LD , 1935, p .  208):
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX aggl .   . ~--! vg ? ~ I ~' ~ . 
Segment : A ~" ~ ~ ~ ~
Segment : B
Fig .  1 . Scale of Language Carrier-Systems : Agglutinative to Isolated Consequently it becomes convenient to disregard segment A of Fig  .   1 entirely and look more into details of segment B . Syntagms , limited down by their nature in language x pression systems of segment B are easier to pinpoint  . The vast jungle of syntagms in segment Ahinders the extraction of those syntagms which are of most significance concerning language universals  . They are too much covered and hidden by conventional balast of low-value syntagms  ( Fig .  2) . 
Segment A . . . . . . . . . . . . . Din.
.... J
Segment B
Dotted line : -: syntactical universals
Fig . 2.
The number of possible syntactic algorithms to construct sentences in all existing natural anguages if inite  , but still at the present state " uncontrollable " and thus not computable  ( G . SALTON , 1968, p .  191) . 
O beying this fact of nature , efforts led to the conclusion , otto operate on sentences of natural language as they exist now  , but to form a rule and a recipe to conceive sentences  , which are : 228 PETERK fiMMEL 1 . natural in character and 2 . easy to formalize and compute . 
Even if limited in syntactic patterns , natural anguage systems are easy to employ because of being available and programmed already in the brains of human beings  . Interpreting the criteria for natural language systems  ( J . H . GRE~N~ERG , 1968, p . 110 if ) , it is trivial to rea-lize that certain systems , up to now mostly out of regard , deliver contributions of syntactical features highly valuable for the whole enterprise  . Those syntactical features of limited but natural expression systems are mainly extracted from language systems of isolated morphology as shown in Fig  . 3, etom . But the entire operation to limit syntagms and form algorithms must be stopped by one certain point  , which prevents it from crossing the boundaries from natural to artificial language systems  ( Fig .  3) . This boundary has been easily p in pointed by following the rules of a work published one year ago  . In this publication a distinct separation between atural and artificial anguage systems has been made per definition em  ( P . KOMM ~ L , p .  86):
Definition : NATURALL ANGUAGE
A language is natural in its character , if a ) the number of using individuals is larger or equals one million heads and b  ) the period of use is larger or equals one life span of a using individual ga  C7"  ~
Natural Languages ~' o ~~? ~ . ~' ~'" ~ O ~ . ~"~ t'rlmb~t~m ? .  ~  .   .  ~
Artificial Languages
Fig . 3.
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 229
The remainder of language systems can be considered artificial  . 
Artificial also insofar as a few native language systems  , presently only used by some thousand individuals , have a too limited number of users and thus lack the natural momentum  . Within the scope of natural languages ( Fig .  3 , etom ) a rather wide gap exists between d and e . The closer a language system is located to the boundary between atural and artificial system  ( Fig .  3 , m/n ) , the easier it becomes to formalize it , as the balast of conventional syntactic rules fades away  . So it paid off quite heavily to analyze language carrier systems especially from etom  ( Fig .  3) . It is a pity that so few linguists have involved themselves with language systems of isolated morphologies a show nine to m in Fig  . 
3 . This fact explains why the author of this publication has to refer to eight of his own publications in the reference literature  . 
The language systems in Fig .  3 , etom are natural in character and still after the Bloomfieldian definition of isolated morphology  . 
Thus they are easier to formalize . They represent : e ) Children Expression Systems f ) Adult Foreigner Expression Systems , as found among tourists or guest-labourers with a very limited vocabulary treasure and almost no knowledge of syntactical patterns  . Hab its practiced by adults who are forced to maintain dialogs in foreign languages without preparatory study  . Language of people whostay only a limited time in foreign countries  . 
g ) Aviation Control Communication Language as used between the pilot and to wer personal  . 
h ) Chinese for the audible perception.
i ) Chinese in written form for the visual perception . 
j ) Ideography and ideographic expression system such as Hiero-glyphs  , etc . 
k ) Gesture Expression Systems as for example deaf -mute  , indian and no madic gestures for the acute visual perception  . 
1 ) Pictographic Expression Systems as found in traffic signs  , etc . 
In ) Japanese KANGO Expression Systems , a form of ideogram sequences referring back to Chinese  . 
A conglomerate of universals in syntactical features to be found especially in the preceding language system set om but also among those of a to d  ( Fig . 3) is filtered and concentrated , to retain syntactic phenomena , characterized by the highest frequency of occurrence  ( Mc . D . NEIr ~ L , 1971, p .  40) . Thus an ALGORIT rIMOFLIMITEDSYNTAX ( ALS ) in the form of several fundamental syntagms i gained  , which pre-230 PETER KI3MMEL serves a full scale consolidation of the natural momentum and enables the user to feel familiar at once  . 
The Preceding details led to a somewhat unconventional pproach characterized by the following three features :  1  . In order to apply a few and most essential syntactical algorithms for natural anguages  , the content metric of one meaning is enlarged . S~ANNON/W~AWa'S information measurement ( entropy/bit ) has been extended by evaluating eight content criteria or socalled sub-criteria of one information unit  , one meaning or one RADICAL(P . KOMMEL , 1972a , p . 64 if ): 1 . Identity , 2 . Truth , 3 . RADICAL-Value , 4 . Age , 5 . Common Frequency , 6 . Relative Frequency , 7 . 
Priority and 8. the Interlogging Value.
2 . A conglomerate of syntactic universals found especially in content-related natural language systems is cooked down to the es-sentials in form of a few syntacticallg or ithms with highest frequency of occurrence  . This conglomerate in cooperation with the newly conceived content evaluation  ( 1 ) is called : ALGOra TaMOrLIMITED SYNTA x3 . The amalgamation of the preceding features ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) in form of the very . ~LS serves for a case study . This case study involves an execution of Archival Hard Storage  , Automatic Fact Retrieval and Automatic Translation of Natural Languages  . It covers a small molecular scope of human knowledge centered around the meaning " S and Glass " and the " father-son-relation "  . Those artificial question answering systems on structural and functional phenomena of the domain "S and - Glass " as well as the " father-son- relation " can be considered a recipe for automated handling of the remaining human knowledge treasure on earth  . Concessions to be made appear in the form of stereotype syntactical patterns  , which affect theesthetic momentum but not the transmission flux of information  . A natural text to be computed is conceived after application of the easy to learn and easy to limit ALS-kules  , which makes it natural in character . Present day used texts of Natural Languages must be rewritten  . 
2 . 0 . ARADICAL , the newly conceived content unit and its sub -criteria in the ALS-system  . 
In 1928 Hartley originated the idea of demonstrating the canal capacity of a system mathematically  . He put the logarithm of the sum
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 231 concerning all possible situations equal to the information capacity  ( R . v . L . HARTLEV , 1928, p . 535 f ) . Later this was reversed by Shannon and Weaver . In respecto the probability of choice We aver stated : " The actual expression for information is "  ( W . W ~ AVER , 1964, p .  14) :
H=-loep,
Expressed by the logarithm dualis in bits Shannon declared the probability of occurrence to be high  , if the information value is small . In case the probability of occurrence reaches 1 the information equals O . 
t(a ,) =- ld = 0 bit
Consequently if p = 0 , it will cause the information to be come inde -finite  ( C . E . SHANNON , 1964, p .  63):
I(a ~) = - ldO = oobit
This calculation , which is analogous to the entropy evaluation of the rmo statisfical data was used  ( 1963 ) by Beer to express the dimensions of information values by bits  . He associate several different inscriptions on train windows with the corresponding information value  ( S . BEER , 1963, p . 65): Do not lean out of the window 137 . 75 bits
Eperieolosos porgers i 104.50"
L is far ligt art lut a sigut 128.25"
Nepassepencheraus de hors1 28.25"
Nichthinauslehnen 85.50"
Since that time , developments have shown that a strict limitation to only this kind of content evaluation might lead into a blindalley  . 
Bit evaluations are sufficient under certain circumstances to measure carrier systems and signs as their units  , but they fall absolutely short in the determination of contents in the form of information  . A newly born scientific factor an invention represents one meaning and can be named with one sentence  , one word or even one sign . This meaning stands for an information unit and is criticized by more than the value " improbability of occurrence "  , which might come close only to No 6 of the eight content criteria . 
232 PETER KUMMEL
An information unit , represented by an abbreviated noun , verb , or adjective in lemma - or better said stem- form  , is called RADICAL . 
ARADICAL is the main and only component in ALS- sentences besides the particles  . The PARTICLES carry exclusively syntactical functions  . ARADICAL can be subdivided into eight further sub-criteria  , which also are to be enumerated . 
Quite wellknown among Orientalists and about 1 billion a siatic people are the socalled RADICALS  , after which composed Chinese Characters can be classified  ( P . Kt ~ MM ~ L , 1966, p . 110 f ) . The system of RADICALS delivers for the information theory as well as Semantics of natural anguages a highly valued contribution to form sub-criteria of one meaning  . In other words they represent the interlacing- , entan-gling-or involving-value of one meaning to others  . With the aid of RADICALS several sub-criteria of one meaning can be formalized and enumerated to a  100% degree of precision . Below , five examples of Chinese RADICALS are given in connection with several composi-tive characters  , in which the RADICAL represents one component :
RADICALS : Composed Characters : l'~ , HIssel-----~ . to re . t , wage , ~ to b . y , ~ I ~' e ' " ber/l'ers ? " There are already existing expression systems in Natural Languages  , ? saddle , ~' f~w hfp
Go-Stone ( a game) . ~, ~ to continue , ?'~%" to seg ~: ~ receive , i . 
which come close to Ars-habits . Besides the Chinese expression system for example the Japanese KANGO-System is known  . ~ means literally " Chinese words " . In a Japanese text theoretically all particles have to be eliminated  , in order to generate a KANGO-Text . For example : The sentence : The car runs fast can be written : t  2   3 
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 233
If 1 the nominative particle ,   2 the adjective particle and 3 the verl ~- suffix are oMtted , it results in ~ , ~ ' -  ,   , ?~ , out of which still tile same meaning is understood  . Examples for used KANGO-Expres-sions in Japanese are:  , , , ,~ . \]~ d!~c . l to park , , or : ")~")__~ , x ~" ~ an electrical express train . Both KANGO-Expressions were conceived after the fifties  . 
Finally , the use of RADICALS with a limited number of PAR -TICLES comes not only close to CHINESE and Japanese KANGO-Texts  , but also offers the opportunity to subdivide one RADICAL-into several content-criteria  . 
The eight sub-criteria of a RADICAL : 1 . IDENTITY A new information unit can be interpreted and integrated here and there  . It can be filed here and there . The identity is implemented by the RADICAL -Number  ( Deuterziffer )   ( P . KOMM ~ r ,, 1972b , p . 483 f ) . 
The first meaning in the human treasure of knowledge receives the number  1  . The RADICAL-Number is implemented at a graph's vertex  ( Fig .  4 ) in the way of decimal fractures used for decimal classifications  . The RADICAL represents a vertex to the origill -~ iii  .   . ~  . ~ Jilli , i
IIm
Fig . 4.
in a graph which also can be shown as a loop with connection strings like a cable-tree  . 
/234 P~T ~ RKUM MEL 2. TRUTH
If a new information represents a perpetuum-mobile or a product of fantasy  , it has to be marked false . The truth is implemented into the treasure of knowledge graph by even numbers making use of the IDENTITY-Numbers under  1  . If the truth is not existing and an implementation has to be done  , odd RADICAL-Numbers are provided . 
3. RADICA1,-VALUE
It is more or less related to existing information  , which makes it attached as a green bud to thicker orth inner branches of the information graph  ( Fig .  5) . The RADICAL-VALUE is also to compare with the
Fig . 5.
distribution ability of a vertex ( P . K/J MMI% ,  1969 , p , 64 if ) and thus is identical to the number of strings in the vertex loop  ( Fig .  6) . The RADICAL-VALUE is written in brackets at the RADICAL-Loop or the vertex  . For more detail see P . KOMra ~ L(1972b , p . 481f ) and
P . KOMMEL (1972a , p . 36f).
5) j , , , , 0)
Fig . 6.
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 23 54 . AGEIf an information unit or RADICAL turns out to be not new  , the exactage has to be determined . The implementation fage is done by chronological numbers  , starting with 1 for the oldest and furnishing the highest in use for the latest RADICAL  . Secondly the age of a RADICAL may be determined in relation to a known time-calendar  . 
So it receives a birth date.
5. COMMONFREQUENCY
If a RADICAL is already known , it can be classified by its common frequency since its birth  . The COMMONFREQUENCY is implemented by numbers indicating the occurrences of counts  ( P . Ki)M ~ L , 1968b , p . 242 if ) . 
6. RELATIVE FREQUENCY
In comparison to others , one information occurs for practical use oftener or not  . The information unit with the highest relative occurrence is designated with the number one  ( 1 )  . Another of half of that rate by 1/2 and so on ( P . KOMMEL , 1968b , p . 242 if ) . The Relative frequency substitutes more or less Shannon/Weaver's Bit-Metric  . 
7. PRIORITY
A larger or smaller importance compared to other meanings is indicated by a number which states the surface tension of a RADICAL-Graph in those places  , where the surface is grown unregular ( Fig .  7) . 
The vertex A is located close to a surface area where high tension exists  ( see arrows ! )  . It owns a higher PRIORITY-Value than the knots B and C  . The PRIORITY-Value is measured in percent . If the tension on the RADICAL-Cluster 236 P ~ T ~ R  ~ OMMEL
Fig . 7.
( see arrows !) is strong enough , the PRIORITY-Value can reach up to 100% ( P . K/~MS fEL , 1972b , p .  483) . 
8. INTERLOGGING-VALUE
An individual associates with a certain meaning ( RADICAL ) another meaning , which lies far away from the Cluster-Branches of the first concern  ( Fig .  8) . Thus this association cannot run along neighbouring branches  , but jumps to a RADICAL-Loop far away via the dotted lines H :-  .   .   .   .   .   . 
q ., j s #
Fig . 8.
( Fig .  8) . The extent of the INTERLOGGING-Value is given by the distance of the dotted line  , to be measured by the differences of the Iden -tity-Value in the l~adical-Cluster  . Secondly the INTERLOGGING-Value depends on the number of interlogging - and distance-jumps via dotted lines  , in other words by the number of dotted lines . 
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 237
Definition : RADICAL
ARADICAL represents a meaning , which can be subdivided into socalled sub -criteria or RADICAL-Criteria  . The RADICAL represents the counterpart to the PARTICLE in ALs-Texts  . It carries the meanings of nouns , verbs and adjectives . For automatic translation purposes a RADICAL is translated exclusively into different national languages  . 
3 . 0 . The PARTICLES , a limited number of syntagms permitted in the

The human knowledge is to be considered as a huge cluster of now-adays not less than several million RADICALS  . But a language , funct-ioning as a carrier system for information and thus single RADICALS  , is always composed of syntagms too . These syntagms finally combine sequences of RADICALS to sentences of Natural Language Systems  . 
They can be reduced to a minimum of units , but may not be neglected entirely . A very carefully done and delicate process of limiting down the syntagms resulted in a concentrated stock pile of abbreviated PARTICLES integrated into the ALS-I~ules  . The PARTICLES are abstract in their character and each embodies a motion in the branches of the RADICAL-Cluster  . Consequently the use of a PARTICLE releases an electrical process within an associative hardware storage  . 
The PARTICLES in isolated form do not supply much information  . 
They become useful only when appearing in connection with RADI-CALS  . As some examples of elementary PARTICLES can be considered :  1  . /( quest . )/ for question and 2 . /( pret . )/ for preteritum or past tense . 
Definition : PARTICLE
In ALs-Texts the PARTICLE represents the counterpart to the RADICAL  . A PARTICLE serves as a fundamental syntagm exclusively syntactical functions  . The PARTICLE is considered a concentrate of internationally universal syntactic rules  . For automatic translation purposes the PARTICLE is not translated  , thus appearing in internationally understood abbreviated forms of Latin or Greek  . 
238 p ~ . T~ . a ~ OMM ~ . L4 . 0 . Fundamental rules of the algorithm of limited syntax divided into single paragraphs  . 
In order to use ALS , conventional sentences must be transformed to heteronoms with the maximum size of a fivefold -heteronom  . Different from other approaches to the same project  , where at least 172 syntactic features must be taken into consideration  ( T . WINOGAD , 1972, p . 173f ) , At Slimits the formalism by permitting only stereotype patterns  . These patterns include contextual rules within the nominal-sequences of up to five nouns  . Only a restricted number of PARTI-CLES within the five fold-heteronom is permissible  . ALs-Formalisms are based on the " Grund regelnder Formal grammatik "  ( P . KOMM ~ L , 1972b , p .  485 ) as well as on details described in the " Deuter folgen-Grammatik "  ( P . KOMl VmL , 1972a , p . 76 ff and 83f ) . The main rules of ALS are classified in paragraphs :  1 All expressions of Natural Language must be divided into RADI-CALS embodying meanings and PARTICLES representing syntactical function  . 
2 Each RADICAL has to appear in sentences with an abbreviated morphology  , in stem-pattern or lemma-form . 
3 All expressions must be cast into sequences of RADICALS similar to heteronoms  . Example : glove = mononom , H and s chuh = binom in form of a heteronom . 
4 Each of these heteronoms may not exceed the size of a fivefold nomen  . 
In other words , a sentence may not include more than five RADI -CALS  . Example of a maximum :/ train/terminal/station -master/office/telephone /  . 
5 Each of these heteronoms according to ~ 4 is to carry one meaning in form of an information unit  . 
6 The meaning of a sentence in the form of a heteronom is always to be taken out of the last RADICAL  , while the preceding ones only serve for more detailed specifications  . Example :/ information/bank/means bank or accumulation place  . But/bank/information/means news from or about banks  . 
7 Each meaning according to ~ 5 has to be analyzed by the eight content criteria ( P . KOMMEL , 1972a , p . 69 f ) and ( P . KOMM ~ L , 1973b , p . 482 if ) . 
Additionally they must be translatable into all existing natural languages  . 
8 Each meaning or RADICAL according to \] 7 must be furnished with a national language identification number for example  110 belonging
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 2395 135 , 4  5 is ~8 to the most relevant national language systems on earth  ( see 5 . 3 below !) . 
Thus for translation purposes the adequate expression sequences belonging to each identification umber can be provided  . 
The heteronoms according to ~ 4 exist of conventional nouns , as well as substantivated verbs and substantivated ajectives as nouns  . Example: . . . gives the money=/money transfer/orsunnyday = /sunday / etc  . 
All RADICALS according to 1 and 3 should be possibly limited to their lemma patterns respectively shortest understandable form  . Example : Automobile = autoor television set = TV-set  . 
Each RADICAL in lemma-pattern should not surpass the length of a certain sequence number of letters  , which is stated here with 20 letters . 
Each RADICAL within a heteronomic sentence must be written with inverticalines  . Example :/ father / . 
Longer sentences of conventional text can be reduced to several hete-ronoms by rewriting  . As an example see the text of News week below : According to the chain stitch-method  ( P . KOMM ~ r , 1972a , p . 77 and 85) as well as recursive functions ( P . KOMMEL , 1972b , p .  485 ,  ~ 4 ) one RA-DICAL of the preceding heteronomis chained into the following one  . 
Example : The father living in London gives the son studying in Paris money  . 
1 . A threefold heteronom :/ father/London/living /, 2 . A threefold hete-ronom :/ father/son /money transfer / and  3  . Another threefold hetero-nom:/son/Paris/study / . 
Heteronoms of concrete value end with a concrete noun or RADI-CAL  . Example :/ motor-car/door / . Heteronoms with an abstract value end with an abstract noun  . Example :/ motor-car/delivery / . 
Necessary PARTICLES expressing for example time , questions , etc . , must not be placed behind the last RADICAL of the heteronom  . Example : The father gave the money :=/ father / ( pret . )/ money transfer / .  2 . 
Does the train leave at 12  :  30 h ? --/ train/12  :  20 h / ( quest . )/depart/ . 
PARTICLES have to be written in brackets . Example see ~ 16! Serving the purpose of automatic translation all PARTICLES must be expressed in Latin  , Greek or an internationally known abbreviated letter sequence  , because PARTICLES will not be translatable in the ^Ls-System  . 
The pronoun , which normally represents a noun , always has to be replaced by the originally substituted noun  . Example : Little Joe does not say : " I want to eat "  , but : / Joe/want / eat / . Or , the pilot does not say:ledg"/CI ////" yes " or " I ack no we  , but : essnaniner three victor affirmative . 
For each RADICAL to be used with ALs-Systems a fully content-related expression unit in form of apic to gram has to be furnished  . 
240 PBT ~ RKUM MEL
This must be available in an adjacent archive . Thus ambiguity by carrier functions of different languages as well as homo-and syno-nymities can be eliminated  . Even for the conception of content related abstracts pictograms are possible  , see ( P . KiJMlVI ~ L , 1972a , p . 53 if ) . 
The meanings stay constant in time ( P . KOM/CmL , 1967b , p . 42 if ) and ( P . 
Ki ~ lvil ~ L , 1968a , p . 52 f ) . Pictograms of abstracts must be conceived with the fourth dimension " time " in them  , realized by a narrow or a dotted line for deplacements and movements  . For example in China and Japan the character carrying the meaning " to gather " or " assemble " is still presently in use  . The sign-etymology reveals the following development of morphological structures :  1  .  "~- ,2 .  ,3 .  ,4 . 
21 1 . A bird flies into the direction of the arrow on top of a tree  . Numbers 2 ,   3 and 4 represent abbreviations within several thousand years of use  . 
4 . expresses the present da ~ used form in China and Japan  . 
For each RADICAL the equivalent lemma or stem-word of at least ten National Language Systems has to be provided and implemented  . 
Context sensitivity is limited down to a sequence law : Subject-Object-Predicate  . Example :/ fatherls on/money transfer / . 
RADICALS written invertical strokes and PARTICLES written in brakes and vertical strokes are expressed by letter sequences without capital etters  . 
Example of rewriting conventional text into ALS -TEXT : Text to be rewritten : News week  , February 5 ,  1973 , page 1 , top of the week , second column above : MACAOBOOMING OUTPOST , Page 23 . : Portugal spint-size colony of Macao is a geopolitical anachronism per-ched precariously on the flank of China  . Newsweek correspondent Tony Clifton report show Macao  , once known as the world's wickedest city , is flourishing against all odds-and changing in the process  . The preceding text is reduced to sequences of heteronoms or sentences according to ALS-Rules : Caution : This states an example of ALs-R  . ules and is not implemented for case study purposes !  1  . /macao/out post/boom abstract , all ALs-Sentences or heteronoms 2 . \[macao/23/page exist of abstracts ; with the exception 3 . ~ portugal/macao/pint-size / colony/of No .  7 4 . ~ macao/geopolitical/anachronism / 5 . /maca olch in a/flank luns a felsitting I
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 24 16 . /newsweekl correspondent ltonyclifton lmacao/report /   7  . /macao/(pret . )/?1rst/wicked/world/city / 8 . /macao/(against/s ~ / odd/flouri ~ h / 9 . /macao / process ~ change / . 
5 . 0 . A case study within a molecular scope of human knowledge  5  . 1 . Archival Hard Storage by the ALS-System . 
The whole human knowledge is to compare with an immense Cluster of RADICALS  . Each RADICAL represents one meaning . All of them are connected to each other following the graphic rules of a directed graph  . The number of meanings if inite . Each day new meanings are added , because inventions and scientific detections are made  . 
Thus the cluster grows daily . In order to obtain a 100% precise record of the Cluster , each RADICAL should be evalt ~ ated after its eight content - or subcriteria  . These data of the criteria have to be implemented into a storage system  . For reasons of rationality primarily facts should be stored and expressions with untrue contents omitted  . 
One molecular scope of the human treasure of knowledge is shown in Fig  .  9 . This RADICAL-CLUSTER in form of a directed graph explains the single connections between the RADICALS  . If a Cluster in form of a cable-tree is given ( P . KOMmEL , 1972a , p .  65) , compare also the loops in figures 4 , 5 and 6 above , at each RADICAL the DISTRIBUTION - or RADICAL -VALUE is indicated by counting the number of cables in the loop  . 

S . G . Struct . , , S . G . Glass , S , G . llousil ~ g , S . G . Frame , S . G . Sam\[
Dir . Time . . . . . . .
Mcasurh\]g__~~J,~,G.mcchl 4
Device - . , n love mmC "~ S . /puttiqg topdown pos . 

G . time M eas.

Omam cnt , F.~='-
Fig . 9.
In Fig . 9 five concret and eight abstract are listed . The way they are implemented can be considered ripefore ternal implementation  . 
16242 PraTER gfdM~r
But for each RADICAL the enumerated sub-criteria must be given  ( compare 4 . 0!) . 
5.2. ALS-fact retrieval in natural anguage.
The procedure of Fact Retrieval is in this case not simulated with the help of a model but executed in realistic practice  . The naturally grown graph in Fig .   9 as a " directed graph " allows questions and precise answers  , The precision comes close to that demanded by patent office examiners  . The operation of Fact Retrieval in the RADICAL -CLUSTER is compared to the function of a beetle  , crawling up and down the branches of a bush , a cluster or a tree . 
Possible questions and answers :
Thirteen meanings are cutoff from the knowledge treasure and put into the system including their relations  . The user might . ask about one meaning : He delivers his question in natural ATS-Text  . For instance :/ existence /( quest . )/s and - glass/function / . "/ exi-stence /\] ( quest . )/" alone represents he ALs - equivalent for " what is a  . . . ?", or , " what about a . . . ? " . This constituent of a query "/ existence/\] ( quest ) /" triggers immediately aftrstorder retrieve circuit  ( Fig .  10) , which is programmed to print all content criteria of one RADICAL in ALs-Text  . The other constituent of "/ s and - glass/function / " guides the ftrstorder retrieve circuit to its corresponding loop or RADICAL in the information graph  . The content criteria of the heteronom/s and -glass/function/are taken from the storage and are printed  , d  ~ , ~'~' ~" ~ ap?s-: .  ~
Query RADICAL Query RADICAL
Fig . 10. Fig . 11. Fig . 12.
( first ord . R . C . ) ( second ord . R . C . ) ( third ord . R . C . )
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 243.

ask , what does a meaning belong to ? For instance in ALs-Text:/depend /  ( quest . )/s and - glass/function / . This triggers a " second order retrieve circuit "   ( Fig .  11) . For the purpose of an answer all content criteria of the next upward loop or RADICAL  ( in this case "/ s and - glass / " are printed in ALS - Text  , ask , what does a concrete meaning consist of , respectively what subfunctions an abstract meaning can be divided in ? This reads for instance in ALs-Text:/consist /  ( quest ) /s and - glass/structure / . By "/ consist / ( quest ) /" or "/ divisible / ( quest /" a third order retrieve circuit ( Fig . 12) is triggered . All content criteria of the neighbouring ramificated RADICALS from the " Query-RADICAL " are printed in succession according to the decimal fracture of the 

For the procedt tresso farthree questions different in function were possible : clear text : ALs-Text : implemented procedure :  1  . what is a . . . ?/ existence\[ ( quest ) \[1 storder retrieve circuit 2 . to what belongs a . . . ?/ dependent / ( quest ) /2nd order retrieve circuit 3a . of what consists a ?/ consist / ( quest ) /3rd order retrieve circuit 3b . into what funaions divisible is a . . . ?/ divisible / ( quest )  /  3rd order retrieve circuit If the preceding microscopic scope of human knowledge is extended  , or further scopes including human relations are added  , surely other questions must be available or made available as for instance : who ?  , by who ? , etc . Also the RADICALS of many concret a must be subdivided and ramificated into concret as well as abstract a  . 
5.3. ALS-Automatic translation in natural anguage.
In order to make use of the INTERLOGGING-VALUE of one RADICAL  , the following jump has been made from the RADICAL /s and - glass /: A person associates with S and -Glass a nuncle in London  , who , informer times , helped to construct a working model of a S and -Glass  . This uncle has a son studying in Paris who spends lots of money from his father  . The interlogging string ends at the RADICAL :/ father /  ( Fig .  13) . 
244 WT ~ . RK ~ JMMEL/f ~ thed Ir : < hc?/sonl / fatherls onlmone y transfer \]/? =  a~e~/1o  , ,do , ~// raa , cr/lonao , qliving/w/son//son/paris//son/paris /study\] 
Lv : O . . . . IL
Fig . 13.
A second interlogging jump is made , when the sentence : The father who lives in London  , gives hisson studying in Paris money . Three 6Ls-Sentences are conceived : 1 . If atherls onlmone y transfer/2 . /father/London/living/3 . /son/Paris/study/The procedure of Automatic Translation demands that each RADICAL to be translated must be implemented into the RADICAL -CLUSTER as in Fig  .  13 . All sub-criteria of a RADICAL have to be implemented by numbers too  . Corresponding to the Fact Retrieval above in 5 . 2 . , each meaning or information unit implemented as a RADICAL into the system is additionally related to a set of numbers  . These related identification numbers each point to a repert oire of nouns belonging to national languages  . If , for instance , the system is furnished with ten different national anguages  , every single RADICAL handled must be numbered with a national identification number  ( P . Kf3 MM~L , 1972b , p .  486) . From 1 to 10 for example the following nation a language systems might be put in sequence corresponding to their frequency of occurrence and importance by the user's per capitarate :  1  . English 2 . Chinese 3, Indian 4 . Russian 5 . Spanish 6 . French 7 . Portuguese 8 . Japanese 9 . German 10 . Dutch and Each meaning represented in the system by a RADICAL or loop with its eight content criteria  , is international in character . Only the RADICALS can carry expressions of several national languages  , not the PARTICLES . To obey this rule , words for question input can be
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 245 often different national origins . The system is programmed to mark each word with an additional national number  , corresponding to the very nationality . Thus , ten different words link to one implemented meaning of one RADICAL and are connected to it  . 
The demand to translate into one of the ten above listed languages triggers a corresponding number between  1 and 10  . Consequently ALs-Texts can be printed for answers in  10 different national languages . 
Because of internationally known syntactic patterns exclusively ap-plicated in the ALs -Sequence of heteronoms  , the nationality of each RADICAL in use does not affect the syntactical momentum involved  . 
This leads to a simplification of the whole act of AUTOMATICTRANSLATION  . The entire procedure is solved by exclusively translating the RADICAL-Ex pressions for the whole information in form of heteronoms  . If needed , the number of different nationalan-guages implemented into the system can be extended voluntarily above ten  . 
Automatic Translation of different national anguages according to the ALs-System is only possible if all information units  ( meanings or RADICALS ) concerned are implemented in the very patterns of the Automatic Fact Retrieval under ~  2 and after the ALS-R~ules . All texts to be handled must follow stereotype syntactical features obeying strict eliminations of syntagms with low frequencies of occurrence as described in the ALGORITHMOFLIMITEDSYNTAX  ( ALS )  . 

Y . B ~ tH~t t ~ t , Communication ad Argumentation in Natural Language  , Milano 1970 . 
S . BE ~, Kybernetik und Management,
Hamburg 1963.
L . BLOOM , Language Development , Cambridge ( Mass . ) 1970 . 
L . BLOOMH ~ LD , Language , London 1935, 566p.
IL . B Row N , with coauthors , Psycholinguistics , Three processes in the Child's
Acquisition of Syntax , New York 1970.
N . CHOMSKY , Aspects of the Theory of
Syntax , Cambridge ( Mass .) 1965.
J.H.GI~E~N~RG , Universals of Language,
Cambridge ( Mass .) 1968, pp . 73-113.
IL . v . L . H~T  ~ Y , ~ Bell Systems Technical Journal ~ , vii (1928) . 
P . KiJMMr ~ , Die Sechsschreibung derchi-nesischen Schrift zeichenals Einfahrung in den Fragenkre is deswi Ilkiirlichen 
Aus drucks , in ~ Grundlagen studienaus
Kybemetik und Geistes wissenschaft ~),
Quickbombei Hamburg , VII (1966) 4, pp . 109-118.
P . KfiMMm , Ideographie-Funktion dessicht baren Aus drucks , in ~ Grundla-genstudienaus Kybemetik und Gei -steswissenschaft ~  )  , Quickbombei Hamburg , VIII (1967 a)2 , pp .  63-66 . 
P . KiJMM ~ , Ideography-Function of Vo-luntary Expression , in Transactions of the International Conference of Orientalists in Japan  , No . XII , The Institute of
Eastern Culture , Tokio 1967(b ), pp . 36-50.
P . KiJMM ~ L , Hanzeichen ( Chinese Characters ) oh neideographische Punktion , in ~ Grtmdlagen studienaus Kybemetik und Geistes wissenschafth Quickbombei Hamburg  , IX (1968 a ) 2 , pp .  4857 . 
P . KOMM ~ r , Betrachtungen zur Aus drucks a-nalyse , in ~ Zeitschrift for Sprachwissenschaft Phonefik und Kommunika-tions wissenschaft ~  )  , Berlin , X X I (1968b ) 34 , pp .  232-244 . 
P . KUMMEL , Struktur und Funktion slcht-hater Zeichen , Quickbornbei Hamburg ,  1969 , 233 p . 
P . Ki ~ MM  ~ , Wertbestimmungy on Information , zurqualitativen Analyse des In-halts natiir licher Sprachen  , Grundlagender Nichtnumerik , TiJbingen 1972 ( a ) , 90 p . 
P . KiJMM ~ , Formalisierenyon In haltna-tiir licher Sprachen dutch Deuter valenzen und Deuter kriterien  , Lecture Notes in
Economics and Mathematical Systems,
Berlin , Heidelberg , New York , ( Vor-tragbeider GI-Tagung 1972 in Karls-ruhe ) , 1972 ( b) , pp .  480-489 . 
Mc . D . N~ILL , The Capacity for the Onto-genesis of Grammar , in D . L . SLOBItq(ed . ), The Ontogenesis of Grammar , A
Theoretical Symposium , London , New
York 1971.
M . L . MINSKY , Semantic Information Processing , Cambridge ( Mass . ) 1968, pp .  132 . 
G . S~TON , Automatic Information Organization and Retrieval , London , New
York 1968.
H . SCHNELL ~ , Language Communication with Children , Toward a Theory of
Language Use , in Y . B~-HILLII.(ed.),
ANAL GORITH MOFLIMITED SYNTAX 247
Pragmatic of Natural Languages , Dordrecht ( Ne . ), 1971, pp .  173-193 . 
C . E . SHANNON , Recent Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Communication  , Urbana ( Illinois ) 1964 . 
W.W ~ Av  ~ a , Recent Contributions to the
Mathematical Theory of Communication,
Urbana ( lllinois ) 1964.
T . WmOGRAD , Understanding Natural
Language , London , New York 1972.

