GUSTAVLEUN BACH
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSISAS ASASTEPIN AUTOMATED
SYNTACTICAN ALY SISO FATEXT

The general purpose of this study is to investigate the possibility of an almost completely automated syntactic analysis of a given text of a known language  . This has in itself some theoretical linguistic interest  , and to the extent hat it succeeds , it will save a large amount of labour in relation to automated indexing and translation  , etc . .
One step in this analysis is to count the occurrences of all wordforms of the text  , not for statistical purposes , but for the purpose of selecting a list of highly frequent wordforms for which the labour of adding syntactic information before the automated analysis is most fruitful  . 
This list contains some substance words for which the syntactic information mainly consists of assigning a word class  ; this helps the automated analysis just because the words are frequent  ; they appear in many periods of the text . 
But mostly the list contain structural words ( prepositions , pronouns , adverbs , auxiliary verbs , etc . ) ; without information on the syntactic function of these words it is usually impossible to analyse a text at all  . 
Another step in the investigation-the one with which this paper deals - is the automated utilization of the morphological information contained in the text : a search of the implicit information on word class and syntactic function which is given by the knowledge that two or more wordforms are flexions of a common stem  . 
The concept of a lemma.
As indicated above , a lemma is defined as a group of two or more wordforms of the text which morphologically may beflexed forms of a common word stem within one of the flexion paradigms included  270 GUSTAVLE't , INBACH in the analysis ( most socalled irregular paradigms being excluded as too difficult to automate  )  . 
The language in question is Danish , and a list of 25 paradigms and paradigm variants for that language is given as Table  1  . 

EES-SETETSENEENES
EMS-SENENS MNEENES
EMSZ-ZSETETSENEENES
EESZ-ZSENENSENEENES
EESX-XSETETSENEENES
EESX-XSENENSENEENES
ER . ER`S-SETETSER . NEER . NMS
ER . ER . S-SENENS MR . NME kNMS
ER . ER . SZ-ZSET MTSER . NEER . NES
ER . ER . SZ-ZSENENS MIKNEER . NES
ElkER . SX-XSETETS MRNEER . NMS
ERER`SX-XSENENSERNEER`NES
EES-SETETSNENES
EES-SENENSNENES
EESER . EKSET MTS MR . NEER . NES
EESEIKER ` SENENSE I~NEEKNMS
EDMEDES-SETETSENDEENDMS
EESETEETESE TETSE lK
EESEDEEDESETETSENDEENDMS
EESEDEEDESETETSENDEENDES
MESTTSTETESENDEENDES
EESXTXTSXTEXTESENDEENDES
EMSSTESTEKEEKESESTEESTES
MMSSTESTEREEKESESTEESTES
EESSTESTEREER . ESESTEESTES

MR .-
MR . X-

MR . X-
T -
XTX-
ZTZ-
STESTES
TABLE 125 PARADIGMS ANDP ARADIGMVAR . IANTSOFSTANDAR . DDANISH THE FIKST 16 AlKE NOMIN ALP ARADIGMS , NOS . 17 TO22 AlKEVERBAL , THELAST THREE ADJECTIVAL . THEORDER . OF ENDINGS WITHINE ACHLINE HASNOSIGNIFICANCE WHATEVER  . 


XANDZBEFOREENDINGSINDICATESTEMMODIFICATIONS THESTEMISFOK MEDBY DOUBLING THELASTLET TER  . BEFOR . THEENDING A NEBEFOR`ET HELASTLET TER . BEFORETHEENDING ( FLUIDE ) ISDELETED ANDAPOSSIBLED OUBLEL ETTERBE FORE THISEISDISSOLVED  . 
The text has been read into a computer , giving each word form an index number the ftrst time it occurred and storing in one file the text represented by index numbers and in another the wordforms  . Lem-matization was performed on this latter file by reading each word 
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS 271 backwards . If the last letter was one which could form an ending or a part of an ending the preceding letter was also searched  , etc . .
All cases of a possible stem and ending have been treated as putative stems  . To quote the extrem example , a form XXSTES is treated as a putative stem in itself and as derived from the following putative stems : XXSTESS  ( this is the x-modification of Table 1 , the double consonant only appears before endings containing an e  )  ; XXSTS ( thez-modification ) ; XXST ; XXS and XX . The last three all occur in common Danish words ; the three first do not , but this only means that another derivation from the same putative stem does not appear unless by a very rare coincidence  . 
The putative stems are stored in a list , and each one is compared with all preceding until it is revealed as either one of them or a new one  . 
It is essential for the practical maintenance of the analysis that the word forms are sorted at least by fLrst letter and the comparison made one group at a time  ; actually the words were ordered nearly alphabetically  , but no general rule could be devised for stopping the search earlier  . 
After the search has been completed , all putative stems which appear only once are discarded  . Of the rest , only those are conserved where at least two endings belong to the same paradigm  , that is to the same one among the 25 lines of Table 1  . Finally , a file of the index numbers of all wordforms i loaded with information on every lemma that each wordform belongs to and with which ending  . If the same wordform belongs to more than one lemma  , there is a conflict , see later . 
The text is a short Western novel of about 41 , 0 00 words which have been sorted into slightly more than  5  , 000 wordforms . Of these , about 2 , 950 have been marked as members of lemmas . 
However , this does not mean that useful syntactic information can be derived for nearly  60 pct . of the wordforms of the text . Unless the lemma is a pure coincidence ( homograph )  , between two unrela-ted words apart from some letters which may be flexion on endings  ; this is a problem of the same kind as ordinary homography is for any automated text analysis  )  , it indicates a semantic bond between its members , but the syntactic information depends on the set of endings contained in the lemma  . 
In the following , lemmas will be divided into three main categories  , unambiguous , ambiguous and conflicting . So far , a complete analysis has been performed on the 323 lemmas formed by words with initial letters A-G , including 882 out of 1568 word forms . 
272 GUSTA VLEUN ' BACH
Unambiguous lemmas.
A lemma is called unambiguous if the endings of its members determine unambiguously which of the three word classes  , noun , adjective and verb , the lemma may belong to . Normally , this also means that the endings can only belong to one of the  25 paradigms of Table 1  . 
Of the 323 lemmas formed with the initials A-G , 162 are classified as unambiguous . 
Nouns account for 79 lemmas . Most of these contain the ending-en , the definitite article in singular for nouns of the common gender  , which does not belong to any adjectival or verbal paradigm  ; several contain the plural definitite article . 
One lemma has 6 members ; a computer-aided inspection has revealed this to be the word " b and it "  , a very appropriate word for this type of text , several of its forms have high frequency . Two lemmas have each 5 members and seven have 4 each , but more than half have only 2 members . With only two forms represented , the risk of a chance homography is of course high . 
Adjectives account for 14 cases ; they nearly all include the comparative ending- ere or the superlative-st which can be extended with-e or-es  . A 15th lemma was also by the computer classified as unambiguous-ly adjectival  , but it contained only two forms with the endings -steand-stes  , and as the example above of different borders between putative stem and ending shows  , either-s-or-st-may belong to the stem . 
(Inspection showed the word actually to be a verb with a stem ending in-s  . ) Two of the fourteen lemmas have 4 members each and eight have 3  . 
Verbs : 69 lemmas .   22 of these include the ending-o which in almost all verbal paradigms has the function of imperative which is unlikely to occurs o frequently  . Instead , the form with zero ending is probably in most cases a noun of the same stem  , but not represented in any of those forms which differ from verbal flexion on endings  , and thus not causing a conflict between two lemmas  . 
Two verbal lemmas have 6 members each ( both including the dubious imperative )  , one has 5 and ten have 4 ( six of them including the zero form , the dubious imperative ) ; almost half have only 2 members . 
If a lemma is by this definition unambiguous , and the set of endings contained in it gives no reason to suspect its validity  , the syntactic information on each word form is in most cases quite obvious  . With
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS 273 nouns and adjectives , the form sending in-sare of particular interest  ; they are possessive forms with function of adjectives  , but with a peculiar distribution of articles . In verbs the participles may form composite tenses  ( the present participle almost never ) or may function as adjectives with restricted flexion patterns  . 
Ambiguous lemmas.
These 115 lemmas have none of the forms which are characteristic of either of the three word classes  ; all are short , 13 of them have 3 members and the rest only 2 . 
58 are classified as possibly nouns or verbs , but 37 of these contain the zero ending , mostly together with-et which may be either the de-finite article of a neuter noun or a past participle  , or with-er which may be plural or presentense . As the flexion-less form of a noun is much more frequent than the imperative of a verb  , the large majority of these words are certainly nouns  . It may be reasonable to classify them together with some of the shorter nominal or verbal lemmas as " almost unambiguous "  . 
Conflicting lemmas.
The same wordform may be a member of more than one lemma  , either with the same border between stem and ending or with a different one  . In each of these cases , each lemma is followed through until all wordforms interconnected directly or indirectly are summed up  , and the whole complex is defined as one conflicting lemma  . 
There are 46 conflicting lemmas in the part of the vocabulary investigated  , containing from 3 to 7 members , apart from one of 10 members which on inspection proved to be a mixture of demonstrative pronouns  . 
Most of the others can be explained either by a noun and a verb formed from the same root  ( occasionally also an adjective ) or by homo-graphy between two unrelated words , each with some flexed forms represented . 
When both one or more of the shorterendings of a paradigm and one of the longer endings are present  , one may with reasonable certainty assess the word class and syntactic function of the longer form  , even if the shorter form may belong to more than one paradigm and no inference can be drawn on its word class  . 
Danish compared to other languages.
The same analysis performed on a text in English will be somewhat easier in computational work because of the fewer paradigms and fewer forms in each  , but I expect he yield to be much less . I would expect a lot of ambiguous lemmas ( noun or verb )  , containing the zero form and the ending-s , some verbal emmas , containing-edor-ing or both , and a few adjectival lemmas with comparative or superlative endings  . 
A noun can only be identified by the endings -' s or-s '  , which I expect to be rare in most texts - and which can be found by more mechanical means also  . Many verbal emmas would be expected to hide a noun of the same root  . 
On the other hand , applied to a language with richer flexions the computational work involved in this analysis might get out of hand  , and I am not sure that the yield would in all cases increase comparably  . 
In German I expect many ambiguous lemmas to be found because several endings occur in paradigms of different classes  . French has the same problem as English that nouns can hardly be identified by their endings  ; more over the boundary between regular and irregular paradigms is rather vague in written French  , making it somewhat uncertain how many paradigms it pays to include in the automated analysis  . 
Russian seems to me to offer somewhat better possibilities  . There are many verbal paradigms with various stem modifications which it may be impossible to automate  , but the forms of the present tense on one hand , and most other forms separately may make it possible to identify a verb by two different stems  . The risk of finding ambiguous lemmas is small , though conflicting lemmas may occur . And the specific information on case which many nominal forms contain is often relevant to the syntact is analysis  , although it may be difficult to utilize it in an automated manner  . 
S . Hellberg's analysis of Swedish.
After the computational work for this paper had been completed my attention was drawn to an article by S  . HELL BV . RC : Computerized
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS 275
Lemmatization without the Use of a Dictionary , in ~ Computers and the Humanities)) , VI (1972) 4 , pp .  209-212 . The following discussion of his method is built mainly on astencilled report in Swedish mentioned in a footnote to the article  . 
Hellberg does not investigate all possible ways of dividing one wordform into stem and ending  , but investigates for two word forms at a time whether they can be the same stem with two flexion endings within the same paradigm  . 
This procedure depends heavily on a complete alphabetization fall word forms  . In the cases where Swedish as the same stem modifications that my program takes into account  , Hellberg has to define the stem as the shortest part of the word which is identical in all flexed forms  ; this increases the number of different endings , and the definition of a stem comes rather far from the ordinary grammatical concept  , while mine corresponds rather closely to it . 
Hellberg's method may be faster than mine in computation time  , but I believe that he runs a greate risk of missing lemmas which are actually present han I  ; the concept of a conflicting lemma does not appear in his system  , instead he discusses the frequency of wrong lem -mafizations  . 
Praaical results.
Of a vocabulary of slightly above 5 , 000 wordforms in a novel of about 41 , 000 words , nearly 60 pc t have proved to be members of lemmas , that is sets of two or more wordforms which may beflexions of the same stem within one of the regular paradigms  . 
An inspection of those lemmas which are formed by words with initials A-G shows that of the wordforms contained in them  , about 60 Pct can with reasonable certainty be assigned to a definite word class  , about half as nouns , somewhat less as verbs , and a few as adjectives . 
The rest cannot be thus assigned , either because all the endings of the lemma may belong to paradigms of different word classes  , or because the same wordform belongs to lemmas of different paradigms  , thus indicating the possibility of a homograph . 
Of the endings pertaining to a given paradigm , some convey a definitite syntactic function while others do not  . 
These figures summarize the yield of the analysis as regards its function as a step in an automated syntactic analysis of the text  . 
276 GUSTA VLEU NBACH
A different summarization of the results of the analysis  , which has some general interest , concerns the distribution of lemmas by length . 
The part of the lemmas investigated in detail show three lemmas of  6 members and three of 5 members as the longest . 
Which words occur in so many flexions depends of course on the content of the text  , but the numerical structure I suppose to be characteristic of a much wider range of self -contained texts  ; if the investigation is carried out on the vocabularies of different exts  , an interesting by product may be the study of the stability of this structure  . 
One may be interested in a differentype of statistical analysis  , namely of the frequencies of various grammatical categories  , for instance , the frequencies of singular and plural forms of nouns  , of present and past tense . For this purpose , however , the analysis performed here is not sufficient , not even combined with the frequency count of all wordforms mentioned in the introduction : firstly  , the analysis express-ly only recognizes aflexion ending if at least two different endings to the same stem occur  ; that is , the frequency of e . g . plural forms may be counted only for those nouns which are represented in at least two forms  . Secondly , in the Danish nominal paradigms not all forms are with certainty identifiable as either singular or plural  , and in the regular verbal paradigms the simple past is always the same form as a participle which is used in an adjectival function  , and not incomposite tenses . 
( For the purpose of test parsing , the latter ambiguity is not a fundamental obstacle  ; whenever such a form is encountered two possibilities must be left open  , and one must hope that other words of the period will close one possibility  )  . 
