P . CASTROGIOV ANNI*-L . MORETTI-G . DELISIO~r
VERBAL BEHAVIOUR . OF THEP SYCHOTIC
ANDP SYCHONEUR OTICPATIENTS :
ANAPPROACH ACCORDING TO THE METHODOLOGY
OF COMPUTATION ALLING UISTICS
The theoretical premise behind our investigation is based on the view  , held by many authors , that not only the meaning but the structure of language itself is in some way the expression of the psychological characteristics of the person speaking  . 
With this theory in mind we thought it would be interesting to check whether this supposed connection between verbal expression and personality is also confirmed by results of projective tests  . We chose to use t ~ or schach test because the ten cards form a highly standardized stimulus and because  , at the same time , the cards are indefinite and have little effect on the subject's verbal expression  . 
The aim we set ourselves was to study the connection between linguistic expression and the characteristics of personality  , in order to find out whether the morphological structure of the language used in the responses to the test might provide further information to add to that obtained by traditional signs  . As is well known , the subjects ' way of expressing themselves when confronted with each card often differ greatly even when their responses are given the same signs in the psychogram  . 

We do not intend to go into details here about the method used  , or the principles of selection of the subjects or the characteristics of the * Is titu to di Psichia tria dell ' Universit ~ tdiP is a  ( Dir . Prof . P . Sarteschi ) . 
72 1, . CASTROGIOVANNI-L . MORETTI-G . DELISIO sample ( already reported in a previous paper )  . 1 The essential data is as follows . 
The sample is made up of 119 subjects , 32 females patients at the Psychiatric Clinic , University of P is a (15 schizophrenics , 14 neurot-ics and 3 classified as " various " ) and 87 relatives ( 41 relatives belonging to the schizophrenics , 36 to the neurotics and 10 to " various ") . 
The responses to the Rorschach test were recorded on tape and then typed out  , before being transcribed into perforated computer cards  . 
The cards were then run through a computer which provided an alphabetical list of all the words used by the  119 subjects . Below each word was given the context in which each word appeared  . 
At this initial phase of our research we decided to limit our investigation to the analysis of traditional grammatical categories or parts of speech  ( substantives , adjectives , adverbs , verbs , pronouns , articles , prepositions , conjunctions , interjections ) . However in order to go deeper in our analysis of language  , we further split these grammatical categories into subdivisions  , taking gender ( masculine and feminine ) and number ( singular and plural ) of the parts of speech into consideration too . 
Therefore the lemma and the codenumber indicating the corresponding grammatical categories and subcategories were transcribed opposit each word in the list drawn up by the computer  . 
The computer calculated the number of words for each grammatical category and the respective percentages in relation to the total number of words spoken for each card  , so that a summarizing table was obtained for each subject  . 
Then the total values for each category and subcategory for each subject were worked and finally for the various groups : schizophrenics  , neurotics , various and the respective relatives . 
Being well aware of the arbitrariness of attempting to apply traditional statistics tests to language  , we deliberately decided not to try to make a statistical analysis at the initial stage of our examination of the data  . We should be able to do this later , at the end of our analysis , when the results themselves might have suggested which of the many statistical tests and elaborations that might be borrowed from statistical linguistics would prove most suitable  . 
1 1 ) . CASTROGIOVANNI , S . A . CERaI , G . MAI ~ PBI , P . J . PAS QUI NUC CI , G . TORRIGIANI , A . ZAMI'OLLI , An alisill nguistic a deller is posteal test di Rorschach dischizo frenicie neuroticie dei rispettivifamiliari  . I : Me to do logia e priml risult at ldi analisi condotta mediante cal colatorie lettronki  , in < ~ Neopsichiatria ~) , X X Xl V (1968) , p .  810 . 
VERBAL BEHAVIOURO FPSY CHOTIC ANDP SYCHON EUROTIC PATIENTS  73 

The findings obtained so far in this first approach to the problem suggest some interesting conclusions :  1  . The grammatical profile is similar in the four groups considered  . Grammatical structure therefore represents he flametm derlying the variability of language behaviour and as such has a certain static characteristic  . 
2 . The schizophrenic group shows certain specific aspects in respect othe other three groups : reduced number of words : higher percentages of substantives and articles  ; higher conceptual/articulatory , substantive/adjective , substantive/verb ratio , lower verb/adjective ratio . 
These linguistic characteristics of schizophrenic patients are correlated with the autistic attitude of these subjects towards the test of Rorschach  .  2 3 . The distribution of the grammatical categories for each card suggests the hypothesis that the type of stimulus  ( in this case the ten cards ) does not alone determine substantial variations in the morphological structure of speech  . An exception is constituted by those categories ( substantives , articles , adjectives ) more closely dependent on the experimental situation in which the subject is asked to represent something  . 
In a following phase of the study it was attempted to verify  , at a micro and macro linguistic level , whether , in the same patient , significant linguistic variations during the evolution of a psychotic episode were present  . 
In one case of a maniac-depressive psychosis , maniactype , 5 samples of spontaneous speech , corresponding to various tages in the evolution of the psychop at hological picture  , were taken . 
This material was examined at a phonematic , lexical , morpholog-gical , syntactic level in order to show whether there are variations of linguistic structures correlated with the variations of the symptom a tol -ogy  . 
This material is still in course of elaboration.
The results are reported in detail on the following research : P  . CASTROGIOVABINI , A . T ~ LAr ~ A , Pdmi risult at ldlun ' an all si statistica morfologica elessical edeller is posteal test di Rorschachnelt a prospettivadiuno studio dei rapportifrapsicopatologia elinguaggio  , in A . 
ZAMPOLLI(ed . ) , Linguistic a matematic a ecalcolator i , Firenze ,  1973 . 

