M . MENNUC CI-E . MORREALE
ANINTER ACTIVE SYSTEM FOR . STEM-SUFFIX
DISCRIMINATION INITALIANWORDS
1. Introduction.
Today , owing to the growing diffusion of online processing faci-lities  , the automatic processing of textual data , i . e . of information expressed in natural anguage , becomes more and more important both for : 1 ) applications concerning specifically the processing of textual fragments  , ( studies in linguistic analysis , in information retrieval and question-answering systems  , etc . ) ;  2 ) the implementation faviable communication process within interactive systems also for problems not specifically linguistic  , ( such as computer aided instruction , computer aided design , etc . ) , so that nonspecialized people can access and use the system without the burden of some more or less rigidly coded command language  . 
A typical application which combines both of the above aspects can be found in a hospital where the collection and the analysis of cli-nical data is to be performed automatically  . This will be accomplished by a combined hardware -software system capable to process and analyze clinical data expressed in narrative form  , e . g . the patients ' a nam-neses ; it should furthermore enable the sanitary staff of the hospital to use some form of online communication language as explicit as possible  . 
Any significant processing of information expressed in natural language requires one be able to perform some kind of content analysis on the input data  , and to infer some significant associations between these data and particular actions which are considered pertinent in a given context  . For instance , in the case of the hospital system mentioned before  , the content analysis of patients ' a namneses should make it possible to relate the textual data composing an an armles is with the clinical aspects considered useful for the possible diagnosis and therapy  . 
19290 M . MENNUCCI"\]~. MORREALE
The content analysis to be performed on a text requires that both syntactic and semantic features of the text be simultaneously analyzed : -the syntactic features will lead to the recognition of the simple linguistic elements forming the given  , more complex , one ; -the semantic features will assodate with the different linguistic elements  , composing the text , concepts and actions which are relevant for the particular context in which the text is analyzed  ; for instance the clinical context in the case of an anamnesis  . 
In the case of artificial anguages , it has become customary to analyze separately these two kinds of features  . The much greater complexity of natural languages consists essentially in the fact that such a sharp distinction between these two kinds of features can no longer be made  , and therefore , the analysis will require a more unified procedure  . 
The necessity of a combined syntactic and " semantic " analysis ari-ses even at the very preliminary level we are considering in this work  , i . e . at the level of the morphological nalys is of the words composing a text  . More precisely , we shall consider the problem of an automatic morphological nalysis of Italian words  , and hence the computer-aided construction of an Italian morphological dictionary  . 
The necessity of a combined analysis , as mentioned before , arises already at this level as a consequence of the fact that the stem of a word carries the bulk of its semantic value  , while the various suffixes that can be appended to it must follow specific morphological rules  ; they are , furthermore , related to the possible syntactic uses of the word in a sentence and determine  , at the same time , its precise meaning in the text . 
Actually , from such a dictionary , one would obtain for any Italian word ; -some grammatical qualification such as substantive  , adjective , verb , singular , plural , masculine , feminine , tense , person etc . ; - some semantic qualifications specify!ng which kinds of relations tie together this word with some other words in the dictionary  , according to the particular context in which the text is analyzed  . 
In such a way , after stem-suffix analysis has been made , grammatical qualifications will mainly result from suffix structures which are common to all the words of the language  , while semantic qualifications in any given context will depend only on stems  . Therefore the semantic relations constituting these qualifications will be built around the set of stems contained in the dictionary  . 
According to the above remarks , our work has been oriented to-ANINTERACTIVE SYSTEMFORSTEM-SUFHXDISCRIMINATION  291 ward the study of the flexive structure of Italian words  , i . e . the structure according to which , from a single stem , through affixing it with a set of differents u ~xes  , a set of different forms can be derived , each one being qualified by convenient grammatical categories  . 
The problem of building a morphological dictionary is considered here more from the Information Science point of view than from the linguistic point of view  . More precisely , our attention has been mainly focused on the problem of giving some automatic assistance to human operators engaged in the construction of a morphological dictionary  , and an interactive system has actually been studied for this purpose  . 
This system has been planned for languages which , like Italian , have a richly flexive structure . 
In the present paper , after some short comments about the utility of automatic morphological nalysis and the different approaches which can be followed in constructing an Italian morphological dictionary  ( sec .  2) , we give the description of the proposed system ( sec . 3) and some concluding remarks ( sec .  4) . 
2 . Computer aided construction of a morphological dictionary  . 
Morphology is that part of linguistics which studies word formation and provides us with rules and explanation about the internal structure of a word  . Such information about the internal structure of words can be very useful in the analysis of a text at least in four major are as:  1  ) It helps us control the widening , enrichening and modification of the concepts used within the universe of discourse which is specific to any application context in which textual analysis is performed  . In a system in which no morphological nalysis is provided any word is considered merely as a " sequence of characters "  , each one independent from the others ; therefore the addition of any new word will be considered merely as the addition of a new entry to a list of words  , even if the new word is simply a new derivation of a stem already present in the dictionary through one or more of its forms  . 
Furthermore the use of morphological nalys is allows one to give semantic qualifications to the stems instead of to the forms  , facilitating thus both a more compact and uniform treatment of semantics and the recognition of similarity among aggregates as:  292 M . MI~NNUC CI-E . MORREALE matematic applicata applicazione della matematica applica relamatematica applicazioni matematic he  . 
2 ) In languages possessing a rich flexional structure-like Ita-lian-it allows a significant compression i the dimension of the whole dictionary  ; in languages like Russian or Finnisha ratio between  1020 can be estimated between a fullform and a stem dictionary  . 
3 ) It allows the automatic expansion of words in their full fie-xional schemes  . 
4 ) It allows an easier and more uniform association of grammatical categories to the forms composing a text  , so that subsequent seps for a more comprehensive content analysis can reach more significant results  , even when hampered by some not yet encountered form  . 
In order to perform an automated morphological nalys is of a language  , it is mandatory to have a morphological dictionary of that language  , i . e . atabulated and/or algorithmic means , allowing the distinction of stem and affixes within a word  . 
Without entering here into a complete analysis of such dictionary-creating processes  , we can agree on the fact that these processes can be complex and long  , in accordance with the large number of forms to be considered and the large number of affixional structures which must be taken into account  . 
It can therefore be obvious to ask whether one could receive some operational help from some automatic means in constructing this dictionary  , and it is in this direction that our approach as been mainly oriented  . 
In the case of the construction of a general morphological dictionary  , perhaps the most immediate approach could be that of starting from a conventional dictionary and expanding all its entries in all their possible forms  , according to a set off lexional structures taken from a conventional grammar  . The situation appear somehow different when the dictionary is to be used in some specific field of application  , for instance that of a namneses analysis in a particular medical field  . In fact , in this case it is very difficult to reach any a priori decision about :  1  ) the selection of the specific words to be included in the dictionary  ;  2 ) the selection of the nonspecific words to be included in the dictionary : AN"INTERACTIVE SYSTEMFORSTEM-SUFFIXDISCRIMINATION  293   3  ) the selection of the flexional structures to be considered for the expansion of the above words  . 
On the other hand , in a hnost all applications of such kinds , one has a quite large and significant sample of text fragments to analyze  , which in some way explicitly defines the area in which linguistic analysis should be made  . 
According to such considerations , the guidelines which seemed to us worth following for the computer-assisted construction of a dictionary  , can be condensed as follows : 1 ) to start from the collection of text fragments which are already available  , i . e . from a set of forms , assuming , as we have verified , that in such texts many forms derived from the same stein are present  ;  2 ) to apply some automatic mechanism which can put in evidence  , as much as possible , the strong regularities which are characteristic of the Italian morphology  , so that human decisions can be applied to classes of words  , and to exceptions ;  3 ) to try to take into account as many as possible of the regularities and of the exceptions explicitly outlined by a conventional grammar  , in order to enhance the efficiency of the above process  . 
Therefore , according to the explicit indications ( examples ) given by a conventional grammar , two sets , E and lk , of words will be formed : - the exlusion list E , which will contain all those words for which no , or very individual behaviour , is indicated ;- the regu/arity list R , which will contain some flexionally complete samples  ( hereafter to be called " templates " ) for any flexional structure which is representative of a large class of words  . 
For a specific application to a certain field , for which we have a collection of text-fragments , we shall , first of all , build the set S of all forms contained in it , subtract from Stile elements belonging to E , and add to it the elements of lk ; the resulting set will be the input for the system  , to be processed as described in the next section . 
3. Description of the system.
We shall assume that the text sample to be processed includes  , for a significant number of stems , a sufficient number of derived forms , so that the extraction of a significant number of flexional structures is at least in principle feasible  . 
The basic structure of the system can be schematized as in Fig  . 1, 294M . MENNUCCI-E . MORREALE

I1 ? rTTREE . ? TOCONSTRUCTION lFULL " AUTOMATIC
TiSTEPS
I?1t SUBTREEEXTRACTION 1
SELECTION-I ! . _ ~ INTERACTIVE ? STRUCTURE , (~)___J
EXPANSION ?_~ iTi+1
STRUCTURE . OFTHESYSTEM
Fig . 1.
in which , after the initial step devoted to the " tree construction "  , the remaining ones , i . e . 
step function 2 minimal subtrees extraction 3 structure selection 4 structure xpansion can be repeatedly iterates Let us remark that :- steps  1  , 2 are fully automatic , while the remaining two involve some amount of interaction with the operator  ; -the possible iteration of steps 2 , 3 and 4 is related with the " arti-culation depth " of the flexional structures to be recognized  . 
Along the whole process , the given set of forms is stored and processed as a treelike data structure  , like the one exemplified at the right of Fig .   2 which refers to the excerpt of forms listed at the left  . In this structure , each node represents a single character of a form  , and an oriented link betwee two nodes represents how these characters follow each other in that form In the figures the character ~  , denoting the ANINTERACTIVE SYSTEMFORSTEM-SUFHX DISCRIMINATION  295 o = o * , 


PORTANDOCLIELO
PORTANDOGLI'ELI






PORTERA'








POPOLAZIONE



POSTALE oto "
T-E
R-E~M 0
E"\R-I--IR-T//~/N-D-OO

OM--O/"I~T_EA--V~A,~~NOt ///
I i I i ~-

L-V-E-R--E
O/IS--T~A_L_E
ANEX CERPTOF THE INITIAL FOR MTREE To
Fig . 2.
end of each form , has been omitted wherever unnecessary . In our sy-stem , the realization of this data structure is performed by step  1  , which reads the different forms and builds up the initial tree T  . At the end of the Ith iteration the input tree T  ~  . , will be processed and tran-sformed into the new one T  , which possibly will be processed similarly by the next iteration  . Obviously , forms derived from the same stem constitute a subtree of the whole tree  ( see Fig .  3) . In such a subtree , unless it is an improper one , we distinguish :- a " cut node "( c . n . ), i . e . the leftmost branching node in the tree ; -astem , i . e . the sequence of characters preceding and including the c  . n . ;-a " flexional structure ", i . e . the set of branches starting from the c . n . ( but not including it ) . 
296 M . MENNUCCI-E . MORREALE

T .. CUTNODEA-V-A-N-0"~/s-!
A-C-C-0-M-P-A-R~.O_N_0
I ! E-R-O -!
I1STEM"IFLEXION ALSTRUCTURE\[
Fig . 3
It must be noticed that , if we extract a generic subtree from the form tree  , the left and the right part does not generally coincide with the stem and the flexional structure  , so we call them " left part " and " right structure "  . Three different stituations ( as Fig . 4 shows ) may arise : !

It
STEPSTEPI u
O_.....
.,~s ~ S . . . . . I !/! ~.., !! I!I

LEFTPART!RIGHTSTRUCTURE=STEM=FL . STCOMPLETE
RESTTOBE'~STEMc=FL . STDETECTED
INCQRRECTSTRUCTURE TO BEREJECTEI
Fig . 4
ANINTER ACTIVE SYSTEM FORS TEM-SUFF IX DISCRIMINATION  297   1  ) the " left part " coincides with the stem ; the " right structure " coincides with the flexional structure  ; no further operations are needed ;  2 ) the " left part " contains the stem plus some characters of the flexional structure  ; the " right structure " is properly contained in the flexional structure  ; further iterations are needed ;  3 ) the forms in the subtree are not derived from the same stem and the structure must be rejected  . 
We are actually interested in extracting , fiom the given set of forms , all the subtrees related to the same stem , possibly after having widened these subtrees to their largest linguistically consistent expansion  , so that both the left part and the associated flexional structure reach their most stable form  . For this purpose , two basic operations must be performed : 1 ) extraction of-even incomplete-subtrees related to the same stem  ; this process will result essentially from the , possibly iterated , extraction of " minimal subtrees " to be defined below  ; 2) widening , as much as possible , of the flexional structures extracted before ; this process will benefit from the introduced templates  , and will require some amount of interaction with the operator  . 
In order to describe the functions performed in step  2  , let us define a " minimal subtree " of a given tree as the tree of all  ( at least two ) branches which emerge from the same node , and which do not give rise to any other proper branching  . Let us call " fight part " any set of characters constituting a branch in a minimal subtree  , and " right structure " the set of all right parts in a minimal subtree  . 
The result of applying step 2 to our example is shown in Fig .  2 , where all minimal subtreees have been marked by bold lines  . As this example shows , the majority of minimal subtrees o extracted refer to the same stem  , and this result has beeen strongly conftrmed by our experience on Italian words  . A more detailed analysis of the different situations which can arise during the extraction of minimal subtrees is made through Fig  . 5:- In Fig . 5a , the extracted minimal subtree represents exactly aflexional structure  ; - in Fig . 5b , the detected minimal subtree gives us a fight structure constituting only a part of a broader flexional structure which will be detected by further iterations  ; - in Fig . 5c , the detected minimal subtree gives us a fight structure which does not represent a flexional structure and should therefore be discarded  . 
298 M . MENNUC CI-E . MORREALE a ) "


Ib )
A./
B-U-O-N ~0. A
C_A - - p-I/
G--L--I-A--T-U-R--A

Fin . S
According to this discussion , the required filtering of minimal subtrees resulting from step  2 is performed by step 3  , mainly on the basis of the number of occurrences of structures and of their terminations  , and under the control of the operator . 
Let o = ~1," r2 . . . . . . . . ,  . r ~ denote any structure composed of kter -minations n " ~  . . . . . . . ~, and let ~( o ) and c0( . ~ ) denote the number of oc-ct trrences of a given structure o and of a given termination " ~ respe -ctively  . Assuming that two threshold values and t<s have been sele-cted for the number of occurrences of structures and terminations respectively  , the filtering of structure siperformed as follows : for any structure  1  ) if c0 ( ~ ) >s then the structure o is retained ; in the case c ~(0) ~< s the occurrences ~(' r , ) of terminations " ~ , are matched agains the threshold t , and decisions are taken according to one of the following three possible outcomes :  2a   ) if c0 (  . ~i ) > t for i = 1 , k , then the structure o is retained ; 2b ) If c0('r ~) ~< t for i = 1 , k , then the structure ~ is rejected ; 2c ) in the remaining case , these to = vl , " ca . . . , "?~ is properly partitioned by the threshold into two non empty subsets o ' ---  vl  , " ~ i . . . , AN INTERACTIVE SYSTEM FOR STEM-SUFFIX DISCRIMINATION  299 - g , with c0(v :) > t , and ~"=' d' ,  "~' , '  . . . . . - c ; ' , with ~0(~-;') < t , and one of the three following actions can be optionally applied : - the structure ~ is rejected  ; -only the substructure e ' is retained ; -the structure is displayed and further decisions about it are left to the operator  . 
The above filtering scheme could be further refined by taking into account even some other parameters  , as for instance : the length ( number of characters )  , or the mean length of the right parts within the structure ~  . 
After this selection step , all the words related to rejected structures will be removed from the tree  , and will be collected as a part of the output of the system  . 
In any iteration , after partial flexional structures have been detected and selected by steps  2 and 3  , step 4 will perform the possible widening of these structures as follows  , on the basis of similarity matching between structures and under operator control  . For every pair of structures ~, % . i  #j a similarity value X ( ~ , e  ~ ) is computed through a properly selected function X  , which evaluates the similarities between twostru -ctures  . For instance one could select : or else : where :   ( cc ) 
X = max N~+C'Nj . + C'
X = W + - C + N,+C'
C = number of characters in ~"= ai 13oj ( see Fig .  6)
N=~~~~%'-7
According to the decreasing order of their similarity values  , pairs of structures % ~ are displayed to the operator  , for decision about the possibility of widening cr i and/or ~ i in the structure ? ~ U %  . In this phase , the operator can communicate his decisions through a set of commands which allow him to manipulate structures  , transfer forms from a structure to another , etc . Commands will be also provided for displaying entities  ( structures , forms related to a given structure , etc . ) useful to 300M . MI~NNUC  CI-I  ~ . MOP , I~AL\]~
A-C-U-T ? .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . % tl ' . 
I0=I'\[/"// , ~I-S--'S-I-M ~ EI ~'
I1AA,?'E~O'j
J/I ,  -  ,  -~-  ,  -~\  ,   ,   , _ o_ ,  _  ,   , ~  ,   , o I/~iO"i-)'~ ,  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  , . 
0=I'',,~_ .   .   .   .   .   .  /  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  __', . ,  . . . . . := o " in ojei-7_8 C=8X- . - . ~ = 4
Ni-"-10
Nj " " 10
Fig . 6 evaluate and possibly adjust parameters , as threshold stands in step 3 , which control the process . 
After having shown the functions performed by the single steps of the system  , let us discuss through the example in Fig . 7 how the sy-stem works by iterating steps 2 , 3 and 4 . Let us suppose that the nine-ANINT t~I~CTIVE SYSTEMFORSTBM-SUFHXDISCRIMINATION  301 

ITE2MO3'4 I5NNO8E9NO10LI11RE ( ~ 12  . 1~  ( ~13 EL~14A ~ ) 15 ~ r ? 16L~17 NDO ~ ) 18 V~2OE~21 A ~ )  \
STRUCTURES ?.;
NNO/i ? 0 aE"r4A ? ? av ? 9RE
LEVEL VIVIIIII
TERE~MO
E ..-..
RA ~--'.

G'LI~E=IPORT ~/,/~ EAO
NDO~L
A~V ~----~--0 I/M O~.--TE

Fig . 7.
teen uppermost forms shown in Fig . 2 have been submitted to the sy-stem . The set of structures formed by the first iteration would be the one shown in Fig  . 7 under level 1 . When these structures have been detected ( for the sake of simplicity we have omitted the effects of possible expansions eventually generated by step  4  )  , each one of them will be condensed in a single node representing the identification of that structure and new iterations will then be applied  . In this way , all the further levels , shown in Fig .  7 , of the flexional structure will successively emerge  , converging at the end to a stable left part ( stem ) and a stable right structure ( flexional structure ) associated with it . 
In any new iteration , as already remarked about step 3 , the form tree To will be progressively stripped of some forms  , and the process will stop when it vanishes . At this point , all the material resulting from the process , i . e . left parts and flexional structures , will constitute a base suitably structured to zecelve the grammatical qualifications needed in a morphological dictionary  . 
302M , MENNUCCI-E . MORREALE 4 . Concluding remarks . 
Some parts ( steps 1 ,  2 ) of the system described above have already been implemented  , while implementation is presently underway for the others  ( steps 3 , 4) . The set of commands already implemented allows one to perform  , on a nonautomatic basis , all the interactive operations by steps 3 and 4 . 
At the present stage of implementation , a teletype is used for the interaction . However , in order to speed up the interactive conmmnica - tion  , the use of an alphanumeric video display equipped with a light pen  , is planned . 
So far some experiments have been made with the implemented parts of the system  , by processing a small sample of texts , i . e .   30 neurological anamneses including about 2000 forms . These tests , even though incomplete , have shown that the process of grouping together forms derived from the same stem is largely satisfactory  , as it has given after the first application of steps  1  , 2 and 3 ( in a non-automatical version ) , a very low fraction of still incorrect groups , i . e . groups of forms nonderivable from the same stem . 
These preliminary results allow us to think that , after the implementation of the interactive portion of the system is completed  , the system itself can be a useful tool for building morphological dictionaries for specific applications involving the analysis of textual data expressed in a richly flexive language as Italian  . The main advantages that such a system can offer can be summarized in the following points :  1  ) The textual data to be analyzed constitute by themselves the input to the system  , and no further input is required ;  2 ) human operations are restricted mainly to validating and/or modifying structures already prepared by the system  ;  3 ) manual interventions can be applied to whole classes of morphologically homogeneous forms  ;  4 ) grammatical qualifications can be applied to whole classes of morphologically homogeneous forms  . '
