F . KNOWLES
THEQUANTITATIVE SYNTAG MATICAN ALYSIS
OFTHERUSSIAN ANDPOLISH PHONOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
The description of a language's phonological system is not complete 
without statistically reliable data pertaining to the varied syntagmatic relations occurring within that system  . A measure offtmctional load is needed to elucidate the efficiency  , viewed from a cyberneticangle , of the particular set of phonemes . This approach opens up the way for various information-theoretic concepts such as entropy  , relative entropy , information content and redundancy . These values are deriv-ed , with respect to the Russian and Polish phoneme inventories  , ranging from zero to the third order . It is useful to consider the efficiency of various methods of information-theoretic coding procedures for phonemic strings  . Huffman coding can achieve not only a high degree of efficiency but also a relatively trouble-free unique decoding routine  . 
In the syntagmatic analysis of phonological systems  , junctures of varying types must be taken into account and must be " retrievable " for statistical purposes  . The presence of count details relating to juncture allow an acceptable " transfer modulus " to be derived which can be a useful parameter in the comparison of a language's phonemic and graphemic systems  . 
The question of sample size is important in any statistical survey  , not least in linguistics . Pilot tests have to be run in order to yield a general impression of a given phonemic distribution  . Nearly all phonemic inventories how a Lexia nor hyperbinomial distribution  . Very often these distributions can be plotted logarithmically to give a reasonable fit to a theoretical exponential curve  , derived from considerations similar to those postulated by Zipfin lexical statistics  . Most phoneme systems contain rare phonemes-in Russian / ~  , / is a case of such a phoneme-which present some difficulty  , when probability intervals are to be estimated from relative frequencies  . Using a 95 % confidence level and a 10 % error margin the sample size needed to satisfy these  80 P . KNOWLES conditions with regard to the rarest phonemes tends to become very large-often of the order of several hundred thousand-whereas a sample of  20  , 0 00 phonemes is often sufficient to " pinpoint " phonemes of the highest frequency  . A compromise decision regarding sample size has to be taken in which it appears reasonable to allow no more than  10 % of the phoneme inventory - that is , between four and five phonemes , normally-to exceed the stated confidence criteria  . 
One area of great interest to the phonologist is the extent of binary relations occurring within phoneme systems  . What is needed is a numerical assessment of relational feature such as completeness  , transitivity , reflexivity , symmetry . These values are computed according to the methods proposed by Hovary and Paper  . The results these methods give are partly statistical and partly Boolean but taken together it can be said that Hovary-Paper indices are important parameters of phonol-ogical systems  . 
It can also be shown that the distribution of phonemes over arbitrary " blocks " of text is of a Poissonian character  . The division of a large corpus into many small blocks can also yield information about text homogeneity  . 
The sampling methods used to construct a large database are also important  . If a corpus can be broken down into a small number  , say twenty , of subcorpora , a further test of homogeneity is available . The sampling distribution over these subunits can also supply information needed to construct " population " probability intervals  . 
In much of computational linguistics it is as important to comment on computational methodology as on the linguistic results obtained  . 
Mention must therefore be made of the specialised hardware and software that was necessary for implementing the above P~ussian-Polish contrastive phonemic analysis  . The computer used was a second-gen-eration English Electric  XDr9  , having 32K of core store and appropriate backing store in the form of discs and magnetic tapes  . An extension of ALGOI . 60 was used as the chief programming language . A series of input and output routines allowed special characters to be printed either by over printing or by using two-line output  . A number of specially designed procedures permitted the manipulation of characters  , trings and the addressing of specified parts of machine-words  . 
The basic sorting process used was a tree-sort which  , however , had to be adapted for a number of different uses . The programs used were : a ) sort of individual phonemes , giving frequency , relative fre-ANALY SISO FTHERUSSIAN AND POLISH PHONOLOGICAL SYSTEMS  81 quency , standard eviation , functional load , entropy , redundancy , confidence limits , sample size , and Huffman codes . 
b ) sort of phoneme pairs ( digrams ) giving appropriate frequencies , matrix representation , second-order information-theoretic values , full range of Hovary-Paper indices . 
c ) sort of phoneme triples ( trigrams ) , giving list of clusters and third-order information-theoretic values  . 
d ) sort of individual text files , giving full details of phoneme distribution in " numerical " as well as alphabetic order  . 
e ) sort of phonemes over " blocks " , to fit theoretical Poisson distribution and to assess homogeneity  . 
f ) comparison of phonological systems , giving a measure of typological " distance "
