Joh NHEWSON
RECONSTRUCTING PREHISTORICL ANGUAGES ONTHE
COMPUTER : THETRIUM PHOFTHEELECTRONIC

1. THE PROJECT
The prime principlelying behind all comparative linguistics is the regularity of sound change  . Without this principle , comparative linguistics would be mere empty speculation : any adhoc rule could be created on the spur of the momento justify the most fancifule ty-mology  . But with the principle of the regularity of sound change comparative linguistics becomes a rigorous science :  1 it is possible to propose a hypothesis , and then demonstrate clearly from the data whether the hypothesis works or not  . In classic scientific method if the hypothesis does not work  , it is to be abandoned ; if it does work it must be shown to apply to all of the data in a completely coherent fashion  . All apparent anomalies must therefore be either explained as the effects of some other cause : as a result of analogy  , or borrowing or dialectal interference . 
The socalled neogrammarians who developed and elaborated this principle of the regularity of sound change a hundred years a gower eguilty  , like most revolutionaries , of pushing their doctrine to an extreme position . To day we are aware that sound change is a very complex phenomenon and not at all the somewhat simplistic regular shifting from protolanguage to daughter language that they imagined  . Every language is , for a start , a collection of different dialects , and the same must be considered true of those protolanguages we try to describe in our reconstructions  . We must , as well , ridourselves of the simplistic notion of a proto language being a centre from which  , at some select and special . moment of history , all the daughter languages began 1 It is possible for a science to be rigorous without being exact  ; comparative linguistics is not an exact science . An exact science deals with mechanical laws , arigorous science deals with observed regularities  . 
J 264 JOHNHEWSON to diverge like the spokes of a wheel  . Our knowledge of phyla and families shows us that the splitting off is much more haph a zard  , and that there can be contact and interference long after the original dia-lectal split  . 
Nevertheless , the principle of the regularity of sound change remains of fundamental importance  , and will remain of fundamental importance in the discipline of comparative linguistics  . And it follows that if sound change is regular then it should be possible to make use of machine methods in the reconstruction of proto languages  . It was with such a plan in view that we set to work in the summer of  1971 to devise computer strategies that would enable us  , from an input of four daughter languages , to reconstruct the lexicon of a protolanguage and produce a protolanguage dictionary on the computer from the raw input of the daughter languages  . 
We chose four fairly closely related Amerindian languages to work with : Fox  , Cree , Menomini and Ojibwa , from which we hoped to reconstruct a lexicon of Proto Algonkian  . The correspondences of these four languages had been originally worked out some fifty years ago by LEONARD BLOOMFIELD in an article in the first volume of Language  , now famous for its solitary footnote on the universality of the principle of sound change  . Bloom field later refined this work in his masterly sketch entitled Algon quian in the volume Linguistic Structures of Native America edited by HOIJER  . In short , the sound system of Proto Algon-kian had been long before thoroughly worked out  , so that we were in a position to enter all the reflexes and correspondences into the computer programming as necessity might arise  . But , and this was the factor of interest , although the sound system had been worked out for the protolanguage  , no one hadever applied Bloomfield's correspondences and reflexes to the totality of the data of the four daughter languages from which he worked  , so that only a few hundred words of Proto Algonkian hadever been reconstructed  , in spite of the lapse of over half a century . Reconstruction is , of course , enormously time consuming , and a dictionary of a protolanguage normally takes many years to produce  . 
Our aim , therefore , was : to devise a ~ programme that would use the correspondences and reflexes of the daughter languages to find cognates in an input of raw data in these languages and to reconstruct proto forms for these cognates  . The protoforms and the cognates from which they had been generated would then be assembled on the computer in the form of a protolanguage lexicon or dictionary  . 
RECONSTRUCTING PREHISTORICL ANGUAGES ONTHE COMPUTER  265   2  . THE APPROACH The phonology of reconstructed Proto Algonkian has three main aspects : the consonants of which there are  12  , the consonant clusters of which there are 32 , and the vowels of which there are 8 . Since the correspondences of the consonants and the consonant clusters in AI-gonkian  ( as in other language families ) show greate regularity and simplicity than the vowel correspondences  , the decision was made from the beginning to concentrate he search for cognates on the correspondences of consonants and consonant clusters alone  , and to ignore the vowels . This is necessary for two reasons : a ) to spread the netwider , and b ) to simplify programming and reduce machine time . 
The team that embarked upon this project was composed of linguists and computer personnel  . The linguists envisaged a programme that would start with a word in one language and by generating the possibilities inherent in the correspondences sarch for a cognate in the same grammatic alnd semantic area in a second language  . It is quite easy for such generated possibilities to run to computations of  30 or 40 forms , so that one word in Fox , for example , could generate a search for 30 or more possibilities in Cree , perhaps find one , perhaps find more than one , or perhaps draw a blank . The search would then continue o11 to Menomini , taking into account he possibly considerable information already accumulated from Cree in order to compute the possibilities to be sought for in Menomini  , where again one might find a possible cognate , more than one , or zero . To proceed onto Ojibwa would then require all the previous information to be digested before predicting and searching for the possibilities in Ojibwa  . 
One of the worst aspects of this strategy ( apart from its complexity ) is the impossibility of preventing the machine from deciding  ( on the consonant correspondences , semantic and grammatical categories alone ) that a word is cognate , when the linguist can tell at a glance ( from the English gloss , or from the vowel correspondences ) that it is not . The machine then proceeds to assimilate this false information and compounds the error by using it in its further predictions  . 
For example , for Fox poohk damwa " he cuts it open " , the Cree consonant possibilities are only phksmp sksm  266 JOHNm~WSON but such a programme would find both Creep a ask is am " he shoots it " and poosko sam " he cuts it open "  . On the basis of this data the programme would then generate the following possibilities for Meno-mini : phk smphk hsmphk  2s mp ~ k smp ~ k hsmp ~ k 2s mNo cognates would be found in Menomini , however , and the programme would proceed to generate the following set of possibilities for Ojibwa : pkk In pkk ss VV np kk n ~ np ~ k ~ np ~ k ~ np ~ kn ~en For this set the following would be declared cognate : Ojibwapa ~ ko ~ aan " he cuts it down "  , pakk we daan " he slices off apart " , neither of which is truly cognate with either the Fox or Cree items  . 
The end result of such a programme , therefore , would be almost nil . 
When the problems with this approach became obvious  , a totally different strategy was proposed by the computer personnel  . In this strategy the first procedure is to extract he consonant framework of every input word in the raw data file  ( R/F ) and to create a new file ( N/F ) listing these consonant frameworks . A sample of R/F is given in APPENDIXA , and a sample of N/F is given in APPENDIXB . 
Secondly every possible protoform is generated from the known reflexes for the consonant framework of each word  . This is done very simply , in a single pass , and the result stored in file W/F . On our first run , with 3 , 403 items in R/F and N/F , we generated 74 , 049 protoform potentialities ( proto-projections ) showing an average of over 21 possible proto-projections for every item of raw input  . 
Thirdly a massive alphabetical sort is carried out to collate all the proto-projections in file W/F in alphabetical order within identical RECONSTRUCTING PREHISTORICL ANGUAGES ONTHE COMPUTER  267 grammatic alnd semantic sets . The result of this sort is that all identical proto-projections in the same semantic and grammatical categories are collated together : in this way they may be distinguished from those proto-projections that occur only once  . 
Fourthly , all sets of identical proto-projections are sorted into a new file Cx/F  , and the results of this file are printed out . A sample of this print out is given in AVVENDIXC . It is remarkable that out of a total of 74 , 049 proto-projections only 1 , 305 items were transferred to Cx/F , these being the only items that showed identical proto-projec-tions in another language  . 
A major edit is made at this point in the system by the linguist  , who surveys the sets of proto-projections , and , from his background knowledge decides on the correct reconstruction and adds the vowels  . 
This amended reconstruction is then keypunched , along with the codenumbers which give access to the cognates from which it is generated  . 
The final dictionary file ( D/F ) is then established by a programme which first enters the reconstruction  , then enters the cognates by identifying them , removing them to the dictionary file and deleting them from the raw data file  . A sample of the final dictionary file , which may be used as input to an automated type setting machine  , is given in AP-
PENDIXD .
The machine used was an I~M 370/155 and the following were the statistics of the first run of data with general programming in FORTRAN but using COBOL for the sorts : 
File Size CPU(1) R/F N/F 340 30 .  5 . 52(2) N/F W/F 740 498 . 23 . 81(3) W/FP/F 7404 91 . 51 . 44(4) P/F Cx/F 130 51 . 01 . 14
Total 11.2 1.923. CONCLUSIONS
It should be emphasized that this method does not use the correspondences  ( or sound relationships between daughter languages  ) in order to predict possible cognates , but the reflexes ( or sound relationships between each daughter language and the protolanguage  )  . All the 268 JOHN HEWSON possible protoforms ( consonants and consonant clusters only ) are generated rather than all the potential cognates  . What is important is that the machine does not gather and sort information and make decisions in order to proceed to the next step : it simply generates all the possibilities in one fell swoop  , and then collates identical possibilities together  . This technique streamlines the whole process and , ultimately , leaves to the linguist the decision as to whether a word is cognate or not  . 
It is also of importance that the major edit in this system comes at a strategically important moment : after possible cognates have been collated  , and all possible proto-projections listed , but before any decisions have been taken as to what is actually cognate  . The machine , in short , carries out the time consuming task of seeking out the possibilities hidden in the masses of data and presenting them to the linguist  . 
All that the linguist then has to do is to decide on the items that are genuinely cognate  . 
The same basic strategy may be applied to any closely related family of languages  , although the programming must be closely tailored to the details of the languages themselves  . The languages used should be conservative enough to retain sufficient discriminatory features and should also generally correlate with each other in syllable structure if the programming and machine time are to be kept within reasonable bounds  . If one were to attemp the reconstruction of Proto -R  . omance , for example , it would be advisable to use Sardinian , Spanish , Italian and l~umanian , and leave the French evidence out . The loss of intervocalic consonants , of final vowels and final consonants has much reduced the materiality of cognates in French  , and thereby reduced their discriminatory power . A comparison of Italianagos to ( with its 6 phonemes ) and Frenchao ~ t ( with its one phoneme ) immediately demonstra-tes how much historical information is conveyed by the Italian word and how little the French word tells us  . 
The French data , and that of other divergent languages can be ad -ded later  , in fact , in much simpler fashion once the basic proto dictionary has been established  . From a given Proto-Romance form it should be possible to predict reasonably accurately what the French word  ( if it exists ) is likely to be . If one can define an item in such a way it would be a simple matter to initiate a search for it  . 
The protoforms must be found , in short , by working backupstream in time . This is the difficult part of the task and is best done from the evidence of conservative languages  . Once this difficult upstream work RECONSTRUCTING PREHISTORICL ANGUAGES ONTHECOMPUTER  269 has been done , it is possible by much easier downstrea methods to correlate the evidence from the divergent languages  . 
In both cases there will be a residue once the obvious cases have been dealt with by machine methods  . This residue can then be printed out so that the linguist can direct his efforts to the challenging problems that remain when the purely mechanical and regular items have been cleared from the data  . 
Such a strategy utilizes the best possible interaction and integration of man and machine  . Manis poorly designed for collating masses of data  , but is able to bring a wide range of knowledge and interpretation to a single item of data at anyone time  . The machine , on the other hand , betrays a certain in anity when it comes to matters of interpretation  , since it has no knowledge of the world , and is thereby obliged to form its interpretations on mere surface appearances  . The capacity of the machine to collate and search  , on the other hand , may well arouse our admiration . As for the combination of man and machine , we are only just beginning to realize the potentialities that this combination has for the world of scholarship  , and especially for the discipline of Linguistics . 
H ...
2 70 JOHNHEWSON < ~ ~ 0  < < < <  0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0 RECONSTRUCTING PREHISTORICL ANGUAGES ONTHE COMPUTER  271 z 0   0   0   0   0   0  ~  0   0   0 voo~o ~ ~ oooo ~ ~ 0 ~ ~ Z ~ n ~ , ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ z
JOHNHEWSON 0 0 0 0 m0~30#?z~~ . ~ -~ ;; ~~~~ . ~~
ZZ ~ ~ Z ~ 7~   7~ ZZZZ ~ n ~ u=r I eqcq ~ eqeqeq ~ eq ~ ? oN ~ , : ,  . ~ ~  . ~= ~ ~- . ~,~ ~'~ *~  . ' ~~~~= ? RECONSTRUCTING PREHISTORICL ANGUAGES ON THE COMPUTER  273 z ~ ~? o ~ ~- ~ oo o6   0   0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ o ~ o ~ ~ o ~ ~ ~
