_w ., -
THOMASM . PAIKEDAY
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE INTER MEDIATE COP . PUS
Sample studies of the five-million-word American Heritage In- 
termediate Corpus , the largest yet for English , show the inadequacies of computerized word counts for lexicographical purposes  . Out of about 87 , 0 00 word types listed in the American Heritage Word Frequency Book  ( by JOHNB . C ~ R or I . et ali , Hought on Mifflin-American Heritage , New York ,  1971) , only about 40% seem distinctive lexical items . On the other hand , 22% of the vocabulary entries required by the 50 , 0 00-entry dictionary for which the Corpus was prepared id not occur even once among the five million word tokens  . 
We first examined three randomly selected portions of the listing in the American Heritage Word Frequency Book  ( AHWFB )  . side byside with the corresponding entry lists of the American Heritage School Dictionary  ( AHSD )  , the Thorn dike-Barnhart Intermediate Dictionary ( TBID )  , the Merriam-Webster New Students Dictionary ( WNSD )  , the Holt Intermediate Dictionary ( HID ) , and the Random House School Dictionary ( RHSD ) . Each of the three portions checked in AHWFB was based on a consolidated list of  100 entry words ( 300 in all )  , made up of the vocabulary entries in the dictionaries :  ( 1 ) AFTER . to AHAB , (2) CABBAGE to CALEB , and (3) LAKE to LANOLIN . 
Our aim wast of redout how useful the Corpus was in assessing the vocabulary of Grades  39 and in adding new words to the lexicon of that level as presented in the dictionaries  . 
Here are some of our findings :
There are approximately 110 word types in each sample of the main AHWFB listings  ( once-occurring entries listed at bottom of pages were omitted  ) corresponding to each 100-entry-word portion from the dictionaries . 
Of the 110 word types ,   36 % are lexically undistinctive items in admissible as vocabulary entries in dictionaries  . Such are : ( a ) hyphenated loose compounds , e . g . After-Shaving , agreed on , and air-breathing ; ( b ) solid forms of hyphenated compounds ;   ( c ) spellings with tm distinctive initial capital instead of lower case letter  , such as After , Against , Age , 282 THOMASM . PAIKEDAY and Ahead ; ( d ) regular inflected forms of nouns , adjectives , verbs , and adverbs ; ( c ) unusual word types , numbers , and other such " graphic types " Over 13 ?/ o are lexical and nonlexical items in admissible in any of the five dictionaries  , including AHSD . The complete listing of such items is given below : after hold cabildo lake side 
Agard cabman Lamar
Agatha Cabral Lambert
Agba Cabrillo Lambu
A gelaos C accinilamp shade
Aggy Cadillac * Lamsonag ' in Cadore Lanciotti
Agnes Caecilian landcrab
Agootuk Caemarvon Landry
Agram onte Cahokia L and short
Caipira Langanescalamus Langelinie
Calchas Langewiesche
Calder Langley
Caldwell Langmier
Cale Langston

In addition to the above , items (5%):
Agamemnon Cadi
Agassiz Cadiz
Agin court Calais
Agnew Calderon
AHSD had to discard also the following lamplight


Lancastrianl and fall landless l and mass
Summing up , according to the entry criteria used by AHSD alone  ,  175  ( 54 ?/ o ) out of a total word type listing of 322 items in the AHWFB samples had to be discarded . 
* N . B . There seems no reason why high-frequency items like Cadillac  ( 72 ) and Ford ( 109 ) should not be entered in dictionaries , especially when they occur in sentences of this sort : ~ A Cadillaccrashed into a Ford ~  , in which Cadillac and Ford are used in a generic manner  , not as proper names . 
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE INTERMEDIATE CORPUS 283 In other words , only 46 % of the word types sampled from AHWFB were found to have been useful for AHSD  , and these were already in the other dictionaries . 
On the other hand , out of the 300 entry words in the three conso-lidated lists based on dictionary entries  , only 235 ( about 78%) were in AHWFB . The other 65 lexical items ( 22 ?// o ) which the dictionaries collectively had , but did not occur even once in the Intermediate Cot-pUS  , are : after birth cabby Laker after care cab driver lain after deck cabriole tlamasery afterglow cacique lambda after taste caco mistle lambent ageratum cacophonous lambkinagglomerate caddish lambskinagglomeration Caddolamentably agglutinate Caddoan lampoon agglutination Cadette lampo onery agglutin in cadge Lanai aggrandize Caduceus Lancashireaglitter Caes are alancel et agnosticism Caesarean Lancelotagog caesium lancerag or a caesuralance wood 
A gracaftan l and auagt . cageylands mancahoot slandwards caitiff lankily cajolery lanolincal a mine calash calcify calcine calculable In other words  ,   22 % of require dictionary entries are not in the sample of five-million word tokens  ( including 86 , 741 word types ) drawn from 1045 texts of grade 39 level fed into American Heritage computers . 
New words entered in AHSD that are not in the 300-word entry list based on the other dictionaries are the following two which seem rare birds occurring not even once in either the Intermediate Corpus or the Brown University corpus:  284 THOMASM . PAIKED AYCACOMISTLE : Araco onlike animal of southwestern North America  , having a long black-banded tail ; LAKER-S : The national Basketball Association team from Los 

Another study of the American Heritage Intermediate Corpus that we did was an analysis of its lexical components  . 
We listed all the word types ( including those of single occurrence ) in the three portions used in our study of the usefulness of the corpus for lexicographical purposes  , viz . (1) AFTER . to AHAB , (2) CABBAGE to CALEB , and (3) LAKE to LANOLIN . Then we grouped them under the following headings : a  ) Lexical items : Under this head we included all word types having lexical meaning  , including also names of persons and places applicable to more than one individual  . Thus Caesar was included but not Agnew . Spelling variant such as Caddy/caddie/Caddie were counted as one  , but irregular inflectional forms were counted separately  . Ca-dillac was included for obvious reasons . 
b ) Grammatical items : In this we counted all word types based on hxical items  , such as spelling variants , regular inflectional forms , compounds and nonce forms having no more meaning than those of their parts  , such as land loving , land-management , adland-reform , etc . 
c ) Nonlexical items : In this we included unusual word types to which we could not assign a meaning  , and unique persons and places . 
A word type such as a h-h-h was counted as a lexical item  , but lan ' and Aggie were considered nonlexical . 
The following chart indicates the components of the lexicon  , according to our sample study , of the Grade 39 vocabulary presented in the AHI Corpus . It must be mentioned here that nonlexical per-0 o ? 20  , 1% LEXICAL ~41'1% ~i ~ THEAMERICAN HERITAGE INTERMEDIATE CORPUS 285 sons and places of the type usually entered in dictionaries amounted to just over  1 ~ o of the word types we sampled . 
Our studies seem to throw much light on the relations between frequency word counts and dictionaries  . Dr . Carroll , the senior author of the America Heritage Word Frequency Book  , has said : " My mathematical analysis of the problem of sampling indicates that a trulyerior -mous corpus  , say on the order of 500 million words , would be required if the resulting list were to be expected to include all or nearly all items required for a dictionary of respectable size  . " ( Research in the Teaching of English , Fall 1972 , N . C . T . E . , Urbana , Illinois , pp .  236-237) . 

