R . M . FRUMKINA-P . F . AND RUKOVICH-A . YU . TEREKHINA
COMPUTATION ALMETHODS INTHEANALYSIS
OF VERBAL BE HAVIOUR
The paper attempts to contribute to the development of the math- 
ematical models of verbal behaviour by demonstrating the use of multidimensional individual scaling methods for differential representation of verbal perceptual structures  . 
The method is illustrated with data on computational nalysis of perception of letters of Russian alphabet  . 
The main concern of computational linguistics ( at least , of its theoretically oriented branch ) has been the automatic analysis or generation of written texts  . " Computational linguistic analysis " has thus become a tool for the validation of linguistic methods and theories  . 
Another branch of computational linguistics-a more empirical and more practically-oriented one -has been largely restricted to data processing and information-retrieval problems  . 
It is safe to say that the full extent of the potential influence of the computational pproach upon the study of language functioning  , that is of speech perception and verbal behaviour has not been generally recognized  . Unlike psychologists , linguists have been rather slow to adopt computers for the development and evaluation of mathematical models of verbal behaviour  . The present paper attempts to contribute to the development of such models by demonstrating the use of some computational approaches for differential representation of verbal perceptual structures  . 
Speech perception may in a broad sense be defined as that part of the communication process taking place within the receiver  . We should try to reach a more detailed view of the speech perception mechanism  , that is to suggest some " white box " instead of the " black box " The common methodological premise for a model which accounts for various aspects of the speech perception problem is a representation of any speech unit  ( a sound , a syllable , a word etc . ) as a point in a multidimensional perceptual space with the perceived ifference between  172 R . M . FRUMKINA-P . F . AND RUKOV lCH-A . YU . TEREKHINA such stimulire presented by the distance between the stimulus points  . 
To develop a model for this psychological space we have:  1  ) to determine the dimensionality of the space ;  2 ) to describe the position of the speech stimuli in question along the dimensions obtained  ;  3 ) to determine the position of the Ss perceiving the given set of speech stimuli with respect to these dimensions  ;  4 ) to suggest some linguistic and/or psychological interpretation of the discriminative dimensions and of groupings  ( if any ) of individuals having different " viewpoints " about stimulus interrelations  . 
From the manner fia which Ss make perceptual similarity judgements about verbal stimulitis possible to infer the dimensions of the given set of stimuli which account for the responses obtained  . 
Methods of multidimensional scaling provide us with highly sophisticated tools for making this inference  . The problem of multidimensional scaling broadly state distofind n points whose interpoint distances match in some sense the experimental similarities of n objects  ( instead of similarities the experimental measurements may be dissimilarities  , confusion probabilities or other measures ) . Hence , we view muhidi'mensional scaling as a problem of statistical fitting-the similarities are given  , and we wish to find the point configuration whose distances fit the mbest  . 
The wellknown method of principal components can be used to fred out the most discriminative r sponse dimensions  ( W . S . TORG ~ R-SON , 1952) . Given data which represent on metric information concerning perceived similarity of stimuli  , this method aims at constructing a configuration of those stimuli in a best-fitting Euclidean subspace  . 
The dimensions obtained are oriented along the latent vectors corresponding to the most valued latent roots of similarity matrix  . Method of principal components gives a linear orthogonal projection in a best fitting subspace  . 
There exists , however , another class of methods which provide for the mapping of raw data by some kind of nonlinear transformation  . 
For the analysis of perceptual structures in verbal behaviour the present authors have used a modification of the " individual multidimensional scaling " method suggested by B  . BLOXOM (1968), C . Hoa_~N (1969) and J . D . CA a ROL and J . j . CrlANG (1970) . This approach to the analysis of experimental data permits us to describe the individual differences between Ss in stimuli perception  . In our previous research we have applied some methods of multidimensional scaling for studying the subjective probability estimates of Russian words  . In the present COMPUTATIONAL METHODSINTHE ANALY SISO FVERBAL BE HAVIOUR  173 paper for purposes of illustration we perform an analysis of similarity judgements among block letters of the Russian alphabet according to the abovementioned model  . 
Measures of perceived similarity among stimuli may be obtained by several experimental procedures  . Tiffs study uses the data of the experiment , in which the stimuli- 32 block letters of Russian alphabet-were presented pairwise  ( E . N . GrR ~ ANOV , P . F . ANDRUKOV'tCH , A . 
P . VAS lrEWCH , 1972; the same procedure was used by T . K/2 NN AVAS , 1966) . Ss have been asked to judge each pair of letters as " alike " or " not alike "  . Each comparison was made by at least 50 Ss , the " point of view " of each S being represented by similarity matrix with  0 for " alike " and 1 for " not alike " as entries . 

JlI11 Iooo " ibo Po
Eo ! q
To-oa
Ho
II,

OOc8o of\[o
I Ooih Ko
Ho
Hoxo Y Aoo
Mo


Fig . 1.
174 R . M . FRUMKINA-P . F . AND RUKOVICH-A . YU . TEREKHINA After these data had been processed by the method of principal components we have obtained the plotting of stimuli on the planes corresponding to various pairs of latent vectors  . We have excluded from further analysis the first latent vector because it has more or less constant elements and may be regarded as allowing for the mean value of distance between all the elements of pairs  ( J . C . GowrR , 1966) . 
The projection of letters obtained is presented in Fig  . 1 and 2 . 

II
Bo
Pob I % oo
It-o


K ~ oo

Ho Toy AI ? Xooo
Ao Momooo O
IVi : Il
Hllio11 I?1 Ioo
Hog I ~ oo
Fig . 2.
An analysis of these configurations resulted in discovering the three main factors underlying the perceptual behaviour of the Ss:COMPUTATIONAL METHODSINTHEANALY SISO FVERBAL BE HAVIOUR  175  \["'  32 P . ussi~nb2ockletter . ~ '"  . '\]/3d factor ~/ 2d factor ~ ,   ,  ( , P , , , ,B ) , , ,  (0 , C ) ( llIH) ,   , , ( M , X ) \] A more detailed analysis can be made from the databased upon the projections on successive coordinate axes allowing for progressively less important differences among letters  . 
Now we turn to individual scaling method which , as we have stated earlier , permits us to uncover the individual perceptual structures  . 
According to this approach individuals are assumed ifferentially to weigh the several dimensions of the " common psychological space " Let us take an assumption about the existence of a " true " point configuration ik-dimensional Euclidean space  , where a set of k dimensions or " factors " are common to all individuals  , but the weights they assign to these factors are different  . Then , for any individual the " weighted " Euclidean distance if given by /? i =  l=1 where xil , xjz-values of the jth and it hstimulus on the lth dimension  , Whl-the weight which represent she salience of the lth dimension for the hth individual  . If for a given Sthelth dimension have no importance at all  , w ~ will be equal to zero . 
Let us denote by Dh the similarity matrix for hth individual  . No wour goal will be to find out such point configuration and such set of weights to minimize some function f  ( Dh , dh ) used as a criterion of goodness of fit . One of the present authors has suggested the following criterion : 
ShD is ''( D , ,-d , ;)~? D , ; , for d , , < D , ; .
This criterion applied , the distortion of the small distances makes them smaller  , and the distortion of the greater ones makes them greater  , thus permitting better discrimination between groups of objects  . 
176 R . M . FRUMKINA-P .  ! ~ . AND RUKOVICH-A . YU . TEREKHINA 0 ooo
Fig . 3.
COMPUTATION ALMETHODS INTHEAN ALY SISO FVERBAL BEHAVIOUR  177 To evaluate the amount of discrepancies for all the judges  , we can take the average of Sh thus defining the following divergency criterion : m 
S - - - - - - 1 ~ Shmh = l
The gradient method has been used for obtaining the numerical values of x ~ and wh ~ which minimize the value of S  . Limiting ourselves to the two-dimensional representation of the Ss'perceptual spaces we may plot our data on the plane  , taking values of xi ~ as coordinates of the stimuli and wja as those of the Ss  . Fig .   3 and 4 represent two interrelated point configurations . 
i !/ ? OQ ? go ? ? Oo "; 74P "??? 47
Fig . 4.

I0
I 178 R . M . FRUMKINA-P . F . AND RUKOVICH-A . YU . TEREKHIN A It is evide Dt , from Fig .  3 , that there are groupings of letters according to their subjective intersimilarity  , thus providing us with two psycholinguistically interpretable dimensions  . The analysis reveals that dimension 1 corresponds to the opposition " letters with straight elements-letters without straight elements "  . The dimension 2corresponds to the opposition " letters with a cute-angular elements-letters without a cute-angular elements " Method of individual scaling also provides us with a mapping of Ss into two-dimensional subject space  . Coordinates of the point for a given S in this space correspond to the weights of the various dimensions in the stimulu space  . Fig .   4 gives a visual impression of the one--two plane of the subject space  . We see that the Ss can be first of all contrasted with respect omagnitude of the weights assigned by them to the  1st and 2nd dimensions . The analysis of individual similarity matrixes revealed that the Ss who tended to choose answers " alike "  , weighted equally low both the 1st and the 2nd dimensions , while the S s with tendency to choose answers " not alike " weighted heavily both dimensions  . For instance , subject N .  5 , who attached very low weight to both dimensions , gave 117 answers " alike " and 36 answers " not alike " . A good contras to the subject N . 5 is provided by the subjects N . 10 and N .  15 , who answered " alike " only 3 times from 153 comparison judgements . 
However , the most important outcome of our analysis is the fact that the same dimensions being present they have different relative importance for different Ss  . One group of Ss attaches maximal weights to the 1st dimension ( in Fig .   4 the corresponding points are under the diagonal )  , while another group attaches maximal weights to the  2nd dimension . SN . 47 and SN . 41 provide a good contrast in this respect . SN .   47 weights dimension I considerably more than dimension II while SN  . 41 shows the opposite tendency . Fig .   5 and 6 contrast the " perceptual spaces " for these two subjects  ( coordinate axes are transformed by multiplication to the corresponding weights  )  . 
Still , for the greater part of the Ss there seems to be almost no difference in the weights for the dimensions  ( the corresponding points are plotted in Fig . 4 along the diagonal ) . The place of the study of individual perceptual structures underlying similarity judgements of I ~ussian letters is  , of course , restricted to the value of i Uustrative xam-ple . However , trivial could seem the resulting letter classification  , even in this very simple case the method of individual scaling has allowed COMPUTATIONAL METHODSINTHEANALY SISO FVERBAL BE HAVIOUR  179 



AH





EB



Fig . 5 ( S41)
I . ZI
Arl









Fig . 6. ( S47)
O . C
I 180 R . M . FRUMKINA-P . F . AND RUKOVICH-A . YU . TEREK ttINA us to obtain highly nontrivial results concerning the communality and differences of Ss ' perceptual subspaces  . 
We would like to stress that in the overall context of verbal behaviour research the possibilities given to a linguist by the model described could not be overestimated  . Perhaps , one of the strongest points of this method being applied to the analysis of verbal behaviour phenomena is its potential generalization to discovering socially determined cognitive superstructures underlying the individual behaviour  . 
To give no more than one example the individual scaling method makes it possible to analyze confusions data for children at different stages of native language acquisition  , thus providing some experimental data which , we hope , could throw some light on the problem of the internalized and unconscious peaker-heater's knowledge of his language  ( N . CHOMS ~ rY ,  1965) , which serves as a base for distinction between " competence " and " performance " 

B . BLOXOM , Individual differences in multidimensional scaling  , Educational Testing
Service , Princeton(N.J .), Kesearch
Bullet in 68--45, (1968).
J . D . Oau ~ o =, J . J . CuaNG , ~ Analysis of individual differences in multidimensional scaling via annway generalization of  , Eckart-Young ~ decomposition , i ? Psychometrika , , XXXV (1970) 3 . 
N . CHOMSZY , Aspects of the theory of syntax , Cambridge ( Mass . ), 1965 . 
E.N.G ~ axa ~, . Nov , P.F.AND RUKOVmrI,
A . VASmSV lCH , On graphical resemblance of Russian block letters  , in Sinkh-ronicheski-tipologicheskiei storikotipolo-gicheskie issle dovania  , Institute of Linguistics , the Academy of the USSIL ,  1972 . 
J . C . GOW ~ R , Some distance properties of latent root and vector methods used in multivariate analysis  , in ~ Biometrika J , 
LILI (196@p.3.
C . Ho ~ , Multidimensional scaling : combining observation when individuals have different perceptual structures  , in , Psychometrika , , XXXIV (1969) 2 . 
T . K01 ~ N^V AS , Visual perception of capital letters , in , Sc and . J . Psychol . ~, VII (1966) . 
W . S . TORGr . RSOt ? , Multidimensional Scaling , Theory and Method , in ~ Psycho-metrika ~ , XVII (1952) 4 . 

