R .. G . PIOTRO WSK I-I . V . PALIBINA
AUTOMATIC PATTERN RECOGNITION APPLIED
TOSEM ANTICP kOBLEMS
The idea of computer pattern recognition as applied to semantics 
has the same basic principles as the theory of the perception  , which represents a sufficiently generalized model for that part of the brain whose function is classification  , insofar as classification presupposes similarity between elements  ( or groups of elements ) of the same class and difference between elements  ( or groups of elements ) of different classes . 
In this respect automatic semantic pattern recognition  ( ASPR ) consists in the following . An unknown text is analyzed by computer . 
At the first stage of the text treatment its subject matter is identified at the wordform level  . The second stage results in indicative abstracting at the phrase  ( word-group ) level . 
The theory of semantic pattern recognition offers a number of concepts with their structural and functional particularities  . First of all , these are concepts of 1) semantic space , as a certain semantic zone of the language ; 2) semantic regions , ascertain semantic subzones of this space ; 3) distinguishing factors , those semantic elements in whose terms the semantic space is being formed  ;  4 ) pattern alphabet-a list of the region names and finally the concept of  5  ) semantic pattern itself . 
The semantic pattern is regarded to be the name of a particular region of the semantic space wherein information structure on phenomena of the outer world is reflected  . This information structure is represented as an ordered set consisting of objects  ( as extralinguistic reality ) and its relations . Any information on the phenomena of objective reality could be rendered by means of combinations of objects together with their relations  . Any finite set of objects combined with the relations between them produce situation  . So , properly speaking , the semantic pattern is a situation mould , sui generis , transferred to the na-104 R . G . HOTROWS ra-X . V . PAUB ~ NAtural language . A real semantic space which is represented by a sublanguage is infinite and reflects all possible situations in the given sublanguage that has a concept system of its own  . This concept system is reflected and fixed in texts as a whole complex of semantic relations along with signifiants of individuals  . If the semantic space manifests itself as a specific sublanguage then its regions can naturally be represented by separate branches of knowledge  , divisions and subdivisions of this sublanguage and even by a single descriptor  . A list of the region names , into which the semantic space falls , makes an alphabet of patterns . Ideally , the pattern alphabet agrees with UDC entries . 
The actual semantic space referred to , e . g . texts of any scientific and technical sublanguage is under study  , to be exact , a finite model for this semantic space as wordform  ( or segment ) frequency dictionary , obtained as a result of automatic text processing  . By this means there is a model a posteriori whose structure follows naturally from the properties  , particularities and semantic parameters of the source material  . Frequency dictionaries representing a certain semantic zone of a scientific and technical sublanguage along with subject frequency microdiction-aries  , as semantic subzones of this sublanguage give a true lexical picture and reflect the specific content system for a given sublanguage  . 
A wordform ( segment ) frequency dictionary of the texts under investigation serves as a basis for selecting semantic distinguishing factors  , which are represented by the meaning of certain wordforms  , words ( keywords ) and segments ( key segments ) . The construction of recognizing systems is a matter of some difficulty especially in the field of man-machine communications  . Recognition is regarded to be the whole complex of processes in the system  , including the process of learning . 
Informing a recognizing automaton we ~ rough-hew ) ) the ~ internal ) ) world of the computer , a functional model of high nervous activity , our attention being focused on experimental criteria only  , that is ~ consciousness ~ ) is considered from a functional point of view . As we stated above , the recognition process falls into learning and the application of information obtained in learning  , i . e . extrapolation of regularities of linguistic material  , that has been registered into the storage to the source text in its processing  . The structure of recognizing automaton should reflec the information ature of that branch of knowledge  ( specific sublanguage ) on whose treatment it is oriented . It involves a variety of reference regions ( 3 talons ) of the semantic space of the sublanguage under treatment  . These reference regions are represented by generalized patterns of sublanguage divisions which are being formed on the basis of distin- 
AUTOMATIC PATTERN RECOGNITION ' 105 guishing semantic factors obtained after statistico-distribution alalysis of a great body of scientific and technical texts in English and Russian has been carried out  . The reference region manifests as a certain model for a specific branch of knowledge with its characteristic features and particularities as it is represented in the designer's brain  . The more comprehensive and deeper insight of the recognizing automaton designer into this branch of knowledge  , the better the reference region serves the purpose of recognition  . By the end of learning as many reference regions must be recorded in the storage as we can bring out analysing the texts under study  . Each of these reference regions involves a number of distinguishing semantic factors that provide descriptions of the semantic space regions  ; the semantic factor selection follows the principle of establishing a strict line of demarcation between the regions in making their descriptions  ; either distinguishing semantic factors are available in a region of semantic space and not found in all the other regions  , or they can possibly be found there . 
Two possible situations arise from checking a semantic pattern of an unknown source text against reference regions recorded into the storage in the course of teaching computer  . 
1 ) Deterministic situation occurs when a description of a source text pattern agrees  ( p = 1 ) or doesn't ( p = 0 ) with a reference region , it means , that the source text belongs to that scientific and technical branch of knowledge  , whose model this particula reference region represents  . 
2 ) Probabilistic situation occurs when a partial agreement between semantic patterns of a source text and reference region description occurs  . The coincidence probability takes all the values in the interval from  0 to 1  . 
Both deterministic and probabilistic models of semantic pattern recognition function at different levels such as lexical  , morphologo-syntactical , semantico-syntactical . 
Of the working semantic recognition systems which have been developed until now one can name the bilingual automatic dictionary  ( deterministic model at lexical level )  , the bilingual dictionary of segments ( deterministic model at morphologo-syntactical level  )  , multilingual thesaurus of local syntactical meanings  ( deterministic model at seman-tico-syntactical level  )  , semantic , pattern recognition system for indexing , annotating and abstracting ( both deterministic and probabilistic models at the integrated semantico-morphologo-syntactical level  )  . Ill addition , a bilingual thesaurus development is underway . 
106 1~ . G . PIOTROWSKI-I . V . PALIBINAIn obtaining the information eeded for the efficient performance of an automatic system for semantic pattern recognition we used the statistico-distributional technique combined with automatic text treatment  . It offers a higher degree of formalization of the process and also of objectivity  . Each of these factors is of prime importance if the problem of ASPK is to be worked out and realized on a commercial scale  . 
