A SKARDZHUBANOV-BAKHITD ZHANKHASANOV
COMPUTATION ALDESCRIPTION OF THEKAZAKH

The subsequent development of the languages and their comprehen- 
sive study in connection with social progress is a natural process in our multination also cialist country  . Such development and interrelation ( or interaction ) of languages can be observed in Kazakhstan , where the representatives of more than one hundred and twentynations and nationalities live and the languages are developed in conditions of complete equality of rights  . Some of these languages have already become the object of linguistical investigations  . For example , the Kazakhlinguists at present investigate the problems of the Kazakh  , the Russian and the Uigur languages and their interaction with many other languages in our republic  . Hence at the International conference on computational linguistics we should like to speak about our experiments of computational studying of the modern Kazakh language  . 
The first experiments of statistical study of the Kazakh language have been made by professor H  . K . Dzhubanov at the beginning of the thirties . Then such professors as S . K . Kenesbayev , N . T . Sauran-bayev , M . B . Balakaiev , S . A . Amanzholov and others made attempts to use a statistical method in their researches  . Nevertheless it can be said that statistical methods have been accidentally used by Ka-zakh linguists  . At present here is a group of " Statistical investigation and automation " and the laboratory of experimental phonetics  . 
The Institute regularly holds republican and all -union conferences on statistical and informative study of Turkish languages  ( 1969 )  , and also on the automatic recognition of acoustic images  ( 1972 )  , a number of scientific works have already been published by our scientific workers  . 1One of them is Dz hubanov's investigation , its theme " The statistical investigation of a Kazakh text with the use of a computer "  ,   ( the use of the material of Auezov'sepicAbai zholy-Abai's path  )  . 2xK . B . BEKTAYEV , Language Statistics (1957-1972) , Alma Ata ,  1972 , M . O . Au Ezov , " Abai " , A novel , Foreign languages Publishing House , Moscow ,  1957 . 
7 6 A SKARDZHUBANOV-BAKI-IIT DZHANK HASANOV First of all it was necessary to work out methods on the automatic construction of frequency lists of linguistic units with the use of a Turkish text where a computer is used for the first time  . Apparatus coding text information , introductory and discharge quipment of modern computers are founded on Latin and Russian drawing  . Therefore for the convenience of coding of the texts and the universality of machine programs for putting into shape the linguistic material of these languages  , the unit transcriptions of identical phonemes of different Turkish languages are adopted in this work  . 
The investigation was made on the harmony of statistic distributions of classes of words of the Kazakh language by the following theoretical laws : normal  , logarithmic-normal , distributions of Puasson and Sharlie in two types  ( A and /3 )  . It was established that the choice of a standard ( amount of series , a number of series and the amount of choice ) influences the character of distribution of the researching linguistic unit in this connection  . 
One can say that the language of the epic was statistically described completely  . 
The epic has 465 , 966 words ( expressions ): I book has 105 , 788 , Ixbook-124 , 398 , m book-112 , 727 , iv book-123 , 053-words ( or expressions ) . 
One hundred highly frequent wordforms have been commented in the investigation  . It's interesting to remark that different conjunctions  ( da , de ) , particles ( ma , me ) are used more often . Many of them helped the author to create individual expressions  . Then he commented auxiliary verbs ( from the stems e and de , otir , tur , gut , gatir ) and modal words ; then the pronouns ( men , sen ) and the adverbs ( endi , kazir ) , the adjectives , nouns , pronouns . 
The frequency of equally used wordforms has been defined  , the total number of them is 110 . The correlation of highly frequent words in the epic in its whole and in its parts taken separately has been defined too  . 
Kazakhlinguists are intending to analyse qualitatively all parts of speech of the Kazakh language using works of leading Kazakhpoets and writers  . 
For instance , statistics for the lexicom or phological structure of the adjectives were studied  . They are used 38 , 531 times in the epic which comprises 8 . 3 ?/ o of the whole word building . Various wordforms of the adjectives can be met 4 , 773 times without accounting for repetition , that is 7 . 7 ?/ o of all wordforms in the epic amounting to 61  , 824 words . 
COMPUTATION ALDESCRIPTION OPTHEK AZAKHL ANGUAGE 77 These percentage correlations express vividly the equality of distribution of words-adjectives in accordance with a word-list and text of the epic  . 
Statistic linguists of the Institute started studying statistically the complete works of M  . Auezov consisting of 12 volumes . It is planned to investigate works of other leading Kazakhwriters in the future  . 
The experiment and method worked out in the investigations of the Kazakh language have practical meaning in the statistic-linguistic study of other languages of the nations of Kazakhstan  . 

