BENTEMAEGAARD-EBBE SPANG-HANSSEN
SEGMENTATION OFFRENCHSENTENCES
1 . This paper describes a programme which , by means of a very
limited number of criteria , analyses French sentences into principal
clauses and subordinate clauses . We prefer , however , to speak of segmentation rather than of analysis , because the analysis in question is very incomplete  ; there is , so to speak , no analysis at all ; what we are doing is simply to try to find the extent o which the computer  , using only a few kinds of landmarks in the text , is able to divide the sentence into certain segments  , viz . the clauses . We raise the question whe-ther French sentences can be segmented correctly by the computer recognizing in the input-text as linguistic signs having a special value  , only words of the following three types : 1 ) finite verb-forms , 2) conjunctions and relative pronouns , 3) punctuation marks . 
All other words are considered as belonging to a single class  , the unmarked words . Iu practice we shall make some subdivisions within the three main groups so that we finally get eight classes of signs in the input-text between which the computer should be able to distinguish :  1  ) words introducing subordinate clauses ( subordinating conjunctions , relative pronouns ) ; 2) coordinating conjunctions ( et , mais , ou ); 3) comma ; 4) unmarked words , i . e . every word not belonging to any of the other classes  ;  5 ) finite verb without clitic subject pronoun + clitic pronouns and particles  ; 6) full stop , semicolon , colon , exclamation-mark , question-mark . 
7) " car " ;  8 ) finite verb with a clitic subject pronoun+ditic pronouns and particles  . 
278 BENTEMAEG AARD-EBBE SPANG-HANSSEN
As will be seen , the computer will not , as a rule , try to identify the subject of the clause . Preliminary experience has shown us , however , that we could diminish considerably the number of errors by conserv-ing the information given by the existence  , or non-existence , of a clitic subject pronoun before the finite verb  . We find that information of this kind is of the same type as the other " landmarks "  , i . e . wordforms that one can identify fairly easily without going very far in the analysis of the context  . 
2. Survey of the different stages of the project.
The first part of the programme converts the input -text into a string of symbols  ( the numbers of the eight classes just defined )  . Example : c'estr heure dange reuse o~le froid , sionn'est pas couvert , vousrend malade . 

The conversion programme , which should be the first to operate on the text , is nevertheless the last to be elaborated and , at present , it is still not operative in its entirety . At the first stage of our work , we made the conversion manually , wanting to see the efficiency of our parser before undertaking the rather tire some work of writing the conversion-programme  . Therefore , the segmentations presented in this paper are all segmentations of manually written strings of numbers which correspond to some French sentences  ; but , indeed , when writing these input-strings , we were careful to do only what our conversion programme should be able to make the computer do  . 
Although the conversion programme does not pretend to any degree of originality  , it might be useful to give some idea of the amount of analysis contained in it  ; this point might be essential to the discussion of the interest of the entire project  . The conversion programme consists mainly of the following subsections : a  ) segmentation of the input-text into sentences and words  . 
This programmespecially examines the puntuation marks  ( in order , for instance , to find out whether a point is a fulls top or something else  )  , the hyphens , and the apostrophes ; both hyphens and apostrophes may , or may not , separate words . 
b ) Conversion of the punctuation marks into one of the two symbols  , 3 or 6 . 
SEGMENTATION OFFRENCHSENTENCES 279c ) Conversion of highly-frequent grammatical words ( 82 different words are listed ) into the symbols 2 or 7 or into the symbols that represent two auxiliary classes  . Apart from the eight classes taken over by the parser  , we have setup , for the purpose of the conversion only , two auxiliary classes : determiners ( for the purpose of disambiguating homographs that may be either nouns or finite verb-forms  ) and prepositions ( on account of the possibility that they form part of a rela-tive-phrase introducing a subordinate clause  )  . 
d ) Conversion of finite verbs into one of the two symbols  , 5 or 8 . This routine is undoubtedly the most important part of the conversion programme  . It examines every word from right to left in order te see whether the ending of the word matches with an entry in the list of verb -flexives  . If the answer is in the affirmative , the routine will try to match the remainder of the token with an entry in the list of stems  . This list comprises about 3200 stems which correspond to the verbs selected as those belonging to ordinary French in J  . CAVUT , Dictionnaire des verbes Fran?ais , Larousse 1970 . 
e ) Conversion into the symbol 1 of the words introducing subordinate clauses . 
f ) Conversion into the symbol 4 of every word for which the previous tests have failed  . 
The second part of the programme , the segmentation programme proper , analyses the string of numbers and gives as an output a string segmented in the following way  ( we take as an example the sentence quoted above ) : input : 8444144318443546 output : 8444/   1443/   18443 /introduced , however , the convention that a single stroke is not a boundary if followed at the same level by a space and a string which is not preceded by a stroke  . In our example , this is the case at the second level where , as a matter of fact , there is only one clause : c'estl ' heure dangereuse/o~le froid/vousrendm  . 
sionn'est pas couvert\] 280 BENTEMAEGAARD-EBBE SPANG-HANSSEN The output does not only give information about the boundaries of the clauses  ; it also indicates the levels of the clauses and the ways in which they are embedded in one another  . In our example it is easy to see that the clause at the lowest level is embedded in the clause at the second level which  , in turn , is subordinated to the clause at the top level . 
It is evident hat it is only a simple matter of programming to convert the output-string consisting of numbers into an image of the segmented sentence  . This conversion , too , will be included in the final system . 
3. Examples.
INPUTSTRINGNR 6044 3443 4454//234 3445 4246 183/
INPUTSTRINGNR 61445 444/244 444/544 4444 4615 444/
INPUTSTRINGNR 454 444 3444 44443/254 46
INPUTSTRINGNR 6444 34438 44444/1445 4444/
Sondos , sesbras , soncoului font real quandilles remue , et , surtout , sat~teest lour deet doulou reuse . 
Sonsang bat derrie reson front et la du relumi ~ re dujour quitraverseses lunettesnoireslui piqueles yeux deses centaines d'aiguilles  . 
Jean voud rait pouvoirs ere poser vraiment , dormir route unenuits ansser ~ veiller , mais celan'est p as possible . 
Chaquesoir , ilretrouvel ' air encore plus chaud et lourd de lamoustiquaire  . 
Dixlois , vingtfo is , ilse retournesurs on lit detoile pendant que lesmousti-quescherchents ansfinletrou par of fils pour ront entrer pour le piquer  . 
Chaquejour , il mange unpeuplus real ;
SEGMENTATION OFFRENCHSENTENCES 28'1
INPUTSTRINGNR 69   48444/2/   44445434444344443/846   1844444444/  /  183/ 
Bien Mtiln ' a plus depain et comme ilne sait pas assezbiench asser pour tuerles an imaux qu'il rencontre  , presque to usses repass on tmaigres : unpeude riz  , quel ques pommes determ , c'est tout . 
4. The interest of the project.
If the programme turns out to be reasonably successful-that is to say if the automatic on version of the text into symbols will not increase too much the number of errors-one might think of two possible applications : The programme might be useful for obtaining more interesting concordances  . The computer has often been thought of as a means for the linguist of obtaining better documentation than that of the old-fashioned card -index made manually by the linguist himself  ; but if the computer is to replace the old card -index  , the linguist must have the opportunity not only to give to the machine a list of words in which he is interested  , but also to define for the machine the kinds of context in which the keyword should occur  . A programme that recognizes the boundaries of the clauses should offer a good many possibilities for defining the contexts that the linguist is looking for  . 
Another possible application of the segmentation programme might be as a first stage of a complete analysis  . It might be profitable to start analysis with a tentative segmentation of the sentences into clauses  . 
For us , however , the linguistic interest proper of the project is more important than the rather hypothetical pplications  , even though it seems quite clear that our grammar does not give a better understanding of the structure of the French sentence than that which could be found in a traditional grammar  . Our grammar does not give any insight into the deep structure of the sentence  , but it gives a description of the profile of the surface structure  . One might speak of it as an investigation of some surface-constraints in French  . It is not without interest o examine the extent o which it is true that French sentences are cast in a certain mould so that only a few marks are sufficient for a correct segmentation  . Or to put it more simply : the segmentation programme can be seen as a new approach to the study of word-or-der in French  . 
282 BENTEMAEGAARD-EBBE SPANG-HANSSEN 5 . The linguistic facts . 
In this section we will discuss the linguistic facts that make possible a segmentation solely on the basis of the finite verb-forms  , the conjunctions , and the punctuation marks . 
We have found it convenient to set up the rule that every finite verb constitutes a clause  , that is to say there can be only one finite verb in a clause  . This view is linguistically justifiable , for instance within the framework of a dependency grammar  . Consequently , we shall say that there are two clauses in each of the following sentences : 
La voitured dmarre et parten vitesse
La voiture ddmarre , parten vitesse.
In general , it is fairly easy to identify the beginning of a subordinate clause  . It is a striking peculiarity of the French language that every  ( or nearly every ) subordinate clause is introduced by some kind of introductory word  , a conjunction or the like . Or to put it otherwise : the first word in a subordinate clause is always a word that belongs to a very limited class and one which it is rather easy to recognize  ( subordinating conjunctions , relative pronouns ) . Some of these words can play other roles as well ( for instances i , combien ) , but the ambiguities are relatively few or unimportant  . 
It is much more difficult to find out where the subordinate clauses end  . It is perhaps one of the merits of our model that it puts that question-until now  , as far as we know , grammarians have almost exlu-sively treated the beginning of the subordinate clauses  . There is no problem , of course , if the end of the subordinate clause coincides with the end of the sentence  ; the real problem arises with the embedded clauses . 
Normally , the information contained in our strings of numbers is sufficient for the identification of the end of the embedded clauses on account  , above all , of the fact that the subordinate clauses are most often embedded before the verb of the dominating clause  ( i . e . a clause that contains a subordinate clause-a subordinate as well as a principal clause may be a dominating clause  ) : levin qu'il boitest tr~s fort levin qu'il boltles oirest tr~s for t  . 
SEGMENTATION OFFRENCHSENTENCES 283
If the clause is embedded before the finite verb of the dominating clause  , and if there is no comma or coordinating conjunction between the verb of the subordinate clause and the verb of the dominating clause  , the end of the embedded clause is to be found just before the verb of the dominating clause  ( as in the two examples just quoted )  . In a string such as safely put the final boundary of this clause just before the second "  5  "  ( finite verb )  . This observation , which does not seem to be a matter of course , can be stated in the following way in terms of traditional grammar : if you inserta clause just after the subject  , you cannot insert anything more before the verb phrase  . 
The unmarked words ( denoted here by the number 4 ) standing between two finite verbs are connected with the preceding verb  . This is true also of a string of " 4 "s surrounded by commas : levin qu ' il boitle soir  , quel ques minutes a vant desecoucher , est tr~s for t . 
There is only one exception to these rules concerning the final boundary of clauses embedded before the verb of the dominating clause  . 
If the clause is inserted after an adverbial phrase at the head of the dominating clause  , the subject of the dominating clause will be placed after the embedded clause just before the verb:lejourohleliv reparut Jacques ? tait absent de Paris  . 
Our grammar does not solve this problem if the embedded clause is not terminated by a comma  , or if the subject of the dominating clause is not a clitic pronoun  . But normally there is a commafter an embedded clause which is part of an adverbial phrase at the head of the sentence : Dansune  soci3t3 qui fonctionne comme unorganisme robuste , l'3 limi-nations efait touteseule . 
The problems are more complicated when between the two finite verbs there are one or several coordinating conjunctions or a number  284 BENTEMAEGAARD-EBBE SPANG . - . HANSSEN of commas different from two . Our grammar analyses correctly most of these combinations such as  , for instance , the following case : sondos , sesbras , soncoului fontmal quandilles remue , et , surtout , sat ? teest I our deet doulou reuse . 
In this example , the stroke that marks the end of the embedded clause will be placed just be fore et  . 
The weakest point in the model is the treatment of clauses embedded after the verb of the dominating clause  ; in this case , we have no definite means of identifying the end of the subordinate clause  . Example : il avait donn3 ~ tousceuxqui s'3taient   pr3sent3s descade aux magni-fiques . 
This case is , fortunately , rather infrequent ; it is much more common to find the subordinate clause at the end of the dominating clause  , at the head of the dominating clause , or before the verb of the dominating clause . In the texts analysed until now by the computer , more than 90 % of the sentences have been correctly segmented . 
6. The grammar.
Our grammar is intended to analyse grammatical French sentences  . 
Ideally , it should be able to analyse correctly every grammatical French sentence  . On the other hand , it is not designed for discarding ungrammatical sentences  . 
The grammar has the form of two state diagrams , one of the main clauses , and another of the subordinate clauses . In many states , in both of the diagrams , the parsing procedure can leave the level where it is and enter the diagram of the subordinate clauses at the next  , lower , level . In principle , there is no limit to the number of times the procedure can make new entries  , at still lower levels , into the diagram of the subordinate clauses . Consequently , the grammar can be considered as an extended finite state grammar  , rather similar to the Transition network grammar described by Wood  ( in < ~ Communications of ACM >> , 
XIII (1970) no . 10.
It is the loops provided with the number 1 ( the symbol for the class of words introducing subordinate clauses  ) that have this particular effect of making a new entry into the diagram of the subordinate clauses  . 
SEGMENTATION OFFRENCHSENTENCES 285 l\
MAIN CLAUSE.
Thus , a loop carrying the number I does not have exactly the ordinary meaning of a loop  , viz . that the machines hall stay in the state where it is  . The machine will pursue the analysis at a lower level  , but when it has found the end of tile subordinate clause  , it will come up again into the state it left , and in this way , from the viewpoint of the upper level , the loop can be said to keep its ordinary meaning . 
Apart from the numbers symbolizing the different word-classes  , the arrows of the diagram may carry some other symbols  . Ld and Lg signify that the machines hallprint , at this moment , a stroke marking 286 BENTEMAEGAARD-EBBE SPANC ~ HANSSEN the boundary between two clauses  . Ld means that the strokes hall be printed on the right side of the symbol which has just been read  , whereas Lg will put the stroke on the left side . Gmeans that the machine , when arrived at the new state , shall read the symbol to the left of the symbol just read  , i . e . the machine shall read from right to left . 
The backward reading , from right to left , plays a rather important role in this grammar , because , among the 8 symbols , some are more informative than others , in particular class I ( words introducing subordinate clauses ) and the classes 5 and 8 ( finite verbs ) : each of these three
SEGMENTATION OFFRENCHSENTENCES 287 numbers indicates by itself the existence of a new clause  , whereas the commas and the coordinating conjunctions have only a secondary importance  . For this reason , the machine will most often , during a first reading from left to right , remain in the same state after having read a comma or a conjunction  . O11 the contrary , when the machine has read a new finite verb ( the state q6 in the diagram of the main clauses , the state q105 in the diagram of the subordinate clauses )  , it will know that it must look for a place to put a boundary somewhere to the left of the verb it has met  ; at that momen the commas and the coordinating conjunctions become interesting as the words that are most likely to indicate the boundary  . 
The states that mark the end of a subordinate clause are indicated by rectangles  ; these states control the level shifts . 
The computer programme had to solve the rather puzzling problem of combining the backward reading with the shifting of levels  . 
From a linguistic point of view , the computer programme adds to the grammar only a device for the treatment of the " holes " which appear in the string when a part of the string has been put at a lower level  . In the programme , such a hole is considered as being framed by two commas  , even if the subordinate clause was not framed by commas  ; this means that , at the level of the dominating clause , the embedded clause has the same status as a string of unmarked words framed by two commas  . ** We suppose that the programme in its entirety will be operative in the course of " autumn  1973  . It is our intention then to analyse a certain number of French texts-at present we have at our disposal  12 novels on paper tape which we have borrowed from , Le Cent repour unT rts or de la Langue Fran9aise  ~  ( Nancy ) and which we have trans-coded . 

