
ANTONfNR ~ HA-SVATAVA MACHOV.~
COMPUTER TESTING OF AGENERATIVE GRAMMAR
1 . 1 . The emergence of materially elaborated variants of generative 
description of languages has brought about a pragmatical question as to whether a particular generative grammar is working in such a way as it is assumed to be  . This problem proved to be unsolvable by a linguist not aided by computer  . Therefore , programme started to be written , so as to enable the computers either a ) to make a grammar work or b ) to allow to find out-through a recognition procedure  , e . g . changing the directions of arrows in all the rewriting rules - whether an initial S can really be reached when starting from assumed output strings  . 
1 . 2 . In the Computing Centre of Charles University , Prague , the former of the above methods of computer testing of generative grammars was selected- similarly as at the University of Michigan  ( J . F ~ a ~ D-MAN , 1971) and at other research centres . Tests are being worked out for a certain variant of functional generative description of the Czech language  ( the author of its frame is P . SGAr ~) . For the time being , the object of the testing is the generative component  ( GC ) of this description enumerating semantic representations  ( SR's ) of sentences . 
1 . 3 . Before demonstrating the way in which the testing is carried out we shall give a brief outline of the basic properties of the GC of the functional generative description  . For a more detailed characterization of this type of description see P  . SgAtt , et al (1969) . 
The GC is a contextfree phrase structure grammar , i . e . a grammar of the type 2 in Chomsky's classification of grammars . Together with the theory of immediate constituent she dependency syntax finds its application in it  . In the GC there are several types of contextfree rules : modifying  , substitution alnd selection alones . They are shown illustra-tively in Fig .  1 , where U , V , W are auxiliary nonterminal symbols , u is a terminal symbol , r is some functor-terminal symbol indicating 144 ANTONIN~i I-IA-SVA TAVA MACHOV/t which of the two nonterminal symbols on the righthand side of the rule is the dependent one and which is the governing one as well as the type of dependency  . For the sake of simplicity each of the terminal and nonterminal symbols is represented by a single letter  . 
modifying rules U ~ ( VrW ) rewriting ~ substitutional rules U~V rules ~ seleaional rules U~u 
Fig . 1.
In the written form of the grammar , nonterminal symbols of the grammar are ordered ( nq-2 ) -tuples X , X 0 , X 1 ,   . . . , X ~ where X is the socalled name-symbol , i . e . a name shared by a certain class of nonterminal symbols  , and X0 ,   . . . , X , , are indices specifying individual nonterminal symbols of that class  . Terminal symbols are characterized by a similar structure  . From a linguistic point of view the name-symbols in terminal symbols correspond to the socalled lexemes  , grammate mes and functors . For the time being the lexemes represent semogly phs  , their total number in the variant tested being 275  . Thus this experiment ranks among those experiments operating with a " lexicon " of a small extent which is typical so far of most computer experiments with generative grammars  . One name-symbol corresponds to the left bracket and one to the right one  . 
A substitution of some units for others is often possible in Czech in certain contexts only  . The GC meets this fact generally by introducing new  , more refined categories pecified by indices . The number of indices actually used differs with the individual name-symbols  , the brackets and some other name-symbols having no indices at all  . The maximum number of indices attached to one nonterminal name-symbol is  15  ; the maximum number of indices attached to one terminal name-symbol is  30  ; the maximum number of values of each individual index is  94 and the average number of values per one index is  8  . 
The right hand side of the rules in the GC is subject o certain restrictions  , namely the right hand side of the rules does not contain more than two nonterminal symbols  . Hence we work with a binary con-text-free grammar  . The GC contains recursive rules . The order of the rules applied is determined by the form of the rule itself and by a selection of nonterminal symbols  . The rules are not distinguished as oblig-COMPUTER TESTING OF AGENERATIVE GRAMMAR  145 atory and optional ones . However , the answer to the question whether it is necessary  , or only possible , to use some rule in generating some SK of a sentence is given by the form of the rules itself  . To make the representation brief and to increase the legibility  , rule-schemes are largely made use of . 
2 . 1 . The form of grammar was maintained in a shape close to the original one  , with which the linguists are used to work ; it makes a good orientation i the grammar possible  . Some modifications , however , were introduced . 
The values of the indices were coded with natural numbers and some designations were employed  , such as so called references , which make it possible to register only once the lists of index-values and even whole nonterminal symbols that occur more than once  , and to refer to these values in other cases ; they also make it possible to describe the fact that the value of some index is determined by a value of some other index  , etc . These lists , symbols and values are usually referred to by means of references in the frame of a single rule -scheme so that these references do not cause any serious slowing down of the work of the programme and at the same time they save the storage space  . 
The leftmost-derivation method is used , as well as a random choice of alternatives . It was , however , necessary to avoid , e . g . , a repeated choice of some recursive rules , which would lead either to an excessive prolongation of the string generated  , possibly without any transition to terminal symbols  , or to a situation where the number of some types of Slk's if i the generated sample would be far removed from their actual frequency in the language  . Therefore , the alternatives on the righthand sides are not picked out simply at random but with a certain prescribed probability  . As a consequence of the use of rule-schemes it is not possible to prescribe probabilities for the schemes of the right hand sides as wholes only  , and it is necessary to prescribe also probabilities for various values of indices used in these schemes  . The prescrib-ed probabilities make it possible to control the derivation of the SPCs so as to make the generated sample contain  , first of all , some strings of a particular type chosen a priori  , which we intend to examine more closely . Thus it will be possible to change the set of the generated strings by means of a change of the probabilities prescribed  . In other words : by a modification of probabilities of some subset of rules it will always be possible to meet the demand : " Let the given phenomenon occur in SR  . 's with much higher ( or lower ) frequency !" . However , an answer l0   146 ANTONiNRfI'IA-SVATAVA MACHOV fit to the question : " What will be the effect of a modification of the probability in the rule number n ~ upon the generation of SK's ? " can only be given after evaluating the further experiment of random generation in which the probability modification intended will be materialized  . 
The programme makes use of a special subroutine to obtain pseu-do random numbers  . 
An example of a modifying rule:
VERBUM 0=18-..>.
VERBUM , NP
RD 8=0,1$9 = 133 = L8
LS7----18=0 , 1$9 = 13-~40(NP0=9(20) , 102----13 = L8RDLS ) are nonterminal name-symbols is a functor- terminal name-symbol means that this rule can be used when the value of index  8 with given nonterminal name-symbol is 0 or 1 means that the rule can be used for nonterminal name-symbol VERBUM when index  9 either has the value 13 or is not used a prescribed probability for choice of this alternative  ( other alternatives are not quoted here for this example  ) means that in 20 ~o of cases the value 9 is to be chosen , in the rest of the cases the value 10 the value of index 3 with a nonterminal name-symbol NP will equal the value of index  8 of the rewritten nonterminal symbol reference ; it means that at this place the whole lefthand side should be repeated  ( i . e . VERBUM with all its indices ) . 
Some quantitative characteristics of the tested variant :  ( The given average values are mere estimates based on partial calculations  , exact values will be reached on the computer in the course of trans-ducing the grammar into a form suitable for the work of the programme  )  . 
The number of nonterminal name-symbols 62 the number of indices with one nonterminal name -symbol  15 max ,   5 average COMPUTER TESTING OF AGENERATIVE GR MMAR 147 the number of possible values of one index with one nonterminal name-symbol the number of terminal name-symbols the number of  (  , proper terminal name-symbols ( corresponding to lexemes ) the number of indices with one terminal name -symbol the number of possible values of one index with a terminal name-symbol the number of schemes of lefthand sides for one name-symbol the total number of schemes of lefthand sides the number of schemes of right hand sides for one lefthand side the total number of schemes of righthand sides the number of all name-symbols of one righthand side  94 max ( with the socalled de-terminations ) 34 max ( in other cases ) 8 average 30 max ( with verbal lexemes ) 7 max ( with noun lexemes ) 3 average 94 max ( with the socalled de-terminations ) 18 max ( in other cases ) 7 average 79 max 6 average 2 average 3 average 3 . In giving information on research work , including linguistics , a great depends on the way chosen for the presentation of the results  ( A . MalITINrT , 1970) . In the field of computer treatment of 148 ANTONf lq ~ . fI--IA-SVA TAVA MACHOV , ~ grammar we have not found it very easy to choose the most adequate way for transferring the acquired knowledge and we assume to have reached this goal only partially  . 
3 . 1 . The most essential work involved in the transduction of the grammar into a shape which is cohvenient for the work of the computer was left to the a RAMMARTR a NSD trCER programme which also performs the input check of the representation  . 
The programmes are being prepared for a computer of the type IBM  360 or 370 and will be written in PL/1 programming language . 
3 . 2 . The whole grammar will be written on a magnetic disk as one file by means of the GRAMMAR TRANSDUCER programme  . This file will contain records of variable length  . One record will always contain information about all left hand sides with the same name-symbol and about the corresponding right hand sides  . 
The structure of a record on a magnetic d~sk:LS i  . . . information about a left hand side ( about indices , their values and their probabilities ) RS ii . . . information about righthand sides having the form IP l  W11   W21   . . . IW ~ I'where Wi describes the word of the right hand side  , i . e . the code of its name-symbol , indices and their values , and the probabilities P stands for the probability of the selection of the given scheme of the right hand side 
Fig . 2.
The main programme DEm VATION OFSR'S and the generated string will be stored in the internal storage of the computer  . The programme reads a corresponding record of the file on the disk storage  , using the code of the nonterminal name-symbol as a key  . The read record is processedirectly in the buffer with the use of based variables  . First , an appropriate lft-hand side of the rule is found  , then a corresponding righthand side of the rule , and the substitution is carried out . 
It follows from the shape of the rules that approximately  1/4 out of the total number of symbols in the generated string are the so-call-COMPUTER TESTING OFAGENERATIVE GRAMMAR  149 edsemogly phs . An analysis of the process of generation has shown that  , if the generated string contains Nsemogly phs , it was necessary to use , in the course of its generation , about 5N to 8N-times a substitution rule , N-times a selectional rule and ( N-1 ) -times a modifying rule . E . g . when simulating a generation of a string of 13 symbols-containing 3 semogly phs- 23 substitutions were carried out , which corresponds well to the estimation according to the methodes cribed above  . 
We can thus estimate the number of readings from the external storage of the computer in the course of the generation of one string  . 
The maximum length of a string will be determined by the dimension of the storage space declared for this string  . The probabilities prescribed for the choice of the right hand sides of the rules ensure that a premature finishing of the process of generation caused by exceeding a given length may occur only in exceptional cases  . 
On the output of the programme there will be two output files containing generated SR's  . One will be on the magnetic tape and will serve as an input for the programme for the next  ( transductive ) component of the generative description , the other will be a print file serving for checking up the results  . 
Possible changes and corrections of the rules of the grammar will be carried out by means of a programme called CRAMM ARMOmr ~ R  , which will carry out the changes in the file stored on the magnetic disk according to the data on punched cards  . 
In the present moment , we have finished the rewriting of the grammar into the shape which will be punched on the cards  . Some basic problems have already been solved , e . g . the shape of the data has been decided upon and the algorithm of the generation of SR  . 's has been formulated . The programming itself will be done during the autumn of this year  . 
A system of programmes for testing the whole generative grammar is illustrated by means of a flow chart diagram in Fig  .  3 . 
The diagram of the data preparation for a programme corresponding to the GC is shown in Fig  .  4 . The other data files will be prepared in an analogous way  . 
4 . The main contribution of the computer testing of a generative grammar is usually seen in the fact that the linguist acquires knowledge on the interaction of the rules of grammar  ( J . FRIED MAN , 1971) . Moreover , the preparation of the data for the computer calls for more  accu-150 ANTONfN id HA-SVA TAVA MACHOVA
Derivation of SIL's
Y ?
Transduction to the
Phenogrammatical Level ~ r

Transduction to the
Morphemic Level ? " V
Transduction to the
Graphemic Level 1 . . . Rules of grammar 2, 3, 4 . . . Rules of transduction __Representation of
Sentences on the
Phenogrammatical Level
Representation f
Sentences on the
Morphemic Level--3-Sentences in

Fig . 3
Rules of Grammar I
GRAM MARTRANS DUCER
J Corrections and/or
IModifications
GRAM MAR MODIFIER\]
Rules of Grammar
Adapted for Computer
Fig . 4
COMPUTER TESTING OF AGENERATIVE GRAMMAR 151 rate formulations and solutions of some questions  , which would otherwise be neglected as less important  . 
We also find some value in the fact that the results of computer testing of any particular generative grammar can help even a linguist who is not precisely familiar with the theory in question : he can promptly verify his own views  , or those of somebody else , on linguistic properties of the sequences generated  , and gain useful information for his own further work  . 
REFERENCESj . FRIED MAN with T . H . BI~r . DT , R . . W . 
DORAN,\]3. W.POLLACK,T.S.MAR-
TN  ~ , A Computer Model of Transform-ational Grammar , New York ,  1971 . 
A . MARTINET , Analyse et Prdsentation :
Deux Temps du Travail du Linguiste , in Linguistique Contemporaine . Horn-mage ~ E . Buyssens , Bruxelhs , 1970, pp .  133-139 . 
P . SGALL , L . NEBESK~r , A . GORAL ~ IKOV ~ I,
E . HAJI~OV . ~ , A Functional Approach to Syntax in Generative Description of 
Language , New York , 1969.
