M.V . AAI , OV-M.M . Flul ~ Z
FREQUENCY ANDAGEASCH ARACTERISTICS OF AWORD
1 . The problem of rdation between the frequency and age of a 
word is only a small part of the general problem of opposition of the 
synchronic and diachronic aspects of language . The frequency is obviously a purely synchronic haracteristic of a word whereas the age  ( the time intervalt between the appearance of the word and the present moment  ) is a purely diachronic one . However there is a simple dependence between both characteristics : the oldage of a word corresponds to a high frequency ranking and vice versa : among the words with low frequency the proportion of ancient words is small  . The existence of this dependency was first discovered by G  . K . Zlvr (1947) . 
2 . To obtain this dependency in analytical formlet us split the whole frequency dictionary into a number of groups of equal size  ( n words in each of the groups )  . * Each group consists of words of equal or nearly equal values of frequency  . The most frequently used n words belong to the group with rank  1  , the following n words constitute the group with rank  2 and the words having in the dictionary numbers from  ( i-1 ) n+1tilli . n constitute a group with rank i . 
Then the ratio N(i , t ) of words with an age equal to or greater than t in the ith group of the dictionary is:  ( 1 ) N (  ;  , 0= ~ v(-KtV ~) where K is a constant . 
3 . There is a simple method to obtain (2) from (1) . Formula ( 2 ) gives us the distribution i the dictionary of words with a get  , t , < t~t ~ : (2) N(; , t  ~ , t ~) = N q , t ~) - N q , t ~) - - - - 1In our experiments - - - - 100 . 
4M.V . ARAPOV-M.M . HERZ
The interpretation of ( 2 ) as a function of rank i is as follows : the number of words that appeared in the time intervaltl-t ~  ( for example : from 973 till 1073 A . D . ) is growing till it reaches some rank i , ,~ , where the function ( 2 ) will obtain its maximum value and then it will decrease approaching zero  . The maximum value function ( 2 ) is the nearer to the beginning of the rank axis the more ancient heep och considered  . 
The maximum value for the above cited example places it in the group with rank  16   ( i , ,~ = 16) ; if we chose the XVI I-th century as a time interval the point of maximum value would shift to the group with rank  134   ( i , ,~ = 134) . Here we have supposed the mean value of K to be 0 . 0 25 which holds for a number of European languages . The value of function ( 2 ) at the point of maximum is the greater the more proximate to our day are the time intervals we choose  . Here we have a sort of mapping of the time axis on the rank  1  . 
4 . The dependency between age and frequency is a dependency " in the mean "  . There is no way of predicting , for any word with a given age , the frequency of that particular word . All predictions would be applied only to sets of words  . By ( 1 ) we can obtain the ratio of words in the considered group i having anage equal to/greater than t  , but by no means can we establish exactly which words have such an age  . 
One of the basic postulates from which ( 1 ) was established consists in the following : there exists no difference between e wandol dele-meats in their behaviour on each step of vocabulary evolution  , i . e . 
the probability of " dissociation " is equal ( or nearly equal ) for all the words of the same group . 
5 . Another basic postulate of our theory is as follows  . There is no intrinsic difference between any two vocabularies which can be described by  ( 1 ) or similar functions if this pair of vocabularies represents two historical stages of the evolution of the same language  . In other words the collation of a pair of frequency dictionaries compiled for two successive periods in the history of the same language does not in itself  ( without consideration of historical evidence ) make it possible to determine which of the dictionaries corresponds to the later  ( resp . previous ) epoch . 
6 . Then it is necessary to assume the independence infrequency shifting of any particular word  . This assumption rules out the appli-FREQUENCYAND AGEASCH ARACTERISTICS OF AWORD  5 cation of our theory in other than the vocabulary levels of the language system  , since it excludes the situation when dissociation of a particular element yields a " chain reaction " which results in the whole rebuilding of the system  . 
7 . The following problems would be solved within the framework of the present heory : a  ) if we have reason to suppose that a given set S of words appeared in a period preceeding some moment t  ( the value of parameter K is given )  , we can calculate the absolute value of t ; examples of S : the set of words appeared before the splitting of the parent language  ; the set of words experienced the influence of a given phonetic law  , etc . ; this problem is the same as the one which glotto chronology has attempted to solve  . 
b ) if we have reason to suppose that a given set S of words ? appeared in a time period following some moment  , we can obtain the absolute value of t ( in this case the words belonging to S are innovations  , specifically , borrowings ) or demonstrate hat this moment does not exist ( in this case , the given set S most probably consists of vernacular words  )  . 
c ) having historical data about the time of appearance of the words forming the initial part of the frequency dictionary  ( 1000-3000 most frequent words ) we can calculate , with the aid of (1) , indexes of the evolution rate K ( K = K ( t ) ) for the whole vocabulary and for any stage of the language for which historical data is obtainable  . 
d ) analogously we can study with the aid of ( 2 ) the dynamics of language borrowing and obtain indexes of intensity of vocabulary interaction for any period for which corresponding data is available  . 
8 . For testing the present heory we have taken the frequency lists for the following languages : Russian  ( two lists )  , Czech ( one ) , French ( two ) , l ~ oumanian ( three ) , Spanish ( one ) , German ( two ) and English ( two ) . The volume of the lists is spread from 600 to 6000 words . The period for which lexicological data are available  ( depth of analysis did not exceed 1000-1500 years ) was present as a system of intervals : ( 0 , tl ) ,  (0 , t ~) ,  (0 , ts ) . . . , where tl < t ~ < t ~ . . . and zero corresponds to the present moment . We take t as an age of the word x if x was primarily registered in the language at t  , , t , > t and there exists no such time interval (0 , t , ) that t , > t , > t . 
6M.V.ARAPOV-M.M.ttERZ
The observe dependency N(i , t ) upont only roughly , for a long period , corresponds to the theoretical derived one , hence we sought to investigate also fluctuation of vocabulary changerate  ( K = K ( t ) ) . 
A full account on theoretical and experimental aspects of the problem " age and frequency " is contained in M  . V . AaAvov , M . 
M . H~Rz (1972).

M . V . ARAPOV , M . M . H  ~ z , lz menenies lovarj avov remeni , n * Informatsion-nyevo prosysemiotiki , ling vistikiiav to mat its heskog operevod a , , III (1972) . 
G . K . Z ~ Pr , Prehistoric ' cultural strata ' in the evolution of German : the case of 
Gothic , in ~ Modern Language Notes,,
LXII (1947).

