COMPUTATIONAL ANALYSISO FPREDICATION ALSTRUCTURES INENGLISH 
V Henry Kucera
Brown University
Providence , R.I ., U.S.A.

The results of a computational
analysis of all predications , finite
and nonfinite , in a one-million-word
corpus of present-day American English
( the " Brown Corpus ") are presented.
The analysis shows the nature of the
syntactic differences among the various
genres of writing represented in the
database , especially between informa-
tive prose and imaginative prose . The
results also demonstrate that syntactic complexity  , if defined as the number of predications per sentence  , is not directly predictable from sentence length . 
The purpose of this paper is to present an outline of the procedures and the summary of the results of a computational analysis of the structure of predications in a large and representative sample of English texts  . This paper is thus intended both as a contribution to the discussion of computational techniques in linguistics and as a study of l inguistic performance  . 
The database for this research was a one-mill ion-word corpus of present-day American English  , originally assembled by W . N . Francis and Henry Kujera at Brown University in the  1960's and thus commonly referred to by researchers interested in text analysis as the Brown 
Corpus . More recently , the compilers of the Brown Corpus have completed a grammatical annotation of the database  . 
The entire one million words of the
Corpus have been " tagged " , with each word given a specific grammatical symbol  . The " tagging " procedure , which was semiautomatic , assigned to each running word an unambiguous symbol based on a taxonomy of  82 grammatical categories . 
The basic principle of our tagging is an expanded set of grammatical word classes  ; so , for example , modal verbs are identified by a unique tag , differentiating them from other verbs , as are each of the verbs be , have and do . The second principle of our tagging system is morphological  , e . g . plurals of nouns are explicitly coded and thus separately retrievable  ( as are singulars )  ; the same is true of past tense forms of verbs , verbal participles , and so on . We have also introduced some syntactic factors into our coding  ; so , for example , coordinate conjunctions are differentiated from subordinate ones  ; sentence boundaries are marked . Because of the system of grammatical annotations used  , the retrieval of various types of syntactic information can now be accomplished algorithmically  . Our research , partially presented in this article , is concerned both with automatic parsing of the annotated text and with the study of linguistic performance  . Specifically , I shall report on the investigation of sentence length and its relation to sentence complexity in written English  .  1
If we disregard headlines and other headings ( of chapters , sections , etc . ) , the Brown Corpus contains 54 , 724 sentences , with the mean sentence length of 18 . 49 words . However , both sentence length and sentence structure vary greatly among the  15 genres of writing represented in the Corpus . In general , sentence length differs significantly between " informative " prose and " imaginative " prose  , the former exhibiting a substantially higher mean sentence length  . 
In the Brown Corpus , the term Informative
Prose is applied to all those samples that have been selected from nonfiction sources  . This section is divided into nine genres ; for convenience of reference , each genre has been assigned a letter code : A . Press : reportage , B . Press : editorial , C . Press : reviews , D . Religion , E . Skills and hobbies , F . Popular lore , G . Belles lettres ( biography , memoirs , etc . ), H . Miscellaneous ( documents and reports of various kinds )  , and J . Learned and scientific writings . There are altogether 374 samples of Informative Prose in the Corpus ; with each sample being approximately 2 , 000 words long , this part of the Corpus consists of 755 , 010 words . 
imaginative Prose , on the other hand , includes samples taken from a variety of fiction sources and is represented by six genres : K  . General fiction , L . Mystery and detective , M . Sciencefiction , N . Adventure and Western , P . Romance and love story , and R . Humor . There are 126 samples of Imaginative Prose , a gain of about 2 , 000 words each , accounting for 256 , 955 words . The entire Corpus thus consists of 500 samples of texts and contains 1  , 011 , 965 running words ( word tokens ) , not counting headlines and other headings . 

All genres of the Informative Prose portion have a higher mean sentence length than any of the genres in the Imaginative Prose section of the Corpus  . 
The mean sentence length in Informative
Prose ranges from a high of 24 . 23 words ( in H . Miscellaneous ) to 18 . 63 words ( in E . Skills and hobbies ) . In Imagin-ative Prose , on the other hand , the highest mean is only 17 . 64 words ( in
R . Humor ) and the low is 12 . 81 words ( in L . Mystery and detective fiction ) . 
This difference is , to some extent , due to the percentage of quoted material in the two sections of the Corpus  . While no genre of Informative Prose has more than  11  . 9% of quoted material , with Belles lettreshaving this highest percentage and the learned samples the lowest of only  2  . 8% , the percentage of quoted material in Imaginative Prose ranges from a low of  12  . 76%  ( Mystery and detective fiction ) to a high of 26 . 8% ( Science fiction ) . Moreover , there is a difference in the nature of the quoted material : in Informative Prose it is a mixture of representations of spoken material and quotations from another written source  ; in Imaginative Prose , virtually all quoted material is fictional dialogue  . Two facts should be noted in this regard , however : first , that no sample with more than 50% of quoted material was included in the
Brown Corpus ; and second , that the correlation between sentence length and the percentage of dialogue is by no means exact  . Several discrepancies in such correlation are given in the essay by Marckworth and Bell who studied sentence length distribution in the Brown 
Corpus in detail . 2
Sentence length distribution , of course , is bound to have some effect on syntactic complexity of a text  . Clearly , a sentence consisting of two words cannot be considered to be syntactically complex by any conceivable standard of measurement  . However , neither in theory nor--as I shall demonstrate below--in practice  , can sentence length be viewed as a reliable indicator of some common sense notion of syntactic complexity which might be useful either in the study of performance in general or in stylistic syntactic characterizations  . 
Consider , for example , the length in words and the syntactic properties of the following two sentences :  ( 1 ) John's grandfather left all his oil paintings to the 
Metropolitan Museum of Fine
Arts (2) Tom planned to ask Alice to dance
The first sentence has four teen words ( by conventional graphic count )  , the second exactly half that , i . e . seven words . But while the first sentence has only one verbal form  , left , the second has three , one finite , planned , and two infinitives , to ask and to dance . In the fairly conservative versions of transformational grammar of the  1960's   ( such as the ' standard theory ' )  , the first sentence would have had an underlying phrase marker  ( deep structure ) consisting of one S , and thus not very different from the actual sentence  . The second sentence , on the other hand , would have had an underlying phrase marker consisting of three S's  , supposed to represent the three underlying predications which could be informally given as ' Tom 
PAST plan ' , ' To maskAlice ' , ' Alicedance ' In other linguistic theories , of course , the situation might be quite different , with a much more elaborate initial phrase marker in a generative semantic representation  , for example . 
More recently , on the other hand , syntactic solutions have been proposed in which no sentential source at all is required for infinitival phrases  . In this kind of syntactic treatment , the infinitival phrases are then directly generated as 

The purpose of this article is not to discuss or evaluate such conflicting syntactic treatments  . Rather , I want to discuss first the algorithm for the retrieval of verbal constructions from the data base  , and then summarize the results obtained in the analysis of sentential complexity in the entire Corpus as well as in the different genres represented in the database  . 
The data analyzed in this study are the actual sentences of the Corpus  , which were encoded in the usual standard English graphic form  . There is thus no direct information in the data base about " underlying " structure or even about any syntactic bracketing of the surface string  . I will therefore avoid the use of the term " surface structure " entirely in referring to my data  . Surface structure , in all those linguistic theories that have ut il ized this concept  , includes at least some labeled bracketing of the terminal string  . In the " revised extended standard theory " ( REST ) of transformational grammar , surface structure actually refers to that level of representation which is not only enriched by the socalled traces  , but has yet to pass through the deletion rules , the filter component of the grammar and , of course , the stylistic rules . 3In our case , however , the only information besides the actual sentences is the accompanying  -33-sequence of grammatical tags , described above . 
My basic definition of sentence complexity in the present study will be simply the number of predications per sentence  . I shall report these results for each of the 15 genres of the Corpus as well as for the Corpus as a whole  . 
Given the form of the analyzed data , the reader should also be aware that my use of the term " predication " is broader than is usually the case in linguistic literature or in general usage  . As is customary , I shall consider a predication to be , first of all , any verb or verbal group with a tensed verb that is subject to concord  ( for person and number ) with its grammatical subject . I will refer to these verbal constructions as finite predications  . In addition to that , however , I will also include in my analysis what I shall call nonfinite predications  . These include infinitival complements , gerunds and participles . 
My basic taxonomy of verbal groups is thus quite similar to that adopted by structural ! stl inguists in the analysis of the English verb  . All verbal groups exhibiting concord with a subject  , including the subject it ( as in it rained ) will be counted as finite predications , as will interrogatives ; those that do not satisfy these conditions will be considered to be nonfinite  . 
My only departure from some structural treatments lies in the inclusion of all imperatives in the class of finite predications  . This allows metoplace imperatives with and without an overt subject  ( e . g . Don't worry ! and D on't you worry ! ) in the same class of predications . 
When it comes to complex verbal strings involving a quasi-auxiliary plus infinitive  ( such as going to , supposed to , used to + infinitive ) , I shall follow here the consistent--although perhaps somewhat controversial--approach of Joos  .   4 Joos treats all quasi-auxil-iaries differently from " true " auxiliaries  ( such as will or may )  , pointing out that they exhibit different syntactic properties  . Joos also argues that including only some of the quasi-auxil-iaries with the class of auxiliary verbs would make the whole English verbal system ' incomprehensible '  . My adoption of Joos ' approach means that in my analysis a sentence such as He used to play tennis will have two pr~ications  , one finite and one nonfinite . 
The retrieval and analysis of verbal forms , which is the subject of this report , represents only a segment of a larger parsing algorithm for the complete syntactic and stylistic analysis of the Brown Corpus  . The retrieval has been made possible by the " tagging " system described above  . As already mentioned , verbal constructions from all the sentences of the Corpus have been included in this analysis  , with the exception of those occurring in headlines and other headings  . Headlines and headings , which are identified by a special symbol in the tagged Corpus  , were not included because of the particular nature of English " headline grammar "  , which often omits verbs entirely , e . g . 
Actor in Critical Condition after Explosion , or omits some verb form , particularly the finite one , e . g . President to Meet Brezhnev in Vienna . All sentences outside headlines are included , however , even those that do not contain any verb at all ( e . g . Just our luck !) . The number of sentences with a " zero " predication is small : there are  1869 of them in the entire Corpus , accounting for only 3 . 4% of the Corpus sentences . 
Nevertheless , they have been included in computing the statistics  . 
Verbal constructions of both types , finite and nonfinite , may consist of a single verbal form ( e . g . likes or to like ) or of one or more auxiliaries plus the main verb  . The longest possible finite verbal group in English can have five elements  , e . g . may ( might ) have been being considered ; the longest active verbal group can have only four elements  , e . g . may ( might ) have been considering . A non-finite verbal group can consist of a maximum of four verbal elements  , e . g . to have been being considered . Of these , the maximum finite passive verbal group with five elements does not occur in the Corpus at all  , nor does the maximum non-finite group with four verbal elements  . However , the maximum finite active group with four elements  , i . e . the type may have been consider in H , occurs 8 times , and the second longest passive group , i . e . the type may have been considered , 68 times . 
The situation is similar with regard to nonfinite groups : the one of maximum possible length  , i . e . the type to have been being considered , does not occur at all . In three-element groups , i . e . 
the type to have been considered or to have been considering  , only the first ( passive ) form occurs , 22 times ; there are no occurrences of the active type of this three-element group  . 
Complex verbal groups may be continuous ( i . e . not interrupted by a nonverbal element ) or discontinuous , i . e . 
34 so interrupted . Discontinuous verbal constructions exhibit a different pattern in declarative sentences on one hand  , and in wh-questions and yes/no questions on the other  . In declara-tives , the number of word-classes that can interrupt a complex verbal group is relatively small : it consists primarily of adverbs  , e . g . He will probably consider . . . , He has indeed been asked . 
In declarative sentences , other word-classes , including all the components of a noun phrase , constitute a definite clue that the verb group has terminated  . 
Clues of this sort are of crucial importance in any grammatical retrieval or parsing that uses annotated but otherwise unbracketed strings as input  . One of the important facts that such an algori thm has to consider is that  , due to various " deletion " rules under con-di tions of identity  , an English verbal group may appear in at runcated form  . 
Consider , for example , the following sentences : ( 3 ) Teddy could not be elected but his cousin could ( be )   ( 4 ) Teddy could not have been elected but his cous in could  ( have ( been ) )  ( The forms in parentheses indicate optional delet ions  . )
It is because of this possible truncation phenomenon that the retrieval algorithm needs to allow for the possi-bility of a verbal group ending in an auxiliary  . 
The situation is more complex when it comes to the retrieval of verbal groups in wh-questions and yes/no questions  . Because of the auxiliary inversion in such cases  , a large number of word-class representatives , including entire noun phrases , can be embedded within a verbal group in such sentences  . 
The retrieval of complex verb groups thus needs to take into account a number of variables  . Particular attention needs to be paid in the parsing procedure to the fact that an incomplete verbal group may represent either a truncated string or a discontinuous predi-cation which continues later in the sentence  . 
The retrieval algorithm for all verbal groups  , finite and non-finite , and continuous and discontinuous , scan-ned the tag sequence in each sentence from left to right  , without backtracking . 
The retrieval was thus essentially accompl is hed by a finite-state automaton  ( FSA )  . The complete FSA that can properly handle both continuous and discontin-uous verbal contruct fons  ( including truncated ones ) is quite complicated . Pure-ly for illustration , I give below a small fragment of the FSA , which will retrieve only those verbal groups that begin with a modal or with ' have '  , and are continu-ous . 
Figure 1
The arcs in the transition diagram in F igure  1 are labeled with the tag symbols of the appropr iate classes of items that need to be present for the automaton to reach a final state  , and for the string to be thus accepted as a legi timate verbal group  . Transition arcs labeled X , all of which terminate in the final state of the automaton  , make it possible for truncated groups to be accepted  . The symbol X , in this case , thus designates any tag outside of those that may appear in a verbal group  . The meaning of the other tag symbols in Figure 1 is as follows : MD = modal ; 
BE='be'(baseform ); BEG='being';
BEN='been '; H = any form of ' have ';
HV='have ' ( baseform) ; HVG='having' ; HVN='had'(past par?iciple) ; DO='do'(base'form) ; VB = main verb ( baseform) ; VBG = present participle of main verb ; VBN = past participle of main verb . 
The basic results , obtained in my analysis , are summarized in Tablei . 
Three figures are given for each of the fif teen genres and for the Corpus as a whole : mean sentence length in graphic words  ( i . e . word tokens ) , mean number of predications per sentence , and the k35 average number of words of text per predication . 
TABLE1
Genre Words Pred . Words per per per
Sent . Sent . Pred.
A . Press , report . 20.81
B . Press , edit . 19.73
C . Press , reviews 21.i1
D . Religion 21.23
E . Skills 18.63
F . Pop . lore 20.29
G . Belleslett .21 .37
H . Misc . 24.23
J . Learned 22 . 34 2 65 2 74 2 65 2 90 2 60 2 82 2 94 2 82 2 87 7 . 85 7 . 20 7 . 96 7 . 32 7 . 17 7 . 20 7 . 27 8 . 59 7 . 78
K . Fiction , gen . 13.92 2.41 5.78
L . Mystery/detect .12 .812 .295 .59
M . Sciencefict .13 .042 .235 .85
N.Adv./Western 12.92 2.30 5.62
P . Romance 13.60 2.45 5.55
R . Humor 17.64 2.84 6.21
CORPUS 18.49 2.65 6.97
The three sets of figures , taken jointly , throw a considerable light on the nature of the principal differences among the genres  . Particularly revealing is the comparison of the genres of Informative Prose  ( A through J--henceforth INFO ) as a group with the group encompassing I magin at iveProse  ( genres
K through R--henceforth IMAG ) . As already mentioned--and certainly not unexpectedly -- the mean sentence length  , measured in word tokens , is much larger in INFO than in IMAG . The reader should notice especially that all genres of INFO have their sentence-length mean above the Corpus mean  , while all genres of IMAG are below the Corpus mean  . 
The situation is different , in interesting ways , when it comes to predications . Here , too , the number of predications per sentence tends to be greater in INFO than in IMAG  , but not consistently so and certainly not to the extent that the differences in sentence length would lead one to expect  . No longer are all INFO genres above Corpus mean and all IMAG below it  . Within INFO , genre E ( Skills and hobbies ) is below the Corpus mean , and A(Press , reportage ) and C(Press , reviews ) are exactly at the mean . On the other hand , in IMAG , genre R ( Humor ) is well above the Corpus mean . 
The lack of correlation between sentence length and the number of predi-cations per sentence  , i . e . sentence complexity in my definition , is displayed in a particularly striking manner in the third set of figures  , which give the mean number of words per predicat ion  . In this case , all genres of INFO show a much larger number of words per predication than the genres of IMAG  . As a matter of fact , all genres of INFO are above , and all genres of IMAG below the Corpus mean in this instance  . Table 2 , which sum-marizes all the relevant data for the two groups of prose and for the Corpus  , shows these results quite clearly . 
TABLE 2
Measure INFOI MAG CORPUS
Words/Sent . 21.12 13.55 18.49
Pred./Sent . 2.80 2.38 2.65
Words/Pred . 7.54 5.69 6.97
While Table 2 simply confirms that sentence lengthish ighly genre dependent  , it also shows that the predica-tion/sentence figure is not directly correlated with sentence length  . The words/predication figures show , in essence , that the number of words needed to express a pred ication is considerably smaller in those styles of writing in which sentences tend to be shorter  . 
This fact also implies some interesting facts about the overall structure of sentences in INFO as compared to IMAG  . 
Since , aside from the verbal groups , the other major constituents of a sentence are the nominal groups  ( i . e . NP's ) , the statistics presented in Table 2 clearly suggest that nominal groups in INFO generally tend to be longer  ( and , in some sense , thus more complex ) than those in IMAG . Both cognitive and automatic parsing of texts of the infor-mational kind will thus put greater demands on noun phrase processing  . 
In order to investigate the matter somewhat further and to see what kind of requirements the two groups of prose may impose on the process ing of verbal groups  , I have also investigated the differences between the ratio of finite vs  . non-finite predications in the two groups of writing  . The results are given in Table 3 , where the symbol F and NF stand for finite and non-finite predications respectively  . 

TABLE 3
Group Type No . Pred . Pct.
per sent.
INFOF 68,157 1.91 68.09%
NF 31,935 0.893 1.91% 100,092 2.80 100.00%
IMAGEF 34,329 1.81 75.96%
NF 10,866 0.572 4.04% 45,195 2.38 100.00%
CORPUSF 102,486 1.877 0.54%
NF 42,801 0.782 9.46% 145,287 2.65 100.00%
A further examination of the information in Table 3 shows that the greater percentage of nonfinite predications in INFO  ( 31 . 91%) than in IMAG (24 . 04%) is due largely , although not exclusively , to the greater frequency of gerunds and participles in the INFO texts  . There are , on the average , 0 . 5 9 gerundival and participal predications per sentence in INFO and only  0  . 36 in IMAG ; the mean for the Corpus is 0 . 51 . This difference is less pronounced with regard to infinitival complements : INFO has a mean of  0  . 30 infinitives per sentence , IMAG 0 . 21; the Corpus mean is 0 . 27 infinitives per sentence . 
To summarize then , we can describe the syntactic style of Informative Prose  , compared to Imaginative Prose , by at least these three characteristics : longer sentences  , more complex nominal structures , and a larger proportion of nonfinite predications  . In contrast to this , the texts of Imaginative Prose exhibit shorter sentences  , a significantly smaller number of word tokens per predication  ( pointing to less complex nominal groups ) and a smaller percentage of nonfinite predications  . The research which we are now conducting with the Brown Corpus should provide us with further insights into the syntactic structure of English texts and their stylistic properties  , as well as into problems of automatic parsing in general  . 
References 1 . The list of tags and the rationale for the grammatical annotation system is given in W  . N . Francis and H . Ku~era,
Manual of Information to Accompanya
Standard Corpus of Present-Day American
English ( Department of Linguistics,
Brown University , Providence , 1979).
Much of the computer programming required to produce the final form of the tagged Corpus  , as well as the retrieval of the predications , was done by Andrew Mackie whose imaginative assistance is gratefully acknowledged  . 
2. Cf . Mary L . Marckworth and Laura M.
Bell , " Sentence Length Distribution inv the Corpus , " in Henry Kucera and W . 
Nelson Francis , Computational Analysis of Present-Day American English  ( Brown ~ iversity Press , Providence ,  1967) . 
3. Cf ., for example , Noam Chomsky and
Howard Lasnik , " Filters and Controls,"
Linguistic Inquir Z , Vol .8, No . 3(1977).
4. Martin Joos , The English Verb ( The
University of Wisconsin Press , Madison 1964).

