An intelligent digester for interactive text processings 
K . Hanakata
University of Stuttgart
Institute for Informatics
F?R . Germany
Abstract : I his paper outlines a practical approach to our project to design an intelligent system that supports an expert user for his understanding and representing news reports on a special world of the japanese computer industry  . 
With the extensive help of the intelligent system the expert user purposefully assimilates new information in a knowledge database of a frame like representation through a multiple window interface  . 
l . lntro due tion
Recent computer application to the so-called office automation is characterized by the increasing use of intelligent software systems  . These systems are often required to interface with textual information via users who are more or less trained or expertized to deal with the kinds of information to be processed  . The ideal goal of such a text processing system is to transfer all experts ' processing tasks to the system  . It must be well recognized , however , that even with regard to the most advanced knowledge-based natural language processing systems such as 
SOPHIE(1), SAM(Z ), FRUMP (3), GUS(4),
EXPIUS ( 5 ) this ideal goal seems to 5e still far from the present state of the natural language  ( N\[ ) processing techniques , though they are very promissing . There are many reasons why existing Nl systems can hardly be applied to the above goal  . Two of them may be formulated as follows: ( a ) The present relatively robust NI systems have been basically designed to deal with each separate sentence and not with a set of semant ically related sentences  . 
There are many research efforts aiming at this point  ( el . eg . 
approaches of the Yale Nlschool).
( b ) Because the N\[understanding systems are generally concerned with deep understandings of sentences  , they often take care too much of general relat ions and  ( common sense ) reasonings in every detail , to which readers don't pay attentions so much in understanding them  . Human readers skillfully control depth and details of understandings being conscious of their potential usefulness  . In short , the present N\[systems are not enough explici tly designed to extract purposeful meaning of sentences  ( el . (4)) . 
In this developing state of Nl processing and knowledge representation techniques we set a practical goal of our project to design an interactive system which digests news and reports on the foreign computer industry to support experts bysreactive knowledge data base  . At the moment such a knowledge database is u rgently needed for experts to do their tasks such as writing reports to be submitted to some governmental institutions  , industrial credit bureaus or agencies and the like  . 
2  . Interactive assimilation and abstraction Typical experts ' tasks in an industrial credit bureau above mentioned are  , for instance , to collect information about a special world such as the news world of computer industry  . They collect clippings of newspapers or journals  , make memos from other news media and classify them according to their topics or themes  . Their understanding of such information means that they not only understand the meaning  ( surface semantics ) of each article literally , but also assimilate it into their related knowledge base  ( deep semantics ) in such sway that it can be effectively used in some future contexts  . That is , they identify relations of the new info rmation with This research was supported in part by Ostasien-Tnstitut  , e . V . , Bonn --504--some parts of their knowledge and recognize its potential usefulness for their new conceptual i zation to advocate  , to emphasize or build up their opinions , judgements or beliefs . 
The way of summing-ups by abstraction and as s imilation of suce essive information to construct a special knowledge base strongly depends on the purposes  , as it is generally stated in empirical ep is temology  ( 15 , 15)  . In our practical ease this means that the experts purposefully ' understand ' the news to write a eom prehensive report on the computer industry in which they draw from it conclusions such as future tendencies or proposals for some industrial policies  , etc . 
Taking both available teehniques and reality of problems into account  , we decided on the whole not to directly apply N \[ processing approaches to our expert support system  . Instead , we extensively use N\[techniques for case by case  . Starting with the lowest intelligent level of interaction  , we hope that we could continuously elevate the intelligent level of the machine processings in the recycling course of design and exper iences  ( 5 )  . 
The interface of the machine-expert interaction is based on the multiple window display communication  ( s . seet . 5 ) and the mechanical representation of experts knowledge is founded on the frame-like formal is m  ( s . seet . 3 and 4) . 
In the interactive text analysis and meaning representation an expert reads a news article from his special domain of computer industry and has various levels of understandings typically reflecting his special domain dependent knowledge and his evaluation of news values  . Some part of his special knowledge is activated , new information from the article is eventual ly added on it  , a part of the existing knowledge is acknowledged  , refined , amplified or reversed , etc . 
In contrast to this explicit flow of informat ion from texts to the expert user there is a implicit counterflow of predictive  , expective or focal information which is feedbacked to the texts  . In this sort of " backed-up " interaction between text source and expert's knowledge  , there are roughly two classes of information to be represented :  ( i ) Conceptual information Generally speaking , the content of a news article is expressed in text sentenses  , ie a restricted set of natural language in which they are written  . However , for the expert of a special news world texts are a set of key concepts mostly well defined and structured within his knowledge  , though they are organized by general syntactic rules of the language ons surface level  . These key concepts indicate for him how to use them  . The methods of using his knowledge , are described in procedures and structurally inherent in the concepts  . The expert's responses to a key concepts canned from a given text are that  ( a ) related concepts around a given key concept are stimulated  ( b ) some concepts are expected in the subsequent scanning of the texts  . 
( c ) These stimulated or expected concepts interact with each other to constrain and filter their semantic roles  . 
( ii ) Control information
The interactive flow of conceptual information is controlled by control information which is partly invoked by the former  . The experts responses ( a )   ( b )   ( c ) can be viewed as the evaluation results of the control information caused by understanding the eone eptual information  , this means that conceputal information implies the control information whieh specifies how the former should be processed or interpreted under which conditions and what should be done when the former is to be perceived  . For ( a ) the control information specifies the activat ion of all concepts that are related to the  --505--key concepts in some way , for ( b ) it specifies L he search of a term which sati fies a given condition and for  ( c ) it specifies the context to which all act ivate de on cepts in Lerma of a key concept must be subject  . 
The cognitive interaction between texts and expert can be actively supported by a system in that both sorts ' of information are directly or indirectly transferred to the system in the course of database organization process  . This triadic relation between texts , expert and system can be modelled as a double production system  ( Fig . l ), in which an

ISTM
If -" IExpert


I Knowledge Data Base I
I .__


ST~'l(Figl ) A double production system
Texts/User User/KDB expert user plays a double role of production rules in ITM against the scanning texts and the stored knowledgte data base as Well  . However , with increasing amount of information t ransfer from the expert user to the system  , this role of the expert user as ITN agains t the knowledge database system is gradually changed to the role of STM  . Then the user's control function of in teractive process is taken over by thesy s tem  . As a result the expert user plays an in termediate role for making decisions on longterm purposeful representations of textua l meanings following advices and suggestions from the system with the help of its control in formation  . The transition degree of the user's role from \[ TM to STM is continuous and goes down to the extent that the expert user only takes care of such tasks as selection of key terms or deep abstractions with regard to the future applicat ions  , those are too hard and time concuming for the system though not impossible  . 
3. Frame-like Datebase
There are many reasons why a frame ~ like struc tured database seems to be appropriete for our purpose  . They are partly identical to those which are explicitly stated by the proponent off rame theory  ( 7 ) or the designers of framelike representation languages  , Following reasons are more or less specifi c for our case :  ( 1  ) Expert's knowledge about the computer indust ry and its developments are organized around the conceptual units which are more or less standardized  . 
E . g . " Main-frame-makers " is a concept for the expert that is used in conjunction with the computer-policy-making in Japan  . 
(2 ) Roles of conceptual objects are relatively clear and not much flexible in the target information space  . 
Eg . MBI is a rival of a national main-frame -makers and the national industrial Ministry ITIM  , which specifies market strategic policies . 
(3 ) Because of the reason ( 2 ) control information associated with each role of a conceptual unit is well formulated  . E . g . If MBI announces a new product of H-Series , the expert expects the concept of M-Series of main-frame-makers  . 
(4 ) Those news and reports from a special world which are written for interested readers are partial ly  ( 5 ) The frame-like representation is directly formulated to the form displayed in windows  ( s . sect . 5 ) where the expert user interactively fills slots with keywords or modifies descript ions  . 

Other reasons are based on our pragmatic at ti tude that we could eventually find an exist ing frame-like representation system which fits our special target world and approach ~ if not completely  , we could use it by minor modification , or in the worst case we could design a new one by using existing system as a design guidel in e  . 
Our home made frame-like representation language is called OBJ TA\[K  ( 8 ) which is characterized by the object - or i ented idea of SMA\[\[TA\[K  ( 9 )  . Frames called objects are organized into knowledge structures by message passings which activate procedural properties of the recipient object  . In generalization heterarchies of objects , slot properties as well as procedural p roperties of super objects are inherited by subordinate objects  . 
Following example illustrates instant iated concepts  . 
Any objects or the user can senda < message > to < object >  . The above example of the instance MBI-JPN is c reated by sending to the object foreign-computer -industry  . 
(ask ~ reign-computer-industry make MBI - JPN with : < slot >  .   .   .   .   . 
< slot > .   .   .   .   )   ( concept freign-computer-industry ( individuate a computer-industry ( generic-properties name : ( calss string )   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ) )
By means of sending messages to a object we can create a new object  , change it , activate actions of it , ask its properties or find an object whichs at is fies a given quantified condition  . 
( concept main-frame-makers ( individuates national-computer-industry ( generic-properties produce : Compuer-main -frame members : Fujitsu  , Hitachi , Mitsubishi , 
NEC , Toshiba , Okiriva \]: foreign-computer-industry suppor ted-by:ITIM  ( method subvention : ? = > ( askITIMPD-budget:$!CPU ) ) )   ( concept MBI-JPN instanciates fereign-computer -industry generic-properties a-part-of:HBI -WTC products :  ( ( CPU ( E-series H-series ) )  ( periphery (   . . . .  ) )  ( FS ) ) ) ) method ( pre is : ? = > ( a ~ E-series pre is : ? ) )
It is interesting to note that , practically the expert user always tend to directly define concrete instances or indiv iduals representing his knowledge  , though frame-like languages such as OBJ TALK are all designed to be used in a topdown way  , i e . before he describes MBI-JPN as an instance of a concept  , he is supposed to define the data type of MBI -JPN  , is . foreign-computer-industry . This topdown definition requested from the language structure doesn't necessarily correspond with the natural verbal behaviour of users  , as it is stated in a general learning theory of languages  . 
For bottom-up definitions of higher level concepts  ( superconcepts ) we need some methods for generalization and abstraction of individual or instance objec ts intuitively defined in terms of  ( product : ? = > ( ask window write: ( askself ?? ) ) ) real data . 
OBJTA\[K offers a simple language of the form massage  ( ask < default class-name > generalize < instance-name >  )   ( ask < default class-name > abstract < individual >  )   ( ask < object > < message > ) By generalizing a instance or abstracting an individual we can create  --507--a class of instances or individuals according to their perspectives  , such that it prescribes property conditions to be satisfied by sample objects  . This generalized class or abstract class must be modified by those other instances or individuals that belong to the same class  . 
Theoretical backgrounds for this bottom-up generalization or abstraction process are given by learning by examples  ( 10 ) and grammatical inference ( ll )  . 
Another practical problem we have indirect appl ication of our object oriented language is that given a message of some properties it is a very time consuming task to identify an object with them in its inheritance hierarchy  . Particularly , it is hard to find some procedural property in it  , which is triggered by matching a pattern descr ibed as a prerequisite condition in it  . At the moment a pattern marcher of OBJ TA\[K does this task  . Starting from the recipient object of a message the marcher searches through a inheritance hierarchy of the object a procedure called method which can be matched with the message body  . 
For simple deseiptions of passive properties SRL  ( semantice presentation language ) of EXP\[US ( 5 ) avoided this time consuming problem of p roperty inheritance by making an external bi t-table which represents a herarohica\] property relations called semantic feature systems  . For more complicated property descriptions such as procedural patterns we need a sort of global associative bit-map memory which mappes the procedural property-space onto the object space so that  , given a procedural property by a message , those objects associated with this property can be retrieved very fast without any searches  . This associative bit-map memory must dynamica lly store any new relations between objects and properties  . Such a global associative memory contradicts the fram-like object-oriented represent at ion principle which dictates the distribut ion of properties among objects  . The philosophical justifi-cation of a pr party/object associations are founded on the general theory of object-predicate rec iprocity  ( 12 )   . 
4 . Hierarchical script frames for stere of iypicality Our human experts roughly classify collected news and reports on the computer industry according to their topics  , eg , IIIM vs . MBI , ITIM policy for information industry promotion  , new product announcements from a computer industry  , etc . 
A main topic is assigned to each class which may be characterized by sset of predicates to be satisfied by members of the class  . On this global class level our news world is stereotypical  . 
However , if we try to represent many reports of the same class in a stereotypical form  , we get a largesparse table but items are local ly filled with various levels of details  . ( Fig . 2)  . However , if we look into the contents of each report of a class under the surface of its main topic  , we find on local levels some other subtopics which are not always consistently subordinate to the main topic  . 
This means first of all , there is no clearcut between classes , and each class cannot be completely formulated in a stereotypical form  . Secondly , if we go down to the lower level of main topic description sie  . subtopics , we find that the stereotpicality is stronger within a subtopic  . Each subtopic is described in different levels of details  . We can come up with this situation by using h ierarchical script frames  ( cf . (13)) , where a subordinate script frames specify more detailed forms of the superordinate  --508--script frame . Those are connected to the latter in parto for isa relations  ( Fig . 3) . By instantiating appropriate script frames the user can interactively organize  . . . . . into a frame structure which fits a given report on the whole  . The instantiation process can be supported by the system receiving message patters or key words from the user  . 
subtopic I subtopic 2 subtopici subtopic h
I script frame mI script frame m2 .   .   .   .  ,  .   .  , ?  .  , , ,  .   .   .  ,  .  ,  .   .   .   . , ' II script frame mi

Q .,.,,.. o....,.,.....
script framem h
Fig . 2) Script frames of different details ( Fig . 3 ) Hierareh chalscript frames 5 User interface by a window system A few number of AI research groups are using multiple window systems on a high resolution bit-map display such as ALTO  ( XEROX )  , the CADRs of \[ ISP-maehine ( MIT ) , PARQ ( Three River) , etc . There are some cognitive-perceptive reasons for using a multiple window user interface  . One of the most important reasons is that the user has a multiple  ( or parallel ) contact with the machine , which offers him parallel decision alternat ives as well as supports for shortterm memory during the course of interactive processes  . In contrast with the act of scanning e newspaper through apin hole the user can avoid back-t rackings of dialog listings while keeping simultaneously various kinds of in formation each displayed in a window  . 
This makes the user feelfree from the laby rinth effects  , being always aware of what the machine is doing and in which state of interaction he is  . By reducing the labyr in the ffects on the user , the machine offers him a better opportunity to plan his imput behaviour  . The application of a window system to our in teractive text proeessings adds more cons is tency of representations to the system  . 
A window may displays whole frame for the user to fill in some slots while one other window shows the ether frame  , whose name is just mentioned by the first one . Another one contains only names of those frames which are directly or indirectly mentioned in other frames  . There are control windows which offer the user a set of control commandos and software tools such as editors  ( lISP editor , frame editor , kowledge editor ) , by which he controls the interactive process for embedding  --509--new information , revising the old one or creating new frame scripts  , etc . 
( Fig . 4) \[ MINISTERIDM
Ca-klnd-of > : behSr den<mi\[MITI ( * called-by cfull-name > ' ZUS ~ N *= cpr ca-kind-of>:mlnisterium  ( & show-all min is ? . . < a-par t - o f ~: reg i@rung ( & show regier ung ) cants prlcht > tBMWZ & BWM < m ? Aister ~: shi in a -saburo 

PROJEKTF ~ RDERUNG ? an reger ~: MITI < ziel > : f6 rderung ~ v-indust . 
< et at ~: PROJEKTETAT cbe auf tragt,: .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . DV-PIRMEN < information > :/ ~< energie ~: SUNSHINE TER MALGEN  (  ? . ) < ~ m welt ? : O . 02 PPM . . . . .  \]
CONTROL : ENU


EDIT\]IISTORY

OPERATION\[NISTRYOFINTEP . NATION ~ T~DE~DEDITTI-ProgACTIVATED FBA~S'LMI:~SERT  . .  .   .   . DV-FI . ~ MENAPPEND
METIDELETN\[PIPSPROEKTETATREPLACE?ctr ~ger > : ELECTROTECHNICAL-LA ~ ? et at ~ t  400   , * lloDM < dauer > : 5 -JAH~<beauftragt ?: TOSHIBAMITUBISHI \] h These itelligent machine responses to the user on the window levels are also controlled by t ~ distributed control information embedded in frames  . Some special frames such as window-agent and frame-agent take care of mapping between w in dows and internal representation of f rames  . We could view these agents as a two dimens ional interactive syntax  , which rules what kind of information shou ld be given in which window  , depending on its semantics . In this sense the interactive representation of meanings through a multiple window system can be viewed as more natural  ( i e . cognitively efficient ) way to transfer the expert's knowledge to the machine  . A user interface which disregards this cogn itive aspects of user's man-machine communication behaviour \] cads to a bad in teractive system which doesn't serve as an ef ficient expert's assistant  . It is one of our goals to investigate the rules which underlies the expert's behaviour of representing his text understanding  . Embedding these rules into a system , we could make the system intelligently reactive to the expert's interactive behav iour  . 
6 The State of the Implementation
In order to make the present task procedures of the human experts consistent to the machine support  , we are fo \]\] owing the expert's task process by using the same data and becoming ourselves a bit experts of our world  . 
For standardization of terminologies to identify the corresponding concepts web in d together those terminologies in different reports which have the same meaning  . This is the first step to understand the wor ld in view of a machine but we find out this is not an easy task  . Beside this , there are many contradictions and mistakes as it is wellknown to our experts  . 
Paralle \] to thJ . ssort of the world analysis , we now examine our frame-like language BBJTA \[K which is avai \] able in our computer at the moment beside FR t  , to decide whether it gives us a sound base for our approach and if not exactly  , what should be done to tailor the language for it  . From our test example we experience what add it ional features we need  ( see section 3 )   . 
Without having a high resolutation bit- map-display our implementation of the mult iple window system is restricted to the d is play terminals available to our computer  . Hoping to get such a terminal in the near future a multiple window system has been simu \] a ted on the HDS-terminals in lOGO  ( 14 )  . 
--510--7 Reference (1) Brown , J . S . and Burton , R . R . ,Bell,A . G .   ; SOPHIE : A step towards are active \] earning environment  , International journal of manmachine studies , Voi . 7, 1975, pp 675-696(2) Schank R . C . Abelson , P . R . ; Scripts , Plans , Goals and Understanding , lawrence Erlbaum
Press , 1977(5) DeJon , G . ; Prediction and Substantiation :
Process that comprise understanding,
IJCAI , \]979, Tokyo , pp217-22(4) Bobrow , D . G . ,Kaplan,R . M . , Kay , M . Norman , D . A . Thompson,H . , Winograd , T . ; GUS , A fram driven dialog system , Artificial Intelligence
Vol . 8, No \], 1977(5) Tanaka , H . ; EXP\[US - A semantic processing system for japanese sentenses  , Trans . IECE,
Japan , '78/8 Vol . 61-D No . 8(6) Bobrow , D . G . , Winograd , T . ; An overview of KR\[ , a knowledge representation language , XEROX , Palo Alto Research Center , tS\[-76-4 , JU iY 4 , 1976 (7) Minsky , M . ,; A framework for representing knowledge , in Th__eepsycholoqy of computer vision , by Winston P . ( Ed ), Me Graw-Hill , New
York , 1975(8) laubsch , J . ; OBJTA\[K , mmk-memo12,
Universitaet Stuttgart , Institut fuer
Informatik , \]979.
(9) Ingalls , D . ; The SMA\[tTA\[K-76 programming system : design and implementation , ACM
SIGP\[AN , Tucson , Arizona 1978.
( lO ) Winston , P . ; \[ earning structural descriptions by exsamples , in The psychology of computer vision , by Winston , P . (Ed),McGraw-Hill,
New York . 1975.
(ll ) Feldman , J . ; The first thought on grammatieak inference , Stanford AImemo No . 55,
Wiley & sons , lnc . , New York , 1969(l\]) Cullingford , R . ; Script application : computer understanding of newspaper stories  , Ph . D . Thesis , Yale University , New Haven,
CT , 1978 (14) Boeeker , D . ; Implementation of multiple window system on the HDS-terminals in IOGO  , If l-report , Inst . f . Informatik , Universaita et
Stuttgart , 1980(15)\[orenz , F . ; Die Rueckseite des Spiegels,
Piper Verlag , Muenchen , 1973(16) Csmpbell , D . T . ; Evolutionary epistemology , in P . A . Schi\]p(Ed ), The philosophy of Karl
Popper , Opencourt , \[ asalle , \]. 974--511--
