CONNOTATION ASA FOR MOFI~qFERENCE
JBBERTHELIN , University of Essex ( language and linguistics )   , Wivenhoe Pk , 
COLCHESTERC043 Sq , GREATBRITAIN,
and INSTITUTDEPROGRAMMATION , Universit ~ Paris 6 , 75230 PARISCEDEX 05 , FRANCE . 

Story-processing systems have to deal , or avoid dealing , with INFERENCE CONTROL ''6' Ii ,  13 . 
when designing one such system 2 , we were greatly helped by the " ( ERC ) RC " expression for connotation I . Our system is specialised in multi-faceted descriptions of characters  ( not , however , in the most difficult problems of beliefs about beliefs  4 and 8  ) : here we present another aspect of the story character processing  , namely the recursive EXPLANATION of inconsistencies appearing in the description of a character  . 
We give a very schematic system overview , then some details about the CONNOTATION rules and an example of their application to a story  . 
posed to (" from age " RC (" cheese ")) RC (" french ") , but also situation-specific ones , as ( " cheese " RC ( " cheese as geological stuff " ) RC ( " bizarre " )  , in the processing of a robot who asked what the moon is made of  . As Barthesthenremarks , connotations may be based on a set of initial expressions rather than on a single one  , which is expressed by ( EiRCl , E2 RC2 .   .   .   .   . EnRCn ) RCTh is seems to be an essential feature of connotations  , since it allows emphasis on ' connoted ' contents by means of an accumulation of signi-f iers  . Another feature , elegantly illustrated in ' l'envers des signes '  i0 by the two steps (   ( " voile " RC ( "navire" ) )RC ( "po~sie" ) )RC ( " rh ~ to-rique " )  , is their recursivity . 

The allusiveness of human languages , in addition to being quite convenient in sociall if e  , justi-fies the use of variable amounts of in te  1   -1 igence in processing a sentence r according to the number of reasoning steps leading to a position where a satisfactory reaction be-  , 14 comes possible , like " to redefine ' substance when reading Spinoza "  . Let us represent a first step by " ERC"i . e . " an expression is related to a content ''1 , which Barthescalls the denotation : the second reasoning step will be represented in the connotation formula : "  ( ERC ) RC " . 
It does not determine exactly where the reaso -ning step leads to : if we write E's content as C  ( E )  , we may have quite general connotations like ( " cheese " RC ( "cheese" ) )RC ( " english " ) as op-As a beginning we made an attempt to express this in AI terms by writing a program  , BA QUI L , which finds the connotations with structure ( EIRCi , E2 RC2) RC in a recursive way . The interest of such connotations can be shown by15:   . a doctorasks : " how is he feeling ?" . the nurse answers : " heisgroaning . " where the nurse means , by connotation , that the patient is suffering : ( " groaning " RC ( " groaning " ) RC ( " suffering ) ) , but our understanding is directed by the previous interrogation  , so that the definitive result we expect from our system will be  ( " feeling " RC ( " feeling " )  , " groaning " RC (" groa-ning ")) RC (" suffering ") . This result shall be reached by consulting a semantic network and observing that ' groaning ' is not exactly a case of ' feeling '  , but an expression of it . Thus " then urse means he is suffering " is both a connotation and an inference  , and seemingly a useful one : compare with Charniak's  6 " demon-demon in-piggy-bank ' together trigger ' need money '  ; but BAQUIL has no such extended world-knowledge . It is specialised in DISCOURSEATTITUDES like ' errors '  , ' lies ' , ' jokes'etc . This also means it can run without an elaborate model  5 of persona-lities , and so deal with fables and folk tales about foxes and sparrows  , which would perhaps fail to have goals ' common to most people '  , although they are meant as human in a way . 
System overview
Before explaining how it works , we give an idea of BAQUIL's construction ( i . e . its hierarchy ) . 

INPUT/
HAlt 14, ~, . j , ~, , , .   , , o u'rP~JT ?~/ Al~Acr~l~ , V'-"\~~-scmrr'lo~\ou~vr--229--Schema . tic explanation of how the system runs i ) the dictionary input procedure builds , from a file whose structure is shown in the ' sample session '  , a classical semantic network 7'9"''2 ) the story specialist submits sentences to a parser  12 and the resulting case structures to the story character specialist  , whose actions include the comparisons and inferences detailed here  . 
3 ) output procedures express the inferences in English and  , on request , detail the representation of each character in the story  . 
Meta rules of BA QUIL ( this page and the following three will develop what rules are applied by the story character specialist : this includes METARULES  , RULESOF
COMPARISON and INFERENCERULES.)
MIBAQUIL starts a connotation or inference only when a comparison rule has been applied to a pair of predicates which are related to the set of descriptors of one character : the predicates are versions of the semantic case structure in terms of the current character description  , and are called ' NOTATIONS' M2 Except when specified otherwise ( inference rules R6 , R7) , the inference is expressed by a ' notation ' whose verb is a subcatego-ry of either CHANGE or INCONSISTENCY  . 
consistency . The metarules are represented in BA-QUIL by instructions : Mi in the NOTATION procedure  , M2 and M3 in the CONNOTATION procedure . 
The latter also contain the instruction corresponding to the inference rules  , while the comparison rules form the comparison procedure  . 
Discussion of the metarules
M 1expresses the hypothesis that many interesting antinomies can be detected during the pairwise matching of predicates concerning one story character  . "  M2 aims to expresa more or less syntactic finding about the description of a character  ( co-presence of two antinomic ' notations ' ) in terms of the ' notations ' themselves . 
M 3 means " use the lexical taxonomy when trying to recognize a situation "  ; as a result it introduce a distinction between natural languages  , for the subcategories of ( for instance ) " inconsistency " are not the same in different dic-tionaries l Consider French and English  , " error " and " mistake " vs . " erreur " and " m@rise " , or worse : the two cases of " to tellalie " in Russian  , i . e . " vrat '" vs . " l ' gat '" . Still it is perhaps acceptable to allow for important pragmatic divergences between languages  ( and , indeed , dialects or sociolects . ) Moreover , we did not represent the vocabulary of other languages than French and English in our system  , so we lack precisions about how " whorfian " it would turn out  . 
M 3 Those subcategories are examined in the dictionary order and the first one which permits the application of an inference rule is selected  . 
To sum up : ( M 1 ) comparison and then inference about ( M3 ) subcat ( gories of ( M2 ) change or in-Although a similar discussion of the comparison and inference rules would be necessary  , we will simply present them here along with some examples  . The examples are taken from a set of 20 stories ( 4 to 200 sentences ) which were dealt with by the system at Essex in 1979-1980  . 

Comparison rules Exagples.
Their object is to tell whether an inference must be started  , or not . 
C 1 the predicates differ only by a negation in one of them  ( i . e . same environment , verb etc . 
and none was inferred.)
C1 Confucius is hand some , Confucius is not hand some ( in which case ' h and some ' need not be a priori present in the lexicon  . )  . 
C 2 similar to C1 but there is a hyponymy between the verbs . 
C2 Confucius is horrible , Confucius is notugly.
C 3 lexical exclusion between the verbs of two aff irmative predicates  . 
C4 transgression of lexical interdiction , or lexical necessity ignored . 
C5C1 ,   C2 or C3 applies and the first predicate expresses an inference  . 
C3 Confucius isrich , Confucius is broke.
C4 Confucius is human and flies away.
( interdiction )
Confucius flies away , he does not exist.

C5 the system inferred Confucius is lying , the story reveals he is joking ( like C3) . 
C6 a predicate confirms an inference.
C7 a predicate confirm a discarded inference.
(this occurs after a C5 situation led to the application of the relevant inference rule  . ) C6 in the situation above , Lao-ts usays that Confucius is lying BEFORE the story discon-firms it  . 
C 7 Lao-tsu's remark comes AFTER the revision of the inference  . 
The predicate or ' notation ' structure , which permits the comparison , is ( affirmat . -or-neg . , case frame , char . descr . ) and the connotation has the same structure augmented by reference to premises  (  2 ,   3 or a list of pairs if an inference has been confirmed  . ) The lexicon element has following slots in i ts structure :  ( list of subcategories , are-they-mutually-ex-clusive-or-not , supercategory , property list ) and the property list contain references to other lexical elements  . 

Connotation rules : exam ~ es
As the rules by themselves do not suggest the situations which make them useful  , let's have some examples first . 
RI .   .   . the servant said : " that cow is not going to eat you  . " (  .   .   . ) The next morning , she sees one of them is missing and says : " Oh my God ! the grey cowate one of the semen "  . 
. INFERENCE ABOUTTHESERVANT'SVIEWOFTHE

R2 ( same example as RI) . ACCORDING TO THESERVANT , THECOWUNDER WENT
ACHANGE.
R 3 A teacher quoting Krylov said that God sent a cheese to a raven  ; a child objects that there is no God . 
.INFERENCE ABOUT AN INCONSISTENCY ; USING THELEXICAL CONNEXION BETWEEN THE TOPIC' God ' AND ' religious discourse '  , BA QUIL SELE CT ST HAT
KINDOFINCONSISTENCY.
R 4 the peasant believes that the tree will be hi t by other rabbits  . . But i t is not . 
. INFERENCE : ERROROF THE PEASANT.
tween levels of discourse independently of which character the inference is about  ,   R3 and R5 make use of some knowledge associated either , as in the examples , with the name of the character , or with previous sentences about it , e . g . 
'Kry lov is an author ' could be part of the beginning of the story  . 
R3 and R5 , which connect the inference with a previously observed detail  , are " causality " rules : in addition to references to the two premises whose comparison start edit  , the inference has one reference to the predicate that justified the choice of a more precise verb like ' fiction ' or ' joke '  . 
A difficulty ( which we provisionnally avoided ) is that some lexical connections could represent ' necessary truths ' that are just sometimes true  , as " teachers are some time sigorant " ; whatR5 should do with them is not clear . However , if one considers folktales and fables , the diction 2 nary connection one uses are almost always " foxes are sly  , fulls top " so the question does not arise . 
R5 ( continuation of example for R3 ) the teacher answers that there is no cheese either  . 
.INFERENCE ABOUT AN INCONSISTENCY ; USING THELEXICAL CONNECTION BETWEEN ' Krylov ' AND ' author '  , ANDONEFROM ' author ' TO'fiction ' , BAQUIL SELECTS THE LAT TERSUB CATEGORY OF

A difficulty for R3 is that a ' topic ' could be connected both to ' religious discourse ' and ' joke '  , so in the present state of the system one of the connections would be systematically ignored : but for the time being  , there are very few lexical connections , the reason being that we cannot decide which necessary truths really belong in a lexicon  . 
While the other rules exploit comparisons be-232  -
BAQUIL's connotation rules ' references ' are the two initial premises of the inference  ; ' hypotheses come from the list of subcategories of the initial verb  , i . e . the different cases of ' change ' or ' inconsistency ' as represented in the lexicon  . 
R 1 if both references are about the same character descriptor  , the inference is also about that descriptor . ( this allows for stories inside the story ) . 
R 2 if the inference's verb is not yet specified and the inference is about the descriptor of the second reference  , BAQUIL tries the cases of ' change ' . 
Rules R6 and R7 are illustrated by the story of the vegetarian wolf : given a dictionary which connects ' wolf'to'badaction '  , hence to ' lie ' , the system first infers from the beginning of the story  , where the wolf is contradicted by someone , that it lies ; later , the story-telling warns the reader about i t  , telling explicitly that it does not . The inference is NO Terased , butear marked as falla-cious ; so R7 applies when a character says : this wolfisly ing  ; but , if the story had not denied the possibility of alie  , R6 would have applied . One can see that R6 , R7 and R8 are not quite satisfying . I suspect them of being in need of some refinement  . The set of situations ' clever character or lucky guessor etc  . ' is not clearly defined , and I do not know what to do with the Liar's Paradox  . 
R 3 if the verb of a hypothesis is connected to the name of the character in a reference by a ' be about ' link  , the hypothesis is selected . 
On the contrary , R3 and R5 give less trouble.
This is shown by the ' sample session ' next page , representing approximately 1 . 8 second CPU ( using about 25K core ) on a PDP-iO . 
R 4 if one reference comes from a ' belief ' and the other from the ' story-telling '  , the verb of the inference should be ' error ' . 
R 5 if the verb of a hypothesis is connected to its character's name by a ' tendency ' link  , the hypothesis is selected . 
RULES APPLIED : C4" lexical necessity "
R3"topic "
R 6 if a character's discourse matches an inference , BAQUIL checks whether the characteriscle veror has made a lucky guess etc  . 
R5" tendency "
C3" lexical exclusion "
R 71if the story-telling contradicts an inferen - and ~ ce  , the inference is ' discarded ' ; if the R8Ydiscarded inference is matched by a discour-se , one looks for an ' error ' or ' trick ' etc . 

SamPle session ( DICTIONARY INPUT )

FOODISA SUBSTANCE
SHORTISASTATE
TEACHERISAMAN
QUOTEISADISCOURSE
AUTHORISAMAN
KRYLOVISA AUTHOR
WRITEISADIS COURSE
SAYISADISCOURSE
GODISAPUTATIVEBEING
CHEESEISAFOOD
RAVENISABIRD
CHILDISAMAN
PRODUCEINCONSISTENCYISADISCOURSE ( comment : abbreviated PRODINC ) 
LIEISAPRODINC
MISTAKE IS APRODINC
JOKEIS APRODINC
ILLUSIONIS APRODINC
RELIGIOUSDISCOURSEIS APRODINC
FICTIONIS APRODINC
BEABOUTISADISCOURSE
MEANISADIS COURSE
IGNORANTISASTATE
END WORDS

USUAL ( AUTHOR , FICTION )
USUAL(CHILD , IGNORANT)
USUAL ( IGNORANT , MISTAKE)
BEABOUT ( RELIGIOUSDISCOURSE , GOD)
FORBIDE(RELIGIOUSDISCOURSE , QUOTE ) comment : that is to account for the location being Soviet Russia  . 
NECESSITY(ACTION , EXIST)
NECESSITY(ACTION , AVAILABLE ) ( STORYINPUT)
Food was short.
At eacher quoted Kry lov.
He said that Krylov wrote : ' God sent a cheese to the raven  . '
A child said : ' There is no God !' but the teacher replied'there is no cheese  , either .   .   .  '
THEEND ( INFERENCES )   ( God sentacheese 1 ( there is no God
C 4 in description of God and R3/God : " the child means Krylov has a religious discourse "  . 
(Krylov has a rel ig ious discourse 2 ( the teacher quotes Krylov C4 in description of Krylov and default : " the child means the teacher has an inconsistent discourse "  . 
( God sentacheese3 ( there is no cheese
C 4 in description of cheese and R5/Krylov : " the teacher means Krylov's discourse is fic - tion "  . 
(Krylov has a rel igious discourse 4 ( Krylov's discourse is fiction C3 in description of Krylov and R5/child : " the teacher means the child is mistaken "
ENDOFINFERENCES
ENDLINKSENDOFSESSION-234-

While not achieving much by itself , Baquilis 2 an important component of the larger system currently built at Paris  6  , and could probably also be integrated in a large A IMT system as an expert of indirect descriptions of characters  , for instance it could recognize the use of a nationality adjective suggesting a character tra it  ( Cretanforliar , etc . )  , which is helpful in many cases : when the nationality adjective is not familiar in the target language  ( Chinestexts about the ancient king-doms )  , but also when there are several possible interpretations for the nationality adjective in terms of personality  ( ' qua'ambiguity )  . 
References ( i0 ~ GENETTE : Figures I , Paris ,  1966 . 
(1) BARTHES : Elements of semiology , Hill and
Wang , New York.
(2 ) BERTHELIN and SABAH : Le traitement des personnages  , congr~sAFCET-IRIA , Toulouse 1979 . 
(11) HAYES : The logic of frames , in METZING , e do Frames , conceptions and text understanding , 
De Gruyter , 1980.
(12 ) SABAH : A contribution to story under stan-ding , thesis at Universit ~ Paris 6 ,  1978 . 
(3 ) BIEN : Toward a multiple environments model of NL  , IJCAI-4 . 
(13) SCHANK and ABELSON : Scripts , plans , goals and understanding , LEA ,  1977 . 
(4 ) BIEN and WILKS : Speech acts and multiple environments  , IJCAI-6 . 
(14) WILKS : Grammar , meaning and the computer analysis of language , RKP ,  1972  ( 5 ) CARBONNELL : Computer model of human personality traits  , IJCAI-6 . 
(15) WITTGENSTEIN : Philosophical Investigations,
Blackwell , 1953.
(6 ) CHARNIAK : Toward a model of children story understanding  , thesis at MIT ,  1972 . 
(7) CHOURAQUI : Surunr ~ seaus ~ mantique act if , congr~sAFCET-IRIA , Toulouse 1979 . 
I JCAI-4 and IJCAI-6 refer to the Proceedings of the international Joint Conferences on Artifi-cial Intelligence  . 
(8 ) CLARK and MARSHALL : Mutual knowledge and definite reference  , mimeo , Stanford Univ . 
(9) FAHLMAN : Representing everyday knowledge,
MIT , 1977.
The story in the sample session is adapted from " The BigRed Joke Book " by Benton and Loomes  , 
Pluto Press , London , 1979.

