TO WARDS A COMPUTATION ALMODEL FOR
THESEM ANTICS OF WHY-QUESTIONS
W . Wahlster
Germanisches Seminar
Universitaet Hamburg
Von-Melle-Park 6
D-2000 Hamburg 13
Federal Republic of Germany
Summary . This paper discusses aspects of a computational model for the semantics of why-ques-tions which are relevant to the implementation of an explanation component in a natural language dialogue system  . After a brief survey of all of the explanation components which have been implemented to date  , some of the distinguishing features of the explanation component designed and implemented by the author are listed  . In the first part of the paper the major types of signals which  , like the word whV , can be used to set the explanation component into action are listed  , and some ways of recognizing them automatically are considered  . In addition to these linguistic signals , communicative and cognitive conditions which can have the same effect are discussed  . In the second part the various schemata . for argumentative dialogue sequences which can be handled by the explanation component in question are examined  , Par-ticular attention is paid to problems arising in connection with the iteration of why-questions and the verbalization of multiple justifications  . 
Finally schemata for metacommunicative why-ques -tions and for why-questions asked by the user are investigated  . 

The explanation component of a natural language AI system is that component whose jobit is to generate  , in response to a why-question an explanation which is both understandable to the user and appropriate to the current state of the dialogue  . 
Although there has been relatively little research into the semantics and pragmatics of  why-questions1  , 5 , 9 ,   17 and the cognitive processes underlying the answering of them  , several AI systems do exist which are capable of handling certain types of why-questions  . The practical value of the incorporation of an explanation component lies essentially in the fact that  , as Stallman and Sussman have put it , ' ~ such programs are more convincing when right and easier to debug when wrong "  . ~ 5 Figure I provides an overview and comparison of the explanation components which have been implemented to date : BLAH  22  , DIGITALISADVISOR 16 , ELIs , EXPOUND ~ , HAM-RPMI ~ ,  21 , LUIG 113 , MYCIN 12 ,  ~ , NOAH 11 , PROSPECTOR 7 , SHRDLU ~ , TKP2I ? ( The symbol "-" signifies that the attribute in question is not applicable to the given system  )  . 
This paper presents some results of my experience in designing and implementing an explanation  com-ponentS1  ; together , they represent a step toward a computational model for the semantics of why-questions  . The explanation component was designed as a module which could in principle be incorpora-ted into any natural language AI system  . It has been tested within the natural language dialogue system HAM-RPM  6  , which converses with a human partner in colloquial German about limited but interchangeable scenes  . 
In implementing HAM-RPM we have taken into account the human ability to deduce useful information even in the case of fuzzy knowledge by approximate reasoning  . The model of fuzzy reasoning used in HAM-RPM can be characterized by the following four  properties2?:   ( a ) A fuzzy inference rule represents a weak implication  ; a particular ' implication strength'must thus be associated with each such rule  . 
( b ) The premises of a fuzzy inference rule are often fulfilled only to a certain degree  . 
( c ) The applicability of a fuzzy inference rule in the derivation of a particular conclusion is likewise a matter of degree  . 
( d ) Several mutually independent fuzzy inference rules can corroborate each other in the derivation of a particular conclusion  . 
The explanation component which I have developed differs from BLAH  22  , one of the most advanced explanation components which have similar goals  , in that on the one hand fuzzy inference rules and facts can be modified by appropriate hedges  ( in accordance with ( a ) through ( c ) above )  , and on the other hand the system is able in the course of a dialogue to generate multiple justifications for an explan and um  ( in accordance with ( d ) above )  . A further important difference between this explanation component and the other systems included in Figure I is that the system is equipped with a fairly sophisticated natural language generator  , which is ATN-based and includes algorithms for generating pronouns and definite descriptions  19  . 
Only two aspects of this explanation component will be discussed in this paper : The signals on the basis of which the explanation component generates an argumentative answer to a question asked by the user and the speech act schemata for the argumentative dialogue sequences which can be  --144-- 
SYSTEM'SGENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 8~~~ s .  ~-_ :~ '-

U.S . in-AMORD
AMORD come tax rules laws
EXPLANATION COMPONENT
LINGUISTIC\]COMMUNICATIVE AC ~
CAPABILITIES ' ICAPABIL!TIES , C = ~"-88;~-~' Z ~= ,  - ~=  . -o ~" ~~' ~~ o = ~: ~ . 
~.~~? ulc =


No I schemata COLL MOD , DIASTR , DET assertions , suggested al-
HYP ternatives ~
I decl s ions

ADVISOR medicine : OWL schemata,
OWL digitalis procedures Nocanned TECHDIADET therapy text system's questions  , reasoning chain
EL electrical ARSARS circuit rules analysis !
No HYP system's conclusions






LISP logic : predicate simple formal culus No case TECH-STR proofs formulas grammar traff ic 
FUZZY scene , DEDUCEATN-based room-procedures Yes generator p COLLMOD  , DIADET , STR FUZ booking schemata
SOL kitchen SOLI specific I ! Yes generation : COLL world procedures  0rocedures medicine : ' i production LISP bacteriali Yes schemata TECHDIADETFUZ rules  , rnfections Ii repair of electro-SOUP No
SOUP mechanical procedures equipment geology : rules in LISP mineral inference No schemata TECH explo-netration 
FUZ theorems system's ques-tions and con-cus Jons , reasoning , incl . 
multiple der-ivations simulated actions system's questions and con-ciusions  , reasoning chain , meta-infer-ences system's instructions tO user system's questions 


MICRO-blocks consequent specific
PLANNER world theorems Yes generatiOn mrocedures COLL logic : I predicate 
LISP formal calculus No schemata TECH proofs formulas I 

Figure I : Comparison of all explanation components implemented to date  --145--systemls simulated actions theorems realized in the system . 
A Formal Description of the Signals Suggesting an
Argumentative Answer
The purpose of the present section is to list the major types of signals which are capable of setting an explanation component into action  . 
The resulting classification of linguistic expressions does not  , of course , imply that all of the expressions in a given category are completely synonymous  . 
Signals for Argumentative Answers in the User's

From the point of view of algorithmic recognition , the simplest case is that in which the use relic -its an argumentative answer from the system by asking a direct question  . The word why can often be interpreted as a signal for an argumentative answer  . On the other hand , its exact meaning depends on the dialogue context and it can be used within speech acts which have nothing to do with explanation  , such as making a suggestion or a comment 5 . In spite of its ambiguity , the word why represents the only means of eliciting an argumentative answer in most AI systems which have an explanation component  . 
Special idiomatic expressions such as those listed in  ( LI ) can have the same function as the word why . In the system HAM-RPM expressions like ( LI ) How come , what . . . for , how do you know these are recognized through pattern matching during lexical analysis  6  . 
Indirect questions such as those in ( LI ) require that the system be able to divide the utterance into matrix sentence and embedded sentence syntactically  ; only then can it process the latter using the same means as in the case of direct questions containing why or the questions in  ( L 1 )  . 
( L2) Please tell me whyA , I'd like to know why AFurther types of signals include direct  ( see LJ ) and indirect ( see L4 ) requests . The problem of ( LJ ) Please explain whyA , prove that A ( L4 ) I'd be interested in hearing why you think that A  , Are you prepared to justify your conclusion that A ? how indirect speech acts such as the requests in  ( L4 ) can be recognized automatically is one which has recently been attracting much attention from natural language AI researchers J  , 8 The word why and the expressions in ( LI ) needn't accompany the proposition to be explained within a single utterance  , as they do in the example ( El ) ; they can also be used alone after the system has answered a question to elicit an explanation of the answer  ( cf . E2) . 
(El ) USER ( U ) : Why is Glenbrook Drive closed ? ( E2 . 1) USER(U ): Is Olen brook Drive closed ?( E2 . 2) SYSTEM(S ): Yes . 
(E2 . 3 ) USER ( U ) : Hew do you explain that ? The expressions in ( LJ ) and ( L4 ) can also be used to achieve just the opposite : An argumentative answer is requested in advance  , before the corresponding question has been asked of the system  . 
(EJ ) PLease explain your answer : Do you think that A ? As the continuation of  ( E2 . l ) and ( E2 . 2) represented by ( E2 . 4) and ( E2 . 5) illustrates , a speaker often explains a previously given answer when the listener-perhaps using an expression such as the ones in  ( LS ) shows signs of doubt as to ( L5 ) Really ? Are you sure ? That's strange . 
(E2 . 4) U : Really ?( E2 . 5) S : Yeah , they'rere paving it . 
the truth of the answer.
A kind of signal which suggests an argumentative answer in a still more obvious manner is the category of utterances by the user which indicate an opinion contrary to that expressed by the system  ( cf . L 6) . The idiomatic expressions in ( L5 )   ( L 6 ) I doubt that , That doesn't follow , I can't believe that . . . , Since when ? and ( L 6 ) which always express doubtor a contrary opinion no matter what the current dialogue context may be  , can be handled adequately if information concerning their implications is stored in the system's ' idiom lexicon  '6  . 
A further way in which the user can indirectly ask a why-question is by himself suggesting an explanation of what the system has just asser - ted  , while at the same time indicating a desire to have the explanation confirmed by the system  . 
For example , after the system has given the answer ( E2 . 2) , the user should be able , by asking the question ( E2 . 6), to elicit an explanation like ( E2 . 7) from the system . If this kind of behavior ( E2 . 6) U : Because of an accident ?(?2 . 7) S : No , because they'rere paying it . 
is to be realized in a dialogue system , the program must be able to recognize ( E2 . 6) as a proposed explanation . Algorithms which recognize explanations in certain contexts have been developed  , e . g . , for the ICAI system ACE TM and the text -understanding system PAM  23  . 
Leading and rhetorical questions which suggest an affirmative answer may be seen as containing an implicit request to justify the answer if it is negative  . If the system's answer to ( EJ . I ) ( E3 . 1 ) U : You aren't going to restrict me to 40k of core today again , are you ?(?3 . 2) S : Yes , in fact I am . I'vegot47 jobslogged-in in the moment . 
is not something like ( E3 . 2) , but rather simply Yes , in fact I am , the system is n't exhibiting the sort of cooperative behavior which we would like to have in a natural language dialogue system  . 
These last two types of speech acts cannot at present be handled adequately by AI systems  . 
The same is true of explanations within the schema reproach-justification  ( cf . E4 . 1 and E4 . 2) . 
-146-(E4 . 1) U : Youerased my file COLING . TMP#(E4 . 2) S : Yeah , your log-out quota was exceeded . 
Communicative and Cognitive Conditions as Signals for Arj'umenEatliv ~ Answers Two further kinds of signals which suggest argumentative answers deserve mention in this section  . 
In contrast to the preceding types they can be incorporated without difficulty into existing AI systems  , e . g . HAM-RPM 21 . 
Both kinds of signal lead to the questions being oucr-~we2  . .?d in that they suggest an argumentative answer in the absence of any explicit or implicit request for such an answer in the user's question  . 
On the one hand , the system may offer an unsolicited explanation for reasons of p  ( z . , utneAtae2 . /? ~ if it has already noticed that the user seems to have a tendency to ask for explanations of answers  6  . 
On the other hand , over answering may even be reasonably expected of the system in the case where the answer is based on uncertain beliefs and approximate or hypothetical reasoning  . This kind of behavior can be modelled to a limited extent if the system is programmed so as to attempt to generate an explanation as soon as its confidence in its own answer sinks below a certain threshold  , e . g . , because the implication strength ( see ( a ) above ) of one of the inference rules it has used is low ( cf . E5 . 1, E5 . 2 ) ? The ( E5 ? I ) U : I wonder if the Mercedes is cheap . 
(E5 . 2) S : I imagine so -- . it's pretty old and rusty . 
generation of an argumentative answer in such a context falls outside the usual scope of linguistic analysis  ; it is a good example of an application of the AI paradigm in that the condition which gives rise to the generation of an argumentative answer is a certain property of a cognitive process  , namely the inference process by which the answer is derived  . 
Figure 2 summarizes the various signals for argumentative answers which have been discussed in this section  ( types of signals which have been implemented in HAM-RPM's explanation component are indicated by a *  )  . 
,quest ion~_~_quest ion word * idiomatic expression * __------direct * ? request~_____~ind i rec t * ? evidence of doubt in user * ? evidence of a contrary opinion in user * ? inadequate explanation suggested by user ? unexpected answer to a leading or rhetorical question ? evidence of reproach in user ? / par tner - tac t i cs * "? ver-answer~ng"-~- -uncertainty about own answer * Figure  2: Signals which can elicit an argumentative answer Speech Act Sch  . emata for Ar@umentative Dij loju@

This section deals with argumentative dialogue sequences and their reconstruction in AI systems  . The speech act sequence depicted in schema I will serve as a starting point  . 
($1 . 1) U : < yes-no-question > ($1 . 2 ) S : < affirm at veans wer > ( with restric-ting hedge )   ( $1 . 3) U : Why ?($1 . 4) S : < argumentative answer >
Interpretation of $1.3 by S:
What is the basis for the assertion ( belief ) in $1 . 2 that A ? Schema I : A simple argumentative dialogue sequence In schema I  , as in the schemata to follow , the word why represents the entire class of signals in the user's utterances for argumentative answers which were discussed in the previous section  . 
Here is an example of a simple argumentative dialogue sequence :  ( E 6 . 1) U : Do you know if the Merce desischeap ? (?6 . 2) S : I think so . 
(E6 . 3) U : What makes you think so ? ( E6 . 4) S : It's in need of repairs . 
Iterated Why-questions and Ultimate Explanations A sequence such as  ( E 6 . 1) through ( E6 . 4 ) may be continued by one or more repititions of schema  2  , in which the user requests that the system's argumentative answer itself be explained  . 
($2 . 1) U : Why ?($ 2 . 2) S : < argumentative answer >
Schema 2: Iteration of a why-question
The dialogue sequence ( E6 . 5) through ( E6 . 8 ) is a continuation of ( E 6 ) in which two further why-questions occur . The answer ( E6 . 8) is an example ( E6 . 5) U : Why ?( E6 . 6 ) S : It's in need of repairs because its rearaxle is bent  . 
(?6 . 7) U : How come ?( E6 . 8) S : That's just the way it is . 
of anu . /_-t/mcc . tC cxpZ ~ noJCio ~ . Though it is debatable whether ultimate explanations in a philosophical sense are in fact possible  , it is clear that participants in everyday dialogues frequently offer explanations which they are not in a position to explain further  . Some typical formulations which are used in such cases are listed in  ( L7 )  . 
(L7) It's obvious , That's the way it is,
Can't you see it ?
The Ambiguity of Iterated Why-questions
A further problem in connection with iterated why -questions is the ambiguity which they regularly involve  . Each of the why-questions after the first one can refer either to  ( a ) the assertion which constituted the explanans , or ( b ) the --147 -inferential relationship between the explanans and the explan and um  . 
($3.1) U : WhyQ?($3.2) S : Because P.
J %
WhyP??Why(P~Q ) ?
Schema 3: The ambiguity of an iterated why-question If the second sort of interpretation is applied to the question  ( E 6 . 7), an answer such as ( E6 . 9) becomes appropriate . 
(E6 . 9 ) S : A machine is in need of repairs when one of its parts is in need of repairs  . 
It is of course possible to eliminate this ambiguity with a more precise formulation of the why-question  , as when , for example ,  ($2 . 1) is replaced with ($2 . 1') . 
(S2 . 1') U : I know that . But why does that make you think that Q7 Although interpretation ( a ) is far more common than ( b ) in nontechnical dialogues , the occurrence of questions such as ($2 . 1' ) shows that it is nonetheless worthwhile to provide an AI system with the ability to answer in accordance with either of the possible interpretations  . For interpretation ( b ) , this means that the system must be able , ' like HAM-RP Mal , to verbalize the inference rules it uses . 
Jf the system is requested , via a further why-question , to explain an inference rule that it has verbalized in this way  , the existence of a third type of argument in addition to the presentation of factual evidence and the verbalisation of inference rules becomes evident : The system may supply abacl  . /n9Is for its inference rule . 
A backing usually refers to a convention , a theory , or observations . 
An explanation component which uses back-ings must have access to the corresponding meta-knowledge about its inference rules  . 
The Elicitation of a Multiple dustific@tionA further variant of schema  2 can be used to exhibit the step-by-step elicitation of a multiple justification  . Instead of simply asking another why-question , the user specifically requests further corroborating evidence for the explanan-dum  . Some typical expressions are listed in ( L8) . 
(L8 ) IS that all ? Any other reason ? Just because of that ?  ( $4 . 1) U : < request for further evidence > ($4 . 2) S :< corroborating evidence for SI . 2> Schema 4: The elicitation of a muJtiple justification As the example  ( E 6 . 10) through ( E6 . 13) shows , schema 4 can be instantiated several times in succession . 
(E6 . 10) U : Is that the only reason ?(?6 . 11) S : Well , it's pretty old and beat-up . 
(E6 . 12) U : Anything else ?( E6 . 13) S : It's a bitrusty . 
.Djalo@ue Schemata with Metacommunicative Why-qua -tions in all of the dialogue schemata we have examined so far  , a why-question asked by the user follow-ed an answer by the system to a previous question  . 
In this section we shall discuss dialogue sequences in which why-questions refer to questions or requests  . In fact , of course , any kind of speech act , e . g . a threat or an insult , can give rise to a metacommunicative why -question  ; the two types to be discussed here are those most relevant to foreseeable applications of natural language AI systems  . 
Schema 5 will serve as a starting point . In clarification dialogues schema 6 , a variant of schema 5 , can be instantiated . 
($5 . 1) S :< question >, < request > (55 . 2) U : Why ? (55 . 3) S : < argumentative answer > ($5 . 4) U : < response to S5 . 1> interpretation of $5 . 2 by S :
What was the intention underlying the speech act in  $5  . 1? Schema 5: A dialogue sequence with a metacommuni-cative why -question  ( $6 . 1) U :< question > ($6 . 2) S : < clarification question concerning
S6 . 1>, < request for a paraphrase of $6 . 1> ($6 . 3) U : Why ? ($6 . 4) S : < argumentative answer > ( S 6 . 5) U : < response to S 6 . 2 > ( S6 . 6) S : < response to $6 . 1> Schema 6: A metacommunicative why-question within a clarification dialogue Here is a dialogue sequence containing a meta-communicative why -question asked by the user :  ( E7 . 1 ) U : Please list all articles since 1978 on the subject of ' presposition ' . 
(E7 . 2) S : Do you really mean'presposition ' ?( E7 . 3) U : Why do you ask ?( E7 . 4) S : I don't know this word . 
(E7 . 5) U : I meant'presupposition ' ( E7 . 6) S : I have the following entries : . . . 
Why-questions Asked by the System
Although all of the why-questions considered so far have been asked by the user  , the system can also ask why the user has made a particular input ? This situation is described by schema  5 except that the roles of USER ( U ) and SYSTEM ( S ) are reversed ? Providing an application-oriented AI system with the ability to ask such why -questions is worthwhile because there are many situations in which the system requires further information about the user's intention to guide its search for an answer or to help to formulate its answer in a communicatively adequate manner ? Of course  ,   -148--the system can only make use of the user's answer to such a why-question if it is equipped with the ability to analyse argumentative answers  . The example ( E8 ) might occur in one of HAM-RPM's dialogue situations  , in which the system simulates a hotel manager who is anxiou storent a particular room to a caller who is in-quiring about it  . It illustrates the way information about the dialogue partner's intentions can influence the way a particular state of affairs is described  . 
(E8 . 1) U : H as the room got a big desk ?( E8 . 2) S : Why do you ask ?( E8 . 3) U : Because I've got a lot of work to do . 
( E8.4) S : Yes , the desk is fairly large.
( E 8.3') U : I hate big desks.
(E 8.4') S : It isn't particularly big.
The schemata we have investigated in this and the previous sections can also be embedded in one another  , as can be seen from schema7 . In this schema , ( S7 . 4), but not ($7 . 3), is a metacommuni-cative why-question . 
($7 . 1) U :< yes-no-question > ($7 . 2 ) S : < affirmative answer > ( with restric-ting hedge )   ( S7 . 3) U : Why ?($7 . 4) S : Why do you as k ? ($7 . 5) U : < argumentative answer to $7 . 4> ($7 . 6) S : < argumentative answer to $7 . 3> Schema 7: Successive why-questions of different types In mixed-Z ~  . ) . 2J . o . ~ . .i_u ? systems , in which either of the partners can initiate a dialogue sequence  , the system must be able both to ask and to answer why-questions  , including those of a meta-communicative nature . 
Summary and Integration of All Argumentative Dialogue Schemata Relevant to AI Systems Figure  3 summarizes and integrates the schemata for argumentative dialogue sequences discussed in the preceding sections  . The arrows joining the rectangles indicate that one speech act follows another in time  . If arrows join two rectangles in both directions , loops such as those discussed in connection with iterated why-questions are possible  . Double vertical lines on the left-or right hand side of a rectangle indicate that the speech act in question can be the first or the last speech act in a sequence  , respectively . The system's criteria for recognizing at each point which of the possible speech acts the user has performed and for selecting its own speech acts are not included in the diagram  . 
If one extends Figure 3 by permitting the reversal of the roles of system and user  , all schemata for argumentative dialogue sequences  21 are included which are relevant for foreseeable applications in dialogue systems with mixed-in i -tiative  . 
Technical Data
A non-compiled version of HAM-RPM is running on the DEC system  1070   ( PDP-10 ) of the Fach-bereich fuer Informatik of the University of Hamburg under the  TOPSI0 operating system . Compri-sing approximately 600 LISP/FUZZY procedures , the current version occupies 150K of 36-bit words and requires from one to Fifteen seconds for a response  . 

I wish to thank Anthony James on for careful reading of an earlier draft of this paper  . 
'1 ( I ) USER ' (2) SYSTEM , (, 3) USER
II
II iI
II , \] Llarifl cation l'
IAI question/Ik ~ I / ~ request I ~
II question answer why-question
II /' ,   ; ~ rejection IF : ii : Lilli I ( 4 ) SYSTEM ~ rultlmate explanatIonil/argument at ive\]'~I  , 3 on swor ILII
III \ oference toll previous II explanat I on II ) t , , I ( 5 ) USERi ~ request for further evidence response to  ( 2 )  111  ( 6 ) SYSTEM answer to ( 1 ) Figure 3: Schemata for argumentative dialogue sequences in Alsystems  -149-- 
References\[I \] Bromberger , S . (1966): Why-questions . In:
Colodny , R . ( ed .): Mind and Cosmos.
Pittsburgh : Univ . Press , p . 86-111\[2\] Chester , D .   ( 1976 ) : The translation of formal proofs into English . In : Artificial Intelligence , 7, 3, p . 261-278\[3\]Cohen , P . R . (1978): On knowing what to say:
Planning speech acts . Univ . of Toron-to , Dept . of Computer Science , Technical Report No . 118\[4\]Davis , R .   ( 1976 ) : Applications of metalevel knowledge to the construction  , maintenance and use of large knowledge bases . Stanford Univ . , Technical Report STAN-CS-76-562 \[5\] Freeman , C .   ( 1976 ) : A pragmatic analysis often seless why-questions . In : Mufwene,
S.S ., Walker , C.A ., Steeuer , S.B.
( eds . ): Papers of the twelfth region-al meeting of the Chicago Linguistic 
Society . Chicago : Chicago Linguistic
Society , p . 208-219\[6\]v . Hahn , W . , Hoeppner , W . , Jameson , A . ,
Wahlster , W .   ( 1980 ) : The anatomy of the natural language dialogue system 
HAM-RPM . In : Bolc , L . ( ed . ): Natural language based computer systems . 
Munich : Hanser/Macmillan\[7\]Hart , P . E . , Duda , R . O . (1977): PROSPECTOR-
A computer-based consultation system for mineral exploration  . Stanford
Research International , AICenter,
Technical Note 155\[8\] Hayes , P . , Reddy , R .   ( 1979 ) : An anatomy of graceful interaction in spoken and written man-machine communication  . 
Carnegie-Mellon-Univ . , Dept . of Computer Science , Technical Report CMU-
CS-79-144\[9\] Heringer , H . J . (1974): Praktische Semantik . 
Stuttgart : Klett\[I0\]Nakamishi , M . , Nagata , M . , Ueda , K .  (1979):
An automatic theorem prover genera-ting a proof in natural language  . In:
IJCAI-79, Tokyo , p . 636-638\[11\]Sacerdoti , E . D . (1977): A structure for plans and behavior . N . Y . : Elsevier\[12\]Scott , C . A . , Clancey , A . , Davis , R . ,
Shortliffe , E . H .   ( 1977 ) : Explanation capabilities of production-based consultation systems  . In : American Journal of Computational Linguistics  , 
Microfiche 62\[13\] Scragg , G . W . (1974): Answering questions about processes . Univ . of California,
San Diego , Ph . D . Thesis\[14\]Sleeman,D . H . , Hendley , R . J . (1979): ACE:
A system which analyses complex explanations . In : International Journal of Man-Machine Studies  ,  11 , p . 125-144\[15\]Stallman , R . M . , Sussman , G . J .   ( 1977 ) : Forward reasoning and dependency-direc-ted backtracking in a system for com-puter-aided circuit analysis  . In:
Artificial Intelligence 9, P . 135-196\[16\]Swartout , W . R .   ( 1977 ) : A Digital is therapy advisor with explanations . MIT Lab . 
for Computer Science , Technical Report TR-176\[17\]T on dl , L .   ( 1969 ) : Semantics of the question in a problem-solving situation  . Czech
Academy of Science , Prague\[18\] Tou\]min , S . (1969): The uses of argument,
Cambridge : Univ . Press(Isted . 1958)\[19\] Wahlster , W . , Jameson , A . , Hoeppner , W . 
(1978): Glancing , referring and ex-planing in the dialogue system HAM-RPM  . 
In : American Journal of Computational
Linguistics , Microfiche 77, P . 53-67\[20\] Wahlster , W .   ( 1980 ) : Implementing fuzziness in dialogue systems . In : Rieger , B . 
( ed .): Empirical Semantics . Bochum :
Brockmeyer\[21\]Wahlster , W .   ( 1980 ) : Automatic generation of natural language explanations for conclusions based on fuzzy inferences  . 
( in preparation )\[22\] Weiner , J . L .   ( 1979 ) : The structure of natural explanation : Theory and application  . 
System Development Corporation , Santa
Monica , Technical Report SP-4035\[23\] Wilensky , R . (1978): Why Johnmaried Mary:
Understanding stories involving recurring goals . In : Cognitive Science , 2, p . 235-266\[24\]Winograd , T . (1972): Understanding natural language . N . Y . : Academic--150--
