ACHINES ECHARACTERS CODING SCHEME FOR COMPUTER INPUTAND INTERNAL STORAGE 
Chorkin Chan , Computer Centre , University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong

A coding scheme for inputting Chinese characters by means of a conventional keyboard has been developed  . The code for each Chinese character is composed of two strings of keys  , one corresponds to the spelling and the other the ideographic property of the character  . Each code requires no more than seven keys ( average five and a half keys ) and 99 . 5% of the ten thousand characters in a dictionary ' XianDai HanYu CiDian ' have unique codes  . Each input code can be packed into 32 bits for internal representation . 
Introduction of eighteen pairs can be easily removed by deleting one member of each pair from the vocabulary because they are either ' dead ' characters appearing in ancient classics only or they can be replaced by other characters of equivalent meaning  . 
The non-uniqueness of the remaining eight pairs can be removed also by either changing the ideographic pattern or the spelling of one of the members in each pair  . Thus , by means of these remedial measures , this coding scheme offers a unique code to each of the ten thousand characters found in this dictionary  . The list of characters sharing the same codes is in Table  1 together with the suggested remedies to overcome the problem of non-uniqueness  . 
Over the last few years , encoding
Chinese characters has become a very active subject of research  . Numerous papers have appeared , mainly written in Chinese ( hence difficult to be referenced in English )  , proposing various kinds of inputting schemes . Unfortun-ately , most of these papers offered only the ideas without accompanying implementation and experimentation  . This paper presents a coding scheme of Chinese characters based on their ideographic properties as well as their spellings so that a conventional type writer keyboard can be used for inputting purposes  . 
This scheme has been implemented at the
University of Hong Kongusing an IBM 3031 under VM/CMS . Without a proper output device to display the Chinese characters  , when the code of a Chinese character is entered , the address of that character ( where it can be found ) in a dictionary ' Xian Dai Han Yu Ci Dian'is displayed  . This is a wkward but still sufficient to prove the correctness of the code recognition procedure  . 
The Coding Scheme for Inputting
In this scheme , a code for a Chinese character consists of two strings of symbols concatenated together  . One string of three symbols corresponds to the ideographic radicals the character is composed of  . The other of no more than four symbols is the spelling of the character  . Corresponding to each of the ten thousand characters in the dictionary ' Xian Dai Han Yu CiDian '  , with the exception of twenty six pairs , there exists a unique code in this scheme . In other words , this coding scheme is 99 . 5% unique . Furthermore , among these pairs of characters sharing the same codes in a pairwise manner  , the non-uniqueness
The Spelling of Chinese Characters
There are two standard systems to spell
Chinese characters , one in terms of the
Latin alphabets and the other in terms of Mandarin P in Y in symbols  . By means of the former ; a maximum of five alphabets are normally required to spella Chinese character  . However , since the alphabet ' G ' ( except when it is the leading alphabet ) always appear with ' N'as ' NG' , one can replace ' NG ' with ' G ' and reduce the maximum number of alphabets required from five to four  . By means of the latter , no more than three symbols are required to spell a Chinese character  . This can be an important saving but in this paper  , spellings are in terms of Latin alphabets just because a conventional terminal keyboard does not have Mandarin PinYinkeys  . 
It is not always obvious whether one should read certain Chinese characters with or without a curling tongue  , i . e . , whether one should spell with ' C ' or ' CH ' ' S ' or ' SH ' and ' Z ' or ' ZH '  . This 8 is particularly difficult to those whose mother tongue is not Mandarin  . In order to be more forgiving , this coding scheme allows one not to differentiate'C'from'CH''S'from'SH' and ' Z'from'ZH'so that  , for example , ' SHAO ' can be spelled as ' SAO' . As a consequence , there Will be three additional pairs of characters sharing the same codes in a pairwise manner as listed in Table  2  . Fortunate-ly , the non-uniqueness so engendered can be easily el iminated by deleting one member of each pair because of its rare occurrence  . For the same reason , this coding scheme also allows one to confuse a leading'N ' with a leading ' L'F or example  , ' LUAN ' can be spelled as ' NUAN ' and vice versa  . No non-uniqueness is introduced as a result of this 
Spelling









JIA
JIAN
JING

















Radical
Composition










PKL-y

HOP2DK
I8EL
F ??
X . X ; . X


I ~ t ~ f
A @




T %
Suggested Remedy delete char . 2 write char . 2 as delete char . 1 delete char . 2 delete char . 1 delete char . 1 delete char . 2 spell char . 2 as FO delete char . 1 write char . 2 as ~ delete char . 1 write char . 1 as ~"\[ delete char . 2 delete char . 1 delete char .  1
Justification same meaning it means a defect delete char  . 2 write char . 1 as write char . 2 as delete char . 2 write char . 1 as ~ A write char . 2 as ~ delete char . 1 delete char . 2 spell char . 2 as OU delete char . 2 write char . 1 as ~ delete char . 1 delete char . 1 delete char .   1 same meaning replaced by + uncommon uncommon un common so is uncommon metalics hackle un common human activity uncommon uncommon un common uncommon that's original that's orig in alre placed by ~' ~ that's original being ~celestial 
Hn common uncommon
SO is I~un common made of fabric uncommon replaced by @ replaced by y  ) ~ --275-- . 
relaxation because the complete code consists of the radical string as well as the spelling string  . Over the ten thousand characters in ' Xian Dai Han Yu Ci Dian '  , this coding scheme requires an average of 2 . 5 alphabets to spell a
Chinese character.
The Radical Comppsition of
Chinese Characters
One traditional method of looking up a
Chinese character in a dictionary is first to identify a radical in the graphic representation of the character  . 
There are hundreds of different standard radicals used in a dictionary and there are rigid rules to apply in order to identify one  . The number of Chinese characters identified to a single radical is numerous  . Even a combination of the spelling and the identifying radical together is not sufficient to yield a unique code for a Chinese character  . 
An experiment was conducted in which each of the ten thousand characters mentioned above was decomposed into a string of as many as eight radicals  . In order to do so , a total of four hundred and fifty six radicals were employed  . 
These radicals were grouped into fifty sets according to their common graphical properties  . Each set is then associated with a key of a conventional keyboard  . 
Table 3 lists all these radicals , their groupings and their associations with the keys of a keyboard  . Human engineering aspects were considered when the set-key association was determined  . The radical string for a Chinese character consists of the keys corresponding to the first three radicals composing the character  . In case the character is decomposed into less than three radicals  , blanks are used as fillers to make up a string of three keys  . For instance , the character ~ is decomposed into 91T and the radical string for ~ is I . In this coding scheme , the grouping of radicals into sets is of paramount importance  . On the one hand , they are grouped according to their common graphic properties into as few sets as possible  . On the other hand , care is exercised to assure the uniqueness ( or almost uniqueness ) of the code-character correspondence . 
The Codin@Scheme for
Internal Representation
For data processing purposes , it is necessary to arrange the Chinese characters into a collating sequence which is a direct result of their internal representation in computer memory  . Hence , when one is designing the internal codes , besides minimizing the length of the codes , one should also observe that the collating sequence that follows is logical and practical  . This paper attempts to derive the internal codes logically from the input codes which  , in turn , are logically related to the spellings and graphical properties of the Chinese characters  . When a new character is created in the future with a unique input code  , this scheme guarantees that the internal code will also be unique and a logical place in the collating sequence for it is assured  . 
The maximum number of keys used for an input code is seven  . Storing seven symbols , in general , requires seven bytes . We recall that three symbols out of the seven serve to indicate which sets of radicals the Chinese character is composed of  . Since there are fifty sets of radicals altogether  , there are a total of 125 , 000 possible combinations . Seventeen bits will be sufficient to represent these combinations  . 
The remaining four alphabetic symbols used to represent the spelling have the following properties : - The first symbol can be any alphabet from A to Z  ( except
V ) . Five bits would suffice to represent it . The second symbol can be a blank , A , E , H , I , M , N , O , R , U or V , a total of eleven possibilities . Four bits would suffice . The third symbol can be a blank , A , E , G , I , N , O , or U , a total of eight possibilities . Three bits would suffice . The fourth symbol can be a blank , A , G , I , N , O , or U , a total of seven possibilities . Three bits would suffice . 
Thus the spelling can be packed into fifteen bits  . Combining with the seventeen bits required for the radicals  , a code in these scheme requires only thirty two bits of memory space  . 
As a consequence of this internal representation , the collating sequence would be such that where a character should appear in the sequence first depends on the spelling of the character  . The order of two characters of the same spelling depends on the keys used in the radical strings for the two characters  . 

Table 2: Conflicts Introduced by not Differentiating ' C' from ' CH'  , ' S'from'SH'and'Z'from'ZH'as Leading Symbols in Spelling Chinese Characters Radical Char  . Char . Suggested Remedy Justification Spelling Composition  1   2 


SI/SHI 72Y 7M
G2 delete char . 1 delete char . 2 delete char . 1 uncommon uncommon replaced by 4~
Table 3: Grouping of Radicals
KeyRadicals in Sets
B ~ ~ ~ - ~ - ~ ~ cg
GtWl~ttt % ~

Rk > " ~ ~ l < , l-
U =/



X !
Radicals in Sets t3~o.~g_.~..?.
sr~t/t li~l,~?tf,4\]ii
Key ! i !
Radicals in Sets , ,
The Next Step
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of this coding scheme  , the author plans to experiment with different users and measure their coding efficiencies as a function of training and experience as well as their reaction towards using this scheme  . The acceptance of the users is the ultimate measure of success 
Of any invention . The design of the set-key association in Table 3 is somewhat arbitrary . Since it has a subtle impact on the collating sequence  , more research in this area is necessary . 

The author is indebted to Professor
T . C . Chen for his constructive suggestions and criticisms  . The author is also grateful to Mr . T . H . Tse for his assistance and discussions . 

