ANASSIGN MENTO FKEY-CODES FOR AJAPANESE CHARACTERKEY BOARD 
Yuzuru Hiraga , Yoshihiko Ono , Yamada-Hisao
Dept , of Information Science
Faculty of Science , University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo , Bunkyoku
Tokyo 113, Japan
Summarz
An input method for ordinary Japanese text is proposed  . A regular keyboard has been selected as the input device  , as a means to effect touchtyping . The primary objective of the design of the code system is to make the keying fast  , least fatiguing and error-free . Modeling for performance simulation was carried out  , which showed the system to be better in its efficiency in comparison with the Standard English keyboard  . 
1. Introduction
Since its first appearance some I00 years ago , the English keyboard type writer has come to be one of the most indispensible tools of the Western society today  . This is not only for the great role it plays in business offices  , but also for its widespread acceptance for everyday use by the majority of the people  . Indeed the type writer caused a social revolution . The most remarkable of its influence is that it opened up an entirely new career  ( especially for females )  , - - the typist . And now , the invention and rapid development of the computer has opened a yet new important role for the type writer keyboard as a remarkably simple  , though effective interface between machines and human beings  . 
While all this was going on in the Western hemisphere  , no device in Japan ( and China , and other nonalphabetical countries ) had attained the high potential of the type writer keyboard throughout this period  . The introduction of computers has not altered this situation  , since the alphabetical keyboard was directly imported as the computer-input device  . 
Whyso ? The answer is quite simple-it is because of the huge character set used for the Japanese writing system  . This affects all aspects of Japanese text processing  , such as how to create and store character fonts , how to output them to the end devices , and most serious of them all , how to input the text . 
But eventually the rapid development of computers and peripheral devices is becoming to enable us to do what was impossible  . Complicated characters may be printed by means of a fined ot matrinter  . Memory units to store these character fonts and processors to handle them are becoming reasonable in size and economy  . Still , the problem at the inputting end remains . 
Our intention in ibisnote is to suggest an input method that would assume the position in Japanese text processing what the keyboard does in Western societies  . That is , we are laying emphasis on the efficiency of input  , presupposing professional uses . We do not assume the use by untrained users . We further note that the current " QWERTY " English keyboard is by no means optimally designed  , and we must not follow the path that the Western society has followed and  , as a consequence , suft ~ rs today from being stuck with the poorly constituted device  . 
2. A Brief Survey
The Japanese language uses an extensive and complicated character system  . There are two types of phonetic symbols ( kana's )  , hiragana and katakana . They are in one to one rel 0 tion with each other , and about 150 in all . Arabic numerals and alphabets are also commonly used  . An indefinite set of punctuation marks is quite similar to that of English  . Finally , there is a huge set of ideograms called kanji . There are about 50 , 000 of them in all , though an average person would use some 800 in daily life . About 2000 are taught in the elementary education to the ninth grade  . 
With this complicated system , the usage is quite flexible , that is , it is legal to write texts in quite an arbitrary mixture of these character types  . So , it is possible to write down a Japanese sentence with onty the phonetic symbols  , kana , but that would deter the readability of the present day text  . One reason that kana-written texts are hard to read is because the Japanese language contains numerousets of homonyms  , each of which is written the same in kana form . So for ordinary text handling , we must take into account the kanji characters . That immediately means that we must deal with a character set of a few thousand  . 
Several types of input devices have been proposed and realized in the past  . They may be roughly categorized as in figure (21) . 
,1 ) Direct Methods " Direct " means that all information necessary to select a correct input character is provided by the typist  .   ( The term " typist " is used in a general sense as the person who handles the input process  . ) This type includes : 1 ) One-to-one keying that uses one separate physical key for each character  . Devices for this may be made without the help of electronics  , and are relatively easy and inexpensive to build . Several types of these are already on the commercial line  . 
2 ) Multi-shift keying which uses 100 to 300 main keys , each keystanding for some number of characters from which a selection is made by means of shift keys  . Thus , a character is printed by pressing two keys at a time  . 
This principle may be extended to : 3 ) Chordkeying , which uses a combination of keyshit simultaneously to represent a character  , or even a word or a phrase . This type of keying is used mainly in stenographs  , and requires a high level of trained skill . 
4) Multi-stroke keying , on the other hand , is operated by hitting only one key at a time . A character is expressed as a sequence of key strokes  . This may be implemented on a keyboard of a small size of  30 to 40 keys , and is a menable to touch-typing . This type would require electronic devices for implementation  . 
(2) Interactive Methods
These are methods to support multi-stroke methods . Since the character codes for multi-stroke methods are  ( or seem to be ) hard on memory , the operator first types simple--249-- Table ( 2-i ) : Input Methods q for Japanese
Text . ' ( Adapted from Yamada ~)
Direct Methods

IW a bunty pew riter(planar , drum)


IOne-page
I Multiple-page ( Hitachi )
Chord ( Stenotype style)

IU ni iorm length code
With shift ( Kantec , Taikei )
Without shift ( Rainputto,

Variable length code
Kanji , coded-
Kanji , synthesis from parts.
Interactive Methods ( Multi-stroke )
By sound
By shap . . e
Hybrid ( Hitachi )
Kana-kanji conversion ( Toshiba )

H and writing Recognition
Voice Recognition
Table (22): Two Types ~ f Operations.
(Adapted from Yamada ~ ) methods Sight method Touch method features ( Hunt & Peck )   ( Blind ) 


Rhythm ~ peed Low 3kill ac--2-Product luisition

Mental High , t , stress
Strained by moving from manuscript tokey board to platen  . 
Definitely cons-=ious , especially at character selection at the keyboard
Lacking 4ostly stationary at : he manuscript.
Subconscious reflex of hands and fingers ~ ueh
Operator ' morale & pride duct~6nw ~can commence without much training . 
Highend to cause restlessness.
LOw geeds systematic training ; heavily depends on training nethod . 
-- Low
I i

High associatively recallable codes , and the machine answers back with possible selections from which the operator picks the proper choice  . Among this type is the kana-kanji conversion method  , in which the text is first input by its phonetic representation  , and the machine converts it into proper ideograms . 
Comparing these methods from the viewpoint of human factors  , we see two extremes on the line . One is the Sight ( or Hunt & Peck ) method , which requires constant watching of the input device  , either because there are too many keys , or the keys are not position oriented , like a diallock . The other is the Touch ( or Blind ) method , where the operator requires practically no viewing of the input device  . This is the way of professional ( English ) typists . For touchtyping , it is important to keep the keyboard small enough so that all keys are within the reach of fingers  . We note that touchtyping is done in the subconscious level of mind  , that is , the motion of the hands is a conditioned reflex , and not a result of some consciously made decision  . The operation in interactive methods lies somewhere between the two extremes  . They require constant intervention by the machine  , and the subconscious flow of mind is kept interrupted  . The merits and demerits of the two extremes are listed in table  ( 22 )  . 
It is natural to conclude that when both methods are available  , touch methods are far more effective than sight methods for a trained typist  . One question is whether an enormous character set would ever be made touch-typable in the first place  . We will discuss this problem later in section 8 . 
3. Designing Principles
The crucial point in the design of our code system is its " efficiency  . " By this we mean a code system that embodies the following features :  ( 1 ) A high level of input speed is attainable . A good English typist easily types 80 to 100 words per minute . A method that cannot outpace hand writing is not acceptable  . Hunt & peck devices \[' or Japanese tend to be even slower than h and writing  , so they would serve as a device of necessary evil only for final printing  . 
(2) The typist suffers from less t ~ tigue . Employing a trained operator as a user means that long hours of continuous work are expected from her  . Thus attention must be given to the work load on the typist  , not to impair the health of the typist while maintaining the high rate of input  . 
(3) A high rate of accuracy may be maintained . That is , the codes should not be susceptible to error neous fingermotions  . 
These are of course not independent factors , but are rather closely correlated to each other . Of them , speed is in a way the most decisive , and also the most appealing , factor . It is also the easiest to examine experimentally . The other two involve complex human factors study  , to measure and to analyze . 
From the discussions in the preceding section , we see that the best method to accomplish the above objectives is one that allows touch typing  . Our objective would be met by a multi-stroke code system on a small keyboard  . This immediately implies that the system is not usable by an untrained user  , for she must look up the code of each character to input  . 

There are several multi-stroke systems currently implemented and put to use  , most of which are provided with some kind of mnemonic features for character codes  . They may be in terms of the pronunciation of kanji in kana or alphabet  , or built around the constructs , or visual forms , of kanji . Assume a situation that a practical number of codes are learned by heart  , that is , they are not memorized by way of the conscious mind  , but are attained as subconscious reflexive motions  . What counts then is that the input operation is highly efficient  . Them nemonicodes are not likely to work in favor of efficiency  , in fact , often against it . So , we basically dispense with all intentions for mnemonic assoeiativity  , and pursue efficiency in the main . We will even make no distinctions among different character types  , namely kanji , hiragana , katakana symbols , and the punctuation marks . This will make it still harder for the untrained user  . Consequently , our code system is primarily for the use of trained personnel  , who are likely to be professional typists . 
Our measures for the efficiency of keyboards has l been obtained from the analysis of the current English keyboard  . We find from them that keeping a steadyr hythm is the best strategy for speed  . Alternate hand stroking is the best for this purpose  . 
This suggests that a code should consist of an even number of strokes--where a text character is entered by an alternate hand sequence such as R  ( right )  , L(left ) , R , L . . . . then the next again by R , L , R , L . . . , and so on . Of course , the total number of strokes per code must be held as small as possible  . 
To meet these requirements , the code system for the entire character set can not be of uniform length  , but be a 2-levelled one . We assign 2-stroke codes to the set of basic characters , and longer codes ( presumably 4 or 6 strokes ) to the rest , called outside characters . This partitioning has certain other merits . 
We may require only the codes for the basic characters to be learned completely  ( by hands )  . The longer codes for outside characters may have mnemonic features  .   ( This would not harm the whole typing process if codes are constructed with care  . 
Outside characters cover only a small fraction of the total text  . ) The size of the basic character set will be about  900 on a 30-key keyboard , and 1200 on a 40-key keyboard . The latter does not use all the possible 2-stroke combinations because there are key pairs which are not suitable for good touchtyping  . 
4 . The Determination of the Character Set The selection of the basic character set is based upon the frequencies of thud usage of characters in a sample text  , taken from newspapers . However , alphabets are excluded from the fist since it would be better to treat them in a different keyboard mode  . All Arabic numbers are among the 50 most frequently used characters , and they are included in the basic character set . 
As for punctuation marks , only the standard ones are included . 
Most of the kana characters are among the top 900 , and it is of no problem to include them in the set  . The rest of the characters are kanji . Considering a statistical fact that about 500 kanji and 150 kana characters are used by an average person for his daily use  , although the set may change gradually , our selection of the basic character set seems reasonable  . 
By exam ! ning the cumulative frequency graph of Japanese characters given in figure  ( 4- I )  , we see that 95% of all the usage is covered by the top 900 characters . However , if the distribution is looked at in jukugo units , that is , a character combination that lbrms a concept in . Japanese ( asa " word " does in English) , then 87% of the whole text is covered by the top i00%  \ \  9  ,  . s ! 00100 . 
6.0\['I , eharal cters 500i 0 0 0 1 5 0 0
Figure 4-i
Relative Cumulative Frequency of Japanese Characters  900  , so we might extend the size of the set to perhaps  1200 or more , by using not 30 keys but 40 on the keyboard . Even in this case , it is not necessary to use all the available key pairs for the reason of maintaining the quality for good touchtyping performance  , and the top row will be used only in alternate handstroking  . This extension is planned as a future work . 
.5. Coding of the Basic Character Set
The coding of the basic characters is based strictly on the efficiency of finger movements  . Our method maps characters , arranged in the order of the frequency of usage , to the key pairs arranged in a suitable ordering as defined below  . Second order adjustments will be made afterwards . 
The ordering of key pairs is obtained by assigning certain weights to certain characteristics of handmotions and using their linear sum for each key pair  . The characteristics that are thought to have a greater importance will be given a larger weight  . In this way , the ordering of 900 key pairs on a 30-key keyboard was made . 
Though the key pairs have an ordering based on their inherent features  , this ordering is not immediately usable to fix the assignment of characters directly  . This is because that the typing process is not a collection of isolated key pairs  , but their continuou sequence . For example , if keypair " d-k " is with a high score , then its reverse , " kd " would also be with a high score , but frequent appearances of these two key pairs would result in the frequent tapping motion of key pairs " k-k " and " d-d " in the interval of consecutive " k-d "' s and " d-k "' s  , or vice versa , which are known to be less preferred . This would also be adverse to alternate hand stroking as well  . 
Through such considerations , the desirable keyboard characteristics may be itemized as follows:  ( I ) The whole typing procedure is to keep as much keying rhythmas possible  . Fluentrhythm , as well as high average of typing speed , is best realized by alternates troking by both hands  . Thus , it would be our principal objective to let the code system be such that it would allow alternate handstroking as much as possible  . 
(2 ) H and s should not be moving up and down incessantly on keyrows  , but stay in the same row as much . Thus , strokes on the home row should be used as much as possible and excursions to other rows should be held minimum  . 

Comp ~ tring between the upper and the bottom row , all evidences point out that bands are more fluent on the upper row  , so the ranking of rows should be in the preference order of the home  , the upper , and the bottom . 
(3 ) Fingers should be loaded in proportion to their dexterity  . 
In typing motions , fingers are divided into the stronger ones ( index and middle fingers ) and the weaker ones ( ring and little fingers )  . Index and middle fingers are not so much different in their capacity and functions  , However , we must keep in mind that each index finger must cover two inner dolumns  . The difference between ring and little fingers is also not so obvious  . Althougharing finger is superior in its stroking force In typing motions  , a little finger may have the advantage of the twisting motion of the wrist  . ( Though in reality , this motion might lead to more typing errors . ) In the present study , little fingers will be given more emphasis than the ring  . Numbering the key columns 1 through 5 from the outer one in ward , their ranking in the order of manipulative superiority will be  3  ,  4 ,  1 ,  5 ,  2 . 
(4 ) The number of awkward keying sequences must be decreased as much as possible  . Almost allawkward key pairs are of one-handed stroking  , again attesting to the importance of alternate handstroking  . The major awkward key pair sequences , in the order of their disadvantages are : 1 ) Hurdling : the stroking from the upper to the bottom row or vice versa  , jumping over the home row . 
2 ) Reaching : the stroking of different keys with the same  . finger . 
3) Tapping : the stroking of the same key.
4) Rocking : stroking with adjacent fingers , especially from an inner to an outer one . 
There are other minor considerations that should be made  , one of which is the load balancing between the two hands  . We have loaded the right slightly heavier , but we do not consider this factor that important  , and the roles of the right and the lefthand may be reversed to obtain a code set ' with the mirror image assignment to hands  . 
The actual weighing process starts by accommodating for condition  ( 1 ) above . The key pairs are divided into 4 blocks , namely RL , RR , LL , and LR blocks , where symbols L and R stand for the hands that stroke the keys of the pair  . The blocks are given preference in the order given above  , and key pairs in each of the blocks are then ordered by taking further conditions into account  . 
The above ordering of blocks comes from the distribution of the frequencies of the usage of Japanese characters  . Since character pairs have a frequency distribution proportional to each of the individual character frequencies  , characters belonging to blocks of lower rank would appear most of the time alone in a sequence of characters belonging to the top-ranked block  , forming a singular point . If this character belongs to block RR , then the sequence would look like :
RLRLRRRL .....
but if LR , then:
RLRLLRRL . . . .
They would have the same effect on the average LR -sequence length  ( described later )  , but the latter causes two singular points in the basic " RL " sequence  . Also i in the R-L-R-L environment , it is possible that they might be typed in the reverse order  . Thus , from the alternates troking point of view , it is preferred to use block RR , not LR , next to RL .   ( If a character pair is made of characters with nearly the same frequencies  , then the above statement is not true . ) Within individual blocks , conditions (2), (3) .   .   .   .   . are evaluated and weighed accordingly , and the whole ordering is decided . Awkward sequences are deliberately given negative weights in order to bring down their ranking  , thus decreasing their occurrences when the codes are used  . 
The above procedure takes into account only key pairs  , or , from the viewpoint of the source text , the distribution of individual characters . For the further improvement of keying motions , considerations on the distribution of character sequence should be made  . But tests on our code system showed that these secondary changes would not seriously affect the overall rating of the system  , so this line of modifications has not been fully carried out in the present status  . One exception is the introduction of entry codes into the outside character set  . 
Codes " j-f " and " f-j " are used for this purpose  . The entire codetable for the basic characters is given in the appendix  . This table is yet subject of urther changes . 
6. Coding of the Outside Characters
As tbr the outside characters , we do not insist on having the codes made free of mnemonics as for the basic characters  . 
One reason for this is that the length of the codes are too long for easy learning  , and another is that there are too many of these characters  . But the main reason is that since they cover only a small fraction  ( 5% for a 30-key keyboard , 2% for a 40-key keyboard ) of an average text , those codes for seldom used characters may be easily forgotten  , therefore they should be consciously constructible  . Since most of the outside characters are kanji characters  ,   ( leaving out a few exceptions of punctuation marks  , ) we may code them mnemonically using the features inherent in these characters  , where them nemonic codes are the codes of the basic characters  . That is , the codes are constructed by a two-strokentry code that indicates that an input sequence of an outside character has started  , followed by the codes of two basic characters that express some feature of the character in question  , making the number of strokes 6 in all . 
( By means of shift keys or t~fdw are modifications , we might be able to omit the entry code , ) In this way , we have coded 2000 of the outside characters as a start . 
Them nemonici ~ atures of an outside character to represent it must meet such requirements a :  1  ) Them nemonics of the character can be easily recalled  , or is recoverable from the character itself . 
2 ) The introduction of additional characters to the character set will not require the modification of the whole coding system  . 
There are various features of characters that we might utilize for coding the outside kanji  . Various kanji dictionaries use radicals ( substructures of kanji )  , the number of strokes used to draw the character , or the reading ( in phonetics ) to index a certain kanji . Of them , the reading is not suitable , for a character may be read in several different ways  , or several different characters may correspond to a reading  . In addition , as the character to be typed becomes a less commonly used one  , it will be less probable that the typist would know how to read it  . 
The number of strokes is not usable either as a means of specifying a character because its exact value is riot so readily perceivable  . Most of the kanji characters are composed of two or more radicals  . A radical may be a kanji itself , or be a substructure of the whole and may appear in a good many other kanji characters in common  . By inspecting a complex and less used outside character  , we can often agree upon a set of two- -252--radicals which embody the essential features of the character  . 
This identification process is a subtle and very much a subjective psychological one  , heavily dependent on the past experience of individuals  . Yet different individuals seem to have a nearly same set of choices for each character  . We shall call these chosen characters component characters  . When the choice is not unique , we use a reasonable number of alternatives as well  . 
All component characters we use form nemonics are from the basic set  . The codes made of these pairs may be classified into the four types given below  , where W in ( 1 ) through ( 3 ) indicates that the whole of a component character is representing a part of the outside character  . The Pin ( 2 ) through ( 4 ) indicates that a part of a component character is representing a part  ( the whole in ( 4 ) only ) of the outside character . "+" means a combination of components . " PW ' in ( 4 ) means that a component character W is eliminated from the other component character P and the remaining is the outside character  . Alphabet letters below component characters are the codes for the characters  . 
Examples of codes for outside characters
Outside Components Other Components
Char . and Codes and Codes ( i ) W+WNJ ~ iN"~iN ( P + W ) 
IT ; XJJ;X (2) P+W~~~~~(p+W)
MZ , ;,; HX(3) P+P~~6'~~'~~(P+P)
DC/WVTZN (4) pwN~J  ~
XPMN
This way of coding may cause some conflicts in rare cases where the code typed in is not for the character intended  , but for some other one . For these cases , we are leaving it at present to the typist to verify the character on a display  , and correct it if necessary by trying another code  . There are still a lot of possible codes unused , and other outside characters beyond the 2000th may be coded similarly . The 6 strokes necessary to type in a character might seem too many  , but as we have seen , their appearance in text is not so often that the effect of the codeleng this not that critical to the overall speed  . We place more importance on the good typing rhythm in  6-character codes , and the ease of the recall or reconstruction of codes  . 
7. Evaluation of the Code System..
The ultimate test of a code system would be to actually measure its productivity on a real system  , but we have not been able to go that far yet . In addition , those experiments would involve human factors problems not well understood even at present  . One example is the problem of an objective measurement of mental fatigue  . 
Hence , we chose to_s how some statistical figures derived from some sample text  . 8In the test , we considered the basic . character set only , and treated the outside characters as if each consists of  2 invalid strokes . The QWERTY keyboard run on an English text is also made for comparison  . Results are shown in table ( 7- l ) and figure ( 7-2 )  . Our code is referred to as " T-code " in the table  . LR-sequence lngth in table ( 71 ) means the expected length of the alternate hand stroking starting from an arbitrarily chosen character of the text  , counted by stroke intervals . Such expected value for a random sequence is 1 . 00, since
E\[length\]=(1/2)'0 + (1/2) 2'1+ . . . +( l/2)n*(n-l ) + . . . 

From the table , we see for our code that : I ) H and s are evenly loaded , slightly lighter for the weaker lefthand , 2) Strokes are concentrated on the home row , so that the moving of hands from row to row is held minimum  . Note that quite a different situation holds with the QWERTY keyboard  , where more than half of the strokes fall on the upper row  . 
3 ) The loading of fingers is in a qualitative agreement with the conjectured strengths of the fingers  . We feel , however , that index fingers ( covering two columns each ) may be loaded a little too heavily . It is possible to lighten their burden by weighing the ring and the little fingers more  , but this is a tradeoff problem , and we are unable to tell which is better at this moment  . In any case , our code for Japanese gives much cleaner distributions than those of QWERTY  . For example , the rightring finger on the latter is readily seen to be overloaded  . ( This finger covers keys " o ",' T ', and " . " )  4 ) Our keyboard has attained a good low level of awkward sequence rate  , which is about the same as for the improved . 
English keyboard of Dvorak.
5 ) A high rate of alternate handstroking has been obtained  , but the reason for this is obvious , since it was our primary design objective . This may be further improved with keyboards having more keys  , but that would also raise the rate of awkward sequences  , as well as the use of the less preferred to prow . 
The efficiency of our code system is qmte clear , in comparison with the QWERTY keyboard data . The figures attained even the level of the Dvorak Simpl ~ lied Keyboard  ( DSK )  , which is though to be near optimal for English . The results are especially favorable in awkward sequence rate and LR-sequence length  . The LR-sequence has far out lengthed even that of Dvorak  . We believe that a further significant reduction of the awkward sequence rate  ( through the secondary modifications of the codes ) is hard , if at all possible . Still , it may be beneficial to try to accommodate for the character pair distribution of Japanese texts  , because in fast typing , the transition of every second stroke between characters might have a nonneglible effect on speed  . 
As an attemp to see the effect of such factors , a computer simulation of typing motion was made . The aim of the simulation was to find the coordination between hand movements and finger stretches for keystroking  , in order to model the most adequate over all typing motion  . The designed model was intended to capture the significant features of realtyping procedures where the typist would lookahead a number of characters  ( may be taking words as units )  , and unconsciously hold the hands over a position that would require least finger  --253-- 
Table (7-I ): Stroke Distributions.
( Space bar and to prow excluded from
QWERTY data.)
H and Distribution


T-code QWERTY 47.5% 57.2% 52.5% 42.8%
Row Distribution



T-code QWERTY 21.9% 51.5% 58.5% 31.8% 19.6% 17,7%
Finger Distribution
T-code QWERTY
Left Right Left Right
Index 18,8% 20.8% 21.3% 19.4%
Middle 13.4% 14.2% 19.9% 9.2%
Ring 7.2% 8.1% 8.0% 11.8%
Little 8.2% 9.4% 8.1% 2.4%
Rate of Awkward Sequences ( Total , ( Left : right))
T-code QWERTY
Hurdle 2 . 1% "(2 . 0%:2 . 2%) 9 . 6% (5 . 4%:15 . 3%) Reach 5 . 2% (4 . 1%:6 . 2%) 8 . 2% (7 . 5%:8 . 7%) LR-sequence Length ( Expectation 1 . 00 for random . 
T-code QWERTY 7 . 69 I . 09 21 . 9 ~\[\] top\[--~\] 51 . 5% 58 . 5Z\]\]bore\]\[3Z . 8 ~19,6% L\]b .   .   .   .   . \]\] i7 . 7%
T-Code QWERTY
Figure (7-2)
Finger and Row Distributions motions for the stroking sequence  . The outline of the model is as follows : A certain key is hit by the finger assigned to it  , holding the hand over a certain position . The hand positions were quantized into 4 locations , each of them being the most convenient position to hitkeys in a certain row  , namely , the top , the upper , the home , or the bottom row . A finger may hit a key with no stretching effort by moving the hand over the row the key is in  , or , it may stretch over to bitakey in the row right above  , or right below , the row the hand position stands fbr , without moving the hands . The load of the whole process is the sum of ( 1 ) the load on the finger to stretch over , (2) the force to hit the key , and (3) the load on b and movement . The load parameters were adjusted so as to realize  ( 1 ) a case where no finger stretching would occur , or ( 2 ) a case where no hand movements would occur ( using the lower three rows )  , or (3) other cases in between . The hands may either ( 4 ) return to the home position ( that is , the position over the home row ) after a given blank period , or ( 2 ) stay in the position where the last key was hit . Also a mechanism to lookahead 1 to 6 characters was used , in order to plan for an optimal movement . Strokes continued on the same hand , and also those continued on the same finger are given extraload factors  . 
The results of simulations showed the effi ~ctiveness of DSK against QWERTY for English  . QWERTY require some 20 to 100% larger amount of handmotion when compared with DSK  , depending on various parameter settings . The worst case occurred when the parameters were such that no finger stretches were allowed  , no load was assigned to the hitting of the key itself  , and the hand always returned to the home position after each stroke  . The difference between these two became smaller as finger stretches were brought into the picture  , and the force to hit a key was taken into account  . The difference was about 20% at the least . This fact indicates that with QWERTY , a good typist would mostly hold hands over the upper row  , rather than the home , since more than 50% of the strokes are on the upper row . Our code for Japanese texts gave about the same figures as those of DSK  . 
The effect of lookahe add id not show a significant difference  . We also tried a modified model that has a builtin lookaheadability  , by assuming additional hand positions between adjacent rows  , which serve as a transient position when moving from a row to another row  , but this also gave results similar to the original version  . 
From these results , we may conclude that our codesys lem , though it is still of an experimental status , would be able to lead to a good performance lvel in touchtyping of Japanese texts  . 
.8 . . Remarks on Implementation a d Training So far , we have been deliberately ignoring the problem of the attainability of touchtyping  . It may seem counterintuitive that codes for so many characters will ever be learned for typing within a reasonable period of training  . You might think this to be analogous to the training for playing the piano  . So small a number of people willever obtain the level of skill necessary to become a professional pianist  . But this analogy is not appropriate , since there are millions of professional typists in the Western societies  . This fact shows that the skill to touch type has not so much in common with piano playing  . 
But is this because the Western type writer has a one-to-one mapping between l~he characters and codes--namely  , the key s?--254---Again , the answer seems negative , as we see that the typist treats characters not individually  , but as keystroke sequences by units of words . We may find a better analogy in Morse codes . 
Morse codes are not too complicated for an average person to learn  . The transmitting and the receiving skill of the code can be learned by anyone in a reasonable amount of ' time  . The trick for the best learning procedure there is in that the codes be learned as a conditioned reflex  . It is an established fact that if one first learns the Morse codes mnemonically  , he has to give up those mnemonics eventually in order to attain a good level of communication skill  . The same holds for the touchtyping of
Japanese in multi-stroke codes.
One might be still both ered by the size of the codeset  . We have set an upper limit of about 1000 for this . Whether this is a reasonable choice is not so obvious  , and the best and only way to see this is to actually test it  . We are yet to carry out this training experiment . 
There already exist some practical experiences by others with Japanese touchtyping in almost mnemonic-free multi-stroke codes  . Example learning curves are given in figure (81) . We see that the speed of stroking progresses approximately at the same rate as that of English type writing for the same amount of training  . 
Note that in Japanese , the unit of a concept that matches the English word consists of about two characters on the average  , while the average length of an English word is about  5 strokes . Then with a 2-stroke code , about the same amount of information may be represented by the same number of strokes  . 
Thus we conclude that Japanese touchtyping will be as powerful as English type writing in the handling of Japanese documents  . 
One important ask is to develop an appropriate method of training  . The period necessary for training will be greatly affected by the quality of the teaching method  . We see that this is still a problem for Western type writers after  00 years of history , This is not a trivial task , and if we are to organize a horde of typists as a professional institution  , a careful and extensive f for t must be addressed to this task  . 
9. Concluding Remarks
We have proposed an input method and an associated coding system for the input of Japanese texts  . The principal goal has been to realize an input system that wouid allow a high degree of touch typing  . Our code system may not be optimal as yet . Nevertheless , we are convinced that it can attain a higher performance level than any other method proposed up to the present  . 
What we wish to emphasize is that if one wants to obtain good productivity  ( in any field )  , one has to pay for it , and when provided with well designed mediums , one will certainly get his investment for training amply paid back  . The majority of the input methods for Japanese that are now receiving attention emphasize their easier accessability by beginners  . If only the realization of good sales is what matters  , then that might be a better marketing strategy . But if the device is to take hold of a firm position in the society as a truly efficient tool of production  , then it should not stay as a beginner's to y . It should be well worth several month's training to be able to prepare document several times faster than hand writing  . 
With the advancement of technology , machines may go one voluting without bound . Then an efficient communication with machines would become a critical problem  . It is high time we realize that one of the most difficult problems in technology is the design of interface between human beings and machines  , and that should aim at well trained operators . 
Acknowledgement : s : We would like to thank Dr . S . Kawai for helpful suggestions and discussions on our work  . We are grateful to Mr . M . Mogaki for the preparation of the conversion table for Japanese character codes  , which was of great help to our work . We also thank Mr . J . Jan for helpful comments . 
150 ! i0 0
DSK(USH ghschoolk ~ i - ~ Iamur ~
QWERTY ( USHi
IIIJJi\[II . 50 ~! C
I(str . /min ~ ) ~30O~i00''' flSb''''f OO ( hours ) 
Figure (81): Learning Curve.
3 Japanese multi-stroke keyboards and
US high school students.

References\[1\]Hiraga , Yuzuru ; Ono , Yoshihiko & Yamada , Hisao ; " An Analysis of the Standard English Keyboard " ( October 1980 ) 
Elsewhere in these Proceedings.
\[2\] Yamada , Hisao & Tanaka , Jiro ; "A Human Factors Study of Input Keyboard for Japanese Text "  ( December 1977 ) Proceedings of International Computer Symposium 1977  , National Taiwan University , Taipei , Republic of China \[3\] Yamada , Hisao ; " An Ergonomic Comparison of Kanzi Input Methods "   ( in Japanese , March 1980) Printing Information , Japan Association of Graphic Arts
Technology , 17 ( March 1980), pp . 4-12\[4\]Yamada , Hisao ; " A Historical Study of Type writers and Typing Methods : from the Position of Planning Japanese Parallels "  ( Feburary 1980 ) Journal of Information Processing , Vol . 2, No . 4, pp . 175-202 . 
\[5\]D vorak , August ; Merrick , Nellie L . ; Dealy , William L . & Ford , Gertrude C . ; " Typing Behavior , Psychology Applied to Teaching and Learning Type writing "  ( 1936 ) American
Book Co ., New York 521 pp.
\[6\]D vorak , August & Dealy , William L . ; " Type writer Keyboard " ( May 1936) U . S . Patent 2,040,248,8pp . 
\[7\] Yamada , Hisao ; " A Letter Selection Method by Type writer Keyboard "  ( July 1979 ) Patent Application , No . 54-096033, 19 pp . and 4 figs . 
\ [8\] " Text Data from Three major Japanese Newspapers "   ( 1966 ) The National Language Research Institute ( 1 , 500 , 000


CODETABLE
Each of the 4 overall 3 x 5 , and their component 3x5 , blocks of characters represent key positions on one half of the keyboard  . The 4 large blocks stand for the first stroke , and the small ones for the second . 
The headings of the large blocks indicate the hand sequence of the key pair  . ~ is the entry code for the outside characters . 

L-L
L-R--256--
