GOALORIENTED PARSING : IMPROVING THEEFFICIENCY OF 
NATURALL ANGUAGE ACCESS TO RELATION ALD AT A BASES
Giovanni Guida
Hilan Polytechnic Artificial Intelligence Project 
Politecnico di Milano
Milan , Italy
This paper is devoted to present a new appro-ach to natural language understanding which is called here goal-oriented parsing  . The interaction in natural language with arti ficial sy-stems  ( robots , database systems , program gene-rators , question-answering systems , etc . ) does not require in most cases of actual interest a ful l  ( humanlike ) comprehension of natural language in all its details and nuances  . A par-tial understanding is often enough , wich extracts from the natural language expressions the only significant information which is necessary to construct a correct formal input for the target system  . In such a model of comprehension the same meaning is assigned to several different natural language expressions  , thus defining a many-to-one mapping between natural language sentences and corresponding formal representations  . We argue that a bounded scope , restricted , goal-oriented understanding of natural language may greatly increase the efficency of representation models and parsing algorithms  , thus allowing the construction of effective systems  . This claim is supported by the design and implementation of a natural language interface to a relational database called NLI and developed at the Milan Polytechnic Artificial Intelligence Project  . In the paper the architecture of the system , the linguistic models , and the parsing algorithms are presented and il lust rated through selected examples  . Promising directions for future research are outlined as well  . 
l . lntroduction
The development of natural language understanding systems has received in the last years a growing interest  , both in the area of computational linguistics and artificial intelli-gence  . In this field a lot of running systems have been implemented which are based on different l inguistic models and parsing algorithms  . 
This paper is devoted to illustrate NLI , a natural language understanding system which has been developed at the Milan Polytechnic Arti-f icial Intelligence Project for the inquiry in Italian of a relational database  . NLI is ba-sed on a new approach to natural language understanding called here goal-oriented comprehension  . 
It is claimed that the understanding activity may be correctly defined only if the purpose or goal of the comprehension is clearly specified  , and that the same sentence may have several dif -ferent meanings depending on the purpose for which it is considered  . It follows that the complexity of the natural language understanding task depends  , in addition to the inner linguistic or structural complexity of the sentence which is considered  , on the complexity and extent of the scope of the understanding activity  , Therefore , we can argue that , if one confines the understan-ding activity to well defined and bounded goals  ( as it is generally possible in most of the natural language processing applications  )  , it should be possible to develop ad hocl inguistic models and parsing algorithms which are particulary fitting and efficent  . Such models and algorithms will obviously str ictly depend on the particular goal which is considered and will generally not hold for very different scopes  . Let us outline that goal-oriented understanding implies a boun-ded scope  , incomplete , and in some way diagonal comprehension , in which any detail and nuance which is not relevant to the goal is ignored  . 
In the design of NLI the classical topic of data base inquiry has been chosen as application domain and the goal of the understanding process has been defined as that one of translating the user's natural language queries into the formal query language QBE  ( Query-By-Examplel 5 )  . The ado-pted liguistic model is strongly semantics based and doesn't take into account  , as much as possible , the syntactic aspects of the sentence to be analysed I  . The linguistic information needed for the parsing is stored in a lexicon and a base of the heuristics  , and the parsing algorithms are strictly dependent on the particular goal which is considered  . NL l has been so far developed in two versions , NLl-I and NLI-2; the latter one , which is presently in an advanced development --550 stage , is the subject of this work . 
The paper is organized in the following way : in section two the version NLI-I is shortly illu -strated and the design specifications and criteria for  NLI-2 are discussed ; section three is devoted to present the overall architecture of the system and the parsing algorithms which have been implemented  ; section four shows some selected examples of comprehension  ; in section five some promising directions for future research are illustrated together with some conclusive remarks  . 
2 . Previous work and experimental activity In this section the first prototype version of the system NLI  ( NLI-I ) is shortly illustrated . 
The functional requirements and the basic technical decisions are then presented  , on which a second version of NLI ( NLI-2 ) is presently being developed . 
NLI-I has been designed and implemented at the Milan Polytechnic Artificial Intelligence Project in the years  1977-784  , 5 with the following aims : - to evaluate through a sample application the new model of natural language understanding proposed and the designed algorithms for seman-tic-based parsing l  ; -to study in a particular case the most crit ical aspects involved by the developent of actual applications  , such as efficiency , memory occupations , creation and management of the dictionaries , evaluation ~ of the understanding capabi-liti es  , etc . 
The inquiry in natural language ( Italian ) of a toy relational database representing the catalogue of a library has been chosen as an application domain for NLI-I  . The architecture of the system has been structured in three sequential modules  . The first module scanns the input sentence , searches in the vocabulary each word which has been recognized through a simplified lexical analysis  , and generates an internal representation of the sentence in which the meaning of each word and elementary construct is embedded  . The second module is devoted to reduce the ambiguities and to check the correctness of the structure proposed  ( through an algorithm ba-sed on set intersection l )  ; it produces a semantic tree which represents the formal internal representation of the input sentence  . The third modu-le translates the semantic three into an equivalent sentence expressed in a formal query langua-ge for relational databases  ( SEQUEL )  . 
NLI-I has been implemented in FORTRAN first on an UNIVAC  II00 and , later , on a Digital PDP-II/34 computer . It requires about 15 K bytes memory with a lexicon of 200 words . The parsing of a simple sentence ( a single query of about 1015 words ) needs a few seconds and more complex sentences need up to  2030 seconds . 
The research activity done with NLI-I has highlighted some relevant aspects concerning the development and actual implementation of NLI  , which will be further considered in the design of  NLI-2  . We list some of these below : - the necessity of developing an high-level dia-gnostic subsystem to be used by the application designer  ( often , then d-user himself ) in the tuning activity ; -the need for an interactive system for the incremental definition and for the management of the vocabulary  ( to be utilized also in the design of a new application versions of NLI  )  ; -the necessity of refining the parsing algori -thms and of defining a base of the heuristics to be utilized in the most complex cases of comprehension  ; -the problem of the optimal content of the vocabulary  ( increasing the content of the vocabula-ry doesn't always improve the understanding ca-pabilities of the system !  )  ; -the problem concerning the need of inserting in the vocabulary all the words which constitute the content of the database  . 
For greater details about NLI-I the reader is referred to the literature  5  . 
The new version NLI-2 has been designed in 1979 on the base of the experience acquired through NLI-I  . The main methodological assumptions , funcit on alspecifications , and technical decisions on which NLI-2 is based are illustrated below : - goal -oriented understanding  ; -semantics directed parsing ; -hierarchical organization of the linguistic information supplied to the system in two mo -dules : the lexicon and the base of the heuri -stics  ; -development of a generalized parsing algorithm independent of the content of the lexicon and of the base of the heuristics  , of the structure of the database , and of the particular natural language which is used  ; -developent of an high-level diagnostic module ; -design of a fully interactive system for the incremental definition and dynamic management of the content of the lexicon and of the base of the heuristics and for the implementation of new versions of the system  ; implementation of the appropriate human engineering features needed to improving the usa -bility of the system  . 

The natural language used for the inquiry is Ital ian and the output of the system is the tran -slation of the query in QBE  ( Query-By-Examplel 4 )  . 
The database adopted for the development of the sample application of  NLI-2 is concerned with a departments to redescription and is just the same used for the illustrat ion of QBE  ( a complete definition of the database is reported in the Appendix  )  . In designing NLI-2 it has been decided of not inserting anything about the content of the database in the lexicon of the system  , in order to keep its dimensions as small as possible  . 
This choice implies that the user indicates expli -citely  ( through a pair of special symbols " ) in the input sentence the words which denote values of domains of the database  . The adequacy and effectiveness of this decision will be evaluated during the experimental act ivity to be done with  NLI-2 and could be removed if considered unappropriate . 
The next section will be entirely devoted to the illustration of the global structure of  NLI-2 and of the parsing algorithms which have been developed  . 
3 . System architecture and parsing algorithms NLI-2 is based on a modular structure in which there is a distinct division between the data  ( vo-cabulary , database model , formal query language structure ) and the programs ( analyser , generator , vocabulary management ) . The system architecture is illustrated in Figure I  . 
The monitor is devoted to open the job ( it informs the user about the system capabili ties and present to himan appropriate menu of different options  )  , to interprete the user's commands , and to manage the activities of the lower modules  . 
The user's control messages accepted by the monitor are : - SHELP : detailed informations and instructions on the operation of the system are supplied  ; -SU : the understanding cycle of the natural language queries is activated  ; the system is ready to run in U-mode ; -SV : the module for the management of the vocabulary is activated  ; the system can be used for the definition , updating , and tuning of the vocabulary in the V-mode ; -$ STOP : returns the control to the monitor for
U-mode and V-mode operations ; -SEND : closes the job . 
The analyser , which is activated by the monitor when running in the U-mode  , accepts the natural language query in input and generates an appropriate internal representation or  , if some step of the parsing fails , a diagnost lc message to be displayed to the user . The analyser opera-tes in acyclic way : when the parsing of a sen- 
MONITOR wlI




MANAGEMENT 4IGENERATOR



DATABASE

FOR MAL QUERY LANG UAGE

Figure 1  -  NLI-2 architecture 552-tence is concluded it is automatically reset and is ready to accept a new query  . Queries are not stored by the parser , so that the user is not allowed to carry on a dialog with the system in which new queries can refer to old ones  ( or to their answers )  . The module for the vocabulary management can be activated by the monitor or directly by the analyser when a fail occurs  . It supplies the user with some basic functions ( some of them mainly relating to text editing ) for a flexible management of the vocabulary ( search , display , delate , add , update , etc . ) . The generator receives in input the internal representation produced by the analyser and translates it into the formal query language QBE  . 
Let us describe now the internal structure of the vocabulary  . It is composed of two parts : the lexicon ~ which contains the words and the elementary construct referring to the applica  . -tion domain in which the system operates , and the base of the heuristics , which embeds further linguistic information ( sometimes also of syntac-tic nature ) necessary to understand complex and often ambiguous constructs  . 
The lexicon is organized in 26 alphabetic groups , each one of them contains all the words beginning by the same letter  . Each word ( ore-lementary construct ) is bound to all its possible meanings , thus yelding a record of the lexi-con . A record is in fact composed of two parts : - the left part contains a word or a  ( short ) sequence of words representing a simple construct  ; morphology is ( generally ) not taken into account in the parsing , but the words are represented in such a way to be recognized in all possible forms  ( conjugated verbs , inflected nouns , ect .  )  ; -the right part embeds the representation of the semantics of the word within the application domain which is considered  . 
The right part of each record has a different structure depending on the semantic type to which the word stored in the left part belongs  . In our application a word can denote threed if ferent types of information concerning : the identification of the relations and of the domains involved by the query  ; the logical connection between relations and domains  ; the specification of the required output . 
Therefore , in relation to the three above presented activi ties  , we define the following semantic types : object , connective , and function , respectively . 
The general structure of an object record is : li I  111   12222   0   N1  . LI=N2 . M  ~ .   .   .   .   . N 1 . MI=N2 . M~where : - P denotes a word or a simple costruct  ; -0 denotes that the record is of type object ; -each pair N ~ . M~denotes that the wo~d P refers to the domain IN  ~ in the relation M  ~  ( relations and domains are ~ e presented by positive inte-gers  )  ; the = symbol separates equal domains belonging to different relations  ; if P refers to a relation without specifying the domain  , N ~ is replaced by the special symbol $ ; each f ~ eld of the record contains a different meaning of the object P  . 
The structure of a connective record is : where : P denotes a word or a simple costruct  ; C denotes that the record is of type connecti-ve ; -each pair X . : Y . denotes a possible meaning 1 . 1 of the connect lveP ; namely , X : represents the I pattern in which P may appear  ( position of P and type of the adjacent words )  , Y : denotes ( through I a pointer ) the function which must be applied or the action which must be performed during the parsing to take correctly into account the meaning of the connective P  . 
The structure of a function record is : where : - P denotes a word or a simple construct  ; -F denotes that the record is of type function ; - each Z . denotes a possible meaning of the fun-ction ~ and represents  ( through a pointer ) an action which must be performed in the parsing . 
The base of the heuristics is constituted by a bag of heuristic rules  ( of the type precondi-tion-action )  , which allow to represent linguistic informations which are not comtained in the lexi -conbut are still needed for understanding complex sentences and for the resolution of ambigui-ties  . The heuristic rules are selected and acti- vated during the parsing  , whenever a critical si-tuation occures , on the base of a pattern directed invocation algorithm  . 
Let us outline that the vocabulary ( both its structure and content ) is strctly dependent on --553--the particular application to which the system is devoted  . This feature , which represents a quite rigid bound to the flex ibility of the system  , is , on the other hand , a straightforward consequence of the concept of goal-oriented understan-ding  . The issue of designing system architectures which allow a flexible handling of the purpose and domain of the comprehension is considered as a promising and ambitious topic for future research  , as it will be illustrated in the conclusions . 
Let us illustrate now the activity of the analyser  . It accept as input a natural language query and supplies an internal formal representation of it which is not far from a QBE expression  ; in such a way the role of the generator is confined  , within NLI-2 , to a simple editing activity . The activity of the analyser can be splitted in four steps : I  . scanning of the natural language input senten-ce , search in the lexicon , and generation of a first-level internal representation  ;  2 . parsing , (partial or fu l l ) resolution of the ambiguities , and generation of the second-le-velinternal representation  ;  3 . intersection , i . e , verification of the consi-stency of the proposed structure and resolution of the possibly remaining ambiguities  ;  4 . generation of the correct formal representation or  , if any fail has occured , of the appropriate diagnostics . 
In step I . the input sentence is first scanned and an internal representation of it is construc-ted  ( first-level internal representation )  . The searching of the words in the lexicon is indexed sequencial  ( with a one-level index )  ; if a word or elementary construct is found in the lexicon it is replaced by all the record to which it refers  ; on the other hand , if a word is not recognized , it is enclosed between brackets in the first- level internal representation and it is successively ignored in the parsing  . The words which denote values of domains , i . e , which appear in the content of the database , are preceded and followed by the special symbol " in the input sentence and remain unaltered in the internal representation  . The first-level internal representation reflects the ordering of the words in the input sentence and embeds all the linguistic information which can be obtained from the lexicon  . 
In step 2 . the relations involved by the user's query are f irst recognized through a deta-iled analysis of the words of type object  . This activity cannot yeld , in general , a definite and unambiguous result since some objects may refer to different relations  . A pattern directed invocation of appropriate heuristics may contribute in eliminating some  ( or also all ) of the ambigui-ties . After the correct relations are individua-ted , their logical schemata are extracted from the database model and a new phase starts aiming to individuate the domains referred to in the input sentence  . The possible ambiguities may be resolved through an appropriate use of the heuri-stics  . The domains which have a role in the user's query are then labelled in order to be further processed in the following steps of the parsing  . The words enclosed between pairs of " symbols are then considered in order to find the appropriate assignement of these values to the relating domains  . Different criteria may be used to perform such an assignement  ( e . g . , the contiguity of a value and an object) , but , in any case , the assignement is not a definitive one until i t is confirmed by an heuristic or by the following step  3  . ( intersection ) , A tentative interpretation of the input sentence ( second-level internal representation ) is then produced , which will be further refined and completed in the following steps of the parsing  . 
The analysis of the connectives constitutes the kernel of step  3   .   ; it is organized in two phases : singling out the correct semantics of a connective on the base of its position in the senten-ce and of the type of the words to which it refers  ( appropriate heuristics have to be utili-zed to resolve possible ambiguities  )  ; verification of the proposed interpretation of the sentence segment to which the connecti-ve belongs  ( this activity is performed through set intersection algorithms I  , what gives the reason for the name assigned to step  3  . ) . 
In step 4 . the functions ~ which possibly appear in the input sentence  , are considered and the domains to which they apply are individuated  . 
If the parsing terminates correctly the formal representation of the sentence is generated which will be later translated in QBE by the generator  . 
In the following section some complete examples of comprehension are illustrated  . 
4. Parsing sample sentences
In this section we are going to present some examples of parsing extracted from the sample application in which  NLI-2 is presently working ( the department store database which is descri -bed in the Appendix  )  . 

Example I.
Input sentence : < TROVAIREPARTICHEVENDONO PRODOTTIFORNITI 
DA " PARKER ">( I)
The first-level internal representation , after step I . of the parsing is concluded , results : < TROVA/F/PV/(I ) REPARTI/O/I . 4=I . 2(CHE)VENDONO/C/XISX2,XI=O,X2=V:PA2 . 2/YISY2,YI=O,Y2=O:PR2PRODOTTI/O/2 . 2=I . 3=I . 4FORNITIDA/C/XISX2,XI=O,x2=V:PA2 . 3/YlgY2,YI=O,Y2=C:PR3"ARKER "> In step 2 . the relations involved by the user's request are first recognized  , < VENDITE(REPARTO , ARTICOLO ) > < FORNITORI(ARTICOLO , FORNITORE ) > and , then , the domains referred to in the input sentence are labelled through the letters A and 
B : < VENDITE(REPARTO : A , ARTICOLO : B ) > < FORNITORI(ARTICOLO : B , FORNITORE ) > The second-level internal representation ( propo-sing a tentative assignement of values to the labelled domains  ) results : < VENDITE ( REPARTO : A , ARTICOLO : " PARKER " ) > < FORNITORI ( ARTICOLO : " PARKER " , FORNITORE)>
After step 3 . we get : < VENDITE(REPARTO : A , ARTICOLO : B ) > < FORNITORI ( ARTICOLO : BFORNITORE : " PARKER " ) > and , after step 4 . , the correct formal representation in QBE results : 
VENDITE(REPARTO:P , ARTICOLO : B)
FORNITORI(ARTICOLO : B , FORNITORE : " PARKER " ) PV is a pointer to a routine which puts the special symbol P in the domain which follows the function TR~A  . PA is a pointer to a routine which assigns X ; to domain 2 of relation 2 ( in the case VENDONO ) , or to domain 2 of the relation 3 ( in the case FORNITIDA )  ; PA is activated if the connective to which it is bound connects an object  ( 0 ) to a particular value of a domain ( V )  , as it arrives in both cases VENDONO and FORNITI DA  . The second meaning of these two connectives ,   ( I ) find the departments which sell products supplied by Parker represented by the pointer PR  , is not considered in this parsing . 
Example 2.
Input sentence : < VOGLIOINOMIDEGLIIMPIEGATI CHEGUADAGNANO 
PIU'DELLORODIRIGENT\[>(2)
First-level internal representation : < VOGLIO /F/P V  ( I ) NOMIDEGLIIMPIEGATI/O/I . I(CHE ) GUADAGNANO/O/2 . 1 PIU'DEL/F/PM(LORO)

Second-level internal representation : < IMPIEGATI  ( NOME : A , SALARIO : B , DIRIGENTE : C , 
REPARTO ) >
After step 3 . we get : < IMPIEGATI(NOME : A , SALARIO : B , DIRIGENTE : C , 
REPARTO ) >
In step 4 . , after the analysis of the functions , we have : < IMPIEGATI(NOME : P , SALARIO : B , DIRIGENTE : C , 

In this representation there are two domains ( SA-LARIO and DIRIGENTE ) whose role is not yet understood ; this pattern activates a particular heuri-stics which allows two obtain the following correct formal representation : IMPIEGATI  ( NOME : P , SALARIO > B , DIRIGENTE : C , 

IMPIEGATI(NOME:C,SALARIO:BDIRIGENTE,

Example 3.
Input sentence : < VORREIINOMIDEL GIIMPIEGATI CHELAVORANO 
NELLADIVISIONE " CANCELLERIA "> (3)
First-level internal representation : < VORREI /F/P V  ( I ) NOMIDEGLIIMPIEGATI/O/I . I(2) I want to know the names of the employees , who earn more than their managers ( 3 ) I would like to know the names of the emplo-yees , who work in the writing-materials department --555   ( CHE )   ( LAVORANO )   ( NELLA )   ( DIVISIONE ) " CANCELLERIA ">
Second-level internal representation : < IMPIEGATI  ( NOME : " CANCELLERIA " , SALARIO , 
DIRIGENTE , REPARTO ) >
After step 3 . we get : < IMPIEGATI(NOME : " CANCELLERIA " , SALARIO , 
DIRIGENTE , REPARTO ) >
Step 4 . fails since the assignement of the special symbol P to the domain NOME  , which is requi-red by the function VORREI ( pointer PV )  , cannot be executed , being the value " CANCELLERIA " alrea-dy present in the domain NOME  . The following diagnostic message is therefore generated :> an alisifal litanella fase  4 > impossiblit ~ dieffettu are uncorretto as segna->mento delvalore " CANCELLERIA " adun opportuno dominio > termini ignoratine ll ' an a lisi: 
I , CHE , LAVORANO , NELLA , DIVISIONE > rap presentazion i internegenerate : ( 4 )   ( vedisopra ) Let us note that , if we insert in the lexicon the new record DIVISIONE/O/I  . 4=I . 2 , it is possible to obtain the following correct parsing : IMPIEGATI  ( NOME : P , SALARIO , DIRIGENTE , REPARTO:"CANCELLERIA")
Example 4.
Input sentence : < DAMMIINOMIDEIFORNITORIDI" OROLOGI ">  ( 5 )   ( 4 ) parsing failed in step 4 the value " CANCELLERIA " cannot be correctly assigned to an appropriate domain words ignored in the parsing : 
I , CHE , LAVORANO , NELLA , DIVlSIONE internal representations generated : ( see above )   ( 5 ) find the names of the supplyers of watches Fi rst-level internal representation : < DAMMI/F /PV  ( I )   ( NOMI )   ( DEI ) FORNITORI/O/2 . 3(DI)"OROLOGI">
Second-level internal representation : < FORNITORI  ( ARTICOLO , FORNITORE : " OROLOGI ") >
After step 3 . we get : < FORNITORI(ARTICOLO , FORNITORE : " OROLOGI ") > Step 4 . fails because of the same reasons as in Example  3  . In this case , however , the system can correctly parse the input sentence only by inserting in the lexicon the word OROLOGI which  , on the other hand , is part of the content of the database . 

In the paper the NLI system has been illust rated  , with particular attention to the NLI-2 version . 
It is devoted to the inquiry in natural language ( Italian ) of a relational database . NLI is based on a modular architecture which allows the desi-gner  , or even the user , to define his own application in a fully inte  . ractive and incremental way . The linguistic model supported by the system is that one of goal-oriented understanding  , and the parsing algorithms adopted are mainly seman-tics directed  . 
The implementation of NLI-2 is now being completed and the system will be used in the future for developing the following research acti-vities : definition of performance evaluation criteria for measuring the understanding capabilities of natural language systems  ; evaluation of the complexity of the parsing algorithms in relation to the complexity of the input sentence and of the scope of the comprehension  ; investigation on the flexibility of the system in relation to small variations in the structu-re and content of the database and in the ado-pted natural language  ; definition of new system architectures allowing a full flexibility in relation to the purpose of the understanding and to the application doam in  . 

This Appendix is devoted to present the sample relational database which has been adopted in the development of  NLI-2  . This is concerned with the activity of a department store and it is just the same ut il ized in the definition of QBE  15  . The --556--data base is sketched below through a set of tables in which both the names of relations and domains and their internal representation  ( pairs of integers ) is given . 
I . SIMPIEGATO(I . INOME , 1 . 2 SALARIO , 1 . 3 DIRIGENTE , 1 . 4 REPARTO ) 2 . $ VENDITE(2 . 1 REPARTO , 2 . 2 ARTICOLO ) 3 . 3 FORNITORI (3 . 1 ARTICOLO , 3 . 2 FORNITORE ) 4 . 3 TIPO(4 . 1 ARTICOLO , 4 . 2 COLORE , 4 . 3 TAGLIA)

I am indebt to E . Cuccurullo for the implementation of NLI-2 and for stimulating discussions . 

I . Burger J . F , Leal A . , Shoshani A . Semantic-ba-sed parsing and a natural language interface for interactive data managelent  . Proc . 13th '
Conf . of the ACL , Boston , 19752 . Codd E . F . A relational model of data for lar-ge shared data banks  . Comm . ACM 13,6(1970), 377-387 . 
3 . Codd E . F . Seven step storendezvous with the casual user . IBM Research Report RJ 1333, San
Jos 6, Cal ., 1974.
4 . Guida G . Ideas about design of natural langua-ge interfaces to query systems  . Proc . of a Workshop on Natural Lang . uage for Interaction with Data Bases , IIASACP-78-9 , Laxemburg , 
Austria , 1978, 265-279.
5 . Guida G . Natural language interfaces to computer system : An experimental project  . Alta
Frequenza XLVII , 9(1978), 668-674.
6 . Guida G . , Somalvico M . A two level modular system for natural language database query applications  . Proc . 6th Int . Joint Confon Artificial Intelligence0 Tokio , Japan ,  1979 ,  345-347 . 
7 . Harris L . R . Experience with ROBOT in 12 commercial natural language database query appl ications  . Proc . 6th Int . Joint Conf . on Ar-tificial Intelligence , Tokio , Japan ,  1979 ,  365-368 . 
8 . Hendrix G . G . , Sacerdoti E . D . , Sagalowicz D . , Slocum J . Developing a natural language inter-face to complex data  . ACM Trans . on Data Base
Systems 3, 2(1978), I05-147.
9 . Kaplan S . J . , Mays E . , Joshi A . K . A technique for managing the lexicon in a natural langua-geinter face to a changing database  . Proc . 
6th Int . Joint Conf . on Artificial Intelligen-c_e_e , Tokio , Japan ,  1979 ,  463-465 . 
I0 . Lehmann H . The USL project . Its objectives and status . Proc . lnt , Technical Conf . on Re-lational Data Base Systems , IBM Scientific
Center , Bari , Italy , 1976, 7-38.
II . Mylopoulos J . , Borgida A . , Cohen ~ Roussopo-ulos H . , Tsotsos J . , Wong H . TORUS : A step towards bridging the gap between databases and the casual user  . Information Systems 2 (1976), 4964 . 
12 . Schank R . C . , De Oong G . Purposive understan-ding . Machine Intelligence 9, J . E . Hayes , D . Michie , L . l . Mikulich ( Eds . ), Ellis Horwood,
Chichester , 1979, 459-478.
13 . Waltz D . L . Natural language access to a large database : an engineering approach  . Proc . 
4th Int . Joint Conf . on Artificial Intelli-gence : Tbilis i  , USSR ,  1975 ,  868-872 . 
14 . Waltz . D . L . , Goodman B . A . Writing a natural language database system . Proc . 5th Int , Joint on Artifi Cial Intelligence , Cambridge , 
Mass ., 1977, 144-150.
15 . Zloof M . M . Query by example . Proc . Nat . Computer Conf . , AFIPS Press , Vol .  44, 1975, 431-438 . 

