ACONCEPTUAL FRAME WORK FOR AUTOMATIC AND DYN AMIC THESAURUSUPDATING 
IN INFOR MATION RETRIEV ALSYSTEMS
M.F . BRUAN DET
Laboratoire IMAG
B.P . 53X , 38041 GRENOBLE Cedex ( France)

This paper aims at presenting a methodology for automatic thesaurus construction in order to help the search of documents and we want to obtain the development of classes for specific topics  ( for a given corpus ) without a priori semantic information . Information contained in the thesaurus lead to new search formulations via automatic and/or user feedback  . This presentation even being theoretical is oriented toward a database implementation  . 
Preliminary remarks
Different strategies used in Information Retrieval Systems must be developped to increase " recall " and " precision  ''8'9  . The classic one is the construction of thesaurus . A thesaurus is usually defined as a set of terms ( called descriptors ) and a set of relations between these terms . 
This study is made for an information retrieval system using an inverted file  ( bitmap , each keyword points to a set of documents containing this keyword  )  . For formulating a request the user defines a set of keywords and boolean operators on this set  ( for example MISTRAL , GOLEM-PASSAT , STAIRS systems ) . When entering a document into the database , a module ( e . g . PIAF ) 4 , 5 generates stems from the data ( several grammatical variants of the same word are reduced to a canonical form  )  . We call this form an item . 
Thesaurus construction in the context of local documents Our object is to find a method for the construction of nonhierarchical relations and the definition of item clusters from these relations  . 
A point to be underlined is that this methodology could efficiently be used only on homogeneous collections of texts  . To this purpose , we only consider a database subset : the local set of all documents returned from a given query  . The local clustering method makes use of the common occurrences of items within a certain " neighbo-rhood "  , this method has been studied by R . 
ATTAR and A . S . FRAENKEL ( in " Local feedback in full text retrieval " ) I . 
Let be D ? the local set of documents retrieved from a given query and TZ the set of items contained in DZ  . We define a metrical function which is inversely proportional to the distance between items in the same sentence  . Each item is defined by its coordinates ( DN , SN , IN ) where DN is the document number , SN the sentence number and IN the item number within a sentence  . 
For any item t ? T ~ , let wt ( i ) be the coordinate of the ith occurrence of t . 
For any couple(s , t ) ? T~?T % , we defined = ?\] wt ( i ) -Ws ( J ) \] the distance between the ith occurrence of t and jth occurrence of s  . 
In fact , (\] ) d--\]IN t ( i ) -INs ( J ) \] with IDNt ( i ) = DNs ( j ) 
SNt(i)SNs(J )
Let be F a function of the distanced :
Ii I/difwt(i ) , Ws(J ) are in the same sentence (2) Fkwt~i ) , Ws < J ) jtr~t . .\~ = with d -< 20 0 otherwise . 
For s and teT % we define : (3) b(s , t ) = IIF ( wt(i ) , Ws ( J )   ) ij where the summation is overall occurrences i and j of s and t  . 
Remark : b(s , t ) = b(t , s).
In order to normalize the function , we take b(s , t ) ~ R(S , t ) - ~ where f ( t ) is the number of occurrences of t for all local documents D ?  0 -< ~ R ( S , t ) <- I . 
Through this function , we obtain for an items a reference vector R which is a list of items ts related to s  , such as DR(S , t ) is greater ( or equal ) than a threshold-e . These values form an eigenvector : ER . 

Taking into account new local information in thesaurus updating Without excluding for the thesaurus the search of hierarchical relations  ( specific or generic )  , we try tO build a set or a group of items having a notion of " similarity " or " liaison " between themselves  . This thesaurus is built as the answers of the used Information Retrieval System are analysed  . It must be structured so that the updating should be dynamic and automatic  ; the implementation study has not yet been examined  . The main problem of updating is to take into account " liaisons "  , " proximities " or " similarities " between the already registered items in the thesaurus and the new liaisons found after a new query  . 
For any query , we obtain a set of items related to s . Let be R the previous reference vector ?$ ( ~ Rits assoclated function ) and R's the newlys calculated vector ( ~ R ' its associated function )  . 
s - - 5 8 6 - -
A new reference vector may be calculated from R and R ' using two function sm  ( s , t ) and M(s , t ): s
S(4)
Min(~R(s , t ), ~ R,(S , t))
SSm(s , t ) = 1-IIIDIRI(sI , t ) - ~ g , ( S , t ) lss (5)
Max(~R(s , t ), PR , ( S , t))
SS
M(s , t ) = I + I~R(s , t ) - ~ R , ( s , t)\[
SS
The function M involves all the items t which are related  , or not , to sinR and Ri ( see Table I ) . The function mallow sust ~ consider only the items which are both in R and in R '  ( see Table
SSI).
One might consider m and M to be respectively the union and intersection of items t related to s  . 
Table I using the above functions m and M ( formulas ( 4 )  ,  (5))
Min(~R'~R')Max(~R'DR')
SSS ~ Rs(s , t ) ~ R , (S , t ) sm=1_\]~R-~R'\]M=1+\]~R~R , I
SSSS 0 lindeterminate 0 . 5 0 0 . 2 0 0 . 166 0 0 . 8 0 0 . 44  . l00 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 1 0,1 0,1 0 . 1 0 . 1 0 . 9 0 . 8 0 . 7 0 . 6 0 . 5 0 . 4 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 . 5 0 . 33 0 . 25 0 . 2 0 . 16 0 .  142 0 . 125 0  . 11 0  . 1 0 . 5 0 . 47 0 . 43 0 . 40 0 . 36 0 . 30 0 . 25 0 . 18 0 . 1 0 . 5 0 . 5 0 . 5 0 . 5 0' . 9 0 . 2 0 . 66 0 . 52 0 . 9 0 . 4 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 9 0 . 5 0 . 83 0 . 64 0 . 9 0 . 6 0 . 85 0 . 69 0 . 9 0 . 8 0 . 88 0 . 8 1 Functions m and M consider the weakest and the strongest bindings between items  . Any association between s and t is meaningful only as regard to the " binding strength "  , that is to say the value of the association function  . 
Use of the function sm and M for thesaurus cons -truction and updating F or an item x  , only the items related to x in several local contexts must be considered in the thesaurus  . Thus , it is necessary to keep records of the initial queries into a pseudo-thesaurus  . 
In this pseudo-thesaurus is registered , for any item x , the set of items related to x in one or more local contexts  . 
Let be
PSx = t / ~ ps(X , t ) e ~ for x belonging to the set of items T , ( T = uT %) . 
Concerning an item x of T ~ , three reference vectors ( and their associated functions ) can be yielded : R , PS and T which are the ? X sets of items tre ~ated to xx respectlvely considered in the treated local context  , in one or . 
more local contexts kept in the pseudo-thesaurus , and in the global context kept in the thesaurus . 
These sets can be void , also several cases can been countered :
I ) PS and T are not vo id X X
The updating process is performed in three steps :
Stepl : ~ ~_2 ~_ ~_ ~
In order to know , if the newly calculated liai-sons in Rx already exist in other local context  , we compare Rx and PSx . 
Only the common items of these two reference vectors are considered  , and we form a temporary reference vector P using the function m  ( formula ( 4 ) ) . xIn Px only items from Rx which are previously related to x in at least one context are retai -ned  . The stronger connections are decreased ( see Table\[ ) because we can suppose they are only local . 
Step 2: Thesaurus_H ~ a ~_ E r ~ e ~ ~
The thesaurus updating is made in two different ways :  ( i ) if Px . and Tx contain the same items t , only the elgenvector ET ( of Tx ) is modified using the function ~ ( formula ( 4 ) )  ;  - -587- - ( ii ) if the items t in T x are different from those occuring in Px ' then a new reference vector T is constructed combinating the values of x funct lons DT and ~ PS using M  ( formula ( 5  )   )   . xx
Remarks : - We do not calculate the new association func-tion between two items for T with m  ( formula ? x ( 4 ) ) , because we do not introduce new items related to x in the thesaurus  , when new items appear in several local contexts . 
-The function M uses the common or not common items and introduces in the thesaurus the new items  , which are related to x in at least two local contexts  . 
Step 3: Pseudo-thesaurus ~!! ~_~! ~! ~
The pseudo-thesaurus updating must take into account the new items Occuring in Rx  . The new association function for PSx is calculated from the association function ~ R and the old association function ~ PS using M ~ formula  ( 5 ) ) . 
x2) PS and T are void xx
This case corresponds to the situation ~ lerex is never appeared in any local context  . We create the reference vectors PS in the pseudo -thesaurus  . and Rx with the assoclatlon function ~ R ( PSx = Rx )  . No information about x is kept in ~ he thesaurus ( Tx = ~ )  . 
3) PSx is not void and Tx is void
This corresponds to the case where x is already appeared in only one local context  . If Rx #? , then we can build the initial reference vector T in the thesaurus  . We use the association function m ( formula ( 4 ) ) calculated from the values of association functions DR and Dps  ( respecti-?x ~ Rvely contained in the elgen vectors x and EpSx  )  . 
The present experimentation exhibits among the items related to x in Tx  ( initial step ) local synonyms , some global synonyms and many parasis-ticitems . After a few thesaurus updatings the values of the association function for parasistic items rapidly decrease  , and the values for local and global synonyms increase  . It is clear that reliability of such a thesaurus can be reached only after a large number of queries  . In such a situation new updating procedures might be considered so that new parasistic items should not be introduced in Tx  ( thus breaking the stability of

Global treatment of thesaurus
Let be T the large set of items registered in the thesaurus  . In order to classify T ( i . e . to split T into classes of similar items ) , we consider the couple of reference vectors Tx and Ty  ( so ET and xET ) for any items x and y . 

Let be r(x , y ) a similarity measure :
ZM in ( DT , DT ) (6) r(x , y ) = Txy
Z Max(DT , DT )
T x y (7) d(x , y ) = 1-r(x , y ) is a pseudo-distance whose range is \[0 , 1\] . 
We can use an association matrix ( i . e . term-term matrix ) between items and found a partition of T in equivalence classes  . Moreover , this method hardly applies to a great many items and does not seem realistic for a large scale dictionnary  ( 6000 or 10000 items , for example ) which are common in information retrieval field . To overcome this drawback , we may try to build up the global association matrix from the local ones  . 
Some ideas have been suggested 2 using the fuzzy sets theory6  , 13 but there are still theoretical approaches . 
Feedback query processing
Number of parers are related to the feedback query processing \]  , v , \]2 and our approach is similar . 
We think to adopt the following strategy , though we lack practical results to assert better " score " on queries  . 
After a query we have therefore a set R of items s related to s  ( for each s ~ T ~ ) and a partition of T % into equivalence classes F  4  . In the thesaurus we might have both a set T ( J items related to s ) and a partition of the global set T into equivalence classes C  . . i Several strategies can be used , they are detai-led in another paper 4 . We can use only local context , global context or both global and local context . We summarize some of the solutions below : \] ) use of only global context A query is automatically generated with t instead of x when t belongs to the reference vector T and ~ T  ( x , t ) is greater or equal than a threshold ~ . x If the user agrees , a new query is generated with t when x and t are equivalent in the thesaurus  . 
2) use of both local and global context
When an item t is considered as " similar " to x both in local context  ( Rx ) and in global context ( T x ) and DR ( x , t)NDT(x , t ) , t automatically xx replaces x in the query . When R and T x have common items , we can purpose to X the user new queries with item t appearing in Tx but not in 
Rx(~T ( x , t)e~).

As previously mentioned we can use the same strategy using the local equivalence classes F  . and global equivalence classes C ~ ( automatic fled-back query processing with xlcC . nF . , and under i j user control with x e C i but x ~ C i n Fj and 
C in Fj#~).
In this last case , we can think global synonymies allow to retrieve new documents originally left out  . 

From the previous analysis , it seems that the best strategies should be those using both local and global contexts  , but this needs to be verified . 

We conclude from present experimentation on small number of french texts that the thesaurus upda -ting methods hall give horizontal thesaurus relations  . 
Moreover unexpected relation between items should appear in the thesaurus  , that is association which strongly reflects the corpus ' content and which could not a priori be established and enhanced  . 
The methodology presented above does not exclu-de any further intervention on the thesaurus to refine semantic information about some particular cases  , such as modifying values of the association function for some items  , enriching definition of synonyms , Our next goal for such a design of the thesaurus is twofold : I  ) we wish to make possible nonboolean queries through the use of fuzzy keywords and subsequent improvement of dialogue  ;  2 ) we wish to cluster documents with a dynamic indexing mechanism  . 

R.ATTAR&A.S.FRAENKEL
Local feedback in fulltext retrieval systems.
Journal of ACM , vol . 20, n ? 3, pp . 397-417,
July 1977.
M.F . BRUAN DET
A propos dela construction automatiqued ' un thesaurus floudans unsyst~me de recherched ' information  ( syst~medocumentaire )  . 
Internal research report IMAG Grenoble,
Juin 1980.
M.F . BRUAN DET
A conceptual framework for automatic and dynamic thesaurus updating and for feedback query processing  . 
Processing of SECONDINTERNATION ALCONFE-RENCEON DATABASESINTHEHUMANITIES AND 
SOCIALSCIENCES , Madrid , Juin 1980.
J . COURTIN
Algorithmes pour le traitement interact if des langues naturelles  . 
Th~sed'Et at soutenuegl ' Universitg Scienti-fique et M~dicale de Grenoble  , INPG , Octobre 1977 . 
E . GRANDJEAN
Projet PIAF - Application gladocumentation automatique : dgfinitionet utilisation du produit prototype PIAF DOC  . 
Internal research report , IMAG Grenoble , 1979.
T . RA DE CKI
Mathematical model of information retrieval system based on the concept of fuzzy thesaurus  . 
Information processing and management , vol . 12, pp . 313-318, Pergamon Press , 1976 . 
L . REISINGER
On fuzzy thesaurus.
COMPSTAT/4-Proc . Symp . Computational statistics , Bruckmanb , Fershl I , Schmetterer-
Vienna Physics Verlag?
G . SALTON
The smart retrieval system , experiments in automatic . 
Document processing ( ch . 2 1 -the use of statistical significance in relevance feedback  . 
J . S . Brown , P . D . Reilly ), Prentice Hall , 1971 . 
G . SALTON
Dynamic information processing.
Prentice Hall 1975.
I0G . SALTON and D . BERG MARK
Clustered file generation and its application to computer Science taxonomies  . 
IFIP Information processing 77, pp . 441-447,
North Holland publishing company.
11 W . SILVERT
Symmetric summation : a class of operations on fuzzy sets  . 
IEEE Trans . SMC , 1979.
12 C.T . YU , M . K . SI U
Effective automatic indexing using term addition and deletion  . 
Journal of ACM , vol . 12, n = 2, April 1978, pp .  210-225 . 
13L.A.ZADEH
Fuzzy sets , Information and control.
pp . 338-353, 1965.

