TRANS LATING INTERACTIVE COMPUTERDIAL OGUES
FROMIDE OGRAPHIC TO ALPHABE TICLANG UAGES
Ian H . Witten
Man-Machine Systems Laboratory
Department of Electrical Engineering Science
University of Essex
Colchester CO 43 SQ


A scheme is described which enables users to interact with a time sharing computer in an ideographic language such as Chinese  . The host computer runs a completely unmodified English-based operating system ? the necessary translation being performed by a preprocessing microcomputer which constitutes the ideographic terminal  . The two systems communicate through a serial line  , and the host sees the preprocessor as an ordinary  ( English ) terminal . Although the examples are all drawn from Chinese , the scheme could equally well serve other ideographic languages like Japanese and Korean  . 
After brief consideration of the terminal's keyboard and display  , we examine the software problems of translation for six example subsystems ~ two interpreted programming languages  , text editor , document preparation system , interactive database management system , and the command level of the operating system itself  . 
The investigation shows that few limitations need be placed on the user's actions  . For example , a suitable transliteration to alphabetics allows ideographic file names to be used and manipulated quite naturally by operating system commands  ( which are themselved transliterated )  . The same transliteration allows ideographic text to be entered  , edited , stored , displayed , and printed without difficulty . If text to be altered is located and specified by context  ( as is common with most modern text editors )  , rather than by character offsets , the transliteration must be designed to yield unambiguous pattern matching  . 
Existing document-preparation software can be used for ideographic text  , although there is a difficulty if English and ideographics are interspersed within the same document  . The most difficult subsystem to handle is the BASIC language  , with its baroque syntax and noncontextual string -matching operations : however  , the paper shows how suitable action by the preprocessor can overcome all problems of standard BASIC except for operations which depend explicitly on ASCII codes  . 
Recent advances in technology enable considerable improvements to be made over previous attempts to construct an ideographic terminal  .  1 , 2 High-quality raster-based graphics systems provide an economical means of output  . 
Hard copy can be obtained with high-resolution matrix printers  3 and laser-driven phototype setters .   4 Character generation requires a fast read-only store for frequently-occurring ideographs  , backed up by a slower store for the rest ~ this approach is encouraged by language statistics  . 5 , 6 Furthermore , large read-only memories will so on become available which are suitable for storing picture grams of thousands of characters  . For example , at the recent International Solid-State Circu its conference in San Francisco  , NTT's Musashino Electrical Communication Laboratory announced a  4 Mb it read-only memory , arranged as two duplicate halves of 2 Mb it each to reduce the effect of single-bit errors  . 7This could accomodate up to ~000 picture grams , each stored as a 16 x 16 dot matrix . The major computer companies in the West have no product lines which include ideographic terminals  , although IBM recently introduced a Katakana V D U . 8 However , their appearance can only be a matter of time . 
Input of ideographic text is somewhat more difficult than output  . Chinese type writers have a table-sized keyboard with  2400 ideographs , supplemented by a library of extra characters which are inserted into the machine when required  . The problems of inexperienced users with such a large keyboard are exacerbated by the difficulty of finding a particular character  , for ideographic languages have no simple and universally-accepted " alphabetic ordering "  . Although novel keyboards and computer-based retrieval methods have been designed  ,  9 . 1 they do not appear to have met any great degree of acceptance  . 
However , a new scheme which employs 238 keys shows promise as a computer input device for Chinese ideographs  .   I0 The method originally covered a basic lexicon of 3260 characters , but has recently been extended to over twice this number without increasing the keyboard size  . It is based on an analysis of characters into radicals  , which corresponds to the way that Chinese children are taught to write in school  . 
With 346 radicals , between I and 6 keystrokes are required for each character , the average being 2 . 7 .   ( Compare this with the average of 6   --526 alphabetic characters per English word . * ) These 346 radicals are placed on the 23~ keys in such a way that although some keys correspond to two radicals  , no ambiguity is created when actual
Chinese words are entered because of restrictions on valid combinations of radicals  . 
Note incidentally that this simple technique has been used in situations where alphabetic ~ nglish words are keyed on a  12-key toucht one telephone pad . 11 Taking these considerations into account , we envisage an ideographic computer terminal comprising a small micro computer system with keyboard  , display , and hardware character generator , possibly supplemented by a writeable character store which is maintained by the processor from a floppy disk holding the remaining  , rarer , characters . 
Given such a micro computer-based ideographic terminal  , it is clearly possible to write a specialized operating system and application software for it on a general-purpose time sharing system  . However , the effort required is enormous , and the approach denies rapid access to new computer developments in the West  . This paper explores an alternative , namely , the use of the terminal as a frontend processor for accessing English computer systems  . Such a scheme is not without its disadvantages , for much data-processing depends upon an alphabetic structure of language  . 
However , we presuppose no modification whatever of the host computer software and examine the extent to which the scheme can be made to work  , and what facilities must be for feit . 
Semiotics of interactive computer systems
When users speaking other alphabetic languages , like French or German , interact with English-based computer systems , relatively few problems arise . Much interactive dialogue involves ~ text , which is not interpreted or constrained by the system at all  . For example , files can be edited or used for database retrieval  , and comments can be included in programming languages  , irrespective of the particular language used m providing it is alphabetic  . String decomposition by character position , as is common in older text editors , creates no problem . Syntactic constraints are placed by the system on certain signs  , which we call neutral . Examples are file names and other identifiers . However , there is no reason to ~ Of course , the information in a single keystroke is much higher in the Chinese case  . Using a naive zero-order approximation which does not take into account character or radical frequencies  , the entropy of a keystroke is 6 . 4 bits , while for English with a 27-key board it is only 4  . 8 bits . Multiplying these by the mean lengths we obtain surprisingly similar figures of  23 bits/ideographs for Chinese and 28 bits/word for English . 
believe that this causes any more difficulty in other alphabetic language ~ than it does in English  . Symbols for constructs which have semantic import in the system  , like keywords in programming languages and operating system commands  , constitute active signs which must agree exactly with the representation stored internally in the computer system  . Often , foreign users are content to write keywords in English  , because of its predominance in the computer world Binternational computer language standards usually use English  , most programming-language primers are written in English  , and so on . However , altering the keyword representations stored in the computer system is not a difficult task  , at least in theory : they will appear as character strings in the source code and editing and recompiling it is all that is necessary  . Hence the issue of language-translation preprocessors which is tackled in this paper does not arise for alphabetic-language users  . 
With ideographs , the situation is not so simple . Certainly an ideographic computer terminal could interface to a standard serial line  , emitting ASCII code sequences which represent ideographs and accepting them to generate an ideograph on the screen  . Then the operating system tables which store keywords internally could be adjusted to hold the ASCII sequences which represent the particular ideographs used as keywords  . Although this copes correctly with active signs , difficulties would still arise with passive and neutral ones  . 
For example , string editing based on character positions would fail  , unless the user was keenly aware of the internal representation of ideographs  . It would be difficult to accomodate the syntactic constraints for neutral signs  . 
BASIC identifiers , for example , must contain at most two characters , the first being a letter and the second , if any , a digit . Resolution of these problems requires a more radical modification of the system software than simply altering tables  . Another , simpler , alternative is to leave the system unchanged and to try to incorporate the necessary intelligence in a preprocessor  . 
The kind of signs that must be dealt with , then , are as follows . 
e  ?
These constitute text that is not interpreted by the system  . Certain special characters , which are interpreted at deviced river level ~ like interrupt signals  , rubouts , and line-erase characters ~ must not appear by accident in the passive text  . The possibility of editing by character offset must be noted  . 
These symbols must conform to syntactic constraints imposed by the system  . Examples are file names identifiers in programming languages  . 
Most systems in sist that neutral symbols contain only ~ n ~ characters  ( and not control--527 characters )  , and in many cases only alphabetics and numerals are allowed  ( ie not "/" , " I " , etc . ) . Certain characters sometimes have special meaning in certain contexts  . For example , many operating systems allow wildcard specification in file names  , either of a single character ( often indicated by "?" ) or a string of characters ( by "*" )  . Programming languages usually prohibit identifiers beginning with a digit  , and some ( eg BASIC ) restrict their length to two characters . 
These symbols must agree exactly with internally -stored keywords  . Hence they must be translated by the preprocessor  , if operating system modifications are fors worn . 
One serious difficulty arises when text is entered in one mode and subsequently used in another  . This happens , for example , when a command file is entered using the editor ( as passive text ) and is subsequently interpreted by another subsystem which normally accepts input from the keyboard  . The keyboard input typically contains a mixture of active  , neutral , and passive text ( say keywords , file names , and comments ) , and whenever a subsystem is being entered the preprocessor must obviously ensure that these elements are converted appropriately  . 
However , when a previously-entered text file is used for input  , the conversion cannot be done by the preprocessor because m when the file was entered originally  , the preprocessor could not know that it was destined for use by the particular subsystem as a command file  , and m when the subsystem reads the command file , its contents do not pass through the preprocessor and so there is no opportunity for conversion  . 
For a more concrete example , consider interacting with the BASIC language subsystem via an ideographic preprocessor  . BASIC keywords are typed asideographs , and converted by the preprocessor to English ~ PRINT  , IF , GOTO , etc . . Furthermore , BASIC identifiers are also typed as ideographs , and must be converted to BASIC variable names ~ A0  , AI , A2 , etc . -- but let us ignore this at present . The preprocessor must maintain tables to effect the conversion  . 
Now if the BASIC program is SAVEd , what should the resulting computer file look like ? If it is to be reLOADed by the BASIC subsystem  , the keywords in the program should be in English form  , so that they are recognized by BASI Con reloading  . If , however , it is destined to be printed on a line printer by a standard system utility  , it should have been SAVE das text , with keywords represented as the passive encoding of the ideographs which were typed originally  . 
For the preprocessor to work transparently , it must invoke mode-conversion programs automatically whenever the user issues certain commands  ( like SAVE a BASIC program )  . The virtue of our semiotic classification into passive  , neutral , and active signs is that it allows us to see clearly the need for this  . 
For an ideographic terminal to interact with English computer systems  , all ideographs must be converted to English pseudonyms  . It is possible to identify several desirable properties that the translation should have  . 
The requirements for passive text are :
I . An ideograph's English pseudonym should be as short as possible  , for the sake of storage economy on the host computer  . 
2 . The translation should be fixed-length , so that every ideograph is represented by the same number of ASCII characters  . 
Requirement 2 will assist in string decomposition by character offset  , for then only a fixed scale factor is needed to translate from an ideographic offset to the equivalent one on the host computer  . It also simplifies the problem of document preparation  , for a fixed-length representation means that existing software for line splitting and Justification will work on ideographic text  . However , it rules out the rather attractive proposition of directly encoding the radicals forming a character  . 
3 . Given two strings of ideographs , it should be possible to tell from the translations if one is a substring of the other without false matches being caused by incorrect alignment  . 
This allows matching by context , as used in most editor programs . 
4 . True English should never masquer adeas translate dideographs  . 
It will often be necessary to mix English and ideographic text  . For example , programmers may wish to use some English variable names  , for mathematical symbols like x , y , sin , and cos are used in their Western form in most Chinese mathematics  . Clearly , requirement 4 can never be fully satisfied , for any sequence of ASCII characters can be entered directly if desired  . 
However , we wish to minimize the likelihood that the kind of text normally entered will masquer adeas translate dideographs  . It would seem sensible to include a little-used control character to flag each translated ideograph  , but we will see below that this introduces difficulties  . ? more force , for file names and identifiers are usually heavily restricted in length  . Clearly , in the case of BASIC identifiers no universal ideographic encoding will suffice  , for only 26  +  26wi0  =  286 different combinations are allowed , and this is far less than the number of ideographs  . Leaving aside this special case , which must be treated as an exception by the preprocessor  , neutral text presents another requirement : 5 . Translations of ideographic strings should not violate any restrictions that the host computer places on file names  , and should conform with the syntax of variable names in as many programming languages as possible  . 
additional advantage of satisfying the syntax of variable names for most computer languages  ( except BASIC , and upper-case-only languages ) . 
Requirement ( 6 ) indicates that the code should be based on the address of the picture gram for the ideograph in the preprocessor  , so that although translation from the ideograph keystrokes to the pseudonym may be slow  ( Uecause a table of radicals , which may reside on backing store , must be consulted ) , reconstruction of an ideograph from its translation requires access to the character generator only  . 
Translatin ~ interactive languages
This requirement is rather stringent , because for most systems it rules out all characters except letters and digits  . Furthermore , the fact that most languages prohibit identifiers which begin with a digit means that we cannot use the standard  4-digit telecode , * as employed , for example , in some standard character indices . 12 However , we will present a simple coding scheme which can reDresent  27  . 000 ideographs as three-character strings , with the characters chosen from the digits and upper - and lowercase alphabetics  . This allows two ideographs to serve as a 6-character file name , provided that the host distinguishes upper - and lowercase characters  . 
Another requirement is 6 . Although the translation from ideographs to English may be slow  ( because ideographic text is entered slowly on the keyboard  )  , its inverse should be fast so that the host's output can be displayed on the terminal quickly  . 
Requirement 3 implies the use of a delimiter to ensure correct alignment of ideograph boundaries when English translations are matched  . This is difficult to accomodate within a three -character translation  , since with one reserved for the delimiter insufficient combinations of alphabetics and digits exist  . 
To solve this , more than one character is employed as a delimiter  . With N possible characters out of which n are reserved for delimiters  , n(N-n ) 2 different triples exist . 
Examination of this function , where N has value 62 (26+ 26+10) , shows that the obvious choice of a single delimiter gives a paltry  3  , 700 combinations compared with the maximum of 35 , 300 when n = N/3 . We choose an easily-recognizable encoding with a digit in one fixed position and alphabetics filling the other two  . This gives 27,000 combinations . To minimize the likelihood of mistaking genuine English for ideographic translations  , the digit occupies the central position , flanked by alphabetics . This has the * A brief account of the fascinating history of telecodes is given in reference  2  . 
As a prelude to our examination of the translation process for BASIC  , the most commonly-used interactive language , let us consider a simpler , although somewhat more esoteric , interpreted language mLIS p . 13k ~ The fundamental entity in LISP is an at Q ~ . and is represented by a string of up to 30 letters and digits . The indivisibility of atoms , the generous maximum character length , and the starkness of the LISP syntax make translating an ideographic version an easy proposition  . All names in LISP are atoms , including functions and the builtin functions which comprise the LISP system itself  . Atoms are combined into lists using a handful of special characters like parentheses  , full stops , and quotation marks . 
These special characters are all commonly used in Chinese text  , and so there is no need to translate them . 
An ideographic LISP preprocessor must translate each ideograph into a unique sequence of English characters as described above  . 
Translations of the system-defined atoms , of which there are somewhat over 100 , need to be stored in a table in the preprocessor with their English equivalents  , so that they are converted into the correct character strings  , With the encoding developed in the previous section  ,   30-1etter atoms permit up to 10 ideographs to be concatenated to make a name , and this should be quite sufficient to allow mnemonic identifiers to be used  . The only problems with the scheme are the atom decomposition functions EXPLODE and IMPLODE  , which do not appear in " pure " LISP but are often provided in specific implementations to break an atom into its constituent characters and reform it  . They must be handled by writing special ideographic EXPLODE and IMPLODE functions  , which take into account the structure of the codes and use the primitive EXPLODE and IMPLODE to decompose an atom into  3-character pieces . 
Digits and operator symbols will need to have their single-character representation  , and the new atomic decomposition functions should distinguish genu in eideograph translations from ordinary text  , using 3-character decomposition --529--for the first and single characters for the second . 

The baroque syntax of the BASIC language gives rise to many more problems than with LISP  . 
There are four syntactic categories in BASIC that may be presented asideographs : keywords  , identifiers , character strings , and comments ( REMarks ) . 14 Other elements of the language , namely numbers , arithmetic operators , and special punctuation symbols such as commas and quotation marks  , are used in the Chinese language in the same way as in English  , Furthermore , the Chinese use ordinary Western mathematical language  , so we do not envisage translating the names of mathematical library functions likes in and cos  . 
Keywords are stored in a ChineseEnglish translation table in the preprocessing computer  . 
Single ideographs are used for keywords , and although this imposes a degree of unnaturalness on the Chinese representation  , the resulting economy of keystrokes in entering programs was judged to outweigh any artificiality  . In fact , multi-ideograph keywords could be accepted equally well if so desired  . 
Identifiers in BASIC comprise an alphabetic letter which may be followed by a decimal digit  . 
In Chinese , identifiers must comprise a single ideograph . Whenever an ideographic identifier is entered in a BASIC program  , it is checked against the translation table . If it does not appear , it is added to the table with a 2-character translation . Thus the first ideograph which is not a keyword will translate to " AO "  . the second to " AI ", and so on . 
Numerals , operators , and punctuation pass through the processor without translation  . So also do English letters : this makes the filter transparent to English BASIC  . 
If English and ideographics are mixed in a BASIC program  , confusion may occur . The user cannot tell what English pseudonyms have been assigned to hisideographs  , and so cannot guarantee to avoid variable name clashes  . The ambiguity could be removed by translating English identifiers to a name selected by the preprocessor  , in the same way that ideographic ones are . An easier possibility is simply to forbid mixed -language programming  . 
Some English letters appear in Chinese programs m we have already mentioned mathematical functions  . It is important to ensure that no parts of legal English strings can masquer adeas translated identifiers  ; this is indeed the case for the 2-character identifiers AO , AI .   .   .   .   . Z9 . 
Character strings are the most difficult items to translate  , because BASIC contains string-processing functions such as LEN  ( )  ( length of a string )  , LEFTS ( ) , RIGHTS ( ) , MID$()(substrings ) , and INSTRS ( )  ( searches one string for the first occurrence of another  )  . It is not feasible to encode a sequence of ideographs as a single unit  , for this would prevent decomposition . Instead we translate the ideographs individually into fixed-length English strings  . The 3-character encoding outlined above is quite suitable , and has the advantage that the English representation is as short as possible  . This is important because otherwise string over flows will occur often within the BASIC interpreter  . 
The BASIC string-processing operations specify offsets in a string as character counts  . 
Since strings now contain a fixed number of English characters per ideograph  , all of these figures must be adjusted to account for the new unit of measurement  . Thus , since ideographs are converted into three English characters each  , ~LEN ( the ideograph for LEN ) is translated into ( I/3 ) * LEN , @LEFTS ( . . . , < expression >) into LEFTS ( . . . . 3~(<expression >)), and so on ~ . 
Identifying < expression > s when translating LEFTS , RIGHTS , and MID $ is the closest the preprocessor gets to the syntax of the BASIC language  . 
Note that this scheme will not work if
English and ideographics are mixed within strings . In a simple system , one might choose to out law this . However , since symbols such as punctuation and digits count as English  , this requirement may be too stringent . The only alternative , if strin~decomposition is to work properly , is top ad each English character that appears within a string to the length of the ideograph translations  . If the pad character is chosen as a control character which would not otherwise appear in strings  , it will be easy to remove when translating character strings received from the host on output  ; however , since one use of strings in BASIC is as file names  , and the host operating system will probably not welcome control characters in these  , it is better top ad with a printing character instead  . 
String operations which involve ASCII character codes  , for example CHR $ ( ) which returns the character corresponding to a given ASCII code  , and CHANGE ( ) which transfers a string to an array of ASCII codes  , are not implemented . The most sensible interpretation would be to return the  4-digit telecode mentioned earlier . This would involve communicating with the ideographic preprocessor  , and so would need a nonstandard implementation of BASIC on the host  . 
As for program comments , any ideograph in a BASICREM statement is converted to an English pseudonym using the same translation as for strings  . There is no need top ad English characters , but it may be best to do so for the sake of uniformity  . 
* The "@" prefix indicates that an ideograph is typed  ; thus "@ LEN " should be read as the ideograph whose meaning is LEN  . 

Lastly , its hOuld not be forgotten that error messages originating from the host computer will have to be translated before being presented on the terminal  . Some BASIC implementations simply return an error number  , like "?16" , which does not need altering .   ( Note that our aim is not to ~ l~g ~ the programming language  , but to preserve it ~ warts and all wherever possible  . ) If error messages are used , they should appear in full in the translation table ~ a word-for-word translation would probably be too confusing in most cases  . 
Fortunately , BASIC implementations do not include user-defined variable names or parts of program statements in error messages  . 
Implementations . With the above considerations in mind , we sketch the working of both a simple preprocessor and a more sophisticated one  . The first maintains a single translation table , which is initialized to hold the keywords of BASIC  . Everyideograph input is translated via this table  , which is augmented if the ideograph is absent with the next unused member of the sequence AO  , AI ,   . . . , A9, BO, . . . 
as its English translation . Anything received from the host computer is inverse-translated using the table  . Digits , operators , and punctuation pass transparently through the preprocessing filter in both directions  . 
English characters do too , unless they appear as translations of ideographs in the table  , in which case they are transformed back to ideographs on output  . The only syntactic checking of the BASIC program by the preprocessor is in detecting  , bracketting , and halving expressions which form the second argument of a LEFTS  ( ) , MID$()0 or RIGHTS()function , and the expressions can be detected easily by stacking parentheses  . 
This simple system will work correctly for all -Chinese BASIC  , providing punctuation is avoided in strings which are decomposed  . The maximum number of different ideographs which can be used in any one interactive session is  260  . 
It will work for all-English BASIC and Chinese BASIC with English identifiers and strings  , provided the string decomposition functions are typed in English  . It will work for mixed English and Chinese if English is avoided in decomposable strings  , unless name clashes occur . 
These can be avoided by using single-letter variables and ensuring that numbers are not adjacent with letters in strings  . 
The more sophisticated preprocessor uses BASIC syntax to distinguish strings and comments from identifiers  . A table is maintained for identifiers as described above  . English identifiers are translated , as well as Chinese ones , to avoid name clashes in mixed programs . 
Ideographs in strings and comments are translated to a fixed-length character representation  , like the one developed above , which cannot clash with keywords , identifiers , or numbers . English characters , punctuation , and digits , occurring in strings , are padded to the same length . Note that an ideograph may occur both in a string or comment and as an identifier  . This causes no special difficulty . 
What in adequacies still appear in this second preprocessor ? Juxtaposition of characters on output cannot masquer adeasideograph translations because characters in strings are always padded  . ( The padding is , of course , removed before final output . ) If the user types English , punctuation , or Chinese as input to his program it will all be translated before going to the BASIC program on the host  . 
There is only one difficulty . If numbers are typed as input , there is no way that the preprocessor can tell whether they are destined for string input : 
INPUTAS , when they must be padded so that they can participate sensibly in string comparisons  ; or for numeric input :
INPUTA , when padding would cause a BASIC error . Thus we must rule that ~ must never be read into ~   . Punctuation and operators that accompany numbers ( "+" ,  "-" , " E " ,  " , " ) must be recognized through context analysis by the preprocessor  , and padded only in non-numeric contexts . To remove this restriction would require interpolating a hidden subroutine call whenever a number is read  , to transfer it into a character string , process it to remove padding , and return the numeric result . If this were done at BASIC level by the preprocessor problems would occur when listing the program  , and highly confusing error messages may appear . 
Text ~ no oess in ~ and database
The handling of unstructured text is rather easier than programming languages for the preprocessor  , because of the uniformity of data representation and the syntactic simplicity of editor commands  . Ideographs are translated into the universal byte representation described earlier  . 

The variety of text editors is so great that it is difficult to say anything about ideographic conversion which is generally applicable  . A simple editor is discussed in some detail in reference  15  . It poses very few problems for ideographic conversion  . The preprocessor must distinguish several different kinds of information  . Editor commands are translated from Chinese according to a predefined table  . 
It is possible to determine whether typed input is a command or not by mimicing the editor and entering text mode on the appropriate commands  ; but a more robust alternative is to examine the prompt sent by the host system and decide on that basis whether a command or text is expected  . Another kind of input is the numbers which follow certain commands  . Where these refer to line numbers , they pass directly through the preprocessor . If intra-line editing is by character offset , such offsets must be adjusted to allow for the three-character per  --531--ideograph representation of passive text , but unfortunately this precludes editing of mixed English and Chinese files  . Character strings specified in contextual search and change commands are treated as text  , the ideograph delimiters ensuring unambiguous matching  . 
Another information type used in text editing is the file name  , but this causes no special problems because the coding scheme for ideographs does not use English characters that are unacceptable in file names  . 
Text files are frequently used as input to document preparation software  . In this case , the text will be interspersed with formatting commands  , which are identifiable in some way by the formatter program  . ( For example , a common convention is to place formatting commands alone on a line beginning with a full stop  . ) Such commands could be made known to the preprocessor when entering or editing the file and translated accordingly to their English equivalents  , but the modularity of the system is enhanced if they are placed in the file as passive text and converted to their active form by a special program on the host Just prior to formatting  . 
This can be invoked automatically by the preprocessor whenever the document preparation program is run  , in a manner which is transparent to the user . 
Little difficulty is foreseen in taking advantage of many of the features of English document preparation systems which may exist on the host  . In order that filling will work properly , ideographic translations should be separated by whitespace  , and this can be done by the abovementioned conversion program  . 
Furthermore , ideograph representations should have a fixed length  . Any English which appears in the text should not be padded  , or else it will occur in the output with ideograph spacing  . 
Automatic hyphenation should of course be suppressed  . 
Specification of line lengths , vertical and horizontal spacing , centering , and paragraphing will all be effective . It may be desired to convert numerical specifications of character positions so that ideographs rather than characters are measured  . Sections of English text will be formatted with a different paper width than Chinese  , for in reality each ideograph occupies less width than its English pseudonym : this can be corrected by the user inserting line length commands before and after the English text  . Footnotes , superscripts , and subscripts cause no special difficulty . As with English text , underlining and alternative type fonts are allowable only if the output device and its handler permit  . 
The output of the document preparation program will be a new version of the input with modified line breaks and some space characters inserted for padding  ( for example , at the beginning of paragraphs ) . Conversion of this file to paper form is a Job for a specialised Chinese application program with knowledge of the character representations  . 
~to databas ~
Like editors and document preparation systems , database systems vary so much that generalizations about the feasibility of ideographic translation are impossible  . An example system 16 has been considered in some detail ,   15 and indicates that no special difficulty should occur  . 
~ ~ a~th ~ ho~o ~ ~
The host operating system itself is treated by the preprocessor simply as another interactive subsystem  . The keywords , with their ideographic translations , are tabulated in the preprocessor . Wildcard specification of characters in file names is easily handled by defining a " wild-ideograph " character and expanding it into three adjacent copies of the host operating system's wildcard character  . 
A distinction must be made between commands which enter an interactive subsystem and those which do not  . The latter class comprises logging in and out and the file maintenance commands  , including that which invokes the ( non-interactive ) document preparation system . 
Because file names and text files are represented on the host system according to the standard translation method described earlier  , no special action need be taken by the preprocessor for most of these commands  . In the case of the command which sends a file to the host's printer  ( as opposed to the one which lists it on the terminal  ) the appropriate ideograph should translate to the name of a special application program designed for ideographic printing  . We saw earlier that execution of the document preparation system should be preceded by passing the file through a software filter which translates ideographic formatting commands into English : this action is performed automatically when the document-preparation command is received by the preprocessor  . 
Whenever an interactive subsystem is entered , information appropriate to it needs to be installed in the preprocessor  . This will certainly include a translation table for the keywords of the subsystem  , and for most subsystems certain keywords require special action which is specified as code executable by the preprocessor  . Since the amount of code is not great , it can be permanently resident in the preprocessor and accessed symbolically from translation tables  . 
Translation tables for subsystems can either be stored locally on the preprocessor's disk  , or centrally in the host . If many ideographic terminals are attached to a time sharing host  , there are advantages in central storage ~ especially if subsystems are being updated or new ones added  . Tables are --532 sent from host to preprocessor by executing a specially-written host application program with an argument which specifies the host's file name of the appropriate translation table  . Whenever a subsystem is left , the preprocessor reverts to its table for operating system commands  . 
All the subsystems we have encountered use the standard method for ideographic translation throughout  , except BASIC which builds a table of identifiers dynamically  . For this , the table of identifiers must be saved on the host whenever a program is SAVEd  , and loaded into the preprocessor whenever one is LOADed  . Local storage cannot be used in case another terminal user wishest or unthe same BASIC program  . It seems that the most generally useful way to store BASIC programs is in the form of passive text  , with identifiers and keywords in their ordinary ideograph encoding  . This will involve file conversion prior to each LOAD and SAVE command  . Part of the table entry for the BASICLOAD and SAVE keywords will invoke this mechanism automatically  , so that the user need never be aware of the process  . 
This paper has outlined design considerations for an ideographic preprocessor which acts as a time sharing terminal ~ to a host computer  , working in English . To the host , it is just an ordinary terminal . None of the operating system needs modifying in anyway  . A smal number of special utility programs and translation tables must be stored by the host : the programs perform such jobs as file conversion and sending translation tables to the preprocessor  . They are invoked by the preprocessor when needed , without explicit requests being made by the user . 
Six important subsystems have been examined : the operating system itself  , and two interpreted languages , which were analysed in some detail ; a text editor , document preparation software , and an interactive database management system . Very few limitations need be placed on the user's actions  . The most difficult subsystem to handle is BASIC , with its restrictive syntax and noncontextual string-matching operations  . 
The chief shortcomings of the system are its commitment to half-duplex operation  , and the need to foregoany processing of characters as numbers  . These are both inherent in the nature of the translation process  , and cannot be overcome without modifying the host software  . 
It is felt that they are a small price to pay for the convenience of an easily-implementable  , modular , ideographic terminal for accessing
English host computers.
Acknowledgements
It is a pleasure to acknowledge the contributions of John Brazier  , Rod Cuff , Brian Gaines , and Y . H . Ng through interesting and stimulating conversations on the subject of the ideographic preprocessor  . This research was supported by GWITS . 

I . Chang , S.K ., " An interactive system for
Chinese character generation and retrieval , " IEEE Trans . ~_ V_~J ~ , Man and Cvbernetics , SMC-\] , pp 257-265 , May 1973 . 
2 . Walker , G . L . , Kuno , S . , Smith , B . N . and Holt , R . B . , " Chinese mathematical text analysis , " IEEE Trans . En ~ in eer in ~ ~ and ~ , EWS-11 , pp 118-128 , August 1968 . 
3 . For example , the Mullard 11 SSDR . Also , Ideographics Inc . , Sunnyvale , California make a special printer intended for ideographic output  ( IPX Model 1800 )  . 
4. For example . Monotype International's
Laser comp 4000.
5 . Hsieh . Hwang and Lin . " Analysis of Chinese radicals , " ~ . National ~- ~3A Ilg
University . December 1972.
6 . Kwok , P . C . K . and Lai , J . P . K . , " Dual-mode transmission technique for Chinese ideographs in a teletext system  , " ~ Le ~ ,  15 , pp 268-269 , May 1979 . 
7 . Posa , J . G . and Allan , R . , " ISSCC : a gallery of gigantic memories , gigabit logic , and single-chip systems , " Electronig ~ ,  52 , pp 13~-151 , February 14 ,  1980 . 
~.~BM~/!4978-!d~solavst~t ~ on,
Kevboar ~= ~ feature manual , IBM , 1979.
9 . Caldwell ) S . H . , " The Sinotype m a machine for the composition of Chinese from a keyboard  , " ~ . Franklin Institute , pp 471-502, June 1959 . 
10 . Kong , L . and Tu , J . , " User manual for Loh's Chinese keyboard , " Hung On-To Research Centre for Machine Translation  , March 1979 . 
11 . Witten , I . H . and Madams , P . H . C . , " The Telephone Enquiry Service : a man-machine system using synthetic speech  , " International ~ . Man-Ma ~ ~ .  ~ . pp 449-464, July 1977 . 
12. Dougherty , C.Y .. Lamb , S.M . and Martin,
S . E ., ~ character ~.
University of California Press , 1963.
13 . McCarthy , J . , Abrahams , P . W . , Edwards , D . J . , Hart , T . P . and Levin , M . I ~, LI ~! . ~ pj  ~ O . g~_mm . ~'~ ~  . M . I . T . Press , 1962 . 
14. Forsyth.R ., T_~\]~Jk ~! ~\] ~, London:
Chapman and Hall , 1978.
15 . Witten , I . H . and Ng , Y . H . , " An ideographic-language frontend processor , " ~ omouter ~ . , in press . 
16. Held , G . D ., Stonebreaker , M.R . and Wong,
E . , " INGRES ~ a relational data base system , " ~ J ~ O ~ q . Nat ~ Q~l ~ Co ~
C_~f ~.4_~4. pp 409-416, 1975.

