TOPIC-COMMENTSTRUCTUREOFTEXTS
(AND ITS CONTRIBUT ION TO THE AUTOMATIC PROCESSING OFTEXTS  ) 
Ferenc Kiefer
KVAL , Stockholm,
11645, S6 dermalm storg 8
Abstract
In general , topic is informally defined as that parto f the sentence which the sentence is about and comment as what is said in the sentence  . 
This is , of course , not a formal definition but so far no one has succeeded to provide a viable formal def inition for these notions  . In the analysis of sentences and texts these notions can nevertheless be used with cons iderable 
Success.
Typically , topics are noun phrases and comments are open sentences  ( that is , sentences containing a variable ) . For example , the sentence John is writing a letter is about John and it says that he is writing a letter  . Formal-ly ,   ( i ) John x: ( x is writing a letter ) where John is a variable binding expression and is writing a letter is an open sentence in which the variable x is bound by John  . 
A sentence may have more than one topic . The sentence John saw Mary in the garden may be a statement about John and Mary and what is said about them is that he saw her in the garden  . 
Formally ,   ( 2 ) \[ John x ~ Marry\]: ( x sawy in the garden ) If a sentence has only one topic this topic is very often  ( but not always ) the subject of the sentence . Consider the sentence John wants to see Mary with heavy stress on John  ( the sentence can , for example , be considered as an answer to the question Who wants to see Mary ?  ) This sentence is evidently about Mary and says that John wants to see her  . 
Texts are built up from sentences and the top ic-comment structure of a text will consi st of the topic-comment structures of its constituent sentences  . The topic-comment structure of texts is , however , not simply a cumulative function of the top ic-comment structures of the constituent sentences  . I shall present in my paper a series of observation concerning the topic-comments t ructure of texts on the basis of a lega  , text ( Rules of the Arbitration Insti-tute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce  )   . 
( i ) Each text has a set of terms which are not def in ed  ( not introduced ) in the text : they are taken for granted . These terms belong to the stock of common knowledge with respect to the given text  ( SCK )  . SCK defines the frame of the text ( or its scenario )  . Thus , for example , in the text in question the following terms belong to SCK : Stockholm Chamber of Commerce  , The Swedish Law of Arbitration , the parties , the arbitrator(s ) , the ( arbitral ) tribunal , the claimant , the respondent , the request for arbitration . It is a characteristic feature of texts that topics belonging to SCK are empty  ( non-informative ) topics . If such a topic is found it should in general be replaced by a more informative topics  . The latter can be reconstructed on the basis of the preceding text  . For example ,   ( 3 ) Each party shall be given an opportunity to state his views  . 
Taken in isolation , this sentence could be analyzed as having the topic each party and the comment its hall be given  .   .   . In the present context , however , the sentence is about the interpretation and correction of an award  . 
Sentence (3) must thus be reconstructed as (4).
(4 ) Each party shall be given an opportunity to state h is views on the award  ( or the inter-pretation of the award )   . 
The topic of (6) is , then , the views on the award and it is stated about this topic that each party shall be given an opportunity to express it  . 
( ii ) In several cases the topic of the sentence is given by the heading of the whole paragraph  . 
On the surface the topic of sentence ( 5 ) is the Institute . 
(5 ) The Institute may request a party to amplify any submission to the Institute  . 
However , as indicated by the heading of the paragraph , what is at stake here is the amplification . The question which one would as about ( 5 ) is ( 6 ) :  ( 6 ) What about the amplification of a submis- sion ? definite noun phrase and a term introduced in the comment is an indefinite noun phrase  . 
Taken in isolation this observation may lead to incorrect analyses  . Consider , for example ,   ( 7 ) The claimant shall pay a registration fee and both parties shall deposit with the Institute a sum to cover the costs of the proceedings  . 
In the given context , this sentence is not about the claimant and the parties but rather about the registration fee and the deposit  . 
( iv ) Conditional sentences raise special problems . Take ( 8 ) If an arbitrator appointed by a party dies , Such a sentence may be an answer to the question ( 9 )  . 
(9 ) What happens if an arbitrator appointed by a party dies ? Formally  , conditional sentences can often be analyzed as implications : ADB  . In such sentences , as shown by (8) and (9) , the if-clause ( = A ) is the topic and the comment is that this clause ( i . e . the underlying proposition ) entails the consequent clause ( i . e . the underlying proposition ) , that is , we get the structure ( lO ) :  ( 10 ) A x : ( x  ~ B ) In connection with if-topics several problems must be solved : the function of if-topics in texts  , the domain of if-topics , the internal structure of if-topics . Each of these problems shall be given ample consideration in my paper  . 
On the basis of the above observations I am going to stipulate a general strategy for the determination of the topic-comment structure of texts  . In addition , I shall briefly report on an experiment , made at KVAL , concerning the implementation of a model based on topic comment structure  . In this model questions are answered by means of topics  . Finally , I shall present some arguments in favor of the approach chosen  . 

