ONTHEDERIVATION OF ACONVERS ATION ALMAXIM
Th.R . Hofmann
Shimane National University
Matsue City , Shimane , Japan 690

A conversational maxim of relation--aprinc iple of connectedness of text--is derived from a more general & independently motivated principle governing the interpretation of sentences in context  . This principle--PIM , principed ' inter-pretation minimal e--that sentences are interpreted in the most redundant way possible  , is thus seen to be fundamental , & a general argument is given that the statement of  , & the effective semantic procedures lie in the interpretive  ( toward semantic structure ) & not in the generative ( away from there ) direction . 

My purpose here is to show that a conversa-tional maxim---believed to be a maxim for the speaker in well-formed conversation -- is in fact only a special case of a much more general rule  . 
This more general rule , moreover , is a rule for the interpretation of sentences . This leads to questions about conversational maxims & the nature of the relation between syntactic form & semantic structure  . 
We shall is targue for a narrow & specific conversational maxim  ; a connectedness principle according to which texts & conversations should exhibit a quali ty of connectedness  . It appears that this covers the ground of Grice 's relation maxim : " be relevant "  . 
Grice if ormulated several maxims for the speaker , which may be assumed of a speaker in usual c ircumstances  . Together with the utterance of a sentence , they give rise to his ' conversa-tional impl icatures '  . They are grouped under 4 headings : quantity , quality , relation , & manner . 
We are concerned here mainly with the 3? , but shall have some comments later on the 1?2 . The 4? group , " avoid obscurity " , " avoid ambiguity " , " bebrief "& " be orderly " , like the 3?" be relevant " , are extremely vague & unformalizable stated as they are  , as maxims for the speaker . 
To illustrate their operation with the ist 2 groups , consider one saying " I think it is rain-ing " instead of " It is raining "  . Clearly this is less informative of the state of the world  ( though more informative about the speaker ) than what could have been said , violating the quantity maxims in one direct ion or the other  ( be inform-ative enough , & only enough ) , & it also violates brevity . Hence the quality maxim must be domin . -anthere , " do not say that which you believe to be false or for which you lack adequate evidence  . "It follows that the speaker does not know or have adequate evidence that it is raining  . 
We propose here as a conversational maxim , a connectedness principle . A simple statement is " stick to the subject " or " don't change the subject "  . Thus , " you were rather drunk last night .   .   .   . Say , it's rather cold today , isn't it ?" is an obvious violation of this pr inciple  . That some relation maxim is operating here , is beyond question . 
While the above statements of this maxim suggest that there is some sort of subject or topic that one might alternatively stick to or change  , these topics or subjects turn out to be il lusive  , However , these injunctions are uttered when there is l it tle overlap of semantic content with the preceeding context  . We shall understand this connectedness princip le in the following way  ; " there should be a high degree of overlap with preceeding context  . 
It is true that many cases where these in jun-ct ions are uttered can be characterized by one person refusing to continue in a direction  ( topic ) which is unpleasant to him . However , it is also common experience that a convers at ionbetween  2 or more people may wander exceedingly . Quite often , in fact , it takes considerable effort by the partic ipants to reconstruct what they discus-sed or how they arrived at i topic from a quite dissimi lartopic  15 minutes earlier . And in such a reconstruction , one usually finds 3 or 4 other equally dissimilar topic-areas which were passed through  . 
In such cases , one seldom even perceives a " change in topic " , even though the topic does change in a rather radical way  . On the other hand , when the topic of a conversation does not change  , the conversation will often be judged as boring  . We may conclude that what is avoided is not changes in topic  , but rapid changes in topic ; what is excluded by this maxim is a sentence with little or no overlap with the preceeding context  . 
This lack of overlap will be found in all cases of objectionable topic change  , but there are numerous cases of gradual topic change without problem  . Moreover , with rapid change of topic , misunderstanding may arise , as we shall see below . 
It is however not true that the human mind , or human language , cannot acceptrapid changes in topic . Rapid changes can & are often made , but must be accompanied by a marker of the change . 
There are numerous devices to indicate gross changes of topic  . In spoken English , we have such things as " Says . . . " or " Did you know that . . . " to mark a big jump . In more formal English , there is " Incidentally ,   . . . " or " By the way, . . . " which carry an implicit promise to return to the subject at hand after a short interruption  , which is often not fulfilled in conversation . 
Temporary topic shifters like by the way both mark that overlap need not be found  , as a context later on for overlap . . . . i . e . it is a segment probably slightly overlapping , but which can be forgotten later without loss . 
In more formal English , we find conLDlete shifters of topic , " to change the topic ,   . . . " or " speaking of . .,  . . . " . These instruct the addres-see to seek no overlap , here or later . 
The existance of these markers shows that one can change the subject  , but if so , that change should be formally marked . Thus we can reformulate this principle as " stick to the subject unless you indicate otherwise " or " changes in subject should be overtly marked "  . This may be seen as a refinement of Grice's relation maxim " be relevant "  , but may also be seen as related also to his manner maxim " be orderly "  , insofar as it entails marking changes . 
However , given that conversations can & do wander , changing the subject gradually , without any annoyance or hinderance , or even awareness , to the participants , we must revise our notion of relevance to: relevance to the immediately preceeding context  , & the connectedness principle to " rapid changes in the subject must be marked "  . 
To say that there is a topic or subject throughout a conversation is too strong  . Nevertheless , sentences must bear some connectedness ( semantic overlap ) to their preceeding context . 
I propose that this is all that can & should be said in the area of Grice's relation maximt " be relevant "  . 
Elsewhere 2 I have proposed a principle of semantic interpretation  , PIM . This principed ' interpretation minimal e disambiguates words  , constructions , pronouns , & c , based on selecting the meaning which adds the least to the prior semantic context  . Thus " flying planes can be dangerous " is not ambiguous in a context " don't flyairplanes  . " or in a context " watch out for airplanes .  " . In each case , there is only way to interpret this sentence with a minimal addition to the preceeding semantic context  . 
Similarly , some word disambiguations can be explained only by PIM  . For example , the word light in the sentence " it is light " is not ambiguous in contexts like " how heavy is it ?" or " is it still dark ? " because the semantic components of only is ense will overlap sufficiently with the preceeding context in each case  . 
This principle PIM may seem ontologically weak , as it is claimed to be true Only in cases of good communication -- i  . e . cases of communication where the idea is transmitted without ambiguity  . PIM can be easily falsified by construc-ting a text where the reader is left in doubt as to what is said  . This appears circular at first glance . It is not , however . 
Good communication ( or well-written text ) is empirically identifiable . In such cases , PIM is met . Even more easily identifiable is poorly written text  , poor because it leaves ambiguities in the reader ' smind  . In most if not all such cases , it appears , PIM is violated . Such cases can be rendered non-ambiguous by the addition of enough words to disallow all but I way of integ-rating  ( overlapping ) it into its preceeding context with a minimum of new information  . 
Lastly , as it states a condition necessary for good ( or even adequate ) communication , it makes strong predictions about what speakers or writers will use  ( pronoun , noun+adjective+de fin-ite , or just noun+definite ) , given a prior context & an idea to express . These predictions are easily tested , & it is thus empirical . 
Assuming then that this principle PIM does exist , it is easy to see why large changes in the topic must be marked  . If a jump of topic is not marked , the initial sentence in the new topic will be interpreted in such a way as to add the least possible to the preceeding  . This will generally lead to misinterpreting it , if there is an overlap possible . Or , if the addressee cannot find overlap , he must draw upon scenarios 3 & belief-structure ~ that the speaker might be assuming  , failing which heperceives a " lost " feeling , as when a speaker appears to say something completely incoherent  , " it is raining . 
moreover , elephants are big."
The markers of topic change simply indicate to the addressee that he should not use PIM in interpreting what follows  . They are necessary whenever the following material might be open to a different interpretation when PIM is applied  . 
The existance of PIM requires that topic change markers exist & be used in this case  . 
Moreover , as one often does not know in advance exactly what words or construction she will use  , topic change markers are a useful heuristic device to avoid potential misinterpretations  , when making a zapid topic change . Indeed , when such a marker is approprite , but missing , the addressee may ( & will ) search for some interpretation of the following sentence which will overlap to at least some degree  . In such a case , it is a kindness to the addressee ( & part of the notion of good communication ) to indicate that such a search is unnecessary . 
The existance & use of topic changing markers is thus required by PIM  . In fact , the whole prohibition of rapid topic change ( unless marked ) is simply a reflection of PIM . With no marker , the listener will assume , by PIM , that each sentence overlaps seriously , in a maximal way , with its preceeding context . Hence , a speaker--who presumably talks to be understood by someone -- must construct each sentence so as to overlap  . 
This is precisely what we have seen to be the interpretation of the connectedness principle or relation maxim  . 
Thus this relation maxim can be derived from PIM . However , PIM cannot be derived from this maxim . PIM is much more general , disambiguating even pronouns based on collocated verbs  , for example . In the following example, . she is under ~ stood as neither the closest female antecedent  , nor the subject of the preceeding sentence , Susan that Betty was coming . Unfortunately , shem is understood it . " Rather , she is understood , in accordance with PIM , as referring to whatever allows the greatest overlap with the preceeding context  , here to misunderstand overlaps in meaning with to tell  ( which is something like ' to cause to understand , by speaking ') . In such an example , a change in the verb in the 2 ? sentence causes a change in the interpretation ; if it we recome or arrive , she would refer instead to Betty , while if the 2 ? sentence were " she said its oft-ly " , she could only refer to Mary . 
Thus the relevance maxim can be seen as a reflection for the speaker of a principle for the interpretation  ( disambiguation ) of sentences . It is perhaps for this reason that the relevance maxim has been resistant to formalization  . 
Happily however , the interpretation principle PIM is formalizable . 
Because the connectedness principle can be derived from PIM  , but PIM cannot be derived from it , & because PIM is formalizable , but not apparent l ~ an ~ elevance maxim , we may conclude that it is so derived , & that it either has no independent existance , or possibly has existance only as a heuristic for the speaker  . 
Moreover , it does not seem possible to state PIM for the speaker  . In the pronoun case abover stated for the speaker  , it could be stated only as a rule for when a pronoun cQuld be used in place of a more extensive description or name  . 
Even when so stated , it is still an interpretive rule ; a pronoun can be used if no ambiguity will result  , taking ambiguity to be measured relative to the verbs or other things collocated with the prospective pronoun  . A more directed procedure is probably the case : try integrating the projected sentence  ( with pronouns ) into the precee-ding context's semantic structure  . If that results in an undesired meaning , then find or construct a more complete description  . When this is executed in realtime , it may result in the post-sentence nominal ( extraposition or right displacement ) which is not uncommon in spoken language , " he came yesterday , the tall boy , that is " . 
Although we have concluded that this i maxim is derived from an interpretive principle  , not all maxims are interpretive rules . One of Grice's quantity maxims , " do not make your contribution more informative than is required " is probably better formulated as MCCawley's least-effort principle  .   5 What is minimized is not the transfer of unrequired information  , but something like the number of lexical items or perhaps the number of syllables  . Speakers are generally lazy . Either formulation , however , is clearly describing speaker behaviour , though to call it a maxim seems a bit inappropriate if MCCawley's version is correct  . 
I note however that as a principle describing speaker behaviour  , this ' maxim ' is available for use by a listener to discover more infer-mation than is overtly encoded  . By studying what a person could have done ( or said ) but did not , one can make more or less sure conjectures as to the cause  ( s ) of avoidance . This maxim seems to be no more than that . It is seldom used by a speaker to transmit more information than is encoded  . 
The other quantity maxim , " make your contribution as informative as is required "  , is in many cases more a maxim for proper behaviour in the social interaction  , question-answer . When one executes the question performance , the addressee is obliged to give an answer , by the rules of the social pact . " Where are you going ? . . . Out " violates this maxim as stated , but is adequate to satisfy the social ritual initiated by the question  . This maxim , then , may be derivative from the meanings of performative elements  , like question , command , & c . They are only linguistic expressions of socio-l inguistic rituals  ; it is the serituals which define the proper behaviour of the participants  , in precisely the same way that performative expressions like " I promise  . . . " or " I pronounce youman & wife " do . 
Grice's quality maxims also , " denot say what you believe to be false "&" do not say that for which you lack adequate evidence "  , can be derived from the ' meaning ' of the declarative or assertion performative  . As this is something like " I warrentee or sign my name to the fact that this sentence  ( the proposition ) is true " , & the speaker opens himself to accepting public criticism if it is wrong  , it is clear why most speakers ( whom we assume would avoid criticism ) will behave according to these quality maxims . 
Thus it appears that most of Grice's conversational maxims derive from other things  , either principles of interpretation or the social ritu-alsexpressed in performatives  . The others , those of manner , are not only vague , but I suspect , also derive from other things . But that is the subject of another study . Our purpose here is the destruction of I maxim , & the repercussions that follow from this . 
I believe that I have shown that at least I conversational maxim is a special case of a general rule for interpretation  . Some other maxims a rederivable from other sources  . This interpretive rule throws considerable doubt on the possibility of a completely generative component to connect semantic structure & syntactic form  . 
It is , then , a challenge to proponents of generative semantics or other non-interpretive theor : - ies of semantics  . 
Indeed , the proper statement of most if not all semantic processes appears to lie in the in-terpretive direction  . The reverse direction , creating syntactic strings out of semantic structures  , is a highly nondeterministic pro--cess , or rather art , often done by trial & error , even by master writers . Its fine execution , high rhetoric , is one of the highest human cap-acities , & is seldom attained except by 5% of the population . These wellknown facts alone ative direction may be very difficult  . The reo-verse direction , which all human beings can do easily , quickly , & with seldom any hesitation or backtracking ( within the limits of the person's vocabulary )  , is at least deterministic for samples of good communication  . It is thus much more liable to formalization . 
Thus I hope to have shown that one more aspect of semantic processing allows & demands formal representation only in the interpretive direction  . The game of speaking appears to be to compose sentences that will be interpreted in the way desired  . For this task , heuristics , but no fail-safe procedures can be given . A sentence may be composed , tested for its meaning in the context , & revised until it bears the desired additional meaning  . The game of understanding is much simpler ; decode lexical items into their meaning components  , & the syntactic structures as well into meaning relations  , & integrate that resultant structure into the semantic structure of the preceeding context by overlapping it as much as possible  . Ambiguities met in this process should be resolved by this maximal overlapping process  , which is the principed ' inter-pretation minimal e . There are of course many constraints about definite marking  , topic & focus marking , scenario-searching , & c . 
As a challenge to proponents of semantic interpretation without a specific semantic representation  , let menote that any & every statement of this procedure requires the use of a notion of " prior semantic context "  . This is , I believe , nothing more or less than a semantic representation  . 
Lastly , I would propose the following speculation based on observation of how we have used the notion of topic  . In the early part of this discussion , we used a notion of topic or subject of a conversation as if we knew what it was  . In my limited experience , however , I have not found it easy to identify quite what the topic is  , for most paragraphs or discussions , except in a vague way . Yet it is a notion much used in prescriptive studies of rhetoric  ( re~ducing semantic content to expression )  . Could it be that this notion is no more than : that whichought not be changed without warning ? That is  , I question whether this notion of topic -- roughly  , what one is talking about--is anything more than a speaker-oriented reflection of the need for semantic overlap  . If so , then it is not much more than the sentential topic in a topic comment syntactic structure  , which is the portion marked to overlap obliga -torily  .   2 This notion of topic of discourse need have little more existance than the successive overlaps found between pairs of successive sentences  . 
Model writing usually does of course have an identifiable topic at any given point  . And to be sure , there are rhetorical figures based on a recurrent topic  . But such figures are not obligatory at all . For ordinary writing or conversation , If indit difficult to say more than , " this paragraph is about X , & Y , & Z ,   . . . " It is thus that If ind the notion of topic or subject of a text suspicious  , that it is perhaps an imaginary concept invented for teaching rhet-oric  . Indeed , we have found nouse here for it , except in the prohibition of rapid changes in topic  , which was really a requirement for some overlap between sentences  . 
References i . Grice , H . P . ' Logic & conversation ' ( 1975 ) in Cole & Morgan ( Ed ) Syntax & Semantics 3: S~eech Acts , Academic Press(N . Y . ) . & (1967) part of William James Lectures . 
2 . Hofmann , Th . R . Descriptions ~ mantique & dy-namique du discours ( 1978 ) th ~ sepourla Sorbonne ( Paris ) j & G . E . T . A ( Grenoble) . 
3 . ---' What some semantic theories can't do ' ( 1979 ) C . L . S . Parasession on the elements,
Univ Chicago ( Chicago).
4 . ---' How to ignore pragmatics & get away with it  , almost'(1980) Canadian Semiotics Assn--~239--
