ENGLISH-JAP ANESE TRANS LATION TH ROUGH CASE -STRUCTURE CONVERSION 
Fujio Nishida , Shinobu Takamatsu and Hiroaki Kuroki
Department of Electrical Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering , University of Osaka Prefecture , 
Sakai , Osaka , 591 JAPAN
This paper reports some trials on mechanical translation from English to Japanese through a case structure constructed on Horn by ~ s verb patt - erns  . Though the general theory of case structures is still at the beginning of study  , it provides partial sentential patterns with rough but reso-nable classification labels  . After determination of schematic dependency relations  , multi-vocal problems for choosing appropriate equivalents are dissolved using subcategories of terms and cases  . 
Case structures of English are transformed into those of Japanese if necessary  , and from those , Japanese sentences are generated by a Japanese grammar  . 
i . Introduction
English and Japanese are fairly different languages from each other  . Accordingly , it will be necessary to make translation based on a kind of deep structures of sentences which determines sentential forms schematically in respective languages  . The case structure used here is a conventional one which is closely related to surface structures  . But it was found that the cases tru-cture is fairly useful by adding some new means in construction and usage of it  . 
The parsing for obtaining the case structure from English sentences is done by category-match-ing on a fairly precise verb pattern given by A  . S . 
Hornby . It dissolves most of multi-syntactic and semantic category problems of words and phrases  , and determines global dependency relations among constituents of English sentences  . 
Subsequently , it determines the app-ropriate Japanese equivalents and postpositions among several candidates by using subcategories of terms and individual prepositional words  . 
The case structure thus obtained con-taines the modal part which represents various characteristics of the predicate part in almost independent form of respe-THING Sctive languages  . It also embeds idioma-tic expressions in itself . 
At the level of the case structure , the difference between both language expressions is not so large  . Transformations of sentential forms such as those of non-livlng subjects and those of principal clauses followed by long subordl-nate ones for readability are processed at this stage without difficulty  . From the case structures transformed into Japanese  , translated sentences are generated under control of various involved-EVENT-parameters  . 
2 . Case structures 2 . 1 Case structures of verbs Many English words have multi-syntactic and sema-ntic categories  . However , these multi-categories of a word in a sentence should be able to be dis-solved in a context of the sentence  , namely , in syntactic and semantic relations to the neighbo-ring words  . A . S . Horn by has given comparatively precise verb patterns  .   3The use of verb patterns at parsing is fairly effective to identify the syntactic categories of words and phrases as well as their syntactic roles such as complements and adverbial infinitives  . 
On the other hand , an efficient introduction of semantic information about words is very important in order to identify their semantic roles and appropriate Japanese equivalents as well as to dissolve the still remaining syntactic ambiguities after a syntactic analysis  . For this purpose , there are several approaches based on the case grammar  .   4 It is still in an incomplete state for general purpose of thorough comprehe-nsi on of sentences  . But if it is used on detai-led syntactic rules of the conventional word usage with the aids of categories of an approp-riate level at various stages of mechanical tra-nslation  , these approaches based on the case gra-mmar will serve fairly well to assign reasonable 
FEXI Stence ? ~ ATT Ribute
PHY Slcal-~POS Session-S Tate ~ S Tate IRE Lation
LMEN Tal ~ PER CEP tual S Tate
LSTate-\]-EMO TiveSTate
NATUR alphenomenon
F Physical TRAN Sfer
PHYSical ~ POS Sessive TRAN Sfer-~ATT Ribute TRANS fer ~BO Dily ACTiona-PRO Duction 
ACTion ~ ACTi?n
LMENTal
ACTion ~ Mental TRAN Sfer PER CEPtual ACTionEMO Tive ACTion 
THIN King ACTion
LIVING object ~ HUM anr ~ ical ~ < ANIM alc ~\[ NON  , LIVING rNATURE
OBJECT ~ object-~PRODUCTS ~ MENTalOBJect
MENTalSUBJect
Fig . l The upper part of the categorical trees.
- -447--semantic roles to various constituents in a sou-rce sentence as well as to choose their appropriate equivalents and sentential forms in the target language  . 
From the above considerations , a case structure is assigned to a sentence based on Horn by's verb patterns  . 
Events of discourse are classified by categories of predicates  . Fig . l shows the upper part of the categorical tree used here  . The categories used for describing case structures are  , in many cases , those appearing at the rightmost in

Semantic roles of constituents are described using case labels shown in Table i  . 
Tablei Case labels
PREDicate , AGent , OBJect , EXPERiencer , RECIPient , SOurce , GOal , INSTRument , DEG ree , COMPAR is on , LO Cation , TIME , RANGE , MANNer , ROLE , CAUSE , RESULT , MEANS , PURPOSE , CONDition , MODal ( FORM , TENSE , ASPECT , AF firmation , MOOD , VOICE ) ,  ? . .
By using several pairs of categories and case- labels chosen from the above the main parts of each event are schematically described and called case frames of events  . The first row of Table 2 is the main case frame of the PTRANS event . 
Them ~ in part of a case structure based on a case frame is transformed into a surface structure using a verb which has a sufficient number of Table  2 Case frame of PTRANS action and assignment of verb patterns 
PRED-AG-
PTRANSTHINGS

VP2ESUBJ-ect


OBJ-GO-
PHYS . OBJ LOCATU


Direct Object
Object links to describe the main part and belongs to an appropriate verb pattern  . Table 2 shows verb patterns used for English description of PTRANS  . 
On the other hand , if a verb pattern is given , pairs of categories and case labels of dependants are almost determined every category of the predicate verb as shown in Table  3  . Hence , if the verb patterns as well as the categories of a verb are recorded in a word dictionary  , the possible case structure can be retrieved at parsing immediately  . Table 4 shows a part of pairs of verb patterns and categories about ~ take ~  . 
Example is hows several examples of case structures obtained by parsing with the aids of Table  4  . 
After determination of a case structure or a dependency relation of a sentence  , there still remain several problems to be solved . 
One of them is the choice of an appropriate equivalent or a subcategory  . The word r take ~ with the verb pattern VP6A and the case structure has fairly many Japanese equivalents  . However , this kind of multi-vocal problems can be dissol -vedin many cases by looking up subcategories of a few designated dependants involved in the case structure and hence in advance by recording them for each equivalent in the word dictionary as shown in Table  4  . 
The other is the choice of an appropriate Japanese postposition corresponding to a case label and a category of a dependant of a verb  . 
Though a good correspondence generally holds between them  , there are some exceptions . For these cases , the postposition is recorded at the item of the associated verb in the dictionary and picked up at parsing  . 
DEG-PURPOSEM ANN
QUANT-ACT-ACT
ADVer-bial
Adjunct to-INF---initive
Table 3 Case structures of verb pattern VPI2A





LOCATU
PHYS . OBJ






PRED-AG-RECIP-OBJ-
POSS'TRANSHUMHUMOBJECT





EVENTU


PARtici-ple

HUM 0

Example i ( i ) VP6A:BO Dily ACTion ~ He took bread . ~( PRED-BOD . ACT : eat , MOD : ( TENSE : past ~ OICE : active) , AG-HUM : he , OBJ-
FOOD : bread ) tHe took a taxif ( PRED-BOD . ACT : get-on , MOD : ( TENSE : past , VOICE : active) , AG-HUM : he , 
OBJ-VEHICLE : a-taxi ) (2) VP 6A : Mental TRANS fer
Cl took his speech . ~( PRED-MTRANS : make-a-record-of,
MOD : ( TENSE : past , VOICE : active),
AG-HUM:I , OBJ-EVENT : his-speech )   ( 3 )   VPI5A : Physical TRANS fer ~ I took the children to the park  . 
( PRED-PTRANS : go-leading , MOD : ( TENSE : past , VOICE : active) , 
AG-HUM:I,OBJ-HUM : the-children,
GO-LOCAT : the-park)--448--
Table 4 A part of the item ' take ' in the word -dictionary Verb patterns Categories Meanings  ( and the designated conditions ) VP6 ABOD . ACTi . get into one's hand(OBJ-PHYS-OBJ)2 . eat(OBJ-FOOD ) 3 . get on ( OBJ-VEHICLE ) PTRANSI . go carrying ( OBJ-NON . LIVING ) 2 . go leading ( OBJ-LIVING ) POSS'TRANSi . receive ( OBJ-COMMODITY ) MTRANSi . make a record of ( OBJ-MENT . OBJ:UEVENT ) VP22 PERCEP . ACT1 . suppose ( OBJ-EVENT )   ( 4 )   VP22 : PERCEP tual ACTion ~ I took her intelligent . ~( PRED-PERCEP . ACT : suppose , MOD : ( TENSE : past , VOICE : active) , EXPER-HUM:I , OBJ-EVENT : ( PRED-ATTR : intelligent , OBJ-HUM : she )) 2 . 2 Optional cases Adverbial phrases and clauses outside verb patt-erns constitute optional cases  . Most of idioma-tic phrase prepositions such as r with respect top and many subordinate conjunctions such as C when ' and C although * determine the case labels and the Japanese postpositions of the following phrases and clauses  . On the other hand , many prepositi-on alphrases which respectively have only one prepositions such as c with ~ and C for ' require the information about frame of discourse for deterimination of the case label and the appropriate Japanese postposition  . These information is the categories of the object term of the phrase and those of main verb of the governor and furthermore  , in some cases , other information about case structure of the verb pattern  . 
For example , an adverbial phrase consisting of a prefixed preposition ~ in ' and an object term with category ~ PHY Sical LO Cation ' can be assigned a case label ' LOC ' or CGOal '  , but the appropriate postposition and case label are determined by referring to the semantic category of the main verb  . 
The necessary information for determining them are recorded each preposition and subordinate conjunction in the word dictionary  . 
2 . 3 Case structures of noun phrases and clauses Case structures of noun phrases and clauses have similar forms to those of sentences as follows  ; t(Kr-Cl:t ~ ,  . . ?  , K6-CL:t , " ? ?  , K~-Cn:t ~)( i ) where t is the main term , ~s are the depend-ants and K~-~ is a pair of a case label and a category  . 
The case structure only consisting of several individual objects and prepositions are determined by referring to the categories of the objects and their syntactic patterns linked with the individual prepositions  . 
If a noun phrase contains some verbal nouns , the case structure is constructed based on the verbalized words of some of them  . 
Example 2(i ) C receip to fhis letter ~
C-EVENT : receive ( PRED-POSS . TRANS :*,
OBJ-PHYS . OBJ:Ietter(OBJ :*,
POSS-HUM : his ) )  ( 2 ) tpunctual arrival of trains ' C-EVENT : arrive ( PRED-PTRANS :* , AG-VEHICLE : trains , MANN-MODAL : punctual ) where C denotes a certain case for the outside governor and the symbol * denotes the prefixed term to the case frame containing it  . 
3. Parsing
First , processing of negative expressions and idioms are described  . They are processed in a somewhat special manner . 
3.1 Negative expressions
Negative expressions of English are fairly different from those of Japanese at the points where negative adjectives or adverbs of English correspond to some negative modifiers and a negative auxiliary verb in Japanese  . Hence , it --449 will be better to express the negative expression of an English sentence in a language-free format the modal part of the case structure and to generate the corresponding Japanese sentence from that a new  . The types of NE Gation are classified to INT ensified TOT al  , TOTal and PAR tial ones . 
At parsing , the value of type is put in the modal part of the case structure together with the terms directly negated except the case when the terms belong to the predicate part of the sentence  . 
Example 3 ( i ) ~ No student can solve the problem ~ ( PRED-THINK . ACT : solve , MOD : ( AF : ( INT . TOT . NEG , student ) , MOOD : can) , AG-HUM:student , OBJ-MENT . OBJ : problem(OBJ :* , DET : def )) (2) ~ Converses are not always true . '(PRED-ATTR:true,MOD:(AF:(PAR'NEG , always )),
OBJ-MENT . OBJ : converses , FRE Quency : always ) Most of terms of modal cases are omitted here and hereafter except important terms for simpli-city  . 
3.2 Idiomatic expressions
For an efficient parsing , idiomatic expressions are processed with some priority  . They are recorded near the heading of the leftmost wnrd among multivocal constituents of the idiom in the word dictionary  . If the idiom has a separated form tl~tzas shown in Eq  . (2), tIsI ? . . s ~ t z ( 2 ) the syntactic and semantic conditions on the strings of words or phrases sl  ,  ?  .   .   , s ~ lying between tl and t 2 are recorded together with the partial case structure and the Japanese equivalent of the idiom in the word dictionary as follows  ; so ~ that ~( DEG-QUALity:so\[ADV erb\]very* , PRED-ATTR : ~ f\[ADJective\] , RESULT ( that\[SUBORDInateCONJunc-tion\] ) -EVENT:~\[SENTence\] )   , where ~ very * ~ denotes the Japanese word equivalent to the English word ~ so ~  . 
When a constituent word . of an idiom is found in a sentence at parsing , it is examined whether ~ or not there exist the rest parts of the idiom in the sentence by reading the sentence a head or by examining the partial case structure already constructed  . If there is , and if the intermediate parts l-- . s ~ satisfies specified conditions by parsing , the partial case structure and the Japanese equivalent of the idiom are added to those already constructed by referring to the word dictionary  . Otherwise , ordinary mode of parsing restarts from term tI
Example 4 ~ The problem was so difficult that he could not solve it  . ~( PRED-ATTR : difficult , OBJ-MENT . OBJ : problem ( OBJ * , DET : def ) , DEG-QUAL:s o(very) , RESULT-EVENT : ( PRED-THINK . ACT : solve , MOD : ( AF : TOT-NEG , MOOD : can) , AG-HUM : he , OBJ-THINGS : it )) 3 . 3 Construction of case structures The rewriting rules used for parsing are descri-bed in a Chomsky-like form as follows ~ 
Vl(K~-C , : tl , IK2-C2:~2)--~V2(K , -CI:tl ) V3(r~z-~Z : J~Z , VP i ) (3)
V3 ( FKz-62:~2'K3-C3:ts'VP ? ) -- ~ V % ( \] K~-~z:$2' VP ) V5 ( K3-C3:t3 )   ( 4 ) where V ( ~= i ~5 ) denotes a nonterminal symbol , ~-~: ~ a sequent of several pai~s of a case label and a category followed by a term  , and VPL a label of a verb pattern . 
Eq . (3 ) represents the type of rewriting rules of a subject and a predicate part  , and Eq . (4) that of a predicate part and a right dependent . 
The parsing is done from left to right in a bottom -upmanner and case structures are const-ructed in the order of the predicate part  , the right part of a verb pattern of the predicate part  , the subject part and the optional adverb-ial parts  . This order is considered to be efficient for restricting possible construction of case structures of many sentences of English because the central structure is generally constructed in this order  . 
At first , the partial case structure of the predicate part is constructed  . If the main verb is a constituent of an idiom , parsing is done in a manner described in the preceding section  . 
Otherwise , all the case structures for the verb patterns are constructed using the word dictionary and a table of case frames  . 
When a main term t6 with a category CL comes to be included in a partial case structure S  ( ~ =1 , 2 ,   . . . , m ) as shown in Fig . 2 , syntactic and categorical consistency is checked . 
If the consistency holds , the term with the category C~L is added to the partial case structure S~with a designated case label K~L  . 
And if the case KiL is designated for dissolving multi-Japanese equivalents of the main verb in the case structure S ~  , appropriate Japanese equivalents are extracted by subcategory matching  . 
Otherwise , if the category C ~& of the main term ti does not match one of any partial case structure S ~  (  ~=1 , 2 ,   . .-, n ), the category C~L is deleted . Similarly , if a partial case structure requires a main term with a designated semantic category and a designated syntactic category or a position and cannot find the term  , the partial case structure is deleted . 
--450 ( SUBJ)(PRED ) tlt2t3


Cln , l,IC ~ 31 i
L-__4 r~-iL--_.J ., Sm . t
I - -_--4 t +
Fig . 2 Construction of case structures
In such a manner , the number of partial case structures decreases or increases as a term is added to partial case structures and  , in many cases , it reduces to unity at the end of parsing . 
4. Case transformation
Some typical differences between English and Japanese sential forms do not require any case transformation  , One of them is negative expressions and processed as already mentioned in section  3  . 1 . The others are oompound noun expressions containing some verbal nouns which are prefered to be verbalized in Japanese sentences  . However , these Japanese sentences are directly generated from the case structure obtained by parsing since the case structure of a compound noun expression is constructed in the same way as a sentence when it contains some verbal nouns as mentioned in section  2  . 3 . 
Hence , the main differences which require some case transformations are those as mentioned as follows  . 
4 . 1 Case transformation for noncausative and state oriented descriptions 
Table 5 Case transformations
Category of Instances of predicate predicate
CAUSE cause , make
ENABLE enable
ENABLE allow , permit
ENABLE prevent
PERCEP tual look
ACTion overlook
PERCEP tual show

EMO Tive surprise
ACTion please
Japanese sentences avoid sential forms in which nonliving objects bring actions such as causative and perceptive ones especially when the actions directly affect human beings and some events associated with them  . In Japanese , these sentential forms are replaced by noncausative sentences or by resulted-state expre -ssions using state-oriented verbs  . This problem is wellknown as the nonliving subject problems and has been fairly well studied by many lingu-ists  .   5 It is shown here that the transformation of the expressions can be processed in terms of case structures in a systematic way  . 
First , the value of the voiee in the modal case of such a sentence is set passive  , because in such a situation a passive form is generally a little bit more acceptable than an active form in Japanese  . Second , depending on the category of the main verb and the agent  , the agent case is renamed to a more appropriate case so that a more natural Japanese sentence is generated  . 
Third , if possible , the equivalent of the predicate part is modified into a more app-ropriate form such as state -oriented descripti-ons  . 
Some examples of this modification are shown in Table  5  . 
Case label Modification of for agent predicate
CAUSEDE Letion
MEANSINTRANS VERB




REPL by ' capable verb * ~
REPL by ~ not + capable verb * ~
INTRANSVERB
SOURCE + capable verb
REPL by
MEANSC understand,~
CAUSE INTRANSVERB--451--
The third column of this table designates some candidates of case labels to be renamed for an agent ? The appropriate case label and postposition are determined by the category of the term to be filled  . 
The fourth column designates the version into which the equivalent of the predicate part is to be modified  . The versions are class-ified into two kinds . One of them is REPL acement of the predicate part by a new intransitive verb ? The other is some modification of a passive Japanese predicate part  . The latter is subdivided into DE Letion of a causative verb  , INT-RAN Sitive VER Balizatiog and addition of the meaning C capable ~ to it  . 
The version is coded and the code is recorded together with a new Japanese intransitive verb for REPL acement in the word dictionary  . In ' Fable 5 , the words with a symbol * denote the equivalent Written in Japanese ? At the execution of case transformation  , the routine designated by the code is called and carries out the necessary processing  . 
Example 5
By case transformation using Table 5, two
English sentences ( i ) C The weight of snow caused the shed to collapse ' and  ( 2 ) ' Our limitted budget did not allow us to start a new project ' are translated to Japanese sentences corresponding to  ( f ) ' Owing to the weight of snow , the shed collapsed ' and ( ~ ) tO wing to our limitted budget , we could not start a new project ~ respectively . 
The main case transformations used here areas follows  ; ( i ) ( PRED-CAUSE : cause , AG-QUANT : weight(D ~) , 

OBJ-PHYS . OBJ:shed(D2))) ---~( PRED-PHYS-ACT : col I apse , OBJ-PHYS . OBJ : shed(Dz ) , CAUSE-QUANT : weight ( DI ) ) where ~ DI := OBJ-QUANT :* , DET : def , 

Dz := OBJ-PHYS ? OBJ :* , DET : def(2) ( PRED-ENABLE : al Iow , MOD : ( TENSE : past , AF:TOT . NEG ) , AG-QUANT : budget(D3) , OBJ-EVENT : ( PRED-ACT : start , AG-HUM : we , OBJ-MENT . ACT:project(D#))) ---> ( PRED-ACT : start , MOD : ( TENSE : past , AF :
TOT-NEG , MOOD:can*), AG-HUM:we,
OBJ-MENT . ACT : projeet(D ~) , CAUSE-QUANT : budget ( D3 ) ) where D 3 := OBJ-QUANT : * , POSS-HUM : we , 

Di := OBJ-MENT . ACT :*, DET : indef,

Beside the above type of case transformations @ here are miscellaneous types of them  . A kind of verbs such as ~ bring ~ requires reference of the category of a term in the object case as well as the one about the recipient or goal case  . 
A sentence containing a main verb such as Cforce ~ is transformed to a more preferable form in Japanese which has a new manner case filled with a term like ' inevitably ~ instead of the main verb  . 
A sentent lalform which includes the verb ~ have ~ as a main verb is transformed to a more Table  6 Miscellaneous case transformations
Category of predicate




Instances of predicate bring take bring take force compel have 
Referred case category

PHYS . LOC

MENT . SUBJ

OBJ-HUMU

Change or addition of case
A D Dition of a
MAN Nercase with ~ inevitably * ~
CHANGE from POSS to EXHI Bition
Modification of predicate
REPL by ~ arrlve ~
REPL by ~ attain * ~

REPL by ~ exist *' --452 -preferable form in Japanese even in the case the POS Sessor is a HUM an unless the expression is like that " a living POSSessor has a PHY Sical OBJ -ect in his hand ~ Some examples are shown in 
Table 6.
ExamPle 6
By case transformation shown in Table 6 , the following three English sentences ( i ) eA few minutes walk brought me the place ~ ( 2 ) ~ The factled him the conclusion ' ( 3 ) ~ We had heavy snow fall last year ~ are translated into Japanese sentences corresponding to  ( f ) ~ By walking for a few minutes , we arrived at the place '(~) ~ From the fact , he attained the conclusion ' ( ~ ) ' There was heavy snowfall last year ' respectively  . 
In sentence ( i ) , the agent with the category PTRANS action is verbalized in construction of the case structure  , and renamed as the case
CMEANS ' by the case transformation.
4 . 2 Case transformation for target-clause ordering This section describes a case transformation by which the order of clauses of a target sentence corresponds to that of a source sentence to some extent in the locative or temporal sense  . 
In general , an English sentence is translated into a Japanese sentence so that dependency relations in surface structure such as those of subordinate clauses to the principal clause do not change so much for preserving the stream of the main subjects included in successive English sentences  . 
However , there are several exceptions . One of them has a comparatively definite type in sentential forms as well as in translation  . A certain kind of English sentences do not correspond to natural Japanese sentences unless the relation of a subordinate clause to the principal one is reversed  . For example , if a resultant state is contained as a dependent in an English sentence which describes an action or a state  , each of them is generally described in Japanese as a dependent in a sentence which describes the result as shown in Example  7  . 
Example 7
Two English sentence stHe a woke to find himself in a stranger oom ' and ~ The problem was so difficult that noman could solve it ~ are translated to Japanese sentences corresponding to ~ When heawoke  , he found himself in a stranger oom ' and ~ Because the problem was so difficult  , noman could solve it ' respectively . 
The first of the above translation is done by the case transformation  ; ( PRED-PERCEP . ACT : a wake , EXPER-HUM : he , RESULT-EVENT : ( PRED-PERCEP , ACT : find , EXPER-HUM : he , OBJ-HUM : hlmself , LOC-PHYS ? LOC : in-room ( D ) ) )  --->  ( PRED-PERCEP-ACT : find , EXPER-HUM : he , 
OBJ-HUM : himself , LOC-PHYS . LOC : in-room(D ) , TIME-INSTANT : when ( PRED-PERCEP , ACT : a wake , EXPER-HUM:he )) where D := OBJ-PHYS . LOC :*, DET : indef,

The Other exceptional translations do not have definite type  , but are desirable for readability of translated sentences when English sentences have some long adjective or adverbial subordinate clauses or phrases after their rather short principal clause  . These subordinate clauses have generally more concrete and essential meaning than the principal clause  . 
In such cases , if translation is done in the ordinary way so that the relation of subordinate clauses to the principal clause remains unchan-ged  , the generated Japanese sentence tends to have a long essential subordinate part followed by a short and rather introductory part of the principal clause  . The Japanese sentences thus obtained will often bring about difficulties in immediate comprehension  . Furthermore , when a part of subordinate clauses is referred in the next sentence  , the immediate identification of the anaphora will not be so easy owing to increase of distance from the referring part as shown in Fig  .  3 . 
In such cases a continuative translation is more preferable  .   6 It assigns a location succ-eeding to the principal clause for an equivalent of the subordinate clause  . The subordinate cla-uses are classified to adverbial clauses and adjective ones  . 
In the former case , the subordinate clause is qualified as a sentence or a coordinate cla-use in a continuative translation  . For a coordinate clause , the coordinate conjunction is preceded which is determined by the ease label of the adverbial clause and more precisely by the preposition or the subordinate conjunction  . 
In the latter case , syntactic roles of a pri-ncipal clause and a relative clause are reversed through a modified term as follows  ; s % ( KI:tI , Kz : t2 ,  ? ?  . , Ka:t ~( KI : sl , ???, K ? : ~ . ,
I ....K~:s~))
I--~(KL:t ~( K ~: tl , Kz:tz, . . . , , K ~ :*) ~ = KI:sI ,  ? ?  , K ~ : s ~ )  5  ) where the double-underlined case means that a thematic fronting and addition of a certain thematic postposition is done for the underli-ned case in generation of a Japanese sentence  --453-- 
Il PRE0 I principal clause referred subordinate clause the next sentence  ( a ) a source sentence referred
I parts of subordinate principal principal clause clause clause  ( b ) a Japanese sentence the next sentence Fig .   3 Order of subordinate and principal clauses from the transformed case structure  . 
Example 8
Two English sentences ' Science deals with sense impressions which are similar to make universal agreement possible ' and ' That all men are all equal describes a proposition to which no sane human being has ever been given his assent ' are translated into Japanese sentences corresponding to ' Sense impressions which science deals with are similar to make universal agreement possible ' and ' To a proposition which describes that all men are all equal no sane human being has ever been given his assent'respectively  . 
A sentence which contains a kind of appositi-ons is also transformed as follows  ; ( K1:tl ,   .  ,  . , KL:it , ?? . , Kk:tk,
K ~: that ( K~:sl, .   . , K~:sz )) --> ( PRED : that ( K~:st, .   .   . , K~:sb ), OBJ : it ( KI:tI, . . . , KL :* ,  ? ?  , K ~ : t ~ ) )  ( 6 ) where K ~ is an apposition case to a case KL . 
Example 9
An English sentence ' We should make it clear that they lead the same conclusion ' is translated to a Japanese sentence corresponding to ' That we should make clear is that they lead the same conclusion '  . 
5. Conclusion
The ease structures obtained by parsing or the transformed case structure are expanded in an appropriate term-order by a Japanese grammar under various control of the involved parameters  . 
Some experimental results show that this approach is effective to dissolve multi-syntac-tic and semantic category problems of words and phrases and efficient to transform case structures  . 
From the viewpoint of more precise and multi-l in gual translation  , it is desirable that more precise , detailed and standardized definition is established for case structures and hierarchic category systems and also their codes are attached to some word dictionaries  . It will not be impossible as far as mechanical translation of technical papers is concerned  . 
References i . Wilks , Y . ~ An artificial intelligence approach to machine translation '  , Schank and Colby ( eds . ) , Computer models of thought and language , San Francisco , Freeman , p . l14,(1973) . 
2 . Vauquois , B . ,'Aspect of mechanical translation in 1979' , GETA , Unlv . Grenoble , (1979) . 
3 . Hornby , A . S . ,'Guide to patterns and usage in English' , second edition , London , Oxford University Press ,  (1975) . 
4 . Bruce , B . ,'Case systems for natural language ' , Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 6,p . 327,(1975) . 
5. Kunihiro , T ., ' Structural semantics ',
Sansei-do , (1976), ( written in Japanese).
6. Bekku , S .,' Study of translation ',
Yashio-shuppan-sha , (1976), ( written in


