HUMANFACTORS ANDLINGUIS TICCONSIDERATIONS :
KEYSTOHIGH-SPEEDCHINESECH ARACTER INPUT
Paul L . King "
Cornell University
Ithaca , NY , USA

With a keyboard and supporting system developed at Cornell University  , input methods used to identify ideographs are adaptations of wellknown schemes  ; innovation is in the addition of automatic machine selection of ambiguously identified characters  . 
The unique feature of the Cornell design is that a certain amount of intelligence has been built into the machine  . This allows an operator to take advantage of the fact that about  60% of Chinese characters in text are paired with other characters to form two-syllable compounds or phrase words  . In speech and writing these pairings eliminate about  95% of the ambiguities created by ambiguously identified syllables  . 

For Chinese character input to computers , a Cornell research team has approached the problem from the point of view of the type of person who would most likely be operating a Chinese electronic type writer  , namely , a commercial Chinese typist with juni or middle school education who would regularly be typing for eight to ten hours per day  . For such a person , a word processing system should be easy to learn , fast ( averaging 50 characters/minute ) , and cap-able of being used for several hours without inducing a high level of fatigue  . 
Of the many input systems that have been proposed in recent years  , one based on Wang Yun-yu's four-corner numbering system has best demonstrated  , in the opinion of the Cornell team , the capability of meeting the criteria of ease of learning  , speed , and low operator fatigue level . For example , operator training is simplified because keystrokes are assigned by " inspection " rather than rote memory  . 
Also , frequently used simplex characters such as particles are given unique identifiers so they can be inserted in text without going through a manual disambiguation process  . Even more significantly , manual disambiguation has been eliminated entirely in nineteen cases out of twenty by attention to ling-uistic affinities of characters  . 
Shape Code
The four-corner system is a simple encoding scheme that native 
Chinese speakers learn in about half an hour . In this system , the peri-pheral forms of all Chinese characters are projected on to ten basic stroke shape classes  ( ~ ,  - -  , ~  , ~ , ~  , ~  ,  ~  ,  7  ,  /~  , ~)  , to which single-digit values are assigned . On the basis that ideograms are basically square in appearance  , four-digit numbers can be read from stroke shapes at the corners  , in the sequence top left , top right , bottom left , bottom right . 
Thus the shape classes describing a character such as ~ are  . ~, J ~, ~, -- . 
I have made two refinements on
Wang's original four-corner system.
First of all , the Cornell code includes elimination of all four -corner null zeros  , so that identifiers for characters vary from one to four digits  . Thus , the identifier for the
Chinese character " --" is simply " ~" , with the three null zerose liminated . 
As applied to the Cornell input system , middle-of-word ( " comma " ) and end ~ of-word ( " print " ) delimiter keys make possible the use of var-iable -length input codes for identification of Chinese characters  . If nullzer os were retained so that all characters were uniformly identified by four -digit numbers  , there would be no need for either " enter " or delimit keys  . However , new flexibility comes through the use of delimiters  . 
Specifically , there are three advantages to the Cornell code : i  ) The variation of identifier size increases the number of identifier categories  , thus somewhat reducing ambiguities . 
2 ) An operator does not need to mentally add null zeros in order to read an identifier from an ideo -gram  ; he identifies only the shapes that are there . 
3 ) On the average it takes fewer --279--key strokes to type the identifier for a given ideogram  . 
On this keyboard , all keys are taught indirect correspondence to stroke shapes  , thus eliminating the need for operators to do any intermediate encoding into numbers  . They do , however , use the number values of the keys in disambiguation  . At any given instant the keyboard is thus being treated either as a collection of stroke shape class identifiers or as a collection of digits  , but not both together . 
The second refinement that the
Cornell team has made in the four-corn-er system is in redefining the number values of some of the shapes in accordance with human factors considerations of keyboard design  . Figure 1 is a schematic representation of the new shape identifier keyboard  . 


Figure 1
Placement of stroke keys is determined by shape association  , frequency of use , and positions in characters . 
"--" and ' ~\" are the Chinese numbers 1 and 8 , and "7" looks like a number 7 , so those three shapes are placed on their respective number keys  . Although no shape-number associations are taught to typists  , placing the above shapes on their associated number keys is an attempt to forest all potential interference across modes  . 
The most frequently used shapes ,  "~" ") " , and "-" , are placed on the middle row of keys , so that an operator does not need to move his fingers from the normal rest position in order to depress those keys  . 
The remaining four shape identifiers are the least frequently used of the ten  . They are placed on the keyboard in the approximate positions where they usually appear in Chinese ideograms  . 

Lack of speed has , until recently , been a major drawback of shape identifiers for Chinese data entry  . In a set of 8 , 000 characters , Wang Yun-yu's code uniquely identifies only 11% of characters . 
Thus , if the four-corner method is used to identify a simplex character  , there is a two-step process that can be invoked in order to isolate the desired character  . The key to speed in typing is to automate this process as often as possible  , which is what we have done . 
The non-automatic aspect is simple . The first step involves looking up all characters described by a particular code  . In an electronic word processor , all the characters meeting a particular shape description are displayed on the CRT  . The operator then implements the second step which consists of picking the desired character out of the displayed list for insertion in text  . 
In the Cornell device , manual two-step disambiguation is a straightforward process  . If the identifier points to only one character , that character is inserted in text . In the event ambiguity remains after initial entry  , the machine gives the operator an audible cue and displays the complete ambiguous list  . Then the operator can make his choice by typing a number indicating which listed character he wants  , followed by the " PRINT " command . That character is printed , and typing continues with the next entry . 
However , the unique feature of the Cornell design is that a certain amount of intelligence has been built into the machine  . This allows an operator to take advantage of the fact that about  60% of Chinese characters in text are paired with other characters to form two-syllable compounds or phrase words  . In speech and writing these pairings eliminate about  95% of the ambiguities created by homophonous syllables  . 
The Cornell input scheme capitalizes on this characteristic of the language by allowing the operator-  280 to type in identifiers for two paired characters in sequence  . A stored dictionary of pairings eliminates most ambiguities that arise in searching for simplex characters  . 
For example , Cornell code--identifies such characters as ~ ,  ~  ,   , and ~ . However , the character @ ( Cornellcode\]/\\]-- ) occurs in a pairing only with the last character in the above list  . Thus , if an operator enters ", J1\)
PRINT " , using " , " as a nonfinal character delimiter and " PRINT " as a final delimiter  , the unique pair i ~ is retrieved immediately from the machine without need for any manual disambiguation  . 
In the event ambiguous pairs are still encountered  , they are disambiguated manually in the manner first described  . In any case , input speed is greatly increased through use of the dictionary  . 
An editor is constantly accessible as part of the system  , so that changes can be made to any part of the text that is being typed at any time  . 
Development and Application
The Cornell design is meeting the criteria envisioned for commercial operators  . Chinese test subjects require only half an hour of instruction to learn the shape keyboard of 
Figure 1 and the means of disambiguating . Thereafter , with about 80 hours of practice , typists are achieving speeds of more than 40 characters/minute with typing error rates approaching  0   ( See Figure 2 )  . Moreover , over a period of a year , test subjects have maintained a high level of motivation with frequent long hours at the keyboard  . 
It is anticipated that mean typing speeds of 5060 characters/minute for uncorrected text will be achieved with further machine development and operator training  . 
Current areas of development are i ) implementation of simplified character sets in the machine along with associated shape identifiers  ,  2 ) isolation of specialized vocabulary into specified sets  , and 3 ) continued testing of Chinese operators in the field  . 
Future development and applications include the following : i  ) The 12-key keyboard can be implemented via a toucht one telephone  , enabling any toucht one telephone to be used as a remote terminal for the electronic word processor  . 
2) Various output applications can be developed , including printer/plotter , type setting , and direct telegraph transmission . 
3 ) Implementation of a chord keyboard can be studied . 

In sum , the Cornellelectronic word processor for Chinese has added machine disambiguation to an old input idea  . By using a " friendly interface , " we have enabled the machine to accept ambiguous input codes  ( four-corner shape identifiers ) and use its limited intelligence to provide the desired output in a one-step process  . With this system , the learning process is greatly simplified for Chinese typists  , rapid typing speeds are achiev-ed within a short period of time  , and operator fatigue is kept at a low level . 
The work on which this paper was based received support from the 
NCR Corporation.
References 1 Herring , J . A . , The Foursquare Dictionary , Taipei : Mei Ya Publications , 
Inc ., 1969, pp . 612.
2 Meguire , Patrick G ., Human
Factors Scientist , NCR Corp . , Personal communication to author , 15
February 1979.

Kiang , Te-yao , " A Natural Way of
Analysis of the Ideograms and its Application to Chinese Language Input System  , " Proceedings of International Computer Symposium 1977  , p .  322 . 
Proceedings of International Computer
Symposium 1977, Vol.i , Taipei:
National Taiwan University.
Proceedings of the First International
Symposium on Computers and Chin-ese Input/Output Systems  , Zai~i :
Academia Sinica , 1973.

Yu , Wellington Chia-pier , " An Input
Encoding Scheme for Chinese
Characters , " Proceedings of International Computer Symposium 1977  . 
8 ?  . ~; ' ~ ? ? ? 4= I ? ?% o ? ~ l = ~ m , ,; " ? ? ? ? ~ =4o Y : 0: . -'<"? F -~?=~-= I='-/?;!=~ . JIK ? o<-i -=
CUMULATIVE HOURIIf EXPERIENCE
NUMBER OF SUI3 JECTS : 30
ITPINGF ~ ATE :
NUMBEREIFTEST5:\]QB
TIMECONST , qNT : 6B . ?17. HOURS.
RSTMPFOIE = q3.?3. CI4RRIMIN
SCAITER = 9. CHRR/MIN
ERR ~ JAFIATE;
NUMBEFIOFTEST 5= 83
TIME CON $ TRNT = I ~. ? 7. HOURS
RSTMPTOrE = I.?2.PERCE_Nr
SCR\]rEfl=\]I.PERCENT 31May 1980
Figure 2 - - 282 -
