THEROLE OF PERCE PTUAL STRATEGIESINTHE PROCESSING 
OFENGLISH RELATIVE CLAUSE STRUCTURES
Gary D . Prideaux
Department of Linguistics
University of Alberta
Edmonton , Alberta
Canada T6G 2H1

In order to assess competing
predictions made by several different perceptual strategies  , an experiment was conducted , using as stimuli English sentences conta ining a variety of types of relative c lauses  . The results indicated that of all the stra tegies investigated  , only Word Order and Interruption playeds ignificant roles in the comprehension of the sentences  . A similar experiment was then conducted us ing dapanese sentences with relative c lauses  , and exactly the same two strategies were found to account for the data  . The Given-New strategy was also found top layan important role in the two languages  . 

Over the past few years , functional considerations have come to play an important role in the empirical study of language comprehension processes  . This functional perspective assumes that hearers employ a set of perceptual  , ~mental ,   2 or cognitive strategies to extract semant ic information directly from surfaces t ructure  . Throughout the psycholinguistic liter a ture  , a wide variety of strategies has been proposed  , some with a syntactic orientation , and others having a semantic or even a di scourse basis  . Moreover , some strategies appear to be language speci fic  , while others are language independent . The term " perceptual " is somewhat in appropr iate in this context since the processes invo lved typically do not refer to perception in even its most general sense  . The more apt term " cognitive " will be used throughout this paper  . 
In order to establish the viability and relative importance of various strateg i es  , both simplex and complex sentences have been investigated experimentally  . English sentences containing relative c lauses provide an especially rich source for experimental study  , since English sanctions relative clause formation on NPs p \] ay inc virtually any grammatical role  , while the relative pronoun ( RP ) can itself play a wide variety of grammatical roles with the relative c lause  ( RC )  . For arEnglish sentence containing a subjec t  , a transitive verb , and a direct object , a relative clause can be formed on either the subject or object NP  . Moreover , within a relative clause containing at ransitive verb  , the relative pronour can itself be subjec to r object  . For such sentence types , the following four structures are permit ted  , assuming a single relative clause per sentence : 
SS a:NP\[RP VNP\]V NP
The man that chased the dog saw the boy.
SO a:NP\[RP NP V\] VNP
The man that the dog chased saw the boy.
OSa:NP VNP\[RP VNP\]
The man saw the boy that chased the dog.
OOa:NPVNP\[RPNPV\]
The man saw the boy that the dog chased.
In the coding to the left of each structure , the first letter represents the grammatical role  ( subject or object ) of the NP on which the relative clause is formed  , while the second letter represents the grammatical role played by the relative pronoun  . The third letter represents the fact that the relative clause is in the active vo ice  . 
A parallel set of structures can be const ructed in which the relative clause is in the passive voice  . These are:
SSp:NP\[RP be Ved by NP\]V NP
The man that was chased by the dog saw the boy.
SOp:NP\[RPNP be Ved by \] VNP
The man that the dog was chased by saw the boy.
OSp:NPVNP\[RP be Ved by NP\] by the dog.
OOp:NP VNP\[RPNP be Ved by\]
The man saw the boy that the dog was chased by.
Several strategies have beery proposed to account for the differential ease of p rocessing of structures containing relat ive clauses  , a ~ though most proposals have concentrated on actives and have not addressed the problem of passive relative clauses  , When these strategies are gathered together , however , it becomes obvious that they make different predictions  . 
The original purpose of the research reported here was to evaluate four important strateg ies bearing on relative clause processing  , in the context of a single experiment with s timuli based on the eight structures di scussed above  . 
The incorporation of passive relative c lauses was an important added dimension  , since it is the passives which serve to dif ferentiate among the strategies  . A related goal was to eliminate from cons ideration those strategies for which empir ical support was not forthcoming  . A final goal was to establish a hierarchy among the relevant strategies  . 
The following cognitive strategies are a ll relevant to the processing of sentences containing relative clauses : 
She Parallel Function ( PF )
Strategy . Comprehension for sentences containing relat ive clauses is facilitated if the relat ive pronoun plays the same grammatical role  ( S or O ) as is played by the modified noun .  8
The Interruption Strategy . A non-interrupted clause is easier to comprehend than an interrupted clause  . ~? The Word Order Strateqy . A clause in normal word order is easier to comprehend than a clause in nonnormal word order  . I ? The Adjacency Strategy . In parsing a noncompound sentence , start from the left and group together as constituents of the same clause two adjacent NPs  ( i . e .   , those not separated by another NP ) and an adjacent verb not already assigned to a clause  . Interpret the first NP as the subject and the second 
NP as the object of the verb . e
The Parallel Function strategy was in it ially proposed  8 to account for English acquisition data , a \] thouqhit was later found 9 to be far less operative for adults . There are twcfundamental problems associated w ith this strategy  . The first is that it is not clear whether parallel function is to be defined on under lying or surface grammatical roles  . In the passives listed above , surface grammatical roles are indicated for a ll NPs  , including relative pronouns . However , each of those could also be interpreted in underlying terms  . For example , the relative pronoun is construed as subjec t in type SSp  , although in deep structure terms it is the object  . Consequently , two distinct versions of the strategy are possible  , one based on surface grammatical relations and the other based on underlying relat ions  . Both versions are tested here . The second problem is conceptual in nature , In particular , the strategy seems to lack any explanatory power  , standing only as an isolated statement of certain results  , without independent motivation . 
In fact , even its relevance for the acquisition data has been challenged  .  7
Both the Word Order and
Interruption strategies were proposed 1? to deal with language acquisition phenomena  , but both can readily be translated into processing terms  , as they have been here . Clearly , neither is language specific , although the Word Order strategy assumes the existence of a " basic " or " normal " word order  , usually assumed to be that of the simple , declarative , affirmative sentence . On quite independent grounds , Givon 4 has argued that the simple , declarative , affirmative sentence type is the most basic in many  , if not all , languages precisely because it is presuppos itionally the least burdened type  . The Word Order strategy predicts that any c lause which deviates from the normal form wil l be more difficult to process than one which does not  . The Interruption strategy predicts that any sentence with an internally embedded  ( interrupting ) clause will be more difficult to process than one with an embedded clause at one extremity or the other  , 
Sheld one noted that the Adjacency strategy is basically an English parsing device which applies blindly across a sentence from lef t to right  , assigning a surface grammatical role to each full NP iten counters  , and leaving relative pronouns unanalyzed . She pointed out that the strategy sometimes fails to assign grammatical roles correct ly  . For example , in an SS a sentence like " The the strategy assigns Theman as subject of chased and the do q as object  . It then skips over that and incorrectly as s igns the doq as subject of saw  , and fina \]\] y specifies the boy a sob ject  . 
Thus , the Adjacency strategy makes one error for type SS a  . She\]don 9 suggests that the number of errors made by the strategy determines the relative process ing difficulty of that type of struc ture  . 
Each strategy generates predictions as to the ease of processing of the eight sentence types  . If both Deep and Surface versions of Para \]\ ] el Function are tested  , five sets of predictions follow . These are listed in Table 1 , where "> " signifies " is easier to comprehend than " or " is more natural than  . " TABLEI . PREDICTION SFORE A CHSTRATEGY
Strateqy
Deep PF
Surface PF
Interruption
Word Order


SS a , SOp , OOa , OSp >

SS a , OO a , SSp , OOp >

OOa , OSa , OSp , OOp >

SS a , OS a , S Sp , OS p >

OSp , OSa >
SS a , OO a , SSp , OOp >

The naturalness data were analyzed on the Un iversity of Alberta's Amdahl  470V/5 computer , using a packaged ( BMD:O8V ) three-way analysis of variance program , with the factors of subjects , syntactic type ( four \] eve\]s : SS , SO , OS ,  00) , and v__gQice ( two 1 eve\]s : active and passive )   . All the main effects were significant ( ~< . 01)  , but more importantly the type by voice in teraction was also high \] y signifi cant  ( F ( 3  , 51)=20 . 48, E < . O01) , with the sentences containing active relat ive clauses judged significantly more natural than those containing passive relative clauses  . Consequently , the two groups were analyzed separately . 
Planned comparisons were carried out on each group to determine which types within each group were judged to be significantly the more natural  . Each of the five strategies was tested within the two groups  . Within the group containing active relative clauses  , the only significant factor was Inter ruption  , with types OOa and OSa judged significant lymore natural than SSa and SO a  ( F ( 3  , 119)=14 , 27  ,  ~< . 001)  . 
None of the Uther strategies was operative in this group  . 
Within the group containing passive relat ive clauses ~ the only significant factor was Word Order  . The types OSp and SSp , which have a relative clause word order of SVO  , were judged significantly easier than types SOp and OOp  , which have relative clause word order of OSV ( L ( 3  , 119)=64 . 60 , ~< . 001)  . 
These results are all summarized in
Table 2.
TABLE 2. ENGLISH NATURALNESS dUDGEMENTS
The English Experiment
In order to test the predictions , a single experiment was conducted using as s timuli  56 sentences in written form , with seven separate tokens ( replications ) of each of the eight types . The lexical items were varied across all the sentences  . The task of the subjects , eighteen native speakers of English , was to evaluate each of the sentences in terms of relative ease of comprehension or natura lness on an ine-point scale  , with "1" the most natural or easiest to understand and "9" the least . Subjects were permitted to work at their own rates and were urged to ignore as far as possib le the actual lexical items  , focusing their attention rather on the forms of the sentences  . 
Voice Naturalness Type Word Order
Active
Passive 1 OSaSVO\[SVO\]
OOaSVO\[OSV\]2SOaS\[OSV\]0V
SSaS\[SVO\]V03 OSpSVO\[SVO\]
SSpS\[SVO\]V04 O OpSVO\[OSV\]
SOpS\[OSV\]VO

The first question to address in interpreting these data is why those sentences containing passive relative c\]a uses were judged significantly more complex and less natural than those containing active  relat4ves   . To unravel 62-this complex issue , it is instructive to examine several fac tors associated with the active/passived istinction  . Within an active clause , the subject of a transitive action verb i s typically  , although not always , interpretable as a semantic agent , while for the passive , it is certain that the subject is not an agent  . In fact , Givon 4 has suggested that an important function of the passive construction is to place a non-agent NP into subject position  . A passive clause therefore deviates from the " normal " case of subject as semantic agent  . Consequently , while both active and passive clauses can be characterized as having a surface SVO word order  , the subject of the passive is non-agent , and the object is the object of the preposi tion  . b_~ . 
Another important difference is that pass ives are far less frequent than actives  . In discussing text counts made over a broad spectrum of genres  , Givon 4 reported that some 90% of the affirmative , declarative sentences were actives , and only 10% were passives . 
Furthermore , only 20% of the latter were " full " passives with overtagentive b ~ phrases  , while 80% were truncated passives . Accordingly , only 2% of affirmative , declarative sentences are " full " pass ives  . Givon 4 suggested the special discourse properties and presuppositions associated with the passive might account for their low f requency  . For example , the subject of a passive clause is not a potential agent  , but is more typically a semantic patient . However , the subjects of declarative sentences tend to contain Given information  , with the objects more likely to be New . This follows from the Given-New strategy ,   2 according to which Given information normal ly precedes New in a sentence  . Some 90% of the subject NPs in active sentences are de finite  , while 93% of the subject NPs of passive sentences are de finite  . 4 In general , then , the subjects of both active and passive sentences tend to be definite and Given  . In active sentences , however , only about 56% of the direct object NPs are definite , and the direct object is far more like ly to contain New information than is the sub ject  . 
Similarly , if there is an overt object ( agentive ) phrase in a passive , it is almost invariably New information . 
Based on these observations , we can extract the following general facts concerning the distinction between active and passive clauses  . Actives are more frequent , have subject as an ent , and object as patient , Furthermore , the subject of an active is typically def inite and Given  , while the object is less likely to be def inite and more likely to be New informat ion  , The passive , on the other hand , has a definite , non-agentive , typically Given subject and if it has an object at all  , the object is agent , typically definite , and New . The differences are clearly signalled by the word order and morphological factors associated with the passive  . Consequently , it would appear that the global character is tic of voice has associated with it a host of syntactic  , semantic , and discourse properties , with the passive being by far the more " marked " and less expected form  . 
Once the two groups have been separated by voice , we can examine the factors within each group which give rise to further subgroupings  . Within the actives , the Interruption strategy separates the four groups into two  , demonstrating that comprehension is more di fficult when a relative clause inter rupts the main clause  . Within the passives , Word Order was the only significant factor : a passive relative clause with SVO word order was judged easier to comprehend than one with an OSV word order  . Interruption played no role among the subgroupings of the passives  . 
The experiment demonstrated the importance of In terruption and Word Order  , while neither version of Parallel
Function nor Adjacency emerged assign if i cant  . However , the two operative strategies are not equal ly salient  , and in particular , it appears that Interruption is important only for the active structures  , in which the normal expectation of subject as agent is met  . 
For the nonnormal ( passive ~ cases , Word Order is very important . Consequently , it appears that Word Order must be satisfied before Interruption can be called in top lay  . 
At this point , something further must be said about the consequences of the Given-New strategy with in relative clauses  . Since it has an antecedent , a relative pronoun typically represents Given information  . Consequently , in are . \] ative clause with the structure \[ RP VNP\]  , the relative pronoun is subject and is in the position associated with Given info rmation  . For relative clause structures of the form \[ RPNPV\]  , the relative pronoun is again the first NP in the clause  , and satisfies the Given Given RP which can be successfully deleted  . However , the subject NP , which is also typically Given informat ion  , now finds itself in the New position , according to the Given-New strategy . 
Consequently , this type of relative clause structure , with word order OSV , might be expected to be somewhat less natural in terms of the Given-New strategy  , than the former , with the word order SVO . No such significant difference was found in these data  , although such a result was reported by Lynkowsky  , 6 who conducted a similar experiment , but used only active relative clauses . In her experiment , there was no deviation from the expected , normal case of subject as potential agent , and consequently it would be expected that the dominant Word Order strategy would be the fi rst strategy to be called into operat ion  . 
Within the passive group , the issue is somewhat more complex . The passive relative clauses can have one of two forms  , either\[RP be Ved by NP\] , with the word order of SVO , or \[ RPNP be Ved by \] , with an OSV word order . In both cases , the normal expectation of subject as agent is violated  . The results of the experiment indicate that i t is the former  , SVO , passives which are judged far more natural than the latter  , OSV structures . In terms of the Given-New strategy , this makes a great deal of sense . In the SVO case , the relative proqoun appears to be Given for two reasons : it is a subject and it is are lative pronoun  . The agentive NP object is precisely where New information should be  . In the OSV case , however , the relative pronoun should be Given since i t is a relative pronoun  , but it should be New since it is the object of the preposition  . .~ . 
Furthermore , the subject NP is in the New position , but as subject it should be Given . Consequently , the Given-New strategy seems to be working against itself in the passive relative clauses with OSV word order  , 
One final aspect of the Given-New factor must a lso be mentioned  . 
Typically , definite NPs are construed as Given info rmation  . In the stimuli for the present experiment , however , a 11 NPs were definite . If a relative clause is formed on a defin ite NP  , there may be a tendency to view the relative c lause as adding to the definiteness or speci ficity of the NP  , thereby making it even more " Given , " regardless of where it is placed in the sentence  . 
Consequently , within the active group , the Given-New strategy might be viewed as a " force  ''3 favoring structures with the relative c lauses on the subject NP  , while Interruption would be a force favor ing structures with relative clauses on object NPs  . Accordingly , these two forces are in competition within the actives  . In the passive group , however , the Word Order strategy favors relative c lauses of the form SVO  , and the Given-New strategy also favors such structures  . Here , the two strategies work together . 
The Japanese Experiment
At this point , brief mention will be made of a Japanese experiment similar to the one reported above  , but focusing only on active relative c lauses  , The same methodology was employed , with 24 native speakers of Japanese serving as subjec ts  . The stimuli were twelve sentences , with three replications of four types . Japanese is an SOY language , and the relative clause precedes the modif ied NP  . Furthermore , Japanese relative clauses do not contain re lative pronouns  , but rather exhibit deletion of the re\] ativized NP  . The following four structures were tested  : 



O 0 \[NP+oV\]NP+gaNP+o Vokaneomitsuketao toko gash are iomoratt a money OM found man SM reward OM received " The man who found the money received the reward  . "\[ NP+ga V\] NP+ga NP + oV ko domo ga karakatta inugate ok and a child SM teased dogSMh and OM bit " The dog that the child teased bit  ( his ) hand . "
NP+ga\[NP+oV\]NP+oVshoojog as a naotabeta neroot at a it a girl SM fish OMatecatOM spanked  . 
" The girls panked the cat that ate the fish .  "
NP+ga\[NP?gaV\]NP+oV gakuseigakyoojugaka it a honoyond a student SM professor SM wrote book 
OM read " The student read the book that the pro fessor wrote  .  "
The data were analyzed on the
University of Alberta's Amdah \] 470V/6 computer , using the BMD:O8V two-way analysis of variance program with subject  . s and types ( four levels : SS , SO,
OS , 00) as factors . The only 115 . 54, ~<,001)  . Planned comparisons were used to test for each of the strategies except for the English- specific Adjacency strategy  . 
The first comparison indicated that types SS and OS were significantly easier and more natural than types SO and  O0   ( F ( 3  , 69)=318 . 27 , ~< . 001)  . There was no sTg nificant difference between  O0 and SO , although type SS was significantly easie r than OS  ( L ( 3  , 69)=28 . 25 , ~< . 001)  . These results are represented in Table 3 . 
TABLE3, JAPANESENATURALNESS dUDGEMENTS
Naturalness Type Word Order 1 ss\ [0v \] s 0 v 2 OSS\[OV\]OV 3   O0 S\[SV\]OV s0 \[ sv\] 0 v The factor separating the first two types from the second pair is clearly 
Word Order : sentences containing relative c lauses with OV word order are preferred over those containing relative clauses with the SV word order  . 
Moreover , within the pair containing OV relative clauses  , Interruption determined that the non-inter rupted SS type was preferred over the inter rupted OS type  . Consequently , indapanese , as in English , the Word Order strategy is the more important of the two  , with Interruption only called into operation when the normal word order is met  , Inherstudy of the acquisition of compound and complex sentences in dapanese  , Kawashima 5 found that left-branching structures were mastered before those containing center embeddings  , thus supporting Interruption as the major factor in the acquisition of relative c lauses  . 
Only speculation can be offered as to why the OV word order is preferred to the SV  . dapanese , like English , appears to obey the Given-New strategy , but unlike English ; Japanese permits the omission of an " understood "  ( e . g .   , Given ) NP , making sentences without overt subjects qui te common  . Within relative clauses , the Given , relativized NP is omitted . But since Given subjects may also be omit ted  , it follows that the OV clause type would be more natural and common than the SV type when the verb is transitive  . In short , the Japanese data support the cross-linguis tic viability of the Word Order  , Interruption , and
Given-New strategies.
Conclusions
Originally , this research was undertaken in an attempt to sort out competing cognitive strategies relevant to the processing of complex sentences with relative clauses  . That goal was achieved , and the importance of both
Word Order and Interruption was demonstrated , while both versions of Parallel Function and Adjacency were rejected  . However , other strategies were also found to be operable  . The semantic strategy which associates sub ject with agent is in fact a version of Word Order  . In addition , and perhaps most importantly , the Given-New strategy was found to be of extreme importance  , both for English and for Japanese . 
Finally , a hierarchy of strategies has suggest edit self  . The Given-New strategy is obviously of g reat importance for sentences in context  , and although the stimuli used in the two s tudies reported here were presented in isola tion  , the strategy still seems to be operative . Furthermore , within a particular sentence , it appears that Word Order criteria must be satisfied before Interruption is employed  . 
There are still numerous loose ends to be investigated  . The definiteness of NPs must be varied exper imentally to tighten up the tentative suggest ions concerning the Givenness of definite NPs  ; sentences must be carefully studied in contexts  ; text counts should be undertakento establish the proportion of relative clauses and the irpositions  , in accordance with such factors as defini teness  , Interruption , and the Given-New strategy . The present study has only scratched the sur face  , but at least the results are encouraging in that they accord we\]\]across two very diffe rent languages  , providing a start on the problem of the in teraction of cognitive strategies  . 

I am grateful to Wm . J . Baker for his comments and advice in matters statistical  , to Matthew S . Dryer for his insightful metaphor of competing strategies as " forces  , " and to Michiko Kawashima for collecting the dapanese data  . I am responsible for all errors . 
This manuscript was formatted on the Univers ity of Alberta " Text form " system  . 


I . Bever , T . G . The cognitive basis for linguistics t ructures  . Ind , R . Hayes ( Ed . ), Coqnition and the development o_ . f_language . New York : John
Wiley & Sons , 1970, 279-352.
2. Clark , H.H ., & Clark , E.V.
Psychology and language : An . introduction t_9" psycholinquistics . New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich , 1977.
3 . Dryer , M , S . The positional tendencies of sential noun phrases in universal grammar  . Canadian Journal of
Linguistics , forthcoming.
4. Givon , T . O . ._O . understanding qramrnar.
New York : Academic Press , 1979.
5. Kawashima , M . The acquisition o_.f.
Japanese rela . tive clauses . Unpublished M . Sc . Thesis , University of Alberta , 1980 . 
6 . Lyn Kows Ky , P . E . The development o . j_ relative clauses : Comprehension strateg iesi__  . n English and U Krainian . 
Unpublished Ph.D . dissertation,
University of Alberta , 1980.
7 . Prideaux , G . D . The acquisition of re\]ative clauses : A functional analysis  . 
Canadi and ournalo . j . Linguistics , 19?9, 24, 25"40 . 
8 . Sheldon , A . The role of parallel function in the acquis ition of relative clauses in English  . dournal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior ,  1974 ,  13 ,  272-281 . 
9 . Sheldon , A . On strategies for processing relative clauses : A comparison of children and adul ts  . 
Journal of Psycholinquistic Research , 1977i6 ,  305-318 . 
10, Slobin , D . I . Cognitive prerequisites for the development of language  . In C . A . Ferguson & D . I . Slobin ( Eds . ), Studies of child \] an quaqe development . New York : Holt,
Rinehart & Winston , 1973, 175-208.

