LINGUISTIC MODEL BASED ON THEGENERATIVE TO POLOGICAL INFOR MATION SPACE 
Seiichi Uchinami and Yoshikazu Tezuka
Faculty of Engineering , Osaka University
Yamada-Kami , Suita , Osaka , 565 JAPAN
Based on the st ~ uctuzL ~ m , we propose a generative semantic model which has a topological information space generative grammar as basic rules  . In this model a semantic map which is called a topological information space  , is generated by the grammar , and the space can express implications and sim-il arities among concepts  . In the syntax , a syntactic generative grammar is defined based on the space grammar  , and a mapping from the map to the language is defined  . The mapping is composed of two mappings : one is a meaning affix mapping ~ which maps a conceptual area in the space to a token in the language  , and the other is an operator mapping ~ which maps a generative rule in semantics to a rewriting rule in syntax  . By these mappings , a derivation tree in semantics is mapped to a derivation tree in syntax  , and vice versa . 
An algebraic system on the space is defined , and an algebraic system on the sentences is derived by the  ( ~ , ~)- mappings . English will be analyzed according to this model and the algebraic systems on them  . 
Finally an information processing model is described based on the model  . 
The information processing in a natural language is carried out in the fol-lowing steps : recognizing the inputs  , parsing , interpreting , deducing , updating them , and outputting . These processes are discussed in details . 
I . INTRODUCTION
Linguistics has been investigated from three aspects : syntax  , semantics , and pragmatics . 
As for syntax , many studies have been done since Chomsky presented a genera-tive grammar based on strueturalism  , and splended accomplishments have been made . 
As for semantics , some reports have been published . In the standard theory and the Case grammar , syntactic rules are considered to be power fulenough to describe and manage meanings  , but it is insufficient to describe mean ings com-pletely with the discrete and branching rules  , because meanings have continuous properties . 
In the stratificational grammar and the generative semantics  , semantic components seem to be more important than in the standard theory  , because semantic rules are used basically . But they have the similar defects as thes t and ard theory  , because these rules are discrete and branch in gones  . ' Lakoff and McCawley's generative semant ics model are not enough to des-cribe mean ings  , because their semantic rules are treated w it h the same form of syntax  . 
In general , their notations adopt classifications based on the categories or binary class if i cations  . So it has the following weak points : lack of expressive power of similarity and di stance  , and ordering of property value of concepts . 
We have proposed to adopt a highdimensional semantic map  ( i . e . a topolo-gieal information space complement ing for these defects  . 
It is said that when one wants to express one ' sintention  , not a sentence but a concept is formed in his brain at first  , then it is translated into a sen-tential form  , feeding back the differ-ence between the concept and the sentence translated  , and at last it is ex-pressed as a speech or a writing  . 
Therefore we have proposed the model that the concept which we want to utter is formed at first as a specified area in the semant ic information space  , next it is transformed into a phrase-marker ( P-marker ) in the deep structure , and at last it is transformed in the sentential form in the surface structure being fed-back in each stage  . 
2. OUTLINEOF
THELINGUISTICACTIVITY MODEL
There are two ways in describing meanings : one is connotational semantics  ; in this case meanings of sentences in a language A are described by sentences in a language B  , for example , English is translated into Japanese . 
The other is the operational semantics ; in programming language , input data are computed and the results are output  . 
So the meanings of a programming lan-guage i sexpressed as an operator that prescribe input -output relation  . 
In our model these two semantics are cons idered as follows  . As for the con-notational semantics , we take the top ol-ogical information space as the language that describes meanings  . 
In this model we express the meanings of a natural language in the following way : we locate the concepts in the se-mantic map  , i . e . the topological infor-mation space as fo llows  ; if a concept A implies a concept B , we assign them as the area B contains the area A  , and if a similarity ( or distance ) between a concept A and B is greater than as imilari-ty  ( or distance ) between a concept A and ther ) the area Athan C . 
As for the operational semantics , there are two kinds of operators . One is responces or reactions against there -ceived message  , the other is updatings or rearrangements of the memory  . The for-mer is carried out by responding w it haspeech  , writing , or actions . The latter is carried out by updating the database  . 
The model has four description levels : ( i ) Expression level ( utterances , writings , and actions )   ( 2  ) Surface level ( sentences )   ( 3  ) Deep level ( phrase-markers )   ( 4  ) Semantic level ( information space )  . 
In the expression level , one's inten-tion is expressed through one ' sorgans  . 
The surface level is the level of the language which we use in the daily life  , and the set of sentences compose ele-ments in this level  . 
In the deep level , each element is a generator of a surface description  , and is in the form of P-marker , i . e . so called a derivation tree . 
In the semantic level , the concept is expressed as an area or a file of areas in the information space  , where the information space is something li kea semantic map  , and is made up of the neighbourhood system or the metric space  , and has topological properties , which can express distances , similarities and inclusions so on . 
In the functional point of view , the information space is composed of a meaning subspace and an estimating subspace  , where the meaning subspace expresses topologica l relations among concepts  , the estimating subspace expresses vari-ouses timated yalues in the process of management  . The estimating subspace has an activity ax is  , an occurrence proba-bility axis and so on . 
There are three levels of processing on them as follows:  ( I ) Expression processing ( expression level ? ~ surface level ~ )  ,   ( 2  ) Syntactic processing ( surface level ? ~ deep level ~ )  ,   ( 3  ) Semantic processing ( deep level ? ? semantic level ~ )  . 
The expression processing is to utter , write or act , and in the opposite direction to recognize the received signs  . The syntactic processing is map-pings from the deep level to the surface level and vice versa  , in other words , mappings from P-markers to the sentences and the mappings among P-markers  . 
A syntactic structure consists of two levele lements and the algebraic struc-tures on them  . 
The semantic processing is mappings from the semantic level to the deep level and vice versa  , and mappings among the semantic level , in other words map-pings from domains in the information space to P-markers and vice versa  , and the mappings among domains in the infor- mation space  . A semantic structure con-sists of two level elements and the algebraic structures on them  . 
The correspondence between the seman-tics t ructure and the syntactic struc-ture is as follows  . There are two map-pings which connect two st ructures  , one is a meaning affix mapping ~ that maps an area in the space to a word in the syntactic g rammar  , the other is an oper-ator mapping ~ that maps an operator on the space to a production ru le in the syntactic grammar  . 
The algebra on the syntactic and the semantic structure are defined  . 
3. TO POLOGICAL INFOR MATION SPACE
In the syntax-generative grammar , it is of no use to introduce relations among sentences  , because there are no semantic relations among sentences which are generated by the grammar  . But in the semantic-generative grammar , not only elements but also a topology over them should be generated  . Because interpret-ing meanings of sentences , distances , similarities and inclusions among concepts which are expressed by points or a reas  , are very important . 
In an algebraic point of view , a to-pological space is defined by an ordered pair  ( X , T ) , where X is a support ( set of points ) , and T is a topology on X . 
The whole topological space is gener-ated as a dictionary  , or a thesaurus , or the universe of knowledge . In conversa-tion with someone or a descrip tion of one's concept  , a particular area is pointed out to communicate one's inten-tion with others  . Then we need two kinds of production rules : one is the universe generative rules which generate the whole topological space  , i . e . elements set and a topology on them , and the other is the utterance generative ru les which generate distinct conceptual a reas  . 
In terms of sorts of topology , we investigated topology-types which are required to express properties of meaning so fabout one thousand Chinese characters for o rdinary use  . Following types of topology are listed up  ; I ) Linear number axis . In this type , a property value is expressed in a numeri- calvalue such as an integer or a real number  , e . g . a weight axis : 150 Ibs . 
2) Cyclic number axis . Property values are expressed in numerical values in a given closed interval  , and both endpoints are identified , i . e . a number sequence is defined cyclically , e . g . a time axis ; one o'clock , twoo'clock ,   . .
twelveo ' clock , one o'clock , ...
3) Ordinal axis . Property values cannot be expressed in numer ical expression  ,  -  -94 -? but property values are lined up in order along its strength and weakness  , e . g . a sensation of warm thax is ; cold cool , comfortable , warm , hot , heated . 
4) Cyclic ordinal axis . Property values are lined up in order cycli cally  , for example , a season axis ; spring , summer , autumn , winter , spring ,   .   .   . 
5) More general topology . Property values cannot be expressed in type i )  -4  )   , and are given weaker topology as near-and - far relations or similarity relations among elements  , for example , chromaticity diagram on color ; yellow , red , blue , green , etc . 
6) Simple set . There is no topology on elements , so only a medley of elements constitutes a set  , e . g . a set of terms which expresses aspects or un its  . 
We ' ll formalize the model that can cover a ll sorts of topology listed above  . 
A topological information space generative grammar  ( TISG ) consists of three levels of production ru les which are restricted in the rewrit ing order  . 
Def . l Space Constitution Grammar : Gi G1 =< VNi'V Ti'Pl' S1  >  ( i ) where Vi = VNi UV Ti , VN i ~ V T i = ~(2)
D = ?,#, I(3)
LA(v,D ) = ( a ~)* ~ I a , SgV,~D (4)
V \] is a finite set ( vocabulary) , VN\]arid V ~ 1 are called a nonterminal vocEDu-lary , ~terminal vocabulary respectively . 
S . is a subset of VNi ( initial vocabulary ) , and Pi is a T1nite set of produc-tion rules ( rewriting rules ) of the form : P1:A ? ~ ( 5 ) where Ae VNi ' ~ eLA ( Vi , D) . 
D is a space constitutor set , and consists of direct product : ? , connected sum : # , and direct sum : I ?
Def . 2 Space Proper ty Grammar : G2   ~2  = <  VN2  '  VT2  '  P2  '  $2  >  ( 6  ) where V2 = VN2UVT2 ,   VN2nVT2 = property production rule P2 is a finite set of production rules of the form : 
P2:A ? ~ , where A e VN 2 , (7) ga ,  ~  , ca , aa-l , aba-lb-I , abe-1 , a , be V ~ .   ( 8  ) A grammar G2 generates properties of subspaces . Sorts of properties are as fol-iOWS : ( i ) Lineax is ( a )   ( ii ) Cyclicaxis ( a )   ( Jii ) Sphere axis ( Sp here )   ( aa-1 )   ( iv ) Projective axis ( aa )   ( Projective plane )   ( v ) To rusaxis ( Torus )   ( aba-lb " 1 )   ( vi ) Boundary axis ( abe-1 )   ( Surface with boundary ) where type ( i d )  -  ( vi ) are of polyhedral forms of manifold . 
Def . 3 Topology Prescription Grammar : G3
G3=<VN3'VT3'P3'S3> ( 9  ) where V3 = VN3UVT3 , VN3 ~ VT3 = P3 consists of two parts , one is P ^_ which generates the universe , the ~ her is P ~ A which generates a specified are a top ~ int out a concept  . 
P3T : A ? ~ ( i0 ) e topological spaces of each types
P3A : A*~ ( ii )  6  ( areas of topological spaces G3 generates the topology of each subspace , then following types of topolo-gies are adopted adaptively : To  , Ti , T2 , R , T3 , CR , T , N , T 4 , T  ~ , T , Compact , Metric , Uniform , Separable V and so on . 
Def .4 The Topological Information
Space Generative Grammar : GI
GI=<G1 , G2 , G3> , (12) where G1 , G2 and G3 are subgrammars defined above . And the relations among three levels are as follows: 
S1=S,S2=VT i,S3 = VT 2
Def . 5 The Topological Information
Space : II = I(Gi ) (13)
The topological information space generated by GT is written as eq  . (13) Def . 6 The Syntax Generative Grammar : ' G
G s = < VN , VT , R , S > ( 14 ) s where S is an initial vocabulary , and subset of V .   , R is a set of phrase structurer ~ writing rules  . 
The other side V is divided into two : V = VU V a  , where V is significant voca-bulary , a Yid V Gisg ~ ammatical vocabulary . 
An intersectlon of V with V ~ is not always null  . PA generation tree , i . e . derivation tree of a sentence is called a P  . marker ( phrase marker ) , and the set of all P-markers generated by G is written as P = P  ( G )   . The terminal string extracted from the t reetop of the P-marker is called a sentence  , and the set of all sentences generated by G , is written as L(G ) , and is called the language gene-rated from the grammar G  . 
The P-marker sets and the set of all sub-P- markers gotten by decomposing P are called ~ niverse of P-markers  , and written as P . 
Def . 7 The Semant ic A lgebra ic System:~i The semant ic a lgebra ic systen ~ ~ I is de f ined as ~ I = < I  , II , EI > ( 15 ) where I is the information space defined by GT , and IT , ET are the interior and exte Pior operators on I respectively  . 
Generally speaking interior operators are funct lons II  ( n ~ 2 )  , and exterior operators are functions I?2?I , where is an exterior operator . 
Def . 8 The Syntact i c A lgebra ic S~tem:~s The syntact icalge braic system is defined as ~ s = < P ' Is'Es >  ( 16 ) where ~ is a set of P-markers generated by G , and I and E are the interior and exterior op ~ rators Son ~  . 

Def . 9 The meaning affix mapping : f ,   ( 17 ) ~': D ? Vp where D is the set of all areas in the space I  . @' assigns an area ( a concept in semantic map ) to a token or string of tokens ( words ) in the syntactic level . We interprete a sentence through used-rewrit ing rules  , so in order to avoid ambiguity we extend V ? to P  , i . e . 
: D?PP (18)
Def . lO The operator mapping : : OI~Os ( 19 ) where 01 = PiU~uIiUEI ( 20 ) 
Os = RUVGUIsUEs ( 21 ) assigns the semantic operator in the semantic space to the syntactic operator in the syntax  . 
4. THESEM ANTICAL GEBRAIC SYSTEM
INENGLISH
We will show the semantic algebraic system in English briefly  . Fig . l shows the outline of GI . 
\[\]\] The organization of the support in E  . n . gl . ish . --% o . rganization of the . meaning subs . p . ac . e . - - - The mean ' ing subspace is used to ex-p ress the topology among concepts  . It consists of three subspaces : intel lec-tual  , feeling , and ordering subspaces . 
The intellectual subspace is a field to represent  , state and judge . 
The feeling subspace is a field to ex-p ressout actions  , emotions and senses . 
The ordering subspace is a field to express the ordering of events or the informations  . ~( I ) The intellectuals . u . bspace In Engl'ish there are four typical intellectual subspaces : in ouns or noun phrases  , 2 adjectives or adjec ~ vephrases , 3 adverbs , 4 verbs . 
These four subspaces are written as IN , IA , ID , and Iv respectively . 
They constitute the support of the system , but some of adverbs correspond to the operators  , for example , " very " . 
These four subspaces are composed to the higher level by nesting each other  . 
(2) The feeling subspace
The feeling subspace is divided into three subspaces : action driving  , emo-tional and sense subspaces . 
( i ) The action driving subspace
This subspace expresses forms of actions and act ion-driving potentials  . 
The forms of actions are imperative , prohibition , request , hope , desire , petition , question , doubt , obligation , permission , causative , voluntary and intention so on . 
This subspace is divided into the reply and the action subspaces  , in the functional point of view . The reply subspace expresses " answer by language  "  , and the action subpace expresses the actions except utterance  , e . g . eat . 
The words are mapped from the areas in the space by the meaning affix map-ping @ and the operator mapping ~ as follows : if one rece ives words which arouse actions  , one finds form of actions in this subspace by ~-~ and finds driving potentials by ~- ~  . 
The meaning affix mapping ~ is defined on the following types of words : verbs which arouse actions  ( for example , ask , order etc .  )  , imperative and interroga-tive forms of verbs  , and auxiliary verbs of prohibition and wish so on  . 
The meaning affix mapping designates only " forms of actions aroused "  , and " the content of actions " is designated by the area in I  . For example , impera-tive sentence " V Read " is managed as follows  . The form of action is desig-nated " or d in ary imperative "  , and a action " to read " is designated as a corresponding area in I subspace  . 
? V The operator mapping ~ has following funct ions  , As for verbs listed above , the aroused degree of the action is des ignated  . And if there is an adverb that modifies a verb  , and its adverb expresses the degree , $ is designated by the degree expressed by the adverb  , for example , a word " abs0 \] ute\]y " designates " extreme " degree . 
( ii ) The emotional subspace
The emotional subspace is used to expressemot ions of a speaker and a hearer  , and to modify a criterion level of decis ion of taking action  , and this subspace does not a rouse immediate ac tions  . 
i < information space > ? < meamings s > . < estimating ss > Pl < meaning subspace >? < intel lectuals s >  . < feelings s > . < orderings s > < estimating subspace >? < rel iability ax >  . < activity ax > . < occurrence probabil Ltyax > . <  .   . > .   . .
< i ~ teIiectu ~ subspace >+ < nouns s > < adjectives s > l < adverbs s > I < verbs s > < feeling subspace >? < action d ~ ivings s >  . < emotio ~ lss > . < sensess > < action driving subspace >+ < reply s s >  . < actions s > < emotional subspace >? < state of emotions ss >  . < degree of emotions ss > < ordering subspace >? < events orderings s >  . < cau ~ ality orderings s > < events ordering subspace >? < seasons > < months > l < times > I  <   .   .   . 71  .   .   . 
p2: < reliability axis > + I..
< seasons > ? S, . . ' . i where s s means " subspace " , and axmeans " axis ") I ? ? , ( O<x<l)I?\[0 ,  \ ] \ ]  ,   . . .   P3A  : $ ?  P3T  :  5 + < spring > < samm ~ z > < autumn > < wim Z ~> < s p~ing > l<~m~>l<a~tamn>l<wi ~> Fig  . \] A part of the rewriting ru\]es Jn the information space generative grammar  96-Th is subspace is divided into two : the state of emotions and the degree of emotion's subspaces  . 
Usually the area is computed both on the sub ject and the indirect object  . 
Sorts of emotions are joy , anger , pity , fear , love , hatred and sadness etc . 
is computed by adjectives , verbs and nouns that express emotions , and interjections . And ~ is determined by the degree of words li sted above  , ad-verbs , and emphasizing styles . 
( ~ i ) The sense subspace
Kinds of senses are these nes of sight , hearing , smell , taste , touch , and internal organs . These senses are a woke by direct excitat ions and by particular words in convers at ion  . In case of words , there are two types as follows : I The words which designate a certain sense area in the space  , for example , dazzling , hungry . These words are mapped by @- i into the sense subspace  . 
2 The words wh ich ac t ivate the poten-t ia l o f a certain area in the sense esti-mating subspace  . For example , a word " rain " arouses the sense of cold and chilly in Japan  . The sense potential is raised by these words  , and the degree is computed by ~- i The stimul i from the five organs of sense are gained by actual experiences  , but the stimuliby words request to image the same experience as a speaker  . 
(3) Theo.rd . ering subspace
This subspace expresses ordering series of domains in time or in logic  . 
Usually the ordering axis is a realtime ax is of  (  -~  , ~)  , and is divided into three areas : past , present , and future . 
But present is the relative value , and has meaning of only a time base . 
( i ) Ordering the events
This designates the occurrence time of the contents described in the inte-llectual and feeling subspaces  . 
There are two kinds of time assign-ment , one is simple : past , present , or future . The other is composite : perfect , simultaneous , or delay . The composite assignment designates order ing in time or in logic among clauses or events  . 
( ii ) Ordering the causality
As for logic , input clauses are classified into two groups : one is a group of assumption or causes  , the other is a group of conclusion or ef fects  . And a suitable causality type is assigned to each clause  . 
\[2\]OPERATORSINENGLISH ( i ) The intelle ' ctual subspace ( i ) The exterior operators The ex-terior operators modify or restrict the conceptual area in a specified axis  , and there are two types as follows : the value -shift type and the quantifier type  . 
For example , letu ~ Vpf , v ~ VG ? , and d : an area in the space , w : exterior operator on the space , if ~-1(u ) = d and ~-1(v ) = ~ , then the area corresponding to a phrase " uv " is formed by " md " in the space  . 
There are four types in the exterior operators as follows:  ( a ) Restricting to limit , e . g . very ( b ) Settlement of range , ( i ) Extension of range , e . g . all (2) Reduction of range , e . g . small ( c ) Inversion of range , e . g . unpresant ( d ) Shift or limit the value of reliabili ty in the estimating subspace  , e . g . infer . 
Sorts of limiting are conclusion , presumption , hear say , degree , possibi-lity , question , negation & emphasis . 
( ii ) The interior operators There are four levels in the interior operators as follows : words  , phrases , clauses and sentences . Let a , c ~ Vp % , be VG % , ?-1(a ) = a , ~-1(c ) = y , ~-1(b ) = B , a , T  ~ D , B ~ binary operators over the space . Then 6 ~- l(abc ) = ~' l(a) . ~- l(b ) . ~- l(c ) = ~ T . 
1 The interior operators common to each level ( space )   ( operators )   ( syntaxisynthesis of a reas+enumeration in , by +
Sum : parallel logical sume x . red and white tulips , Selection : selection exclusive or ex , either You or I , Product : series logical product ex . beautiful and healthy . 
2 The in ter io r operators in words Compound words in syntax are cor res - pond ing to these operators  . Usually the operator is designated by a rewr iting rule in the syntax  , and VG does not appear in the compound words . This oper-at or limits the area expressed by the main word in the compound word by the area expressed by the subordinated word  . 
For example , the conceptual area of " letter paper " is the restricted area of " paper " for a let ter  . 
3 The in ter io r operators in phrases These operators resemble to the oper-ators in the words  . But in this level , not only rewriting rules but , also V ~ such as " the monkey in a cage des ignates an operator too  . In case of noun phrases there are two kernels : V and one VG  , and these are mapped to one Parea . In case of adjective phrases or adverb phrases such as " in a cage "  , there are one kernel V and one V ~ , so the lack of V_causes Ft ~ at these phrases are mapped to unary operators in the space  . 
A phrase has a ease , and each phrase is attached a pair of the concept and its case  . 
4 The in ter io r operators in c lauses The process o f compos ing c lauses f rom words and phrases i s cor respond ing to the un i f i ca t ion o f some conceptua l a reas as fo l lows  . There are three main--97-concepts : subject , object and action . 
And there are three types of unifica-tions as follows  ; * Mutual dependency : composition of tran- sitive verb with direct object  , and com-position of direct object with indirect object  . 
* Uni-directional dependency : composit ion of the subject and verb  ( phrase )  . 
* Mutual independency : composition of two c lauses by a coordinate conjunction  . 
5 The in ter io r operators in sentences There are two methods of composition by a coordinate junction or nesting  . 
(2) The feeling subspace
This information does not always appear , but if it appears it designates the state o f feeling between the sender and the rece iver  . 
(3  ) The ordering subspace ( i ) The exterior operators A shift or limit a tion of the value in the ordering axis is designated by the inflection of verbs and tense  . 
(~) The interior operators
Conjunctions designate interior operators . The operators are classified into subjunct ive  , indicative and impera-tive groups in the modal point of view  , Also operators are divided into copula-t ive  , alternative , adversative , disjunc-tive and illative conjunct ive groups in the conjunctive point of v iew  . 
5. INFOR MATION PROCESSING MODEL
ONTIIE INFOR MATION SPACE MODEL
Our communication is carried out bi-direc tionary  . On sending we compose a concept which we want to communicate oth-ers  , next point out a corresponding area in the topological information space  , map an area or areas to tokens in the syntaxby the meaning affix mapping ~ or oper-ator mapping ~  , form the P-marker in the deep level , get the sentences , and at last speak or write sentences . 
Descriptions of entities and relation - ships are managed as follows:  ( i ) when we quote one entity , or when we express one entity's propert i es  , a par-ticular area in the information space is pointed out  . 
(2  ) when we express two or more entities and rela tionships among them  , a direct product of two or more areas of entitie ~ and an area of the relationship is pointed out  . Both entity-subspace and a relationship- subspace are topological information spaces  . Then the composed space become a topological space too  . 
On receiving we listen or read the sentences , analyze them lexically , parse them , get the P-marker in the surface level , transform it to the deep P-marker , map it to the derivation tree of the top o logical information space generative grammar  , find the corresponding areas , compose the areas and relationship among them  , interprete the message , update the memory , and respond the required actions . 
These two processes are inverse relation , so we here describe in detail these processes in the latter case  . 
We depict processing steps in Fig . 2.
\[\]\] Lexical analysis and Parsing In this step syntactic processing is carr ied out  . There are four recognition levels of syntax as follows:  ( i ) Rec . og . nizing phonemes & characters The received phonemes or ' ch'a racters are checked whether they belong to per-missible phonemes or characters  . 
(2  ) Lexical analysis Input strings are div ided by the word delimiters  , and recognized as words . Words are checked whether they are contained in the token-dictionary or not  . 
(3  ) Parsing & Deriving P-markers Delimiter so f sentences are searched and each sentence is parsed  . If ambiguity occurs in parsing , all feasible P-markers are listed up . 
Input ~ I Lexicai Analysis ~ O ~_erational semantics IIP arsing  1  ~ -~ ~ -~ ?'~-- -~ :  ~1  '\]'  A1 % ~< Sntax .   .   .   . >( P-markers )% ~ yn ~ axl ~ Ctlonary * ,  % ~  , ! > I Range check II Concept Prescription l -- i  ; \[! Integration check ( Conceptual areas ) -- ~ Feeling , Ordering -- ~ ( Fe )  ' ~ Interpretation -- < KnowledgeDict ionary Ji Output Utterance ::: 
Description ( P-mar %. ers )
Sentence I
Generation ~( File )
IUpdating
Induction
Deduction
Evaluation
Fig . 2 The Information Processing Model--98-- ( 4 ) Reduction of P-markers to generator P-mar- kers The parsed P-marker in the sur-face leve l is transformed into a genera-tive P- marker in the deep level  . 
If recognition is failed in each step , the degree of potential for question is in c reased  . And if the degree of poten-tial for quest i on exceeds the threshold  , a question to resolve the ambiguity is fo rmed  , and is utterd . 
\[2\] Range check
The value of property of the input data is checked whether it is out of range of permiss ible interval or not  , i . e . range check of property value is carried out  . Because in the information space , the domain of property value is defined by the topological information space gener at ive grammar  . This process is divided into two subprocesses :  ( i ) the validity judgement of the con-ceptual a reathatis mapped from the words or phrases in the input sentences  , i . e . the check for grammatical sentence ~ ( ~ ) meta-description of a virtual world , i . e . the definition of words or assumtion of property values etc  . "' A ' is defined to be ' B '" is in terpreted that the range of @  ( B ) is adjusted to @ ( A ) by modifying the characteristic funct ions of A for the virtual view  . 
\  [3 \] Intellectual interpretation The ob ject is definitely prescribed to be in such a situation  , and is managed as follows . 
( i ) The intellectual prescription In this step the focussed conceptual area is poin tedout to interprete the communicated intent ion  , and the area is mapped from the words , phrases , clauses or sentences . This means the specializa-tion of un iversal predicates  . An element of direct product of IA , IN , Iv ,   . . e tc . 
are pointed out.
(2) Correlation
The corr ' elation between subject and ob ject in the sentence is clarified  , and the relationship among entities are investigated  , and the cases of each word is made clear ; there are following cases Agentive , F actitive , Objective , Dative , State , Actionarousing , Emotional , Feel-ing , Time , Cause , Result , Degree , Loca-tive and Goal cases so on . As for cases we don't make verbs special t reatment as the dependency model  , so verbs are as-signed cases , too . 
The correlated tuples of conceptual areas are filed with cases  . 
\[4\] Integration check
In bussiness database systems , the conceptual schema for the enterprise is analyzed at set-up-time  , and the most suitable schema is selected , and is not time-variant . And the correspondence between the external schema and the con-ceptual schema is preset  , so the input data is integrated to the conceptua l schema automatically  . 
On the contrary , in the academic use of the database or in our th inking  , the universe of knowledge is not fixed , and is growing according to the input data f rom the circumstances  . 
So we introduce View ( Aspect ) for integrating the same object in diffe rent records  . A group of experimental data , a group of sentences in a book , etc . , have the same view . This view is different from the view in the relational model  . 
A group of fragmentary data with the same v ie wischecked whether they can be integrated to one object if they ex-press the same objec t  . A group of frag-mentary data , which has the view that contains or is conta ined by the input data view  , is checked whether they can be integrated to one object or not  . 
\[5\] Feeling and Ordering interpretation ( I ) The feeling interpretation In the action arousing subspace  , whether action is required or not is examined  , where the action means res-ponses by hands , speech or writing soo ~ There are emotional and feeling subspaces  . As for the emotional-state , the conditions of the sender and the recei- verare judges by particular words concern ing emotions  . As for the emotional state , the same judgement is executed . 
(2  ) Ordering information interpretation For described events  , before-and-after relations on time , and cause-and-effect relations are judged . 
These informations are used in deduction and induction of theorems from axioms  , and in management of subjunctive mode . 
E 6 \] Evaluation of the received contents Af ter the grammatical valuation of input sentences and semantic interpreta-tion in the space  , following managements are carried out : eva luation of communi-cated contents  , and judgement of logical validity . These managements are executed by inferences using deductions  , induc-tions and arithmetic operations on areas in the space  . By these . processing , con-firming the validity on the communicated contents  , and drawing new conclusions from inputs and knowledge  , are executed . 
( I ) Arithmetic operations
Arithmetic operations are used in deduction , induction and other manage-m~nts . There are following property-types :
D : a power set of areas,
H : a power set of hyperplanes,
V : a power set of values P
E : a power set of estimating value.
And following kinds of operations exist.
D?H?V ?* D?H?V?E ( 2  ) Evaluation of Declaration The input info rmations are checked whether they contradict with the data that are already input and confirmed  ,   ( 3  ) Deduction and Induction --99-- ( i ) Deduction The question is rewritted to the ques-tions on the space  . Using the algebraic properties , the equation is transformed and solved . In case that the algorithm is cataloged , a suitable procedure is searched and tr iggered  . Also suitable procedures are triggered i f the estimat-ing value exceeds the thresho ld in each process  . 
In case that the algorithm is not cataloged , or the input is not a ques-tion , deductions from the input is executed . We communicate each other with some view , and the received information is interpreted in that view  , i . e . if the received data contradicts with the same view data  , the input data must be checked whether it is r ight or not  . And if a contradiction is not deduced , the valua-bled at a deduced from the input a rearranged and stored  . In these processes , the deduction is executed by syllogisms or resolution  . 
(2) Induction
The induction is executed as follows : at fi rst some special predicates in the same v iew are selected  , common variables are searched , universal special predi-cates are reconstructured by choosing the domain appropreately from the exis-tential spec ial predicates  . These exis-tential predicates are not a lways valid  , but if the contradiction is not found by checking the domain in the information space feeding back the result  , the Predicates ~ reregarded to be correct p robably  , and are stored as a hypothesis , and output . Where induction is executed on the data which have the same view  , and the predicates are selected from the predicates which have the same properties in the same view data  . 
This operation is useful in creative think ing  , for example , from the data gathered , common properties are extracted , and the induction is executed to the pred icates which contain the common prop-ert i es  . As a result , from the experimen-tal data or the observat ional field data  , some valuable hypotheses are generated . 
(4  ) Updating the Memory or Database The received message are parsed and mapped to the semantic level  , interpreted and deduced . As a result new facts or new informations are clarified  . These data are stored in the database . There are two ways of updatings : one is a perman entamendment : if the data is a princ iple one  , modifications of the information space are needed  , so the information space generative grammar is reconstructed  , and the corresponding amendments of files a recarried out  . The other is a temporary modification in an interim file  . 
C 7 \] Composition of Intention & Utterance I f the question is ambiguous or the answer is not deducible from the database and inputs  , the action-driving potential to fill up the information insufficiency is e levated  , then the question to resolve the ambiguities is composed and utterd  . 
If the question is correct and the answer is deducible from the dictionary and inputs  , the answer file in the semantic levelist ranslated into the P-marker  , and is utterd . If the input is not an interrogation , then the database is up-dated , and no answer or agreeable res-ponces are made  , In every case , the intention is described in file form in the semantic level  , i . e . tuples of con-ceptual areas with cases . The file is recomposed to the derivation t ree in the syntactic level by  0 and $ , transformed to the surface description , and uttered . 
6. CONCLUSION
A generative semantics model based on the top o logical space generative grammar was proposed  . This model has more de-scriptive power than other models because both implications and similarities can be generated in the basic level  . 
The aim of this model is to describe and manage the semantics algebraically  , and for that purpose English was arranged based on the model  . 
The question-answering process in a natural language was clarified  . In this model not only a concept but also esti-mation of the information is cons idered  . 
Then the motivation for next actions can be interpreted  . Based on the model , we are now implementing a research-DBMS . 
Using it we can built up and test hypotheses by KJ-methods and so on  . 
REFERENCESi . Chomsky , N . " Aspect of the Theory of Syntax ",
MIT Press , 19652 . Fillmore , J . C . " The Case for Case " , In Univer-sals in Linguistic Theory . Bach , E ; Harms , T . R . 
eds . Holt , Rinehart & Winston , 1968, ppi-90 . 
3 . Jackendoff , R . S . " Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar "  , MIT Press ,  1972 . 
4  . CODASYL Dev . Committee , " An Information Algebr ~ Phase I Rep . ", C . A(~5-4, April 1962, pp 190-207 . 
5  . Uchinami , S . , Tezuka , Y . and Kasahara , Y . " A Model of Linguistic Information A lgebra "  , Tech . Rep . 
of Osaka Univ . 1970, 20(962), pp 711-723.
6  . Tsurumi , Y . , Uchinami , S . and Tezuka Y . " Infor-mation Retrieval using the Mean ingSpace "  , Trans . of IECE of Japan , 1972 May , 55D 5, pp 307-314 . 
7  . Uchinami , S . and Tezuka , Y . " On the Formal Prop-erties of the Topolog ical Information Space Generative Grammar & its Space "  , Trans . of IECE of Japan , 1980 Jan . , 63 DI , pp 79-86-100
