ATNSUSED ASAPROCE DURALDIAL OGMODEL
D . Metzing , University of Bielefeld,


An attempt has been made to use an Augmented Transition Network IO as a ' procedural dia logmodel '  . The development of such a model appears to be important in several respects : - as a device to represent and to use different dialog schemata proposed in empirical conversation analysis  ; - as a device to represent and to use models of verbal interaction  ; - as a device combining knowledge about dialog schemata and about verbal interaction with knowledge about task-oriented and goal-di rected dialogs  . 
A standard ATN should be further de-veloped in order to account for the verbal interactions of task-oriented dialogs  . 
Introduction 4 Naturally occuring task-oriented dialogs are the joint product of the interactions of  ( at least ) two participants who know how to cooperate , i . e . who know how to organize-their social in teractions - their verbal interactions  , and - their task-oriented interactions . 
The amount of such interactions which seem to be necessary in specific task-oriented dialogs may  ( i ) depend on a number of factors given in advance such as : readiness to cooperate  ( a )  , preciseness of the task representation ( b ) , amount of mutually shared task-specific knowledge  ( c )  , amount of knowledge about the other parti-c ipant  ( d ) and personal factors as for example competence and  ( self- ) confidence ( e )  ;   ( ii ) depend on procedures apt to modify these factors ( a-e ) in an efficient and positive way ;   ( iii ) depend on procedures used for task resolution and result ex-planation  . 
Participants of naturally occuring task - or iented dialogs are able to make use of these factors and procedures in a skillful and f lexible way  , but such properties are still lacking even in experimental dialog systems  . 
In past natural language processing research considerable efforts have been made to process the structures under-lying sentences or texts  . Procedures have been developed which build up deep structures of sentences or which determine macro-structures or event skripts  ( ' frames ' ) underlying texts . In the next two years special efforts will be made to process the structures under-lying task -oriented dialogs  . 
Representation of Interactional

In coversation analysis , systematic accounts of the sequential organization of dialog interactions have been developed  , e . g . for turntaking , for opening sequences , for closing or repair sequences 7 or for different types of task-oriented verbal interaction as a whole  ( e . g . giving advice , direc-tions , explanations )   12 But these accounts have only Deen of a struc tural type  , not of a procedural type . A formal representation has rarely been attempted  6 and an integration or interaction of d if ferent knowledge sources is generally not considered  . 

In the subsequent sections we will argue for a level of representation guiding the social interactional and the verbal interactional aspects of task-oriented dialogs  . A personal belief or knowledge component wil luse information of this interactional level together with infor-mation of a task level as well as infor-mation of a sentence / text level  . We will argue for a procedural representation of interactional knowledge and we think that the usefulness of ATNS  I0'3 for such a representation should be examined in more detail  . 
' Parsing Interactions '
The approach presented here differs from other computational dialog models in the fol lowing way : - A dialog model is not based on an  un-2 derlying dialog prototype specifying essentially task-oriented information  . 
It is claimed that the social interactional and the verbal interactional aspects of task - or iented dialogs are important enough to be represented in a detailed way on a special level  . 
-Dialog proporties are not only exa-mined by problem solving techniques I  . 
Instead , extended parsing techniques are used in ' parsing interactions ' and they are supposed to be helpful in de-termining the interaction a l structure underlying utterances  . 
Let us further specify the kind of interact ional knowledge which participants of certa in types of task-oriented dialogs are supposed to have as well as ways to represent it  . The participants will generally know how to manage the social  , the verbal and the task-oriented interactions . They will generally know about several rather invariant  , components of a certain type of task-oriented dialogs as well as of a normal sequence of these components  . They know about the detailed ( alternative ) structures of each component , the choice of which may depend on factors as were mentioned above  ( a-e )  . 
They know-how to initiate a social contact / a verbal interaction and how to respond posit ively/negatively to this initia-tive  ; -how to continue/to maintain an interaction , -how to signalize interest , competence or difficulties of ) understanding , -how to organize turn-taking , -how to initiate the termination of a social contact/a verbal interaction and how to respond positively or nega-tively to it  . 
Part of this knowledge may be described as sequences of social/verbal interactions  , formally to be represented as connected ( sub- ) networks of an ATN . 
I . e . social/verbal interaction is seen as a process of path selection of  ( at least ) two participants in a network of states and state transitions  . These ( sub- ) networks should be set upon an empirical bas is  ( recordings of naturally occuring task - or iented dialogs  )  . 
An Example
Some properties of the interactional knowledge mentioned above may be represented in an ATN in a straightforward way  , whereas the representation of others seem lesss traightforward  . 
Constituents
Let us assume that some types of infor-mation-g iving dialogs may be assigned a  -488 network structure with the following consti tuents of social/verbal interaction : v l 
T ~ <
Z ?
H@/9 r..) o5!
Each ( sub- ) network represents sequences of interaction-on the level of a dialog type  ( a )  , -on the level of speech act sequences ( b ) , or - on the level of turn-taking organi-zat ion  ( c )  . 
The arcs indicate ( alternative ) state transitions / ( alternative ) courses of interaction . They may be marked or unmarked (' JUMPs') . 
According to fig . I a dialog interaction may start : - with a contact initiating utterance  ( "EXCUSEME . . . ") , level a ; -with a question introducer (" MAYI
ASKYOU . . . ") level b ; -with a task-specific question (" WHERE
DOIFIND . . . ") , level b ; - with a ' turn introducer ' (" YES " I " . . . "), level c . 
Possible actions may be skipped ( cf--~4--~arrow )  , repeated ( loons ; itera-tion ) or some sequences nay ~ e embedded into other sequences  ( cf . QUESTION/ANS WER arc in the QUESTION/ANS WER subnetwork  ; recursion ) . 
These subnetworks are connected to other networks with the same type of infor-mation or with other types of infor-mation : linguistic in formation in order to re-cognize/generated i fferent forms  ( e . g . 
to initiate a contact , to introduce questions , to passturns ) or direct/indirect ways to ask a question ( "9 ~ EREDOIFIND . . . " vs " IDONOTKNOW . . . ", " ISUPPOSEYOUKNOW . . . ") ; task-oriented information in order to build up coherent sets of answers  ( on the basis of a task-model )   . 
Note that some utterances may serve- -489- -several interactional roles ( " MAYIASKYOU . . . " uttered at the beginning of a dialog in it iates a contact and introduces a question  . ) Specia l tests on arcs wi l l recognize this and the corresponding actions will build up an interactional structure according to such multiple roles of constituents  .   ( A way to see them from different perspect ives  .  )
Interpretation of Arcs
The interaction a ? information represented in an ATN-subnet may be used to plan and to guide the recognition/generation of social / verbal interaction as part of a task - or iented dialog  . The information represented on an arc should be used for both  , for recognition as well as for planning / generation  . The structure of the ( sub- ) networks is useful in the sense that ' normal ' courses of interaction are explicity represented  . So they are expected and indicate a kind of interactional coherence of a task-oriented dialog  . But speakers may violate such normally respected dialog sequences and they can cope with this fact  . It is therefore desirable to make a more f lexible use of the information represented in a network  . E . g . it seems desirable to calculate a ( not yet existing ) tran-sition on the basis of task-specifi c cues and/or utterance cues  ( for example when a participant reopens an al ready closed subtask or when he repeats or reopens an already executed move or when he suddenly terminates an interaction  . 
Further developments
It seems desirable to have an extended ATN parser in order to cope with unexpected dialog sequences  . In implementing aspects of social/verbal in teractions one should examine carefully ef for ts made  5  , 9 - to use an ATN in a more f lexib le way - to combine recognition and generation in an ATN  8  , and - to build up several interacting ATNs " . 

I . Appelt , D . E . " Problem solving Applied 1980 to L an auage Generation " , 
Proc . of the 18th Meeting of ACL , 59-63.
2 . Bobrow , D . G .   , and the PARC understander 1977 group , "GUS-I , a Frame
Driven Dialog System "
Artificial Intelligence 8:2.
3 . Goldstein , I . P . , M . L . Miller PAZATN : 1976 A Linguistic Approach to Automatic Analys is of Elementary Programming Protocols  , 
MITAIMEMO 388.
4 . Grosz , B . " Discourse Knowledge ", 1978 in : D . Walker ( ed . ) Un-derstanding Spoken Language , 229-3445 . Kwasny , S . , N . Sond heimer " Un-1979 grammaticality and Extra-
Grammaticality in Natural
Language Understanding

Proc . of the 17th Meeting cfACL , 19-24.
6 . Metzinq , D . Implementation of Inter-1979 actional Processes
MemoUniversity of Biele-feld.
7 . Sacks , U . , E . Schegloff , G . Jeffers on " A Simplest Systematics for Conversation  --490 for the Organization of Turn-Taking for

Language 50, 696-735.
8 . Shapiro , S . C . " Generalized Augmented 1979 Transition Network
Grammars for Generation from Semantic Networks ",
Proc . of the 17th
Meeting of ACL , 25-29.
9 . Weischedel , R . M . , J . E . Black " If the 1980 Parser Fails "
Proc . of the 18th
Meeting of ACL , 95-96.
10 . Woods , W . .A . " Transition Network 1970 Grammars for Natural
Language Analysis ~,
CACM 13, 591-606.
11 . -Research in Natural 1978 Language Understanding , 
BBN-Report No .  3963 12 . Wunderlich , D . "E in Sequenz muster fur Ratschl~ge : Ana-lyse eines Beispiels "  , to appear ' in : D . Metzing ( ed ) Dialog muster und
Dialog prozesse ( Hamburg).

