SOFTDIS PLAY KEY FOR KANJIIN PUT
Jouko J . Sepp ~ nen
HELSINKIUNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
Computing Centre
02150 ESPOO15, FINLAND
Abstract . The concept of a soft
display key as applied to input of large character sets or vocabularies such as Kanji  , the ancient Chinese ideographic script is di scussed  . The Japanese orthography and the necessity of using Kanji characters in data terminals are explained  . Problems arising from the number and complex ity of Kanji symbols for the manufacture and use of keyboard devices are stated  . 
A review is made of devices and methods present ly used or suggested  . The feasibility of the soft display key is then demonstrated  . Some requirements for the design and implementation of a soft display keyboard for Kanji are considered  . In conclusion , implications to man/computer interfacedes ign  , human factors engineering and hardware unifi cation and standardization are stated  . 
Keywords . Displaykey , soft panel , touchd is play , character set , Kanji input , programmed interface , data terminal , man/computer dialogue , human factors , cultural variation . 
Introduction
The Kanji Script . The Ancient
Chinese ideographic writing system , Kanji , is today used in China , Japan and to some extent in Korea . A principal advantage of an ideographics cr ipt is that its understanding does not suppose knowledge of the spoken language  . Written Chinese , e . g . , is unders tood all over the country , though the spoken languages are mutually incomprehensible / ~/  . The main disadvantages are obviously the large number and graphical complexity of wri tten characters and the consequent hardship of learning and writing them  . 
Once learned , reading , instead , does not present equal difficulty thanks to the excellent pattern recognition a bil ity of man  . Complex meanings are conveyed in condenced graph ical patterns  , which are grasped at a glance . 
Kanji Data Terminals . The real prohibitions are , however , encountered in the design and manufacturing of typing machines and data terminals as well as in their operation  . The man/computer interface is a serious bott leneck already with the European  , modestly sized alphabet and keyboard . 
Particularly burning this problem is be ing felt in Japan  , where the computer and information in dustr ies are now in fulls wing  . 
In the early beginning data processing in Japan was done on the basis of romaji  , the European alphabet . 
In Japanese business and culture the Chinese Kanji and the Japanese Kana writing systems  , however , play the main role . Therefore , in Japant here is no true solution to computer ization without the use of Kanji/I/  . 
The demand for data terminals is increasing rapidly  . For overcoming the technical , manufacturing and human factors problems invo lved in Kanji input a number of different approaches have been made or suggested  . Several kinds of devices and systems based on very different principles are in use  , while many have remained designs only . 
Some of these are reviewed below in order to get insight into the problem and the presents i tuation  . 
A technique based on the display input princ iple is then introduced and suggested for cop ing with the Kanji input problem  . The technique is demonstrated capable of ' entering all Kanji characters on a normal western size keyboard with normal size characters and operable by finger  . 

The Japanese Orthography
The Japanese orthography is rather complica ted  . Two kinds of script are used-the Kanji and the Kana  . Kanji is the ancient pictographic writing system adopted from China about  1700 years ago . The Kanji characters used today are either or iginal Chinese symbols or symbols later fo rmed or modified in Japan  . 
The Kana Syllabaries . Kana is the
Japanese phonemic writing system . It consists of two syllabic alphabets-Hi ragana and Katakana  . These are parallel character sets , consisting of 46 syllabic characters and two diacritics . Both Hiragana and Katakana denote the same set of syllables  , but are used for different purposes . Their graphics have been derived from Kanj i  , but are considerably simpler . 
Particularly Hiragana has been strongly simplified into a kind of shorthand  . 
All three character sets are necessary by tradi tion  . For Japanese words both Chinese characters and H iragana are used  . Hiragana is also used to form grammatical end ings and other syntactic units to Kanji words  , while loan words from foreign languages are usually transcribed in Katakana  . 
In addition , Katakana is often used in polite addressing forms  . The patterns of usage are not , however , well defined . Ever more often today one can see words of Ch inese origin written in either Kanji or Kana or both intermixed  . 
Kanji Character Sets.
Dictionaries of ' varying coverage In present day use record  49  , 964 ,  14 , 942 ,  9 , 921 and 3 , 885 Kanji characters respectively/2/ . The number of characters sufficient for everyday use such as reading newspapers and magazines varies from  2000 to 3000  . 
About 2000 characters have been designated as essential and selected as a standard set for publish ing  . A set of 881 characters is used in basic education and fur the raminimum of  1968 characters have been selected for educational purposes by the Japanese 
Ministry of Education/2/.
Despite the fairly large numbers of characters recorded in dictionaries  , some 200 most frequently used Kanji account for over 50 percent of the usage in text while 800 Kanji supplemented with 50 Hiragana already account for 90 percent of ordinary text /3/  . 
The Inadequacy of Kana . For practical purposes such as typing , it would be desirable to be able to use the Kanasyllabaries  , since they can be managed with conventional keyboard techniques  . But unfortunately the Kana systems are lingu istically inadequate  . 
The problem is polysemy . It is not uncommon that several Kanji characters with different meaning have equal or so similar pronunciation that they become identical in Kana  . There are e . g . 
some 70Kanji characters , which are pronounced and transcribed as " Shou " in 
Kana /4/ . On the other hand many characters have become to denote concepts quite different from the or iginal  , which happened to have similar pronunciat ion  /5/  . Thus the phonetic and semantic inadequacies of the phonemic scripts necessitate the use of the old Kanji  , which is unambiguous . 
Problems with Kanji Input
The main problems of using Kanji are connected with the input devices  . 
For output , a Kanji printer or display though more expensive than its European counterpart  , can be realized by standard output technolog ies such as matrinter and CRT disp lay  , see e . g . /2,4 and 6/ . The character print head or display matrix only must have higher order to give the requi red graphical resolution  . Kanji printers are available , which use print head dimensions of e . g . 15 by 18 or 22 by 24 dots . 
But for input of Kanji characters we need a keyboard  , which has a great many keys or some special a rrangement by which all necessary characters can be entered  . I ~ fact , an equipment , which would allow to encode all Kanji characters would be simply absurd to imp lement and to operate by conventional keyboard techniques  . In developing keyboards for type writer , telex and data terminals it has been necessary to severely restrict and carefully se lect the set of characters to be included  . Yet it has been necessary either to squeeze many characters per key or to reduce the keys izes o much that it can be operated only by a special implement  . Despite this , sophisticated special techniques for input of nonstandard characters are necessary in many applications  . 
Nonstandard characters do frequent in various texts and subject areas  . The difficulty with them is not only that they are sometimes indispensable  , but also that different sets of nonstandard -288-characters are needed application to another . 
from one
S . tandard Data Process in ~ Set . For the purposes of data processing the Info rmation Processing Society of Japan has inst it uted a set of  6100 characters as a standard set /2/  . These include the 1968 most common Kanji characters plus Hiragana and Katakana  , a set of system oriented Kanji , a set of other system oriented symbols and the ordinary European alphanumerics  /2/  . 
Not all of these are , however , usually available on present devices . E . g . 
for the terminal described in /2/ the following sets have been selected :
Most often used Kanji 1,968
Kanji for general use 1,850)
Kanji for " personal name 92)
Kanji for auxiliary use 26)
Additional Kanji 2,538
System oriented Kanji 64
System oriented symbol 95
Alphanumeric & symbol 94
Katakana & symbol 92
Hiragana & symbol 85
Total 4,936
In the Japanese card punch key entry device deve loped by IBM Japan and described in  /3/ there are 2  , 304 characters . In order to make the keyboard manageable by the human operator  , the size of keys must have been made very smal l  . In the IBM equipment the key dimension is 4mm . 
This has permitted to fit the keyboard on the table of a normal size card punch device  . 
Using such a keyboard does , however , cause considerable eyestrain to the operator and requires a lot of handtranspor t  . Moreover , special means of key actuation such as asty lusas in  /3/ or a pantograph mechanism as in /2/ and /7/ must have been introduced . 
Decgmposition Schemes . . A t tempts have been made to deve lop ra t iona l decompos i t ion schemes in order to break the characters down into simpler common elements  . This would allow reduction of the keyboard size  . The characters could then be piecewise reass embled by typing from their constituent components  , see e . g .  /8/ . From technical viewpoint this approach wou ld seem very advantageous  . But , unfortunately there is little natural sys tematics and consistence in the graphicals tructure of the characters  . 
Therefore any such scheme becomes artificia l and difficult to use  . In addition , such schemes are often insufficient of description and can sometimes specify only classes of characters  . 
Character Arrangement . Still another source of problems is the ar rangement of characters on the keyboard  . In Kanji there is little inherent system at ics  , which could be complied to . To minimize search time and hand or stylust ransport  , high frequency characters are often assigned to a central area  . E . g . the keyboards described in /7/ and /15/ have used this principle . 
One of the imperative factors in keyar rangement is  , however , the historical precedent/16/ . In Japanthis is determined by the Kanji Tele type  , also referred to as Kantele , which has been used for thirty years in the newspaper industry  /3/  . Data input equipment usually conform to the phonetic order  , which is generally used for typing machines . E . g . the equipment described in /7/ applies this arrangement . 
Typing Speeds . Despite of the apparent difficulties , excellent typing performance can be ach ieved in Kanji input through practicing  . The figures of words per minute and accuracy reported in  /3/ correspond to those that can be observed on ski lled western card punch operators  . Thus , the enormous difference between character set size and the keying techniques in the two cul tures causes little difference in the level of skilled performance  /3/  . The small size of characters causes , however , more eyestrain to the operator and the large size of the keyboard more fatique to h and musc les on the Japanese equipment  . 
A Review of Techniques
An account of some techniques and existing dev ices for Kanji input is given in  /4/  . These and some others found in litterature are briefly reviewed here  . 
The Kanji Teletype . According to /4/the Kanji Teletype ( Kantele ) is the most commonly used encoding equipment . 
Kantele has 192 keys , each of which bears labels of 13 Kanji characters . A shift keypad of 13 shift keys is used to select among the 13 characters on thus been reduced significant ly  , but there are still considerable drawbacks : * The amount of hand transport and searching is still considerable * The lack of logica larrangement plagues character localizat ion * There is no facility for either veri fication nor for nonstandard character input  . 
Operator performance observed with the shift key method seems to be inferior to methods us ing stylus  . 
A Chinese Type writer System . In a Chinese Type writer System abstracted in  /9/  , a keyboard is provided for quick access to a master file of digitized 
Kanji characters . On top of the keyboard is a character reference sheet  , which is organized according to the order of the Chinese phonetic alphabet  . By appropriate keying of a desired character  , a mechanism within the control unit will access the master file  . A graphic display is provided for verifi cation of the entered characrter  . Up to 9600 characters are available in the system . 
The Sinotype Syste . m . This equipment is based on the principle of composing characters from a small set of st rokes  . There are 21 different elementary strokes from which each character can be constructed as a unique combination  . An average of six strokes are required to form one character  . The disadvantages are : The difficulty of decomposing characters into a set of st rokes * The difficulty of remembering the stroke combinations  , which are different from the tradit- ional calligraphy  . A special combination dictionary must be used  . 
The Sinow riter System . In this system developed by IBM a Kanji character is formed from two parts  , the upper and lower half . Both of these are classified using 36 standard subpatterns . These operations are , however , not sufficient to specify a character un iquely  . A set of at most 16 characters are displayed on a CRT , from which the operator can then select the correct one  . According to /4/ this system has been designed for foreigners , who do
Kanjil not understand
A . Kanji Data Terminal . In/2/an input arrangement is described , which uses a printed charactersheet and a superimposed binary code filmsheet  . A character is entered by moving a pantograph lever mechanism carrying a code reader device onto the selected character  . On pushing a button the character code is fl a shed on a LED display and read from the fi lm by an array of photo transistors  . 
This system allows to use two kinds of Kanji character boards with different character a rrangements  . The numbers of characters in the two sets are 2 , 205 ( Onkun-jun ) and 2 , 940 ( Bushu-Kakusu-jun ) respectively . 
The R and Table t . This is a general purpose graphic input device developed by the R and Corp  . The system for Kanji input allows hand writ tenstroke sequences to be drawn on the Table t  , matched with a pattern dictionary and di splayed on a CRT  . The disadvantages are :* The slow speed , the amount of manual effort and difficu lty of correctly drawing a character * The complexity and inadequacy of pattern match ing procedures  . 
Machine recognition of Kanji is not a solu tion to on-line Kanji input  , because the human effort required to h and w r itea character is considerably greater than the effort required to read it on the keyboard and to type it  . 
If this , as it is , the case with the Roman letters and the Arab ic numbers  , then let alone with Kanji , whose calligraphy is work of art . 
A Pattern Structural Coding
Method . In /8/a method is described , which enables generative description and de finition of Kanji like patterns  . 
The method allows systematic encoding of an unlimited set of patterns in terms of a small number of alphanumerically codeds t rokes and concatenation operators  . Disadvantages of this method are : * The need of long alphanumeric code strings for characters * Insufficiency of the coding system to express unique stroke variat ions  . 

Automatic Phonetic to Kan~i
Conversion . several systems have been developed for automatic conversion of phonemic Kanascript into Kanji  . These systems must rely on methods of grammat ical analysis of the phonemic script  . Reference files are necessary for the solut ion of ambiquities  . The disadvantages are :* The need of compli cated natural language syntax analysis a lgorithms and large reference files * The inadequacy of the algoritms as to correc tness of translation  . 
Bunkai-Hatsuon Conversion Method.
The subject of /4/ is also a conversion method from phonemics cr ipt to Kanji  . 
It makes use of the fact that many
Kanji characters have several pronunciat ions  . These can be used to reduce the ambiquity in mapping phonemic script to Kan Ji  . The method is called Bunkai-Hatsu on . 
Tests and comparisons reported in /4/ indicate that on the average four keystrokes are adequate to uniquely identify a Kanji character as opposed to six strokes w~th the S inotype  . 
Input rates of 40 to 50 characters per minute have been achieved . According to the authors this is not fast enough for all purposes  , but it satisfies the requirements for some man/computer communication needs and comes c lose to an " easy to use " system  . An advantage of this system is that it can be used for any size of character sets  . The only modification require dist ~ add the new Kanji characters to the system dict ionary  . The system requires an advanced computers ys tem for its support  ( Tosbac 3400 )  . 
Kanji Input System . A Kanjikeyboard has been developed in /7/ , which enables incorporation of nonstandard characters as well  . The keyboard has in addition to the standard keyboard three special sections  . These are called Spare Area,
Function Input and Pattern Input sections.
On the Spare Area different sets of characters can be provided by using replaceable characters heets and function keys for sheet identification  . 
Customized character sets can be defined for varying applications  . 
The Pattern Input section enables introduct ion of new characters to the system  . Character patterns can be interactively const ructed from strokes using stylus and a  64 by 64 point grid . 
The generated patterns are added to the reperto ire of nonstandard patterns and assigned with a sheet number and key position  . The defined character pattern is then h and pr inted on the specified position of the sheet to enable selection  . When entered , any character can be displayed for verifi cation by the operator  . 
In principle the system can handle an unl imited number of Kanji characters  , but its operation is obviously quite impract ical  . In addition it also requires a consider ab lecomputer system  ( NEAC 2200/200 ) for its support . 
The method described above is in principles imilar to that used in some programmable te rminals and pocket calculators  , in which the user can define various funct ions  , assign them to special function keys and label them by hand printing on overlays heets accordingly  . This comes close to the idea of a programmable display key  , in which not only the function , but also its label is stored in the memory and displayed to the user for reference at p rogram control  . 
The Soft Display Key Principle
We now confine ourselves to suggesting a method for Kanji input  , which is based on the programmable display key concept  . The display key , also referred to as video clavis in /11/ -can be thought of as a normal input key , but with the difference that its key top caption  , instead of being engraved , painted or otherwise made and fixed permanently on the key  , is now generated by a display component under program control  . The character images are stored in memory , either read only or renewable , and presented to the user for reference as appropriate  . At any system state only a relevant set of symbols or words are displayed as a menu  . At the touch of a display key , the whole setup , some part of it or nothing at all may change according to how that step had been programmed  . 
Though simple in principle this is a brave idea promising to upset present conceptions about keyboard and panelar rangements as well as the principles of man/computer interface design  . 
Conceptually the soft display key --291---is related to the touch sensitive screen /10/  . The latter makes the displays creen also an input device  , while the former makes the keyboard also an output device  . Both allow to improve the man/computer in teraction by offering a fully virtual human interface  . 
As applied to Kanji input , the main advantage of the virtual interface is that the keyboard equipment becomes independent of the size of the character set  . Consequently the size of the keyboard can be reduced to what is considered most suitable f romoperating and manufacturing points of view  . 
In addition , the very same keyboard can be equally well used for Hiragana  , Katakana , Latin , Cyrillic or whatever character set is needed  . Very large character sets such as Kanji , must be structured in some way so as to al low quick access to the aimed character  . This can be done by breaking the set down into subsets by an appropriate scheme  . Features such as subarea on a traditional keyboard  , phonetic order , stroke number , radical component , writing sequence , grammatical or semantic category or perhaps still other characteristics  , which a European , only superficially familiar with Kanj i  , cannot imagine of . 
A treelike access structure with equally s ized and appropriately named subdirector ies would guarantee most efficient access path  . Actual characteristics of Kanji and learned conventions may suggest differences to obtain a most practical access scheme  . 
The input display principle is a very genera lide a and its essential functions can be rea lized by using alternative technologies available for display and sen~ing  . Similarly both hardware and software suppor t systems allow great freedom of design dec ision  . 
Display technologies are becoming availab le  , which allow fabrication of composite mat rix element display structures suffic ient for the resolution required by Kanji  . The display component may be based on light emitting diode  ( LED )  , liquid chrystald is play ( LCD ) , electr ~ luminence ( EL ) or other flat panel display technology . 
Various technologies are also available for implementation of the switching field necessary for sensing the presence of a finger on some display area  . The switching function can be based on contactive  , capacitive or resistive effect , photo detection , a custic signal etc . switching components . 
The switching system can either be in tegrated into the display system or overla id to it  . On the panel side the two systems are , however , independent of each other . They are oniy coordinated with each other with respect to location  . On the system side they are associated with each other under common program control  . 
The discussion of both technical design ob jectives as well as specific applicat ions would  , however , involve expert know how of both displaye lec tronics as well as Kanji script  , the Japanese language , type of application , user environment etc that we do not possess . Their discusssion must therefore lie outs ide of the scope of this paper  . The aim of this talk has only been to demonstra te the feasibility of the idea and to point out some of its implications  . 
Some Implications
A number of key problems involved in Kanji input devices and their use seem to find the irsolution in the soft display key input principle  . The major problems solved and advantage sach i eved are as follows : * The number of keys and the size of the keyboard can be reduced to what is considered normal * ~ et normal key and character size can be maintained for good leg ib-ility and convenient operation * An un limited number of Kanji characters can be accommodated * New characters can be added by de finition as necessary * The character set can be adapted or changed from one application to another 
The characterlay out can be changed from one convention to another according to user skill * The same keyboard can be used for Kana  , ASCII and still other character sets when necessary at the same time-  292- -* The keyboard can also be used for user in teraction such as prompting  , indication , etc
Moving mechanical parts can be fully elim inated and all keys can be made identical to a llow cost efficient mass production  . 
Optimal Key and Keyboard Size.
The keyboard can be designed into optimal size from manufacturing and human factors points of view  . Yet the key and character size can be made large enough for good legibility and convenient actuation by bare finger  . 
The need for special arrangements for nonstandard characters and verification of entered characters becomes unnecessary  . 
Virtual Character Sets . Through menu structuring and paging an unl imited number of characters can be supported independently of the number of physical disp lay key fields  . It becomes possible to use different size keyboards for a given character set and diffe rent character sets for a given size keyboard  . The only limiting factors are memory space and display raster resolution  . New characters can be added to the system by programmed definition or by loading from external media  . 
Portability ' and Adaptability.
Software portability and adaptability are qualities  , which reflect the ease of moving programs from one hardware environment to another and modifying them to fit different object ives  /15/  . 
The programmed key labelling principle al lows these qualities to be extended to the man/computer interface  . 
Character set device independence provides for a capability  , which can be called human interface portab ility  . 
This means that a character set layout and menus tructure can be transferred from one keyboard to another simply as a software copy  . If not directly compatible , the conversion can be made on software level . This quality does contribute to reduced need of operator retraining and higher equipment usability  . 
Adap . tabilit ~ . The need for adaptability emerges from sys tem dependence on the application and user environment  . System adaptability reduces this dependence and extends the scope of potential system app lication  . 
The display key concept does not eliminate variation or incompatibility among d if ferent application or user environments  , but it allows the system user interface to be adapted to and complied with the diffe rent conventions and requitements by modifi cation and adjustment of the software  . Even minor operator preferences and habituat ions can be accommodated easily  . In many application environments cons iderable savings could be achieved  , if customization and development could be fur ther done by the user along with his develop ing experience  . The virtual interface does allow such development  . 
Unified Hardware . In spite of all the flexibility and var iation it is possible to develop unified display key component designs and to s t and ardize the panel and keyboard structures for cost effective mass production  . 

Iwish to thank Karri Kuusikko,
Harri Hal~n , Heikki Mallat , Anu Arponen and Reichi Nichizawa for their help in the course of the preparation of this paper  . The views presented in the paper are the respons ibility of the author alone  . 
References/I/Kanji Data Processing Serv ice offered by Hitachi Software Engineer ing Co  . , Ltd,
Hitachi SK , November 22, 1976/2/Adachi K . et al , Kanji Data Terminal Equipments : Kanji CRT Display and Kanji Printer  , Second USA-Japan Computer Conf . , 1975/3/Brown C . R . , Human Factors P rob lems in the Des ign and Eva luation of Key-entry Devices for the 
Japanese Language , In /19//4/Hirahara H . , Kikuchi K . et al ,
The Kanji System : A New Method for
Inputting Japanese Sentences,
First USA-Japan Computer Conf . , 1972/5/MalmbergB . , S t ruc tura l L ingu is t i cs andHuman Communic - at ion  , Kommunikation und Kybernetik , Springer-Verlag , Berlin , 1963/6/Hayashihara H . , Saito K . et al , Kanji Display , Oki Review , Vol 36/2 , 1969293--/7/NakataK . , Nakano Y . et al , Problems in Chinese Character Recognition , First USA-Japan Comp . Conf . , Tokio , 1972/8/Mor ? T . , Mori S . et al , Recognition of H and printed Characters , Second USA-Japan Comp . Conf . , Tokio , 1975/9/Moriwaki M . , Furukawa S . et al , A Kanji Input System with Nonstandard
Character Processing,
Second USA-Japan Comp . Conf . , 1975/10/Fujimura O . , Kagaya R . , A Pattern-Structural Coding Method for Kanji , First USA-Japan Comp . Conf . , 1975/11/Chen H . , A Chinese Typewriter and Teletypewriter System , First USA-Japan Comp . Conf . , 1972/12/Johnson E . A . , Touch Displays : A Programmed Man-Machine Interface  , Ergonomics ID (1967) , 271-277/13/Sepp~nenJ . , Video clavis-AUniversal Programmable
Human Interface,
Helsinki University of Technology,
Computing Centre , No 25, 1976/14/Laaksonen K . , Sepp~nen J . ,
Impact of the Soft Panel Concept on
Systems , Design and Programming,
HUT Computing Centre , No 30, 1976/15/Sepp ~ nenJ . ,
Design Principles for Tactile Display

HUT Computing Centre , NoI , 1977/16/Sepp ~ nenJ . ,
Pragmatic problems of Man/Computer

HUT Computing Centre , No 12, 1979/17/Poole P . C . , Waite W . M . ,
Portability and Adaptability,
Advanced Course of Software Eng.,
Springer-Verlag , Berlin , 1973/18/Hanes L.F.,
Human Factors in International
Keyboard Arrangement , in / 19//19/Chapan is A . ( Ed . ), Ethnic Variables in Human Factors Eng . ,
The Johns Hopkins , Baltimore , 1975294-
