GENERATION OF THES AURUSINDIF FERENT LANG UAGES
A COMPUTERBASED SYSTEM
FJDEV ADASON
Documentation Research and Training Centre
Indian Statistical Institute
31 Church Street
Bengalore-56 0001

The development of the theory of
library classification and of subject
indexing , for the organisation , storage
and retrieval of subjects embodied in
documents has a striking parallelism to
the search for ' universal forms ' and
deep structure ' ln language and linguis-
tic studies . The significant contri-
butions of the theories of classifi-
cation and subject indexing are the
subject analysis techniques of Ranga-
nathan and Bhattacharyya's POP SI.A
computer based system , for generating
an information retrieval thesaurus,
from modulated subject-proposlt lons,
formulated according to the subject
analysis techniques , enriched with
certain codes for relating the terms
in the subject-proposlt lons has been
developed . The system generates hier-
archlc , associative , coordinate and
synonymous relationships between terms
and presents them as an alphabetical
thesaurus . Also , once a thesaurus is
generated in one language it is possi-
ble to produce the same thesaurus in
different languages by Just forming a
table of equivalent terms in the
required language.
Inform ~ tlon Retrlev@lTh@s , eurus
An information retrieval the sau-
rus could be defined as " a controlled
dynamic vocabulary of semantically
related terms offering comprehensive
coverage of a domain of knowledge ".
Its main use is in the subject cha-
racterization of documents end queries
in information storage and retrieval
systems ^ based on concept coordi-
nation ~ o.
The application of computers for
updating , testing , editing and print-
ing thesaurus 25 has gained much
importance due to the use of thesaurus
as a vocabulary control device in bib-
liographic information storage and
retrieval systems , at the input stage
for controlled indexing and at the
retrieval stage for expanding the
f ~ , f search query to increase recall-
both in batch and online modes of
processing 18,22,62,64.
Automatic Generation of Thescurus
Several experiments in automatic
generation of thesaurus have been
carried out in which relationships
between terms have been determined by
taking into account the number of docu-
ments in which the respectlve terms
occur Jointly 27,65. Various cluster-
ing techniques have been investigated
out of a range of similarity criteria.
The role played by similarity criteria
in obtaining the environment of each
term and the use of this environment
for retrieval have been explored 57.
Computational procedures for genera-
ting thesaurus include keyword statis-
tics , calculation of Tanlmoto coeffi-
cient 61, matrix inversion , formation
of similarity matrix , automatic cluster
analysis using minimal tree procedure
and compilation of groups2~nd~aln6,~__
groups of descriptors i , ~, ~, ~,

But , " the difficulty , however,
is that text-s can nlng is more effective in syntactic and morphological analysis where there is sufficient repetition to justify the belief that a particular fact is significant "  31  ,  32 . Further , all these techniques use a lot of computer time and are capable of pro-duclngalist of selected and grouped keywords  . But it has also been observed that , although a large variety of clusters and assoclsted query expansions have been obtained  , no slg-nifl cant improvements in the document retrieval3~erformance have bean achieved ~ . In other words , an information retrieval thesaurus is something morekeywordsthan4~  . llst of grouped and ranked
BAsic Aspects of Thesaurus
There are two basic aspects of thesaurus construction  . They are:
I selection of keywords/descriptors of the subject for which the thesaurus is constructed  ; and 303--2 establishment of interrelation-ships among these selected keywords as to whether the terms form a broader or narrower or related or synonymous or ' use ' relation  . 
Using computers alone for both the abovementioned aspects of thesaurus construction is not practicable for  , using computers for selecting the keywords from freelanguage text is not an economic approach  , and it is not feasible to make a computer automatically distinguish the relationship between terms as to broader  , narrower , synonymous etc . 
Metalanguage for Information Or ~ anl-sation
It was realised that the failure of experiments with automatic abstracting  , indexing etc . , " should be sought above all , in an insufficient knowledge of the structure of the text from the standpoint of relationships between an apparent formal linguistic representation on bneh and and on the other hand  , the informational content involved in the text . . . As the result of such investigations we Can arrive  , among others , at various descriptive formulas of the structure of scientific texts  "28  . 
One way of arriving at structures that reflect specific textual content is to make use of the restrictions in langua-geusage which are characteristic of the texts in a particular subject matter that is  , to exploit the fact that on a particular topic , only certain words in certain combinations actually appear  55  . 
In other words , it was realised that what is required is a special purpose artificial language  , to cater to the needs of information storage , processing and retrieval . The Automatic Lan-guage Processing Advisory Committee  1966  ) reallsed and reported that " A deeper knowledge of language could help  . . . to enable us to engineer artificial languages for special purposes  . . . 
and to use machines as aids in translation and in information  retrieval"40  . 
Subsequently , suggestions for a metatheory of linguistics and information science  , with a metalauguage having all the properties of a classifi-cation schema have been proposed  . The term ' metalanguage'specifies a ' public ' metalanguage  , such as a document classification system , as distinguished from the ' object language ' represented by the documents  . The written record of a document classification schema is not really parallel to the surface structure of the object language-the natural language sentences of a document  . A classification schema is intended to classify , and , therefore the language of the schema is mainly classificatory  . In other words , the metalanguage does not explicitly include all relevant terms in the object language  , but the object language does include all terms in the metalanguage  . 
Moreover , superset-subset ( class inclusion ) relations are usually explicitly given by ~ he structure of the classification jo  . Thus some of the ' logical semantic'relatigns , specifically those of implication 4D are specified in the socalled ' surface structure ~ of the metalanguage  , but not in the surface structure of the object language  38  . 
Universal Forms and Subject Represen-tatlon
Parallel to the search for universal linguistic forms such as that expounded by Chomsky  , Fodor and others the discovery that certain features of given languages can be reduced to universal properties of language and explained in terms of deeper aspects of linguistic form  ,  11 ,  12 ,  37 ; and that such deep structure of sentences determine the semantic content while their surface structures determine the phone-tic interpretation  )  , steps towards the formulation of generic framework for structuring the representation of the name of a subject for the development of classification schemes and  subject21 ~ n dexln ~ languages were investigated ,  3 ,  45-~8 . Such universals are Being arrived at and used in various other are as dealing with information and information processing  . For instance , in the area of data modelling , now the basic problem is to identify the world as a domain of objects with properties and relations  10  . 
Such categorlsation of objects of study is not new to the library profe-ssion  . As early as 1930s , the use of categorlsation of component ideas forming the name of a subject into Person-ality /core object of study  , Matter/property/method , Energy/acti~1 , Space/place and Time , and defining an order of these categories to form a ' logical  , classificatory language ' resulting in ' faceted ' library classification sche-mes was known in India  45  ,  47 . 
It is interesting to note that it has been realised now that the abovementioned Rangana than 's categories 
Personality , Matter and Energy , are " general categories building the system's etructure as a spatlo temporal deriving meta informational  , for a process of automatic analysis too 13 ,  14 . 
The order of the component ideas denoting the different categories in the name of a subject as prescribe discontext-dependent order  . More specifically it is context-specifying order . 
Every component category sets the context for the next and following ones  . 
Also in this classificatory language , every category should explicitly have the corresponding superordinate component ideas preceding it  . The reason for fixing the superordinates before the component elements concerned is to render the component elements denote precisely the ideas they represent  . 
Further , it has been conjectured that 46 , 52 the syntax ( order ) of representation of the component elements in the name of a subject as prescribed by the pr $ ~ciples for sequence-facet sequence  4w - is more or less parallel to the Absolute Syntax - i e  . , the sequence in which the component ideas of subjects falling in a subject-fleld arrange themselves in the minds of a majority of normal intellectuals  . If the syntax of the representation of the component ideas of subjects is made to conform to  , or parallel to the Absolute Syntax , then the pattern of linking of the component ideas-ie  . , the resulting kngwledge structure is likely to be ~ 
IMore helpful in organising subjects in a logical sequence for efficient storage and retrieval  ;   2 Free from the aberrations due to variations in linguistic syntax from the use of the verbal plane in naming subjects  ; and 3 Helpful in probing deeper into the pattern of human thinking and modes of ~ ombination of ideas  . 
Subject In ~ exin ~ ~ nd Thes Aurus
Due to the development of techni-ques for structuring of subjects and for classification of subjects  , several experiments were conducted at the Documentation Research and Training Centre to use them for thesaurus construction  . 
To begin with , a faceted library cla-ssification scheme for a specific subject field was used in t ~ computer- -generation of thesaurus - ~ in which it was possible to incorporate the hier-archic relationships of terms  . But it was not possible to incorporate the generation of non-hierarchic associ-ative relationship of terms  . 
Terms that have associative relationship to each other have to be esta-bll shed only by consensus of experts in the field concerned  . But the validity of the assumption that , knowledge based on the consensus of experts in a field is different from the knowledge expre-ssed in the literature of the field has been challenged  , as the two lists of keywords , one given by experts and the other formed by analysis of published literature were not significantly different  33  . In other words , terms that are related to each other assocl -atively could be easily ascertained by an analysis of the statement of the name of the subject of a document or of a reader's query  . For instance , whe-ther " x-ray treatment " is associatlvely related to " cancer "  , or not , could be established if there exists a document on " x-ray treatment of cancer "  . In other words , a published document on " x-ray treatment of cancer " brings into associative relationship both " x-ray treatment " and " cancer "  . Also it is unimportant which terms cooccur frequently in the names of subjects for  , any term that is used once in the statement of the name of a subject is enough to be admitted into the thesaurus for that subject and is related with other terms in that name of the subject in some particular way  . In order to incorporate associatively related terms in thesauri  , experiments were conducted 35 ,   53 using subject representations formulated for the purpose of developing classification schedules  , which were arrived at bYR angana than's facet analysis  21  , 49 for thesaurus construction . With certain limitations it was possible to generate broader  , narrower and associative relationships but not coordinate relationships  . Further , it was realised that 2 ,   17 selection of candidate terms and ascertaining of multiple linkage of relationships among terms can be done in several ways such as by  1 the analysis of user's query specifications ;   2 the analysis of summarised statements of the subjects of documents  ; and 3 the analysis of sentences in the text of dictionary  , glossary , encyclopaedia and even textbooks and treatises . 
Artificlal Lan ~ u ~ e for Thesaurus
Further research into the fundamentals of subject indexing languages resulting in the development of a  305-general4theory of subject indexing languages and the development of the Postulate-based Permuted Subject Indexing  ( POPSI ) language 3 ,   8 has provided a basis for a more efficient and flexible system for thesaurus construction  . 
According to the general theory of subject indexing languages  ; information is the message conveyed or intended to be conveyed by a systemet lsed body of ideas  , or its accepted or acceptable substitutes . Information in general , is of two types : discursive information and non -dlscursive information or unit facts  . Non-discursive information or unit facts may be6either qualitative or quantitative P , I . The name of a sub-Ject is essentially a piece of non-dls-cursive information end it is conveyed by an indicative formulation that summarises in its message  , ' what a particular body of information is about  '  . " The language for indicating what a body of information is about  , need not necessa-rily be in terms of sentences of the natural language  . It can be an artificial language of indicative formulation used to indicate whetabody of information is about " o  . 
The essential ingredients of a language-natural or artificial-ere the elementary constituents  ; and rules for the formulation of admissible expressions using the elementary constituents  . A Subject Indexing Language consists of elementary constituents and rules for the formulation of admissible subject-proposlt lons  . It is used to summarise in indicative formulations what the contents of a source of information are about  . The purpose of these summarlslng indicative formulations is to create groups of sources of information to facilitate expeditious retrieval of information about them by providing necessary and sufficient access points  . 
The component ideas in the name of a subject can be deemed to fall in any one of the elementary categories : Discipline  , Entity , Action and Property . 
The term ' manifestation ' is used to denote an idea or a term denoting an idea  , falling in any one of the elementary categories . Apart from the elementary categories there are Modifiers to the elementary categories  . A modifier refers to an idea or a term deno-ting an idea  , used or intended to be used to qualify the manifestation without disturbing the conceptual wholeness of the latter  . A modifier can modify a manifestation of anyone of the elementary categories  , as well as a combination of two or more manifestations of two or more elementary categories  . 
Modifiers can be common modifiers like time , place etc . or special modifiers which can be entity based or action based or property based  . Apart from the elementary categories and modifiers there is a Base and Core  . Due to the fact that recent research work is gene -rally project-or lented  , mlss lon-or lent-ed and inter-dlsclpll nary and not gene-rally disclpllne-or lented  , there may be a need to bring together all or major portion of information pertaining to a manifestation or manifestations of a particular elementary category  . This manifestation or elementary category is the Base  . Similarly , need may arise to bring together within a recognised Base  , allor major portion of information pertaining to manifestations of one or more elementary categories  , the category or categories concerned are the
Core of the concerned Base . Also the elementary categories may admit of Species  ( genus-specles ) and Parts ( Whole-Part )  . 
The elementary constituents of a specifl cSubject Indexing Language- 
POPSID , 7, 8 are given belation 2 . 1 General 2 . 2Bias 2 . 3 Comparison 2 . 4 Similarity 2 . 5 Difference 2 . 6 Application 2 . 7Influence
Common Modifier 3 TimeModifier 4 Environment Modifier 5 Place Modifier
Elementary Category 7Discipline
A coo . 2 Property 9Base , Part . Specles/Type-Special

A and P can go with another A and P also
Features an a1 ~ gousto D , E,
A and P .
' Fnerules of syntax of POPSI prescribed for the subject-propositions is 
D followed by E ( both modified or unmodified ) appropriately interpolated or extrapolated wherever warranted  , byA ? and/or P ( both modified or unmodified ) . 
Amanifestation of Action ( A ) follows immediately the manifestation in relation to which it is an A  . Amanifestation of Property ( P ) follows immediately the manifestations in relation to  -306--which it is a P . A Species ( type ) /Part follows immediately the manifestation in relation to which it is a Species / 
Part . A Modifier follows immediately the manifestation in relation to which it is a modifier  . Generally a modifier gives rise to a species . Also if nece-ssary auxiliary words within brackets could be inserted in between terms if found necessary ? These form the basis of the POPSI language  . 
While examining whether a classification scheme could for ma'm et alangu-age ' of a metatheory of linguistics and information science  , it has been obser-ved that " all relational information necessary for the explication of an object language " are not present in classification schema  , especially role notions and presuppositions 38 . Such ' relational modifiers ' or ' role indicators '  , qS ,  20 ,   63 that describe the role of the concept in context , representing basic ' role notions ' such as the cause of the event  , the effect of the event etc . , similar to that of the case relations - nominative  , accusative , instrumental 19 etc . -if incorporated in the subject-propositions , fo~nulated according to the ' subject analysis ' techniques mentioned above  38  ,  4552 , then it could form a ' metalanguage ' for thesaurus  , from which thesaurus could be generated automatically  . 
, ! Dput Subject-propositions for

The preparation of input to the thesaurus construction system starts with writing out sentences such as  , " this book is about . . . , this report is about . . . ., this paper is about . . . , this query is about . . .  " 23, 36 . " To tell what is the subject or top is of a play , a picture , a story , alecture , a book etc . , forms part of the indivi-duals mastery of a natural language  . . . 
They are the starting point of most requesters when approaching a bibliographic information retrieval system or in a dialo ~ e with a librarian or  docu-mentallst"-60  . To aid in such an indi-cative formulation that summarlses in its message what a particular body of information is about  , the title of the document or the raw specification of the readers ' query or even sentence or sentences in the text of dictionary  , glossary , abstract and even textbooks is taken as the starting point  . Each of the specific subjects dealt within the document or specified in the rea-der's query or text statements are determined and expressed in natural language  . 
Let one of the names of subjects be expressed as " Re-ts nnlng of chrometanned leather using chest nut "  . Each of the component ideas such as the name of the dl sclpll ne  ( baser the core object of study ( entity ) etc . , that are implied in the expressed statement of the subject are explicitly stated to form an ' expressive title '  48  ,  50 , 51 iow . " as fo1s . In Leather Technology , re-tanning of chrometanned leather by vegetable tanning using chest nut "  . 
The ' expressive title ' is then analysed to identify the ' elementary categories ' and ' modifiers ' and the component terms are written down removing irrelevant auxiliaries  , as a formallsed representation , following the principles of sequence of components  9  ,  49 . The analysed and forma-lised subJect-proposltlon is given below : ID is clpll ne  ) Leather Technology , Core Entity ) Chrome Tanned Leather , Action on Entity ) Re-tannlng , LB ~7 Action based Modifler ) Vegetab Ie-
Tanning , /Using \] ( Entity based Modifier ) CheBtnut . 
The subject-proposltlon is then modulated by augmenting it by interpolating and extrapolating as the case may be  , by the successive superord lna-tes of each elementary category by finding out' of which it is a species  ( type ) or part ' . The synonymous terms if any are attached to the corresponding standard terms  . The modulated subject-proposition is given below :
Leather Technology . Leather , Tanned
Leather , Chrome-tanned Leather/.
Chrome Leather . Re-tanning ( by )
Vegetable Tanning ( Using ) Chestnut.
The auxiliary words ( even if relevant are removed from the subject-pro -position and phrases enclosed within brackets indicating ' role notions ' or ' role indicators ' are inserted between the kernel terms  . The resulting sub-
Ject-proposition is given below :
Leather Technology . Leather ( Type of -) Tanned Leather ( type of -)
Chrome Tsnned Leather/Chrome Leather.
(process used - ) Re-tann ln ~ ( process used - ~ Vegetable Tanning ( agent used- ) chest nut . 
The subject-proposltion is further analysed to determine which terms are associatively related to each other specifically  . For instance , in the above subject-proposlt lon'chestnut'is related to ' Vegetable tanning ' and also-  307-to ' Re-tanning ' , as an agent used in both the processes . ' Chrometanned leather ' is related to ' Re -tannlng ' as it admits of being re-tanned  , and also to ' Vegetable tanning ' as it admits of being vegetable  ( re ) tanned . After this analysis , the subject-proposition ks formulated as a relation map showing the ' links '  . The relation map for the above subject -proposltlon is given in the figure below :  '$3' -- Generate NT relation with the immediately succeeding term and genera-tea reverse BT relation  . No role indicator code is used ( whole-part relation )  . 
The codes for generating RT relation and the associated computer mani-pulation are :  '$1' -- Generate a RT relation with the immediately succeed-in n term using the role indicator code LEATHERTECHNOLOGY  . LEATHER ( type of -) TANNED
In the relation map given above , the dotted lines indicate NT/BT relationship , continuous lines indicate RT relationship and slash indicates synonym/use relatlonship  . 
The relationship between pairs of terms NT or RT as indicated by dotted lines and continuous lines respectively as shown in the example  , are replaced by appropriate codes to form the input to the thesaurus generation system  . 
The codes used in the subject-propositions for generating entries for a thesaurus are of the following types :  1 those that indicate which terms are to be related  ( codes for relating terms ) and whether the relation is
NT or RT or SYN ; and 2 those that denote the role indicators . 
The codes for relating terms are of the following three types :  1 those that indicate NT relation ; 2 those that indicate RT relation ; and 3 that which indicates Synonymous relation . 
The codes for generating NT relation and the associated computer mani-pulation are :  '$2' -- Generate a NT relation with the immediately succeeding term using the role indicator code of the term being manipulated and gene-rate a reverse BT relation changing the position of '-' in the role indicator code  ( genus-species relation )  ; and and generate a reverse RT relation changing the position of '-' in the role indicator code  ; and '$5 ,  $6 ,  $7 ,  $8 , and S0' -- Generate a RT relation with the immediately preceding term with the same '$ code ' taking the role indicator code of the term being manipulated and generate a reverse RT relation changing the position of '-' in the role indicator code  . 
The code for generating Synonymous relation and the associated computer manipulation is : '/'-- Generate a Synonymous relation with the immediate -ly preceding term and generate a rever-se'Use' relation  . 
It is to be noted that the role indicators are used specifically for further categorls at lon of RTs  , as they are expected to be numerous . But representation of genus-specles relations could also be categorlsed to achieve better display format and for proper generation of coordinate RTs out of NTs to a particular term  . The following is an extract of role indicators used in our experimental thesaurus on Leather Technology: 
O1-Source of ; 07-Property of ; 08-Process used ; 12-Agent used ; 13-Device used ; 16-Type of ; 19-Constituent of . 
The subject-proposit londrawn as a relation map is augmented with the different NT and RT links as given below :  $0 LEATHERTECHNOLOGY $4 LEATHER $2   ( 16- ) STTANNEDLE ATHER $ 2 ( 16- ) $6$7 CHROMETANNED LEATHER/CHROME
LEATHER $0(08-)$9(08-)$6 (08-)
RE-TANNING $7(O8-)$6(08-) VEGE-
TABLE TANNING $ I(12-) ST (12-)

? Computer Coding of Sub~ect-propositlons
An assorted number of subject-propositions from a specific subject field  , augmented with codes for relating terms and codes for role indicators are read by a program ' CODEK  '  . Each of the unique terms in the subject-pro -positions is internally serial numbered uniquely and the respective terms in the subject -propositions are replaced by their serial numbers  . As and when a term is encountered in a subject -pro-position  , it is matched with existing terms and its seri8l n %/ mber is picked if the term is available , if not the term is entered as the last entry with appropriate serial number and the given serial number is replaced in the sub- 
Ject-proposition . The term dictionary thus built , and the translated subject-propositions , are written separately as two different files for further processing  . A sample of the dictionary is given below : 0001 SKIN 0002 BEND 0003 BELLY 0004 OFFAL 0005 HALFBACK 0006 SPLIT 0007 FLESH SPLIT
Manipulation of Sub~ect-prc posltions
The coded subject-propositions are manipulated to generate term-palrs  ( terms denoted by serial numbers ) following the links indicated by the codes . Once an entry is prepared its reverse entry is automatically generated by changing the position of the ' lead term ' and the ' context term '  . In hierarchic relationships the relation
NT is changed to BT in reversing the entry . In RT entries the relation does not change in the reversal  . In the case of entries having the role indicator codes  , the position of '-' is changed from prefix to suffix and vice versa as appropriate  . In the case of
Synonymous relationship indicated by '/' in the input  , a SYN and a reverse
USE entries are generated . These processes are done by a program named ' GENTHES '  . The entries foe the thesaurus at this stage are in the form of serial numbers standing for the ' lead ' and the ' context ' terms with the role indicator code in between them  . The entries look as shown below :
O009 RT ( O8- ) 04350433 RT ( - O8 ) OO090010NT ( 16- ) 00110011 B T ( -16 ) 0010
Generation of Coordinate Term-palrs
The term-palrs so for generated are the hierarchic and non-hler archic associative types  . Terms coordinate to a particular term are not present in them  . In order to generate coordinate entries , the generated entries are sorted in ascending sequence so that  , ' context'serial numbers for the same'lead term '  ( having the same serial number in the lead term position and having the same role indicator code  ) that are NTs , are formed as a separate table and coordinate RT term-palrs are generated among them  . These coordinate entries are merged with the earlier generated entries  , and passed as a file for further processing . The generation of coordinate entries is done by a program named ' GENCORD'  . 
Translation of Thesaurus Entrles
The file of generated entries for thesaurus is retranslated back into natural language terms by a program named ' TKANSLAT '  . The term dictionary created as a file by the program CODER is read together with role indicator codes and their corresponding descriptive phrases  . The file of thesaurus entries , passed on by the program GENCORD , is read record by record . The serial number of both the ' lead ' and ' context ' terms are translated into natural language terms using the term dictionary  . The role indicator code is also translated into the corresponding descriptive phrase  . The translated entries are written as a file for further sorting and printing  . 
Translation to Different Langua Ke ~
In order to translate the generated thesaurus into another language the term dictionary and the descriptive phrases denoting the role indicator codes are replaced by equivalent terms in the required language  . Incompatibi-lity of terms though pose some problems it is possible to form these two files choose the correct standard terms and synonyms  . The term dictionary if dumped out has an indication as to which terms are taken as synonyms  , which must be taken care of in preparing the ' translation table '  . 
Sorting and Printing Thesaurus
The file of thesaurus entries in natural language terms  , output of the program ' TRANSLAT ' , is sorted alphabetically using the SORT program available in the computer system  . It is then printed out in double column format with proper in dention for ' lead'term  , relation , role indicator , and ' context term ' . 
Programs Developed for Thesaurus
The programs developed for generating thesaurus as outlined in this paper are written in COBOL end ASSEMBLER languages for IBM  System/370 series computers and require a 256K partition , twotapedrives , one disk drive and a line printer . The programs have been used to generate a thesaurus of Leather Technology terms using test data of about  1500 subject-propositions . 
The number of unique terms were 1851 , the total number of entries were 13 , 717 . 
The thesaurus generation work took about 3 months of input preparation by two persons and lOmln  26  . 73 secs of CPU time at an IBM System/370-159 . The programs were kept as load modules and were executed  . 

The study of linguistics in general , and the theories of universal grammar and structure of languages in particular  , provide a framework for the development of scientific languages - artificial languages for specific purposes-relevant to applications in the different links in the ' communica-tion chain ' that links creators of information and users of the same  . The development of the theory of Subject Indexing Languages and its applications in the field of information storage and retrieval is a clear indication of this development  . 
Bibllographical References
Auguston , JG and Minker , Jack.
Deriving term relations for a corpus by graph theoretical clusters  . 
( J1 of Amer Soc for InfSc . V21, no2;1970, Mar ; p101-111) . 
2Balasubramanian , V . Computer-based thesaurus generation from modulated subject structures  . ( Guide:
FJ Devadason ). Research Project.
DRTC , 1978.
3 Bhattacharyya , G . A general theory of SIL , POPSI and Classau-rus : Results of current classification research in India  . Paper presented at the International
Classification Research Forum , organlsed by SIG ( CR ) of American
Society for Information Science.
Minneapolis . Oct 1979.
4 --- . Fundamentals of subject indexing languages . In Neelameghan , A,
Ed . Ordering systems for global ~ formatlon networks : Proceedings of the Third International Study 
Conference on Classification
Research , Bombay , India . 611 Jan 1975 . FID/CR publication 553 . 
DRTC , Bangalore . 1979. p83-99.
5---.---.---.....---.p87.
6---.---.---.---.---.p88.
7 - - - . Intellectual foundation of
POPSI . ( mimeographed ). DRTC,
Bangalore . 1979.
8 --- . POPSI : Its fundamentals and procedure based on a general theory of subject indexing langua-ge  . ( ~ ibSc with slant Doc . V 16, no 1; 1979, Mar ; p134) . 
9....---.---.....---. p2324.
10 Biller , H and Neuhold , EJ . Semantics of databases : the semantics of data models  . ( Inf Systems . v3;1978; p1130) . 
11 Chomsky , Noam . Aspects of the theory of syntax . The MIT Press . 
1965. p35.
12---. Reflections on language.
Fontana . Collins . 1976.p4.
13 Ciganik , Marek . Meta informational approach to the theory of integrated information retrieval systems  . ( Inf Processing and Mgt . 
v11; 1975; p110).
14 --- . Meta informational in action in the process of the automatic semantic analysis  . ( Inf Process-Ing . dM gtv 15;1979; p196-198) ~ n?15 Costello , JC . A basic theory of roles as syntactical control devices in coordinate indexes  . 
( J1 of Chem Doc . v4; 1964; p116-123).
310--16 Costello , JC . Coordinate indexing . Rutgers , the State University . New Jersey .  1966 . p 1415 . 
17 Devadason , FJ . Using taxonomy of concepts by subject specialists for thesaurus construction : A case study  . DRTC Annual Seminar . v15;1977, Dec ; p179 . 
18 Documentation Research and Training Centre . Seminar on thesaurus in information systems . Bangalore,
India . I5 Dec19 75.315p.
19 Fillmore , DJ . " The case for case ".
In Bach , Emmon and Harms , RT,~ . Universals in linguistic
Eeory . Holt , Rinehart and Wins-ton Inc . New York .  1968 . 
20 Foskett , AC . The Subject approach to information . Clive Bingeley,
London . 1977. p 387,412,426.
21 Foskett , DJ . Systems theory and its relevance to documentary classification  . ( Intl Classification . v7, no 1; 1980; p2) . 
22 Gilchrlst , A . Thesaurus in retrie-val . ASLIB , London .  1971 . 
23 Hutchlns , WJ . The concept of ' aboutness ' in subject indexing . 
( Asllb Proceedings . y30, no5;1978, May ; p172-181) . 
24 Ilion , A . Creation of thesauri for
Euron et . In Overcoming the language barrie ~ Third European Congress on Information Systems and 
Networks . Luxembourg , 56 May 1977 . v1 . E d 2 . KGSaur , New
York 1978. p426.
25---.---.---.---.---. p42 7.
26 International Atomic Energy Agency.
INIS : Thesaurus . IAEA-INIS-13.
IAEA . Vienna .  1970 . p5?27 Ivanova , NS . Automatic compiling of thesauri on the basis of statistical data  .   7th Annual Meeting of the Committee for International
Cooperation in Information Retrieval among Examining Patent Offices 
Stockholm , 18-29 Sept 1967.
ICIREPAT , BIRPI , Geneva . 1968.
p92-107.
28 Janos , Jirl . Theory of functional sentence perspective and its application for the purpose of automatic extracting  . ( Inf Process and Mat . v15, no I ; 1979; p22) . 
29 Jardlne , N and Van Ri Osbergen , CJ.
The use of hierarchic clustering in information retrieval  . ( Inf
Storage and Retrieval . v7; 1971; p217-240).
30 Jones , Karen Sparck . Synonymy and semantic classification . Ph . D . 
Thesis , University of Cambridge.
1964. p 1.7-1.9.
31---.---.---.---.---. p3.8.
32---.---.---.---.---. p 6.21.
33 Kim , Chaland Kim , Soon D . Consensus Vs frequency : An emprical investigation of the theories for identifying descriptors in designing retrieval thesauri  . ( Inf
Processing and Mat . v13, no 4; 1977; p253-258).
34 Leech , GN . Towards a semantic description of Engllsh . Bloomlng-ton , Indiana University Press . 

Maltra , Ran Jlta . Semi-automatl c method of generating ml cro-thesau -rus  . Project Report . DRTC ,
Bangalore . 1977.
36 March , ME . On indexing , retrieval and the meaning of about . ( J1 of
Amer Soc for InfSc . v28, no1;1977, Jan ; P38-43) . 
37Mcneill , D . Empiricist and natu-rlst theories of language : George 
Berkeley and Samuel Bailey in the 2Oth century . In Koestler , A and
Smythles , JR  ~ . Beyond reduct-ionlsm : Newpe ~ pectives in the life sciences  . Alpback Symposium , 1968 . Hutchinson , 1969, p291-292 . 
38 Montgomery , Christine A . Linguistics and information science . ( J1 of Amer Soc for InfSc . v23, no3;1972, June ; p214-215) . 
39 Minker , Jack , Wilson , GA and
Zimmerman , BH . An evaluation of query expansion by the addition of clustered terms for a document retrieval system  . ( Inf Storage and Retrieval . v8; 1972; p329-348) . 
40 National Academy of Sciences , Nat-ional Research Council , Automatic
Language Processing Advisory
Committee . ( Chairman : Pierce,
John R ). Language and machines :
Computers in translation and lingulstlcs-A report . National
Research Council Publication 1416,
Washington DC . 196b . p30.
41Neelameghan , A . Absolute syntax and structure of an indexing and switching language  . In Above cited ref . no . 4, p1~ . 
42... ---.---.---.---. p173.
43 --- . Sequence of component ideas in a subject . ( LibSc with slant to Doc . v8; 1971; p523-534) . 
44 Pickford , AGA . Some problems of using an unstructured information retrieval language in a co-ordl-nate indexing system  . ( Aslib Proceedings , v23 , no 3; 1971 , Mar ; p133-138) . 
45 Ranganathan , SR . Colon Classification . EdI , 1933 .   .   . Ed 6, 1960 . Asia Publishing House,

46 --- . Hidden roots of classification . ( Inf Storage and Retrieval . 
v3; 1967; p399-410).
47  . . . . Prolegomena to library classification . EdI , 1937 . Ed 2,1957 . 
Asia PubHouse , Bombay.
48---.---. Ed3.~sia PubHouse,
Bombay . 1967. p86-87.
49---.---.---v---.---.p395-434.
50....---.---.---.---. p404-405.
51---.---.---.---.---. p43 9.
52---.....---.---.---.p579-582.
53 Ravichandra ~ ao , IK . Semi-auto-matic method of construction of thesaurus  . In Above cited ref . 
no . 18, pB16-~30.
54 Rolling , LN . Compilation of thesauri for use in computer systems  . ( Inf Storage and Retrl . 
v6, no 4; 1970, June ; p341-350).
55 Sager , Naomi . Computational linguistics : Steps towards application  . Paper prepared for the
Workshop in Linguistics and Inf-ormation Science . FID/LD . Stockholm , 35 May 1976 . p18 . 
56 Salton , G . Automatic information organisation mud retrieval . 
McGraw Hill , New York .  1968 . p4048,57 Sasmori , Katsunosuke . Software  esign for vocabulary control DOCTOR ) system , In North , Jeanne
B , Ed . The information conscious soc~ty : Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science  . v7; 33rd Annual Meeting . 
Philadelphia . 1115 Oct 1970.
ASIS , 1970.p 195-197.
58 Schwanhausser , G . An automatically produced thesaurus . In Above " cited ref . no .  18 . p~-B15 . 
59 Shephard , Michael and Watters,
Caroline . Computer generation of thesaurus . ( LibSc with slant to
Doc . v12; 1975; PaperE).
60 Spang-Hanssen , H . Are classification systems similar to natural languages ? In Above cited ref  . 
no . 4. p157-
Tanimoto , TT . An elementary mathematical theory of classification and prediction  . IBM Research
Yorktown Heights . New York . 1998.
62 Thompson , David A . Interface design for an interactive information retrieval system : A literature survey and a research system  . 
( J1 of Amer Soc for InfSc . v22, no 6; 1971, Nov-Dec ; p361-373) . 
63 Vickery , BC . On retrieval system theory . E d 2 . Butterworths,
London . 1965. p58-60,97.
64 Wall , Eugene . Symbiotic development of thesauri and information systems : A case history  . ( J1 of
Amer Soc for InfSc . v26, no2;1975, Mar-Apr;p71-79) . 
65 Wolf-Terroine , M , Rimbert , D and
Rouault , B . Improved statistical methods for automatic construction of a medical thesaurus  . 
( Methods of Inf in Medicine . v11, no2;1972, Apt ; p104-113) . 
66 Yu , Clement T . A methodology for the construction of term classes  . 
( Xnf Storage and Retrieval . v10; 1974; p243-251) . 


CODER\[.~-rm'ISORT
GENCORD , , , 
ISORT
PRINT  tions


TRANSLATIr
SYSTEMS FLOW CHART 313 -
AMMONItl MI-YI~RJ~I~J3 ANILINEJY ~
AMMf~NIU MHYOKJ ~ IJE

RECUG ~ N ~ & ~ ? 4I "
RT(-A~ENIU~Jl
UNF . AL~h~l@/CQJ ~ JlIA , f ~ IJEAS ~
SCOld ; 4~Y ) RJKI , JE
AMMONIUM ~ I~O,~PH,~E

BATIN , ~ MAIIE ~ I~L
RTCOJ ~ IAi'EI ~ EA$t
AMM CN LJ MJ rl LJ ~ J ~ E
AMMENIJN ~ UL~=A6.
EORICAGIJ  blY~LGA~JVICKE , W ~ NJ : dIE  C , ALCANLTRIt . I~WJAfd
DOGM ~ Jk ~
ORENC , tE~NZYM~lUCOiE
LACTIC , AG , ~
MIXE t ) Jk ? a ~.$ ~
PANi ~ T\[I
BliPS ~1
SOOlU4~I~,,,N . FATE
IC1OJ , 4dI ; HKI4 AIEO UR 4ul LA ~ ULI 14 J
WI'~AT~RA 4


RT(COJK~IAT c ~ IJEASI




FYDRO~E,~~Lr;IJ ~


RESIN $ CLU 3 ~. ~ P ~ Uf . = I

ItJc$?NlAi
AMMONIIJ ~ SULFATe


BATING4~TERI~L
DELMING ( C~OR~I~ATEIJEA~l
AMNON ~ UNCHLJ ~ IDE
AMMONIUNIPHJ ~) HATE
BORICACIO
BUTYRICaC'IJ
CHICKEN ~ a'4 J~E
CO~TA , ~
CUTRILINBATE
DOG MANURE


GLUC 3SE
LACTICACI (.1
MIXEDL)RY BaTE


SOOIU~d , ISdLF~TE$ODIU~~IC . HRJ ' taT ~
SOUR ~ OLAS ~

WHEATB~a ' ~

AMYLASE


RT ( COLROINRTE 13EAS)
ASPERGILLU~J ~ IZaE
KERAIINASE


RT?COL)R ~ INAT ~ IO n . AS
BAC lrE~I~LE',tLf4E
FUNGALE , NZY ~ E
PANCREATICE ~ I_/Y4E
PLANTE ; ~ LY~tE
PROIE3 LCTICE ~ ZY 4F
AN~EOF WEA#E-PR(JPE~T fJFJ

ANI kINE
RTt-A;E ',; IUS eJ~.

ANILINEDYE
THESAURUSS AMPLEPAGE--314-
