PIIOBLi ~ ISOF F01@biL REPRESENTATION OFTEXTSTRUCTURE
FROM THE POINT OF VIEL OF AUTOMATICT it iNSLATION
Z.M . Shalyapina
Institute of 0 rien ~ al Studies
of tile Academy of Sciences of tile USSR
l . loscow , USSR

The paper is devoted to linguistic problems of defining the basic formaliz-ed representation of text in an automatic transla tion system within the frsmle work of the so-ca lled integral formal model of tiletr ~ ulslation process  , the primary re-quirement for tills represent at ion considered to be a compromise between its se -mal ~ ticity  , superficiality ~ a/idex hausti-veness . A representation covering five major aspects of text structure  ( its lexico-gra ~\] matical composi$ion ; its pre-dicate-ar~iment organization on these -mantico-syntactic level  ; the syTit actic group in z ~ of its units ; the a/iaphoric re-lations between them ; tile peculiarities of their linear ar rml gement  ) and refer-red ~ oas Combined Structural Represen-tation  ( CSR ) of text , is described to show tile ways and means of a ch ieving this compromise in the Japanese-Russian Automatic Translation Project  , now under development attile Institute of Or iental Studies of the Academy of Scienceso ? the USSR  ( Moscow )  . 
Introduction
Many problems of the automatic proces-sing of text require for their effect-ive solution a previous analysis of the text processed  , aimed attra/isforming this text into its intelnnediate formali-zed representation of some kind  , more suitable for further processing than the text itself  . I'~hen determining tile conc-rete character is tics of such a represen-tation one must obv iously take into account the operations meant to be applied to it  , or to be performed on its basis within the framework of the systemilivol-red  . If it is the problem of automatic tra~Islation that the system is to solve  , the set of tile corresponding operations will depend primarily on the general formal model of the translation process underlying this system  . One version of tlle model in question , proposed in Ia/id discussed in more detail in  2  , envisages the following main groups of operat ions :  1   ) analysis and interpretation of the init i al text  , simulating the process of perceiving and understanding its signifi-cation and denotation  ; ideally , it presupposes a semantic description of tile text  , as well as a model of the situation ( " world " fra~ment ) presented in it , being " constructed from this text ( possibly , via a , lumber of intelnnediate represen-tations ) ; 2) tra/islation proper , which is performed at a level R of some formal representation Ri of the initial text  , de-rived from its analysis , and 6ullounts to selecting translation equivalents for the units included in li : the result is an in termediate representation R t of tl le target text  , this representation being usually ( although not necessarily ) of the same level as Ri ;  3 ) verification of the adequacy of the tr ~ ulslation performed  , by means of a/lalyzili ~' the result a/it representation Rta/id comparing the semantic descrip-tion and the situational model obtained  , with the sema/itic descriptional id the model of tl resituation corresponding to the init i al text  . ;
I ~) generation ( synthesis ) of the tar , z'et text by tra/lsforming tlreinte ~ ne-diate representation Rt formed during translation proper and assumed to be adequate by the verif ication procedure  , into a sequence of actual word-forms a zld punctuation marks making up the tar-t set l  . a / i ~ age text ;  5 ) evaluation of ~ he target text with a view fie detect undesirable ambi-Ln/ities and in accurac ies that mi~-ht have slipped in during the synthesis process  ; it implies 8/lalyzin ~- the text back to the I level and checking , whether tile resulting representation Rt co incides with the representation Rt from which this text has been formed  ;  6 ) editing operations dictated by the checks and comparisons made : if the translation is judged to be inadequate tliey will consistill returning " to the phase of translation proper and either substi-tuting alternat ive translation equiva-  , lents for some of the previously select-ed ones , or reconsidering the entire procedure % Ised and repeating it at a diffe-rent  ( " deeper " ) representation level or in a different form ( probably , resorting ? to synonymous trsl\]s formations of " the ini-tial text at the Ri level  )  ; if it is tile target text ambif ~ lities 6uld stylistic im-perfections that arc ~ obe removed  , better expressive means will be sought chiefly by  actuating9 the system of synonymous tra/Isformations at the Rt level  . 

It is readily seen that the basic level of formal text representation from the standpoint of the above conception of the translation process is level R  , directly concerned with the most important t ranslation operations  , primarily , the operations of translation proper , the scope of ~ lich is practically conf in-ed to the level in question  , and the ope-rations of synthesis ensuring the tran-sition from the R-level represent at ion of a text to its more " superficial " rep resentations up to the text as such  . 
Some other of the operations mention-ed involve also switching from the R-le-velto " deeper " levels of intermediate formal text represent at ion and taking into consideration such supp lementary factors as the essence of the situat ion described by the text to be translated  , the semantic peculiarities of the vocabulary and the syntax of the two languages  ; the requirements of gr~nmaticality and sty listic normativity  ( regularity ) of the target text , and so on . The foregoing shows that these operations are mostly auxiliary in nature  , their main purpose being to improve the content adequacy and the linguistic acceptability of the translation text formed through the use of the R-level representation  ; in a concrete automatic translation system based essentially on ~ he formal model we have outlined  , they may be reduced or even altogether omitted for various practical reasons  . 
However , whether these supplementary operations be in c luded in an AT system or not  , it is clear that the system will depend largely for its efficiency on the choice of the in termediate level R  . It is precisely this basic level that we are now Going to consider  . 
General Requirements
From the point of view of the purposes and pecul iarities of the translation process  , there are two opposite require-ments that can be placed upon the inter-mediate formalized representation R in an automatic translat ion system  . 
On the one hand , insofar as transla-tion boils down to trans forming the surface structure of a text while preserving its content  , it seems safe to assu-me that if some , components of the text to be translated ~ some features of these components  , or links between them are relevant for the content structure of this text  , they may also prove of importance for choosing the correct translation equivalents for the text units  . Conseque-ntly , the adequate representation R used in a uAT system should be sufficiently " semantic " for all the necessary  info~11a-t ion concerning the components , links and features in question to be either explicitly given in this representation Or  , at least , to be easily obtainable from it . To put it differently , represe-ntation R of a text processed must ref-lect its semantic structure with suffi- cient precision and insufficient detail  . 
On the other hand , the structures of the source and the target l ~ages will  , as often as not , have certain features in co , non , this leading to an inevitable neutraliza tion of any analysis transfor-mations invo lving such features  , by the inverse transfo~nations during the synthesis process  . Such transfo~nations will thus prove unnecessary for transla-tion purposes  , no matter how in ~ ortant they might be as regards the full semantic analysis of the text  . Accordingly , representation R must be sufficiently " superficial " for its construction to incorporate the minimum possible of such super fluous transformations  . 
As we see , the second requirement provides a kind of l imitation on the first one  , restricting the extent and the methods of the explication necessitated by tile latter p of the semantic structure of the text  . Taking into account both of these requirements will most likely result in a kind of a compromise solution suggesting that informat ion made expli-cit in representation R of a certain text should not include all the e lements of its semantic structure  ; rather , it should cover only those of them which are apr io-riknown to be extensively used in estab-li shing inter-l ~ guage correlations during t ranslation  . 
With such a solution , however , one must be fully aware that real texts will contain a substantial proprtion of cases where some text information over looked by our analysis might eventually turn out relevant for translation  . If we do not want to give up the idea of adequate lyprocessing such texts as impracticable in principle  , it seems useful to impose a third requirement on representation R-the requirement of " exhaustiveness " which may be formulated as fol lows  . All infor-mation contained in a natural language text and not made explicit in its intermediate representation must be preserved wi thin this representation  ; if possible , it should be preserved fully and without chang ing its original  ( natural language ) form , so that there might be no acciden-tallosses or distortions  . 
If so , the substitution of the forma-lized representation R for the original text will not exclude the possibility of ults of tile standard analyzing procedure and provid ing access to some extra infor-mation that may be required  . This is to say that the linguist describing the means of translating concrete language un its within such a system will not be subject to the pressure of too stringent limi tations originating from the conven-tions of the system  , rather than from the nature of the material he deals with  , and complicating his task ( difficult enough as it is )  . ~leoretically , he will be free to use any text information ( bo ~" superficial " and " deep " ) in any way he may find linguistically appropriate : whether as source units to be rep laced by tr~islation equivalents  , or as condi-tions determining the equivalents chos-en for some other units  , or else astra-nslation equivalents themselves  . 
The above principles are general enough to al low of various ways of imp-lementing them in a concrete automatic translation project  . Wesl ~ all present here one attempt of such imp lementation made in defining the so-called Combined Structural Representation to be used in the system of Japanese-Russian automatict ranslation  , now under development at the Institute of Or iental Studies of the 
Academy of Sciences of the USSR (~ oscow)3.
Combined St , ruc , tural Representation ( CSR ) , Taking into account the typological correla tion between the Japanese and the Russlan  lan6~ages   , we consider it necessary to specify in the CSR of the initi-al Japanese texts  , as well as of their Russiax , translations , five main aspects of text structure : the lexico -granmlati-cal composition of the text processed  , its predicate-ar~iment organization on the semantico-syntactic level  , the syn-tactic grouping of its units , the ~ apho-tic relations between them , and the pecu-liarities of their linear arrangement  . 
Within the CSR the corresponding five types of linguistic information about the text form separate components ~ lich will now bed is cussed in turn  , mostly from the point of view of their cons is tency witll the general requirements stated above  . 
Lexico-~r ~ lati . calcomposition ~ e component of the CSR concerned with the lexico-granm ~ atical composit ion of the text is intended to contain expli- cit descriptions of all lexemes present or implied  ( if ellipsis is the case ) in the text under consideration , as well as of all grammatical ( morpho-syntaetical ) elements accompanying them in the correspond ing wordforms or quasi-word forms  ( units taken to be functionally analogous to wordforms  )  . The descriptions requir-ed must include , apart from the s~n bols of the units involved , information about their meanings within the text in quest-ion and about their relevancy or i rrele-vancy as regards the process of its tra-ns lation  . 
~le operations necessary to obtain this component of the CSR~lenanalyzing the init ial Japanese text will evidently comprise i solating separate word forms and determining their internal structure  ( in terms of lexemes and morphologic mar-kers )  , resolving ~ nbi ~ ities for all units established  ; eliminating synonymy where it is manifes ted as supplementary distribution or free variation of morphologic units  ; detecting phraseological word combinations ~ d reducing them to a one word symbol  ; giving special labels to those word forms or parts of wordforms which play ~ auxiliary role in the text analyzed and require no special tran-slation equivalents  ; filling in the units omitted in the source text if their absence obscures its structure and hinders the translation process  ( due to the dif-ferences between the rules of linguistic ellipsis in the twolml guages  )   , etc . 
From this it follows that the lexico-granm ~atical composition of a text cannot be defin itively established in the course of its analysis without drawing upon in-formation about its structural characte-ristics  . The same kind of information is also needed ~ enworking with this component of the CSR in the synthesis process  ( chiefly in connection with such means of expressing structural relations as grammat ical agreement and government  , typical of the Russian l ~ , guage) . 
Therefore ~ in deciding what language units are to be described as permissible in the g iven con~onent of the CSR  , and ~ at status is to be attributed to them within its framework  , specifically , which units it is best to treat as in div idual words and ~ lich ones should rather be regarded as meaningful parts of words - morphemes  ( the problem being of particu-lar importance for Japanese where no re-gular graphical means are used in writ-ing to separate words from each other  )  , we believe it advisable to pay special at tention to the functions of the corresponding units in the general structure of the text and in the system of operations used for its processing  . With this aim in view , we have devised an operational cri-terion of distinguishing words and their meaningful parts  , based on the principle of the homogeneity of the levels of text processing " and on the requ irement that each level's units should have structural-ly significant functions wi thin the level well-defined  ( although not necessarily one-to-one ) correspondence between certain subsets of units belonging to the adjacent levels of process ing  . According to this criterion , the status of separ-ate words is justified , among others , for such Japanese units as the so-called " causative voice " marker-seru/-sas ~ the " conditional mood " marker - ~  , the negation marker-nai ( at least , in con-ditional contexts ~ d some others . 
Ajnong units ftulctionally analogous to independent word forms  ( and , consequently , appearing as such within the CSR ) , are also classified punctuation marks which are  , to our mind , quite similar to words in that they can be mean ingful and can correspond to definite trans lation equi-valents  ( or play the role of such , cf . 
Japanese kavs . Russian ?).
In this way , so far as the position of a unit in text structure and in the system of translation t ransformations is related to the meaning of this unit  , our general principles of describing the le-xico-grammatical composition of texts in their CSR conform to the requirement of its " semanticity "  . On the other hand , the " exhaustiveness " requirement is also met , since wemm/?eit a point not to leave out of the CSR any text elements  , up to those that serve essentially as surface markers of other linguistic units made expli- cit in this representation  , and do not themselves participate to anys ignificant extent in the semantic operations provid-ed in the system  ( e . g . Japanese " case " particles ; Russian morphological catego-ries of case , gender and number of adjectives ; " surface " linguistic expression of " lexical functions " and their transla-tion equivalents  , etc . ) . 
Predicate-argument organization of the text on the semantico-syntactielevel This component of the CSR represents semantico- syntactic links between words and/or quasi- words corresponding to their predicate-arz ~ment relations and  , accordingly , constituting meaningful text units . It is common knowledge that the surface express ion of these units is language-specific whi le their semantic content is generally assumed to be of a more or less universal nature  . So intra-nslation they must either remain essen-tially the same  ( naturally , with all the necessary modifications of their surface markers  ) or must be transformed by certain formal rules depending on the semantic interpretation of the links in ques-tion and on their relation with the meaning of the units linked  . 
The lexico-sy1~tactic translation trans-formations mentioned are most colmn only used where the source and the target languages have appreciable typological differences  . This is precisely the case with the Japanese -Russian correlation  ( a simple example : kate-we mannen hits u-o nusumar emashita  , lit . " he wass to lenapen ", transl . Y Heroy Epaa ~ pyqEy " he had his pens to len ") . Bearing this in mind we have chosen the dependency grammar to represent the predicate- ar-gument structure of texts in their CSR  , preferring it to its alternative-the immediate constituent system  , for accor-ding to a number of specialists , this type of transformations is easier to describe in dependency terms  . 
One of the central linguistic problems connected with presenting the pre-dicate-arL ~ nnent structure of a text in its CSR is which among the various  ( ~ u ~ d often semantically overlapping ) dependencies between the text units should be selected for explicit description  . In solving this problem we proceed from the pr inciple of the possibility of " immediate semantic substantiation " of the dependencies to be selected  . It can be specified as the following requi rement bearing on the ways and methods of des- cribing words and grammatical construc-tions when compiling the linguistic in-formation for the automatic translation system :- all syntactic dependencies registe-red in the CSR of a certain text must realize some semantico -syntactic valen-cies of the lexical or grammatical units present in it  ( and usually forming part of the lexico- grammatical composition of the wordforms or quasi-wordforms link-ed by the correspond ing dependencies  )   . 
These valencies , in their turn , must directly correlate with the semantic characteristics of the units they are ascr ibed to  , semantic considerations viewed as the major factor underlying their assignment to those units  . One important consideration of this kind consists in preferring the descriptions where the maximum possible of the valen-cies envisaged could be realized in concrete texts by two-word combinations and the maximum possib le of such combinations could be checked for their semantic ac-ceptability  ( consistency ) without regard to any units outside them . 
Apart from the situations where some of the syntactically linked units perfox na in the text processed auxiliary functions  ( thus having no independent semantic content ) the application of the above crite-ria can only be limited for reasons of economy and ef fective controllability of From the above it can be inferred that the linguistic info rmation used to reveal ~ u\]d/or process the predicate-argument structure of concrete texts should combine data on the means of surface expression of the links involved  ( i . e . word order , function words , etc . ) w i th fa i r ly deta i led semant ic descr ip t ions of the words to be fin/ted and of their combinatorial potentialities  . To provide the formal tools necessary for const ructing such descriptions we have devised a special formalized semantic language SLS  , the characteristic properties of which ca /l be briefly outlined as follows  . 
The vocabulary of SL comprises three categories of the so-called semantic elements : categoria lelements  , encyclopae-dic elements and identifying elements  . 
Among these the leading role belongs to the catez ' orial elements which are given special descrip tions constituting a kind of formalized semantic ~' ra~nmar of the na-tural language  . The sy~tax of SL , used to combine semantic elements into semantic formulae ~ accounts both for these -:** anticre lations established between the components of such a formula and for its communicative organization determining the behaviour of its components as regard stile logic operations tllat can be applied to the formula as a whole  . From the formal point of view a semantic formula is a linear sequence of symbols  , structurally equivalent to a special type of a dependency tree where the nodes can be labeled by tile symbols not only of single sems/ ~tic elements  , but also of their combinations ( subtrees ) of 8x ~ y length . 
S ema/2tic formulae caxl be employed to express : I ) semantic definitions of naturall ~ u ~ G-uage tu ~ its  ( from a separate word up to a whole text )  ; 2) their paradigma-ticsem~mtic features ;  3 ) their syntagma-tic semantic properties ( semantic inter-pretations of their syntactic va lencies  )   . 
An important distinguishing characte-rist ics of SL is that it affords formal derivabi lity of information about these-max~tic paradi Lnnatic and syntagm  , atic features of ls/~guage units from their semantic definitions  . This helps to make the sema~tic descriptions of these units more compact  ( by eliminating the unnecessary reiter at ion of essentially thesaraped at a  ) and to improve their reliability , owing to tl ~ e possibility of more object ively evaluating the adequacy of semantic def i-nitions on the basis of such a criter ion as the degree of correlation between the synta & ~ natic properties of a unit deriv-able from its definition  , on the one hand , and its actual semantice ombinability as observed in real texts  , on the other ha/id . ~ oreover , it increases the range of linguistic facts explainable on semantic grounds  . Thus , it becomes possible to give uniform rules ( unattainable if one stays within tile bounds of purely le-xico-syntactic phenomena  ) for the select-ion of tile correct morpho-syu ~tactical markers  ( as well as for the appropriate synonymous t rans formations and logical deductions - operat ions commonly used as translation devices  ) when handling con-structions with such Russ ian verbs as 
FpO3HTB (" runtherisk ") , 0 na CaTBCS (" fear ") , O ~ cM ~ aT ~ (" expect ") , ycneBaT ~ (" be in time ") , etc . , ta/<ing predicate words as their ar~'uments . These rules will enable us , for ex ~ uuple , to choose the correct Russi6u \] sentence
K pa He HO ~ , ly0n0 s~an~onomo ~ sD ( " II elpc ~ unelate to the woundedman " )  , rather tha/l * Pa HeHBI ~ 0 n0s ~ azcHOMOI ~ BD ( " The wounded man was late with help " ) as translation of the Japanese sentence Kegan in-wateate-gaokureteshimatta  . 
With senn~tic definitions of words fo rmulated in the SL tel~ns  , all syntactic dependencies linking these words in texts can be interpreted  ( for the most part , unsm , bi ~ uously ) as semantic relat-ions between certain e lements within their definitions  , and replac in 6' a word by its semaxltic definition will not alter the general form of the predicate -argument structure of the text  . The effect is that ill the framework of the pre -dicate-arzulment component of the CSt tile cont radiction between the " semanticity " a/id the " superficiality " required of its turns out Gobe to a large extent elimi-nated  . For one thing , any fraG~nent of the predicate-aruument structure of a text Call be interpreted  ( developed ) as a structure of sem~ultic elements and re-lat ions  ; for ~ other , the scope of such interpretation does not depend on any but linguistic consider at ions  , and if no transformations affect in ~ the internal semaxltic structure of words or relat ions between them are necessary for translat- ing a certain text fraglnent  , the latter need not be semantically interpreted  , no matter whether this kind of interpreta-t ion be indispensable for some other frail'pen is of the sane text  . 
Syntactic group_in ( ~ of text units
This type of structural information about the text concerl  , s the ~ roup in c of the words contained in it into larger combinations possessing certain syntactic and/or  sem6ultic independence , which makes it advisable to treat them as separate units at least at some stages of processing ' the text in question  . In a way such tion about the constituent structure of the text  . ~ e difference is , though , that the aspects of syntactic word-grouping included in the CSR of a text are limited to those that carry semantically relevant in formation lacking in its dependency structure  6   ( and , for tI ~ at matter , not always directly expressible in the classi-cal constituent marker form  , either ) . 
For the present , the given component of the CSR of a text is supposed to specify only the word groups establ is hed within connected fra~nents of its dependency tree in situations ~ ere the compo -sition of such groups and their bounda-ries are important for some of the opera-tions employed to process it  , such as ascertaining the domain of the quanti fi-ers  ; distinguishing between descriptive and restrictive attributes  ; revealing the full form of some types of ell iptical con-structions  ( e . g . ~ hose with co-ordinative reduction ) ; deciding on whether it would be safe to employ transformations disjoi-ning elements of some word-combinations within the text's dependency structure or linear representation  ( it seems reasonable to mark the combinations exc luding this kind of lexico-syntactict rans forma-tions a S a special type of syntyctic word-groups  )   , etc . 
The relevancy of the data on syntactic word- grouping for translation purposes can be il lust rated by the Japanese sen-~ence Watakushi tachi-notsu kaunichi-~hin-:doen:olaw ~ in~da tsukatteme hera-hal meaning " Among the things we used aily there are none that could be used for a long time and still remain as good as ne ~ If the data in question is not taken into account here we a reliable to dis-tort the presuppositional structure of the sentence by giving it the " literal " translation : * Cpe~Hnononssye MMxHaMEB e~e ~  10ia~- 
Hero06 zx0 ~ aHOTT aEM x,EO TOR Me 6N
He ~3 Ha ~ Ba ~ HcB , ~ a meecnHHM ~ Hon~-30 BaTBCS ~ 0 nr 0 eBpe Ma ( " Among the things we used aily there are none that do not wear out  , even if used for a long time ") , having the evidently false implication that the longer things are used the less they wear out  ( of . : HeTBe~e ~ , EOT0 pNe6 ~ HeMJHa ~ MBa~McB , ~ axeecnHHMHHon ~-
BOBaTBC ~ O~eH~~KKyp ~ THO " ~ ere are nothings that would not we arout even if they are taken good care of "  )  . 
The origin of this undesirable impli-cat ion can be explained twofold  . The first explanation is that one of the word -group boundaries in the given Russian sentence separates the negation He  ( " not " ) from the whole of the fragment following it in the linear sequence of this sentence : Ha Ha ~ HB a ~ Zeb  6~ ~ a ~ eeom\[m  ~ M H0~BSOBQTBC2   ~0nr0e BpeMs ( " wear out even if they are used for a long time " )  , so that the fragment cited is interpreted as an integral seme/itieo-syntactic unit  , this giving rise to the implication to be avoided  . According to the other explanation , the boundary res-ponsible for the interpret at ion of the Russian sentence runs between the whole of its initial fragment Cpe ~ H  HCH0~B3y-eMNX HaM ~ Be~e  ~ ~0MamHer0   06~x0~a HeT
TaEHX , KOT0 pBI e6 BIHe ~ JHa ~ HBa ~ CB ( " Among the things we used aily there are none that do not wear out "  ) and the remaining sequence ~ axe e0n~HmH Hons-
SOBaTBCa ~ 0 zr 0 eBpeM ~ ( " even if they are used for a long time " )  . From this standpoint , the false implication is accounted for by the possibility  , sugges-ted by grouping the sentence units into the above two fragments  , of interpreting and/or transforming these independently of each other  , thus obtaining ~ eHs ~ CH0X~syeM~x HaM ~ Beme ~ ~0- 
Mam Heroo ~ xo ~ a ~ sHam HBa ~ Tca , ~ a ~ eec zHHM MHO ~ BSO BaT BCS ~ onro e Bpems ( " All of the things we used aily we arout teven if used for a long time "  )  . 
No matter which one of the two expla-nations be taken as true  ( the second one seeming more plausible , while the first one suggesting simpler check -ups in process in G texts  ) it is clear that the tran-slation problem is to achieve in Russian the same syntactic group ing as in the original  , by introducing the corresponding lexical and /or positional  ( linear ) modifications , e . g .  :
C p e ~ ~ c n 0 a ~ s y e M ~ x H a ~ Z B e m e ~ ~ 0 i a ~-
Her006 Mx0~a HeTTaKMX ,   KOT0pNe   6B ~ ~ azenp ~ ~ nI ~ Te ~ BHOMHO ~ BBOB SHMHOC-
TaBa ~ HC BHeM3HO ~ eHHB ~ H.
Another ( and , probably , more ord in a-ry ) case of using data on syntactic word-grouping in translation can be exempli-fied by the sentence : q-~F '  . ~% ~ ~ ewa-re-nosei katsusuiun-oitsumade -moxokusaserukoto-~ade ~  . 
Here it is essential that the negation marker , as well as the expression of con-dition , which in the translation sentence must take a position different from the one its Japanese counterpart occupies in the original word-sequence  , should not interpose between the two members of the co-ordinatlve-type word-group present in the sentence  ( for clarity , we have enclo-sed tills group in brackets ) . That is , the translation must be ( l~iglish being structurally similar to Russian in this  -179--respect   )  :
If the workers do not ~ te~d~forward 2o litical ~ em and sl we shall never be able to raise our life level and not * If the workers unite and do not put forward polit ical demands  .   .   . " Generally speaking , the correct tran-slation of the last example ( as well as of other constructions explain ab lein terms of co-ordinative reduction  ) could also be obtained without recourse to tl le information about syntactic word-grouping  . 
Instead , one could use a " deeper " descri-ption of the text to be translated  , with elliptical constructions t rans formed into their full representations  . However , this kind of transformation would be basic a lly superfluous  , for in the synthesis process it would be necessary to reduce the con-structions in question back to their el-liptical formus ing but slightly diffe-rent rules  . It seems therefore preferable for the operat ions of translation proper to result direct ly in axx elliptical con-struction analogous to the original one a ~ d differ ing only in details of its surface express ion  ( such as the position of negation in the above example  )  , speci-fied by the subsequent synthesis procedure  . 
So we see that while the component of the CSR under discussion registers only semantical ly significant phenomena of text structure  , the means of representing them in it remain essentially superficial  , so as to satisfy both the " semanticity " and the " superficiality " requirements  . 
Anaphor_ic relations between text units For interpreting texts in respect of tlleir sicalification and especially denotation  , the structure of anaphoric rela-tions between their units is on the whole no less important than their predicate-argument structure  . However , the anaphoric structure is expressed mainly by le-xical repetition  , and this can be easily accounted for if we require that as long as one text is dealt with  , one and the same translation equivalent should be selected  , so far as possible , for all occurrences of one and the same lexeme ( le-xeme being defined as a word taken in one of its various lexical meanings  )   . Given this requirement ( which appears to be na-tural enough and , but for some special cases , easy to comply with ) , there is no need to include this structure in the CSR in its full form  . It seems sufficient to indicate it only for those types of language units which directly depend for their translation on the propert ies of their antecedents in the text at hand  . 
In Japanese ( as also in other langua-gas ) there are two types of such units . 
The first type are pronouns : when translating , say , the pronouns or e , the choice of one of tile words : thi ~ , lle ~ she , its the , o ~ etc .   , - as its text equivalent will be determined , among other things , by the syntactic class of the unit chosen as the equivalent of its saltecedent  . If this unit is a noun , one will also need to \] ~ low its number and ( for Russia ~ l ) gender . 
The second type of units which cannot be trans lated properly without in-formation about their antecedents is more specific  . These are words which are graphically ident ical with components of more complex units  , also lexicalized from the point of view of their semantic behaviour j and which  ca~1 function as structural substitutes for the latter  . 
When used in this function , such words must be replaced either by the transla-tion equivalents of their  6uatecederlts I or by pronouns ( with the data on these antecedents used in thes ~ mefashion as in translating usual pronouns  )   . Anyway , their own tra/~slation equivalents are ruled out  . 
Thus , the word ni mots u , meaning " lu ~' gage " if used independently , will be translated as " tllem " or " these parcels " in the context of the sentence Ko  , limotsu-gakari-~'a mazunimotsu-nome gata -ohakarimasu  , where ~ Iz mots u is substituted for konimo-tsu ( " parcel " ) : The clerk dealing with ) arcels first ~ i~s ~ e~t t!~9_2~3e~3~ AS regards all other types of lexical units , our approach is that the existence of ' anaphor ic relations between them sllould be checked and the relations themselves registered in the CSR for further processing only in those infrequent situ-ations  ( due mostly to dissimilarities in the combinatorial properties of the ori-ginal language words and of their tra/Is-lation equivalents  , this necessitating the use of synonymous transfor ~ nations  ) where it is impossible to fulfil the above requirement of translating diffe-rent occurrences of the same lexeme by the sa ~  , leequivalent , a/I done has to make sure that employing d if ferent equivalents in this case does not af fect the original anaphoric structure of the traxlslated text  . 
Linear arran K ~ ement of text units
In dealing with linear arra ~' ement of units in a ~ ext in the frs/new or k of axl automatic tra ~ islation system  , it is importal at to distinguish between two types of their positional  ( word-order )   180 " relations requiring different p rocessing during translation  . 
If the first type of such relations occurs between two text units  , the posi-tion of one of them in respect to the other is merely a surface syntactic marker showing the presence  ( or absence ) of , says some semantico-sy ~ It actic link between the two  , an anaphoric relation between them , a syntactic word-group boundary , and so on . In case of the second type such position is me ~ nillgulinit-sel ~'  , irrespective of whether it should or should not be taken into accotult when establishing certain syntactic links or boundaries : it shows the relative posi-tions of the units in question in the co~mnunicative structure of the text  ( i . e . 
from the point of view of its functional perspective  )   . 
It should be noted that the opposition of these two types of positional rela-tions is not the same as that of rigid  ( fixed ) and free word order : while free . 
word order is always " semantic " to some extent  , rigid word order ca/is to our mind , correspond to both cases , depending on whether the given syntactic con-s truction with rigid word order correla-tes in the language under consideration with any al ternative constructions providing the same predicate-argument structure all d/or syntact ic grouping of their Eomponents ~ but assign ing the mad iff e-rent linear arra/l~'ement  ( a possible example of such alternative constructions which can be considered as dependent for their selection on the word order requi-red  , rather than vice versa , is furnish-ed by predicative constructions differ-ing in their voice value  )  . 
Guided by the " ex/laustiveness " prin-ciple , we judge it expedient for the CSR to contain in formation both about the " mea/lingful " axld the " auxiliary " type of word-order relat ions  , thouz % represented and employed in different ways  . 
The sphere of employ Tnent of the " auxi-liary word-order information is practi-cally limited to the analysis and synthesis procedures  . During the analysis phase this information serves mainly as a means of revealing and formally representing units and constructions pertaining to other components of the CSR  ; in the synthesis phase it is used to obtain the correct form of the same type of units and const xn lc tions in the target language  . 
The corresponding facts of the linear arrangement of the text do not play any independent role either in its semantic p rocessing or in choosing translation equ ivalents for its units  , so it is perfectly sufficient to regard them as just one of the various features of tile uni ts and constructions involved  , important enough to be registered in their l ingui-stic descriptions  , but constituting no separate objects of descr iption  . To incorporate these facts in the CSi ~ , we resort to nuunbering the words in the text p rocessed in the order of their successive occurrence  ( tile resulting numbers used also , in combination with some other data , as their identifiers throughout the process ing  )   . 
If , on tile contrary , a construction is characterized by a mean ingful word-order relation between its lex ical components  , it is given the status of a special " posit ional unit "  , distinct from the constrnction itself and represented explicitly in ~ he CSI ~  . Such a unit di-rectly participates in semantic operations  , including those of translation proper , which means that it must flare its own descript ion  ( in particular , its o ~ I translation equivalent ) . It stands to reason that the range of inter-lo/l ~ -uage correspondences involving positio- nal units of either the source or the target laxl guage is not restricted to this class of units alone  , as the communicat-ive organization of text COjl also be conveyed by some types of syntact ic const-ructions and lexical elements  . An example is the Japanese particle ~ as used in independent sentences  ( or , sometimes , in the main clauses of complex sentences ) , where its best Russ i an equivalent ( if the salne type of predicative const-ruct ion is used  ) is the reverse order of the subject and the predicate  . 
As we see , here also , as in the other components of the CSR , there is a compromise between the " semantici ty " and the " superficiality " requi rements  . On the one ha/Id , explicit indication of tile word-order rela tions found to be meazlingful in the text processed characterizes some aspects of its semantic structure  . On the other ha/~d , the forth of " positional units " chosen to represent them is rather superficial in that it does not dis-play the semantic correlat ions underlying - the interchs/M/eability of these units with other structural text features  ( such as the selection of the nexus vs . junc-tion form of expressing the predicate-ar ~ ument dependencies between text units  ; the use of " relational " words ~ of the 0 per , or Funcitype and the like ; the occurrence of emphatic particles and constructions  , etc . ) . 
Conclusion
In the foregoing we have tried to show the way the Combined Structural Re-presentation of text reflects the requi-rements of " semantic ity "  , " superficiali-ty " and " exhaustiveness " formulated at  1'81 tile beginning of the paper as essential for the basic level of fonually representing text structure in an automatic translation system  . We shall now briefly recapitulate ~ he points  . 
The " semanticity ' requirement is accounted for in the CSR  , in the first place , by the very possibility provided in it of explicitly describing the five most important aspects of text structure and composi tion  , as stated above . The quest for " semanticity " forms also the basis of the principles we employ in se-lect ing concrete information to be made explici t  . Among these one can mention the criterion of structural significance of the units to be represented in the CSR as separate words or quasi-words  ; the principle of " immediate sems/itic substa ~ -tiation " of the predicate-arguJnent syntactic relations registered in it  ; the re-quirement of supplying the elements of the lexico-grammatical composition of the text under consideration  , as well as of its linear arrangement , with indica-tions of their meaningful or auxi liary role within this text  ; the employment of a special formal language to define the semantic properties of words and word-combinations  , etc . 
The " superficiality " of the CSR is seen , erelong other things , in the fact that this level of text represent at ionenvisages the use of lexico-syntactic t ranslation equivalents and does not ne -cessarily require decomposition of lexe -rues into combinations of smaller units of mea/~ing  , such decomposition consider-ed appropriate but in comparatively rare cases of descript ive and interpretative translation  . Other features of the CSR originating from the " superficiality " principle are absence of exhaustive in-formation about the anaphoric structure of the text  , inclusion of only those data on syntactic word -grouping which are of importance for the t ranslation process  , direct tr6u\]slation of elliptical constructions , wherever possible , etc . 
Finally , the " exhaustiveness " requirement is specif ie dasw : hatmay be called the " lose-nothing " principle of construc-tingtlle CSR  . It in ca/is that when special labels are fetched in it to explicitly display various st ructural element sim-plicitly present in the surface form of the text at hand  , tile surface text markers ( such as the " auxiliary " type word order ; morphological features expressing t ~rammatical agreement or government  ; function words and punctuation marksha-ving no independent translation equivalents  , a ~ d so on ) , though having been used already to reveal those elements  , are not eliminated from the representation being formed  . They are merely sup-plemented by the design at ions of the elo-me\]its revealed  , as well as by formal indications of their o~al auxiliary nature  , and thus remain accessible for any further analysis that might prove useful  , should it tur ~ out that their f~mctions in the text are not limited to just iden-tifying tile units already made explicit  . 
Notes 13 . M . ~ anan ~? Ha .  !<  np0OneMe   n0CTp0-eH~S   ?0pManBH0~   M0~enM   np0uecca   nepeB0-~a   . -BEH . : Te0pMs nepeB0 ~ aMHay qHBIe
OCHOBHHO ~ FOTOBKH Hepe BOAq ~ EOB . q a CTB ~ . M . ,\[975, C . ' I65-~72 . 
2Z . M . Shalyapina . Automatic translation as a model of tlle human tra/islation activity  . -International Forumon Infor-mation and Documentation  ,  1980 , vol . 5,
No . 2, p . 13-23.
3 An ear l ie r vers ion of text repre-sentat ion a imed at incorporat ing the pr inc ip les proposed had been deve loped in the f ramework of all A/iglo-Iussian automatic t rans la t ion pro ject a/id descr ib - ed br ief ly  in:3  . M . Wa~HM Ha . AHF~o~pyc-cE~MHOFOaoneETH~aBTOMaTZ qecK~zcn0-
Bap ~( APMAC) . - MamHHH ~ nepeB0 ~ np ~ Ena ~ HaSn HHFB MCTNK a . BS:H .  \[7 . M . 
\[974, C .7-67.
The notion of levels of text process in z is not identical with the notion of levels of text representation  ( although the recertainly exist some strong correlations  )  . Linguistically , the for-mar corresponds rather totlle notion of  la/16u/age tiers introduced in : ~ . , D . Bap-~y  ~ B . 0 CHOBBI0HM0 a TeZBH0~MHFBHCTMKM . 
M .," Hay Ea ", ~977.
5 A deta i led formal de f in i t ion of this la ~I Cuage and a description of some of its l inguistic interpretations are given in :  3  . M . ~a as HH Ha . ~ op MaaBH~I ~ 2BME   ~22   3aHHOH TOJIEOBa HH~CJIOBPIOZ OBOO Oqe-Ta HOe . -\[ Ip 0 One MuEz Oep HeT ~ EZ . B ~ In .  36 . 
M .,\[979, c . 247-278.
6 There is also a paper on a French-
Russ is Jl automatic translation project where a similar type of structural infor-mation is mentioned as necessary  ( see : D . A . AnpecsHzAp . H~HrBZCT ~ qecEoe 00ec-neqeH~e Bcz~cwe Me aBToMaT~qecE0r0   neDe-B0~a   Tpew~er0   n0E0neHz~S   . M . ,\[978, c . ~3) . 
In our case of Japax , ese-Russian traxlsla-rich , however , such infor ~ nation seems to require more attent ion due to wider differences between position a l and other rules of express in C the correspond ing constructions in the two  18/qguages  . 

