FOR MALPROPERTIES OF RULEOR DERING SINLING UIST ICS 
Francis Jeffry Pelletier
Dept . Philosophy , Univ . Alberta , Edmonton Alberta Canada
Abstract
The discovery in the late 1960's that standard linguistic theory ( of Chomsky's Aspects ) was equivalent in generative power to unrestricted rewrite rules caused linguists to search for a " stronger linguistic metatheory "  . It seemed to some of these researchers that this meant describing linguistic theory by means of rules which were more restricted than type  0 languages . Such a view we call the L-view of constraints on linguistic theory : it advocates constraining the allowable rules in such a way that legitimate grammars can no longer generate arbitrary r  . e . sets , but only some subset of them . To other researchers this discovery meant rather that one should place restrictions on linguistic theory so that the kinds of gram-mars allowed would be limited  , regardless of whether such limitations affected the generative power of the theory  . We call this the G-view of constraints . The L-and G-views are not equivalent limitations  . For example , a G-view limitation on the class of regularg rammars that any legitimate grammar be right -embed-ding is not thereby a L-view limitation  , since this does not effect an alteration in generative power of the grammars allowed  . The G-view is a vowedly psychological ; according to it , the point of placing constraints on grammars is to less endirectly the language learner's burden of choosing the correct grammar from all the possible ones  . For the L-view , this is a side effect of disallowing whole classes of gram-mars in the first place  . 
One area in linguistics where restrictions on linguistic theory have been advocated is in the ordering  ( within the cycle ) of the application of the rules which generate the language  . Here are eight proposals that have been aired in linguistics about how the rules might be order -ed  . 
Total Ordering : there is a unique first rules a unique second  . . . . . a unique last rule . 
Every derivation applies the rules in this order.
Partial Ordering : there is a unique first rule , but thereafter at every stage of a derivation there are two rules which are candidates for application : the rule which was just applied and the  ( unique ) next different rule . 
SemiOrdering : the rules are given a totalo rdering  , but different derivations may start at di fferent places in the ordering and choose any " later " rule as the next rule to be appl ied  . 
SemiPartial Ordering : the rules are given a partial ordering  , but different derivations may start at d if ferent places in the order-ing and choose ei ther the last-applied rule or else any " later " rule as the next rule to be applied  . 
Unorderings : any derivation can apply the rules in any order  , subject only to the constraint that once a rule has been applied in a derivation  , it is no longe religible for application at a later stage of that derivation  . 
QuasiOrdering : any derivation can apply the rules in any order  , subject only to the constraint that once a rule has been applied in a derivation  , the only other time it may be applied in that derivation is to its own output  . 
Random Ordering : there is no order imposed on the rules  ; any derivation can apply the rules in any order . 
Simultaneous Application : the entire set of rules is applied to an input " all at once "  ; this prevents some of the rules from creating or destroying part of the input in such a way as to affect the applicability of other rules  . 
Advocates of one or another of these rule orderings have adopted the G-view  , and feel that the rule ordering restrictions they desire will directly lessen the psychological task of learning the correct grammar  . The arguments for this conclusion are can vassed and found to be inconclusive  ( at best )  . The present paper adopts the L-view and , consequently , investigates the issue of generative power of the various theories of rule orderings  . We are really interested in more than just the weak generative power of these theories : we would want to know whether every empirical claim  ( such as ambiguity , paraphrase , etc . ) which can be made by one theory could also be made by another  ( their strong generative capacity )  . 
We trust that if , for any grammar obeying rule ordering conditions A there is a grammar obeying rule ordering conditions B such that they both obey standard linguistic strictures  -412 -on the correctness of rules and such that the two contain exactly the same class of derivations  , then rule ordering theory B is at least as powerful in strong generative capacity as rule ordering theory A  . If the converse can also be established , then they are equivalent in strong generative capacity ~ if the converse cannot also be established then rule ordering theory B is more powerful in strong generative capacity than rule ordering theory A  . If they can each be shown to generate empirical claims the other can't  , then they are non-comparable i_nq strong generative capacity  . A series of theorems are proved resulting in the relationships illustrated in Figure  1   ( attached )  . 
Some linguists who advocate " random ordering " actually have in mind random ordering plus some " universal principles "  . These universal principles are intended to rule outcertain derivations -- those derivations in which pairs of rules are not applied in the order specified by the principles  . ( Also , since their proponents hold the G-view , these principles are supposed to correspond to psychologically plausible learning/processing strategies  )  . We investigate the effect of four of these principles from the standpoint of the L-view  , showing that two of them are strongly equivalent to total orderings and that two of them are intermediate between total and partial orderings  . 
We close with an indication of what the role of mathematical linguistics Should be for the ordinary working linguist  . 
RANDO MORDERINGS
QUASIORDERINGS
UNORDERING SSEMIPARTIAL
SEMIORDERING SPARTIAL
ORDERINGS\/
TOTALORDERINGS (=" NON-CONTRADICTORY "
SIMULTANEOUS APPLICATION )
FIGURE 1: Relative Strong Generative
Capacities of Various Theories of
Rule Orderings . X - - - ~ Y means that theory X is stronger than theory Y  . (-~ is transitive ) . 

