PROPOSAL SFORAHIER ARCHY OF FOR MAL TRANS LATION MODELS 
Klaus-Jurgen Engelberg
Universitat Konstanz , Philosophische Fakult ~ t , Fachgruppe
Sprachwissenschaft , BRD
The present deplorable state-of-the-art in the field of machine translation seems greatly due to a fundamental laok of formal translation models needed in natural language processing  . 
From the methodological point of view it appears difflo-ult to delineate a borderline between translation theory and modern theoretical lingu ~stlos  ( availing itself of model theoretical semantics ) or full natural language understanding systems as developed in Artificial Intelligence research  . It seems plausible to postulate that any prospective translation theory should draw on ideas from both fields  . Unfortunately , problems discussed in painstaking detail in linguistics like differences in quantifier scope appear to be of lesser concern to a translator  ( since these ambiguities may well remain present in the target language  )   , neither seems a full or deep understanding necessary in many cases  , standard syntactic phrasing may suffice . More specifically , we regard the problems of disambi ~ ation , mandatory insertion of lexical items not conventionally implied in the source language and corefer-ence/anaphora resolution as the crucial problem areas of machine translation  . 
In this paper , we will endeavour-in this preliminary draft only in a very sketchy manner-to setup a hierarchy of formal translation models ordered according to their in or e as --  90 -ing systematic disambiguation power for certain types of texts  . 
Quite analogous to comple . xity considerations in mathe-matics , the power of a translation system is assumed to be measured by the amount of storage needed for the lexioal component  ( A ~- peoplem Aght call this long-term-memory ) and/or for the transient or dynamic data ( short-term-memory ) built upduming the interpreting process of a particular text  . Any model will be capable % o translate only certain restricted types of texts in a systematic manner and with satisfactory results  , but the idea i8 that any model will also contain components of lower levels of complexity  . This is to make sure that in oases in which di sambigustion on purely syntactic grounds is possible no such process via " deep " semant icre-presentations will be attempted for this particular case  . The rationale , of course , will be to utilize ever lexger portions of contextual  ( or rather co-textual ) information for the seends . As the reader will notice , power full translation system have to incorporate more and more knowledge-of-the world into the database  , as becomes apparent from the famous examples The soldiers shot the women  . They fell down . 
Lessoldate abbatirentles femmes . Ils/el~es ? tomberent . 
Syntactic methods
Level Synl : Word-to-word translation TS out for apps L rent reasons !  ( although a full bilingual dict-i on ary would require a considerable amount of storage space in a oomputer  ) Level Sy ~: Constituent preserving transla tion These models utilize the immediate syntactical context  ( e . g . 
valency of verbs ) for dlsambiguatlon purposes . In such a system a rule may lookllkex slober inner n ~ x remember  , but , xer innerny ~ x re-mandy- 91 -At any rate , a valency oriented lexicon would be helpful in the following models  , too . The search strategy would be long-est match f irst  . 
Level Sy~3: Tree-to-tree translation Unbouded t ranslations allow for reordering of arbi trarily long portions of a sentence  . We think it reasonable to assume that a quar ter-century of Generative Gramma research in Linguistics will have produced enough theoretical and pract lo-  . 1 apparatus to deal with any type of tree -restructurlng that may be needed indirect syntactic translations between natural languages  ( also of . the French system GETA ) . 
Semantic methods
Level Seml : Case . grammar oriented translations There are several MT systems that impose heavy restric tions on the possible arguments of verbs by encoding semantic feat-ures in the lexicon  ( e . g . METEO in Canada ) . By this , of cour-se , disambi ~ ation can take place only within the limits of a single sentence or clause  . 
Level Sere2: Translations using coherence relations The basis of this approach is the assumption that there exist finitely many determined and computable coherence relations between two subsequent sentences and/or clauses in certain types of texts  .   ( sometime called the cohesive-ties- approach  )   . 
They may be even indications of these relat ions at the sur-face level of the discourse  . g . ~ whereas ? suggesting CONTRAST or ? then " suggesting TI~E-SEQUENCE  , other relations may be ELABORATION , EFFECT , CAUSE ( Hirer/1981/) . Processing of these texts could be done by semantic finite state automata that would accept only highly constrained discourses in which no abrupt shifts of focus would be allowed  . At last at this level of complexity It seems necessary to assume that the vocabulary should be organized-in addition to the usual lexioographlc-  92 -order-as a sort of semantic network conta ining all types of sense relations like super-subset relation  , antonymy , conver--seness , time-sequence-existing even between severa l places verbs  . 
Level Se ~: Translations using story trees These models dynamically build up a tree- like maorestructu ~ e for a text in which arb it rary deep embeddings of themes and sub- themes are represented  . In this approach , coherence re-lations between entire port ions of text or paragraphs could be establi shed-thus allowing for ooreferen across long distances in a text  ( vide Rumelhart / 1975/ )  , This process may be facilitated by what Y . Wilks chose to call " paraplates " in the database  . 
Level Sere4: Translations uslng semantic networks This model is designed for not so orderly texts as assumed in the previous levels  . A semantic network as the dynsmlc macro structure of & text would allow for multiple views or them a -tic structures associated with a portion of a text  . To make this effective , a very rlohf a bric of various types of assoc -iative links would be needed in the database  . 
Level Sere5:   1~rsmevbased translations " Frames " or " scripts " have been widely discussed in the AI con:mx ~ ity In the past  10 years or so . The idea seems to bee to aggregate all sorts of information objeot ~ o entred linked with a particular " stereotypical situation " into a structured entity-called " f rame '  . This approach would , ' in principle , allow one-by default reasoning-to recover information not explicitlyment ioned in the texts In particular  , this may be helpful when translating in to a western language from Russian  , in which the deft ni % e/tn defi hite or known/unknown distinction in nouns is lack ing  . Consider the translation problems in the following example  ( drawing on Schank's favou ~ ites or ipt ) s-93-Petrposelvrestoran . Oficiant podalemumen Ju . = 7 Peter went to a rest at t t ~ l t . Th_ . ~ewaiter handed him the menus Soripts cou ldaccount for associations induced by " spat ial--temporal contiguities " as present in this example  . 
Doubts as to the feasibility of MT based on frames-except possibly in very restric tedareas of discourse-have come from var iousquarters  . First , the coding effort could turn out to be enormous  . Second , a intricate problem seems to be how t of in dout which script is relevant to the cur rent portion of text  ,  - 94 -
