THENATUREOFUNDERST ANDING FROM THELOGICAL POINT OFVIEW 
Pavel Materna
I~DIS Praha , Czechoslovakia
In this paper I want to sketch an analysis of the con- 
oep t of understanding ( in the semantic sense of word )  . No com-paration with other attempts at such an analysis wall be made  . 
Since the most adequate logical tool for an a lyzing natural language is  , to the author's opinion , Tioh ~' s " transparent intensional logic " ( TIL , see , e . E . , P . Tich ~: The Logic of Temporal Discourse , Linguistics and Philosophy 3 (1980) ,  343-369) , I shall first adduce a brief exposit ion of some relevant concepts of TIL  . 
1 . Tr_a_ns__~arent intensional ___ logic . ~ X ~ is consequently intensional system that exploits partial theory of types and a modified version of ~- calculus  . Omitting technical details ( however important they are ) we shall summax ~ ze some princip-les of TIL a Objects which are supposed to be denoted by the express-ions of a  ( natural ) language are type-theoretical objects over an " epistemt cbasis "  , where elementary types are the universe of di scourse  ( L )   , the set of truth v values ( o ) , the set of time moments or real numbers (~) , and the logical space ( ~ ; members of ~ are " possible worlds " ) i compound types are sets of ( partial and total ) functions . The obJed ts are the members of the particula r types  . The objects denoted ( named ) by " normal " expressions of a language are in tensions  , i . e . , functions whose domain is ~ . Thus definite descriptions name in div idual concepts  ( members of ~+ ( ~I -' )   )   , sentences name propositions ( members of ~? ( T * o )   )   , some nouns name properties ( members of ~? ( T  ~ ( n ? o )   )   , where n is a type ) , etc . 

In TIL there is introduced a concept of key importance = the concept of construction  . Intuitively , a construction is a way in which an object can be given  . Atomic constructions are objects themselves ( an object_A constructs A_ ) and variabl-es of the given type ( a variable v-constructs an object dependently on the valuation v  )   . Non-atomic constructions are applications of functions to their arguments  , and ~- abstract-ions . Constructions are defined inductively , so that an in-finite hierarchy of const ructions with embedded constructions  82'iseB  . 
Distinguishing between constructions and ob jects is one of main contributions of TIL  . Every object is a construction ( of atomic constructions ! ) but the variables and non-atomic construct ions are not objects  . 
The interrelations between lans~age express ions  , objects and constructions are stipulated as follows : Let E be a language expression : E expresses a construct-ion  , say , CE , and names ( denotes ) the object , say , OE , which is constructed by CE-There are , however , some expressions whose role differs from the role of " normal "  , semantically analyzable expressions . 
This concerns i ) expressions whose role is solely a syntactic one , ii ) interjections , ill ) " ego centric expressions " such as " I " , " you " , " her . n , " thiS ", etc . 
The category ii ) is uninteresting in our context . As for i ) , transform ~ E into CE is generally imposs ible without the expressions from this ca tegory  . Withili ) , a pragmaticel ~ nent appears : the transform at ion into CE is possible only if we are acquainted with the situation in which E has been uttered  . 
A special category of expressions is , from the semantic viewpoint , the category of " formal expressions " , such as the mathematic alones , e . g .   , " two times three " or " four minus two- 200 -equals two " . These expressions are supposed to denoted i rect-ly constructions  . 
2, U_nder_st . and_i_n ~ , It may be stated that there is a ge-neral agreement among llngulsts  , as well as among logicians , that understanding ( in the semantic sense ) is a relation between an individual and an expression  . Any explication must , however , specify this relation , With respect to what has been said above , there are two principal possibilities o f such a specification - a  )   ( the individual ) A understands E iff A asociates E with the object  ( 0E ) denoted by E!b ) A understands E iffA associates E with the construct-tion  ( ~ ) expressed ( or-in case of a mathematical expression - denoted  ) by E . 
Thus let A hear or read a sentence S . In the case a ) we would say that A understands S if fhe knows that S names a proposition P  . In the case b ) we should say that A understands S if fhe knows the construction CS that constructs P  ( or any structure preserving the meanings of " atomic express-ions " and isomorph with CS  )  . 
It is clear that understanding in the sense of b ) implies understanding in the sense of a ) wherever both these senses are thinks ble . We can show , however , that the implicat-ion does not hold vice versa . Indeed , take the English sen-fence ( S ) John owns a cutlassor he does no town a cut lass  . 
Even those who do not know what a cutlassis wi ll know that  ( S ) denotes the proposition " verum " , i . e . , the proposition which is true in every possible world at every time moment  . 
Thus not knowing the construction CS ( because of not knowing an atom being part of it ) the above individuals know the object ( i . e o , the proposition ) denoted by ( S ) . One argument against explloat lnE understanding in the sense a  ) is that we would probably hesitate to say that who does not know the meaning of " cutlass " does all the same understand  ( S )  . 

Another argument against a ) is strictly bound ~ o our conception and can be formulated ms follows : in the case of mathematical expressions a  ) is not applicable , since such expressions generally name constructions rather than objects  . 
The last argument in favour of b ) again refers to our intuition : we feel that one can " more or less " understand an expression  . This " more or less " is excluded if we connect understanding with the objects named by expressions  ( or ~ at most , we must confine ourselves to the cases of " more or less " clear meanings of particular atomic expressions  )  . When connecting understanding with constructions we can explicate tbls " more or less " rather intuitively  . We shall sketch this ex-plication ( technical details are omitted again ) : Let the given expression E contain n " atomic " , i . e . , unanalyzable meaningful ( sub/expressions ) including , as the case may be , the expressions from the category iii )) el ,  . . . , en . A necess-ary condition for A's understanding E ( in the sense b )   ) is that A associated the appropriate atomic constructions  , i . eo , objects with el , . . . , en .   ( The second necessary condition consists in A's correct transformation of E into a construct-ion schema according to the grammar of the given language  )  . 
Now , the degree of A's understanding E can be , among others , measured by 1-k/n , where k is the number of those subexpress-ions among el  ,   .   .   .   , en , which are associated > yA with no object at all ! analogically  , the degree of A's misunderstanding E can be measured by k '/ n  , where k ? is the number of those subexpressions among el  ,   .   .   .   , en , which are associated by A with an inappropr iate object  . ( Clearly , k ~" k ' < n .   ) Thus it seems more appropriate to accept the position b  ) and to claim that understanding is a relat i on between an individ ~  . al and an expression which holds iff the ind ividual correctly associates two struc tured entities : the grammatical  ( or : tectogrammatical ) structure of the expression and the ( logical ) structure of the corresponding construct ions-  202  -
