COLING82, J . Horeck ~( ed.)
North . Holland Publishing Company
? Academia , 1982
ANENGLISHJ APANE SEMACHINE TRANS LATION SYS TEMOF
THETITLES OFSCIENTIFICANDENGINEERING PAPERS Makoto Nagao  , Junichi Tsujii ( Kyoto University)
Koji Yada ( Electrotechnical Lab.)
Toshihiro Kakimoto ( Fujitsu Co.)

The title sentences of scientific and engineering papers are analyzed by simple parsing strategies  , and only eighteen fundamental sential structures are obtained from ten thousand titles  . Title sentences of physics and mathematics of some databases in English are translated into Japanese with their keywords  , author names , journal names and so on by using these fundamental structures  . The translation accuracy for the specific areas of physics and mathematics from INSPEC database was about  93%  . 
i . INTRODUCTION
There have been many researches on syntactic analysis of natural language by computer  , but still no reliable grammatical rules are established yet which can be applicable to any utterances of a language  . Universal grammatical rules for a language looks like almost hopeless  . Grammatical rules to be prepared depend heavily on the text to be analyzed  . Hence the concept of subgrammar is introduced . It does not necessarily cover all the different kinds of sentential structures of a language  . A grammar which covers just the set of expressions to be treated is sufficient from the engineering point of view  . 
We developed a machine translation system which translates the titles of scientific and engineering papers from English into Japanese  . More than 98% of the titles in scientific and engineering papers are noun phrases  , so that the system is designed to translate only the noun phrases  . The ~ verbs can be used in the forms of to + infinitive  , verbing , and verb-ed . The system cannot treat the embedded sentences which are introduced by relative pronouns  . 
Then the essential structures the system can treat are composed of simple noun phrases  , verbs of the forms of to-infinitive , verbing , and verb-ed , and prepositions . Here a simple noun phrase means the juxtaposition  ( endocentric structure ) of adjectives nouns , and some other elements . The word order of a simple noun phrase can be the same in English and Japanese  . The sentential structures obtained after parsing each simple noun phrase into a noun is called a skeleton pattern  . We can expect that the variety of such skeleton patterns is very few for the restricted area of titles of scientific and engineering papers  . 
When the variety is very few , we do not need further syntactic analysis for these skeleton patterns  . For each skeleton pattern the corresponding Japanese skeleton pattern  ( word order change ) can be given . Thus the subgrammar in this system is a very peculiar one which is an accumulation of heuristics of the title structures  . 
We utilized this specific nature of the titles in our machine translation system  . 
The correct translation rate for the wide variety of scientific and engineering papers is about  80%  , but for the specific areas of physics and mathematics from INSPEC database the score was about  93%  . The system is now used for the conversion of English databases into Japanese databases  . This system thus opened away for the Japanese people to make access to English databases in their own language  . 
2 . SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS OFTITLES ENTENCES Title sentences of scientific and engineering papers in English have the following properties from the point of view of translation  . 
( I ) Nouns in the titles are usually specific terminological words in a particular field  . The translation of these words into Japanese is almost unique  . This makes avoid a difficult problem of the selection of proper translation words from several candidates  , which we encounter in ordinary words . 
(2 ) Many colloquial expressions exist in the titles . These are regarded as idioms , and their internal structures are not analyzed . The whole expressions are stored in a dictionary with their Japanese translations  . 
(3 ) A simple noun phrase in English can be translated into Japanese by replacing each word into Japanese without any word order change  . 
(4 ) Many of the special terminological words in science and engineering are compound words  . They are treated as such in a dictionary . When the translation of a simple noun phrase according to  ( 3 ) is not acceptable , the phrase is stored in a dictionary as a compound word with its translation  . Therefore the dictionary lookup is done by the longest match principle  . 
(5 ) The word order change in the translation is 0nly possible in the cases where verbs and prepositions are used  . This word order change can be done at the level of skeleton patterns  . 
3. DICTIONARY LOOK-UP
The block diagram of our title translation system is shown in Fig  . i . The first step is the dictionary lookup of words and idioms  . We gathered a lot of specific expressions as idioms  , such as " time varying ( mechanism ) " , " based on . . . ", and so on . " verbing " can be a noun , adjective , and present participle , but there are many verb-ing's whose grammatical function is almost unique : accounting  , bonding , engineering and so on as nouns , superconducting as adjective , and using , determining as verbs which demand objects or complements  . The dictionary has this information . 
4. CONJUNCTIVE PHRASE
The second step is the parsing of conjunctive phrases by " and " and " or "  . As is well known there is an ambiguity for the conjunctive phrases of the forms : 
A and B of C,
Adjective+noun + and + noun , and so on . It is very difficult to determine the scope of conjunctive phrases  , and to get the correct parsing without the detailed semantic analysis  . The present program parses simply the nearest two terms which have the same parts of speech  , such as : adj . + and + adj . ~ adj . 
verb + and + verb ~ verb verb-ing ( - ed ) + and + verb-ing ( - ed ) ~ verb-ing ( - ed ) noun + and + noun ---> noun Special consideration is given to the following specific conjunctive phrase : MACHINETRANS LATION SYSTEMOFTITLES  247 step i @ 1 idictionary lookup and idiom finding step 2 \[ parsing of program ~ phrases conjunctive I step  3 transiti?n I network lparslng?f simplen ? unl phrase by transition network step  4 
II handling ? fspecial'program~structures and semantic disamblguation step  5 I
I skeleton pattern matching and word order change for 
Japanese step 6I
Isynthesis of Japanese Ititle sentence
Fig.i . Flow of Title Translation.
prep . + noun + and + prep . + no~1 - - - ( prep . + noun ) + and + ( prep . + noun)---> prep . + noun
Conjunctive structures such as , ( noun + prep . + noun ) + and + ( noun + prep . + noun ) ( adj . + noun ) + and + noun cannot be analyzed correctly . 
5. SIMPLENOUN PHRASE
Next step is the parsing of a simple noun phrase , which may include some other parts of speeches . The recognition of a simple noun phrase is done by the finite automaton model shown in Fig  .  2 . The recognition starts from the initial state , and the proper transfer of the state is done for the sequential input of words  . 
When the automaton reaches to the final state the recognition of the end of a simple noun phrase is ended  . The word order of the corresponding Japanese is the same as English within the scope of a simple noun phrase  . 
248 M . NA GA Oet M.
( n , sig , pl , pn , hum ) ( n , sig , pl , pn , num ) ( ing , n , ( det , pn , adJ)~pl , pn , num)(n , sig , pl , pn , ing , num)(adj , adv)(adv)\(ed)(adj)(adj ) sig , pn , pl , ing , v , num )   ( prep ) adv : adverb n : ~ ounsig : singular pl : plural pn : pronoun num : number det : determiner adj : adjective v:verbing:verbinged:verb-ed prep : preposition  ( ed , adv )
Fig . 2.
: Initial State : Final State
Transition Network ( TN).
6. SPECIAL WORDSE QUENCE
There are some particular word sequences which must be treated separately  . Typical ones are as follows . 
( a ) nI+of+n 2 : This word sequence is regarded as a noun after parsing  . This is translated into the Japanese word order : n  2  +  6  ) + nI . 
( b ) prep . + n ( at the beginning of the titles ) : An example is " On pattern recognition " . In this case , very tricky treatment is done as " prep . + n ~ n " . This means that prep . is an accessory to the noun phrase ( n ) which follows it , and the structure of this noun phrase is the main part of the analysis  . The translation is first done to the noun phrase , and at the final stage the translation of the preposition is attached to the end of the translated noun phrase  . 
( c ) verb-ed+prep . : This structure is just parsed to prep . which has the modifying term of verb-ed . The Japanese translation is " prep . + verb-ed+~L~(passive particle) . An example is : MACHINETRANS LATION SYSTEMOF TITLES  249 a paper presented to a conference ---> a paper to a conference  ( presented )   ( conference )   ( to )   ( present )   ( passive )   ( paper )   ( d ) verbing + prep . ( at the beginning of the titles ) . An example is " concerning to . . . " . Syntactically " verbing " in this case plays the same role as a noun  . So it is replaced by noun . 
( e ) noun + verbing + prep . : The determination of the grammatical role of verbing in this case is very difficult  . By the title sentences it is frequent that verbing is used as a noun  ( gerund )  , and the interpretation of noun+verbing---> noun+noun---> noun is adopted  . 
7. SEMANTICDISAMBIGUATION
After the parsing of the above particular structures there still remain some more difficult structures which require semantic treatment  . " verbing+noun " is a typical such structure . Verb-ing can be either a modifying element to the noun  , or a present participle which requires the noun as an object  . An example is : measuring temperature --->~~ ~ , ~ ~\ [ temperature )   ( measuring ) measuring device---->~'\]~~ ,   ( measuring )   ( device ) Therefore the check must be done between the verb and the Noun which follows as to whether the noun can be a subject or an object to the verb  . 
For this purpose five semantic elements are introduced  . These are shown in Table \] ith some nouns classified by these elements  . The same semantic information is u , ~ to denote what kind of nouns can be a subject or an object to a verb  . For e ~? le the subject nouns to the verb " measure " have the semantic categories of too ? and theory  , and the object nouns for the verb have the semantic categories of physical object  , and aspect . By checking these semantic relations the syntactic structure and the translation word order are determined  . 
verbing + noun - - - + verb ~ ~ noun ( subject ) verbing+noun-->noun ~ verb ~$ . . . 

Tablei . Semantic elements tool : instrument , machine , probe , etc . 
aspect : velocity , tem Perature , resistance , etc . 
physical object : metal , water , oil , wave guide , etc . 
theory : principle , technique , approach , etc.
unit : cm , degree , etc.
250 M . NA GA Oetai
Such semantic checking is performed in the following syntactic structures  . 
( i ) n + verbing : if semantic check does not work , verbing is regarded as a gerund and is modified by the noun  . 
(2 ) verbing + n : if the noun phrase ( n ) has an article , it is an object of the verb . If semantic check does not work , n is regarded as an object . 
(3 ) nI+verbing+n 2 : Semantic check between the verb and n , and the verb I and n2 is done . If semantic check does not work , the interpretation is that nI is an object of the verb  , and verbing modifies n2 . 
(4) prep . + verbing + prep . : verbing is understood as a gerund . 
Table 2 . Skeleton patterns and the frequency of their usage in INSPEC translation  . 
English skeleton pattern Japanese word order Frequency for 
INSPEC titles ( i)-ing . nF (2) n (3) n?-ing (4) nl . prep-n2 (5) nl-prep'n2 . ing (6) nl . preP l . n2 . ing . preP2 . n3(7) nl . preP l-n2 . preP2 . n3(8) nl . preP l . n2 . preP2-n3 . 
preP3"n4 ( 9 ) nl-prePl'n2-preP2-n3 ? preP3"n4"preP4"n5 ( i0 ) nl . prePl-n2 . preP2 . n3 . prep 3  ?  n4-preP4"ns"preP5-n   6 -ing?nnn?-ing n2"prep  . n1n2 . ing ' prep . n1n3"preP2 . n2 . ing-preP l'n 1   n3"preP2"n2"preP l ' n 1   n4"preP3"n3"prep   2  ?  n2"preP l-n 1   n5"preP4  . n4" prep3 . 
n3" preP2"n2"prePl'n1n6"prePs"n5-preP4 . npreP 3 . n3 . preP2"n2-prePl'n1(ii ) nl . prep-n2-v . n3(12) n . v . adj (13) nI?v . n2(14) nl . v-n2 . prep . n3(15) nl-v . prep-n2 (16) v ? n(17) v . nl ' n2 (18) v . nl-prep . n2n2"prep'n1"1~"n3"~ . vn .  \[~,  . adj-vn1 .  (~  . n2 .  ~  . vn1"t ~" n3" prep'n2"vn1"\[~"n2"prep'vn . vnI . t~i"n2"v " ~ xn2 . prep-nI . ~- vMACHINETRANS LATION SYSTEMOFTITLES 2518 . SKELETONPATTERN The parsing process thus far produces a skeleton pattern for each title sentence  . 
For example :  #An Automated General Purpose Test System for Solid State Oscillators  .  !  ( Skeleton ) Syste ~ m for Oscillators ( n + prep . + n ) #ALaser Doppler Technique for Measuring Flow Velocities in High Current 
ArcD is charge.
(Skeleton ) Technique for Measuring Velocities in Discharge . 
( n + prep.+ver-ing+n+prep.+n )
The skeleton patterns obtained from ten thousand title sentences are astonishingly few  . These are shown in Table 2 , with the frequency of occurrence of each pattern for about a thousand title sentences of physics and mathematics in INSPEC database  . 
The Japanese word order is also given to each skeleton patterns  . 
The translation of prepositions is set unique by the present program as shown in Table  3  . There are of course several cases where different Japanese expressions should be adopted for a preposition depending on the context  . This is an important problem to be solved in the future  , e
Table 3. Translation of preposition.
of by with at for 0) t : . , %" d5 to on in about --~( n . to . n )   9 TESTRESULTA test result of the title translation from INSPEC database is shown in Table  4  . 
Average time necessary for the translation of a title is  0  . i second . After the translation of i 000 titles , the dlctl pnary was updated by the new words which appeared in the input data and which were absent in the dictionary  . Then the same i 000 titles were again translated , and the rejection was checked . Then the next i000 titles were handled in the same way , and so on . 
Table 4 . Test result of title translation from INSPEC database  . 
title nimber i "-' i000 computer time ( see . ) 100 . 1 6 rejected title sentences new words 8i6 sentences translated after the new word registration sentences after the word registration ii  i001-~2000   107  . 54 39 567 23 16 2001~3000 115 . 4 29479 1415 Computer used is M200 ( one of the biggest computers in Japan )  . 
252 M . NA GA O et al
With 3000 titles from INSPEC the ~ ejected were only 42 titles ( 1 . 4%) . Many of the rejected titles had the structures which the system cannot accept  , such as normal sentential structures , and qhestion forms . The system can only accept the noun phrases without any embedded sentential structures by relative pronouns  . 
Among the translated titles , about 5% were wrong or ununderstandable . Many of these errors came from the wrong parsing of conjunctive phrases  . Some examples of the translation are shown in Table  5  . For some other databases in English the correct translation rate was about  80%  . This rate depends heavily on the dictionary contents  . 
i0. CONCLUSION
The translation system is now being used on trial basis at Tukuba Research Information Processing System  ( RIPS ) of the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology  . 
The titles , keywords , and some other journal information of INSPEC database are translated into Japanese  , and a new database in Japanese language is created  . 
Retrieval can be done by Japanese language by using Chinese characters and Kana letters to this database of INSPECJ apanese version  . 
The system seems to be practically usable , and the program is being transferred to a few other database centers for their use in the conversion of English database into Japanese database  . 
Table 5. Example of English Japanese translation.
THER MOHYD RAULICAN ALY SISO FGAS-COOLED ROD ASSEMBLIESIN NUCLEAR 

BEHAVIOROFDRAGDISCTURBINETRANS DUCERSIN STEADY-STATETWO-PHASE 

VOID FRACTION CORREL ATION OF TWO-PHASE FLO WOF LIQUID METALS IN TUBES COMPARISO NOF THE ORDER OF APPROXIMATION INSEVERAL SPATIAL DIFFERENCE SCHEMES FOR THEDISC RETE-ORDIN A TESTRANS PORT EQUATION IN ONE- 
DIMENSION ALPLANEGEO METRY
GENERALIZED QUASI-STATIC METHOD FOR NUCLEAR REACTORSPACE-TIME 
KINETICS ~~~--~~
SEMICLASSICAL CONVERGENT CALCULATION SFORTHE ELECTRON-IMPACTBROADENING ANDSHIFTOFSOME LINES OFNEU TRALHEL IUMINA HOT PLASMA TRANSITION PROBABILITIES AND THEIR ACCURACY THEORY OFRESON ANCE-RADIATION PRES SUREEX CHANGED MOMENTUMBET WEEN A SURFACE WAVE AND A TOMS 
