MREPRESENTATION OF SEMANTICINF ORMATION INGMAN
MACHINEREADABLEDICTIONARIES
Winfried Lenders
lnstl tutfur Komm~nikatlons for schungu . Phonet Ak , Univ . Bonn
Poppels dorfer Allee 47 , D-5300 Bonn , The basis of this paper is a comparative stud ~ on German machine readable dictionaries which has been conducted during the last two years In connection with a research project financed by the German minister for science and technology  . 
The aim of this project was to compare and to describe about  12 dictionaries , used in computer systems , in more or less conventional language analysis and synthesis systems as well as in understanding systems  . The comparison and description was oriented to the databasis  , the theoretical background , the field of application , and especially the microstructura of these dictionaries  . In this paper we want to discuss a specific problem of lexA calml crostructure which has arisen in the context of thls project  , the problem of semantic Information . This problem Is most relevant since on the one side all of the exAstlng machine readable dictionaries are relatively restricted in their semantic dimension  , and on the other side more detailed information about the semantics of words is extremely necessary for language analysis and synthes-Is programs as well as for understanding systems  . 
The first point of my discussion is to explain how the meaning & of German words are actually represented in theml crostructure of the Intended dictionaries  . My examples are taken from the dictionary components of the systems SUSY  , LIMAS , HAM-RPM , PLIDIS , BEAST/BACONp from the German word data- 176 -bank " WahrAg " and from several other more theoretical approaches  . 
My second point Is the question how far in these approaches the general IAngu Iatic problem of representation of word meanings has been solved and which elements of the semantic level are normally not to be found in these dictionaries  . In the third point I want to advocate the thesis that in a mach-inere a dabled Actlonar ~ j the meaning of a word can be represented by a set of semantic relations  . In connection with this thesis recent developments An word semantics especially An the fields of frame theory and semantic network theory have to be discussed  . 
The general assumption of this paper is that " dictionary "- this concept Is used synonymous with " lexicon "- desJ ~ nat-es an ~ collect ion of word elements of a specific language  ; every element of such a collection should be connected with a certain set of linguist ic Information  . This set of linguistic Anforuatlon Is called them/croatructure of the dict ionary  . 
The mlc~ostmcture should be considered as an n- tupel of descriptive elements  , each of which consists of an Information fie ld  . Examples are the field of morphological Info rmation  , the field of mox * phological information , the field of phonolog-Ical Anfomation and the field of semantic Information  . The field of semantic information again may be regarded as an-tupel of Information  . The elements of this n-tupal may be speci fic relations which combine the concerned lexical element with other lexical e lements of the Intended dictionary  . -The object of this paper Is not to di scuss how the semantic di-mension of an Ind ividuals dictionary or lexicon may be organ -Iced but to show in what way machine readabled ictionaries which are determined for use in d ifferent computer systems could be construc ted In their semantic level with respect to the results of recent discussion in Computational Linguistics and A~tif Acial Intelligence Research  . 

