ACONTRASTIVE ANALYSISO FTHEUSE OF DEFINITE ARTICLES 
INENGLISH SCIENTIFICTEXTS ANDINENGLISH LITERATURE 
Janlne Gallals-Hamonno
Fac.des Lettreset Sciences Humalnes,
Universlt ~ de Metz , Iledu Saulcy , 57000 Metz , France This paper is a continuation of the paper by lh-ofessor I~AMSEY on the use of the definite article In English  . 
Professor Kramsk~y found that the definite a rticle Isless used in newspapers than Insc ientific texts  , and is less used In literary texts than In newspapers  . 
Our analysis of English scientific texts ledus ~ o propose a theory which dist Inguishes In sclent if lc texts two different types of propositions : - those whl choon vey the sc ientific message of the author  ,  1  . e . the new theory or polnt of theory he proposes ? These propositions we call the language propositions In the text  . 
-those which are used to explain , illustrate and comment on the language propositions  . They help the reader understand and approve of the author * s new Ideas  . These we call discourse propositions . 
The definite article Is used An these two types of pro-positions Ins different way :- In language propositions  , the definite article introduces the terms or expressions used to designate the concepts operative for the analysis presented by the author  . 
-Indlscqurs ~ propositions , the definite article is used to in t roduce the terms or expressions which des ignate the examples  , Illustrations which the author refers to in order to explain his theory to the reader  . 
-III-
F ~ om this analysis of the use of the definite article An English scientific texts  , there can be devised a quasiautomatic content analysis of a scientific text  , through the analysis of the words introduced by the definite articles 
In the text.
From thls analysis of the use of definite articles An scientific texts  , we proceeded to an analysis of the defin-
Ite article in literature.
We first worked on Victory by Joseph Conrad , and then on the ~ by Shakespeare . 
From this analysis , we can say that , whether the author of a given text be a scient is to rapo e t  , there is at work a logical process which can be traced through the use of the definite a rticle  . 
The problem of the difference An the number of tames the definite article is used An scientific texts end An lit-erature As due to the fact that the scientist has to demon-strate a theory  , which is a purely logical process , whereas the poet aims at creating beauty end an J ~aglnaT  , y world which the reader must accept of . That Is why there As more emphasis In literature on whetwec all ~ propositions than on what we call language propositions  . 
Nevertheless t there can be tracedIn both types of croat-Ave work some similar patterns through which the human mlnd finds and expresses new things  , which can be Illustrated by an analysis of the use made ~ y the author of the definite artlcle  . 

