TOPICIDENTIFICATION TECHNIQUESY ORPREDICTIVE LANGUAGE 
ANALYSERS/
J.I . Tait
University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory , Corn Exchange
3t ., Cambridge CB23 QG , England.
1 f Introd.u , ctiQn
The use of prediction as the basis for infe rential analysis mechanisms for natural language has become increas-ingly popular in recent years  . Examples of systems which use prediction are FRUMP  ( DeJong 79 ) and ( Schank 75 a )   . The proper-ty of interest here is that the i r basic mode of work i ~ is to determine whether an input text follows one of the systems p~s-specified patterns  ; in other words they predict , to some extent , the form their input texts will take . A crucial problem for such systems is these lection of suitable sets of predict ions  , or patterns , to be applied to any particula ~ text , and it is this problem 1 want to address in the paper . 
I will assume that the predictions are organised into bundles a coordi ~ to the top is of the texts to which they apply  . This is a generalisation of the script idea employed b ~  ( DeJong 79 ) and ( Schank 75 a )  . l will call such bundless ~ ereoty Des . 
The basis of the technique described here is a distinct-ion between the process of su ~ est in ~ possible topics of a section of text and the process of eliminat in ~ candidate top ics  ( and associated predictions ) which are not , in fact , appropriate for the text section . Those candidates which are not eliminated are then identified as the topics of the text-  281 -section . ( There may only be one such candidate .   ) This approach allows the use of algorithms for suggesting possible topics which try to ensure that if the system possesses a suitab lest ereotype for a text section it is ac tivated  , even at the expense of activating larEe numbers of irrelevant stereotypes  . 
This technique has been tested in a computer system called Scrabble  . 
2! Su~est in ~ Candidate Topics
The discovery of candidate topics for a text secant is driven by the association of as e t of patterns of sen~ntio primitives wi the ach stereotype  .   ( For the purposes of this paper it is assumed that the system has access to a lexicon contain ing entries whose semantic component  18 something like that used by ( Wilks 77 )   .   ) As a word is input to the system the senses of the word are examined to determine if any of them have a semantic description which conta ins a pattern associated with any of the systems stereotypes  . If any do contain such a pattern the cor responding stereotypes axeloaded into the ac tive work epace of the system  , unless they are already active . 
3 t Rl4~4n~!~m -Irrelevant C and td Lates In parallel with the suggestion process  , the prediotion m of each stereotype in the act ive workspace are compared with the text  . In Scrabble , the sentences of the text are first parsed into a variant of Conceptual Dependency  ( CD ) represent-ation ( Schank 75b ) by a program described in ( Cater 80 )   . The semantic representation scheme lx as been extended to include nominal descriptions s imilar in power to those used by  ( Wilke 77 )   . The ~ predictions are compared with the CD representation structures at the end of each sentence ! but not hAng in the scheme described in this paper could not be applied to a-  28   ; _  ) -system whloh inteKrated the process of p are fut with that of determining whether or not a fragment of the text satisfies some predic tion  , as is done in ( DeJon 879) . 
It is likely that stereotypes which are not relevant to the toplo of the our z~nt text  8eKment will hats been loadeds ma result of the magKestion proces S '  , Since the cost of the comparison of . a prediction with the CD-represent attonf a sentence of the text  t8 not trivial It is impoz ~ on t that ir-re levant stereotypes are removed from the act ive work ep so e as rapidly as possible  , The pztmax7 algorithm used by Scrabble removes anys tereotype which has faA led to predict mOre of the p~o position g in l noomlng the text than it has successfully predicted  , Thls slmple algort thah as proved adequate in tests and its simplicity also ensures that the cost of  reuovtn6 irrelevant stereotpyes is mlnlmlsed , Further processing Is subsequently done to separate stereotypes whloh were never appropria te for the text from stereotypes whloh were use ful for the analysis of some part of the text  , but are no lon Keruseful . 
4, JblE Xample
Consider the ~ ollow Ang short text , adapted from ( Char-nAak 78) , Jaok p toked aoem of t unaelf the shelf , He put it in hie basket . HepsAdfor it and went home . 
Assume that associated with the primitive pat tern for food the system has stereotypes for eattnKin arester  , shopping at a supermarket , and prepart ~ ams8 ~ In the kitch-en , The Xextoonen . tz7 fortuna ( a larges eafleh whloh 18 Qaught for food ) wall ? onta An this pattern , and this walloa use the loadlng of the above three stereotypes into the active works paoe  . The restaurant stereotype will not predic t the first sentence  , and so will ~- medtately be unloaded . Both the supermarket and kitchen stereotypes expect sentences llke-  283 -the first in the text . When the scold sentence i8 read , the supermarket stereotype will be q ~ x peoting it  ( since it expects pul ~ o hases to be put into basket l ~  )  , but the kitchen stereoty pew all not . However the kitchen stereotype will not be unloaded since  , 8 of ar , it has predicted 88 many propositions as it has failed to pred ict  . When the third sentence is read , again the supermarket stereotype has predic ted propositions of this form  , but the kitchen stereotype has not . Therefore the kitch-enstereotype is removed from the active workspace  , and the topic of text is firmly ident if ied  a8 avisit to the super-market . 
Its hogld be noted that a completely realist ic system would have to perform much more complex processing to analyse the above example  . In such a system additional stereotypes would probably be activated by the occurrence of the primitive pattern for food  , and it is likely that yet more stereotypes would be activated by different primit ive patterns in the lexicon entries for the words in the input text  . 
5 J Conclusions
The technique described in this paper for the identific-ation of the topic of a text section has a number of advant-  aKe8 over previous schemes . First , its use of information which will probably already be stored in the natural language processing system's lexicon has obvious advantages over schemes which require large  , separate data-structures purely for topic identification  , as well as for making the predict-ions ussoolated with a topic ? In practice  , Scrabble uses a slightly doctored lexicon to improve efficiency  , but the necessary work could be done by an automatic proprooess ~ Lng of the lexicon  . 
Second , the scheme described here can make use of nominal8 which suggest a candidate topic , and associated stereotypes , without complex ma~t pulation of semantic in form-ation which Is not useful for thAs purpose  . The scheme of-284-(DeJong 79) , for example , would perform complex ope Z attons on semantic representations associated with " pick " before It processed the more useful word " tuna " if It processed the above example text  . 
Third the use of semantl . oprimitive patterns has great- , ergenerality than techniques which setup d irect links bet-ween words and bundles of p redictions  , as appeared to be done in early versions of the SAM program  ( So hank 75 a )   . 
One final point . The technique for topic identification in this paper would not be practical ei the rif it was very expensive to loads tereotypes which turn out to be Irrelevant  , or if the cost of comparing the predictions of such stereo-types with the text represent at ion was high  . The Scr~bble system , running under Cambridge LIS Ponan IBM 370/165 took 8770 milliseconds to analyse the example text above of which  756 milliseconds was used by loading and act ivatiDg the two irrelevant stereotypes and  103 milliseconds was spent comparing their p redictions with the CD-x~presentation f the text  . 
The system design is such that these figures would not in-creased rematically if mores tereotypes were considered whilst process ing the example  . 
6 tReferences ( Cater 80)
Cater , A . W . S . Analysing English Texts A N0n-determin ist-Ic Approach with Limited Memory . AXSB-SO Conference Proceedings . Society for the Study of Artifi Cial Intell-igence and the Simulation of Behavlour  . July it 980 . 
( CJ ~. tak 78)
Charniak E . With Spoon in H and this must be the Eating
Frame , TIRLAP-2, 1978.
( De , Tong 79)
DeJo ~, O . P . Skinning Stories in Real Times an Bxpex ~ Am-ent in Integrated Understanding  . Research Report No . 
158 . Yale University Department of Computer Sc ience  ,  - 285 -
Hew Haven , Conneotiout . M~1979.
( Sohenk 75a )
Sohank , R . C . and the Yalea . I ? Pro~eot . SAIl--AStory Understander . Researoh Report No .  4) . Yale UniTersit ~ Departnent of Computer Soieno et New HaTen  , Conneotiout . 
1975 ( Sohank 75b )
So hank R . CoConoeptual In?ormatlon Prooesslng ? North-
Holland , Amsterdam . 1975o-(Wilks 77)
Wilks , Y ? A ? Good and Bad Arguments about Semantio Pri ~ tives ? Cc  , ~ untoation and Cognition ,  10? 19770 - 286"-
