THELOCALITY PHENOMENON ANDP ARALLEL PROCES SINGOF
NATURALL ANGUAGE
E.L . Lozinskii and S . Nirenburg
Department of Computer Science
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem , Israel
I . Amon ~ the various traditions established in computer processing of natural language during the twenty-odd years of research the understanding the tany such processing is to be done sequentially has a special status  . 
Even the most advanced natural language processing systems employ the sequential mode as a necessary evil  , or do not even consider it an evil due to the ostensible lack of alternatives  ; thus , for instance , such wellknown systems as SAM , PAM , ELI/cf . e . g . Schank and Riesbeck , 1981/, PHRAN/cf . e . g . Arens , 1981/or PARSIFAL/see e . g . Marcus , 1979/are all based on sequentions lity . 
The recent advances in the VLSI technology suggest % her a reevaluation of this tradition is in order  . Indeed , non-sequential " parallel ~ methods start emerging  . In the field of AI one could mention , for example , Kornfeld's (1979 ,  1981 ) work in problem solving or the approach of HEARSAY-II  ( see Erman et el . , 1980) to speech processing . The word parallelism seems even to turn gradually into a current " buzz-word " in the AI community  . Note that the meaning of this word still remains largely loose  . Thus , Phillips and Hendler ( 1981 ) snggest a system of severalts s___~k-oriented- 186 -processors working in parallel . 
2 . A different and a more powerful approach to parallel processing of natural language is suggested here : in ' steed of functional di stribution we suggest parallel distr ibution of input stream elements  ; a processor is assigned to a very item of input and each such processor is provided with the same software package  , so that all processes within a certain group become equal in status and modus oper and i  .   ( Note that this also increases the system's reliability  , since even in the unlikely case of failu reof  n1 processes the remaining one will accomplish the task by itself  , in the sequential mod?o ~ Our approach to parallelism is based on the phenomenon of locality  . Currently we apply it to constructing a syntact-ic parsing system fors subset of English  , as e simple case of natural language processing . 
3 . Let us consider a text as a vector made up of d is cre-te elements wi: 
T = / w0, wl , ..., Wn/.
Beingfed with Tacertain Natural Laugue ~ e Processor  ( NLP ) produces a structure of the form S ( T ) =/ v0 , Vl ,   . . . , Vm / , where vj can be of various nature : words in the object language and/or word ~ and symbols in a metalangua~e and/or various kinds of delimiters  . 
Let D ( Vj ) be the minimal subset of T determining v ~ in the sense that information carried in the elements of th~s subset is necessary endsufficient for outputting vj by the NLP  . Let gj be the index of the leftmost element of D ( v . ) in the string T , and Hi , the index of the rightmost one ( e . ?g . 
if D(v ~) = / w3 , ws , w10/theng~=3 and hj=10) . We now define the important notion of locality . Locality of an output element v ; jisl(vS): , - h . i-g ~= ~ ; hj hj- 187 -This function has a number of interesting properties  . If an output element v ~ depends on exactly one element wi  , then its locality is unity , the highest possible value . On the other hand , if a certain vk depends on ? large range of input elem-ents  , then its locality is close to zero . Comparir ~ parallel and sequential prooess in E we show that the ratio of the time necessary to produce an output element in paral lel mode to that of the sequential modestr ictly depends on the locality of this e lement  . Moreover , the relative time gain of parallel p rocess  in8 as regards sequential processing is exactly the given element's locality  . In other words , the greater the ~ egate locality of elements in a certain text  , the more benefit there is in its parallel processing  . Such is the intrinsic connection between the notion of locality and the performance of a system based on parallel processing  . 
4 . The process of implementation starts with f inding clusters of h~h locality in the text  . At this st ~ e we prove the following . Proposition . NPs, . VPs and PPs of English are highly local . 
On this basis we proceed to build a system of parallel pars-ir ~ for ~ liah  . In its present form the system consists of three modules : a morphological and two syntact icones  . The result of the first stage is a set of sets of distionary en-tries for every input word  , which determines the syntactic classes to which the input words may in principle be long  . A  ~ . ammar for each processore t the first syntactic stage of analysis is presented as a table which indicates all the cor-rectt riads of syntactic class members in the subset of Er~l-ish We are analyzing  . This means that this stnge is devoted to find ing the states of compatibility between the " neigh-bouts " in the input string  . It terminates when all the possib-let r iads have been checked  , produces candidates for correct parses ( if any ) and transfers them to the second syntactic stage whose task is a/to carry out all k inds of agreement-  188 - and completeness tests ( e . g . the subject-predicate number agreement and the presence of at least one verb in the sent- ence  , reap .   ) and b/to build one or more representations of the parse  ( s )   ( e . g . a constituent tree and a predicate-roles tructure  )   . This modular framework facilitates the add i tion of new stages to the system  , such as one or more semantic stages and an in ferencir ~ mechanism  ( provided a world is defined ) ? The coBunication between separate stages of analysis is accomplished globally  , and here a secondary parallelism , this time the function alone ( of . Phillips and Hendler , op . 
cit .)- can be implemented.
References.
A~ens , Y .  (1981) . Using language and context in the analysis of texts  . Proceedings of the IJCAT-81 . Vancouver , B . C . 
Er~an , L . et el .  (1980) . The HEAP~AY-XI speech understanding system : in tegrating knowledge to resolve uncertainty  . 
ACM Computing Reviews , 12, No . 2.
Kornfeld , W . a .  (1979) . Using parallel processing for problem solv ing  . MIT AT Lab Memo 561 . 
Kojeld , W . A .  (1981) . The use of parallelism to i ~ Dlement a heuri stic search  . Proceedings of the IJCAX-81 . Vancouver I Bo Co Marcus , M .   ( 1979 ) oA theory of syntactic recognition for nat -uralls -  , ~ uage . MIT Press . 
Phillips , B . and J . Hendlar (1981) . Controlling parsing by passing messages . Proceedings of the Third Annual Con-ference of the Cognitive Science Society  , Berkeley . 
Schenk , R . C . and C . K . Rieebeck (1981) . Inside conputer understanding . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hilledale,
N?J?"-189-
