WHYTHEREMUST BEASEM ANTICREPRESENTATION ( OVER AND ABOVE
ANY COG~TIVE ~ ETWORK)
Th.R . Hofmann
Toyama University , Japan
As ~ nantic representation ( or a semantic network ; Mel'-~uk , Seuren , Hofmann , Sgall ,   .   .   .   ) cannot be dispensed within a model of language comprehension which incorporates are-p resentation of knowledge  , commonly called a oo ~ itivenet-work ( e . g . Qu?11ian , Lamb , Shank , Hays , Jackendoff, .   .   .  )  . 
We shall demonstrate this in several ways , claiming to re-solve the contention between those WhO claim they are necess-ary  ( the 1st camp above ) and those who would ols/m that they can be d is pensed with  , the 2n do emp , including also Hontague , who uses them for " convenience only " . 
First , and most intuitively , is the observation that . hican and commonly does understand a descript ion of some-thing  ( e . g . a scientific theory , or a political tract ) which one knows or believes to be at variance with the facts  . This suggests that in-taken information is kept apart from general knowledge  , until such time as one decides to accept it aa true  . Cognitive networks can , however , be augmented to account for this by annotat ing arcs by their  ( epistee Lic ) source , though this is a bit unrealistic for most human use of language-we seldom know the source of some believed fact  . 
A 2nd demonstration is to note that the norms ~ person " knows " of many different worlds  , where facts are at varian-ce with those of another world  . As a scientific example , Riemsnian and Eucledian geometries are such contrary worlds  , -134-as are any pair of compet ~ theories . For more ordinary examples , most English speakers know of at least 4 different worlds , conta?ning different objects , different possibilities , and so on : the world of @ reek mytholo ~ ( conta4n Lnguni corns , gods , etc .  )  , the world of Sherlock Holmes ( with a certain Dr Watson , a Baker St ,   .   .   .  )  , the world of James Bond , and the " real " world . As for the real world , one's interlocutor often has a diffe rent version of it  , which must be known to under-stand his speech . 
Now , if one must incorporate in himself knowled Ee of  4 or sod?s ti not worlds ( and I would suggest it is closer to 40 than 4 )   , then we may say he has as me~y cognitive networks  , of v ~ dus degrees of dete?1 and completeness . These networks may be represented as conflated into one supercognitive netrwork  , with sufficient special marking of the type eu~ested above  ( extended to nodes , also ) , but such a oon flated network can always be decomposed into separate ones for the venous worlds  , if it is adequately marked to model human be hawlour  . 
If then there are a number of distinct cogn itivenet-works needed for understanding ordinary human speech  , there is no reason not to add 1 more for the conversation currently in p rogress  . This is no more nor less than a semantic repres -entation  , except as we shall observe below , it differs in structure , and function . 
A tighter , but longer and more difficult , demonstrationist O show that " inferenc ing "  , which is roughly equivalent to moving through a cognitive network  , is NOT undertaken until the sem~utio operat ion of integration is attempted  . This operation , which combines the semantic contributions of sentences together  , depends heavily on a principle whereby each successive sentence is interpreted in the most redundant way possible  , so that it " overlaps " as much as possible with the content of the previous sentences  . 
-135-t ~
With this principle , we can show that inferencing appears to be undertaken only when integration is blocked for lack of a verlap of the expressed meanings of the component sentences  .   ( Inferencing is of course required for argument  , for determ , tnAng truth of an assertion , or for otherwise apply-ing the comprehension of a language act against the wor ld  .   ) These " expressed meanings of the discourse " are nothing more than their sen~ntic representation  , ld~ich we have thus shown to b9 necessarily held distinct from background knowledge used in lnferenoing  , represented in a cognitive network . 
We can conclude , then , that in some form or other , a representation of the semantic effects of the sentences is needed to account for howd is courses are understood  . Although this semantic representation me ~ be conflated  ( in a computer , e . g . ) with a co~j ~ itive network , it is logically distinct , and may be profitably so-treated . 
This sems~utic representation , we may observe , is dist-inct from the ordinary cogn it ivenetwork in being extremely undet ai ~ ea conta ihing mostly syntagmatic rather than pars-d l ~ natlo relatiof is hips  , and very malleable , and it has a priva'l edged position in the interpretation of language acts  . 
It is also used pri~ns~rily , at speech time , as a depository , with perhaps no inferenci ~ , while a co~litive network as generally understood receives perhaps  , nothing at speech time , butie used primarily for inferencing . Thus they appear to be quite distinct in contents  , function and usage . 

