COLING82, Z Horecl~(ed.
North-Holland Publishing Company
? Academia , 1982
MULTI-LEVEL TRANS LATION AIDS IN A
DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM
Alan K . Melby
Linguistics Department
Brigham Young University
Provo , Utah 84602 U.S.A.
At COLING 80 , we reported on an Interactive Translation System called ITS  . We will discuss three problems in the design of the first version of ITS :  ( 1 ) human factors , (2) the " all or nothing " syndrome , and (3) traditional centralized processing . We will also discuss a new version of ITS , which is now being programmed . 
This new version will hopefully overcome these problems by placing the translator in control  , providing multiple levels of aid , and distributing the processlng . 

At COLING 80 , we reported on an Interactive Translation System ealled ITS  . We will consider three problems in the first version of ITS :  ( 1 ) human factors , (2) the ' W all or nothing " syndrome , and (3) traditional centralized processing . 
The first problem ( human factors ) is the problem of keeping human translators and revisors happy  . Humans naturally want to feel that they are doing useful  , interesting work and that they are using the machine instead of it using them  . However , the first version of ITS forced them to answer many uninteresting questions and to revise many sentences they thought should be retranslated  . 
The " el ! or nothing " syndrome is a name for the attitude that the machine must translate every sentence or it is not worth using a machine at a ll The problem is that a system based on this approach is likely to be hard to adjust into a useful form if it does not attain the desired level of performance  . 
The problem with traditional centralized processing is that it does not provide cons is tent  , reliable response time to e ~ ch user and requires physical proximity or high-speedte lecommunications  . And ae entralized system may be hard to decentralize after it has been designed  . 
The first version of ITS had all three of the above problems  . These problems would disappear if we had FAI-IQT ( Fully Automatic , High Quality Translation -- Bar-llillel , 1960) . In that case a source text would be presented to the computer  , which would promptly produce a poIished trans lation  , type set and ready to be published without revision  . That would solve the human problems because no human translators would be involved  . The " all or nothing " question would be irrelevant because we would have it all  . And centralized processing would not be a problem because there would be no interactive processing  . This paper assumes that FAll QT of general text is not on the visible horizon and proposes a design which answers these problems  . 
In the new version of ITS , each translator works at a microcomputer instead of a conventional terminal  . The micro computers are part of a distributed network but can function without being online  . The translator uses the micro computer as a tool forgetting the translation done and is in control of the translation process  . There are three levels of aid available to the translator  , ranging from simple text processing to terminology aids to full machine transtation  . All three levels are fully integrated and the translator can quickly switch from one level to another even within the translation of a single sentence  . This means that the translation process can continue smoothly regardless of how many sentences fail to receive a full analysis and a good machine translation  . This in turn means that the actual machine translation component can be " pure " in the sense that no compromises need be made to ensure some kind of output even on sentences that are not analyzable v ~ it h the current parser and model of language  . 
It is hoped that the above design will solve the three problems under discussion  . 
Placing the translators in control of the operation of the system should improve their attitude  . Using multiple levels of aid should overcome the dangers of the " all or nothing " approach  . And replacing conventional terminals with microcomputers should overcome some of the problems of centralized processing  . Solving these user-oriented problems is important from a theoretical viewpoint because vena research translation system desperately needs user feedback from real translators  . And real translators will not give the needed feedback unless the system is practical and user -friendly  . 
The rest of the paper will elaborate on each of the three problems and their proposed solution in the new version of ITS  . 
PROBLE MONE : HUMANFACTORS
Lacking FAH QT , human translators and revisors are still needed in a computerized translation system  . In ITS version one , translating a text involved asking questions about each sentence of the text before the translation of the first sentence appeared  . 
When the translated sentences finally did appear , the translator/revisor was expected to examine and then revise them as needed but not to retranslate hem from the source text  . After all , this was a human-assisted MACHINE translation system and we had already invested considerable interaction time and machine time in the translation of each sentence  . The translator/revisor was to remove the errors from the machine's translation and no more  . Understandably , the human translator/revisor often felt more like a " garbage collector " than a translator  . 
Having an unhappy translator is a serious problem . It should be remedied , if possible , for two reasons : ( I ) We should be concerned for the translator as a person  . (2) An unhappy translator will fight the system . Consider the following statement by a human translator : During my years with JPRS  .   .   . I had occasion to do some postediting of machine translations  , in addition to my normal assignments .   .   .   . Monetary consideration saide , the work was odious . To postedit , a conscientious translator had to literally retranslate every sentence in the original  , compare it word for word with the clumsy machine attempts  , and ' then laboriously print in corrections between the lines of the print out  . It would have been much faster--and less tedious - -just to translate " from scratch " and dictate the translation on tape  , as I normally do . 
And I am sure the product would have been better . It was thus my impression that postediting of machine translations i translation work at coolie wages  . I can't imagine anyone wanting to do it unless the alternative was starvation  . ( Silverstein , 1981 ) Seppanen ( 1979 ) claims that relatively little attention has been paid to the pragmatic aspects of man/machine dialogues  . He claims that human factors in man/machine interfaces have not attracted the interest of either computer scientists or psychologists  . Perhaps , then , human factors in computerized translation systems are an appropriate area of interest for computational linguists  , and this view seems to be MULTI-LEVEL TRANSLATION AIDSINADISTRIBUTED SYSTEM  217 gaining momentum from within the field . Researchers at the Grenoble project have concluded : The human and social aspects should not be neglected  . To force a rigid system on revisors and translators ia guarantee of failure  . It must be realized that AT ( Automatized Translation ) can only be introduced step by step into some preexisting organizational structure  . The translators and revisors of the EC did not only reject Systran because of its poor quality but also because they felt themselves becoming " slaves of the machine "  , and condemned to a repetitive and frustrating kind of work  . 
( Boitet et ai , 1980)
Our answer to the problem of human factors is to place the translator in control  . 
The translator uses human judgment to decide when to postedit and when to translate  . Nothing is forced upon the translator . This approach is strongly argued for by Kay ( 1980 ) when he states : " The kind of translation device I am proposing will always be under the tight control of a human translator "  . And Lippman ( 1977 ) describes a successful terminology aids experiment in Mannheim and concludes : " The fact that quality was improved  , rather than degraded as in the ease of MT , appears to support the soundness of an approach where the transla to retains full control of the translation process  . " PROBLEM TWO:THE " ALLOR NOT HINGs ' SYNDROME Originally  , FAHQT was the only goal of research in machine translation  . Until recently , there seemed to be a widely shared assumption that the only excuse for the inclusion of a human translator in a machine translation system was as a temporary  , unwanted appendage to be eliminated as soon as research progressed a little further  . 
This " all or nothing " syndromed rove early machine translation researchers to aim for FAHQT or nothing at all  . It is now quite respectable in computational linguistics to develop a computer system which is a TOOL used by a human expert to access information helpful in arriving at a diagnosis or other conclusion  . Perhaps , then , it is time to entertain the possibility that it is also respectable to develop a machine '- anslation system which include sophisticated linguistic processing yet is designed to used as a tool for the human translator  . 
hyou expect each sentence of the final translation to be a straight machine translation or at worst a slight revision of a machine translated sentence  , then you are setting your selfup for a fall . Remember Brinkmann's conclusion that " the postediting effort required to provide texts having a correctness rate of  75 or even 80 percent with the corrections necessary to reach an acceptable standard of quality is unjustifiable as far as expenditure of money and man power is concerned "  ( Brinkmann , 1980) . Thus , a strict postedit approach must be nearly perfect or it is almost useless  . Many project start out with high goals , assuming that postediting can surely rescue them if their original goals are not achieved  . Even postediting may not make the system viable . 
The proposed solution to this problem is to anticipate from the beginning that not every sentence of every text will be translated by computer and find its way to the target text with little or no revision  . Then an effort can be made from the beginning to provide for a smooth integration of human and machine translations  . ITS version two will have three integrated levels of aid under the control of the translator  . We will now describe the three levels of translator aids  . 
Level one translator aids can be used immediately even without he source text being in machine -readable form  . In other words , the translator cansit down with a source text on paper and begin translating much as if at a type writer  . Level one includes a text processor with integrated terminology aids  . For familiar terms that recurt here 218A . K . MELBY is a monolingual expansion codetable which allows the user to insert user-defined abbreviations in the text and let the machine expand them  . This feature is akin to the " macro " capability on sortie word processors  . The key can be several characters long instead of a single control character  , so the number of expansion codes available is limited principally by the desire of the translator  . Levelone also provides access to a bilingual terminology databank  . There is a term file in the micro computer itself under the control of the individual translator  . The translator also has access to a larger , shared term bank ( through telecommunications or local network )  . Level one is similar to a translator aid being developed by Lel and Wright  , chairman of the Terminology Committee of the American Translator's Association  . Ideally , the translator would also have access to a database of texts  ( both original and translated ) which may be useful as research tools . 
Level two translator aids require the source text to be in machine-readable form  . 
In eluded in level two are utilities to process the source text according to the desires of the t rans lator  . For example , the translator may ranaceross an unusual term and request a list of all occurrences of that term in that text  . Level two also includes a " suggestion box " option  ( Melby , 1981) which the translator can invoke . This feature causes each word of the current text segment obe automatieally looked up in the term file and displays any matches in a field of the screen called the suggestion box  . 
If the translator opts to use the suggested translation of a term  , a keystroke or two will insert it into the text at the point specified by the translator  . If the translator desires , a morphological routine can be activated to inflect the term according to evidence available in the source and target segments  . 
Level three translator aids integrate the translator workstation with a full-blown MT system  . The MT component can be any machine translation system that includes a self-evaluation metr ic  . The system uses that metric to asssign to each of the translated sentences a quality rating  ( e . g . " A " means probable human quality , " B " means some uncertainty about parsing or semantic choices made  , " C " means probable flaw , and " D " is severely deficient ) . On any segment , the translator may request to see the machine translation of that segment  . If it looks good , the translator can pull it down into the work area  , revise it as needed , and thus incorporate it into the translation being produced by the translator  . Or the translator may request to see only those sentences that have a rating above a specified threshold  ( e . g . above " C ") . 
Of course , the translator is NEVER obliged to use the machine translation unless the translator feels it is more efficient to use it than to translate manually  . No pressure is needed other than the pressure to produce rapid  , high--quality translations . If using the machine translations make the trans lation process go faster and better  , then the translator will naturally use them . 
The successful METEO system by TAUM ( Montreal ) expresses the essence of this approach . All sentences go into the MT system . The system evaluates its own output and accepts about  80 percent of the sentences . Those sentences are used without post--editing . The other 20 percent are translated by a human and integrated into the machine-translated sentences  . This application differs from ours in that human translators do not see any machine translat ions at all--goed or bad  . But the basic level three approach is there . 
One positive aspect of this three level approach is that while level three is dramatically more complex linguistically and computation aliy than level two  , level three appears to the translator to be very similar to level two  . Level two presents key terms in the sentence ; level three presents whole sentences . When good level three segments are available , it can speed up the translation considerably but their absence does not stop the translation process  . Thus , a multilevel system can be put into production much sooner than a conventional postedit system  . And the sooner a system is put into production , the sooner useful feedback is obtained from the users  . 
MULTI-LEVEL TRANS LATION AIDS IN ADISTRIBUTED SYSTEM  219 The multilevel approach is designed to please ( a ) the sponsors ( because the system . is useful early in the project and becomes more useful with time  )  ,   ( b ) the users ( because they are in control and choose the leve lofaid  )  , and ( c ) the linguists and programmers ( because they are not pressured to make compromises just to get automatic translation on every sentence  )  . 
PROBLEM THREE : TRADITION ALCENTRALIZED PROCESSING Machine translation began in the  1950's when the cost of a CPU prohibited the thought of distributed processing in which each user has a personal CPU  . Interactive time-shared computing ( where a chuser has a dumb terminal connected to a shared CPU  ) can give the impression that each user has a personal computer -- so long as the system is not loaded own  . Unfortunately , systems tend to get loaded own . Highly interactive work such as word processing is not suited to an environment where keystroke response times vary  . Also , centralized processing requires either physical proximity to the main CPU or telecommunications lies  . High speed telecommunications can be vary costly , and low speed telecommunications are not user-fr ! endly  . A costly solution is to obtain a dedicated main frame and never load it down  . A more cost-effective solution in terms of today 's computer systems ia distributed system in which each translator has a micro computer tied into a loose network to share resources such as large dictionaries  . 
The individual translator workstation would be a microcomputer with approximately  256K of main memory , dual diskette drives , CRT , keyboard , small printer , and communication sport . Such systems are available at relatively low cost  ( under 5000U . S . dollars ) . Additional storage for term files and text files can be obtained at reasonable cost by adding a Winchester-type disk  . If several translators are in the same building , a local network can be set up to share terminology and document databases and even inter-translator messages  . The capabilities of the work station would include rapid  , responsive word processing and access to internal dictionaries and to shared translator data bases  ( i . e . level one and level two processing ) . The internal dictionaries would include an expansion file and a terminology file under the control of the translator  . Of course , the translator could load internal files appropriate ot ' ~  . subject matter of the document by inserting the appropriate diskettes  . Accesstos, . rce texts , document-specific ditionaries , and level three machine translations c~I be granted through a local network  , a telecommunications network , or through the mails on diskette . Ideally , part of the machine translation would be done on the translator workstation in order to allow the translator to repair level three dictionary problems before they cause rep  . eated errors throughout a text . A minimal capability m the workstatl on would be a translator defined replacement table to correct some improper word choices that cause repeated errors in the machine translated sentences  . Ultimately , microcomputers will be powerful enough to allow source text to be presented to a workstation which contains full level three software  . In the meantime , the raw machine translation part of level three can be done remotely on any suitable main frame and then transmitted to a microcomputer translator workstation for integration i to the translation process as level three aids  . 

The system described is not , of course , entirely original . It draws on ideas from University colleagues and other such as Kay  , Boitet , Lippman , Andreyewski , Wright , and Brinkmann . But it does represent an important ~ hift in direction from past years of research on ITS at Brigham Young University  . It is an integration of a machine translation system and a terminology aid system  , with the final translated text being produced on a microcomputer in a distributed network  . 
220 AX . MELBY
The author's major motivations for pursuing this system are to provide a useful translator aids system and to create an appropriate vehicle for machine translation research  . Fortunately , given the framework of this paper , those two goals are Compatible . A significant additional advantage is that the usefulness of the translator aids component  ( levels one and two ) will facilitate obtaining serious user feedback during the development of the machine translation component  ( level three )  . 
1There are three groups doing work on machine -assisted translation in Prove  , Utah , U . S . A . Two are commercial endeavors ( Weidner and ALPS ) , and the third , the one described in this paper , is an academic research project at Brigham Young University  . 
All three groups include researchers who partic ipated in the development of ITS version one  , yet a11 three are independent organizations . 
REPERENCES (1) Andreyewski , Alexander , Translation : Aids , Robots , and Automation , META
Vol . 26, No . 1(March 1981) 5766.
(2) Bar-Hillel , J . , The Present Status of Automatic Translation of Languages  , Advananees in Computers , Vol . 1 ( Academic Press , New York , 1960) 158 . 
(3) Baudot , Jean , Andre Clas , and Irene Gross , Unmodele demini-banque de terminologie bilingue  , META , eel 26 , No .  4 (1981) 315-331 . 
(4) Boitet , Ch . , P . Chatelin , P . Daun Fraga , Present and Future Paradigms in the Automatized Translation of Natural Languages  , in : COLINGS0 ( Tokyo ,  1980) . 
(5) Brinkmann , Karl-Heinz , Terminology Data Banks as a Basis for High -Quality Translation  , in : COLING 80 ( Tokyo ,  1980) . 
(6) Kay , Martin , The Proper Place of Men and Machines in Language Translation  , Xerox Pale Alto Research Center Report ( October 1980 )  . 
(7) Lippman , Erhardt , Computer Aids for the Human Translator , Report presented at the VIII World Congress of FIT  , Montreal (1977) . 
(8) Melby , Alan K . , Melvin R . Smith , and Jill Peterson , ITS : Interactive Translation
System , in : COLINGS0 ( Tokyo , 1980).
(9) Melby , Alan K . , Linguistics and Maehine Translation , in : James Copel and and Philip Davis ( eds . ) , The Seventh LACUS Forum 1980 ( Horn beam Press , Columbia , 
SC , 1981).
(10) Melby , Alan K . , A Suggestion Box Translator Aid , in : Proceedings of the annual symposium of the Deseret Language and Linguistic Society  , ( Brigham Young
University , Prove , Utah , 1981).
(11) 8 eppun an , Jouko , Pragmatic Aspects of Man/Computer Dialogues , in : Helsinki University of Technology Computer Center  , Research Report No .  12 (1979) . 
(12) Silverstein , Virginia , Letter to the editor , ATA Clroniele ( November 1991) . 
