ADVERBS ANDSEM ANTICINFERENCES
Madis Saluveer
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory , Tartu State University , 
78 Tii ~ Street , 202400 Tartu , Estonia , USSR
1 . L . Karttunen ( Karttunen 1970 ,  1971 ) demonstrated that in English there exists ix classes of predicates that differ as fo r the relationships holding between the predicate and its sentential complement : factives  , positive and negative two-way implioat ives  , positive and negative one-way implicat ives  , and non-determlnatlves . H . 8 ira ( ~ im 1974 ) validated the classific-ation for the Estonian lansuage  . K&~drew their evidence from verbs and adjectives  . Now a question poses itself : do the ? principles underlying their classification hold also for ~ dverbs  , and if yes , do they exhibit any differences in com-par is on with verbs and adjectives  . 
According to Kart tunen the relationship between the predicate and its sential complement is determined by these ~ antics of the predicate  , and it canslwaye be computed if the semantic class of the predicate is known  . Together with presupposition semsntic infe rences form a subclass of infer-ences with two distinct characteristics  ( Joshi , Weisohedel 1976) , i ) they are inferences that need to be made when analysing a sentence  , i . e . the problem of when and where to make what kind of inferences does not arise in case of them i ii  ) they do not exhibit a " chain " reaction so characteristic of other kind of inferences the reason being that they stem from either the semantic structure of individual words or  -   247 -the particular synt . actic constructs of the sentence , and the relationships hold within the cor responding sentence  . 
The problem of making inferences has always been a " sore " point in natural language  understandin6 systems . The mechanism of inferences discussed in this paper enables to reduce the amount  , of computation needed and to make the interpretation of sentences more reliable  . 
2 . With respect to their influence on the relationship between the predicate and its sentential complement three classes of adverbs may be differentiated : manner adverbs  , sentence adverbs and complement-oriented a verbs  . 
2 . 1 . The behavior of manner adverbs ( MA ) and sentence adverbs ( SA ) in the sentence is widely different : i ) NA presuppose the truth of . the embedded sentence without the correspondin6 MAz ( 1 ) John ~ ordered the boy to leave ( 2 ) John ordered the boy to leave Some SA ( like " wisely " ) have the same faculty , some ( like " probably " do not : (3) W is_~2 ~ , John ordered the boy to leave (4) Probabl . y John ordered the boy to leave ii ) MA are within the scope of the sentence negation while SA have the negation always within their scope:  ( 5 ) John did not answer the question quickly ( 6 ) John answered the question ( 7 ) Shortly , John did not answer the question ( 8 ) John did not answer the question Thus it can be seen that MA always behave like factives  , whereas each SA must have an entry specifying whether i % behaves like a fac ~ ive or like a non -determinative  . 
- 248 -2 . 2  . Complement-oriented a verbs ( COA ) do not function only to mark the truth value of the compliment  ( Lehrer 1975 ) but also to change that truth value . If from the sentence ( 9 ) Bill accused John of stealing the oar it cannot be inferred whether John really did so or not  , then from (10) it follows that he did so , and from ( 11 ) that he did not: ( 10 ) Bill ~ accused John of stealing theoar ( 11 ) Bill erroneously accused John of steal ing the car COA are mostly used with non -determinative predicates chang-in  8 the non-determined relationship into a determined one : COA like correctly and r ightly function as positive one-way Impll cat lves presup poslng the truth of the complement  , COAllke erroneously and wrongly behave as negative one-way impll catlves presupposing the falsehood of the complement  , It must be noticed that not always COA trigger the change of relationship : triggering depends on the semantic structure of the predicate  ( selection restrictions ) and should be given for every predicate separately  . 
3 . To windup It must be said that adverbs do not poss-ess all the  . features characteristic of verbs and adjectives : they may function as faot lves  ( MA and some SA ) or as positive or negative one-way impll catlves ( COA )  , and even as such their paradi@u is defective , e . g . as one-way Impll catives they do not have any " neutral " form as the corresponding verbs and adjectives have  . 
References :
Josh/A . K . IW elso he del R . M , Computation of a subclass of " inferences : presuppositions and entailment  . TRN 74 , Department of Information and Computer Science , University of California at Irvine ,  1976 . 

Karttunen . L . The Lo~c of English Predicate Complemen ~ Construction  . Non-Publication 12 of the 1970 HSSB Mathematical Ltn~tisttcs Seminar . 
Karttunen L ! Implicative Verbs . Langu~et 1971, vol . 47, N2 . 
~ImH , 3emantlka . Tallinn , Val & ~ e , 1974.

