RECURSIVE FUNCTIONS P0R COMPUTATION OF NATURAL SECRET

Jouko J . Sepp ~ nen
TeKoLa Computing Centre , Helsinki University of Technology ,   . 
02150 ESPO015, Pinlaz ~
The paper describes a system called RENTTU , a collection of functions for computation of transformations from natural languages in to several types of natural secret languages such as PigLatin etc  . By a natural secret language , sometimes called cant in English or child ren's play language we means natural language transformation  , which preserves important morpho-and phonolog ical qualities of the underlying source language  . Such languages seem to make up a rich cultu re  , which is a mixture of lore , linguistics , cryptology , and - if you wish-of computing . 
To day the phenomenon lies probably nearest to fo lklore and children's culture  , but in earlier times they have , and perhaps still do constitute important skills of the lower and underground world  . In the Middle Ages they were widely used among ~ beggars  , tramps , pedlars , vagabonds , thieves etc . To Europe they seem to have come through the By sant it un from the East  , where they still today continue to live an active life  . 
As a linguistic phenomenon they seem to be un iversal and appear in some form and extent p ractically in all languages and cultu res  . Yet it seems that they have attracted lit tle attention from the part of linguist i cs or cryp to log y  . Most of the treatment seem to fall within SOCtOlln ~ Aistics or folk-lore  . As cryptological methods the natural secret l~age-  251 -transformations are fairly simple and their value barely extends beyond the child ren's play ground  . Though interesting-ly enough they seem to well meet five out of the six so call-ed Kerckhoff's criteria often used to assess usability of cryptographio methods and systems  . 
A ~ V how , they work well and fulfill their purpose in situations for which they are aimed for : exchange of oral messages in realtime in as ituation  , where the unintended are present , Since the message does not leave permanent trace , it is not possible to examine it afterwards . 
For linguistic research they can be valuable in that they exhibit some phenomena and processes on the morpho-and phonologl cal levels that can serve as a framework for extralinguistic experimentation  , From computing and programming point of view the sub-Ject is of definite ' interest  , since it involves nontrIvial morpho-and phonological recognition  , context conditions and transformations , which offer an instructive excercise in linguistic progrsmming  . 
Several types of families of secret languages , or rath-erclasses of language transformations , are identified . The typology can be categorized as follows : I . Syllabic transformations , which may involve deletions , replications , insertions or substitutions of syllables or phonemic elements under certain contextual conditions  . 
2 . Transformations that involve syllable permutations  , possib-ly intermixed with transformations of the above type  . 
3 e Types of transformations , which involve nonsyllabic splitt-ing of words in to segments that ere interchanged with segments of a given keyword or with those of the next word  . 
Finally some hybrid types occur , which combine features of various types in one language  . 


As an example a detailed analysis is given of the Kontti language  , which is widely known in Finland and belongs to the third category  . In Kont ti the split point is determined by a number of rules  , ~ hich are conditioned by some metric and prosodic features together with the vowel consonant structure of the two words  . The transformations involve both durational and harmonic accommodations to preserve the metr ic qualities and to meet the vowel harmony laws in Pinnish  . 
Most delicate rules and conditions are found in splitt-ing criteria concern ing various kinds of diphtong  , vowel pair and long vowel combinations , in which the Finnish language is fairly r ich  . Some cases take realear for the l ~ age to be correctly resolved  , but all rules and conditions can , as soon as they have become clearly establi shed  , be programned . Thus a full competence of the Konnti language can be implemented on the computer  . 
Prom the linguistic point of view the transformations are interesting in the sense that they fully preserve the phono - and morphological we li-formedness of the underlying language  , i . e . the resulting words and wordforms could well be real substance of the source language  . 
Another notable feature is that the reverse transformation based on the same set and order of rules restores the original words and wordforms except for certain degenerate cases  , which involve neutral vowels that are incapable of ? receiving information about harmonic quality when it is char~ed  . 
Presently the RENTTU system accounts for some 20 lan-guages known in Finland including some based on Swedish  . It consists of a collection of some 50 neat LISP functions written in a purely functional style  . The functional style of programming is not only well suited or applicable to the problem  , but also clearly reflects the nature of both the-  253 -lingu?stie and the computational aspects of the processes involved  . It also results in elegant and concise function definitions  . The author would be grateful of any material or observations concerning such languages in o ther countries  . 
The system has been implemented in INTERLIEP on the TeKo La  DECSystem-20 and is available as a listing from the author on request  . 
Referenoes z8 epp ~ nenJ .  (1981)  , Sananmuo do stu sleikki - Jasalakieliss ~ , Publications of the Linguistic Associa tion of Y in l and  ,  8 . Sananmuo dostus , Symposio Seiliss ~, 3 .  -4  . 9  . 1981,
Turku0~ansuu H .  (1916)  , Leikki-Jase ~ ekielista , Suomenkiel entutki muksenty ~ me~ta , Gummerus , Jyv ~ skyl ~?-254 -
