COMPONENTSOFSEM ANTICREPRESENTATION
A . E . Klbrik
Kaf . strukturn oJ Ipriklad no Jlingvlstiki
MGU , 117234 Moskva , USSR
The problem of the meaning of the text-the end and product of speech activity  , Is a central one both for theoret-Ical linguistics  , and for the applied fields connected with it p such as artificial intelligence  , question answ 6 ring , man-machlne communication , etc . 
The meaning of the text or , speaking more technically , the semantic representation is not , as it has been considered until recently , a homogeneous entity , that is why a specific-ation of its main dissimilar components may be helpful for theoretical and applied investigations  . 
Without striving for completeness and system at lcness I will enumerate some of these components  . To avoid a possible misunderstanding it should be emphasized that I proceed from an assumption  , which is far from being shared by everyone , that the semantic representation of an utterance has to reflect the complete Info~nation pertaining to the proper interpretation of thls utterance  , In connection with which I would regard the opposition of semantics and prsgmatl cs as invalid  . 
a . Sl tust lonal component is that part of the semantic representation which is intended  ( in the norm ) of express the main information content mapping some external  ( in relation to the message as such and to the speech act  ) situation . This component , undoubtedly , occupies the most prestigious posit-ion in the hierarchy of the components  . It is no mere chance - 154 -then that At constantly remains In the centre of attention In semantic Investigations  , or that the main unit of the syntactic level- the sentence  , is adopted exactly for its expression . 
be Referential component is a relatlon alone ; Its funct-ion As to co , relate the units of the text with the ideas about the units of reality  , to identify these units and actual-ize the sentence  . The semantic reprssentetlon , which lacks a referential component , cannot be Interpreted correctly .   ( The typical representatives of referential meanings are articles  , the categor ~ of number j demonstratl ve pronouns . ) c . Mod~l component , being also relational #correlates a proposition with the sxtrall ngulst lcsituation  . This correl-ation expresses the degree of the speaker's certainty of resllty/lr Teal Aty of the propositions the character of this estimation be ing  , as a matter of fact , continuous but not discrete . On the one end of the scale of modallty there is the meaning of reallty/irr ~ ality j on the other- that of  un-certain~7~ in between them there are various estimations of the de ~ ee of the speaker's certainty in relatlon to reality//ir Teality  .   ( The typical represent at lves of modal mean ln~s ? are moods  , modal verbs , parenthetic modal words . ) d . Dalotl coom Donen ~ correlates the content of an utterance with coordinates of the speech act  . Owing to the anthro-pc-andego centrlem of the natural language the orientation of an utterance towards the speaker As perceived as the speech norm  .   ( The re~Isr means for expressing deictlc meanings are the categories of person and tense  , formulas of politeness , some categories of localization . ) e . P~cka~ln~component correlates each utterance as a part of the discourse with the whole of the discourse  . The importance of this component is determined by the basically nonlinear character of the meaning and bY the compositional problems connected wlth this  . The nonlinear meaning can be " stretched " Intos linear string by s great variety of ways  ,  - 155 -
J but the arbitrariness of such a choice Is extreemly problem-atic  . The pack aglnE component must not only currently coordin-ate the generated message with the previous text  , but simul-taneously as If control the text from the po Int of view of the hearer?s comfort in Its perception  . This component par-tlally eo incldes with the socalled actual division of the sentence  .   ( The units of this component eretheme-theme , old-new information , contrast lveness , topic , empathy , various kinds of anaphor lc expressions , etc . ) f . Lo ~ I gal component correlates , or coordinates , the text with the speaker's knowledge of the world  , provides the transition from the old to the new knowledge  , and ItIs responsible for the meaningfu lness of the text  .   ( The essent-Ial elements of this component are presuppositions and the assertive part of an utterance  . ) g . EmQ t ~ ve component correlates the content with the personality of the speaker  , with his wishes , evaluations , his psychophy ulcal condition . (It Is usually , though not alws . Ts , expressed by prosody . ) h . lllocutlonary component correlates the ut terance wltk the speaker's speech intent ions  ; viz . to Inform the hearer , toln flue nee his behavlour and actions , to stimulate his emotional , verbal or intellectual reaction , etc . -@ hatIs generally connected with the notion of lllocut lonery force  . 
What can be deduced from this apparently Incomplete ? numerat Ion ?  1  . It seems that the inability of natural languages to express  , autonomously and on the surface , various components of semantic representation and the resulting necessity to a malgamate them  , become obvious . It is what happens in the functioning of al l natural languages  , although the degree of the autonomy of this o r that component can vary  . The fact that components of semantic represent at i on are not given -  156   . 
directly ? n the text ~ explains why some of them have been discovered comparatively la te  . 
2 . This . extended interpretation of the mean Ang of the text ~ which leads to including In the struc ture of semantic ~ e present stAon the components enumerated above  , proceeds f~oms preeumpt A on that AtAsIn~ong to regsr ~ the meaning of the text as given to the speaker  . ? n advance to be ' onl 7 verbally expressed . In the process of a thought-speech act the meaning  A8 being crested , or formed , that Is fo~thef ~ not ? on ? ng model of language the tezl J_nal components ar~not meaning and text  , but thought and ( vocal ) speech . Unless this point of view becomes axAomatAc , many fundamental contradictions , of llngulat Actheory as well as obstacles to  8o lvl n ~ a nuaber of applied problems , cannot be overcome . 

