LDVLIB ( LEH ) : ASYSTEMPORINTER ACTIVE LEH MATIZING ANDITS

R . Drewek , M . Erni
Seminar of Romance Languages , University of Zurich /
Switzerland
A concrete pro ~ . ect-like our " Concordanz a lemmatizz at a delle " Operettemorali " diG  . Leopardi " ( a lemmatized concordance of an italian text o f the  18th century with some archaic phenomen and of about  70   "000 tokens and 9   "500 % Tpes ) is a good opportunity to introduce a new so ftw are package for l in ~ tistic data processing not  . as mere cumulation of routines or statements but as a com $ or table tool Just in use  . 
LDVIJ3 is no experimental , single language dedicated and fragile col lection of algorithms  . It tries to provide fast and reliables tandard procedures for everyday Jobs in lingu is t-ic and literary research and sometimes even a bit more  . The package consists of 34 programs and 41 modules , mainly writt-en in PL/1 . They have been carefully developped in the last seven years and been tested in varAous research projects since then  . The programs can be grouped by purpose :- text . preparation ( editing , correcting and printing ) -text corpus handling-lexical text analys is  , lexicostatistics-statisticals tring description  ( length phenomena ) -machine dictionary management-production of indices  , frequency dictionaries and concordances - lennatization-analysis of spoken language texts  -   86 -- content ana2  . yeis-utilities for bibliograph ~ ee , document preps~ation , g ~ aphics and ~ phemes Whereas programs can be used by the nonpro~-s ~ researcher commnicat ~ m ~ with the pro~m by k e ~ or d orient-ed mad wide lyunfomatted co  . s and language , a set of , modules is thou~t to support the pro~w ~ aing l inguist in the fields of striugmanipu lation  , word and word list ma ~ pulation , dictionary haudli ~ , VDU full screen co~munioations , print plot and other purposes . 
All programs which produce numerical output from stat-istical analysis provide a data interface to input wellknown stati stic software like SI ~ S or SAS  . The text coding rules are oriented on the pr inted original with a few restrict ions which can easily be learned even by nont rained personal  . The character set is able to receive any roman transliteration of languages using different ~ a phemes  , even old Egyptian hiero-glyph texts were analyzed by LDVI  . ~ programs . 
The complex task of producing a concordance cla ims a lot of facilities given by  LDVLI3 programs . The " crucial point " of lemmatization must be discussed to define an appropriate interface in man-machine interaction to obta in reasonable philological results  . Our design of an interactive lemmatizer m~7 be useful to show not onl~mau-machine inter -action but computational linguist/li terary expert interaction as well  . And it might reveal the lack of lingulst l cally te -llable algorithms for a fully automatic approach to this problem  . 
LDVLIB ( LEM ) doesn't lenm ~ tize automatically but it supports lemmatization as follows  . It allows to work on sing-le portions of a text and one or more users have access to the on-line machine diot  ions~7 at the same time . The user gets presented on the screen : - 87 -- in the upper part , from the KWlC-concordance : every token to be lemmatized  , with context and referen-ces(page , line ) - in the lower part , from the machine dictionary : proposals of lemmatizing relative to the type shown in  . the upper part . 
Interactive lemmatizing consists therefore in recording the  ( automatically generated ) number of the convenient proposal in the line of the token  . If there doesn't result any proposal or not a convenient one from the machine dict ionary  , the user will insert innnediately the convenient dictionary entry and record its proposal number in the upper part of the sc reen  . 
Such a new proposal will be stored in an add itional dictionary that is to be trans ferred periodically into the main dict ion-ary  . 
The always growing ~ chinediotic nar~bases on a nation-allanguage frequence vocabulary of about  25   "000 types including about 5  ; 000 lemmata . There has been put a lot of care in the design of the information codes  . The machine dictionary entries consist of 4 fields : type ( inflected word form )  , lemma ( deflected keyword ) , lemma information and type information . 
The lamina information includes the following segments : - word class and additional informatlons-additional lemmata  ( enolitio article , pronouns ) -disambiguation of homography-cross-re ference to the standard lemma  ( to be generated in the printed output ) :- graphic variant of the lamin a ( archaic writing ) -alteration of the le . - . -  ( diminutive by suffixation ) -short paraphrase in case of homonymy , where dlsambig-uation is default ( in case of polysemy , where disambiguation is optional ) The type information includes the following segments : -  8   8 -- morphological information ( gender , number , person , mood , tense , case , gradation ) -morphological variants ( archaic inflexion ) -graphic variants ( elision , short form ) - special , i . e . idiomatical use-relation to a distinc t vocabulary  ( e . g . frequence vocabulary ) The users of concordances ( le- ,   , -tized or not ) have different interests . In literar ~ research one may study the si ~ E le types or even merely the single tokens of a ! e """ in the order of occurrence in a work  . In linguistic research one may be interes tedin alphabetic order of the types and in subsequent alphabetic order of the right context of the single tokens  . These two examples of ordered concordances don ' tneed the type information  . But the type information as provided in our machine dictionary will allow to gets ~ more sophisticated internal order of the lemmata : e  . g . singular preceeds plural , positive preoeeds comparative and superlat ive  , present pre-ceeds past , morphological and graphic variants are di stinguish-ed or not  , idiomatical uses a reordered separately or not  . 
The access to a lemmatized concordance will be as to a database and the lin@~tist interested in certain phenomena may select by options e  . g . the substantives and adjectives only oral l verbs in passive construction  . LDVLIB ( LEM ) allow sal-ways to the user to get full pr int of the lemnatized concord-ance or a reduced print of a list of  1 to n lemmata . 
It will be shown that support of the philologist ? swork by a large dictionary is not only useful in concordance making  , but as well cumulates a lot of material for subsequent lexicographic work  . Looking ahead , two questions " must be considered : the integration of a dictionary database and the productive use of grammatical procedures like ATNs to shift balance between intellectual work and machine support in direction to " a little bit more automatic "  . 
-89 o
