COLn VGS2,~Ho~t ~(~/
No~h~ollar , dPub ~ h~g Comply
0 Acwleml ~1982
Aleerntng of objects ti-uetures by verbalisl
Norlhivo Abe , Saburo Tsu Ji
Faculty of Engineering Science
Osaka University
Toyonaka Osaka JAPAN
In this paper a eattempt of learning by verb a lism is shown in order to create the models for an ~ identif ~ cation of unknown objects  . When we expect a computer to recognize objec ts  , the lodels of them ~ must be given to it , however there are cases where some objects may not be  , matched to the models or there is no model with which object is compared  . At that time , this system can augment or create new descr iptions by being explicitly taught us ing verbal instructions  . 
1. Introd Uction
We have reported the story understanding sys tem which uses both linguistic and pictor i all information in order to  , resolve the meaning of given i sentences and images  . In this research , we have believe that a correct meaning of the given sentences is obtained if the relat ions among noun  . phrases , which correspond I to objects in the images , consistent with the relations observed among objects in the images  . 
The J fact that this identification : of objects and the interpretation ~: of the g iven sentences supplements each other simpli fies both the detection of objects and di samibiguation of word sense or preposition a l groups  . In Spite of these effects , this for lalisn has a defect that it requ ires additional knowledge sources  , the model of objects that will appear inp the images  . All of models of objects or actors that are supposed to appear in  , the picture must be given to our system in o rder to achieve its purposes  . But it is not easy for us to store all of such models in a computer  . If a person who does not know . well about the details of this system wants to interact  , with it ~ he will give up to use thesy s tem  , a she knows nothing ! of the representation ~ of models in the computer  . To make matters worse , there , are quite many variations in real objec ts which we will  . encounter in the real world . For example , we can see various type of houses . ~: In the traditional AI system , : a generic model is utilized J to ident i fysuch class of objects  . But it is not easy for such a system to disc riminate idiosyncrasy of varous objects  , i Fig . l shows a part ~ of sample story used to exper iment its story understanding capabili t y  . Even if the system is supposed to be given a generic model  ( for example , BOGLE ) that represents both OBAQ and OJIRO , the system will not be able to discr iminate them  . The system needs some , proper model for 0BAQ and OJIRO . But if a new character which has some similar points to  ; 0 BAQ and OJIR0 apperes in the story , some modifications l to the BOGLE model a rerequired  .   , Thus generalization process could not be a complised in advance  , but should be achieved through experiance . 
When , we are asked to do some task , we are usually given informations concern ing to the objects of that task and ~ their p rocessing method  . In case where we encounter some ~ unkown objects ~ n the course of the task L we can construct a J more generic  , model including them ~ together with a , ereation of instance models for those in div iduals by d~manding an explanation to a person who knows well about those objects  . In this ~ real situation , it cannot be expected that a learning process proceeds successfully like the experiments tudied : by Winston  , as the assumption fails of success that the samples can be arranged conveniently for the learning  . We usually augment our knowledge by explici tly being taught about missing or in suffi cient parts of the known models  . 
In order to realize this type of learning , there are two important problems to be so lved  . First is an explanation capability . Unless a 2N . ABE and S . TSUJI capability to convey one's obscure po in tstahis partner : is given to thesy s tem  , it is difficult for the system to obta in good instructions from its partner L Second is a :: point that from i what kind of levels of knowledge state the system ~: sheulds tart its learning process  . Should an initial state of ~ knowledge beg iven informs of an inner representation or be explained in natural language ? We select the former approach by just the following reason  . Vethink it quite difficult to give a clear view to unknown object without refer ring to models  . So we restrict a class of objects learned by our system : to the group of objects of which the system can  . obtain clear views concerning to their cond itions through the comparison with their similar example  . 
But the assumption is not required that , examples should be different in only one or two points at most from the unknown object  . 
Many , discrepancies between the object and its models are permitted to exis ~ because such d ifferences can be explained explicity in the language  , by a teacher . And through a cognition of analogical ord is crepant points of objects belonging to the same conceptual class  , a generalization process is invoked that c reates a common concept to them  . 
~. Description for Object
The ' model description used in this paper is  , the same one shown in the paper \[ I \] except for the usage of the frame representation to describe ~ relations among subparts of the model  . Let explan using an example . Fig . 2 shows the OBAQ , who is an actor of the ' sample story shown in Fig  . li To describe location of subparts of this model  , its main part is enclosed by a rectangle as shown in Fig  . 2  . Then this rectangle is devided into 9 subregions and the location of its subparts , is described in terms of these subregions . Yhen some of these subparts i has also subpar ts  , they : are hierarchically described in the similar way  . And the relations between these subparts is represented using the frame  , structures . The frame structures corresponding to : the DBAQ model is given in Fig  . 3  ( this figure shows a hypothetical model of OJIRO obtained from the copy of OBAQ frame  ,  ) 3 . FraRe Representation The slot AKO means a wel l-known relation A-KIND-OF  , anathe CLASS indicates whether the frame is gneric or instance frame  . If the frame is generic , then it has two slot , GEN ~ recording its lower clas ~ of generic frames and \[ NST recording its instance f rames  . The F\[G slot represents a pictorial rera tion  , to its parent frame . This slot means that the part corresponding to this frame is a subpart of the  , frame stored in the PART and that it can be found by looking for the region designated in POS-And the face t  01R describes a relation which this ~ art has to its parent ~ There are three relations concerning to the In as shown in Fig  . 2 and concering to the POS , many combinations of subregions are ~ permit ted which can be expressed with the symbols  , L , C , R . and U , C , D . ,: Espec ia l l y the symbols o ** a re used to des ignate the locat ions shown in F ig  . 4  . The slot SH~P represent whether the part cor responding to this frame is a region  ( ~ EG ) or a branch ( BRA ) The SU~P slot records its subparts and the i r locations of or reiations to this part a redescribed in three facets as sho~n above  . EspeCially when the ~ HAP condition is 0~A , th~s frame has a ~ BB slot ~ nstead of ~ Fig 1 . 
Hepu ~ it , He ~ lls OJRO . OJl ~ O takes ~ t . A sample story
HI gives O$IRO the apple.
ALEARNING OF OBJECTSTRUCTURES BY VERBALISM SUOP slot and a branch structure is recorded here  . An example : of branch is shown in Fig . 5  . The COL slot records a color of this part and a slot CONCEPT means that this frame is prepared for the conceptual consistency ' of frames and not for pictorial relation  . In addition t to these slots , there are several slots , WAKE , SEX , NUM and so on . These are prepaired , to generate a sentence for stating a reason why this l frame is required or an explan at i on about why discrepancies between an objec t and its model can he found out in its match ing : process  . 
4. Basic : Strategy of Learning
The system tries to generate , a model for the unknown object by referring to an analogical model and using a teacher ' s instruction  , and simultaneously it augments the concept t rees ~ of objects  . At that time , the first key for a detection of analogy i s assumed to be in locations of subparts of ob jects  . When we are told that an unknown object is s imilar to a certain object amOng various points of view  , we usually expect that many substructures hav ing similar features will be found in the same location as the refered object ? Of course  ,   , there are many examples that resemblance in a Iocation ~ is not useful hut prevents c the program from achieving a correct detection of analogy  . At that case , the teacher should explicilty tell the program to ignore o  , /111o
AKOSVAL BOCLE
CLASSSVALIKSTAffCE
SUBP8 VALJ-BOD y
WA/~:IVAL GIVEN
SEXSVAL r/Aft
J-F~g O
AKOs VALHAND
CLASS SVALINST ~ d~CE
F1 CpA/~J-BODY
DIR(OR(coUT ) ( CII~))"POS((*)C)
SHAP$V-~&PEG
SUBPSVAL ( J-R-HANDJ-L-HAff D)
COL$'?AL~dVAITE
ND ~ 8 VALTWO
CO\[~CEP?8 VALT

AKOSVALEYE
CLASS SVALIN STANCE
FIGPAR~J-BODY
DIKIR
POS(IzlU )
SHAPS VALKEG
SUBPSV/~L(j-R-EYEJ~'L-EYE)
NU ~ BIVAL
COL $ VAL . WHITE
CONCEPt " $ VALT
J-LIPJ-R-EYE
AKOS VALLIPAKO
CLAS ~ SVALINSTANCE CLASS
FIGpAI~J-HOUTH FIC
DIB . INpOS((~z)C)
SHAP SVAL BRASH AP
SUBBeVAL(L4NIL)SUBP
COLSVAL REDCOL



Fig 2 . OBAqFig# .  *  , one of these = ( (*  ) u ) all of the s = ( (*- X- ) D ) $ VAL8 VAL



SVAL $ VAL

AKOSVAL BODY
CLASS SVAL lI~STABCE
FICPAR ~ OJII 10
DIRIN
SHAP SVAL REG
SUBPSVAL(J-HOU'I~J-EYEJ-HAIRJ-HAND)
COLSVAL WHITE
J-HAIR
AKO8 VALHAIR
CLASS $ VALINSTANCE
FICPAP ~ J-BOD y
DIKCOUT
POS((C)U)
SHAP8 VALBOA
SUBBSVAL ( LINILL2"NIL 1,3NIL)
COLSVAL BLACK lqUI ~.$ VALTHREE

AKO$VALNOUTH
CLASS SVALIN STANCE
FIGPAR~J-BODY
DIRIN
PO~((Z*)C )
SHAPIVAL PEG
SUBP8 VALJ-LIP
COLSVAL " PINK
RICHT ~ EYEJ-R-ID tI~O
I\[~STANCE k KOS VAL
J-BODY CLAS SeVAL
INFIGPkP ~(( L)U ) Dill
KEG POS
J-K-pUPIL SHAF $ VAL
RIG ~ T-HAND

J ~ BODYcOUT((L)C)
KEG8 VAL~I~ITE . COLSVAL WHITE
Fiq 3. Frame copied from OBAO frame.
BS/
B2m Branches
B ? B9 ? B10 ( B 1 ( B ~ NIL B3 NI LB 4 ( B5NILB6NILB 7** and 03IRO ( B8NILB9NILB 10NIL ) ) ) 4N . ABE and S . TSUJ ! this standard and to use other methods such as similarity in relations or shapes or colors of objects  .   , As we usually employ these variety way to detect analogy and record these experinces in to our memory  , we can easily decide what method should be used to compare things  . We cannot say that the program has learned something untill these mechanisms recording a standards to comparthings into memory are realized in the program  . 
5. Scenario
C : What Iso Jtro ?
T : OJIROISOHA@'SBItOTEER,
C : Does oJiro resemble . obaq ?
T:YES . BUTO JIRO HAS JUST ON EHAIR .   ( 1  ) C : A color of his body Is not white . 
It is yellow . Is it true ? ( note ~ that a color of OJIRO'SBODY is ye llow  )   ( 2  ) 
T:YES .
C : l have found hiebody . I have found his hair . l have found h is lefthand . 
I have found his r'ight , hand.
But I cannot find his mouth . (3)
T : WHATAREY OUDOING ?
C : I have found a red branch to the left of h is right  . hand as a candidate of his month . But it is different from his model . 
Do you need another explanation of the locat ion of his mouth ?  ( 4  ) 
T:YES .
C : Do you want an explanation in : absolute coordinate ? 
T : NO .
C : It Is to the right of his left hand in the image  . Do you want another expla-nation in absolu te coordinate ?  ( 5 l
T-"YES .
C : It is in the ~ center : of the middle par to fhis body In the imoge  . (6) T : EXPLAINTHEDIFFERENCEBETWEENTHE
MDDEL AND OBJECT.
C : On what part do you want an expler ~ ation ?
T:IqDUTII . (7)
C : The mouth of the model is different f rom that of the model in the point ~ of location  , shade , subpart and color . 
Do you need more exp-lanation ?( el
T:YES .
C : The mouth Is all the middle part of hi sbody  , and that of the object is in the center of the middle patr of hie * body  . The shape of the model is epink region , and that of the object is a red branch . The mouth of the model has a lip , but that of the obJect has not subpart . 
T : OJIBO'SNOUTHISAREDLINE . (9) C : 1 have found his mouth . But I cannot find his right-eye . 
T : WHATAREY OUDOING ?
C : I have found a black region in the center o f the middle part of hie:body as a cand i date of h is right-eye  . But it is different from his model . (10) T : EXPLAINOJIRO'SBIGeT-EYE . 
C : Which do you mean the model or object ?
T : HODEL .,
C : It is a white region which is above hi smouth in the model  . Do you want another explanation ?
T : NO .
T : DOESITHAVE SUBPAIbTS ?
C:Yes , his right-eye has a pupil in the mode1 . 
T:OJIRO'SRICHT-EY ElSABLACK~ION.
C : I have found his right-eye . I have found his left-eye . Finally , I have found o Jiro . 
T : EXPLAINOJIHO.
C : He is a kind of bogle.
T : EXPLAINOJIRO'SSTRUCTURE.
C : O Jiro is a yellow region and hiebody has a hair  , amouth , eyes and hands . 
5. Example
We would llke to explain how the dialog shown in 5 . has been obtained . By ( I ~ the program generate OIJRO model from OBAQ model shown in Fig  . 3:~ and constructs a frame tree consisting from a BOGLE frame and the OBAQ frame  , is stored as an instance of the BOGLE frame . 
But it records ~ in its STM that l there is just one hair as the teacher said so  . Next , C~looks for a candidate region of OJIRO using the copied model  . In . the second frame , OBAQ , TABLE , APPLE , CLOCK and OJIRO are drawn , but as the first four , objects have been appeared in the first frame , in this case C can find OJIRO by looking for new objects  . 
But regrettably a color of the region ( yellow ) which seems to be OJ-IRO'S . body ( J-BODY ) being different from that of the model ( white )  , this cause a complaint shown in ( 2 ) and by accepting a T's agreement C can believe its correctness and T can also think C in a right state  . 
Consequently , C changes value of C0L in J-BODY into Y ELLOW . 
Next ~ Ctries a verification i of J-HAIR which is the ~ first member of Scots'r  ; where Scou'r = J-HAIR , J-HANDAs C can be aware of the fact that J-HAIR is a hair by its  AK0 slot and that there is a note on the hair in STM  , it can know that 0 J IR0 ' S ~ hair cannot be recognized only by refe rring ~ to the copied model  . Since the just one alteration in the number of hairs is recorded fthere  ,   , C thinks their location to be same as tl ~ model specification  , end can find a line in the ( ( C ) U ) part of J-B0 bY . I tends the ve~ffication of J-HAIR bysto ring  ( H1NIL )   . into SUBB~lorioplace of: ( L1NILL2NILL3NIL )   . In a similar ~ ayto this , C begins to ALEARNING OFOBJECTSTRUCTURESBY VERBALISM identify J-HAND  , however C can be aware of that it should 10ok for J-R-HAND and J-L-HAND , as ~ here is a CONCEPT slot in J-HAND . SoC succeeds in the identification * of them ~ because  . of a perfect match in their locations , colors and substructure S . 
The result of this steps is reported in ( 3  )   . Next, . the identification process proceeds to S in and C starts a verification of J-MOUTH  , ~ where SIxffi(J-MOUTH , J-EYE ) . As the locational constraint for this par t is  (   (  **  ) C )   , which means that it occupies (( L)C ) , (( C ) , C ) and (( R ) , C ) of J-BODY , the check is attempted whether just one c and i date can be found for each of  . these 3 subregions . In this case , nothing is found for (   ( L ) C ) l and ( ( R ) C ) but several parts are found in ( ( C ) C ) of J-BODY . So this process is suspended and identifi cation of other parts  ( J ~ R-EYE and J-L-EYE ) is attempted , but the same ambiguity as the above occurs and this causes the identification steps to be suspended  . Consequently , for each one of these 3 parts ,   , their results are just same ~ each other ; there are 3~parts in the (   ( C ) C ) of J-BODY and they lare can diades for J-MOUTH , J-R-EYE and J-L-EY E . Then Cavails of the relational constra intonilocations of them in order to clar if y their correspondences as far as  . possible . It infers , that J-MOUTH , probably locates in a lower position than J -EYE  , because the location * of J-MOUTH is (   (  **  ) C ) and that of J-R-EYE and J-L-EYE is ( ( L ) U ) and ( ( R ) Ut respectively ( in this example note that the location of J -EYE  ,   (   (  **  ) U ) can be also available ) ~ And it is also . decidable if which black region corresponds to J-L  ( R ) -EYE using , the relation between (( L)U ) and (( R ) Ut . By this assumption on availabilty of the relational constraints  , C can discover one possible correspondence between the model and object  . Then other properties are tested : But regrettably  , discrepancies are found for both his mouth and eyes  . The candidate for his mouth is a line segment  , whereas the model says that it is a region and that it has a substructure  . Similary the candidate for his left ( right ) eye is a black region , but its model description is that it is a white region with  . a substructure .   . At the present . state of program , any estimation on which is more plausible is  . not realized regarding to the accordance of these properties  , C simply complains about their di s agreements in the order of their discovery  . 
Therefore it at first complains of his mouth as shown in  ( 4  )   . 
Given teacher * s instruction on a . shape of mouth , C is convinced of his decision and add a new slot SUBB in place of SUBP and records  ( H~NIL ) into it becase it has found that his mouth i snot a region but a line segment  . Here instead of the instruction J(9) , T can say that C should be believe the given image correct  . In that case , C suppose its decision to be right and does the same thing as the above  . The difference between these two cases is that the latter has a high risk in the cor rectness of its conclusion  . 
Next , C complains about the discrepancies of his eyes  . Note here that nothing is stated , about his left-eye on cean instruction on his right-eye is given to it  , because they have the same properties concern ing to both their models and object parts  . In case where one of them is not same , a question is asked : about the difference by :C  . 
T . Use of Generic Frames
As mentioned in 4 .   , OBAQ frame causes BOGLE frame to ~ be generated as a generic ene  , and OJIRO frame ~ is obtained through learning process  . At present our program ~ ust makes frame , trees in which OJIRO and OBAQ frame are child of BOGLE  . 
A reason for this ~ is partly due to a lack of conds ideration how simple pictorial i descriptions can be compiled from various types of deviations in slot values  . An another reason is that there is a danger of partial rearrangements of frames trees ~ In the example  , we at first believe OBAQ if rame to be an ins tance  , frame but it may turn out that i it is not an instance when other examples not mat  . ched to this frame appears in : image , because there are many varietions in his shape a she can wink or move his eyes or open h is mouth  . After program have
N . ABE and S . TSUJI experinced these example , it should ~: , ~ kea general concept of OBAQ and arrange f rame trees by erasing unnecessary instances about him  . 
As a more important problem , s . rategies to discover cues for finding an a logy between subparts mus  . bel stored in some slots of their model ; that is , the locational con~aint is a useful cue for human  , animals and so on , but is not a deq , if or doors and windors of houses . 
Though there are some in co ~ , etepoints in the construction of frame t rees  , program can use a po ,   1on of them to identify subparts of the object to be learned  . For e ~ ample , suppose that we , would like to teach a character Q-KO by referr in ~ to OJIBO  . Let suppose that Q-RO resembles to him very much except for here yes but that they are rathers imilar to OBAQ's  . In the course of identification of her , if OBAQ frame is not stored , program will complain about here yes as wel las in the learning of OJIRO from OBAQ  . However it can use OBAQ ' Seyes in the 1recogn ition of here yes by tracing its AKO link and finding OBAQ frame  , after a failure in the matching of her eyes to OJlRO's  . Of cause , it does not do that without teacher's permission ~ hut will ask for his approvals  ;  8 . Explanation Capability " It is necessary for teacher to be given sufficient exp lanations about the level of knowledge the computer has attained  . Unless the computer ~ can tell him what it is ~looking for  , what it has already found , what sort of descrepancies it suffers f rom  , he cannot give ~ roper instructions leading the ~ computer to a satisfa story state  . here are many sentence generating and explan at ion systems  , however an explanation system like this research has not been investigated in the poin t that our system tries to give its par tner an explanation or pictorial features of objects to : be modeled by translating sentences not from the case frame  , of sentences but from frames corresponding to the pictorial models  . Naturally such an explanation is on locat ions  , shapes , : colors and relations that models or objec ts have  , and must be given in , the forms that the partner can easily unders t and what the system knows  . ' For this purpose , the explanation on locations is first at tempted using the referred things in the dia log  , and is finally given in an absolude coord inate based on the  9 subregions if there is no reference or there ference stack becomes empty  .  (4 )  ,  (5 )  , (6) in the Scenario ~ shows < this mechanism . The next important thing is that a partner may expect a detail explanation for some th ing  , but expect just a simple one for others . Regrettably the present sate of our program cannot detecth is demand like this or reso lveam biguous points of his question l then it must ask him about his require as shown in  ( 7  )   . In this case , there i are also many things to be expla in ed  , however the points are only stated by the program and the detail explanation is left to the partner as in  ( 8  )   . We believe this method proper because of e as in ess of explanations  . 
The comparison between things are listed in above of  ( 9 ) in order to clarify their ~ differenc i es  . If more detail on the lip is needed , the partner can ask the system about it LOn account of limited space  , though we cannot state a sufficient : di scussion  , there are many problems to he improved on how the system should grasp partner's intent ionor requirments  . They must be solved for giving simple exp lanation to the partner  . 
Reference 1) N . Abe , I . Soga and S . Tsuji : A Plot Understanding System on Reference to both Image and Language  , 7th-IJCAI , p . 77(1981)2) P . H . Winston : Learning $ tructual Description from Examples  , Ph . D . Th .  ,
MIT (1975) 3) P . H . Winston : Learning by Creating and Justify ing Transfer Frames  , Artif . Intell . , 10, 2 ~ p . 147 (1978) 4) P . H . Winston : Learning and Reasoning by Analogy , CACM ,  23 ,  12 , p . 689 ( t98o ) 5) J . W . Weiner : BLAH , A System which Explains its Reasoning , Artif . 
Intell .,: 15, 1, p . 19 (1980)
