JAPANESESENTENCE ANALYSISSYSTEMESSAY- EVALUATION 
OPDICTIONARY DERIVED PROMREAL TEXTDATA
K . Shira ?, J . Eubota , Y . Hayashi
Department of Electrical Engineering , WASEDAU niversity
In this paper , we report on an experimental system of Japanese sentence analysis  , called ESSAY , Many Japanese sentence analysis systems , not only Phrase structure analysis systems but also Ke ~: a  , rt-D ~: eanely sissys-tems , are usually based on rules in eTnt actic leve lor Case grammatical restriction  . 
Comparing with such systems , our system is unique in the dictionary . In this dictionary , function of the language elements , such as words or auxiliary morpheme , ared bscr~bed . 
And these lexlcal entries are automatically constructed from analysis of real text data ~ Xn order to evaluate the usefulness of such d ictionary  , we are accumulating Japanese sentences data , and appl TJ-~statistical and struc tural analysis method to this data  . 
Xn the following we concentrate upon next 2 points . 
( 1  ) construction of dictionary ( 2 ) overview of ESSAY (  1  ) Construction of dictionary As the initia l data we entered about  2000 sentences of elementary school text in Kana-le tter  ( Japanese syllabary ) not in Kan Ji ( Chinese character )   . 
Japanese is an agF ~ utinative language , so in analyzing sentences they are u~ually separated into number of parts -  259 -called Bunsetsu . In entering the text at this time , we also used this unit . Between these Bunsetsu , there are some dependency relations called Kakari-Uke which can be decided uniquely fo ra~v sentence  . We can consider that in case there is a Kaka-r i-Uke relation between word A and B  , A is modifying B . 
This time we defined the distance between words mainly based on this Kakari-Ukerela tion  , and the nol assi~fted them into number of groups using some clustering techniques  . Am the result we got a base-dictionary which can represent Kakari-Uke relation between these groups  . 
It is expected that syntax , sau ~ ntios or knowledge of the world can be naturally embeded in this dictionary and this type of lexicon is highly useful in the Japanese sentence ~ ysiso  ( 2 ) Overview of ESSAYESSAY ( Experimental System of Sentence Anal Ys is ) parses Japanese sentence by analyzing Kakari- Uke relation between 
Bunmetsu in input sentences.
This system ham dictionary driven feature , and does not depend on usual syntactic and semantic models  . Thus this system can be used for evaluation of dictionary  , which Is described in (1) . 
The input to this system is a Japanese sentence  , which is segmented in Bunsetsu unit , and the output from this system is labelled binary tree structure  , which represents syntnotio structure of the input sentence  . 
The algorithm to extract this structure is very simple  , and special linguistic knowledge is not embedded in the prooedurable way  . The decision of tree structure is based on Graph theoretic processing  , and labelling of Kakari-Ukerelat-ion is processed by using Statistical dec is ion theory  . 

As stated above , this system has its ilinguistic knowledge in the declarative way by the form of dictionary  , thus structure of system is simple , and rich in modularity , But proaedurable knowledge can be easily implemented  , if we need it . 
By taking this approach , it is possible to get the way to construot a flexible system  , which has rich shility of adaptation to specified world  . This point is one of the merits of ottr approach  , in comparison with usual approaches , that tend %0 depend on researcher's framework . 
In this paper , we present several experimental results which show the validity of our approao ho-  261  -
