REVISING ANATNPARSER
Giacomo Ferrari , Irina Prodan of
Istituto dl Linguistica Computazionale , CNR , Pisa , Italy
1 . An ATN parser for Italian has been developed and 
tested in a series of experiments on complex sentences taken from narrative texts  ( 1  , 2  , 3  , 4 )  . The construction of a complex graemmz as wel las the results of our experiments showed some limits and inadequacies of Woods " ATN as it stands  ( 11 )   , especially when used to parse Italian , a relatively free-order language with a well developed morphological system  . 
1  . 1  . " Parameter-passing " actions such as SENDR and LIFTR have been often Judged " dirty " operations under a form-alview-point  . Moreover it is almost impossible to keep the control of the cross-level pa~sed info rmation  , unless the ~ umber of registers is in c reased  . Such an increase is other-wise unmotivated . This difficulty is more evident in Ita lian relative clauses such as : L"uomolacui crudelta " tutticonoseiamo Theman  ( the ) whose cruelty everyone knows L " uomolac rudelta " delquale tutticonoscismo The man the cruelty of whome very one knows L ? uo model desiderio diven detta delqual et iheparla to Theman about the desire for revenge of whom I spoke to you in which a very heavy use of such actions  , as well as of flags , is required . These phenomena , together with the rich-ness of morpholog icalinf lexion  , increase the necessity for morphological and morpho-syntactic short  , long-distance and cross-level tests . 
-I01-1 . 2  , Another problem is proposed by the structura l  ambi-8~i ty of sequences of PP's , for which both the " embedding " and the " same -level " hypotheses are presented ! a sentence with  ) PP's has 5 parses accordlng to the schema ( PPI ( PP2 ( PP3 ) ) )  , ( PPI(PF2) ( PP3)) , ( PFI(PI~)PP3) , (PP1
P~(PP3)), ( PP1P~PP3)
An attempt to limit th~s explosion was made by adding oer taln  . 
functional labels depending upon the verb frame . This experim-ent showed that attention should be focussed on developing an adequate system of functional tests  . 
1  . 3  . A statistically based , dynsmic heuristic mechanism has been put to work in the traversal of the network  . Those paths which have been more frequently t raversed in previous parsed frasments of ag iven text are attempted first  , during the analysis of the CUZTent sentence ( 6  )   . 
In this way , the concept of performance based syntactic expectation has been introduced and tested  . It appeared that ATN is very suited to the in troduction of heuristic techniques and a l so that these techniques should include a scheduling procedure based on arc types  ( 10 )   . 
2 . A revision of the linguistic formalism as well as of the parsing al Sorithm is now in progress  , and should take all these considerations in to account  . Furthermore , those linsuist-io phenomena related to conversation such as anaphora and the analysi s of partial and partially correct input must be taken into account in the desis ~ing of the formalism and the ATN actions and forms  , not only for applicative purposes , but above all in order to enlarge the range of phenomena to be included in a ~ ammar  . 
2  . 1  . The parser relies both on structural and functional Information  ( 7 )  , i , e . a limited collection of surface struct-ures and functional labels  . A set of fixed ( control ) patts z~s might also be included in this s tatic syntactic knowledge-  102  - ( B , 9) ? The output representation , however , is in terms of functional labels ? The uti lization of these three data types will be fully discussed  . 
2  . 2  . It is not our intention to substantially modify the general structure of the algori thm ? Storing and retriev-ing will be modified  , in accordance with our observations in 1 . 1 . A single register external to the levels of computation will be progressively set to the results of the analysis during pars ing  . Access to precise location of this struc ture is guaranteed by the functional labels  . Traditional ATN registers can be locally used for special purposes  . A detail-ed description of our whole mechanism including examples will be given ? Already assigned functional labels cannot be chanEed ! left concatenation of them has been preferred  ( 8 )  . A mechanism has also been provided to move pointers from constituents to gape or anaphorical pronouns  ( inside the sentence borders )   ( 5 )  . 
This is an attempt to treat by a uniform action or sequence of action sequ/-NP deletion  , gapplng , coordination . 
2 . 3 . Some local procedures connected with the lexicon have been added to these mechanisms  . These procedures include the transmission of feature's to higher level nodes in the structure  , the proceduralisation of idiosyncrasies of single le Kical entries and " paraphrase '  . The latter is expected to reduce nominalizatlon to the corresponding verb with its frame components and to account for linguistic units which have identical distribution and syntactic behavlour  . 
2 . 4? The present list of " linguistically * motivated processes is open-ended  , as we are now trying to identify others , which can be considered to be linguistic ( procedural ) ? um/versals "?-103 - ( 1 ) A . Oappelll , G . Perrari , L . Moretti , I . Prodanof , O . Stocks ~ Parsing an Italian text with an ATN parser '  , report ILC , 
Flee@1978.
(2) A . Oappelli , G . Ferrari , L . Morettl , I . Prodan of , O , Stocks " An ATN parser for Italian : an experiment '  , At tidel
COLING 78, Stocoolma ( microflches).
(3) A . Cappelll , G . Ferrari , L . Morettl , I . Prodanof , O . Stook : " Analisi diuntesto Italiano conun analizz a to reATN ?  , Rivieradl Informatioa , X3 (1980) , pp .  513 . 
(4) A . Cappelll , G . Ferrari , L . Morettl , I . Prodanof , O . Stock : " Analisi automatica dell " italiano : alcu  . neoeser vazioni * , in Laricerca dibase in peicologia . Attl del XVI II Congresso de@ll Psicologl Italianl  , Aoireale 29/X-2/XI 1979 ,  1980 , pp .  246-267 . 
(5) A . Cappelli , G . Perra ~ i , L . Morsttl , I . lh ~ odan of , 0 . Stookl " Iitrattamentodial cunife nomenl an aforicimedian teunATN '  , Attidel seml nario " L ' a na for a ' tenu to preesol ' Acca-demia della Orueoa  , Pirenze 14-16/12/78 . In corsodi
S ~ ampa , (6) G . Parrarl , O . Stock : " Strategie selection for an ATN Syntactic Parser '  , in The 18th Annual Meeting of the Assoo-lation for Computational Linguistics and parases slon on Topics in Interactive Discourse  . Proceedings of the Conference , June 1922 ,  1980 , Philadelphia , pp .  113-115 . 
(7) R . Kaplan , J . Breenan : Lexieal-Functlonal Grsmmar : A formal system for grammatical representation  , to appear in J . Bresnan ( ed . ) , The mental representation of grammatical relations  , MIT Press . 
(8) M . Kay : " Functional Grammar *, in Proc . of the 5th meeting of the Berkeley Linguistic Society , Berkeley 1979 , pp . 
142-I58.
(9) S . Kwasny , N . Sondhelmer : " Relaxation techniques for parsing ill-formed input '  , in AJCL7 , 2 ( april-June 1981) , -104-pp .  99-108 . 
(10) E . Weaner , ~ . Maratsos : " An ATN approach to comprehension " in ~? Halle  , J . Bresnan , G . Miller ( eds . ) Linguistic Theory and PsyChological Reality , NIT Press 1978 . 
(11 ) W?Woods : " Transition Network Grammars for Naturallan S-uase Analysis '  , in CAOM 13~I0 , New York ,  1970 ,  - 105 -
