A SEMANTICANALY SEROFNATURALITALIANSENTENCES
M . Del Canto , F . Fusconl , L . Stringa
Elettrohica San Giorgio-ELSAGS.p.A.
Via Hermada , 6-16154 Genova-Italy
This paper presents the analyser for type-written Ital- 
ian sentences used in the LISA system.
This system has been developed in ELSAG within the researches on Natt~rel Language Processing aimed at making the dialogue with the user easier and more graceful  . 
The analyser was designed to accept input sentences without any constraint on how they are formed  ( e . g . in active or passive form , with a variable number and position of compl - ements  , etc . ) , and to accept such irregularities as ellipsis , idioms and small grammatical errors . The present version works for simple sentences that are introduced one at a time  . 
The output of the system is an internal conceptual representation that we defined  , according to Schank , " concept-ualization " . It represents the meaning of the sentence in a non-ambiguous way and we can define it as an organized set of predioate ~ argument lists  , each of which can have some modif-iers . One feature of the conceptualization format is its generality  , which permits to easily adapt the system to any new application  . 
The analyser makes use of a dictionary that includes a lexicon  , a set of syntactic descriptions and a set of semantic descriptions  . 

The lexicon , in the version presently implemented , con-tains about 2500 words that permit the user to introduce sentences  ( statements or questions or answers ) conerning people characteristics like age  , profession , health and their actions and relations with the external world  , like to go , to come , to travel , to give , to take ( TRANSFER ) , to know (~ OrhEDGE ) , to speak , to say ( COm~JNICATION ) , to own , to contain ( RELATION ) , etc . The lexicon is broken down into several sect ions in order to optimize the memory usage aocord-ing to an exhaustive study of a root- ending representation of italian words  . 
The syntactic descriptions are directly related to lexioal entries and contain at tributes like gender and number of the nouns or like mood and tense of the verbs  . 
The semantic descriptions represent the conceptual entities related to lexioal entries  ; they mainly contain informations about the consistency between predicates  ( named " operators " ) and their ar~mente and provide a classifi cation of the conceptual entities  . 
The analysis process works in three mains teps : the lexical analysis  , a bottom-up reoo~lition of " syntactic and semantic Groups " and a topdown insertion of these Groups in the semantic structure  ( conceptualization )   . 
The lexical analysis recognizes the single words in the input string and compares them with the lexicon components in order to recover ell possible interpretations  . The sequence of the syntactic and semantic descriptions obtained forms the output of th is step  . Unknown terms are neglected at this point , but the dialogue oont rolling module is in form-ed about that  . 
All the characteristics derived from the inpute reanalysed in the next-step endorgan ized in Groups based on the most meaningful terms  ( Verbs , Nouns , Adverbs ) . Each- 83 -particulart ~ pe of construction , corresponding to a Group , is recognized by an independent " special is tsubgremmar "  , which selects only the relevant portion of the input o The last step of the analysis re lates the elements in the previously built Groups with the roles in the conceptual st ructure  ( conceptualization )   . 
This structure in its main peat ( " nucleus " ) is determin-ed by the verbs in the Verb-Group ; some other roles ,   su88ested by the " expectations " in the Noun-Groups and in the Adverb-Groups can be associated to the nucleus through RELATION oper-ators  . The main orite ~ on that guides the associat i on between Groups ~ d conceptualization ro lesis based on expectations pertly related to the verb and partly pre-established  . 
A semantic approach characterizes this method of analys-is : in fact a syntactic representation of the input is not attempted and the semantic descriptions of concepts are direct-lyaccessible  . 
This makes it easier to ~? de the analysis towards the internal representation  , at the same time reducin 8 the number of the alternatives generated and consequently also the problem of dealing wi tham biguities  . 
A further fundamental feattLre is the co- operation bet ~ ween bottom-up and topdown techn i ques in the organization of the input in Groups and in the filling of the output st ructu-re  . The first of them is best suited to deal with grem~atic ~ deviations  , incorrect infle ~ on s and fragmentary utter ~ uces  , also because of the manifold scanning and non rigorous constr-a?nts on the word posit ions  . 
At this level pattern-matc~Lng mechanisms can a l so be used to handle idioms and others fi xed phrases  ; the reco~Lt-ion of these forms , may need both syntactic and semantic de-scrip tions  . 

The topdown approach in the last step iss ui table to make the conceptualization a stande ~ d  , m ~ u ~ u ~ eable , structure , which could be easily adapted , if necessary , to spect fioneed 8 . 
This method of analysis proved % o be as ui table one within a system capable of conduct ing a dialogue through non--oonstreined input sentences  , related % o a general and flexib-le knowledge representation  . 

