ONMODES OF DEPINITEREFERENCE : ANAPPLICATION TO THE 
INTERACTION WITHDATABASE SYSTEMS
Genevieve Bsr~y-Rogghe
Temple University , CI8 Department ; 03824
Philadelphia , PA 19122, U.S.A.
Identifying the referent of a singular def inite term in a database query essentially consists in detemining its extension in the database by applying the Ruassllian truth conditions for definite descriptions  . However , most definite descriptions are " incomplete " in that the description itsel f does not contain the uniquely specifying conditions but it should be au~nented by features derived from the situation or di scourse context  . Most work in AI in this field has con-centra ted on how to delimit the relevant contextua l features  ( see , for example , the work on anapho ~ or eference and focus-sing by Webber  78  , Sidner 77 and Grosz 76) . This paper addresses certain aspects of the theory of definite reference which  , though extensively treated in the liter a ture on lan-guage philosophy  , have been rather neglected in the design of natural language processing system a e  . 
Some of the ambiguities of definite re ference derive from the fact that a defini te description may denote some unique in div idual in the world satisfying the specif ication or some individual the speaker has in mind who may or may not coincide with the former  ( ie the " referential " versus the ,   , attrib ~ tiven mode of reference ) . Furthelqnore ~ the speaker may intend the hearer to interpret the rs fe~cl ~ expression in ei thera " value laden " or a " value free " mode  ( cf rBa ~- wiee/Psx-~y 80 )   . In the former mode the sentence is given - 32 -fase condary interpretation by substitut in ~ in it the entity fulfilling the description  . This raises such issues as to whether defin ite descriptions may be used to inform as we llas to refer  ( see Joshi 78 )  . The first part of the paper attempts to characterize the phenomena variously refer red to by such terms as intension/extenst on  , deditto/dere , attrl but lve/referent lal , value-free ~ value-laden . . . Some of these phenomenare to be accounted for on the semantic level of representation whereas others are deemed to belong to the pra~natic level  , The second part of the paper examines which of the modes of definite reference disting u is hed in paz~tI are manifested in the in teraction with a database system and how they can be recognized by the natuxal language inter face  . The standard procedure for definite re ference identification is to exclude gener ic and " intensional " uses  ; to assume identity between the referent the speaker believes fulfills the descript ion and the actual referent and to uni formly impose a value-laden interpretation mode  , The following examples illustrate some other modes of reference which should receive adequate treatment in a natural language inter face extending its capicity beyond the mere retrieval of factual informat-ion  . 
The generic mode of reference is not always obviously distinguishable from the att ributive mode as shown by  ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  , reepectlvely ~ ( 1 ) How long is the flight from Boston to Chicago ? ( 2 ) How many passengers were on the flight from
Bostonto Chicago ?
The semantic interpretation of the defini tearticle in  ( 1 ) corresponds to the universal quantifier whereas Xn  ( 2 ) it corresponds to theiota-operator . In contrast to the gen-eric mode , a definite description is used " intena ionally " when the substitution of its extension in ~ he sentence may alter the tru th value  . This is the case in referentially - 33 -opaque contexts . It hss been pointed out by Kaplan/Davidson 81 that certain update command such as ( 3 ) may be referent-ially opaque : ( 3 ) Change the teacher of CIS 234 to Dr . Smith . 
The difference between the attributive and the referent-ial uses  , on the other hand , may be illustrated by the different replies ( 4a ) end ( 4b )  , respectively , to query ( 4 ) :  ( 4 ) Is there a car parked under the big cherry tree ?   ( 4a ) No . There is no cherry tree in the scene . 
(4b ) Yes . But the tree you are referring to is a noak . 
In the referential mode of reference the hearer has an independent way of identifying the referent  , usually through locating him in time and space . In this mode the description serves a dual function of referring and of describing  . The referential mode is only likely to occur when interacting with a database consisting of visual objects displayed on a screen  ( as in the SRI and HAM-RPM projects )  . In the attribut-ive mode the description refers to whichever entity fulfills the specification at a particular index  . The referential // attributive distinction is not to be explained as a scope ambiguity  ( cf r there/ded it to readings ) but rather both readings should receive the same semantic interpretation  , the distinction being accounted for on the pragmatic level  ( see further )   . 
Of particular importance to natural language interaction in a system that a les at a high degree of " cooperativeness " is the distinction between the value-free and value-laden interpretation modes  , from the point of view of the hearer . 
Consider the following alternative system replies ( Sa ) and ( 5 h ) to query ( 5 )  . In ( Sa ) the definite description was value-laden , as is the standard practice , whereas the value -- free interpretation indicated by  ( Sb ) seems to be more appropriate to the user's intentions : -  34  - ( 5  ) U : Does the head of the CIS department earn more then the head of the Philosophy department ? 
S : Yes
U : Why ? (5a ) S : Because Dr . Jones has more dependents than
Dr . Smith ( Sb ) S : Because computer science is better remunerated than philosophy ? In order to ret rieve the answer the extension of the descrip tion has to be determined in both cases but in  ( Sb ) the ingredients of the descriptive express ion were retained for further processing  . This raises such pragmatic issues as why a speaker chooses a particular description to refer to an entity and what clues might guide the hearer as to the in-tended in terp retation stratbgy  . 
The third part of the paper gives an outline on how to interpret these modes in the system  . The approach taken is that certain modes should be treated as pra ~ a tiophenca ema rather than as semantic ones  . At the semantic level a language processing system should produce a context-independent in ter-pretation of what a speaker means by an utterance  . The prag-matic level deals with what the speaker Intends the hearer to imfer from hisut terance  . At the semantic level of represent at-i on the Russellian truth conditions for defin ite reference are applied  , where appropriate . These determine the " semantic referent " which is defined by the conventions of the language  ; the " speaker's referent " , on the other hand , is the object which the speaker believes fu l fills the conditions for being the semantic referent  ( see Kripke 77 )  . This paper attempts to specify the notion of " speaker's referent " in terms of refer- ence as a speech act  . For example , a condition for felicitous reference in the referential mode is that the speaker believes that the referent satisfies the description and also that he believes the hearer believes In the " Justification " for the description  ( cf ~ Cohen/Perrault 81 )   . It wall be shown that in- 35 -certain contexts definite reference involves other speech acts besides refez Tlng such as informing  , describing , expla~ning .   .   . 
Li ~ or at ~ e
Baz ~ lse J , and Pez Ty J . (80)z " The situation aJ ~ der ~ ound " , Work in ~ paper si ~ SG ~ m . antics , Voll , Stanford
University , 1980
Cohen P . R . and Perrault C . M . (81) -" A note on in a oc ~ a . ~ate reference , Elements Qf Dl sootu ~ eU ~ derstand in ~ ( eda Joahi , SaE , Webber ) , Cambridge University
I~ess , 1981
Qross B . J . (76) z " Resolving definite noun phrases " , 3 peachU~der~tqnd in KRe~az~h(edD . Walker ) , final tech-nical report , Stanford Research Institute , 1976 Joshi A . K .   ( 78 ) : " A note on partial match of desoriptione z can one simultaneously question  ( retrieve ) and infoz ~ ( update ) ?" TIILAP-proceedings , University of
Illinois , Urbana , 1978 gaplan S . J . and Davidson J .   ( 81 ) -" Interpreting nst ~ a ~ allan-guage database updates "  ,   . l > rooeed in ~ s of the 19t ~ annual meet in ~ of the ~ CL , Stanford University , 
June 1981
K ~ ipke S .   ( 77 ) z " Speake reference and semantic reference " in ~ id we stSt dud ~ es in Philoso ~ by II  , 1977 Sldner C .   ( 77 ) z " Levels of complexity in discouz ~ e for ans -phoradisambiguation and speech act in terpretat-ion "  , l  ~ . o seed in ~ of t ~ fift ~ internati ~ rual con -fere ~ e on Artificia  . 1 Intell . i ~ enoe , Cabridge , ~ T Webber B . L . (78) zA Formal A~proach to Disoo ~ rseanaphora , technical report 3761 , Bolt , Beranek and Newman , 
Cambridge Mass ., 1978-36-
