AUTOMATICTRANS LATION THROUGHUN DERST ANDING AND

N.N . Leonteva
Vsesojuzny Jcentrperevodov
Kr~l ~ an ovskogo 14,117 218 Moskva , USSR
French to Russian automatic translation system be lng developed In All-Unlon Centre of Translation is conceived as part of a multlfunct lonal information processing system in the sense that It should be able to use approaches and methods proper to the information processing field  , such as summarizing , abstracting , indexing , making inferences , etc . In such a system translation is realized through building text informat-ion representation  ( IR )  . The task requires two types of analysis : linguistic analysis  ( LA ) and information analysis ( IA ) working in interaction , the latter being , in particular , able to refer to the automatic thesaurus . The ultimate aim of LA is the building of sentence semantic representation  ( SR )  . It is important that for each individual sentence its SRIs con-\structed as a function of the IR of the whole text  .   ( The current version of the system does not operate with the whole text but is limited for each sentence with Its more or less immediate context  . ) Linguistic analysis calculates morphological structure for words  , syntactic and semantic structures for sentences . Each of these structures is determined by the approprlete language realities  ; still remaining obscurities can be cleared only by referring to higher levels of analysis  . 
SR built for an lnd lvl duel sentence without regard to other sentences " SR's is normally incomplete  ( deficient , ambiguous I incorrect , etc . ) . SR incompleteness Is manifested by incomplet-- 178 -eness of its units ? The construction of text IR requires operations of comparison of different SR units as well as their comparison with thesaurus units  . As a rule , in complet-eness proper to SR's As cleared on l ~ partially  , which calls for some external measures to ensure a formally correct struct-ureready for the synthesis of the output text  . The general scheme of the system functioning runs as follows:  1 ? analysis 2  . reconstruct-3? summarlz-4? synthesis ( LA ) ion ( LA-IA ) Ing ( IA ) lnl~tIalrSR corrected SR compressed SR input outputs enterice sentence Llr ~ uist l can a lysis contains a set of procedures aimed at creating initial S~'s where all cases of Incompleteness are exposed  . Reconstruction compares SR's with each other and with the thesaurus and restaures the missing parts of S~'s  . 
Summarizing means obtaining a klnd of an abstract from which all obscure and Incomplete parts are removed so that only essential Information Is available  . 
Information processing plays an important role in ~ ealle-ation of the scheme as the system translates only what it comprehends  , thus the result may be called not a literal but a " digested " translation  . The information model of automatic translation is based on the properties of the coherent text  . 
One of the main properties Is that pieces of information essential for the text are repeated there In many ways and by variousiIn gulst lc means  . IA alms at Identifying such information and making it the basis for SR reconstruction  . The level of " information noise " in the synthesized text Is expected to be lower than In the classical approach to AT  ( sentence-to--sentence translation through syntactic structures  )  . The degree of abstracting ( summarizing ) can vary depending On the purpose : the system can be oriented at getting a translation -  179 -proper , a detailed or a brief abstracts a summery  , or , final-ly , a search patter ~ . The effect of such reproductions of the Input text with subsiding detallty reminds of anechow hich gradually loses almost ell or J~lnal features keeping the main pattern to the end : node gree of abstracting should a ffect the document main contents  . 
The system Information orientation determines the choice of linguistic means of an alTs Is  , mainly , the structure and unite of syntactic and semantic representations  . Two princip-les can be formulated : H purIty ?' Of means at each level of  analTaI8 and possibilities of Interaction between levels  . The ~ I rat principle makes It possible to use with maximum effici-ency the laws specific to each level and to certify the for-mal correctness of the result'lngs tructure  . The second prin-ciple Implies a kind of h lerarch lelor ganls at lonofg ~ ammar : If a unit of one level cannot be Interpreted at a h Z K her level  , It can be m generallzed N ( 8 lexema can be genera l i zed to a semantic c lass  , a labeled relation can be replaced by a more general or even an unlabeled relation  )   . Building of a structure at each level comprises at least two stages : creat-Ion of the  5nt tIal structure permitted to be Incomplete and Inco~ect  , and reconstruction of a more complete and cor rect structure  , after an Interpretation of the Initial structure by means of the hJ~her level  ( or levels )   . 
The division into levels Is manifested not onl ~ by dif-ferent means of an alTsl s but also by different nature of unite : nodes and ~ el at lone  . Nodes of syntactic representation are wo~ds ( d~fference of lexIcal meanings Is dis regarded  )   , nodes of semantic representation are lexical meanings  , nodes of IR are notions having denotatives ta tus  . Relations of syntactic structure are f lmctIonal  ( from predicate to subject , form predicate to ' director indirecto b ject  , attributive relation , etc .  )  . SR-relation 8 are of eemarrt Ic nature ( cause , trine , patient , etc .  )  , IR relat ion8 are malnl7 the same but- 180 -vary In their lr ~ or ~ atlon value : some appear J ~? deanotion and are d evaluated  , other ~ connect separate notions and acquire denotative status  . 
Uv_tts of translation ere represented by uni ts of IR having an expll clteInner struc ture and liable to translat-I on either ss-aw hole or by parts  . They are formed In the ~" course of both lingu istic and Information analyses  . 

