COTING82,J.ttorec/ff , ( eeL)
North-Holland Publishing Comply
? A eucler ala , 1982
TRANSFOR MATION OF NATUR ALLANG UAGE IN TO LOGICAL FOR MULAS 
Leonard Bolc and Tomasz Strzalkowski
Institute of Informatics
Warsaw University
PKIN , pok . 850
00-901 Warszawa , POL AND
This paper presents an attempt of elaboration of a full parsing system for Polish natural language which is being worked out in the Instlt~te of Informatics of Warsaw University  . Our system was adapted to the parsing of the corpus of real medical texts whici = concern a subdomain of medicine  . We made use of the experience of such famous authors as  ( 6 )  ,  (7) ,  (8) ,  (9) ,  (10) ,  (11) ,  (12) ,  (13) ,  (1~) . 

The system described below could be used as an interface of natural language information systems  , natural question-answering systems , expert systems or automatic understanding o f texts  . The authors paid close attention to the syntactical and semantical constraints o fme-dical dialogue so that the system wou ld be used by physicians without previous preparation  . Although a subdomain of medicine is a cur rent system application  , the change or development of the conversation field may be facilitated  . It requires only that a new dictionary wi ll be established and some expert part so fsemantical interpreter will be changed  . 
Our system contains two stages : syntactical analysis and semantical interpretation  . Both stages cooperate with each other in such a way that the second stage checks upon the cor rectness of syntactical structures which have been built by the first one  . Finally , the par-ser produces a formula of First Order Predicate Calculus which corresponds to the input sentence  . Other outputs as MINSKY frames or
FUZZY formulas are considered.
We used the CATN method ( Cascaded ATN )   ( lk ) to implement the system . 
The CATN possesses ali of the advantages which proved true in natural language processing  . A high degree of universality is a very impor-tant feature of the system  . 
Here are some examples of sentences the parser can understand : Alko ho\]podany doustnle powodu jewzmoz one wydzlelan legastryny  . 
(A lcoho l g iven per os cause greater secret ion o f gast r in  .   ) Alko holzwieks zawydzie lanlesokutrzus tko we go  . 
(A lcoho l inc reases pancreat ic ju i ce secret ion  .   ) Gastry najes thormon empowoduj acymwyd zielan lek was usolne gowzola-dku  . 
(Gast r in i s a hormon wh ich cause gast r i c HCL secret ion  .   ) Sekrytyna Ipankreozynl nastymuluja czynnosc we wn at rz wy dz lelnl cza tr zust kl  . 
(Secret in and pancreocymln s t imu la te end lc r lnactlvlties of pancreat  ) wzrost na piesn lowkld wunastnicy moze by cprzyczynaw zrostucls n leniaw przewodach trzust ko wych  . 
(The lncreas o f tonus o f the tun ica muscu lar i smay cause higher pressure in the pan creatic ducts  .   ) Dlu gotr waled zialan leal ko holu powo duje prawdopo dobnle be zpos rednie uszkod zenle ko more kw ~  , dzielnl czych trzustkl . 
( Long act ion o f a lcoho l p ropab ly cause d i rect injury in the pancrea-tl cendo crlnce lls  .   ) Jakies a kllnlczne objawyost regozapa lenia trzustkl ?  ( How appears the cllnl calsymptoms of a cute pan creatifls ?  ) Costymuluje czyn no scwew natrzwy dz lelnlcza trzustkl ?  ( What stimulates endocrln activities of pancreat ?  ) 
CATNASATOOL
A Cascaded Augmented Transition Network looks l ike two or more " cascades " which succesive lyperform the same information  . Each of them is an ATN grammar (1) which has , In addition ,   , a new action cal-led TRANS MIT . The TRANSMIT action may be set on every arc and causes a piece of Information to be sent f rom the current " cascade " to the lower one  . Whenever a TRANSMIT occurs each information about the current " cascade '= is saved on thes tack while the parser operates on the lower " cascade " until new information or data is required  . Then the higher " cascade " is activated f rom the same point It has been stopped  . 
Two stages of our parsing system correspond to the CATN-casc ~ des  . In the present realisation the struct ? repopped from the syntactical stage is TRANSMITed into semantic ~ nter pretation because a free word-order of Polish sentences prohibits another solution  . Partlculary , the places of the subject and the main verb in the sentence may be varying  . 
If the second stage is not able to find an appropriate interpretation for syntactic a l structure the first stage is act ivated to build an alternative parsing  . I/hen such a parsing cannot be rebuilt the parser fails  . 
In the other Implementation of CATN we used the Earley's algorithm  , a well-known context-free parsing method ( 10 )   . In this case the syn-tactical analyser p roduces all possible p ~ r slngs at once  . The seman-tical interpreter has to verify them and reject each meaning-less parsing  . 
THEFIRSTSTAGE-SYNTACTICAL ANALYSIS
A surface structure of a sentence is rece ived after the First Stage of the parser was applled to an utterance  . It means that such eleme-nts as VERB/ACTION , SUBJECT , OBJECT ( direct and indirect ) , PREPOSI-TION PHRASES etc . are found out . 
Polish natural langua Ke is a typl cal example of a flexion a \] language  . 
One of its most characteristic features i safree word-order in a sentence  . It is very Important for the parser to know each lex~cal parameter of nouns  , adjectives , adverbs , numbers , preposlt lons etc . 
These parameters are number , gender , case , person and de ~ ree . They TRANSFOR MATION OFN A TURALL ANGUAGE IN TO LOGICAL FOR MULAS  31 are carrled over the whole phrase and decide about the role of the phrase in the sentence  . A flex lonal form of the main verb also inf lu-ences the construction of the sentence  . Especlally , however , the fle-xlonal properties of the main verb could help the parser to find out the sub ject and the direct object  . 
These problems and several others as post- modifiers problem  , wh-move-ment , conjunction , etc . we resolved succesfully . 
The syntactical analysis comprises a wlde subset of Polish language eg  . simple affirmative sentences and quest ions  , complements and rela-tlve clauses and cer tain types of complex sentences  . We had to take into account a number of specla l properties of the medical dialect which rarely occur in a common conversation  . The grammar is able to parse not only the common Polish but the " medical " Polish as well  . 
It means , among others , a great deal of participles , gerunds , modal verbs ( eg . moze-could , powinien-should ) and vague adverbs ( eg . 
prawdopodobnle-propably , czesto-frequently , rzadko-rarely , cz as a mi-sometimes ) . 
The syntactical analyser transforms an input sentence into an unflex-ional and ordered form  . Sorle examples of the output of the First S ta-ge are given be \] ow  . The I-hark divides the whole sentence into phra-ses  . An emptypace between two Ispoints out a missing phrase  . The S and END flags indicate the beginning and the ending of each simp-le clause in the sentence  . If the DCL fla ~ occurs just after S-mark in the top-level clause the sentence is deal tasan assertion  . In a question there are one or more question words instead  . The MODIFIERS fla ~ divides a direct objec t  ( if any ) into the main phrase and postmodifiers . This last flagls an Important one because the head word of a direct object phrase nay be a predicative e\]ement of the clause  . 
( eg . by cprzyczyna-to be a cause ) . Notice , that a predicative ele-ment of the top- level clause becomes the main predicative e lement of the whole sentence  . 
alko holpod any doustnie powo du jewzmoz one wydz ielaniegastryny  . 
(a lcoho l g iven per os cause greater secret ion o f gas t r in  .   )   ( SDCLIIIPO WODOWACIIAL KOHOLISIIIPODAC IDOUSTN*IIAL KOHOL MODIFIERS IIIENDIS lI IWYDZIEL ANIEIWZ MOZON * IIGASTRYNAMODIFIERS IIIENDIIIEND  ) alko holzwieks zawydzielaniesokutrzus tko we go  . 
(a lcoho l inc reases pancreat i c ju i ce secret ion  .   )   ( SDCLIIIZ WIEKS ZACIIAL KOHOLISIII NYDZIEL ANIEIIITR ZUST KOW*SOKMODIFIERS II ENDIIIEND  ) costymuluje czynnos cwewnatrzwy dz leinl cza trzustki ?  ( what stimulates edocrin activities of pancreat ?  )   ( SCOIIISTY MULOWACIIIt ~ E~NATRZWYDZIELNICZ * CZYNNOSCMODIFIERS 
TRZUSTKAIIIEND )
Nevertheless , because such information ts not suffic ient an interpre-tation in the Second Stage Is needed  . 
32 LBOLC and T.STR ZALK OWSKI
The First Stage contains the main ATN netnamed SENTENCE which can perform Polish natural sentences  . There are four speclal subnets : NOUN_PHR , ADJ_PHRA , ADV_PH ~ A , Q_ . EXPR which can recognize different types of phrase seg  . nominal phrases , adjectival phrases , adverbial phrases and question expressions respectlvely  . 
The First Stage uses a syntactical dictionary which contains the fle-xional forms of the words  , THESECONDSTAGE-SEMANTICAL INTERPRETATION When the syntactical analysis has been completed the Second Stage of the parser tries to Find out a semantical interpretation of the synta-ctical structure  . The maln predicative element of this struc ture  ( eg . 
VERB/ACTION or OBJECT ) creates one or more Instances of framework descr l bing an event  . That Framework looks like a pattern-concept pair  ( 8  )   ,  (12)  , nevertheless there are more framelndicating verbs  ( 7  )   . 
For example the FOllowing verbs and verb express ions : powo dowac  ( cau-se )   , stymulow ac(stimulate ) , prowadzlcdo ( conclude ) , by cprzyczyna ( to be a cause ) , by cskut kiem ( to be a result ) , etc . refer to the conceptualization  #IMP LY and podac  ( to give )   , stosowac ( to apply ) , etc . to the conceptual lzatl on  #APPLY . 
The pattern determines which phrases may be expected round the predi-cate and which of them must occur  . The interpretation process is dri-ven by such a pattern so It Is calle de ~ oectatio D -drlve ~  . It may be called structure-driven too because there are structural conditions in the pattern which must hold true during the parsing tlme  . 
A concept is a notation t~t represents the meaning of a clause  . 
Together this pair associates different forms of an utterance with 
Its meaning.
The #APPLY conceptualizatlon looks like : ( APPLY TYPETREATMENT-AGT (   (  . ) HUMOPT )
OBJ((()MEDICOBL)
MANNER (() MOAOPT)
CONCEPT ( BUILDQ ( (# APPLY 5 )  + + + ) AGTOBJMANNER )   ) where TYPEIs an indicator which points out that the described event is a treatment  . AGT , OBJ , HANNER determine that there may be three phrases round the pred lc~te  , but only one of them must occur In an utterance . ( OBL means obligatory parameter , OPT-option alone ) . None of these phrases could have a preposition before it-  (   )   . The AGT-ph-rase ( agent that applies something ) must be a human ; the OBJ-phrase ( object which is applied ) must be a medicament ; the MANNER slot may be filled when the wanner ~ fappll catlon is specified  ( eg . doustnle-peros ) . The CONCEPT indicator describes the way an atomic formula has to be built  . As It is seen above , we shall receive a 5-nary pre-TRANSFOR MATION OFN A TURALL ANGUAGE IN TO LOGICAL FOR MULAS  33 dicateca\]led#APPLY which arguments w111 be constructed during the Interpretation process  . The BUILDQ function ls a special ATN form which provides BUILDing of Quoted express ions  ( see ( 1 ) for details )   . 
A filling of frame slots is done after the syntactical and semantic-alrequi rements were satisfied  . When the who \] e pattern were completed an a to mic formula would be generated  . Therefore , the interpretation process is an attempt to saueeze the syntactical structure of a sentence into one or more Instances off ramework of an event  . Beside the maln predlcate(s ) , a great deal of additional information would be joined the output formula  . These facts are storedIn part in patt-e rn-concept pairs and in expert subnets of interpreter  . They create a system knowledge . It is necessary for the system to have such a knowledge because none of the real text corps is able to describe comp\]et elya domaino f the real world  . 
A great deal of context information may al so be used from the special context stack  . It helps to solve the problems of pronoun re ferences and elllpsls  . 
If the " squeezing " could not be made the Fi rstStage is act vated again  . 
In addition , the semantical dictionary is appended to the Second Sta-ge  . It keeps al1 patterns of frameworks mentioned above . It contains some special entities too for Indicating the reference between verbs and patterns  . 
The Second Stage also contains the main ATNnet named FORMULA  . It guides the interpretation process and controls the semantical correc-tness of utterances  . There are as lo some expertnets which can recognize special medical expressions  ( eg . names of sicknesses and symptoms organs , treatments , etc .  )  . These subnets are a changeable part of the system and they decide about the system knowledge  . The expert subnets may communicate with the main net through the middle\]  eve1 of inter-preter-the CASES net . Thlsnet handles no mimaiphrase structures eg  . prepositions , conjunctions and post-modiflers . 
The Second Stage produces a formula of the Fir stOrder Predicate Cal-culus correspond ing to the input sentence  . The formula has an impli-cative form where the main predicate of the utterance is a conclusion and other generated facts are presumptions  . 
Two generated formulas are given below . First of them is an assertion , the remaining one denotes a question . They are In LISP notation so a clarl flcat ion is needed  . IMPLSYM and KONJ SYMmarks are the logical operators IMP LY  ( => ) and ArID ( & )  . Pn integer just after the KONJ SYM mark indicates how many factors were joined  . Each predicate name is preceded by a hash-mark ( # ) and followed by an integer to indicate a number of arguments  . Arguments look like a oair or rr lole which determines the type of argument  , the name of a varlable and a consta-nt ( if any ) respectlvely . 
A1 ko holzwieks zawydzlelanie soku trzust kowego.
( Alcohol Increase span creatic juice secretion .   )   ( IMPL SYM ( KONJ SYM3 ( (# BADMEDIC 1 ) (MEDIC X0002585 ) )  ( (# MEDICAMENT 2 ) (MEDIC X0002585 ) (mname X0002586 ALKOHOL ) ) 34 I . . BOI . C and T . STR ZA LK OWS KI ( IHPL SYH ( KONJSYH ? ( (# ORGAN 2 ) (ORGAN X0002589 ) (ONAHE X0002590
TRZUSTKA ) )  ( (# WYDZIELNICZ*-NARZAD 1 ) (ORGAN X0002589 ) )  ( (# JUICE 1 ) (L IQUID X0002588 ) )  (   (  #LIQUID 3 ) (L IQUID X0002588 )   ( LNAHEX000 2591 ) (ORGAN X0002589 ) )  )   ( (# SICKNESS h ) (SICK X0002587 ) (STYPE X0002592 F I )   ( SNAMEX 0002593 wydzlelanle )   ( BODYX 0002588 )   )   )   )   ( (# RAISE 2 )   ( etio X 0002585 ) (SYHPTOH X0002587 ) )  )   ) Copowodujealko holpo dany doustnie ? ( What damages cause alcohold rink lnE ? )   (   ( X 39 )   ( IMPL SYH ( KONJ SYH3 ( (# BADHEDIC 1 ) (HEDIC X30 ) )  ( (# HEDICAMENT 2 ) (HEDIC X30 ) (MNAHE X31 ALKqHOL ) )  ( IHPL SYH ( KONJ SYH2 ( (# BADMEBIC 1 ) (HEOIC X36 ) )  ( (# HEDICAHENT 2 ) (HEDIC X36 )   ( MNAHEX 37 ALKOHOL ) ) )   ( (# APPLY 3 )   ( an lmX38 ) (MEDIC X36 )   ( HANNERX 33 DOUSTN* ) ) ) )  ( (#1HPLY 2 ) (ETIO X30 ) (SICKNESS X39 ) )  )   )   ) The parser can also produce other kinds of formal representation of natural lamguage  . 

The parsing system described above is an at tempt to build an univer-sal parser for natural language analysis  , The authors incline to the fashionable the si sthet the syntactical and semantical componemts should act in the same time  , nevertheless with a domination of the syntax over the semantics  . This remark is an important one for the Poli sh language  . This approach , however , provides no less efficiency of the pars ing process than in the semantic-dominate systems  ( 7  )   ,  (8) (11)  ,   ( 12 ) and certainly greater universality of tl ~ e system  . This pro-vides among others most of the advantages of regularity of natural language  . 
BIBLIOGRAPHY (1) Bates , M , The Theory and Practice of Augmented Trans it i on Network 
Grammars , in (2).
(2) Bolc , L .   , ( ed ) , Natural Language Communication wlth Computers  , in Lecture notes in Comp . Sci . , voI 63, ( Sprtnger-Veriag , Berlin,
Heiielberg , New York 1978).
(3) Boic , L . ( ed ) , Natural Language Based Computer Systems , ( Hanser Veriag and Hacmiil &n Press , London 1980) . 
(k ) Boic , L . ( ed ) , Natural Language question Answerig Systems , ( as (3)) . 
(5) Bolc , L . ( ed ) , Representation and Processing of Natural Lnaguage  , ( as (3)) . 
(6) Burton , R . , Brown , d . S .   , Semantic Grammars : A Technlque of Construct ing Natural Language Interfaces to Industral Systems  , ( BBN Rep . 
No . 3587, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc . Cambridge MA 1977) . 
(7) Carboneli , J . G . , Hulty-Strategy Parsing , ( OEDt . of Comp . Sci . , Carnegle-Mel\]on Univ . , Pittsburgh PA , 1981) . 
TRANSFOR MATION OF NATUR ALLANG UAGE IN TO LOGICAL FOR MULAS  35   ( 8 ) Gershman , A . V . , Knowledge-Based Parslng , ( Reaearch Rep . 156, Yale University , Dept . of Comp . Scl , 1979) (9) Landsbergen , J .   , Adaptation of Montague Grammar to the qequire -ments of Parsing  , ( reprint from MCTract 136 , Formal Methods in the Study of Language , J . A . G . Groenendijk , T . M . V . dassen , M . B . J . 
Stokhof ( eds .) 1981).
(10) Martin , N . A . , Church , K . W . , Pattl , q . S .   , Preliminary Analysis of a Breadth-Firs t Parslmg Algorlthm  , (MIT Laboratory for Comp . 
Scl ., 1981).
(11) Schank , R . C . , Lebowitz , M . , ~ irnbaum , L . A .   , Integrated Partial Parsing , ( Research Rep . 143, Yale Unlv . , Dept . of Comp . Sci . 1978) (12) Wilensky , R . , Arens , Y .   , PHRAN-AK nowledge-Based Approach to Natural Language Analysls  , ( Dept . of Comp . Sci . , Univ . of Cali-fornia , Berkeley 1980) . 
(13) Woods , W . A . , An Exper lmenta l Pars ing Syntem for T rans i t ion Network Grammars  , ( BBN Rep . No . 2362, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc . 
Cambridge MA , = 1972).
( lk ) Woods , W . A . , Cascaded ATN Grammars , ( in Amerlc and rnl . of Comp . 
Llnguistlcs , vol . 6, no . 1, 1980).

