COLING82, J . Horeck ~( ed.)
North . Holl and Publialu'ng Company
? Academ ~1982
Towards a mechanical analysis of French tense forms in texts  . 
Christian Rohrer
Universit ~ t Stuttgart

In this paper we want to present a system that analyzes tense forms and temporal adverbs in texts  2  )   . For reasons of ex-position we restrict the analysis to narrative texts  . 
The system compri . : es the following components : a ) A parser which assigns a tree structure to sentences  . 
The fragment which the parser can analyse corresponds roughly to the fragment of Engli sh described by R  . Montague in ' The proper treatment of quant if ication in ordinary English '  . Our fragment contains however more tense forms , temporal adverbs , and temporal conjunctions . In particular we treat the notorious-lyd if ficult pair of tense forms pass ~ simple and imparfait  , frame adverbials like aujourd'hui , hier , demai ____~n , celour-l ~ , u_nn ~ our plustard , etc . , as well as the . zonjunctions qu and , pendant ~\[ u_e , depuisque , ar ~ ~ . 
b ) The syntactic analysis constitutes the input to the rules that derive the corresponding d is course representations  . The syntactic structure detezmines the d is course representation  . 
Let D =  Si .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . , Sn be a discourse of L . 
AD ( is course ) R ( epresentation ) S ( tructure ) for Discon-structed by reducing the sentences SI  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . , Sn in the order in which they occur in D . The reduction of a sentence Si proceeds through the application of certain DRS-con-st ruction rules which operate on the syntactic analysis of the sentence and workso to speak ' from the topdown '  ( thus the syntactic analysis imposes a partial order on how the rules are to be applied  )  . 
What DRS-construction rule is to be applied depends on the particular syntactic format ion rule that was used to form the syntactic compound that the application of the rule is to reduce  . Where one of the immediate components of the compound is a singular term  , moreover , the choice of construction rule will be determined by the type of this term  ; thus , for instance there is a different rule for proper names  , for inde-finite descriptions and for pronouns  , x espectively . Similarly there are different rules for each of the tenses considered here  . 
331332 CH . ROHRERc ) In ordinary truth-conditional semant ics truth conditions are stated for indiv idual sentences : A discourse consisting of a set of sentences is true iff it consists of nothing but true sentences  . The order in which the individual sentences occur in the discourse is irrelevant for the truth conditions  . In this system truth conditions are fo rmulated for a sequence of sentences D = $ I  ,   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   , Sn in such a way that the order in which the sentences occur in the text plays a crucial role  . The truth of a discourse D in a model M is de -fined as the existence of a proper embedding into M of the representation of D  . 
A major advantage of the present system lies in its ability to deal with cases of in tersentential and intrasentential anaphora in exactly the same fashion  . Tense forms and temporal adverbs behave in many respects like anaphoric pronouns  . The DRS-con-struction rules handle both temporal and pronominal anaphora  . The system extracts all the temporal informat i on which is contained in the input text  . At a later stage the information extracted f rom the text will form the basis for a quest ion-answering system  . An implementation of the system on a VAX 780/11 is in progress . 
1 ) The work reported in this paper was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grant Ro  245/12  . 
2 ) The system is based on the following papers : Kamp  , H .   ( 1980 ) 'A theory of truth and semantic represent at ion '  , in : Groenendijk , J . , Janssen , T . , Stokhof , M . ( eds . ) , Formal methods in the study of language , Amsterdam , p .  277 - 322 . 
Kamp , H .  (1981) , ' Evenements , representations discursive set r~f ~ rence temporelle '  , Langages , p .  39 - 64 . 
Kamp , H . , Rohrer C . (1981)' Tense in texts ', Ms . Stuttgart
