A PRA~ATICCONCE PTOFTHEME AND RHEME FOR MACHINE

Christa Hauenschild
SFB99-E2 , Universitat Konstanz , Postfach 55 60 , 
D-7750 Konstanz
The concept of theme and rheme we want to propose in this paper is pragmatic in two senses of the word z the theme/theme structure  ( TRS ) is viewed as a strategy of communication and thus belongs to pra~natics  , and it seems to offer a prag-matic solut ion for a problem of machine translat ion  . 
The starting-point of our considerations is defined by several ar Euments claiming then e@essity to preserve the TRS of sentences  ( or utterances ) in the process of translation , as stated in Koenitz ,   1978z -the exhaustive-listing reading of the the me-the presuppositions l character of the theme-the connexion of the THS with the degree of textual coherence  . the correlation of the meness and defini teness-general considerations in a framework of communication theory  ( readability of text set o .   ) Further arguments might easily be added to th is list  ( e . g . the relation between the TR3 and the scope of operators )   . 
In principle all of them hold for mach ine translation as well  , at least if it is pursued within a theoretical fremework  , as e . g . in the case of the project SALAT ( of . Hauensohild ,  1978 ) and of the successor project " Ubersetzungsbezogene Kontext-theorie "  ( Context theory for translation ) in the spirit of which this paper was wr itten  . 

These considerations lead to the question whether it is necessary to compute the TRS o f  ever7 translated sentence , which would be very difficult-if at a ll possible-Eiven the high degree of ambiguity of written texts with respect to the TRS  . 
We want to propose a somewhat simplified procedure which nevertheless ensures the preservation of the TI ~  . 
Theoretically , this procedure is based on a concept of theme and theme that ascribes them a strateg ic role in communicat-ion  , controlling , as it were , several other factors ( semantic and syntactic )   . If these latter factors are kept constant during the tra~slation process  , we can be sure that we have preserved theme and theme as well  ( or that the boundary is irrelevant in the g iven sentence  )   , The central hypothesis of this paper is the following : in most cases it is suffi cient to preserve the underlying  ( communicatively conditioned ) order of main elements , which is conceived in a wa~ve ~ J similar to that of Sgall and Ha-Ji Sov ~  ,  1977/78 , or Ha~l~ov ~ ,  1980 , but without indi@ation of an exact boundaz7 between theme and theme . ~ he validity of this hypothesis is , of course , limited to certain languages ( we treat German , French and Russian ) and to certain types of texts , aim in E exclusively at an optimal t rans mission of inform-ation  . With such a limit a ~ ion , it is very often possible to derive the underlying order in a straightforward way from the surface order of the main consti tuents of a sentence  . 
It might seem surprising that this should hold for such languages as German  , French and Russian , ~ hich are normally viewed as e zJ ~ i bit ing different types of word-order re Eulari t-lea  . But if we look at texts of the mentioned ~ ind  ( e . g . 
reports for international organizations ) , w@find that in all three languages they axe organized in a similar way  , obeying more or less to some kind of " linear ity principle"s sentences -  122 -normally start with the elements connect ing them to the prec-eding context  , the elements carrying " new information " are situated at the end  . Such organization seem-to be most effect ive in the sense of an optimal transfer of in formation  . 
Thus we propose a procedure that derives the underly in ~ from the surface order of the main constituents using some transform at ions for specialoases  ( e . g . cleft-sentences ) . 
The synthesis will yield the corresponding surface order of the target language  , again with a minimal set of transforn ~ t- ionse The procedure is to be controlled by several semantic factors that are closely re lated to the TRS  ( compare the ar&~msnts for the preservation of the  TR3 in translation mentioned at the beginning )   , but have to be kept constant on independent grounds-anaphoric relations-definite or indefinite  ( or generic ) interpretation of noun--phrases-scope of quantifls rs  , negation and other operators

Ha ~ i ~ ovd , Evaz A dependency based specification of topic and focus Is background and motivation  . Journal of Linguist-ic Galculus ,  19801 12 , ppe 93-109 . 
Hauensohild , Christaz SALAT : System for Automatic Language Analysis and Translation  . Paper read at the 7th Inter-national Conference on Computational Lin@uistice  , Bergen ( Norway ) 1978 . 
Koenitz , Berndz Die Thema-Rhema-Gliederung-lnvariante beider Translation  . Linguistische Arbeitsberiohte19,
Leipzig 1978, pp . 75-91.
Sgall P . and HaJi ~ ov ~ E . : Focus on Focus ( Part I and ll ) . The Prague Bull . of Math . Linguistics 28, 1977, pp . 5-54, and 29,1978, pp . 23-41 . 

