II~PERENCING ANDSEARCH FOR AN ANSWERINTIBAQ
Petr Oirk ~, Jan Ha Ji ~
Center of Biomathematics , Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences , 
14220 Praha4, Vtde~sk~1083, Czechoslovakia

Faculty of Mathematics and Physics , Charles University , 11800 Praha 1 , Malostransk ~ n .  25 , Czechoslovakia The objective of this cont ribution is to describe two procedures employed in the question answering method TIBAQ  ( ~ ext - and Inference-Based Answering of ~ uestio r  ~  , an overall outline of which is given in Sga ll's paper  ( COLING82-Pro-ceed~n6s ) o ( i ) The procedure of inferencing is activated a fter the input sentence has been recognized as a question  . However , it would be useless to search through the whole database  . Thus only a small part of the database SQ , viz . the set of re-presentations of sentences re levant with respect to a given question Q  , is activated , which consists of those sentences that contain at least one term sem~utically equivalent w it han element actually occurring in Q  , i . e . in the question to be answered . This set is selected from the database for the inference rules to operate on it  . Let us denote by Cn ( SQ ) the set of all consequences of SQ . Thus Cn ( SQ ) is the theoretical set of statements re levant for the build-up of the answer  . 
Such a set of consequences would grow beyond any l imits  , so that it is necessary to formulate astra tegy which controls the whole process  . Two different strategies will be di scussed  . 
In the first experimen % e with TIBAQ , we represent the meaning of the sentence by a dependency tree  . Inferences are - 139 -performed by using rules for nondestruct ive conditional re-writing of such t rees  . Proma formal point of view a set of infe rence rules can be considered as a set of productions over oriented projective label led trees  . Labels are used for representing elementary terms of knowledge  ( meaning )   , while pro~ectivity permits a treatment of the contextual role of the words in the sentence  . For linguistically motivated rules , which are emphasized in our paper , we can use a bottom-up strategy carried out here by using Colmerauer?s Q-systems  . 
Such a strategy is not fully satisfac tory for an inference process controlled by logical patterns  . The logical deductive ability of the system should rather be connected with backward chaining strategies and thus more advanced devices  , using e . g . backtracking mechanism , are needed . 
( ii ) The procedure of the search for an answer to the question Q operates in the set Cn  ( SQ )  . A consequence cEC n ( SQ ) must fulfil the following conditions to be chosen as a  ( full or partial ) answer to Q: ( a ) the root of c must be either identical wi th the root of Q  ( identity means coincidence in all parts of the complex label of the node  , where " coincidence " is defined as allow ing for certain specific differences such as that of singular vs  . plural under certain conditions , of an adverbial of Manner vs . adverbial of Regard , etc .  )  , or , if the lexical part of the label of the root of Q equals " d~lat "  ( English do in the meaning of a full verb )   , then the lexical part of the label of the root of c may have any shape provided it in c ludes and index denoting the feature " Activi ty " !  ( b ) c must comprise a path that is identical wi th the path in Q that leads to the node label led by the represent at-ion of the question word  ( WH )  , except that the lexical part of the label of the counterpart of WH in c consists in a con-c retelexical word  , possibly accompanied by words dependent on it . 
- 140 - ( c ) ? and Q must have at least one more node in common  ( with a coinciding and lexically specif ied label  )   , dependent on an identical node on the path to WH  ( inc )   . 
If there is no c matching the conditions ( a ) to ( c )   , th ~ system answers I don?t know . The distinction between a full and a par tial answer is determined as follows : if the dependency trees of Q and ? match the condi tions  ( a ) to ( c ) and Q does not comprise any nods not having a counterpart in c  , then_o is printed as a full answer , otherwise it is print-ed as a partial answer  , prefixed by " I know that . . . " . 
This procedure makes it possible to respect among other relevant issues also the dichotomy of topic and focus  , so that e . g . if the set of statements contains the assert ion  . Arithmet-ical operations are carried out by the device D "  ( rather than " The device D carries out ari thmetical operations "  )   , then the questions " What is carried out by the device D ? " will be answered " I know that arithmetical operations are carried out by the device D "  , which points out the possibility that ar ith metical operations constitute only an unimportant part of the set of processes carr ied out by D  . 

