A PROCEDUREOFAN AUTOMATICGRAPHE~E-TO-PHO~
TRANSFORHATION OFGERMAN
Sabine Koch , Wolfgang Menzel , Ingrid Starke
Zentral institut fur Sprachwissenschaft , AdWDDR , Berlin , DDR
The automatic transformation of texts graphemically stored to the corresponding phonemic symbols will enable the speech synthesizer Rosy  4000   (  . developed by VEB Robotron Dres ~ den ) to extend its field of application ( application in information systems , development of reading machines for the blind ) . The texts for this kind of application cannot be limijted in anyway-a fact which had to be taken into account concerning the methods suitable for such a procedure  . The use of the d_% ctionary method , that means storing the whole vocabulary needed together with the corresponding phonemic strings was impossible for this purpose  . 
The procedure presented here can shortly be characteriz ~ ed as a rule system  . The transformation is done on the level of word forms not taking into consideration syntactic or semantic criteria  . 
An important part of the procedure is thb analysis of the structure of word forms  . The results of this analysis ix ~ luence the intended high quality of the transformation to a large extent  . 
The problem of automatically identifying the boundaries between elements of compounds could not be solved havi ~ gin mind the aim to transform unlimited texts  . As it is necessary for a correct phonemic transformation to know these boundar--  158 - ies , all compounds are split by hand when the input text is s~ored  . 
The presented procedure identifies graphemic Bub strings in tb ~ word form to be transformed on the basis of an unique deterministic analysis and it also check ~ if the context of the string or the status of the system fulfil special cond it - ions  . In case these tests were successful the substring will be accepted  , that means the corresponding phonemic transcript -ion as well as the stress information are added to the substring  . In certain cases it is possible to postpone the traus-formation to one of the following steps  . 
The graphemic substrings are contained in the informat-ion part of the procedure together with the conditions and the results of the transformation  . The infommation part , that means the linguistic part , is strongly separated from the algorithm . This separation was of great advantage when working out the procedure  . 
The transformation is carried out in six stages , the most important of which are the analysis of the structure of word forms  ( the prefix and suffix strategy ) and the transformation of graphemes by a set of rules  . 
The analysis of the structure of wordforms splits the regarded wordform into morphemes and marks the morphemic bound ~ ries on the basis of lists " containing prefixes and suffixes together with the corresponding phonemic realizations and the stress information  ( marking of the stressed syllable or stress shifting to other syllables  )  . These lists also con-rain exceptions . The exceptions are substrings of certain word forms which are identical with an affix on the graphemic level but they differ in pronounciation or stress or in both of them  . 
All parts of the wordform which are not treated by the prefix or suffix strategy  ( normally the basis ) are to be trams-- 159 -o-formed by transformation rules . These are context sensitive rules which are applied from left to right  . The word form is runtrough only once . One part of the context conditions result from word structure analysis : That is the marked morphe-mic boundaries which influence the transformation of grapheml c strings with regard to phenomena like the socalled final devoicing and the socalled glottal stop as well as the length of vowels  . Classes and subclasses of graphemes and phonemes ( classes of consonants , vowels , plosives , etc .   ) are also used as context conditions for an adequate transformation  . 
The strate ~ of stress as the last part in the procedure fixes the main stress in the wordform by tak ~ ulg into consideration the stre~si ~formatlon supplied from the other strateg-ies  . There exist three classes of prefences : the absolute stress in fol~nation  , the conditional stress i ~ formation ( if there is no absolute stress information ) and the stress information without preference ( if there is no conditional preference information )  . 
For the r~m-~4~ unstressed wordforms the main stress is fixed by stress patterns  . The native German vocabulary can be handled by these patterns without large lists of except - ions  . Most of the exceptions are foreign words . 
The first strategy before these mentioned main parts of the procedure is a lock-up in a list contaln lz ~ about  250 of the most frequent German word forms ( articles , pronouns ) which are transformed as a whole without running through all the strategies of the procedure  . This immediate transformation saves a lot of time  . 
Purthermore there is a list of about 60 homographs , which could be transformed unambigiously only by the aid of syntactic or semantic crite ria  . The wordforms of this list are also in nnediately transformed to the correspond ing variants  . 
The advantage of this method is that the fol lowiz ~ parts of -  160 -the procedure do not have to handle ambiguit i es  . 
The paper will contain information concern ing the number and kind of transformation mis takes  . In general the German vocabulary can bet rans formed correctly by regularities easi -ly to formulate  . Difficulties and a great number of except-ions to the regularities result from foreign words which are very frequent in German  . The transformation of foreign words cannot be excluded from the procedure because they are often used in German and sometimes they even have no German equive/-ent like Ingen ieur  , Cello , Charta , Chaussee etc . 

