COLEVG82, J . Horeckf/(ed.)
North-Holland Publishing Company
? Academia , 1982
FRAMEBASED RECOGNITION OF THEMECONTINUITY
James T . Critz
Hewlett-Packard Company
Palo Altow California
U.S . A
The paper describes a system which determines continuity and shifts in English texts on the basis of sentential themes  . The theme object within the thematic component of a sentence is determined and a search is made to associate it with a frame shared with the previous theme or themes  . If the theme object cannot be associated di rectly with one of these frames  , interpretive rules are ~ p plied to do so indirectly through one of the frames normally associated with the object but not yet with the text  . 

This paper describes a system which interprets the semantic theme of a text as a mapping of the semantic network of states associated in the text with one or more theme objects onto an established semantic frame  . Theme objects are determined on the basis of the syntactic distinction of thematic and rhematic  ( topic-Comment ) components of a sentence . The concept of " a frame " as used here is that of a semantic representation of experience ~ whose functional roles are related  , rather than of a psychological representation , where physical properties of an object which do not bear any functional relevance to the def inition of the object and its relationship to other components of the frame are included  . 
The problem of recognizing c cntinuity and shifts in text analysis is generally defined in terms of identifying the text's themes  . It is apparent from examples like ( i-2 ) that a system which tries to discover continui ty on the sole basis of searching for antecedent references for a pronoun or synonym is inadequate where a text is developed through the techniques of elaboration  , analogy , comparison and other styles involving implied dependency  . 
( i ) (2)
The store was crowded . The marketing campaign had been a
Success.
Harold notified hfs lawyer . Astorm was brewing . 
In order to identify the implied theme object in text samples such as these  , the system described in this paper makes use of the distinction ~ f the syntactic categor ies " theme " and " rheme " developed by the Prague School of Linguistics  . Once it has determined the sentential theme it further relates this th ~ me to a frame which can be reasonably associated with it in the given context and links the frame with those extabl is hed in the preceding text  . The objects which are the primary referents of a sentential theme are assigned the role of being major nodes through which one frame is l inked directly or  , where more abstract associations can be inferred  , indirectly with others relevant to the continu ity of the text  . The concept of " frame " is that described in M . Minsky (1977) . 
In the following sections the concepts of " theme " and " frame " are defined more explic itly and the manner in which the system relates them to each other is described  . While the system is designed to operate on Engl ish text  , comparisons will be made to Czech . 

Within the grammatical theory of the Prague School of Linguistics a sentence is composed of a minimum of two major constituents - a " theme "  ( " topic " ) and a " rheme " ( " comment " )  .   ( A sentence may also contain components which function as a transition between these two  , but such components will not be discussed here  . ) The theme - rheme d iv is ion of a sentence typically conforms  , in non-contrastive environments , to the NP subject and VP major constituents of a sentence  , with the theme being the first of these to appear in the surface word order of the sentence  . Because of its more restrictive word order , the theme of a sentence in English is normally its subject  . In Czech , however , a sentential subject may more easily appear in the latter part of a sentence  . 
In its attempt to associate the theme of a sentence with a frame  , our system reduces the object of its operation to a " theme object "  , defining this for English as the referent of the highest noun within the the meconsti tuent : normally  , the subject head noun . Within VPs functioning in English sentences as theme the theme object would be the direct object's head noun  , or , given other contrastive stress , the head noun of the phrase containing the h ig hest peak of intonation were the sentence spoken  . 
It is important to note that the theoretical basis for labelling a sentence constituent as theme does not necessarily mean that the theme object has been previously mentioned in the text  . The immediate introduction of new theme objects in English is obvious from the existence of non-definite themes in examples like  ( 3 )  . 
(3) The old hotel burned down last year . A new restaurant is to take its place . 
However , unless some relation can be found between contextually new themes and the existing context  , sentences with non-definite themes would be e it her make a text discontinuous or would maintain their continuity only indirectly through the relation of the theme to another noun in the same sentence which is anaphoric  . In either case there would be little just i fication for assigning a thematic function to non-definite nouns  , and the general definition of theme proposed by the Prague School would have to be greatly a ltered or dropped  . 
FRAMEBASED RECOGNITION OF THEMECONTINUITY 73 The association of themes with frames provides continuity without the requirement for explicit previous mention  . The claim made in associating themes and frames is that themes are not referentially simple : their meaning involves reference not only to some individual  , act , event , etc . , but also reference to some structured set of these with which the noun referent is associated  . Continuity lies in the existence of an assumed shared relation holding between a the me and other objects previously mentioned  . 

A frame may be generally defined as a limited complex of objects  , acts , events , and/or states , whose association is determined by convention or experience and is assumed and expected by a speaker or author to be known by his or her ~ udience  . Simple frames include : the association of the objects " the bathroom "  ( " koupelna " )  , " the bedrooms "(" lo~nice ") , " the kitchen "(" kuchyn ~") , "thero of "(" stecha ") , etc . , with the frame " h)use " , or the sequence " the morning " ( " r ~ no " a " do poledne " )  , " no on "(" poledne ") , etc . , as parts of the frame " day " . Reference to one member of a frame suffices to make other members of the frame available as possible themes  . For example , mention of " the kitchen and bathroom " implies the frame " house "  , and this mention , if themes are assumed to be bound to frames , suffices to allow the occurrence of " the house "  , " the garden " or other associated object as a the meinal ater sentence  . 
The primary characteristics of a frame , as defined in our natural language system , and distinguishing frames from other relat ional structures  , are that each member of the frame must be uniquely identifiable  ( This uniqueness also specifies the member's role in the frame  . ) and that the members share a common re lat ion or property which uniquely character izes the frame to which they belong  . Recognition that a given object is a unique member of a frame is the attribution of the property of " definiteness " to that object  . A non-definite theme is interpreted as a descr ip tion of a frame object  , but the reference itself as definite . 
DETER MINING CONTINUITY
Themes and frames are related to each other through the following process  . The main components of the system include : - a parser-a lexicon  , providing not only the possible syntactic and semantic representations of each lexical item and conditions on their use  , but also an index to the frames normally assoc iated with the entry-a frame dictionary  , stating the set types of the possible members for each frame and their relationship to each other within the frame-a set of logical inference and interpretive rules  , which can be used to relate frames in the const ruction of a frame system representing changes in the continuity and development of a text- a list of frames currently activated by theme reference  , interpretation or inference 74\] J . T . CRITZ During the parse of a sentence the head noun of the sentence is selected as the most likely candidate for being its theme and  , provided that tests of the sentence and the one preceding it do not indicate a contrastive environment requiring the selection of another noun as theme  , declares it to be the theme . The frames indexed in the lexical entry for the theme noun are then searched and compared for identity with or inclusion within those frames currently active  . Those frames most recently used and those which a ~e associated with anaphoric noun phrases within the sentence are examined first  . If the sentence being processed is the first sentence in the text or if a search of all active frames fails  , the theme is associated with a " base " frame . The base frame for a text includes as its members the set types AUTHOR  , AUTHOR'SGOAL ~ , READER and other nodes which may be filled by objects or persons these as part of their immediate world  . 
The frame system for the text is built of the relationships holding between all the activated frames and the base frame  . 
The process is illustrated for (4) . For reasons of space , the hierarchical relations which hold between members of each frame is not shown  . An AGENT frame is automatically assigned to persons mentioned in a text  . The LOCATION , BUILDING and LOCK frames in (4) are interpreted . 
(4) John turned the key . The door still would not move . 
BASE .   .   . \[ John \]\ [ author\]\[reader\] . . . ~ AGENT ( . . . \[ John \]\[ LOCATION > BUILDING\]\[GOAL\]
BUILDING . . . \[ door \] ..-7
LOCK(...\[key\]\[bolt\]...~
DOOR(...\[lock\]\[handle\]...)
COMPARING ENGLISH ANDCZECHTEXTS
Comparing the processing of English and Czech texts  , it is important to note that while most frames can be expected to be the same for both languages  , frame membership and relations between frame members which are dependent on cultural  , political , linguistic and similar differences will cause frames to differ at least at the lower node levels  . The " day " framement i 6 ned earlier , in which English " morning " is paralleled by " r ~no " and " do poledne " in Czech  , is one example . 
An even more significant difference is found in the effect of varying restrictions on word order in the two languages  . Czech seems to indicate shifts to new frames by moving subject nouns which would be thematic in the English equivalent of the sentence to the end of the sentence  . Where the same frame or same samll set of frames can be associated with consequetive subjects in the text  , the subject is thematic . An example of this can be seen in (5) , where " cesta " ( " trip " ) is associated with the general frame of a person 's daily life and with Karel's in particular  . In (6) , FRAMEBASED RECOGNITION OF THEMECONTINUITY 75 however , where a shift is made from an AGENT frame to introduce an object which is not  , on the basis of previous-themes , expected , although an association could be found , Czech makes the subject thematic , and uses as its the mean object more easily associated with existing frames  . English may optionally keep " envelope " as the theme of its equivalent for  ( 6 ) and allows interpretive rules to determine the frame it is associated with  . 
(5) Karel sevcer a preste hoval do nov ~ hobytu . Cesta Karelhimself yesterday moved to new apartment  , trip do praceubude krat . 
to work now will-be shorter.
Karel moved to a new apartment yesterday . Histrip to work now will be shorter . 
(6) Marieoteveladvee . Nazemile e lave lk~o balka . 
Marie opened doors , on ground lay large envelope.
Marie opened the door . I A large envelope lay on the ground . ~
There was a large envelopelaying \[ on the ground  . J
RLFERENCES\[i \] Critz , J . , Definiteness and Knowledge Frames , Paper presented to the Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America  , ( December 1981) . 
\[2\] Danes , F . , Papers on Functional Sentence Perspective ( Cesko-sloven skoak a demiered , Prague ,  1974) . 
\[3\] Hirst , G . , Discourse-Oriented Anaphora Resolution , American Journal of Computational Linguistics 7 . 2 (1981) 85-98 . 
\[4\] Johnson-Laird , P . and Wason , P . ( eds . ) , Thinking : readings in cognitive science ( Cambridge University , New York , 1977)\[5\] Minsky , M . , Frame System Theory , in : Johnson-Laird , P . and Wason , P . ( eds . ) , Thinking : readings in cognitive science ( Cambridge University , New York ,  1977)
