TOWARDSTHEORGANIZATION OYLEXICALDEPINITIONS ON ADATABASE 

Niooletta Calzolari
Istituto di Glottologia - Untversit ~ di Flea  , Italy
Printed dictionaries are grest reposito ries of informat-ion  , and it is important that they can be exploi ted as full ~ as possible  , with regard to all the different types of data they contain  . This was one of the aims when organizing the Machine  D?otionax7 of the Italian language on a database struc ture  . 
The design and organization of the iexical database for the first two relations implemented  , i . e . the set of Le~s (106 , 091) and the set of Wordforms (1 , 016 , 320)  , has been described in other papers ( see for example Calzolari and Ce ? ~ oott ? ,  1980) . 
These two very large archives are maintaine ~ continuous -\]  . 7 on - l ine and are in teract ive ly invoked through a query language whioh permits to the user to access  , in transparent mode , the data , and to have his particular " view " of the data  . The database concept and methodology giver i s e  , in fact , to a radical change in perspective when conf ronted with sequential organization of data  . We have a dynamic rather than a statio objec t which is flexible and easy to query  , update , extend . 
This lexical database is now being extended by the insertion of lexioal definitions  ( 185 , 899) and semantic data . 
The guiding principle behind this pro~ect i s the ? on viction that the study of the def in ing vocabulary of an actual dict-ionary can provide a precious tool in the semantic an a lysis-  61 -of a language ( see Noel ,  1981) . 
The logical or ~ ni ~- atlon of this definitional Infoz : at-ion is not a trivial task  , and must be performed bearing in . ~ nd the goals to be achieved . It must in fact be possible to ~ vedlrect access to each and every piece of l ~ fo ~ tlon contained in the definitions  . The significance of " piece of lnfo1~atlon " in this context is in ~ Lreot relationship to the eventual use to be made of it  . By " piece of information " inside the definitions  , we intend not only the single woe-fezes , as they are written in the definitions , but also the lemma , to which every word for misconnected ; moreover , at a further stage of analysis , the specific sense of every polysemio lemma in the particul ~ r context  ( context : definition ) must be consid-ered ? The logical or ~ is at to n of the definitional part ot the database must  , therefore , be structured to provide , for each word in every defiuition , direct access to : a ) the word . form itself , with the associated information ( morphological , usage level , etco ) ; b ) the lama to which the wordform pertains , with the associated information ( part-of speech , variants , usage level other word form sice . paradi~n ) ; c ) the specific sense of the le~ma ? The implementation of a definition alarch- ive thus requires an enormous task of di ssmbi ~ ation at all the three levels : word -forms  , lemmas and senses , in order to produce material which can be used effectively to extract semantic info rmation fran the dictionary  . ~ The first step in this direction ~ s the lemmatization of the definitions themselves ? For this task  , the other two arc hiv-es of the database ( the wordform and lemma ~ archives ) ere being used , together with a dhoop rooed u_~es , to produce an auto-rustic lemmatizatlon of a large percentage of the words con-rained in the defi ~ itions ? For the other words  , those for which automatic lemmatization has not  7et been achieved , a dissmbiguatlon strate ~ has been developed in which the human-  62 -operator worksiuteraotively with the computer  , and the computer can memorize choices on homographic forms as they are made  . 
After lemmatization , each word is associated in the computer memory to the addresses of its word form and of its lamina  . Therefore , the definitions are organized in the memory not as actual strings of words  , but as lists of addresses of word forms and lamin as  . In this way , a number of important results are achieved : a  ) a great reduction in storage size ; b ) data types ( addresses i . e . binary numbers ) which are easi-lybandied by the computer ; c ) data which are strictly assoc-iated to the first two archives  , ~ at the eventual const-ruction of an in tegrated system  ; d ) much more rapid data processing and direct accesses to each kind of data  , in each position of the definition its e lf  ; e ) the possibility of being able to immediately retrams late addresses into characters trJ  . ugs , and list of addresses into phrases , i . e . definitions ; f ) the possibility of correcting , updating and i user ti ~ within the delet ions  . 
0mly once th i s prel iminsa-y stage has been complete disit possible to extract many k inds of semantic information from the diot ionaxT  . The memorize definitions have an intern-a l logical structure which permits the const ruction of semant-icchains  ( to evidence taxonomic relationships ) and also of other types of semantic links ( to evidence other types of semantic relations h i ps  , such as " part of ' , " set of ' , " in the form of ' , " apt to ' , etc . ) between words in the lexicon . These chains and links , which can be not only displayed , but also handled by computer procedures in many different ways  , surely provide a good starting point for the study of the semantic structure of the lex icon  . In fact , it is hoped that the computerized d~ct i0nary will offer a model of the Italian lex ical system in the various aspects which can be associated with a lexicon  ( phonology , morphology , syntaxi . e . verbal frames , -63-lezioal semantics) , TILts approach is included in the general theoretical view which considers the lexicon as a central reference point both for language analysis and for many ling-u is tic applications  . 

Cs~zolari , N . , M . L . Ceccotti , " A project for an exhaus % ive lexical databases ~ et ea "  , in Proceed ~ e of the Second International Coherence on Data Bases In the Humanit-ies and Social Sciences  ,  1980 , Madrid , In press . 
Noel , J .   , " The Lon~aan-Liege Dictionary project " , Ccngres International Informatique tSc iencesHumaines  , Liege , 18--21 nov .  1981 . 
Procter , P .   , " Problemsi ~ dictionary making " , Congres Intern-ational Y . ufox ~ atiquet Sciences Humaines , Liege , 1821 nov .  1981 . 

