TOWARDSANDE ~ PLICITDESCRIPTION OPPOSSESSIVITY
Parr Pi~ha
Faoulty of Mathematics and Physioa , Charles University , 
11800 Praha 1, Malostransk~n . 25, Czechoslovakia
Any grA---armustao cou~t for the category of possessiv-ity  . As far as we ~ now this category is not yet exhaustively described for any language  . In this paper we want to demonstr-ate an explicit approach to this complicated language phenomenon  . The functional generative grammar proposed by Sgall and worked out in the group of Faculty of Mathematics and Physics  , Charles University , is chosen for this description . 
Distinction between the ontologi ~ , alnotion of possess-ivlty and the language counterpart of it is ~ drawn and distinct-ion between meaning of possessivity and forms of its express-ion is shown  . These distinctions are exemplified on the not-ion of so called possessive dative  , which is not an expression of possessive meaning . Arguments for establishing , this meaning of dative are shown as based on . ontological criteria . 
Various constructions and expressions used for expressing the possessive meaning are enumerated and their syntactic and semantic character is discussed  . 
Three main meanings of the verb %0 have are described : I . full lexlcal meaning-a possessive one connected with active-passive transformation  ,  2 . copulative meaning I connected with he__construction transformation  ,  3 . copulative mean in ~ connected with any of these transformations  . Some differences between copula to b . _ . _ . ~ e and copulative to have are shown . In the b_e-sentences the subject member of the class is -  232 -named in the predicate . In the have-sentences the object as a single element is attached to the subject  . 
Similarly different meanings of the verb to belon F ~ are stated  .  1 . location , 2 . appurtenance , 3 . possession . Classific-ation is rejected as meaning of this verb and is shown as a content phenomenon  . Other expressions for possessivity as genitives , possessive pronouns and possessive adverbs are partially discussed and compared with results obtained for verbal expressions of poesessivity  . Finally a list of imports nt meaning distinctions ( e . g . possessivity versus appurtenance ) is given and a tentative table of homonyms ( and synonymy ) of forms of their expressing is outlined . 
In addition some simplifications of the complete linguist-ic description are shown for applications in question-answer-ing systems and some special treatments adjusted to a given pur-I ~ Sa are suggested  . We suppose that from the point of view of various kinds of applications certain simplifications of the theoretical linguistic conclusions are not only acceptable but in some cases even necessary  . It seems for example that in certain sublanguage in a limited area of texts some content regularities are met with such a high probability  , that we can accept them in these texts as valid arguments for a change in a demcription of meaning  . It seems also better to use in qa systems the genitive construction as a basic expression of the meaning of possession and appurtenance rather than have - or belon ~ to-constructions ~ which seem to be the best underlying structure in a general theoretical description of grammar  . 
-233-l
