COL1NG ~, Z Horeck : ( ed.)
Noah . Holl and Pub~hi ~ Comply
? Ac~lem ~1982
PROCEDURAL MEANING REPRESENTATION BY CONNOTATIVE
DEPENDENCYSTRUCTURES . ANEMPIRICAL APPROACH TO WORDSEM ANTICS FOR ANALOGICALINEERENCING 
Burgbard B . Rieger
MESY-Group , German Department
Technical University of Aachen

Natural language understanding systems make use of language and/or world knowledge bases  . One of the salient problems of meaning representation and knowledge structure is the modelling of its acquisition and modification from natural language processing  . Based upon the statistical analysis of discourse , a formal representation of vague word meanings is derived which constitutes the lexical structure of the vocabulary employed in the texts as a fragment of the connotative knowledge conveyed in discourse  . It consists of a distance-like data structure of linguistically labeled space points whose positions give a prototype-representation of conceptual meanings  . On the basis of these semantic space data an algorithm is presented which transforms prevailing similarities of conceptual meanings as denoted by adjacent space points to establish a binary  , non-symmotric , and transitive relation between them . This allows for the hierarchical reorganization of points as nodes dependent on a head in a binary tree called connotative dependency structure  ( CDS\] . It offers an empirically founded operational approach to determine relevant port-ions of the space structure constituting semantic dispositions which the priming of a meaning point will trigger with decreasing criteriality  . Thus , the CDS allows for the execution of associatively guided search strategies  , contents-oriented retrieval operations , and source-dependent processes of analogical inferencing  . 

In procedural approaches of linguistic semantics , cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence , natural language understanding systems make use of language and/or world knowledge bases  . Defined as lexical structures , memory models or semantic networks , they are formatted according to whatever representational  , explanatory or inferential purpose a particular simulation of processes and/or of understanding was aiming at  ( I )  . ~ he language and world knowledge embodied in these systems  , however , is restricted under two aspects : most of it is obtained introspectively and as such not warranted by any operational means or  , whenever it seems to , these operations are not the permitting condition for  , but a performiff g result of simple referencing in clearcut environments  . 
Based mainly upon the investigator S ' or the system designers ' own or some consulted experts ' linguistic competence and/or world knowledge in a subject domain  , the data considered semantically relevant to be organized in referential and/or conceptual structures  ( lists , arrays , networks , topologies , etc . ) have a more or less ad hoc character and are confined to representing logically reconstructable propositions  . 
319320 B.B.RIEGER
Neglectable as these shortcomings prove to be fo rstrictly ex-tensionally defined environments and fragments of knowledges t ructure in referential models  , data complexity tends to increase to meet ex- ploding difficulties and escalating problems whenever abstract concepts or even vague meanings are to be processed in a not exc lusively de-notative but also connotative setting of formal semantic represent a-t ion  . 
As natural language communication may be characterized by the appar-entease and eff icienc ~  , however , with which ill-defined concepts and fuzzy meanings are being intended and expressed by speakers  , id-entified and understood by hearers , and successfully used by speakers/hearers in performing inferences of some-not necessar ilylogical-sort  , it is argued here , that any non-trivial simulation of p rocesses of cognition and/or natural language comprehension will have to pro-v idesome means of dynamic knowledge represent at i on which permits to account more satisfac to rily for one or the other aspect raised above  . 
The concept of ' representation of knowledge' seems lucid enough when talking about memories of sentences  , numbers , or even faces , for one can imagine how to formulate these in terms of propositions  , frames , or semantic networks . But it is much harder to do this for feelings , insights and understandings , with all the attitudes , dispositions , and ' ways of seeing things ' that go with them . 
\[ The term ' disposition ' is used here in its ordinary language sense to mean ' a momentary range of possible behaviours '\]  ) Traditionally , such issues are put aside , with the excuse that we should understand simpler things first  . But what if feelings and viewpoints are the simpler things - the elements of which the others are composed ? Then  , I assert , we should deal with disposi-tions directly , using a ' structural ' approach . . .   ( 2 ) In the present case this has been developed in two stages : the semantic space as a distance -like data structure  , and an algorithm to transform its distance relations to form source-oriented hierarchies of connotative dependency structures  . 
SEMANTIC SPACESTRUCTURE
Theoretical approaches in formal semantics tend to deny a dynamic linguistic meaning structure  , but assume the existence of an external system structure of a world  , o ~ possible worlds , whose pre-formatted entities may referentially be related to language terms constituting their denotation  . Structural approaches in linguistic semantics tend to deny the possibility of denotational  , but presuppose the knowledge ( and comprehension ) of language systems whose semantic relations among their items are being described intra -lingually by means of syntagmatic and paradigmatic oppositions along certain dimensions in semantic fields  . Other than these two , our present way of approach strives to presuppose as little and to reconstruct empirically as much as possible of the relational  ( not necessarily logically reconstructable ) structure that in the course of discourse is constituted by the regular use of language terms as a system of linguistically labeled empirical objects  , called meanings . 
We consider the natural language users'ability to intend and comprehend meanings in verbal interaction a phenomenologically undoubtable  , empirically well established , and theoretically defensible basis for any semantic study of natural language performance  . It is assumed that the usage regularities followed and/or established by employing different lexical items differently for communicative purposes in discourse may be analysed not only to describe the lexical structure of vocabulary items used  , but also to model a fragment of the con-EMPIRICAL APPROACH TO WORDSEM ANTICS FORAN ALOGICAL INFERENCING  321 comitantly conveyed common knowledge or semantic memory structure constituted  . 
This is achieved by an algorithm that takes lemmatized strings of natural language  disc6urse of a certain domain as input and produces as output a distance-like data structure of linguistically labeled points whose positions represent their meanings  . As the statistical means for the empirical analysis of prevailing interdependencies between lexical items in text strings have elsewhere  ( 3 ) been developed and discussed to some extent ( 4 )   9 and as the formal representation of vague word meanings derived from these analyses has previously  ( 5 ) been outlined and illustrated ~ too ( 6 )  , an informal description will suffice here . 
The algorithm applied so far consists of a consecutive mapping of lexical items onto fuzzy subsets of the vocabulary according to the numerically specified statistical regularities and the differences ~ these items have been used within the discourse analysed  . The resulting system of sets of fuzzy subsets may be interpreted topologically as a n-dimensional hyperspace with a natural metric  . Its n linguistically labeled elements ( representing meaning points ) and their mutual distances ( representing meaning differences ) form dis-cernable clouds and clusters ( 7 )  . These determine the overall struc-turedness of a domain by measurable semantic  ( paradigmatic and/or syntagmatic ) properties of the lexical items concerned . 
CONNOTATIVE DEPENDENCYSTRUCTURE
Stimulated by the theory of spreading activation in memory models  ( 8 ) in conjunction with the psyhhological account of language understanding in procedural semantics  ( 9 ) a dynamic meaning representation can be developed of the basis of the prototypical  , but static representations provided by the semantic hyperspace strucure  . This is mchiev-ed by a recursively defined algorithm which has formally been introduced elsewhere  ( Io ) so that it may verbally be described here as a procedure to generate a potential of latent relations among meaning points in the semantic space  . 
In a way9 this procedure reconstructs for this model what recent theories of cognition and language comprehension have introduced in network models of semantic memory : paths of excitation that may be activated from any primed node and which spread along node relating links over the whole network with decreasing intensities  . Compared to the execution of spreading activation processes in network models ~ however  , the present procedure-speaking in model genetical terms-must be considered of prior status  . The semantic hyperspace is not a transitively related network of nodes  , but asymmetrically related data structure of linguistically labeled n-tuples of numerical values  . 
Therefore , priming of any item would immediately activate every other item rendering the process of spreading activation undiscriminating for semantic representation  . So , the new procedure , first , has to establish links between items and evaluate them by processing the database provided in order to let these links eventually serve as directed paths along which possible activation might spread  . 
Operating on the distance-like data of the semantic space  , the al-gorithm's generic procedure will start with any meaning point being primed to determine those two other points  , the sum of distances between which form a triangle of minimum edges ' lengths  . Repeated success-ively for each of these meaning points listed and in turn primed in accordance with this procedure  , particular fragments of the relational structure inherent in the semantic space will be selected depending on the aspect  , i . e . the primed point the algorithm is initially started with  . Working its way through and consuming all labeled points in the space system  , the procedure transforms prevailing similarities of  322 B . B . RiEGER meanings as represented by adjacent points ~o establish a binary  , nonsymmetric , and transitive relation between them ~ It allows for the hierarchical rearrangement of meaning points as nodes under a primed head in the format of a binary tree ~ called connotative dependency structure  ( CDS ) o The process of detection and identification which the algorithm per-formes may be il lust rated in view of at ~? o-  . dimensionel space configuration of 11 points < da , b , c~dge~f~g~h~i , ~ , k > ( Fig . I ) . 
Fig . \] edb " sk
Jgh
Fig . 2///~x ", aebxc3
Fig . 3
Submitted to the search procedure of least triangle under initial priming of the point a the algorithm will identify the number of triangles in Fig  . 2 and produce the binary tree as shown in Fig .  3 . For the effective use in procedural meaning representation and son  , an-tic Drocessing ~ the CDS-trees may additional -lybe evaluated by connotative c ~ iterialities  ( 1o )  . The criteriaiity is a numerical express-ion of the degree or intensity by whicb any COS-node is dependent on the head  ; c % ! cula ~ ed as ~ funhtion both of the involved meaning points ~ topology and their relative distaDc~s in the semantic space ? The head's criteriality being I  . Oo~this value is splitted among every two dependent nodes ~ and consequently decreases from level to level in the tree structure approximating O  . 
Examples of connotative dependency trees are given below where the upper fragments of the COSts of ARBEIT/labour  ( Fig . 4) and INDUSTRIE/industry(Fig .  5 ) are shown as computed from the semantic space shruc-ture derived of a sample of German newspaper texts from the  1964 daily editions of ' DieWelt ' It goes without saying that the generating of CDS-trees is a prerequi-sitto source-oriented search and retrieval procedures which may thus be performed effectively on the semantic space structure  . Given , say ~ the meaning point ARBEIT /! abour to be primed  , and ssay ~ INDUSTRIE/in-dustry as the target point to be searched ~ the COS  ( ARBEIT ) wiT ~ be generated first . It provides semantic dispositions of decreasing lri-teriality under the aspect of ARBEIT in ~ he semantic space data  . Then , the tree will be searches Cb readth-fJrst ) for the target node INDUSTRIE , ! ~ henthisis hit , its dependency path will be activated to backtrack those intermediate nodes which  6otermine the connotative transitions EMPIRICAL APPROACHTO WORDSEM ANTICS FOR ANALOGICAL INFERENCING  323 of INDUSTRIE under the aspect of ARBEIT , namely UNTERNEHMEN/business , STADT/town , ANGEBOT/offer as underlined in Fig .  4 . 
The priming of INDUSTRIE and the targetting of ARBEIT leads to the activation of quite a different dependency path mediating ARBEIT under the aspect of INDUSTRIE  , namely by KENNTNIS/knowledge , ERFAHR/experience , LEIT/control , as underlined in Fig .  5 . 
Fig . 4
I . OOOARBEIT . 086 INDUSTRIE . 169 UNTERNEEM \] iQO ~3 SUCH . 290 STADTJ . 062 SC~EIB . 121 WUNSCH . 059 SCHUL . 558 ANGE ~ . 075 LEHR . 141 VERKEHR . 066 GESCHKFT . 268, GEBIET . O78 VERWALT . 127 EINSATZ . 049 WIRTS CHAFT . 076 BERUF . 151 STELLE . 075 ELEKTRON . 276 AUSG ABEP .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . " I . 065 UNTERRICHT ' ~ . 125 ORGANISAT 1
I . O60 BITTEI~E_: . =~ .  _  . ~ o53 H~'~RSC~T . 088 ALLGEMEIN . 035 MODE . 166 VERBAND . O40AUSL AND . 078 VERANTWORT . 038 FOLGE
Fig . 5
T5 o'o-?~6 6~?E .   .   .   .  "  . 290 ELEKTRON . 150 SCHUL . 130 SCHREIE . 536 SUCHf .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . ! tI . 137 UNTERRICHTI ! . 246 BERUF'Lp .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . ~' H . 1o90 RG~XSATI . 464 LEIT . 283 COMPUTER . 151 FKHIG ?132 SYSTEM . 115 OIPLOM ?181 ERFAHR . 066 KENNTNIS . 075 GEBIET . O75: VERBAND . 073 UNTERNE~M . 067 STADT . 105 BITTE . 032 TECHNIK . 058 STELLE . O51 WUNSCH . 080 AUSGABE . O71 ALLGEMEIN . 068 PERSON . 064 ANGEBOT . 059 VERKEHR . 056 EINSATZ . 035 ARBEIT ~ .   O31 VERANTWORTUsing these source-oriented search and retrieval processes  , anana- , logical , contents-dependent form of inferencing , as opposed so logical deduction , may operationally be devised by way of parallel processing of two ~ or more  ) COS-trees . For this purpose an algorithm is started by the two  ( or more ) meaning premises of , say , ARBEIT and 324B . B . RIEGERINDUSTRIE . Their CDS-trees will be generated before the inferencing procedure begins to work its way  ( breadth-first ) through the trees ' levels , taking highest criterialities first in tagging each encounter-ed node  . When the first node is met which has previously been tagged already  , the search procedure stops to activate the dependency paths from this concluding common node - here  , ORGANISAT/organization-in the CDS-trees concerned  , as illustrated in Fig . 4 and Fig . 5 by dotted lines , separately presented in Fig .  6 . 


ARBEITINDUSTRIE 1 . O . 442 Person Such . 536  . 276 Ausgabe Beruf . 246 /  . 125\[ORGANISATIONJ . 109
Fig . 6
Rieger , B . B . : Preface , in : Rieger , B . B . ( ed . ), Empirical Semantics
I(Brockmeyer , Bochum 1981), II-XIII
Minsky , M . : K-Lines-a theory of memory . MIT-AI-Memo 516 (1979) Rieger , B . : Problemeder automatischen Text analyse und unscharfen Wortsemantik  , in : Krallmann , D . ( ed . ) , Dialog system e und Textver-arbeitung ( LDV-Fittings , Essen198o \] 55-76 Rieger , B . B . : Fuzzy Word Meaning Analysis and Representation in Linguistic Semantics  , Proceedings of COLING8o ( Tokyo198o) , 76-84 Rieger , B . B . : Feasible Fuzzy Semantics . On some problems of how to handle word meanings empirically  , in : Eikmeyer , H . J . /Rieser , H . 
( eds . ), Words , Worlds , and Contexts . New Approaches in Word Semantics ( de Gruyter , Berlin/New York 1981) 193-2o9 Rieger , B . : Unscharfe Wortbedeutungen , in : Hellmann , M . W . ( ed . ) , Ost-West-Wortschat Zvergleich ( Schw an n ~ DUs seldor f ) forthcoming Rieger , B . B . : Clusters in Semantic Space , Delatte ( ed . ) , Actes du Congr #s International Informatique et Sciences Humaines  1981   ( LASLA , Li  #ge ) forthcoming Collins , A . M . /Loftus , E . F . : A spreading activation theory of semantic processing  , Psychological Review 6(1975) 4o7-428 Miller , G . A . /Johnson-Laird , P . N . : Language and Perception ( Univ . 
Press , Cambridge 1976)
Rieger , B . B . : Connotative Dependency Structur qs in Semantic Space  , in : Rieger , B . B . ( ed . ) , Empirical Semantics ! I , ( Brockmeyer , Bochum 1981) 622-71o
