COLING82, J . Horeck . f , ( ed.)
North-Holland Publishing Company
? Academia , 1982
TEST-SCORESEMANTICS
FORNATURALL ANGUAGES
Lotfi A . Zadeh
Computer Science Division
University of California Berk eley  , California

Test-score semantics is based on the premise that almost everything tha t relates to natural languages is a m atter of degree  . Viewed from this perspective , any semantic entity in a natural language  , e . g .   , a predicate , predicate-modifier , proposition , quanti-fier , command , question , etc . may be represented as a system of elastic constraints on a collection of objects or derived objects in a universe of dis-course  . In this sense , test-score semantics may be viewed as a generalization of truth-con ditional  , possible-world and model-the oretic semantics  , but its expressive power is subst antially greater  . 

Test-score semantics represents a break w ith the traditional approaches to seman-tics in that it is based on the premise that almost everything tha t relates to natural languages is a matter of degree  . The acceptance of this premise entails an abandonment of bivalent logical systems as a basis for the analysis of n atural languages and suggests the adoption o ffuzzy logic  ( Zadeh ( 1975 )  , Bellman and Zadeh (1977) , Zadeh ( 1979 ) ) as the basic conceptual framework f o r d e a l i n g w i t h n a t u r a l languages  . 
In fuzzy logic , as in natural languages , almost everything is a matter of degree  . 
To put it metaphorically , the use of fuz Tylogic may be likened t owriting with aspray-can  , rather than with a ball-point pen  . Thespray-can , however , has an adjustable or if ice , so that one may write , if need be , as finely as with a ball-point pen  . Thus , a commitment to fuzzy logic does not preclude the use of a biva-lent logic when i t is appropriate to do so  . In effect , such a con~itment merely provides a language theorist with a much more fl exible framework for dealing with natural languages and  , especially , for representing meaning , knowledge and strength of belief . 
An acid test of the effectiveness o fame aning-representation system is its ability to provide a basis for inference from premises expressed in a natural language  . 
In this regard , an indication of the capabilit y of test-score semantics is provided by the following examples  , in which the premises appear above the line and the question which may be answered is stated below it  . 
(a ) During much . of the past decade Patearned far more than al l of h is close friends put together How much did Patearn during the past decade ?  ( b ) Most tall men are not fat
Many fatmen are bald
Bigist all and fat
How many big men are bald ? ( c ) If X is large then it is not likely t hat Y is small If X is not very large " then it is very likely that Y is la rg e 
X is not large
How likely is it that Y is more or less small ? In fuzzy logic  , the answer to a question is , in general , a possibility distribution ( Zadeh ( 1978 ) ) . For example , in the case of ( a ) the answer would be a possibility dis tribution in the universe of real numbers which associates with each number u the possibility  , ~( u ) , o ~( u ) ~ I , that u could be the cumulative in come of Pat given  ( i ) the premise , and ( ii ) the information resident in a database  . 
In test-score semantics , a semantic entity such as a proposit ion  , predicate , predi-cate-modifier , quantifier , qualifier , command , question , etc .   , is represented as a system of elastic co nstraints on a collection of o bjects or derived objects in a universe of discourse  . Simple examples of semantic entities whose meaning can be represented in this manner are the following : I  . Ancahasayoungson . ( Proposition .  ) 2 . When Danistire dortense , he smokes a lot . ( Conditional proposition .  ) 3 . It is not quite true that John has ve ryfew close friends  .   ( Truth-qualified propositio n  .  ) 4 . It is very likely that Marie will become wellknown  .   ( Probability-qualified prop osition  .  ) 5 . It is almost impossible for Manuel to be unkind  .   ( Possibility-qualified prop osition  .  ) 6 . Expensive car . ( Fuzzy predicate .  ) 7 . Very . ( Modifier)8 . Several large apples . ( Second-order fuzzy predicate .  ) 9 . More or less . ( Modifier/Fuzzifier . ) I0 . Not very true . ( Qualifier . ) II . Very unlikely . ( Qualifier ) 12 . Much taller than most . ( Fuzzy predicate .  ) 13 . Bringme several large apples . ( Fuzzy command . ) 14 . /Who are Edie's close friends . ( Question . ) Although t e s t - s c o r e semantics has a much g r e a t e r expressive power than the meaning-r e p r e s e n t a t i o n systems based on p r e d i c a t e  , modal and intensional logics , its expressiveness is attained at the cost of down playing  , if not entirely severing , the connection between syntax and semantics . In particular , the homomorphic connection between syntax and semantics which plays a central role in Montague semantics  ( Montague ( 1974 )  , Partee ( 1976 ) and attributed grammars for programming languages  ( Knuth ( 1968 ) ) , plays a much lesser role in test-s core semantics - a role represented in the main by a collection of local tra nslation rules governing the use of modi-fiers  , qualifiers , quantifiers and connectives . In effect , the downplaying of the connection between syntax and semantics in test-score semantics r eflects our belief that  , in the case of natural languages , the connection is far too complex and far too fuzzy to be amenable to an elegant mathematical formulation in the sty le of Montague semantics  , except for very small fragments of natu rall anguages in which the connection can be formulated and exploited  . 
The conceptual framework of test-score semantics is closely related to th at of PRUF  ( Zadeh ( 1978 ) ) , which is a meaning-representation system in which an essential use is made of possib lity theory  ( Zadeh ( 1978 ) )- a t h e o r y which i s d i s t i n c t from the b i v a l e n t t h e o r i e s o f p o s s i b i l i t y r e l a t e d to modal l o g i c and p o s s i b l e - w o r l d semantics  ( Cress well ( 1973 )  , Rescher (1975)) . 
In effect , the basic idea underlying both PRUF and test-score semantics is that most of the imprecision and lack of specific it y which is intrinsic in naturalla n-guages is possibilistic rath er than probabilistic in natur e  , and hence that possi-TEST-SCORE SEMANTIC SFORNA TURALL ANGUAGES  421 bility theory and fuzzy logic provide a more appropriate framework for dealing with natural languages than the traditional logical systems in which there are nogra-dations for truth  , membership and belief , and no tools for coming to grips with vagueness , fuzziness and randomness . 
In what follows , we shall sketch some of the main ideas underlying test-score semantics and illustrate them with simple examples  . A more detailed exposition and additional examples may be found in Zadeh  ( 1981 )  . 
BASICASPECTSOFTEST-SCORESEMANTICS
As was stated earlier , the point of departure in test-score semantics is the assumption that any semantic entity may be represented as a system of elastic constraints on a collection of objects or derived objects in a universe of discourse  . 
Assuming that each object may be characterized by one or more fuzzy relations  , the collection of objects in a universe of discourse may be identified with a collection of relations which constitute a fuzzv relational database or  . equivalently , a state description ( Carnap (1952)) . In this database , then , a derived ' object would be characterized by one or more fuzzy relations which are derived from other relations in the database by operations expressed in an appropriate relation-manipulating language  . 
In more concrete terms , let SE denote a semantic entity , e . g . , the proposition p 4 During much of the past decade Patearned far more than all of his close friends put together  , whose meaning we wish to represent . To this end , we must ( a ) identify the constraints which are implicit or explicit in SE  ;   ( b ) describe the tests which must be performed to ascertain the degree to which each constraint is satisfied  ; and ( c ) specify the manner in which the degrees in question or  , equivalently , the partial test scores are to be aggregated to yield an overall test score  . In general , the overall test score would be represented as a vector whose components are numbers in the unit interval or  , more generally , possibility/probability distributions over this interval  . 
Spelled out in greater detail , the process of meaning-representation in test -score semantics involves three distinct phases  . In Phase 1 , an explanatory database frame or EDF , for short , is constructed . EDF consists of a collection of relational frames each of which specifies the name of a relation  , the names of its attributes and their respective domains  , with the understanding that the meaning of each relation in EDF is known to the addressee of the meaning-representation process  . Thus , the choice of EDF is not unique and is strongly influenced by the de-sideratum of explanatory effectiveness as well as by the assumption made regarding the knowledge profile of the addressee of the meaning-representation process  . For example , in the case of the proposition p 4 During much of the past decade Pat-----earned far more than all of his close friends put together  , the EDF might consist ---7----- - - - - - of the relational frames FRIEND [ Namel ; Name 2 ; p ] , where p is the degree . to which Name 1 is a friend of Name 2 ; INCOME [ Name ; Income ; Year ] , where Income is the income of Name in year Year , counting backward from the present ; MUCH [ Proportion ;  ~1 , wherein is the degree to which a numerical value of Proportion fits the meaning of much in the context of p  ; and FAR . MORE [ Numberl ; Number 2; P] . in which p is the degree to which Number1 fits the description far more in relation to Number P  . In effect , the composition of EDF is determined by the information that is needed for an assessment of the compatibility of the given SE with any designated object or  , more generally , a specified state of affairs in the universe of discourse  . 
In Phase 2 , a test procedure is constructed which upon application to an explan-atory database-that is  , an instantiation of EDF-yields the test scores , 428 L . A . ZADEH

bv the 3Tn , which represent the degrees to which the elastic constraints induced constituents of SE are satisfied  . For example , in the case of p' , the test ppocedure would yield the test scores for the constraints induced by close friend  ,  @ , far more , etc . -- In Phase 3 , the partial test scores obtained in Phase 2 are aggregated into an overall test score , T , which serves as a measure of the compatibility of SE with ED  , the explanatory database . As was stated earlier , the components of T are numbers in the unit interval or  , more generally , possibility/probability distributions over this interval  . In particular , when the semantic entity is a proposition , p , and the overall test score , T , is a scalar , ' I may be interpreted as the truth of p relative to ED or  , equivalently , as the possibility of ED given p . In this interpretation , then , the classical truth conditional semantics may be viewed as a special case of test-score semantics which results when the constraints induced by p are inelastic and the overall test score is allowed to be only pass or fail--The test procedure which yields the overall test score T is interpreted as the meaning of SE  . 
To illustrate the phases in question , we shall consider a few simple examples ( a ) SE4 Ellen resides in a'small city near Oslo . 
In this case , EDF is assumed to comprise the following relational frames  ( + stands for union ) :
EDF4 RESIDENCE[Name ; City . Name ] +
POPULATION [ City . Name ; Population ] +
SMALL [ Population ; PI+
NEAR [ City . Namel ; City . Name 2; lo]
In RESIDENCE , City . Name is the name of the city in which Name resides  ; in POPULA-TION , Population is the number of residents in City . Name ; in SMALL , P is the degree to which a city with a population equal to the value of Population is small  ; and in NEAR , P is the degree to which City . Namelis near City . NameZ . 
The test procedure which leads to the overall test score T--and thus represents the meaning of SE - is described below  . In this procedure , Steps 1 and 2 involve the determination of the value of an attribute given the values of other attributes  ; Steps 3 and 4 involve the testing of constraints ; and Step 5 involves an aggregation of the partial test scores into the overall test score T  . 
1. Find the name of the residence of Ellen :
RE ! c , tyRameRESIDENCEIName=Ellen]which means that the value of Name is set to Ellen and the value of City  . Name is read , yielding RE , the residence of Ellen . 
2 . Find the population of the residence of Ellen : n PRE = Population PDPULATION [ City  . Name = RE ] 3 . Test the constraint induced by SMALL : r , guSMALLIPopulation=RE]where ~ ~ denotes the resulting test score  . 
4. Test the constraint induced by NEAR :
T2=uNEAR[City . Name = Oslo ; City . Name 2 = RE ] 5 . Aggregate ~~ and T2:
T = T1, . T2 where A stands form in in in infix position , and T is the overall test score . This'TEST-SCORESEM ANTICS FIC SFORN ALLANG UAGES 429 mode of aggregation implies that , in SE , the denotation of conjunction is taken to be the Cartesian product of the denotations of the conjuncts  ( Zadeh ( 1981 ) ) . 
( b ) SEADuring much of the past decade Patearned far more than all of his close friends put together  . 
In this case , we shall employ the EDF described earlier , that is:
EDF2 INCOME[Name;Year;Amount]+
FRIEND [ Namel ; Name 2;u ] +
FAR . MORE [ Numberl ; Number P ; n ] +
MUCH [ Proportion ; u]
The test procedure comprises the following steps :   1  . Find the fuzzy set of Pat's friends:
F P4 Namelx nFRIEND [ Name2 = Pat ] in which the left subscript Namel xu signifies that the relation FRIEND [ NameP = Pat] is projected on the domain of the attributes  Name1 and u , yielding the fuzzy set of friends of Pat . 
2. Intensify FP to account for the modifier .*:
CFP 4   FP2 in which FP * denotes the fuzzy set which results from squaring the grade of membership of each component of FP  . The assumption underlying this step is that the fuzzy set of close friends of Pat may be derived from that of friends of Patby in-tensification  . 
3 . Find the fuzzy multiset of incomes of close friends of Patinyear 
Year ;, i = l , . . . , lO:
ICFP .  4  , Amount INCOMEIName=CFP ; Year = Yeari ] In stipulating that the right hand member be treated as a fuzzy multiset  , we imply that the identical elements should not be combined  , as they would be in the case of a fuzzy set . With this understanding , ICFPi will be of the general form
ICFP i = 6,/e1+6,/e+...+6,/em.
where el , . . . , em are the incomes of Name . . . , Name 1'm , respectively , in Year . , and sl , . . . , , m6 are the grades of membership of Name , ; . -, Namem in the fuzzy set of close friends of Pat . 
4 . Find the total in come of close friends of Pat in Yeari  , i = l; . ., 10:
TICFP i = 6, el + . . . +  6 emm which represents a weighted arithmetic in Yeari  . 
5. FindPat's income in Yeari:
IPi4AmountINCOME[Name=Pat ; 6 . Test the constraint induced sum of the incomes of close friends of Pat 

by FAR . MORE : ri$pFAR . MOREINumberl = IPi ; Nurnber2 = TICFPi ] 7 . Find the sigma-count ( Zadeh ( 1981 ) ) of years during which Pat's income was far . greater than the total income of all of his close friends : ciq '  . ; , 430L . A . ZA DE Ha . Test the constraint induced by MUCH :
TePMUCH [ Proportion = C] '16 where T represents the overall test score . 
The two examples described above are intended merely to provide a roughout line of the meaning -representation process in test-score semantics  . A more detailed exposition of some of the related issues may be found in Zadeh  ( 1978 ) and Zadeh ( 1981 ) ' Research supported in part by the NSF Grants MCS79-06543 and IST-801896  . 
REFERENCES AND RELATED LITERATURE 1.








Bellman , R . E . and Zadeh , L . A . , Local and Fuzzy Logics , in : Modern Uses of Multiple-Valued Logic Epstein  , G . , ( ed . ) . Dordrecht : ( D . Reidel 103-165, 1977) . 
Carnap , R . , Meaning and Necessity ( University of Chicago Press ,  1952) . 
Cresswell , M . J . , Logics and Languages ( London : Methuen , 1973) . 
Knuth , D . , Semantics of contextfree languages , Mathematical Systems Theory 2 (1968) 127-145 . .
Lambert , K . and van Fraassen , 8 . C . , Meaning Relations , Possible Objects and Possible World & Philosophical Problems in Logic  ( 1970 ) l-19 . 
Montague , R . , Formal Philosophy , in : Selected Papers , Thomason , R . ,(ed . ) . 
New Haven : ( Yale University Press , '974).
Partee , B . , Montague Grammar ( New York : Academic Press ,  1976) . 
Rescher , N ., Theory of Possibility
Rieger , B . , Feasible fuzzy semantics , Words , Worlds and Contexts (1981) 193-209 . 
10 . Zadeh , L . A . , Fuzzy logic and approximate reasoning , Synthese 30 (1975) 407-428 . 
11 . Zadeh , L . A . , A theory of approximate reasoning , in : Electronics Research Laboratory Memorandum M77/58  , University of California , Berkeley ,  1977 . Also Machine Intelligence 9, Hayes , J . E . , Michie , M . and Kulich , L . I . , ( eds . ) . 
k & York : ( Wiley , 149-194, 1979).
12 . Zadeh , L . A . , Fuzzy sets as a basis for a theory of possibility  , Fuzzy Sets and Systems 1 (1978) 328 . 
13 . Zadeh , L . A . , PRUF--a meaning representation language for natural languages  , Int . J . Man-Machine Studies 10 (1978) 395-460 . 
14 . Zadeh , L . A . , Test-score semantics for natural languages and meaning-represen-tation via PRUF  , Tech . Note 247 , AICenter , SRI International , Menlo Park , 
CA ., 1981.
