ALOGIC-ORI~TEDATN
Grammar Knowledge as Part of the System's Knowledge 
Helmet Gust , Carola Reddig
Institut of Applied Cemputer Science , Technical
University of Berlin ( West) , Ku~f~rstendgmm 202 , D-IO00 Berlin Theey stem BACON ( Berlin Autcmatle COnstruction for semantic Networks  ) is an experimental intelligent qaestion- -answer lng system with a nataralla ~ uage interface based on single sentence input  1  . 
BEAST 1
SIRENI

Figure I : Structure of the BACON-system 1 This system has been developed in the project " Auto-matise he Erstellung eemantischer Hetze "   ( Automatic construct-ion of emantic networks ) at the Institute of Applied Compuger Scienoe at the Technical University of Berlin  . The pro~eet was supported by the Ministry for Science and Technology  ( BMFT ) of the Federal Republic of German ~ . 

Explanations of the s~stems structure : BEAST -" B Erl in Automatic Semantic oriented Trans lation " is the language understanding component  2 SIREN - " Semantic RE presentation and Neteva luator " is the knowledge base management component BACK-performs there translat ion of the semantic represen-tation into natural language to check correctness of unders tanding ANSGEN-"ANS werGEN erator " translates the system?s react-ions into natural language MSRL -" Modal Semantic Representation Language " is the representation language of the BACON -system and therefore the center of the whole system ? The syntax of MSRL is reou ~ sivly def ined following the principles of common logical languages ? The basic  ( finite ) set of operators is derided into two disjo int subsets : - tel~m ~ ers are operators which describe objects of the world of discal rse  . They include the term variables . 
-formel makers describe the relations between these objects  , between formulas or between objects and fol~u las ? An operator with its  ( possibly empty ) list of argmnents constitutes a well formed MSRL-expression  . 
A very important concept of MSRL is the concept of sorts  . 
The set of sorts ( proper names of sorts ) induces a partition of the set of terms . A partial ordering called " compatibil ity of sorts " induces a lattice str-c ture on the set of sorts ? By assigning a li st of s or ts  ( one sort for each argument place ) called " sortal pattern " to each operator we get additional semantic constraints for MSRL expressions  , Theoonstructlon of the sortal pattern of an operator is based  2 An earlier implementation of this component has been presented at COLING  78: Habel/Rolllnger/Schmidt : " Machine translation of natural language into a modal representation language "  . 
-  117 -- on knowledge about the world of discourse . It determines the semantic category of the operator's arguments  . The process of the assignment of meaning by BEAST is based on the corral classification of terms and the corral pattern of the operator  . 
This process performs a semantically correct assignment between the operator constituting the sentence and ~ he terms being able to become arguments  . 
There have been some unaerlying principles / conditions which affected the special ATN formalism in BEAST :  1  . BF~ST should emphasize a semantical analysis which con-stitutes the relationship between the natural language sentence and Its meaning representation  . The aim is the creation of a MSRL expression that represents the meaning of the input sentence  . 
2 . The Ex~mmar component should follow the " pr inciple of minimal information "- The process of translation tries to get along With as little information as possible  . Only if that does not work , more ( not only explicate but also ? implici t  ) Information contained in the sentence need to be discovered  . 
3 . The ATN had to be pr0Ex~nmed in SXMULA since the rest of the system al ready existed in SXMULA  . 
Our AT~formalism is founded on the formalism developed by Woods  , uses ideas of the semantic ATSs and takes the des-cribed principles into account by some modifications  , extent-ions and constraints . 
We use an ATN compiling system which tranala tesin a first step the ATN representation of the g~a~mar into a SIMU ULA program  , and in a second step this 3XMULA represent at-ion together with the other components Is translated into an executable machine proE~aa  . 
The main feature5 of these AT~s are s-they use In addition to syntactic categories semantic categories and constituents -  118 -- that use semantic constraints to select the best pass through the network - and they c reate semantic representations  . 
The fo ~ aaliem supports the treatment of alte rnatives at both sides : at the  sour0~   . lan~uaRe by the possibility of alternat ive categories for the entries in the word form lexicon  , and at the target language where alternat ives relat-ed to a lemma refer to diffe rent sortal patterns of operators  . 
, R,qLItor
I~r ~ lk conditions

E .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . I@tIA~-BaSllL~sten , str~ng~l ~
Figure 2: ATN compiling system
The focus of our interest in future development is an integration of the ATN formali ~ nata h igher level  , namely the level of the representation language MSRL itself  , instead of level of the programming language SY ~ULA  . For this purpose MSRL has to be extended to represent procedural struct ~ ee like A~Ns  . The mainthing is that these structures are normal MSRL expressions  , and therefore on the one hand they are manage ble by the knowledge base  ( storable and retrievable ) but on the other hand they are also evaluab le  . Starting from the fact that the aTN represents the grammatical knowledge of the system we have the ability to handle this knowledge-  119 -Just like the knowledge about the world of disoour sezto ask questions about it and to modify It  . 
In the same way we can represent the lexical knowledge in terms of the representation language  . Together with the extension described above there will ' be the possibility to hand leprooedul ' al lexical knowledge  , especially in the case of ATHs to link a word in the lexicon with as UbATH which has the task to perform the next part of the an a lys is when-triggered by the occu  . rance of this word in the natural language sentence  . 
In ou~lecture we will carry out the fol lowing points : - the description of the ATN fomalism in BEAST-the projected extens ions of MSRL-the consequences of these extens ions on the system oone ept  . 

