DEVEL OPING THE COMMENT ATOR , A COMPUTERSYSTEMSIMULATING
VERBAL PRODUCTION
Nilan Bily , Bengt Sigurd
Department of Linguistics , University of Lund , Sweden
The project " COMMENTATOR " at the department of general linguistics at the university o fL und is intended to test ideas about language production  . The system implemented in BASIC on the ABC80 micro-computer generates a scene on them on i to r where two persons  , Adam and Eve , move randomly around a gate . Not only the present positions of Adam and Eve are shown on the screen but even the posit ions before the last Jump  . This setting is also used for elicit ing comments from human subjects  . The moves are generated randomly but the oper-a tor can choose the length of the Jumps  . The initial place-ment of Adam and Eve can be determined by the operator  , as well as the instructions for the mach ine concerning the focus of attention  ( Adamor Eve ) and the primary goal of the actors ( the gate or the other actor )   . On the operator's command the computer p roduces a set of written comments on the deve lopment of the scene  . COM~ENTATOR is a research tool , and does not use any ready made sentences describ ing for seable situations  . 
The system works as follows : From the primary information  ( the coordinates of the gate and the two actors ) some more complex values are derived ( distances , relations " to left " , " to right " etc .  )  . The conditions for using abstract pred icates equivalent to " to left " etc  . in the given situation are tested accoM in 6 to a question menu . This results in positive or negative abstract sentences  . The abstract sentence constituents - 42 -are ordered as sub . leers , predicates , andoh , leers . Connective elements , such as " also " , " either " , " yet " , are added If possib-le . These connect the last proposition to the previous ones  . 
Proper names p pronouns , or other NPs are chosen on the basis of refe rence relations to the preceding proposit ion  . The abstract propositions are substitu ted by surface phrases and words  . The assembled structure is printed .   ( For a more extens-ive description of the program and one version of t~eprepare itsel fsee Sigurd  1980  . ) The text produced by COMMENTATOR may look l i ke this : Eva ~ rtill h ~ gerom Adam  . ( Eve is to the right of Adam . ) Henartill vans teromhenne . ( HeIsto the left of her . ) Hen ~ rtill vanster omport encoke S . ( He is to ~ he left of the gate , too . ) Henn ~ zmarslg den . ( He is approaching it . ) Henn ~ u ~ na ~ sig Evacoke & . ( He is approaching ~ re , too . ) Hen~rn~rmast portendock . ( Lit . She is closest to the gate , however . ) Hen ~ rinten ~ raden . ( She is not close to it . ) Adam ~ rlnten ~ radenheller . ( Adam is not close to it , either .  )

COMMIE is a semantically and psychollngulstl cally more advanced program  , which is intended to overcome certain short -comlngs experienced with the original COMMENTATOR  . This more complex pro~am generates a more sophis ticated and more dynamic stimulus includ ing more objects and persons on the scene and the vocabulary is about ten times larger  . COMMIE is to produce human-like texts . One important task is to avoid unnecessary redundancies  . The commentaries produced have to be based on re levant changes of the scene and they must avoid repetitions  , including information implied by previous utterances  . ( g . g .   , " Adam is to the left of Eve " implies " Eve is to the right of Adam "  , etc .   ) Not all propositions that ere not true in the given  . moment deserve to be mentioned , either . Negated state -- 43 -ments are meaningful only as answers to expectations evoked by the  pre~ou8 context . ( E . g . , " Bertilischasing Eve . He is not ver ~ near her yet , however . " but not l " Bertilisch as in KE ve . Neither of them is in the . upperriEht corner " .   ) All information about the world of the ~ V screen is stored in a two-d~nensione ? array as mi ~ L-thou Khte-two-place predications that are either true or false at the given moment  . 
Yorgett ln8 is s~nulated by 8radu~l ly letting the contents of the array pass a horizon of forgetting  . In a future version the basic contents may be stored in &  lon8 term memory . The p~ed?cations of the array serve 88 inputs for generati ~ complex semantic structu ~ res  , which are inputs to the production of commentaries proper  . Referring in OOU~IE is to be based on the theory of FSP  . By computiz ~" de ~ rees of ~ Lveness " , its ho Uld be able to cope with even such problems as the difference between thematic pronominal vs  . thematic zero subjects in Sla3~o langus Kes generally or the enclitio vs . full forms of oblique pronominal cases in West Slavicle ~ gue ~ es etc  . (CfeBily1981a , Chapter Three .   ) The deep structures are to be " un ivers8~" enough to allow generation of comments ~ es in several ' lan~ae ~ es  . 
COMMIE will also have more sophisticated conditions for the use of the two-place pred icates  . Instead of , e . g .   , purely geometrically defined condit ions for " X is to the left of Y " to be t rue  , a certain limit is put on the allowed ver tical distance  . The limit seems to be a function of the si ze of X and ?  , the size of the referential frame and the focus of attention  . ( Cf . Bily 1981b )
Other versions in preparation
A version producl nE spoken comments using VOTRAX speech synthesizer or more advanced technique ie being planned  . As the COM~NTATOR has perfect control of the steps in the produat-ion of comments  , it should be able to produce better prosody than ordinary text-to-speech systems  ( e . g . Carlsonet 81 . 
- 44 -1981) . Contractive accents can be derived as the system knows if a comment is in contrast wi thap recidAng statement  , Accents based on syntactic structure can be derived Am the syntactic structure of the comments if prefectly known  , A system which can comment on as parbitrary scene where persons and things appear  , 8 ctions and event stake p~ace , would demand pattern recognition , which is a difficult problem . 
0 nly as meA1 scale system is being planned . It requires a flexible question menu , where " relevant questions are produced success ively  , Beginning comments on such a scene would be something like this : " There is something at the left upper corner  . Zt moves . Now something turns up at the right upper corner  . It looks like as hip . Both objects move fast towards the centre . " Such comment suggest applications as the auto-matioradar  0ommen~ator   , but so far such practical applAoat-ions have been little considered  . It is , however , envisaged that verbal comments on events produced by computers will be oon unon in the future world of robots  . 
Bibliography:
Blly , M .   ( 1981a ) : " Zntrao entential I>z'o no ~ Lnalizat?on and Functional Sentence Perspective  ( in Czech , Russian , and English ) " , Lund 81 avonic Monographs 1 , UnAversity of
Lund (1981b ) : " Experience with COMMENTATOR , a Computer Systa~n Simulating Verbal Behsviou ~"  , in Lien , E ? ( ed ? ) " DeNor-diske Dataling vietik kdagene1981" , p . 39-46 Carlson, . R . et al .   ( 1981 ) : " A Multi-Language Portable Text-to-- Speech System for the Disabled "  , Journal of Biomedice A
Engineering 1981:3
Sigttrd , B . (1980): " C0~TATOR . A Computer System Simulating Verbal Behaviou . r ", Dept . of Linguistics , University of
Lund , . mimeographed-45-
