GRAM MATICANDS ~ ANTICNOR MATIVITY OFLIN GUISTIC UNITS 
AND FEATCRES ASA FACTOROF AUTOMATICTEXT PROCESSING 
Z.M . Shalyap In a
Instl tutvostokove denA ~ aAN 333R,
ul . ~ danova12 , 103777 Mosk va GSP , SSSR All systems of automatic text processing are explicitly or implicitly based on two general linguistic ~ ssumptlons : the assumption o ~ grammatioallty of the texts processed  , and the assumption of their meaningfulness . These assumptions , however , cannot be considered as absolute laws : It is not un-oommon that a text  , thongh acceptable to most speakers of the corresponding language  , still contains some morpholoEic and/or syntactic l ngrammatl calitles or cannot be completely Interpreted In terms of " standard " semantics  ; and conversely , start lng from an acceptable ( meaningful ) semantic structure one may as often as not fail to find fully " grammatical " language means that could express thls structure wlth absolute accuracy  ( one of the usual translation difficulties )  . Thls As due , f~om our point of view , not only to Incompleteness of linguistic and extrall ngulst lc knowledge of separate people or to Imperfections In the corresponding formal models  , but also to the following two fundamental principles of Ilnguls-tic performance : I  ) a large number of ~ equl rementa on lexico -gremmatic  ( superficial ) manifestation of natural language texts , and on their semantic Interpretation , are relative In that they characterize certain manifestations or Interpretations as more or less normative  ( preferable ) in the given conditions , rather than obligatory vs . In admissible In the absolute sense ;  - 255 -2 ) the interaction between the requirements of grammat-Ical and semantic normativlty of texts adheres to a so ~ of ~ om Dlementarlt  , 7 principle : if the basic meaning of a text fragment is supposed by Its author to be sufficiently transparent or known a prlori to the text addressee  , the grammatlc-allty requirement for this fragment *s surface manifestation may be somewhats lackened  ; if on the contrary , the author believes the text to contain much Important Information new to the addressee  , the language rules used in composing its surface manifestation are apt to be as standard and rigid as possible  . 
In this presentation we Intend to describe one Way of incorporating the above principles in the design of the analysis and synthes is  ( generation ) components of an automat-
Ic translation system.
The general structure of the system viewed from this standpoint Is planned to be as follows  . 
The major pertoff actual linguistic Anformatlon Is formulated in the system regardless of the tasks of analysis or synthesis  . It is shaped principally as a set of descript-ive rules arranged into dictionary and grammar according to the socalled lexlco ~ a phlc principle and classified into two maln types : the context -representation rules making up the contextual dictionary and grammar component  , and the context--contrast lvs rules forming the Inter-contextual grammar  . 
The rules of both types describe the possible superficial manifestations and semantic Interpretations for elementary potential components of text structure  . The kind of text structure serving as the po int of reference for this descript- ion  18 defined in our model at the language-sign ( LS ) level , based primarily on the Saussurian concept ion of linguistic sign and roughly cor responding to the level of N  . Chomsky's deep structures . 
The context-representation rules proceeding from th  l8 type of structure specify the contextual functioning of -  256 -language unite and features Isolated at the LS-level  , by relating them to their associated mani festations end Intex--pretatAons?F~sentlal ly  , they amount to statements of the following pattern : " If the I~S-structure of stext contains scertain unit or feature XA na certain contextual position  , thAs unit or feature can be superficial l ymanifested  ( reap . 
semantically Interpreted ) In this text through the use of expression means ? Creep  . of meaning constituent Z ) ? ~ The above principle of " relativity " As Ancorpor~ted In these rules by supplementing each of them by Its priority coeffic ient showing the degree of Its nor ~ ativ Ity  . In con-trast to mar~7 other " preferential " linguistic models we emphasize the linguistic signifi cance of these coefficients which  , An our vAs w , must be derived primarily from the Inter- play of synonymy and homony ~ as phenomena Inherent In natural language  . With our linguistic description centered as ItIs around the notion of linguistic sign In the Seussurian sense  , It Is possible to evaluate these phenomena , as well as the priority coefficients r ~ qulred ~ In terms of statistical data bearing on the occurrence rate  ( relative f ~ equenc ~ ) of vlla'ious specific mstulfest attons and Interpretations of each LS-struotu ~ e among the iralternatives  . 
The context-contrsstlve rules Anplement he " relativity " principle even more Immediately  . Their general pattern is : " If a fragment of the L$-structure of ? text has several a lternative manifestations  ( r ~ sp . Interpretations ) differing An a certain characteristi csY  , preference should be given , all things being equal , to the alternative where the value of YAs related to the values of the same variable for the other altex ~ aatives An a definite wa ~"  . In terms of such rules one can stats all those particulars of the surface and/or semantic arrangement of natural language texts  ( or of a special t ~ p e of texts ) whAoh involve a kind of overall stylistic comparison  , rather than the properties of Individual l inguistic units and structural features  . 

The descriptive part of the system is made operational by means of special control components acting as " planners " of the ana lysis and Synthesis processes  . One of the main tasks of these components with in the framework outlined consists in grad ing the alternatives obtained from process ing separate text fragments  , as more or less p~omisln ~ for accomplishing ? the analysis  ( rasp . synthesis ) of the whole text , this gradat-I on based , among other things , on the priority coefficients of the ru les used to form  ( or check ) different aiternattvesj and on the in ter relation between these rules with respect to the grammar and semantics " complementarity " principle  . In as much as this aspect of processing Is concerned  , the approach accepted makes It possible to re -lnterpret the wellknown idea of " analysis through synthesis " and " synthesis through analy -sis " from the " normet lvlty " angle of vlew  . Thus , for analysis one can reduce this Idea to a formalization of the followlngllne of reasoning  ( quits popular with translators or people somehow concerned with texts In foreign languages  ) : " Express-ion X in the text at hand cannot mean Y because had the author meant Y he would have much rather used expression Z "  . 
Apart from affording better processing accuracy and efficiency  , explicit introduction of data on normat lvlty and preferability of linguistic unite and features throughout all the major components of a text processing system  , and drawing on statistical character is tics of LS-units " contextual mani-festa tions and interpretations as the controll ing factor In selecting the more " promising " among the alternative routes of processing concrete texts  , seems to have one more asset . 
Name \] y , possibilities are opened up for automat ically perfect-?r ~ the system's function ing when required  , and tailoring It to different texts ty les  , by way of modifying the priority
I coefficients of the linguistic rules Involved  , directly from the current results of the system's operation  . 

