COLING82, J . Horeck2) ( ed.)
North-Holland Publishing Company
? Academia , 1982
PROCESSLNGOFSENTENCES WITHINTRA-SENTENTIAL CODE -SWITCHINGi 
Aravind K . Joshi
Depar~snent of Computer and Information Science
R .268 Moore School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104
Speakers of certain bilingual communities systematically produce utterances in which they switch from one language to another  , suggesting that the two language systems syst ~matically interact with each other in the production  ( and reoognitlon ) of these sentences . We have investigated this phenomenon in a formal or computational framework which consists of two gramnatical systems and a mechanism for switching between the two systems  . A variety of constraints apparent in these sentences are then explained in terms of constraints on the switching mechanism  , especially , those on closed class items . 
I . INTRODUCTION
Speakers of certain bilingual cc~nunities systematically produce utterances in which they switch from one language to another  ( called codeswitching )  , possibly several times , in the course of an utterance . Production and comprehension of utterances with intr ~ sentential codeswitching is part of the linguistice ompe-te noe of the speakers and hearers of the secc~nunities  . Much of the work on codeswitching is in the sociolinguistic framework and also at the discourse level  . Recently ther ~ have been few studies of codeswitching within the scope of a single sentence  . ( See Sridhar (1980) for a good review , also Pfaff (1979)) . 
Also until recently , this phenomenon has not been studio4 in a formal or computa-tior ~ . l framework . ( See Sankoff and Poplack (1980) , Woolford (1980) , Joshi (1980) , and boron (1981) . Space does not permit a detailed comparison .   ) The discourse level of codeswitching is important  , however , it is only at the intrasentential level that we are able to observe with some certainty  , the interaction between two Erammatical systems . These interactions , to the extent they can be systematically characterized  , provide a nice framework for investigating some processing issues both fran the generation and parsing points of view  . 
There are some important charscteristios of intrasentential codeswitching which give hope for the kind of work described here  . These are as follows , i . The situation which we are concerned with involves participants who are about equally fluent in both languages  .  2 . Participants have fairly consistent judgements about the " acceptability " of mixed sentences  .   ( In fact it is amazing that participants have such acceptability judgements at all  .  ) 3 . Mixed utterances are spoken without hesitation , paus . es , repetitions , corrections , etc .   , suggesting that intrasentential codeswitching is not some random interference of one system with the other  . Rather , the switches seem to be due to systematic interactions between the two systems  .  4 . The twol~age systems seem to be simultaneously active  .  5 . Intr~sentential codeswitching is sharply distinguished from other interferences such as borrowing  , learned use of foreign words , filling lexical gaps ,  . etc , all of which could be exhibited by monolingual speakers  .  6 . Despite extensive intrasentential switching , speakers and hear ~ reusually agree on which language the mixed sentence is " ocraing from "  . We call this language the matrix ~ s and the other language the embedded l~e  . These interesting charac-of the mixed sentences suggest that the two language systems are syste -matically interacting with each other in the production  ( and recognition ) of the mixed sentences . 
Our main objectives in this paper are ( i ) to formulate a system in terms of the grammars of the two languages and a switching rule  ,   ( 2 ) to show that a variety of observable constraints on intrasentential cede-switching can be formulated in terms of constmaints on the switching rule  . The main result of this paper is that a largent m % ber of constraints can be derived from a general constraint on the switchability of the socalled closed class items  ( determinizers , quantifiers , prepositions , tense morphemes , auxilliaries ~ helping verbs , complementizers , pronouns , etc .  ) . This result is of interest because the differential behavior of closed class items  ( as compared to the open class items ) has been noted in various aspects of language processing  ( in the monolingual case )  , for example ,   ( i ) certain types of speech errors which str and the closed class items  ,   ( 2 ) resistance to change as well as resistance to incGrporate new items as closed class items  ,   ( 3 ) frequency ind pendent lexieal decision for closed class items  ( as compared to open class items for which lexical decision is frequency dependent  )  ,   ( 4 ) the absence of frequency independence for closed class items in certain types of a phasia  ,   ( 5 ) closed class item saiding in ccm ~ prehension strategies  , etc .   ( This list is based on a talk given by Mary-Louise Kean at the University of Pennsylvania  )  . It is not clear what the relationship is between the behavior of closed classes in intrasentential codeswitching and the other behaviors  ( in monolingual situations ) described above . We believer however ~ that investigating this relationship may give some clues concerning the organization of the granmar and the lexicon  , and the nature of the inter~ace between the two language systems  . 
The examples in our paper are all from the language pair  , Marathi ( m ) and English ( e) , Marathi ( m ) is the matrix language and English ( e ) is the embedded language . 
(The coincidence of the abbreviation m for the matrix language  , which is Marathi and e for the embedded language , whie J ~ is English , is accidental , but a happy one : ~- . A few facts about Marathi will be useful to note . It is an Indo-Euro-pean language ( spoken on the west coast of India near Bombay and in parts of central India by about  60 million people )  . It is an S0V language . Adjectives and relative clauses appear prencmirally and it has postpositions instead of pre ~ positions  . It uses a rich supply of auxilliary or helping verbs  . Other facts about Mamathi will become apparent in the examples  . ( See Section 3) . 
2. FOR MULATION OF THE SYSTI ~
Let Lm be the matrix language and Le be the embedded language  . Further let Gm and Ge be the corresponding grammars  , i . e . , Gm is the matrix ~ rmmnaF and Ge . is the embedded ~ . A " mixed " sentence is a sentence which contaLns lexlcal items from both Lm and I e  . Let Lx be the set of all mixed sentences that are judged to be acceptable  . Note that a mixed sentence is not a sentence of either Lm or Le  . 
However , it is judged to be " ccming f-rcm " im . The task is to formulate a system characterizing Lx  . Our approach is . to formulate a system for Lx in terms of Gm and Geanda ' control structure ' which permits shifting control from Gm to Ge but not from Ge to Gm  . We assume a ' correspondence ' between categories of Gm and Ge  , for example , NPm corresponds to NP e ( written as NP m~NP e) . Control is shifted by a switching r ~ le of the form  ( 2 . 1) AmxAe , where Am is a category of G in , Ae is a category of G e , and
Am = Ae.
At any stage of the derivation , (2 . 1) can be invoked , permitting Am to be switched to A e . Thus further derivation involving Am will be carried out by using rules of G e  , starting with A e . The switching rule in (2 . i ) is as > mrnetrici . e . , switching a category of the matrix grammar to a category of the embedded gr ~ ummr 
INTRA-SENTENTIAL CODE-MIXING 147 is permitted but not vice versa . This a synmetry can be stated directly in the rule itself  , as we have done , or it can be stated as a constraint on a more generalized switching rule which Qill permit switching from AmtoAe as well as the other way rotund  . We have chosen to state the asyrgretry by incorporating it in the rule itself because the a syn~netry plays such a central role in our formulation  . 
This a sygmetric switching rule together with the further constraints described in Section  3 is intended to capture the overpowering judgement of speakers about a mixed sentence " coming from " the matrix language Lm  . The switching rule in (2 . 1) is neither a rule of Gmn Orarule of Ge . It is also not a rule of a grammar , say Gx for Lx . As we have said before , we will construct a system for Lx in terms Of Gm and Ge and a switching rule and not in terms of a third ~  , say Gx . Although formally this can be done , there are important reasons for not doing so . Using this general framework we will now show that the system for Lx can be formulated by specifying a set of constraints on the switching rule  ( beside ~ the asyn~netry constraint )  . These further constraints primarily pertain to the closed class items  . 
3. CONSTRAINTSONTHES WITCHING RULE
Our hypothesis is that Lx can be completely characterized in terms of constraints on the switching rule  ( 2 . 1) . The types of constraints can be characterized as follows  ;  3 . 1 Asyn~netry : We have already discussed this constraint  . In fact ~ we have incorporated ~ t in the definition of the switching rule itself  . The main justifications for as ! m~etry areas follows  .   ( a ) We want to maintain the notion of matrix and embedded language S and the asyrmnetry associated with this distinction  . 
( b ) Arbitrarily long derivations would be possible , for example , by allow in ~ back and forth switching of Am and Ae along a nonbranching path  . Them appears to be no motivation for allowing such derivations  .   ( c ) The asymmtry constraint together with certain constraints on the non-switchability of closed class items seem to allow a fairly cGmplete characterization of Lx  . 
3 . 2 Constraint on switchability of certain categories : Rule  ( 2 . 1 ) permits switching any category AmtoAe if Am~Ae . However Certain categories cannot be switched . Although all major categorles can be switched , we must exclude the root node Sm . Obviously , if we permit Sm to be switched to Se , we can derive a sentence in Le starting with Sm in a trivial manner  . Hence , we need the following constraint . 
(3.2.1) Root node Sm cannot be switched.
Constraints on closed class items : (3 . 2 . 2) Certain closed class item S such as tense , i h x , and helping verbs when they appea ~ in " main VP cannot besWitc /% e o  . 
Examples : ( underlined items in the examples are from Lm )  . 
(3.1) mulakhurcy ~ rangawtat.
boys~paint(3.2) mulakhurcy apaint kartat.

In (3 . 2 ) the root verb has been switched fr~n Marathi to English  . The closed class item tatis not switched , however it is attached to an auxilliary or help -ing verb ~-~-- since it cannot be stranded  . This phenomenon ' appears in mixed sentences - ~ other language pairs  ( see Pf aff ( 1979 )  . ) It is not possible to switch both the V and the tense in  ( 3 . 1), and also not the entire VP . 
148 A . K . JOSHI (3 . 3) ~ mulakhurcy_~apaint .  (3 . 4) emulapaint chairs . 
Note that (3 . 4) could be derived by starting with Se(i . e . , by starting to derive a sentence of le ) and then switching VPeto VPm , but this is not permitted by the asyT~netry constraint  . Of course , one cannot start with the Senode because this requires switching Sm to Se which is blocked by the constraint on the switch ability of the root node  . 
(3 . 2 . 3) Closed class items ( e . g . , determiners , quantifiers , prepositions _ , possessiy e , aux , tense , helping verbs , etc . ) cannot be switched . Thus , for example , DETm cannot be " swm~ched to DET e . This does ~ that a lexical item belonging to DET e cannot appear in the mixed sentence  . It can indeed appear if NP m has already been switched to NP e and then NP e is expanded into DET eNeaccording to Ge  . 
(3 . 5) kahikhurcyaDETmNm(3 . 6) some chairs DET eNes-~66~(3 . 7) ~ chairs DET mNe (3 . 8 ) ~" some ~? ~ DE Te Nm Adjectives are not closed classes  ; hence all four combinations below are possible . 
(3 . 9) uncape~i ~ (3 . 10) unc___a abox (3 . 11) tall ~ (3 . 12) tallbox Note that (3 . 12 ) is a Marathi NP min which both the Am and Nm have been switched  . 
It is not derived fr~nNP e , if it were , it would have a determiner . ( Determiner is optional in Marathi ) . 
Prepositions and postpositions are closed class items  . Marathi has postpositions while English has prepositions  . 
(3 . 13) kahikhurcrey ~ war (3 . 14) ~ chairs war (3 . 15) ~ some chairs war+some c\]nairson
Q(3 . 16) ~' ~ sc\[nechairs on (3 . 17)* kahikhurcyaon (3 . 18) on some e_hairs (3 . 19) ~ onk ~ hikhurcy ~ (3 . 20) * wark ~ hikhurcya ) 3 . 21) ~' ~ war some chairs (3 . 2 . 3 ) Constraints on Complementizers : Complementizers are closed class items and therefore c/n not be ' switched in the same sense as in  ( 3 . 2 . 2) above . However , often we have a choice of a oomplementizer . This choice depends both on the matrix verb Vm and the embedded verb V e  ( Vm ~ V e ) to which Vm has been switched . 
let the complementizer slofym h~lC0MPm:\[CI , IC2 , C3 l and the complementizers of V e ( ~ Vm ) be COMP e = CI , C2 , C4 where CI~CI , C2  ~  C2 . Now if Vm is switched to Vei . e . , the verb is lexically r~alized in the embedded language  , then the choice of the oomplementizer is constrained in the following manner  . Since complementizers are closed classes , they cannot be switched . Hence , the choice is CI , C2 , or C3; hQ wever 9nly C1 and C2 are permitted , as the equivalent lexical verb Vepermits Ci and C~which are the eqgivalents of C\] and C  2 respectively . C$is not permltted because its equlvalent C 3 ms not pertain S-ted for Ve , and C 4 whlchs the equivalent of C ? is not permitted because it is not allowed by Vm  . Thus the only oomplementizers that are permitted , if Vm is switched to V e , are those that are permitted by Vm and the equivalents of which are permitted by Ve  ( Vm . ~ V e ) . Thus the choice is constrained not only to the complementizers of Vm  ( because of nonswitch ability of complementizers ) but it is further constrained by the choice of complementizers of Ve as explained above  . 
+ This is a problematic case which is discussed in detail in the longer version of this paper  . 
INTRA-SENTENTIAL CODE-MIXING 149
Exa _ : (3 . 22) tSgoing d~cides (3 . 23)* toperatjay la__~_a . ~ . __la:t ? ~-6 ~--~ tog ~ decides The Marathi verb har_ih ~ aw ( decide ) takes the com  #lementizer ca ( ing ) but not the com  #lementizer la ( to )   . The corresponding English verb de . detakes both the complementizers to anding ( after on )  . We now switch the Marathi verb Vm ( tharaw ) to V e ( decide ) in ---~ th 3~ . 22) and ~ . 23)  . Since the tense in the main VP~-~--~be switched  ( as we have seen in ( 3 . 1) and (3 . 2 ) earlier ) a helping verb kar ( do ) has to be introduced so that the tense can be attached to it  . Thus we have (3 . 24) tS~~decide kart S , ca:ing h -' e hack golng ~ ense ) -- (3 . 25) * tSp ~ jayla decide kart S , la:to HS to go ~-0 ~ ense ) --Note that although decide takes both the cc ~plementizers to and ing  , only (3 . 24) is allowed .  (3 . 2 5~-i~locked because the Marathi verb ~ raw ~-~ snot allow the complementizer to __  . Thus the only ecmplementizer that appears in the mixed sentence is ing  . 
There are several interesting issues concerning the generation and recognition of sentences such as  ( 3 . 24) and (3 . 25) . For example , at what point the decision to switch the main verb is made ?  ( We could have raised this issue earlier when we discussed  ( 3 . 1) and (3 . 2)) . Since a new helping verb has to be introduced when the switch is made  , does it mean that sc~e'local'structural change has to be made along with the switching of the verb ? Another point is that the choice of the ccmplementizer  ( which canes before the matrix verb ) also determines whether the verb can be switched or not  . The machinery we have provided so far may have to be augmented to provide systematic answers to these questions  . Thus for example , we may have to introduce additional constraints on the switching rules  . 
4. PARSING CONSIDERATIONS
In this paper , we have given an account of the constr~ts on intrasentential codeswitching in a generative framework  . The formal model and the constraints on switching that we have proposed clearly have implications for the kind of par~er we may be able to construct  . We will not pursue this aspect in this paper . However , we would like to point out that by adopting some parsing stra-tegies  , we can account for scme of the constraints described earlier  . A preliminary attempt was made in Joshi ( 1981 ) by proposing a strategy involving a socalled left corner constraint  . This stretegy has some serious drawbacks as was pointed out by Doron  ( 1981 )  . She has proposed an alternate strategy called ' early deter ~ nination strategy '  , according to which the parser tries to determine as early as possible the language of the major constituent it is currently parsing  . Thus upon encountering a Marathi ( m ) determiner i . e . , DETm the parser would predict a Marathi NPm . The MarathiNm could be then realized lexically in Marathior the Nm would be switched to Ne and then lexically realized in English  . 
NPm is expanded into DETmNomm where Noramis expanded into AmNm  . 
Note that Am and Nm could be independently switched to Ae and Ne respectively  , thus giving four possible sequences : DET mAm Nm  , DET mAmNe , DET mA eNm , DET mA eN e , all of which are permissible . 
If the parser encountered an English determiner , i . e . DET e then it would predict NP e , but now Neor Ae Nein to which NP e can expand carrot be switched to N mor Am  150 A . K . JOSH because of the asymmetry constraint . Thus the only permissible sequence is DET e ( A e ) Ne , and the following are excluded , i . e . , * DET e Nm , * DE TeAe Nm ~* DE Te AmNe , * DE TeAm Nm , which checks with the data . 
Of course , so far we have the same predictions as we had with the constraint on the nonswitch ability of closed class items  . However , there is some evidence to the effect that a parsing strategy as described above may be in effect  . The following distribution is correctly predicted by the above strategy :  ( 8 . i ) * tallpe ~ ya (5 . 2) tall boxes (5 . 3) uneape ~ ya (5 . 4) uncaboxes . 
(5 . 1) is disallowed , because upon encountering an English adjective , A e , the parser predicts Nome , which is expanded into AeNe . However , Ne cannot be realized lexically in Marathi , unless Ne is switched to Nm , which is disallowed . Note that ( S . l ) cannot be disallowed by invoking nonswitch ability of adjectives  , because these are not closed classes . This early determination strategy does not help however in accounting for the distribution of phrases involving postpositions  ( see
Section 3).
Our conclusion at present is that the framework described in Section  3 along with the constraints on closed class ite ~ as is the proper way to formulate the codeswitching system  . A parsing strategy as diseussed above is perhaps also operative  ( see Examples ( 5 . 1) - (5 . 4 ) ) and when a closed class item is the leftmost constituent of a major category then the two formulations made the same predictions  . 
5. CONCLUSION
We have presented a formal model for characterizing intrasentential code-switch-ing  . The main features of this model are that i ) the model treats the two grammars ( languages ) a synmetrically , 2) there is no third gran ~ ar , and 3 ) the constraints on the switchability of closed class items  . We believe that further investigation of codeswitching in the proposed framework will be very productive  , as it captures some essential aspects of intrasentential code  , switching . Another interesting result concerns the role of closed class items  . Since several in por~tant characteristics of closed class items are wellknown in the context of processing of monolingual utterances  , we think that further investigation of the role of closed class items in the context of codeswitching will give us some insights into the processing of monolingual utterances  . Our investigation of intrasentential code-mixing can also be considered as a small contribution towards the larger problem of determining the nature of the interface between the two language systems of a bilingual speaker or hearer  . 

Doron , E . , " Onformal models of code : switching ", MS . , U . of Texas at Austin (1981) . 
Joshi , A . K . , " Some problems in processing sentences with intrasentential codeswitching "  , Extended Abstract of paper read at the U . of Texas Parsing Workshop,
March 1981.
Pfaff , C . , " Constraints on language switching " Language , Vol .  55, 1979 . 
Sankoff , D . and Poplack , S . , " A formal g ~ an mar of code . switching : Working Paper , 1980 . 
Sridhar , S . N . , " The syntax and psycholinguistics of bilingual code-mixing "  , Studies in the Linguistic Science , Spring 1980 , University of Illinois . 
Woolford , E . , " A formal model of bilingual cede-switching " , Working Paper , 
M.I.T ., 1980.
