COLING 82, 3". Horec?'~(ed.)
North-Holl and Publizhing Company
? Academia , 1982
COGNITIVE MODEL SFORCOMPUTER VISION
G . Adorni A . Boccal atte M . Di Manzo
INSTITUTE of ELECTROTECHNICS
UNIVERSITY of GENOA
GENOA , ITALY
This paper is focused on the relations existing between language and vision  . Its goal is to discuss how linguistic informations about ob-jects  , shapes , positions and spatial relations with other objects can be integrated into a cognitive model tailored to spatial inferencing operations  . 

A common approach to the problem of scenes in terp retation is to generate hypothesis about the position and size of objects and try to use these expectations to guide the search for p icture areas which exhibit the expected features  14  , 8 , 15\[ . But where this expectation came from ? If a robot operates in a known environment  , expectations can be self-generated on the basis of built-in knowledge and previous ly experienced situations  . Another very common source of informations can be some kind of external input  , often based on natural language commu-ni cat ion  . A piece of conversation as " look for the penc i l "  , " where ?" , " on the table " conveys a lot of informations about the presence of a reference object  ( table ) and the characteristics of a surface ( top of table ) which must be located in order to restrict the search for the target object  ( pencil )  . To take advantage of these linguistic infor-mat ion sources we must be able to extract from a qualitative expression like " on the table " all those quantitative constraints which are relevant from a geometric modelling point of view  121  . These problems could seem much more related to the generation of visual analog repre-sent at ions than to the understanding of a scene  ; but what does it mean exactly to " understand " a scene ? When we analyze a scene  , we use a I ~ of not geometric knowledge ; we are not surprised to finds moken ciga-rettes into an ashtray  , and a glance is enaughto classify them , but we could have some troubles to recognize that it contains a company of gold fishes  , and this surely not only because of geometric constraints ! Therefore the processing of v isual knowledge must be based on cognitive models that are able to handle different k inds and sources of informations  , and in this sense we feel that there is not ac lear ? cut between scene analysis and scene generation  114  , 161 . 
In the following we will deal mainly with the representation of objects and the formalizat ion of spatial relationships  , trying to point out how linguistic informat ions can be related to visual ones  . 
* Work supported by Italian National Research Council under grant  80  . 01142 . 07G . ADORNI , A . BOCCAL ATTE and M .   19I MANZOOBJECT DESCRIPTION ANDSPACE MODELLING The knowledge of the structure of an object is often intimately related to our capability of understanding the meaning of a spatial relat~n -ship  ; fop instance , the meaning of the sentence " the cat is under the car " is clear  , even if it may depend on the state of the car , moving or parked ; on the contrary , the sentence " the cat is under the wall " is not clear  , unless the wall is crashed or it has a very part icular shape  . Every object modelling technique must deal at least with the following issues  16  , 7\[: l . Objeot must be described at several levels of detail  . To understand the sentence " put the chair near the table " only a rough definition of chair and table dimensions can be sufficient  , while to build a model of " a mansitting on a chair " a more sophisticated knowledge a-baut the structure of a chair and a man is requested  . 
2 . The articulation of movable object parts must be properly described  . 
The sentences " open the door " and " open the drawer " have different geometric meanings because the movements of doors and drawers usually obey different rules  . 
3  . Characteristic features of objects must be po inted out  . 0 ften these features are free surfaces , as the top of a table , in canonical posi-tions . The recognition of a feature allows the generation of hypothesis about the presence of an object  . 
4 . Typical relations between objects must be descr ibed  . When we look for a pencil we do not start an a lyzing a wall or a window  , but we look at first fo Patable or some other piece of furniture in which or on which it is reasonable to find a pencil  . 
0ur conceptual def in i t ion language al low the def in i t ion of l ines  , suP-face and solid objects . Solid objects are described by means of GENER -ALIZED CONES  19  , 101 , at several levels of detail . Cones can be interconnected by means of fixed or movable points  , with arbitrary constraints on rotations and shifting  . Specific jointing elements are defined to properly describe the surface of an articu lated object  ; so we can correctly answer to the question : " is the fly on the snake ?" indipenden ~ y of how the snake is actually coiled  . More details can he found in Ill . 
From a computational point of view , the use of a system of coordinated axes represent a very natural way to describe the position of an object  . 
If we are able to transform linguistic relat ions into quantitative geo-metric alones  , the wellknows methodologies of an al~tical geometry can be used as a simple  , general purpose set of inferencing rules . Hence the goal of describing objects and spatial relations by means a simple  , nonredundantn-tuple of coordinated axes is very appealing  . Unfortunately it seems quite far from the psychology of language  121  . 
Therefore we associate a redundant FRAMEOF REFERENCE  ( FOR ) to every object , consisting of :- an axis , Z , having direction of the " maO or " axis of the coDe  . Two points a Pespecified on it , Zmin and Zmax , COr responding to the extremities of this major axis  ; -apoint 0 , on the Zaxis , which is the origin of the frame ;- an axis , X , orthogonal to Z , that specifies a further privileged direc-t ion of the object  ; this axis is definib ! e only for some objects ( eg . 
COGNITIVE MODEL SFORCOMPUTER VISION aman ) in which a front and a back can be dist inguished  . Objects f ( r which the X axis is definable are to be called CLASS  1 objects ; those for which the X . axis is not definable ( eg . a pole ) are to be called CLASS2 objects ; an axis , Y , orthogonal to X and Z . The Yaxis is obviously not defina-ble for class  2 objects ; a radial coordinate ~ whose origin is at O ; the coordinates ~ and ~ specified on the XY plane  ; a curvilinear coordinate to riginating at point O  . 
The use of cones simplifies the FOR ; it allows a homogeneous representation of an object shape and of its spatial relations with the external world  ; it proves particularly useful in situat ions like " the ball is inside the box "  . 
SPATIAL RELATION SBETWEEN OBJECTS
Let's now analyze some spatial relations between objects  , in order to discuss how they can be translated in terms of geometrical primitives  . 
Spatial relations involving the Zaxis general ly use a " major " axis per pendicular to the earth surface  ; this is the onl ~ absolute reference used in language perhaps because the concept of " high " and " low " is directly related to the line of action of the force of gravity  . Therefore the sentence " the object A is above the obOect B " can be conceptualized as : // BP -point ~ CQNE  ( A )   , Q-point ~ CONE(B ) : X(P ) = X(Q) , Y(P ) = Y(Q) , Z ( P ) ~ Z ( Q ) IFOR does not require further specification // Note that we can state conditions only for pairs of points whose horizontal projections are the same  . In fact , even the " pure " meaning of " above " is much more constraining  14  , 131 , this relationship is used in a number of " impure " meanings  , in which we cannot say that the horizontal pro jection of A is included in the horizontal pro jection of B  ( Fig . 
la ) , or Z ( P ) ~ Z ( 0 ) for any pair or points P~C0NE ( A ) and QeCONE ( B )   ( Fig . lb) . 
The preposition " on " is often synonymous of " above "  , but in some cases it can mean " below " , as in " on the ceiling " , or involve horizontal re-lations as in " the lamp is on the wall "  . Usually " A on B " requires B to support A against the action of gravity  , by means of some kind of physical contact . Hence , the conceptualization of " aman on a chair " is the same as " a manabov each a ~ r ~' ~ plus an assertion about physical contact and Supporting action : // ~ P-point ~ CONE  ( MAN )   , Q-point ~ CONE(CHAIR ) : X(P ) = X(Q) , Y(P ) = Y(Q) , Z ( P ) ~ Z ( Q ) ICONE ( CHAIR ) appli~s a force to the CONE ( MAN ) IFOR does not require further specification // Horizontal relations ar ~ much more ambigous  . Sometimes FOR is expl ~ ity stated , as in " looking at the church , the post office is on your right " ; otherwise a default assumption is to use FOR associated with the speak_er or the listener  . 
If we consider the sentence " the object A is beh ind the object B "  , two interpretations are possible : a ) FOR is then-tuple associated with the object B  ; 10G . ADORNI , A . BOCCAL ATTE and M . DIMANZ Ob ) FOR is external to both objects A and B . 
Case a can be assumed only if B is a class 1 object ; case b is always assumed when B is a class 2 object , but it is not usual even when B is a class 1 object . In the ease a the previous sentence is conceptualized as follows : // ~ P-point ~CONE  ( A )   , Q-point ~ CONE(B):Y(P ) = Y(Q) , X ( P ) ~ X ( Q ) IFOR associated with CONE ( B )   ( i e . FOR cCONE ( B ) // This definition and the next one allow to handle situations as those shown in F ~  . 
2 ab ; the situation of Fig . 2c does not represent a proper use of " be-h ind "   ; if such a preposition is used , more inferencing capabilities are needed . In the case b the previous sentence means that B is  ( partially ) hiding A to an observer , who can be assumed , to be one of the actors in the story ; hence the conceptual representation is : // ~ P- point eCONE  ( A )   , Q-point ~ CONE(B):Y(P ) = Y(Q) , X(P ) > X(Q)IX(P ) , X(Q ) ? ~ , Y(P ) , Y ( Q ) ~@ IFORaK-point ~ ( CONE ( A ) or CONE ( B ) ) / / a ) 
YE-\]b
Y --?., y--?x Ib)
FIG . 2FIG . 1x

Let's now to consider relations as " on the edge of "  , " on the su ~ faoe of ; '" in the middle of " and so on . For every point P on the surface of the cone which describes the object A  , its possible to find the corresponding cross -section  , that is characterized by a value Z of the coor di -nate along the coneax is  . The boundary of this section is described by a radial coordinate ~  ( (~ , ~ . ) . Therefore the sentence " the pen is in the middle of the table " can be conceptualized as fol lows  , assuming as reference the cross section of the table cone which corresponds to the table top :/ /   3 P-point mCONE ( PEN )   , Q-pointe CONE(TABLE ) :&( ~ , Z ) m ~ , Z ( P ) = Z ( Q ) ICONE ( TABLE ) a ~ lies a force to the CONE ( PEN ) ImaxFORcCONE ( TABLE ) // Let's conclude looking at sentences as " the house is before the bridge '  , '" two miles after the lights " and so on . In these cases spatial relations are referred to a path  , usually not straight . This type of relations can be conceptual i zed using a curvilinear coordinate tass oc iated with a COGNITIVE MODEL SFORCOMPUTER VISION IItrajectorys originating in the center of FOR  . If the analytical de-scription of such at ra jector y is unknown  , the robot will be able to make inferences only about the relative positions of objects along the path  ; so , for instance , from the sentence " the house is two miles after the bridge along the ~ oad  t0 Florence " it is possible to deduce that a man wolking towards Florence will meet at first the bridge and then the house  , after an evaluable time . If more informations are available ( eg . the path is a road and the map of the town is known  )   , the position relative to other FOR can be eva luated from the actual value of t  , in order to infer that " two miles after the bridge " means exactly " on the right of the station "  . The formal description of " the object A is after the object B "  , is : // ~ P-point ~ CONE(A) , Q-point gCONE(B ): Pgs-trajectory , Q~s-trajectory , t(P ) ~ t(0) Is-trajectory star , from CONE(B ) // Finally , we should discuss how to quantify all the inequalities which result from the previous ly analyzed conceptualizations  . Such a quanti-fication can be considered as a special case of spatial inference  , which unfortunately we cannot introduce here because of lack of space  . 
An attempt to classify inferences can be found in Ill  . 

The ' problem of robotic vision has been 0nly sketched in this paper . 
Even if more detailed analysis of some particu lar objects can be found in the literature  13  , 7 , 10 , 131 , vision is yet a substantially open prob ~ lem  . A number of basic questions as , for example , ~ the representation of objects with variable shapes  , or the use of knowledge about the expected goals of an actor to infer its future movement y and the proper linking of cognition with image-process ing procedures  , are still waiting for a suitable answer . However , these topics are receiving more and more at -tention  , both because of impact that an advanced , integrated vision-manipulation system could have on the applications of robotics  , and because artificial intelligence people are aware that there is a large number of linguistic problem that cannot be solved if this perception capability is not achieved  . 
The work described in this paper is part of ala rgoproject  , whose goal is the development of a cognitive background  , based on conceptual dependency and related concepts ll  , 121 , for an integrated vision-manip ~ lation system  . 

IAI

FIG . 2-c12G . ADORNI , A . BOCCAL ATTE and M . DIMANZO


Illl 112\[ llSl spatial knowledge : an insight into the problem of men-robot communication  , 7th . Conf . Canadian Man-Computer Communication Society,
Waterloo , Canada ( june 1981).
Adorni,G . , Di Manzo , M . , Some considerations about a conceptual mod el oriented to the representation of spatial relationship  ( in Ital_ian )  , National Research Council ITD-O45 , Genoa , Italy ( march 1980) . 
Agin,G . J . , Vision systems for inspectation and for manipulation control  , J . Automatic Control Conf . ,S . Francisco , CA , USA ( june 1977) . 
Hanson,A . ,Riseman,E . ( eds . ), Computer vision systems ( Academic
Press , New York , 1978).
Boggess,L . C . , Computational Interpret'ation of english spatial preposition  , Tech-Rep . T-75, Coordinated Science Laboratory , Univ . 
of Illinois ( february 1979).
Kuipers,B . J . , Modelling spatial knowledge , 5th . Int . J . Conf . on A . 
I ., Cambridge , MA , USA ( august 1977).
Lehnert,W . G . , Representing physical objects in memory , Res-Rep . 131, Dept . of Comp . Sc . , Yale Univ . ( may 1978) . 
Mackworth,A . K . ,Havens,W . S . , Structuring domain knowledge for visual perception  , 7th . Int . J . Conf . on A . I . , Vancouver , Canada ( au-gust 1981) . 
Marr,D . ,Nishihara,H . K . , Representation and recognition of the spatial organization of  3D shapes , Proc . Royal . Soc . Lond . B .  (1978) . 
Nevatia , R . , Computer analysis of scene of 3D curved objects , ( Birkhauser Verlag , Basel , 1976) . 
Schank,R . C . ( ed . ), Conceptual information processing ( North-

Schank,R . C . ,Abelson,R . P . , Scripts Plans Goals and Understanding ( Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , 1977) . 
Waltz,D . L . , Relating images concepts and words , NFS Workshop on the representation of 3D objects , Univ . of Pennsylvania , Phyladel-phia (1979) . 
Waltz,D . L . ,Boggess,L . C . , Visual analog representation for na~ural language understanding  , 6th . Int . J . Conf . on A . I . , Tokyo , Japan ( august 1979) . 
Weymounth,T . E . , Experiments in knowledge-driven interpretation of natural scene  , 7th . lnt . J . Conf . on A . I . , Vancouver , Canada ( au-gust 1981) . 
Winston,P . H . ( ed . ), The psychology of computer vision ( McGraw
Hill , New York , 1975).
