DEEP CASESFOR ADVERBIAL ANDPREPOSITIOI~AL PHRASES 
Lieven Jaspaert
Section of Applied Linguistics , Katholieke Universttett Leuven
Blinds Inkomststra at 21, 3000 Leuven , Belgium
This paper attempts to demonstrate the usefu lness for Machine Translation of a case - or iente description of the syn-tactic and the semantic behavior of adverbial and preposit ional constructions  . 
Ee aim to modify and refine the existing descriptiohs of adverbs and prepositional phrases in order to put them to efficient use in Machine Translation  . We hope to point out , furthermore , the desirability of incorporating deep case in-formation into the " interfaces t ructure " of a Machine Trans-lation system  . 
I . Task-svecific requirements on parsing Parsing sentences for translation purposes is bound to differ i ~ significant ways from parsing natural language for other tasks  . In this paragraph , we will formulate an , ,mbar of translation-speclfio requirements on natural language analysis which  , moreover , will be of particular interest in the discussion of the issues in the following paragraphs  . 
2 . Surface cases , deep cases and conceptual caqes A much debated issue in AI is the desirable depth of the case system employed In natural language understanding programs  . From the preceding paragraph , however , it will have become apparent that , in Machine Translation , one could better- 137 -make use of various case systems of increas ing depth  . In this paragraph , we will be concerned with the definition of the three types of oases we consider to be adequate for trans-lational purposes :  ( i ) surface cases reflect the dependency relat ion ~ which exist between constituents and their gover-nors  ;   ( ii ) deep cases provide information about the va lency boundnese of the participants in the predication  ;   ( i l i ) con-ceptusl cases are language-independent va lues which give in-formation about the sta tes of affairs people talk about  . 
3 . Deep ca~eq for adverbial and prepositional phrases It is common practice invalency grammar to assign the properties + valency -boundor-valency-bound to constituents  . 
We hope to show that this dichotomy is inadequate for dealing with natural language in general  , and with adverbial end pre-positional phrases in particular  . The discussion will aim at introducing a third property to the set of deep cases ccm nonly used : the " trens propositional case ?  . 
The main part of this Section will be devoted to the de-finition of the t rans propositional case  . We will point out the descriptive and computational advantages of the three-case system proposed  , on the basis of examples . This will lead to a classification of adverbial and prepositional construct ions which differs in a considerable way from the one traditionally used in lingu istics  . F ~ the rattention will be expended to const ructions other than adverbial and preposit ional ones  , which should as well be labeled trsns propoei tional  . 
4. Conclusion
In the final paragraph , we will briefly sketch the need of int roducing the transpropositional case into the set of deep case relations  , by showing that its omission would lead to bad translations  . 

