ONTHETYPES OF SEMANTICCOMPRESSION OF TEXT
N . No Percova "
Faculty of Numerical Mathematics and Cyberneti cs 
Moscow State University , U.S.S.R.
Any text is constructed in accordance with Imp licit principles of semantic compress ion  . The paper attempts to describe some of these principles  . 
There are two main types of text semantic compress ion :  ( 1 ) the omission of " meaningful " parts , and ( 2 ) the omission of standard connections among par ts of the text  . 
1 . The first type of compression is subdiv ided into:  ( a ) omission within a predication ( by a predication is meant the structure -" predicate-P  , its aotants-A ") , and ( b ) omission of the whole predication . 
& . In special conditions a part of a pred ication should be understood as the whole pred ication in accordance with  6 basic rules +/: A-~AP , P-~AP , A . . . P-~AP , Ai . . . Aj-~-FAIPAj , Ai-~AiPAj , Ai~Aj-

P-~AP
The patient was operated . - ~ The patient was operated by surgeons . 
Ai . . . Aj-~AIPAj
Aftert ~ e operation Nick feels good . -9 The operation was made on Nick . 
+/ In general , as it seems , rules of a text grammar , unlike most ruAea or most sentence grammars , should be not obligatory , but optional . 
-229-b . The omission of a predication is diagnosed by the pre-sence of another predication  ( PRj )   , which is connected with the omitted predicat ion  ( PR ) by such relations ( j ) ' as " ps~t " ( including stsLrting , intermediate or final point or interval )   , " attribute " , " accompazkTing " , reaction " , " cause " , etc .   ( the number of such relations seems not to exceed  20  )  . In such cases the ~ nderstanding of the text in c ludes the rule: 
PR~-~.I~R .

= attribute to put the foot in the stoup -~- tomountahors ej = reaction The Sahalinians take meas ~ uces to liquidate the consequen-ces of the typhoon  . The roads and bridges sure being re-construc ted  . -- The roads and bridges were distroged by the typhoon  . 
2 . The omission of standard connections among the parts of the text can either be universal or depend on the type of the text  . The texts can be divided into two main ~ p ~ cups -" physically oriented " and " mentally oriented "  . Roughly speaking , physically oriented texts describe events as they occ-r and ~ p ~ oup the events in accordance with their sequence  , while mentally oriented texts describe the events as they are re-flected in the text authors mind and group the events into  ( individual or socially acknowledged ) classes . 
an important subclass of ( 2 ) constitute the cases of " de-terminating " . We call a deteminer a unit which relates not only to its immediate context  , but to snme larger piece of the text , up to the text as the whole .   ( Determinex ~ can be either manifested or omi tted in the text  .   ) Lets compare two texts - ( i ) Yesterday Nick went to the theatre . To day he is going to the cinema . 
( ii ) Yesterday Nick went to the the atre . Heme this friends . 
On returning home they discussed the pe~ox~n ~nce  . 

In ( i ) the meaning " yesterday " relates only to one sentence  , while in ( ll ) this meaning relates to the whole text . A piece of the text connected with a definite determiner is called ItJ " sphere of oper@tion "  . Along with constant determiners ( such as one in text ( ii ) ) there are variable determlners : their meaning is regularly changed while moving through the text  ( something like a co~ter )  . An ex~nple of a variable determiner is a sequence of predicate time markers in physically oriented texts  , which usually are partially omitted and should be reconstructed during the textaualysis  . 
To process a constant determiner is to find it ssphere of operation  , to process a variable determiner is , besides , to find out a proportional change of its meaning  . 
The reconstruction of text omissions demands us ing dif-ferent kinds of information  , among which an important role belons m to " c ~ i non-sense " knowledge  . This knowledge is di Tided into general ( typical relations of objects and events ) and concrete . The concrqte knowledge is necessary , for instance , to mader stand such a sentence as Flamin ~ oes_bonos exploration Bhowe that the are ~ f the birds is about  20 million years , where the linguistic meaning of the word ~ contradicts the concrete knowledge of the li felimits of creatures  , which cause the rereading of the sentense . 
Another interesting type of information needed is the information about a possibil ity of a " sub~ectiTe " description  ( from the point of Tiew of either the author or the object described  )  ?

Through the bus windows he looked at a rooting building  . 
- ~ It was the bubut not the building which , , oTed . 
The people of the Hungarian Tillage of Ekshu are proud of an interesting bullding-the chttrch shaping a m~hroomo-~The church is situated in or near the 
Tillage of Ekshu.

