CONCEPTUAL TAXONOMY OFJAPANE SEADJEC TIVES FOR UNDER STANDING 
NATURALL ANGUAGE ANDPICTURE PATTERNS
Naoyuki OKADA , Aiko MIURA
Information Science and Systems Engineering
Oita University , Oita 870-11, Japan
I . Introduction
This paper presents a conceptual taxonomy of Japanese adjectives  , succeeding that on Japanese verbs ' . In this taxo-n~ny , natural language is associated with real world things -- matter  , events , attributes - and mental activities-sp irit-ual and sensual  . Adjective concepts are divided into two large classes  , simple and non-simple . Simple concepts cannot be reduced into further elementary adjective concepts  , whereas non-simple ones can be . Roughly speaking , simple concepts are concrete and can be direc tly associated with physical and mental a ttributes  , whereas non-simple ones are abstract and in- directly associated with them  . 
2. Simple Adjective Concepts
Verb concepts were well understood as " change " fro~state SO to state S  1 as shown in Fig .   14 Adjective concepts are considered to be captured as the " difference " between objects OO and  0 I . Ylg . 2 shows how the difference in vertical length between  00 and 01 brings about the concept of " high " . Notice that surface structures often lack the expression of  00 like " yama-ga takai ( the mountain is high ) "  . Since the meaning of " high " cannot be expressed only by O  1  , deep structures need
O0 as an object for comparison.
-209-change
State SoState S , otoko-gaie-karaderu.
Theman Koes outo-~he house.
Fig . 1 The structure of verb concept jence
ObjectOlObjectO0y ~. a-gaie-yoritakai.
The mountain is ~ than the house.
Fig . 2 The structure of adjective concept 2 . 1 St ructura l Pat te rns Ad jec t ive concepts can be regarded as the concept of a re la t ion among const i tuents which produce d i f fe rence and can be represented as fo l lows : Ad  ( C , e , o , of , Or , om , os , i , l , t , r ,   . . . )  ( 1 ) where each symbol in parenthese stands for a constituent  . For example , c and s stand for an object for ccmparl lon and a sub-~ect  , respectively . Scae constituents are obligatory in the sense that they are indispensable in the recognit ion of differ-ence  . Seven types of structural patterns are proposed  , accord-ing to the combination of obligatory constituents  . 
2.2 Semantic Contents
The semantic contents of Adin formula ( 1 ) are categoriz~ed into physical , mental and abstract attribute . We classify each of them in detail because we cannot detect a Dy difference -  210 -v without such information . In the case of verbs , twenty cate-gories such as displacement , defo~nstion , and spiritual act-ivity were proposed to classify the semantic contents of " changes  "  . We modify theme lightly to apply to the class if ic-ation of semantic contente of adjec tives  . For example , die-placement and deformation are modified to location and shape  , respectively . 
3. Non-Simple Adjective Concepte
Non-simple adjective concepts are not direct ly associat-ed with p~e is alormental at tribute e ~ therefore we emphasize an analysi so fhow they ere composed of simple ones  . 
3.1 Complex Concepts - A
For example , there is a complex adjective " hoso-nagai ( thin-long ) " which is registered as one word in ordinary Japanese dictionaries  . The conne0t i ~ relation between two adjective concepts is a logical product in this case  . The complex concept of A is defineds sfol lows : if two adjective concepts are connected by a rule and the connected concept i s represented by a complex word of those adject ives  , it is call-eda " complex concept of A " . Two types of connecting rules are proposed : logical product and syntactic relation  . 
3.2 Complex Concepts - B
This concept is usually represented by as imple word and is considered to consist of several elementary adjective concepts  . No general rule can be found to connect e lementary ad-Jective concepts  . Semantic contents of the concepts are class-i fied into such categories as linguistic activ ? ty and character  . 
3.3 Derivative Concepts
Some concepts possesse function of derivings new concept by operati ~ others  . They have two morphemic strUct ttres , prefix ~ and ett ~ fix , which add certain i ~ or metion to operands . 
For example , st~ffix "- tarash ~" adds the meaning " indeed " to its operand  . Such derivative information is categori zed into five classes  . 
-211-4. Classification
There are approximately 530 adjectives considered suffic-ient for daily Japanese  . We actually classified their concepts , n~nbering about 630 , according to types and categories proposed in Sec . 2 and 3 . They were well classified into those types and categories  . In the classification of simple concepts , " standard concept e " were chosen from among similar concepts  , amounting to approximately 270 . They might be considered " primitives " in the sense that every other adjective concept can be derived from them by some rule  . 
5 . Extraction of Conceptual Features We extract conceptual features from each Ad and its constituents  , noticing the standard concepts with phys ical attributes obtained in Sec  . 4  . The following analysis shows par@of the feature extraction from taka  . . . _ ~ i ( high ) / hikui ( low) . 
taka__~Chigh)/~i_k_~Clow)
Polysm , y(1) Structural pattern ~ Ad(S , C ) , semantic contents ; shapes , c : thing Ad : The vertical length of s is larger/smaller than that of c  . 
Example : TSky5taw~-gaKy6 to taw ~- yoritakai.
Tokyo Tower is higher than F~vo to To wer.
Polyeamy (2) Structural pattern ; Ad(s , c  ~ , semantic contents ! locations , c : thing Ad : The vertical distance of s from a standard plane is larger/smaller than that of c  . 
Example : Hik ~ ki-ga Kumo-yoritakai.
The airplane is higher than the cloud.
6 . Sentence Production from Picture Patterns System SUPP  , which accepts moving picture patterns , interprets the meaning of changes in them , infers about similarity among changes , end describes the results in Japanese and English sentences  , was constructed as an application of - 212 -the conceptual taxonomy of verbs . SUPP was improved to inter-pretphysical a ttributes of piotn repatterns  . Fourteen standard concepts were chosen forth is improvement  . An example of experimental results ~ a shown in  F~4r   . )  . 
( a ) Input pattern
Note . In I ) through 3) , input picture " on na " is compared to its model in machine  . 
Fig . 3i ) on na-ganagai.
The woman is long.
2) on na-gatakai\[l).
The woman is ~ igh\[l\]:3) on na-ga8k ~.
The woman is large.
4) on na-gaki-yorihikui Cl).
The woman is qower\[l\]"than the tree.
5) on na-gaki-yori hlkui(2).
The woman is lower\[2\] than the tree.
6) on nu-gaki-yor lch~sqi.
The woman is smaller than the tree.
7) on na-gatori-yoritakaiC1).
The woman is ' higher\[l\]"thanthebird.
8) on na-gutori-yorihikuiC2).
The woman is lower\[2\] than the bird.
9) on na-gatori-yori Bki.
The woman is larger than the bird.
( b ) Output sentences
Sentence production from a picture pattern 7* Concltwio Da This taxonomy has made clear an out line of the whole of Japanese adjective concepts  . I~Japanese , the number of ad-Jectives is rather small compared to that of adjective verbs  . 
This taxonomy is expected to give a basis to that of adject-ive verbs  . 
Re~erene e(1)N . Okada : eConceptual taxonomy of Japanese verbs fo runderstanding natural language and picture patterns "  , l ~' oc ? COLING 80 , Tokyo ,  1980 . 

