BUNDLES AND SYNTACTICAN ALYSIS
Dorothee Reim ~ un
Zentral tnstitut f ~ LrS prach wts senschaft AdWDDR  , Berlin
Syntactic analysis-in our terms-means to construct 
a description of the syntactic structures of a given sentence  , starting from a formal description of the syntactic features of  . the word fo ~ ( the-result of a preceding word for mane . lysls ) . 
The description of the syntactic struc ture as well as the formal description of the word fo~ms have to follow a certain mode l  , in our case the Dependency Gre~nme ~ by ~ NZE ( 1975 ) oA central point of the model-in respect 4o analysis-ere the so-called bundles . They represent the necessary syntactic knowledge of a language which is the base for an al-ysi ~ sentences of this le ~ guage  . The bundlesere parts of trees in a very generalized form  . If

N1N2N3 is a bundle , then it means , that there are conditions for the nodes NO , N 1 , N2 , N3 , that there are relations between the ? nodes expressed by the edses and their markings R  1   ,  ~  , R 3 and that there is some order condition for the nodes  , in the example 1; 1N2NON3 . Following the model , these bundles give us a high measure of surety  , for the analysis . 

The bundles are stored in the system in a very concentr-ated form  . For example for a noun group with a noun li ke " tab-le " at the top there is only one bud le with all possible facultative nodes  . So we have in a bundle informations about the mode of occurrence of a node  , i . e . if a node is obligatory , facultative etc . 
The bundles serve also as description for the dominance behaviour of wordforms  ( one part of the formal description of the ir features  )   , thus we have a strong connection between a bundle and a wordform which can " stand " at the top of the bundle  . For this purpose ~ hebundles have a special external shape for linguistic work  . For instance , a finite verb form of the German verb Sschre iben " has several bundles in its dominance component  , one of these is
FIN(ACT?A0 BJ3 fA(PAT~DAS )?)
FIN-means , that the top is a finite verb form ACT ?- there must be a nactor  ( subject ) OBJ3f-there can be an indirect object ( PATADAS ) ? - there mue__~t be a direct object , either in the form of a noun group in " the accusative case  ( PAT ) or as a sub-?ordinate clause with the con junction " dase "  ( DAS ) Free modifications llke local and temporal circumstances are possible as well  . 
Of course , in the syntactic analysis system the bundles have another shape and ~ they contain more lnformat ione There are two possibilities to use the bundles for syn-tactic analysis  , the first one is to use them as proper ru les  , the eeco~one is to use other methods , but to have the bundl-es as syntactic knowledge in the back@round  . The first possib-ility is outlined in my dissertation  ( AROLD 1976 ) as a strong- 245 -where bottom-up and multiple-path analys?8  . But for a working system we intend to follow the second way  . 
In the paper a short summary of the system will be given  . 
The syntactic analysts , of a sentence ~? ven by the formal de-script ion of the syntactic features of the word forms iS made by three steps  . These three steps differ one from the other by d~fferent methods  . 
In the first step an nau~nented transit ionnetworkn  ( A T e ) is used to construct a rough structure of the sentence  . 
The second step uses the bundles which are members of the dominance component of the wordforms to find outso-called subordlnnt i on possibllitie e  . The result of the second step is a loop-f ree~raph  , which is transformed ur?ng the third step to a ~ aph cont using the dependency treem which desor ? be the syntactic structures of the an ~yeed sentence  . In the third step the conditions of the bundles  ( obligator 7 and facultative nodes etc .   ) are used as well as the condlttonm com ? n ~ from the shape of the resulting graph  . 
Up to now we ~ reonly at the be ~ nn~ng of the ~ nplement-ation of the system  .   3ome remake about these problems amwell as about the difficulties to include the analys is of coordtnated sentences w ~ ll be made in the paper too  . 

