THERELATIONSHIPOPUNDERLYING AND SURPAOE STRUCTURE 
INGENERATIVE DESORIPTION OF LANGUAGE
Ol ~ Ml~eska Tomi ~
Universitet " Kirili MetodiJ " , Skop Je , Yugoslavia
The distinction between u~uderlying and sur face structure is more or less well establ is hed in contemporary ~ ammatical analysi s  . The form and depth of the underly iDEs truc ture and its relationship to observable language reality are  , however , permanently in the focus of linguistic di sputes  . 
In the standard generative ~ ranaformations l model  ( Ohc~sky ,  1965 ) underly in E structure was moderately deep . I % reflected the surface structure of Eng lish and catered for semantic distinct ions mainly through the inherent senuantic features of the lexicon  . The semantic component , to which the derived sentences were being sent for semantic processing  , was not well defined . 
The generative semantics models deepened the underlying structure and imposed a cons iderable gap between the latter and the sur face structure  . This gap was to be bridged by transform at ions  , which with McCawley included very extensive lexical changes  . 
The functions of the underlying participants in the act-ion or state came to differ signifficantly from those of the surface nominal constituents  . In Fillmore's model ( Fillmore ,  1969 ) the subject of the surface structure correlated not only subject " actor " but also wi than with the N~de~lyi ~ underlying pat i ent  , experienc'er , locative .   .   . To provide for this correlation , Fillmore setup rules for systhematic sub -Jectivization of non-agentive " underly ing cases "  . What"s more ,  -  291 -he assigned to each verb a specific " case frame " which often lead to proposing features of conditional obltgator in ess  ( re-presented in hienotation by embedded and intersecting brack-ets  )   . Similar endeavoars for correlating under lying functions with divergent surface const ituents lead Gruber  ( 1967 ) to vague characterizations , often in different terms for differ- ent classes of verbs  . Anderson (1971) , in his turn , opposing the characterization of sub , sot/verb relations in terms like " actor / action "  , offered a great variety of case functions to be assigned to his noun phrases  , depending on the nature of their particip at ion in the " process " or " state " represented by the predicate  . 
More recently , generative linguists have been becoming increasingly aware of the necessity to dis tinguish meaning  , taken as the linguistic counterpart of ~ m Censional structure of sense  , from cognitive content , i . e . from the language independent patternings of factual knowledge  . Thus , Fillmore ( 1977 ) reexamines his underlying cases , places them outside the lan-guage system in a strict sense-in the realm of conceptual- ization  , and assumes that the underlying structure of language proper is setup by " creating cond itions under which a speaker cheese to draw  . certain case roles into perspective " . Sgall (1980) , in his turn , ol alms that hlemultilevel generative model permi ts to setup semantic  , underlying , tectogrammatical units , which are set off from the cognitive level " case -roles " but relate to them through Panevov ~? s regular system of shift-Ing  ( Panevov ~ ,  1980) . Thls shifting can , of course , be accommodated in the realm of conceptualiza tion without the system of levels of functional generative  5Tammar   . Recent transfers of selection of " case-ro les " into conceptualization has not madel inguistic description perspicuouslys impler  . The analyst has the choice of ( a ) introducing a set of rules that would " shi ft " the conceptual case roles so that they may naturally take their appropriate p laces in underlying structure or else  ( b ) making provisions for adjustment rules between the levels -  292  - . I of underly in 8 and surface structure . 
Tn the belief that the constituents of the underlying structure of a model ~ for automatic generation of the sentences of a natural language should be defined in terms that associa-te them closely to respective surface structure constituents  , ou ~ initial efforts for the construct ionofag ~-  .  -  . ar for autoamtio generation of Serbo-Croatian have lead us to a pre-dicate-centered underlying structure whose nominals fall w ith-in two general types : nuclear and ext ranuclear or adverbial  . 
mile the latter are optional , the former aveobl igator7 for a given predicate they can be abstent from the surface structure but are always recoverable  . Then , ~ ber and type of nucles ~ nominals that relate to each given predicate can be  . 
stated in a predicate dictionary . When the underlying struct-ure of indiv idual sentences are being generated  , these dict-ionaries can serve as guides fo r the selection of the nuclear nominals for each predicate  , which can be defined as the first , second , third ,   .   . nominal of a given predicate ( ~he exact nomber should be detez'mtned with tes ts for obligator i-n as a  )   . The first nominal ( or nominal one ) is the nominal from Qhich the action or sta te denoted by the predicate cz~lginates  , the second nominal ( or nominal two ) is the nominal towards which the action or s tate of the predicate is directed  , whereas the third nmn in sl ( or nominal three ) is the nominal funct-ioning as an into z ~nedtary between nominal  1 and nominal 20 The linear ordering of the surface struc ture constituents does not always correspond to the ordering of the underlying nominals  ; however , in the cc = municatively " nmarked sentences the CorTespondenoe between the type of surfaces t ructure f ~ u ~ otion and type of underlying st ructure nominal is stable  . 
In these sentences , nominal one is realized as subject , nomi-naltwo as direct object or any other type of direct complement  ( i . e . complement which relates to the verb direct ly  )   , while nominal three is realized as in di rectob  . lector any other cemplement that is contingent on the presence of another oem ploment  . 

In the inflective languages ( and Serbo-Croatian Is one of them ) the surface structure constituents are marked by specific suffixes  . The morphonolcgioal changes incurred by suff txation are usually being attributed to  , the operations of some morphonologica ! component or strata  . We , however , main-tain that the assigxnent of the suffix and the morphonological changes accompanying it can be done by the rules that trans-form  ( or translate ) the ~ derlying structure into surfaces t ructure  . Vitae ( 1980 ) has constructed a pro~-m for auto-marie generation of the nominal paradi ~ a  . Wes~enow devising signals which , when attached to the argu:ents and ad~erbial n " minsls of the underlying structure  , would trigger the gener-ation of Inflec ted nominal surface structure constituents along with their respective preposit ions  , if any . At the same time , work on the automatic generation of the pred icate phrase constituents is underway  . 
In the first generative ( English language based ) models morphology was assigned an anscilla ryrole  . Work with inflect-ed languages has shown that it should be dealt with independent of  , though in coordination with , syntax . By developing programs for automatic gener at ion of the morphons logl calfo~s  , while working on the syntactic and semantic camponent  ( s ) of the grs ~ mar , we hope to be able to build a model which is fox  , sally s4mple and in which the u~m derlying struct ~ e will not be excessively remote t ~ cea the surface one  . 

Anderson J . M .  (1971) , The C~mma:ofCase:Towards a\]~calist Theoz ~  , Cnmbrt ~ eIIntvez ~ ityl ~: ess . 
Choasky N . (1965), Aspects of the Theo~of Syntax , i . I . T . 
~ ess.
Fillmore C . J .  (1968) , " The Case for Case " , Uuiverssls in Linguistic Theory pE . Bach and R . Hal ~ aseds .   , Holt , Rine-hart and Winston , New Ter M , pp .  18 . 

Pillaore C . J .  (1977)  , " The Case for 0 aee Reopened " , Kasus-theorie , Klaseifikation undeemantie ohe Interpreta tion  , K . Heger and J . Pet ~ fiode . , Buske , Hamburg , pp . 3-26 ? Gruber J . ~ .  (1967) , Functions of the Lexicon in Formal Descriptive Grmmaar  , Santa Monioa System Develop Bent
Co . potation , ~-3770/0000/00.
Pane Towd J .  (1977) , "Inner Partle ipants and Free Adverbials " ,   , Prague Studies in Mathematical Linguistle e6 , pp . 227-254 . 
Panevovd J . (1980), Formy a funk oevest avb ~~ esk 6v ~ ts,
Academia , Praha.
Sgall P . (1980) t " Cue and Meaning ", Journal of ~ tlo . 4, pp .  525-536 . 
Vitae D .  (1980) , " Generiean ~ eimeni ~ kihoblikau empeko -hr vatekom ~ eziku "  , Informatioa 3 , pP ? 3439 ,  - 295 -
