CONSTRAINTSONNOUNPHRASE CONJUNCTION : A DOMAIN -INDEPENDENT 

Lynett ? Hirechman
Research and Development , Federal and Special Systems Group , 
Burroughs Corporation , Paoli , Pennsylvania , USA Coordinate conjunction is any important device for expressing complex information  . To provide a habitable langua-geprocessing system  , most applications require some treatment of conjunction  . When a rich conjunction mechanism is in t roduc-ed to account for the wide variety of conJotnings found in continuous text  ( as opposed to queries )   , it also becomes cruc-ial to restrict the parses obtained for the  o0n Joinings , since con~nction is a major source of ambigui tyin parsing  . For example , the sequence of syntactic classes :
NO~NPREPOSITIONNOUN and NOUN has two possible pareeez 
NOUNI ~% EPOSITION ( NOUN and NOUN ) swelling of ( hands and feet ) INOUNPREPOSITIONNOUN ) and NOUNs welling of hands ) and fever The choice of the correct parse depends on apply in ~ domain-specific constrs/nts to determine which words " go to-gether " best  . The concept of o on Junotional compatibili ty depends on semanti ~ psxalleliambetween the conjoined elements ! thus  , in the first example , hands and feet are more semantically parallel thans well ln ~ and feet  . Although it is possible to write special rules to define allowable con~oln~ngs for a part laular domain of application  , this would mean that the- 129 -system would not be portable : the conjunct ion constraints would have to be rewritten for each new domain  . It is , however , possible to formulate a general domain - independent principle to capture conjunct ion constraints  . This paper will describe such a principle , implemented as " conjunction re-strict ions " within the general treatment of con junction in the natural language processing system of the Linguistic String Projec t parser  . The illustrative examples are drawn from actual text occurrences in hospital di scharges unnnaries  , processed using the mechanisms described below , as well as from some building codespec if ications  , also processed with the LSP system . 
The first rule of conJunctional compatib ility is simply : Two conjoined nouns must belong to the same  ( domain-specific ) semantic class , This rule will produce the correct parse for the two previous examples  , swell in ~ of hands and feet and swelli ~ of hands and fever  . Hands and fee_ . _ ~ t are both BODY-PART words in the first example , whiles well in ~ is not ; in the second example , swell in ~ and feve . ._ . . . r r are both SIGN . SYMPTOM words . 
In order to determine conJunctional compatib ility  , the noun conjuncts are compared pairwise ! each conjunct is ini-tially assigned a list consisting of its semantic c lass  ( es )   . 
(Most words belong to Jus t one semant ic c lass ! however  , cer-tain lexically ambiguous wo~ds belong to two or more classes  , as illustrated below . ) The in tersect ion o f the two l i s t s of semantic classes is then computed  . If the intersection is not empty , then the conjoining is allowed , and the intersection replaces the original list of classes associated with each con junct  . This serves as a record of a ~ vdisambignation that occurs as a result of computing o on Junct ionsl compatibility  . 
For example , discharge is lexically ambiguous in medical narrative : it belongs to the ~ DICAL-ACT class  , as in :- 130 -hospitale ~ m'Les len end dlso~ge INITIALLISTS ( INST )   ( MEDICAL vACT )   ( MEDICAL vACT , SIGN-s~su~oM ) AFTERCONJ .   ( INST )   ( KEDICAL-ACT )   ( MEDICAL-ACT ) whereas it has the SIGN-SYMPTOM reading in the phrase : no bleeding or discharge I~TIAL LISTS  ( SI~-SYM ~ OM )   ( ~DICA'-ACT oSION-S~U~O ~ ) 
AW~CONJ . ( SI~W-S~U~OM ) ( SIGN-S~OM)
Thus oom put in ~ conjunction compatibility a l so provides a record of the correct reading when a conjunct is lexical ! y ambiguous  . 
The conJu Bc tion rule does not account for the fact that certain noun phrases have a semant ic class different fr  .  -  . 
that of their head noun . Consider the following phrase from a build ing code text : bull din~s and portions of bu ildings 
BLDG PARTBLDG
In this case , the head noun ~ portion is " transparent " to its prepositional modifier  , of build ln~seT hat is , the phrase portion of build ln~s really has a distribution characteristic of the word build lnK  . If we could disregard the word portions of and look instead at the noun in the prepositional phrase  , namely build in ~ with class BLDG , then the conjunction rule would apply correctly . We call this type of construction the " computed attribute " oonstruct lon  , because , in its most general form , the semantic class for an entire phrase is computed from the interaction of the semantic class of the head noun and theolass  ( es ) of its modifiers . 
The computed attribute construction turns out to be characteristic of a set of Engl ish semantic classes common to  ma~7 domains . These classes include the classes AMOUNT , PERIOD , BEGINNING , END ING , FREQUENCY , etc . To handle these-131-constructions , an additional mechanism has been added as a restriction to the grammar  . It operates on a word ~ belo ~ LUg to at rans parent word class modified by an appropr iate pre-nomiual noun or adjective modif ier  ( e?g . build in ~ portion ) , or by an appropriate prepositional phrase modifier  ( e . g ,, portions of ~ ldin~s ) . It assigns to the phrase as a whole the class of the modifier and binds the modifier to the head noun  , so that the modifier does not distribute over the other con~oined noun  ( s ) ? This produces only the ps . Tsebuildings and ( portions of buildings )   . BLDGP ~ RTBLDG
BLDG 4= COMPUTEDATTRIBUTE " and eliminates the parse ( buildings and portions ) of buildings , The computer attribute is recorded as a spec ial COMPUT-ED-ATTRIBUTE list on the head noun  ; it lists the semanticolass ( es ) associated with the entire ~ The COMPUTED- -ATTRIBUTEll st is assigned before conJunetional compatibility is checked  , whloh allows the conjunction meahanism to make use Of a COMPUTED-ATTRIBUTE  , if one is present ? On the basis of a computed attribute and con~unctlon compatibility  , the following sentence received exactly one analysis : There was no cyanosis and no his tory of prior seizures  ( SI a W-S~PTOM )   ( PERIOD )   ( SIOS-S~-\/TOK ) COI ~ UTED-ATTRIBUTE -> ( SIGN . -SYMI~TO ~ ) A preliminary test on a 22-sentence p ~ ph from a hospital discharges ~ was run to compare the  . parses obtained with and without the above con~unction and computed attribute mechan is ms  . Five sentences in the paragraph contein-ed conjoined noun phrases  . These mechanisms reduced the total number of parses obtained for the five sentences a l most in half:  8 parses total with the conjunction and computed attri-but emechanisms compared to  14 parses total without the me- 132 -The com ~ unction and computed attribute mechanisms do not re-solve all of the ambigu ities of oom Joined noun phrases  . Inpe ~ tieular , they do not always resolve the issue of dist ribut-ion of right and left modifiers  . However , they substantially reduce the number of incor rect parses and they require no modifics t ion for application to new domains  . 

