


The Transfer Phase in an English-Japanese Translation System 
Junichi TSUJII
Department of Electrical Engineering
Kyoto University


IINTRODUCTION
We will discuss in ~ his paper
several topics in a machine translation
system from English to Japanese which
was implemented by using ARIANE 78 at
GETA ( Grouped SEtudes pour la Traduc-
tion Automatique , Grenoble , France).
The system basically follows the same
princilpes as the other GETA~s systems.
First of all , it uses the English an-
alys is program in common with the other
two systems , the systems from English
to Bahasa , and to Chinese . This means
that the same interface structure of
English is used for generating three
different languages . One of the re-
search objectives is to verify the
structure by applying it to Japanese.
As GETAIs basic ideas were explained in
(I ) and (2) in detail , we will concen-
trate here on the problems in generat-
ing Japanese , especially those in
Transfer Phase.
Our generation process is , as in
the other GETASs systems , divided into
four independent phases , Lexical Trans-
fer ( Transfert Lexical-TL),
Structural Transfer ( Transfert
structrale-TS ), Sturctural Generation
( Generation Structurale GS ), and
Morphological Generation ( Generation
Morphologlque-GM ), which are sub-
sequently executed in this order . The
first two phases which we call
" Transfer Phase " are responsible for
transferrir ~ English oriented struc-
tures into Japanese oriented ones , on
which necessary opera , ions will be performed in thesue oeediag phases ( GS and @ M ) top ~ erate syntactioally and morphologically eorreot Japanese  . 
Amom ~ others , the problems of transferring " Valance Structures " add " Tense and Aspect Expressions " are discussed in detail in  2  ~  3  , not only because they are important problems in Transfer Phase  , but also because these problems show us what kinds of " semantic " processings are necessary  ( or unnecessary ) for transferring linguistic structures of two languages belonging to quite different language families such as Japanese and English  . 
They also give us interesting in sig~hts into the roles of " semantics " in natural language processing in general  . 
Some of them are summarized in 4.
2 PROCESSING OF VALENCES 2IBASICS CHEME
Same syntactic forms in English ( direct objects , prepositional phrases with specific prepositions , etc . ) are often expressed differently in syntactic forms in Japanese  . It is obvious that there are no one-to-one correspondences between syntactic functions of two languages and therefore  , transforming from one language to another , based simply on syntactic functions , is net sufficient . 
There are two , essentially different solutions for avoiding this difficulty  . One solution is to set up intermediate " meaning n representations  , through which surface forms of two languages are related  . This scheme has been recurrently adopted , esp ~ ci ~ lybyAl-oriented researchers . The oth ~~ ne , which we adopted here , is the scheme called " lexical unit oriented transfer "  , where many idiosyncratic phenomena specific to individual lexical units are treated by referring to the descriptions in the di -ctionaries  . In this approach , the selection of targets ~ r faeefo et us is per f ~ largely dependlng on lexioaldea or lpti ~ in the Bi-li~D ~- ctio eary  ( W )   , without refeer i ~ to
M3384 J . TSUJII universal semantic primitives or relah tions  . 
The interface structure adopted by
GETA is called " multilevel analysis tree " which is a kind of annotated trees where various kinds of information of several levels such as syntactic functions  ( SF )  , logical relationships ( RL ) , morphosyntactic categories ( K ) etc . are attached to each node . 
Such annotation is expressed in the form of attribute-value pairs  ( At GETA , " attributes " such as SF , RL etc . are called " variables " . We follow this convention in the following . )
Among the variables used at GETA,
VL-i(i=1 , 2:Valences ) and RL play important roles in every stage of translation  ( Analysis , Transfer and
Generation ) . The whole process can be schematized as follows . 
(Basic Scheme )   ( I ) The valences of each source predicate are described in analysis di-ctionary by using VL-i  . VL-i indicates what kind of surface syntactic form is required of the element which fills the ith argument of the predicate  . Suppose that the verb " reach " has the following valences  . 
(a ) ( b)
FOR )   ( c ) reach to NP ( VLI::TO ) reach NP for NP ( VLI := N , reach for NP ( VLI := FOR )

In the AS ( Analyse Syntactique ) , the initial string of words is converted into an annotated trees trueutreby referring to these lexical description  ( See Fig . I ) . 
I reached ab~k for him.


Fig . i Result of Analysis ( 2 ) The TL replaces the source lexical units in the trees with corresponding target lexl calun its  . The target units , especially target predicates , have their own valences which show in what surface forms the ith arguments should be generated  . Because different valence strucures such as above  ( a )  ,   ( b ) and ( c ) often lead to different selections of target equivalents  , the valence information is checked during the lexical transfer  ( See Fig .  2) . In some cases ~ simple source predicates are paraphrased by composite target structures as in Fig  .  3 . 
reach ~-- ~ Lexical Unitl = Tassuru JVLI := NI\ [Lexical Unit := Toru " ~\ [ JVLI := O\[  JVL2:=NO-TAME-NI 
Fig . 2 Descriptions in BD
VCL/I , Fig . 3 argo GO Vargl
I\Structure to reach pp Structure for / ~ Transfer 
VCL arglGOV
SCL NP Nob as u
Iar , o / ~ lv % ' arsl cov
Toru ( 3 ) The GS and GM actualize each argument in the form specified by JVL-i  ( See Fig .  4) . 
VCL .

J ~ L2:-NO-T~-NI
Fig . 4 Actualization Of JVL-i
THETRANS FER PHASE IN ATR ANSLATION SYSTEM 385
From the above scheme , though it is over simplified in many " points , we can see that the surface forms of the two languages governed by predicates are almost directly associated with each other by the descriptions in the 

Furthermore , one can consider that valences of a predicate describe surface usage patterns of the predicate  , and that the BD associates such usage patterns of source predicates with different target expressions  . Because GETAs multilevel analysis trees preserve information of various levels as much as possible  , we can also use the information other than VL-i to enrich the specifications of usage patterns  . 
For example , the usage pattern of " take " take the initiative in--ing  , can be specified by referring to VL-i of " take " , morphosyntactic category of
ARG2(gerund) , the specific lexical unit " initiative " , etc . , and this usage pattern as a whole will be associated with appropriate Japanese expressions  . 
As such , we can transfer naturally idiomatic , semi-idiomatic , semi-semi-idiomatic---expressions in the source into target ones  . This facility is extremely important for the language pairs like English end Japanese  , where we can hardly expect one-to-one correspondence between lexical units and therefore  , the selection of appropriate target units is one of the most difficult problems in the whole translation process  . 
22 DISCUSSION
We adopted " lexical unit oriented transfer " or " transfer based on usage patterns " instead of using any intermediate meaning representations  . 
It might be worthwhile mentioning our attitude toward the latter approach  . 
The meaning representation approach seems very attractive  , but the researchers in this framework have encountered great number of difficulties in designing a complete set of semantic primitives by which subtle difference of meanings of all lexical units can be expressed  . As Boitet (2) pointed out , many systems often use source lexical units as primitives in their representation schemes  , though they use certain " universal " sets of primitive relationships  ( Boitet ( 2 ) classified them as " hybrid " systems )  . However , even in such hybrid systems , to determine a universal set of primitive relationships  , deep cases for example , is quite problematic . Moreover , we doubt whether such relationships are really useful for generating target sentences  . 
We can hardly explain without referring to the specific verbs " enter " and " go "  , why we say " John enters the auditorium " instead of " John enters into auditorium "  , while we say " John goes into the auditorium " . As for deep semantice as e , " the auditorium " plays the same role . The only difference is that " enter " incorporates the meaning of " into " in its meaning but " go " does nJt  . Without semantic decomposi-tlons of verb * s meanings  , we cannot establish any rules on deep cases without referring to specific verbs  , which can decide whether " into " is necessary or not  . If the rules refer to specific verbs , the names of deepoases are not signigicant because the same deep case is differently interpreted depending on indivldual verbs  . Why dont you use ARGI , ARG2 etc . instead of AGENT , INST etc ?
The case relationships are not so powerful in selecting translation equivalents  , either . If we don~t use semantic primitives only by which appropriate target equivalents can be selected  , we have to refer to the the surrounding contexts where the source units appear  , in order to choose appropriate target equivalents  . Why should we reduce the rich structures such as multilevel analysis trees into poor ones ? We don ' t claim that semantic cases are completely useless  , but only claim that a single level structure based on them is not rich enough to select appropriate target equivalents and that surface level information is also useful to specify usage patterns  ( or " contexts where lexical units appear " )  . 
386 J . TSUJII 3 PROCESSING OFTENSE ANDASPECT 3-I BASICSCHEME
English and Japanese have , of course , their own grammatical devices to express tense and aspect  . As for aspect , for examle , English has basically two surface forms , " Perfective " and " Progressive " , and on the other hand , 
Japanese has the forms " PRE Dicate + AU Xiliaries " , where AUX is a sequence of auxiliary verbs such as " Teiru "  , " Tsutsuaru " , " Kake+Teiru " etc . 
However , we should carefully distinguish between these surface forms  ( Grammatical Aspects ) and what are really expressed by them . In the transfer phase , we should select appropriate Japanese surface forms to express what are really expressed in English  . In order to do this , we set up an intermediate representation level which is deeper than surface level  . The following five variables and their values are used for this purpose  . 
I . EASP : Lexical Aspects of English

NCOM : Non-Completive Verbs
NMOM : Non-Momentary Verbs
PMOM : Momentary Verbs
NTRAN : Non-Transitory Verbs
PTRAN : Transitory Verbs
The above values directly correspond to the five different classes of English predicates shown in 
Fig . 5.
-STATIVE + STATIVE // t ~ co_ . ~s ~ O_MMPMO_ . MMm"ed ~ . P'r ~ Fig . 5 Classification of Eaglish
Predicates 2. ESAS ?: English Surface Aspectual

PERF ( Perfective Form)
PROG ( Progressive Form ) 3 . JASP : Lexical Aspects of Japanese

RES : Resultative Verbs
DUR : Durative Verbs
INT : Instantaneous Verbs
STATE : Statl ve Verbs
By combining these four values , we can discriminate the five different classes of Japanese verbs shown in Fig  . 

+ STATE-STATE ( hear )   ( fail )   ( sing )   ( know )   ( observe ) 
Ar-u Kur-u Kik-u Shuppant su-Ok or-u ( exist )   ( come )   ( listen ) suru ( leave )   ( occur ) Fig . 6 Classification of Japanese
Predicates 4. JSASP : Japanese Surface Aspectual

Grammatical aspects in Japanese are expressed by auxiliary verbs which follow the predicates  . The values of
JSASP are such auxiliaries . These values are realized as surface au-xiliaries in the GS  . in some cases , more than one auxiliary are needed to express the specified DASP  ( see below )  . 
TSUTSUARU , KAKARU , TESHIMAU,
KOTOGAARU , TEIRU , TEKURU , etc.
5. DASP : Deep Aspect
UNCOMP : Uncompletion of Activu
COMP : Completion of Action
STATE : Absolute State
EXP : Experience
THETRANS FER PHASE IN ATR ANSLATION SYSTEM 387
TDURI : Temporal Duration , including the reference time point
T DUR2: Temporal Duration until the reference time point
IMF : Immediate Future
ITR : Iteration of Action
TRANS : Transition of State
RES : Resultant State of Action
The basic scheme for generating surface Japanese is as foilows  . 
(Basic Scheme )   ( I ) ESASP ( grammatical aapeet ) is de-term lned in the AS . 
(2 ) DASP is determined for the combination of ESASPa ~dEASP  ( described in the dictionary for each English predicate-lexical aspect  )  . 
(3 ) An appropriate Japanese equivalent for the English predicate is selected  . 
(4 ) JSASP is determined based on DASP and JASP of the selected Japanese predicate  . 
(5 ) Appropriate auxiliaries with adequate inflections are generated in the 
GS and GM.
The above scheme and the detailed correspondence among the values are illustrated in Fig  . 7, and Fig . 8, respectively . ( Fig . 8 shows only the sub- , ortion for " progressive forms ") . 
Lex$calAspect Grammatical Aspect
Source Verb-M ) Source Surface , Expression "(- S , + C ,   . Prosress ? ve ~ Deep Aspecto . : d : : el
Lexleal Aspec : . ~
Target Verb ( Ig )
Gra = ~ a tieal Aspect
Fig .   7 Basic Scheme 32 MODIFICATION SINTHEBASICS CHEME
The basic shceme can treat the following sentences  ( Here , we will see the examples of English progressive forms  )  . 
( EXI ) He is opening the door.
Kare-ga Doa-OAke ( Akeru)-TEIRU.
( he ) ( door ) ( to open ) (- s , -c)~--TDURI~---g-(S ) ' X~- .   . ~( D , R ) ~ TEXRU\"?(V , -R ) I~~(I , R ) ~ TSUTSUARU--(I , -R ) I--(-S , + C , -M ) ~IMF ~--------~- ( S ) - - - - ~ KOTO-NI-NARU ~ . ~ YOU-NI-NARU \"~( D , - R 
Pro , .   .   .   . iv ? (- s , ~(+ s , + T ) ~-- TDURI~(s ) ~ x\~-(v .  ~  .   . _ ~ oX ~ X ~ tTSI~SU-ARU\\-c ~,- R ~ -__ . JoXx ~' TEKI-TEIRU--(I , -R ) ~ X'(+S , -T ) ~- X
ASPEASPDAS ___.~PJAS .___PPJSASP
Fig . 8 Rules for Transferring Aspects 388 J . TSUJII(EX2) The door is opening . 
Doa-GA Hiraki-T SUT SUARU.
(door ) ( to open ) ( EX3) He is leaving.
Kare-GAS huppats ushi-KAKE-TE lRU.
( he ) ( to leave ) ( Ex4) Heistapping his foot.
Kare-ga Ashibumishi-TEIRU.
(he )   ( to tap one's foot )   ( EX5 ) He is doubting h is friends . 
Kare-GA Tomodachi-OU tag at-TEKI-TEIRU.
( he ) ( friends ) ( to doubt )
In these examples , the same grammatical aspect in English progressive-is realized in Japanese by using different grammatical aspects  , depending on lexical aspects of both
English and Japanese predicates . Note that the same DASP ( TDURI ) is expressed by different auxiliaries in ( EXI ) and ( EX2 )  , because " to open " of transitive and intransitive usages correspond to the Japanese verbs " A keru " and " Hiraku "  , respectively , which have different lexical aspects ( Hiraku+TEIRU expresses RES , which means " the door is open ") . 
Though it seems to work well for relatively simple sentences  , the scheme has been augmented in several points , in order to treat more complicated sentences . We will give Just two examples of such sophistications below  . 
( I ) The basic scheme only gives default interpretations of DASP  . That is , the interpretation given in Fig . 8 is adopted , only if there is no evidence which recommends another interpretation  . Occurrences of time adverbial phrases/clauses , for example , often change the interpretation . 
( EX6) He has broken abox.
( DASP := COMP )
He has broken boxes for two hours.
( DASP := TDUR2)
We currently distinguish four different types of such phrases/clauses  ( frequent at lve , duratlve , momentary and non-momeltary ) , and , before the determination of DASP , a specially designed subgrammar is executed to classify the time adverbials into these types  . The augumented scheme reflects the properties of such adverbials in determining DASP  . Another example of evidences which shift DASP is the occurrence of special adverbs such as " ever  "  , " yet " , " already " etc . 
(2 ) English to-anding-clauses in predicate valences are expressed by subordinate clauses  ( SCL ) in Japanese , and we should select appropriate surface aspectual forms for the SCL ts which reflect relative time orderings among the events described by SCL's and the main clauses  . 
( EX7) I saw him walking in the garden.
... Arui-TEIRU .... Mi-TA.
( to walk ) ( to see )
DASP of " he walks " is TDURI , because the events " I see " and " he walks " occur simultaneously  . TDURI for " Aruku ( to walk ) " is expressed by " TEIRU " , according to the rules shown in Fig .  8 . 
( EX8) I remembered walking in the garden.
... Arui-TA---Oboe-TEIRU.
( to walk ). ( to remember)
DASP of " I walk " is COMP , because it procedes in time " I remember " . 
( EX9) I remember to walk in the garden.
... Aruku-null AUX--Oboe-TEIRU.
( to walk ) ( to remember )
DASP of " I walk " is UNCOMP , because it has not completed yet . 
In order to treat above phenomena , valences of predicates taking to-and/oring- clauses as arguments are augumented with the specifications of DASP of the argument clauses  , and based on these specifications , the same scheme as above selects the grammatical aspects of the Japanese SCL  . 
33 DISCUSSION
THETRANS FER PHASE IN ATR ANSLATION SYSTEM 389
We emphasize in 2 the lexical oriented nature of Transfer Phase and claimed that a universal set of case relations is not so useful as often claimed in literature  . On the contrary , we set up a set of " semantic " ( or deep ) markers for processing as peotual expressions . Why ?
First of all , we should notice here that , although both EASP and JASP seem to describ ~ the properties of the realworld actions which are denoted by the verbs  , they are just the classifications of verbs based on their linguistic behaviours in each language  . 
When we say that the Japanese verb " shinu " ( to die ) belongs to the class ( I , R ) , we don~t claim that the action denoted by " shinu " is a momentary action and always happens in physically null time  , but we only claim that the
Japanese verb " shinu " linguistically behaves in a certain specific way  . This becomes much clearer , when we consider the verb " hiraku " ( " to open "- intransitive use ) which also belongs to ( I , R ) . 
While the verb " hiraku " behaves in
Japanese as an instantaneous verb , the corresponding English verb " to open " behaves as a non-momentary verb  ( NMOM )  . 
( Note also that , though " hiraku " is an instantaneous verb , we can express " Temporal Duration of Action " ( TDURI ) by using the verb in ( EX2 ) ) . As such , the classifications given by EASP and JASP are essentially language-dependent and not universal ones  . 
DASP , on the other hand , is somewhat universal . Within the scheme given in 3-I , we could omit this variable by directly associating surface expressions in the BD as we did invalence transfer  . That is , we could associate open ( transit lve , ESASP::PROG ) open ( intransitive , ESASP::PROG )
I eave ( ESASP := PROG ) etc.
directly with
A keru(JSASP := TEIRU)
Hiraku ( JSASP := TSUTSUARU)
Shuppatsusuru(JSASP := KAKERU , TEIRU ), etc.
respectively . However , this direct association method cannot treat various kinds of interactions illustrated in  32 between DASP interpretation and the other linguistic expressions  . We need a certain level of representation through which linguistic expressions of various parts interact  . Without DASP , we cannot generalize , for example , the influence of time adverbials on aspectual interpretations  . 
Though transferring aspectual expressions seems to be performed without referring to individual lexical units  , there are several cases where we have to refer to them  . This occurs when the verbs in the two languages have slightly different " meaning "  . The English verb " to drown " can be roughly par -aphrased as " to die or kill by immersion in liquid " and  , as we can see , the meaning essentially contains the concept " to die " or " tokill "  . " To drown " behaves linguistically in almost same manners as " to die "  . It belongs to the verb class NMOM ( completive but non-momentary )  . The progressive expresses form IMF ( immediate future ) as shown in ( EX3 )  . On the other hand , the
Japanese translation equivalent " obore ru " denotes just the realworld process of one's struggling in water not to drown  , and behaves as a durative and non-resultative verb  . Therefore , though the two sentences ( a ) He is drowning ( b ) Kare-GAO bore-TEIRU ( he )   ( to drown ) denotes almost same situations in the realworld , they describe them from different points of view , and DASP of ( a ) and ( b ) are IMF and TDURI , respectively . The transfer process is illustrated in Fig .  9 . This process're-~xlcal ~ it Crammati~1Aspect
I . dro ~. lJ~sur , . ce ~ ress lo * I . . . .
~-~(- S .  ~  , ~ ~- Progressive I ~( D ~ P of Source ~ press lon)
Target Lexical Unic
DASP of (, .............)
I-I
E ~ resslon of Targe C
Fig . 9 Rules referring to
Lexical Units 390 J . TSUJH fers to the individual lexical units , " to drow n " and " obore ru " , and transfers " drown + IMP " into " oboreru+TDUR1- as a whole . This shows that , even in the process of aspect transfer , we need lexical-unit-oriented operations . 
Moreover , though we talked until no was if EASP and JASP were specified for each lexl calun it  , aspectual properties of predicates often change , according to their usages . Therefore , they should be specified for each usage pattern , ? and aspect transfer should be integrated into valence transfer in  2  . 
4. CONCLUSION
We discussed in this paper mainly about the role of semantics in Transfer 
Phase by taking examples from our
English-Japanese translation system.
The following points should be made clear here.
( I ) We can distlnguish two kinds of semantics in natural language process-ings  , that is , " semantics as meaning representations " and " semantics as constraints  ( or preference ) " , both of which have their own analogues in linguistics  , Logical Formula in MG and Selectional Restriction Rules based on semantic markers  . Our contention in 2 is only that the former type of semantics is not so useful as often claimed  . 
The latter could or should be included as descriptors in multilevel analysis trees  . This is useful not only for reducing possible ambiguities in Analysis Phase but also for augument lng the descriptive power of usage patterns in 
Transfer Phase.
(2 ) We discussed about the utilization of usage patterns in Transfer Phase  . 
However , they should be used also in
Analysis Phase to reduce ambiguities.
At present , only cooccurrence restrictions between predicates and specific prepositions are expressed by VL-i and utilized in Analysis Phase  , but usage patterns of predicates here are much more rich  , such as cooccurrence of specific lexical units ( nouns , adverbs , etc . ) , of phrases with specific semantic and syntactic properties etc  . Because these are highly idiosyncratic . and dependent on each predicate , how we can compromise these idiosyncratic matters with general rules in Analysis Grammar remains as one of important future problems  . 
(3 ) We intensionally avoided the discussions about linguistic properties of deep cases  . In fact , several grammatical rules can be founded on deep cases  . 
By referring to deep cases , we can formulate , for example , a rule which decides whether passive construction is possible or not  . Deep cases in this usage give linguistic classifications of relationships among predicates and noun phrases  , but not those among events and objects in the real world  . 
Deep eases of this type are , however , language-dependent as EASP and JASP ( Rules of passivization in Japanese and
English are different , for example ) , and therefore , we cannot use them as universal relationships in the intermediate representations  . Moreover , even for linguistic deep cases , we think that it might be more practical to use the other kind Of markers such as markers directly showing the possibility of passivization etc  . 
(4) Though DASP is claimed to be universal , this claim should be verified in future by applying it to other language pairs  . In fact , the values of
DASP reflect many properties specific to English and Japanese  . That is , we set up the values of DASP only to distinguish the aspectual features  ( of realworld events ) which lead to different surface aspectual forms of English or Japanese  . These should be distinguished in order to transfer aspectual expressions appropriately  . Other languages might express explicitly in surface forms different aspectual features of events from differnt points of view  . Because of this language-dependent property of DASP  , we perform both the interpretation of ESASP and the determination of JSASP in Transfer 

REFERENCES(i ) B . Vauquois (1976): Proc . of COLINC 76, 127-135(2) C . Boltet (1980): Proc . of COLING 80, 430-436
