DIVe ~ OPING AREADING MACHINE FOR ~ BLIND
M . Boot
Inst . of Applied and Computational Linguistics . Wilhelm A Da-
park 11/12,358 1NCU trecht
The develo ~ aent of a readi ~ machine for the b lind implies the solution of problems on such diverse fields as linguistics  , micro computing and ergonomics . Because of the stats of the art in Comput at ional Lin & qaist $ cs  , however , the lin~qaistic problems turn out to be the major drawbask in this field of scient if icendeavor  . That is the reason why the paper for the greater part is devoted to the description of a new model for automated phonemization  . This model is applied to Dutch . The model was developed for words only . Thus , the reading manhins as it stands now is able to pronounce a series of words e Therefore  , the texts read into the computer are treated as a series of single words by the reading machine  . The prob-le ~ of prosody e:cenot tackled upti l ! news On the other hand  , all problems concerning as similation in ths words have been  8olvedo The computer program that performs this te~ki scall-ed YONGRAF  . It was developed at the University of Ut recht  . The computer program FONGRAF is able to perform a transcription of written text into the phonematic foxiest according to the princip les of phonematic transor?ption  . The paper fooueses on the design of the prepare and enswers questions concerning the relat ion between the technical part  ( implamentation ) and the linguistic considerations behind the computer progj ~ em  . 
It is argued that in the past computer programs performing this linguistic task were pr incipally designed from the-  46 -implementation point of view . This has led to computer pro-grams wi~hast rong ad hock in d of problem solving part in i t  . 
Therefore , these computer prod , rams turn out to be not adaptable tOnew situations and unfore seen mistakes  . ln this paper it is argued that for the solution of linguistic problems of this kind a pattern mato ~- tng computer program has to be developed  . 
It should go without saying that a computer des igned for l  in6~is tio purposes should be firmly based on the l inguistic analysis of the task  . As far as the search for regularities in the phonetic interpretation of written text i sconcerned we used the phonological theory as an important aid  . The phono-logical description of the Dutch language was used as the most important source fo r the definition of the pattern marcher in the computer program FONG RAP  . Many of the observed regular it-ies regarding the Dutch phone me distribution and phonologlo alru les concerning the phonetic interpretation of the phonologic-alforms of Dutch morphemes are particularly useful to our problem in that they state the surroundings which affect a particular phoneme  . For instance the assimilation rule that a consonant becomes voiceless or voiced accord ing to the " voice " of the following consonant  . This kind of rules applies even in surroundings where the syllable boundaries are involved  . This is the reason why we consider the appli cation of hyphenation programs to be out of p lace as far as the solution of the phonemat ization problem for Dutch words is concerned  , This also is the main reason why we developed a pattern matching computer program  . A further advantage of the pattern matching pro-gram is that it is easy to implement " new " regularities  . With the notion " new " regularities were fer to rules and regular it-ies not descr ibedb ~ normal phonology  . Those regularities often are caused by the fact that a computer is too " literal "  . 
Native speakers will , e . g . not confuse any letter-sequence oi_~ror is c_  . _h has in hooi_ . _ ~ k and macar onls ch_ . __otel with the suffix-es oi __~ randise ~ hoAcomputer  , however , does not have this linguistic knowledge . Thus , one has to design means to implem -- 47 -ent this kno Wledge . This is done by the definition of patte rns  . 
In the paper we shortly refer to the eolut ? on of prcnunc ? at ? on  8rab idity caused by semantic reason m . The computer pro~e a FONGRAPw~s tested with the help of a variety of corpus ~ s consist ing of naturalle ~ guage texts  , The results of these tests are reported o- 48  -
