COLING82, J . Horeck~eft.)
North . Holland Publishing Company
Cc~Academt ~1982
NATURALL ANGUAGE ACCESSTOST RUCTURED TEXT
Jerry R . Robbs , Donald E . Walker , and Robert A . Amsler
SRI International
Menlo Park , Call for nla 94025

This paper discusses the problem of providing natural language access to textual material  . We are developing a system that relates a request in English to specific passages in a document on the basis of correspondences between the logical representations of the in formation in the request and in the passages  . In addition , we are developing procedures for automatical ly generating logical representations of text passages  , directly from the text , by means of an analysis of the coherences t ructure of the passages  . 

At SRI we are developing a system for natural language access to textual material  , The system is to provide access to a textbook or other document of some importance  , by returning relevant passages in response to a user's natural language request  . Currently we are using the Hepatitis Knowledge Base  , a compendium of current knowledge about hepati t is compiled by the National Library of Medicine  , although the techniques we are devising are in no way particular to this document \[ cf  . Walker , 1982\] . The project has two phases . In the first , we are developing text access procedures for t ranslating a user's request into an under lying logical form and  , in order to locate the appropriate passages , matching the logical form with a Text Struc ture which expresses the structure of the document as a whole and summarizes the content of individual passages in terms of canonical p redicates  ( Walker and Hobbs ,  1981\] . In the second , longer-term effort , we are developing procedures for automatical ly generating portions of the Text Struc ture directly from the text  . 
THETEXTACCESSCOMPO~NT
In the text access component , a user's request is translated into logica l form by SRI's DIALOGIC system  , described in another paper submitted to this conference \[ Grosz et al  ,  1982\] . This logical expression is then turned over to the lnferencing component DIANA\[Hobbs  ,  1980\] , where various discourse problems are solved and a match with the Text Structure is sought  . 
As an illustration of this process , consider the following example query : During what period is immuno prop by laxis appropriate follo ~ rlng exposure to type Bhepatitis ? DIALOGIC translates the request into the fol lowing form : DURING  ( APPROPRIATE ( IMMUNOPROPHYLAXIS ( I , Xl , Y ) IFOLLOW(I , EXPOSE(X2 , HEPATITIS-B ))) , ? X\[PERIOD(?X )) That is , during period ? X , the ? mmunoprophylaxisI of X1 against Y , where I follows an exposure event of X2 to hepatitis B , is appropriate . 
Two kinds of discourse problems are exemplif ied here  . First , there is the problem of determining implici t arguments  . We are not told explicitly what Immuno prophy laxls is a galnst  , only what exposure was--t ? " We need to draw the inference that exposure to solt ~ thlng is typl cally followed by Immuno prophy laxls against it  . This problem must be solved if we are to ret rieve the proper passages on immunization aga ins the pat it is B virus  ( HBV ) rather than some other agent . 
Similarly , we are not told expll cltly that the one who was exposed is the one who will receive immuooprophy laxls  , that is , that X1 and X2 are the same Ind lvl dual . 
The second discourse problem illustrated here is that of metonymy  . One may talk about both exposure to HBV and exposure to type Bhep at it is  . In the first case we are talking about exposure to a virus  , in the second exposure to a disease . The Text Structure is expressed in canonical predicates in a standardized form  , and one of the standardizations is in the c lass of entities that can be the argument of a predicate  . We must decide , for each predicate , the type of arguments it can take . For example , is one exposed to a virus or a disease ? For various reasons  , we have decided that one is exposed to a vi rus and not to a disease  . Thus the infereocing procedures have to an a lyze the actual query into one involving exposure to the virus caus in ~ type Bhepati t is  , or to HBV . This coercion is done by access lng-lnfo rmatlon in a knowledge base that " expose " requ ires a virus as its second argument  , that type B hepatitis is caused by HBV , and that HBV is a virus . 
In order to match the request with the Text St ructure  , DIANA needs to translate the original request into the canonical predicates in which the Text Structure is expressed  . For example , since " immuno prophy laxis " is not one of the canonical predicates  , we need to use the axiom IHHUNOPROPHYLAXIS(i , p , v ) iff It ~ JNIZg(i , p , PROPHYLAXIS(v )) that is , i is an immuno prophy lax is event of p agains tvif and only if I is an immunization event of p for prophy laxis against v  . The result is a translation into the canonical predicates " immunize " and " prophylaxis "  , which are used in the summaries of the relevant passages in the Text Structure  . 
GENERATINGTEXTSTRUCTURE
Our work on the automatic generation of the Text Structure is at a more preliminary stage  . Automatic summarization is a central aspect of this effort  . A certain amount of work has been done in art lfl clal intelllgence and psychology on the automatic construction of summaries  , including work by Rumelhart \[1975\] , Handler and Johnson \[1977\] , Schank and his colleagues \[ Schank et alj1980\] , and Lehnert et al\[1981\] . Host of this work has focused on narratives rather than expository discourse  , however . 
There are two prlnclpal techniques that we have brought to bear on the problem  . 
The most important involves a coherence analysis of the paragraph  , in a manner described in detail in Hobbs \[1976  ,   1978\] and similar to work by Longacre \[1976\] and Grimes \[1975\]  . 
It can be argued that , incoherent discourse , one of a smull number of coherence relatlons ~ such as ~ arallel and elaboration  , holds between successive segments of the text . The coherence relations can be defined in terms of the inferences that can be drawn from what is asserted by the segments being linked  ( called the assertions of the segments )  . Thus , very roughly ~ two sentences are parallel if their assertions make the same predications about similar entities  . 
These coherence relations allow one to build up a treelike coherence structure for the whole text recurslvely  , as follows : The coherence relations are defined between segments  . A clause ( perhapselliptl cal ) is a segment . When some coherence relation holds between two segments  , the two together constitl tute a co_ . ~ posed segment , which can itself be related to other segments of the text  . 
Since the coherence relations are defined in terms of the assertions of segments  , we need to specify what the assertions of the composed segments are  . For this purpose we use a number of heurlst lcs . For example , if two sentences are NATURALL ANGUAGE ACCESSTO STRUCTURED TEXT  129 parallel , lt is because the same predication is made about similar entities  . Then the assertion of the composed segment makes that same predication about the superset to which the similar entities belong  . Thus , every node in the coherence structure has an asserti6n associated with it . Very frequently the assertion associated with the top node of the coherence structure of a passage can funbtion as the summary of the passage  . 
As an illustration of this technique , consider the following passage : ( PI ) Blood probably contains the highest concentration of hepatitis B virus of any tissue except liver  . Semen , vaginal secretions , and menstrual blood contain the agent and are infective  . Saliva has lower concentrations than blood , and even hepatit is B surface antigen may be detectable in no more than half of infected individuals  . Urine contains low concentrations at any given time  . 
After a grammatical analysis , the sentences in this passage can be aligned as in Figure I  .   1 Every clause considers somebody material containing HBV in some concentration  . They are thus linked by the parallel coherence relation  , and the assertion ( and the summary ) of the passage is as follows : CONTAIN ( BODY-MATERIAL , HBV , CONCENTRATION ) Many paragraphs we have analyzed in this way turn out to have a parallel structure  , and thus their summaries can often be constructed in a similar manner  . 
blood semenvaginal secretions menstrual blood saliva  ( saliva of ) infected individual surine contains contain has in contains 
Figure highest concentration lower concentrations detectable  . . . no more than half low concentrations
Parallels in Passage ( PI)
HBV agent

A second factor must also be taken into account in constructing the summarlzations  . In addition to containing summaries of individual passages  , the Text Structure contains a representation of the hierarchical organization of the document as a whole  , as well as other aspects of its overall structure  . The place of an individual passage within the hierarchical organization constrains what can function as a summary of the passage  . A summary must distinguish a passage from other passages at the same level in the hierarchy  . Top-down considerations frequently lead us to refine a Summary we arrive at solely by the bottom-up coherence analysis  . 
As an example , consider the following passage : ( P2 ) Generally blood do nor quality is held high by avoiding commer claldonors  , persons with alcoholic cirrhosis , and those practicing illlelt self-lnject lon . Extremely careful selectlon of paid donors may provides a feblood sources in some instances  . 
1 This diagram i s s imi la r to the formats developed by Sager and her colleagues \[ Sager  ,  1981\] . 
130 J.R . HOBBS et al
AVOID(DONORICONDITION(DONOR )) / I\/I\
II\
Exception : " ( avoid ) persons " ( avoid ) those AVOID ( DONOR\[with alcoholic practicing Ill ic it COMMERCIAL  ( DONOR ) ) cirrhosis " self-lnjectlon " / \ / \ / \ " avoid Second commercial Sentence do nors " Figure  2 Coherence Structure of Paragraph ( P2 ) A coherence analysis results in the structure show in Figure  2  . " Selection " contrasts with " avoiding , " so we can say that the second sentence expresses an exception to the first conjunct of the first sentence  . Because the second sentence is hedged very heavily  , the assertion of the composed segment is the assertion of the initial conjunct of the first sentence --" avoid commercial donors  . " The three assertions of the first sentences t and in a parallel relation since they imply the same proposition about similar entitles  . They all imply ( trivially ) that certain classes of potential donors are to be avoided if blood quality is to be held high ? Entities are similar if they share some common and reasonably specific property  , that is , if they belong to some common and reasonably small superset  . Our three classes of potential donors are similar in that they are all potential donors  . The similarity would be stronger if there were some more specific property that characterized commercial donors  , those with alcoholic cirrhosis , and illicit self-in Jectors , but there does not seem to be such a property . The most we can say seems to be that they are potential donors  , and we arrive at the following assertion for the paragraph as a whole  . 
AVOID(DONORICONDITION(DONOR))
However , such a summary fails to distinguish this paragraph from its siblings in the hierarchical structure of the HKB as a whole  . The nodes most immediately dominating this section in the hierarchy of the HKB correspond to sections about the quality of blood products under varying conditions  , with respect to the risk of hepatitis in transfusion  . There are two broad classes of conditions that are discussed  , first , conditions characterizing the donor , and second , conditions characterizing the type of 51ood product . Among the conditions characterizing the donorare a history of hepatitis  , recent transfusions , and positive results on serologic tests , as well as the conditions described in the example  . Thus , the structure of the summaries In the paragraphs should be something like that shown in Figure  3  . 
It is therefore not sufficient for us to characterize the paragraph as being about avoid ing potential do nors exhibiting some condi tion  . Thus , top-down considerations lead us to reject the summary we came up with solely by the bot tom-up coherence analysis  . We need something more specific , and the best we can do is simply to have a di sjunction of propertiesss the condition characterizing the donors : AVOID  ( DONOR\]COMMER CIAL ( DONOR ) or CIRRHOSIS ( DONOR ) or SELF-INJECTOR ( DONOR )   ) NATURALL ANGUAGE ACCESSTOST RUCTURED TEXT 131
QUALITY ( BLOOD-PRODUCT)
QUALITY ( BLOOD-PRODUCTICONDITION ( DONOR ) ) \[ summary of our example\]
CONDITION ffi history of hepatitis
CONDITION-recent transfusion
CONDITION ~ positive serologic tests ( BLOOD-PRODUCTITYPE ( BLOOPRODUCT ) Figure 3 Hierarchical Structure of Paragraph Summaries

While these methods for the automatic generation of summaries of expository text seem promising  , difficult problems remain -- Including the problems of encoding and searching a very large knowledge base  . In order to have practical milestone systems in the near term  , we are working toward two scaled-down versions of the ultlmate system  . First , we are experimenting with using a preexisting Text Structure to aid in the construction of the summaries of modifications of a passage  . Second , rather than fully automatic generation of summaries  , we are experimenting with ways that interact lon ~rlth the author of a passage can aid in the task  . 

This work has been supported by the National Library of Medicine under Grant I- 


Grosz , B ; Haas , N ; Robbs , J ; Martin , P ; Moore , R ; Robinson , J ; Rosenseheln , S . 
1982 . "DIALOGIC , A Core Natural Language Processing System . " COLING 82: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference o_~n Computational Lin~ulst lcs  , 
Prague , Czechoslovakia.
Grimes , J .  1975 . The Thread of Discourse . The Hague : Houton . 
Robbs , JR .  1976 . A Computational Approach to Discourse Analysis . Research Report 76-2 , Department of Computer Sciences , City College , City University of
New York ( December 1976).
Hobbs , JR .  1978 . Why IsDiscourse Coherent ? Technical Note 176 , SRI International , Menlo Park , Callfornia ( November 1978) . 
Hobbs , JR .  1980 . Interpreting " Natural Language Discourse . Final Report , National Science Foundation Research Grant No . MCS78-07121 ( July 1980) . 
Lehnert , WG ; Black , JB ; Reiser , BJ .  1981 . " Summarizing Narratives . " Proceedings of the Seventh Internat lonal Joint Conference on Artlfl clal Intalli ~ encepp  . 184-189 . New Haven , Connecticutt : Yale University . 
Longacre , R .  1976 . An Anatom\[of Speech " Notions . Ghent : The Peter de Ridder

Mandler , J ; Johnson , N .  1977 . " ~ eme~n brance of Things Parsed : Story Structure and Recall  . " Cognitive Psycholo ~ y'9: l11-151 . 
Rumelhart , D .  1975 . " Understanding and Summarizing Brief Stories . " In : Basic Processing in Readln ~_L Perception ~ and Comprehension  , edited by DLaberge and S Samuels . Hillsdale , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum . 
132 J.R . HOBBS et al
Sager , N .  1981 . Natural Language Information Processing : A Co_~_puter Grammar of English and Its Appl ications  . Reading , Massachusetts : Addison-Wesley . 
Schankj RC ; Lebowltz , M ; Birnhaum , L .  1980 . "' An Integrated Understander . " American Journal of Computational Linguistics 6:13-30  . 
Walker , D .  1982 . " Natural-Language-Access Systems and the Organization and Use of Information  . " COLING 82: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference o__nn Computatlonal Linguistics  , Prague , Czechoslovakia . 
Walker , DE ; Hobbs , JR .  1981 . " Natural Language Access to Medical Text . " Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Symposium o_~n ~ Appll catlons in Medical 
Carepp 269-273. New York : IEEE.
