SUBORDINATECLAUSES ANDBELIEF-DOMAINS IN VERBAL
INFOR MATION PROCESSING
Istv ~ nB ~ tor ~
EWH Koblenz , Sen~narfur Informatih , Sehwer punkt L in 6~tett k
Rheinau 34, D-5400 Koblenz
There is agreement among ltn6~/stB , logicians and computer linguists on the t reatment of belief-statements as embedded  , hierarchical structures . On the syntactic level of analysis l in6u lsts treat belief-statements as subor d inate clauses  ( S-over-S-structures , LYONS 1977 , KAPLAN and BRESNAN 1981 , etc .  )  . 
On the semantic level of analysis , following the lo~o-81 tradition , they are manifested as predicate formulae , in which full propositions are used as arguments in higher pre-dicates  ( e . go CRESSWELL 1973) . In computational treatments a coord in ~ ly the recovery of the hierarchical proposition a l structures is considered as primary ob jective : The informat-I on conveyed by a be lief-statement is presumed to be s to red  ( or retrieved ) in a database as some kind of nested ( S-over -- S ) structure ( e . g . RUSTIN 1973, EISENEERG 1977) . Consider the sentence ( borrowed from Lyons , slightly modified ) :  ( 1 ) Hr ? Smithbel ' ieves that professor Brown I sthe Dean  . 
The syntactic analysis reveals the follow in  6 structure : ( 2 ) S ( Nr ( N ( Sn ~ Ith )   ) VP ( V ( believe ) S ( NP ( N ( professor ) N ( Brown ) )VP ( V ( be ) NP ( Det ( the ) N ( Dean ) )  )   )   ) ) The semant ic s t ruc ture i s very s im~larz - 25  - ( 3  ) Pl ( bslieve ( Smith , P2(be(nrofese or Brown , Dean ) ) )   ) The CL-ane Zysts comprises a coord Lngly the fol low Lnglo ~ Lcaletepss  ( 4 ) a ) recover the structure of Plo ) process the structure Plb ) recover the structure of P2d ) process the structure P2 This scheme will be referred in the follow ing as the standard model  . 
Due to unsolved problems in evaluation of composite predicates and to the extremely high computational costs embedded structures are avoided in application systems  ( such as USL , ~DIS , HAM-RPU , of . BOLC 1980) . Moreover the super-imposed predicate appears from the point of view of the  ( embedded ) lower predicate as purely accident e ~ . The dome ~ n--concept of beliefs avoids some of the difficulties of the  8tande4rd model . Considering the-basic con~nunicative funct ion of human language the information conveyed by a verbal state-ment should be decomposed into two components :  1  . semantic ( material ) information and 2 . modal information conoer~ng belief-sta tue of the statement  ( UNG ~1972 )  . The fundam-ental difference between the two kinds of information should be reflected in the linguistic design and should be taken into consideration in models form an -machine con~nunioation  . 
Accordingly the comunication partners dispose of belief -- registers in addition to the information registers  ( as it is the case in current systems )   . The belief-register provides a belief- ~ent and a belief-value  ( belief-oertitute ) for each statement received . It is natura ~ to i ~ itialize at the beg inn-ing of a discourse a number of belief- dome?ne for the EGO  , the PARTNER and the PERSONSMENTIONED . Notice that these processing frames ( in the technical sense of the word , like in ~ TZING 1980 ) are necessary in any system aiming at the same degree of sophistication  . 

Zn case of overtly marked belief-agents the objective of analysts is the proper as stg ~aent to a belief-don~tn and not the  recover7 of a structure . This means that expensive reoover ~ j procedures can be dispensed with  , since the surface structure usually prov idestnned Aatekeys for the proper assignment of belief-agents  . Each belief-s~enthash is own domain of be liefs  . In actualoom ~ unAcation the appeare no e of a par tner A initializes a do  , wAn of A ' . As soon as in the conversation further ac tants B  , C , Detc . occur there will be ocr ~ esponding new belie f-do ~ ains B ?  , C ? , D " etc . initial is-ed . Statements overtly ~ rked in view of a belie f-agent will be transferred to the corresponding donnt in  . 
For u ~ arked statements a general strategy of assi~ent of default values can be developed along the lines of  Gri0e and of MEGGLE ( 1981 )  . Havi ~ initialized the appropriate be-l ief-frwne with the appropriate belief- a ~ ent  , there is a particular domain of each bel ief-agent  . In the case of (1) there is a belief-do . An called " world-of-M~-Smith " within the t tuiverse of discourse  . The prooes aing involves s ( 5 ) a )   lo0ate belief-domain by belief-s~ent key ( -Mr Smith ) b ) enter/retrieve p in the activated belie f-don ~ in and o  ) determine our x~nt de ~' ee of certitude ( ~ to believe ) The present concept of belief-donui in s should be regarded in a more general procedural view of language  , such as presented in B~TORI (1981) . The 8u~ested treatment of belief-domains as pointer based areas in DB is another instance of prooedux ~- alsolutions  , in which d~nsmic language structures turn out to be simpler than their static  , purely representionally oriented descript ion  . On the linguistic level of analysis the domain concept of beliefs is motivated by the observation that the superim position of belief-structures on statements does not make the comprehension of these sentences more diff-icult  , at least not in the measure as the processing of the embedded structures in the standard model would let this to-  27 -expect . Even if storing S-over-S structures cannot be dispens-ed with entirely  , the number of their occurrences in actual an a lysis-procedures can be substantially reduced  . Notice that the concept of belief-domains provides a framework to treat opaque references i  ~ a natural way  . 
In the final version of the presentation it w ill be attempted to substantiate the proposed model on the treatment of belief-agents and esp  . of their derivation from agents and subjec tsacross clause boundaries  . 
Literatuze:
B ~ TORI . lStv~n : Die Grau ~ natikaus der Sicht kognit iver Pro-zesse  . ~bingen , Gunter Narr 1981 BOLC , Leonard ( ed . ): Natural Language Based Computer Systems . 
Munohen , Hauser 1980
CRESS WELL , M . I . : Lo@ics and Languages . London , Methue ~ and Cos Berlin . Nalter de Gruyter 1976 KAPIAN , Ronald und BRES NAN , Joan W . ( in press ): Lexical-Functional Gran . nar : A forms l system for grammatical re-p resentation  . I . ~ N : BRESNAN , Joan W .   ( e  ~ ) The mental re-presentation of g~smmatical re lations  , Cambridge , ~IT

LYONS , John : Semantics . Cembridge University Press 1977? MEG GLE , Georg : Grund begriffe der Ko---unikation . Berlin , Wal-ter de Gruyter 1981 tr ~ TZING , Dieter ( ed .   ) : Frame of Conceptions and Text Under-standing . Berlin , Walter de Gruyter 1980 RUSTIN , Randall ( ed . ) " Natural Language Processing . New York,
Algorithmics Press Inc . 1973
UNGEHEUER , Gerold : Sprache und Kommunikation . Hamburg , Helmut
Buske 1972-28-
