COLING82, J.tIoreek p(eel)
North-Holla ~ l Publilh ~ Company
@ Aca ~? m ~1982
DIALOGIC : A CORENATURAL-LANGUAGE PROCESSING SYSTEM 
Barbara Grosz , Norman Haas , 1 Gary Hendrix , 1 Jerry Hobbs , Paul Martin , Robert Moore , Jane Robinson , Stanley Rosenschein Artificial Intel ligence Center 
SRI International
Henlo Perk , California 94025

The DIALOGIC system translates English sentences into representations of their literal meaning in the context of an utterance  . These representations , or " lngical forms , " are intended to be a purely formal language that is as close as possible to the st ructure of natural language  , while providing the semantic composition a lity necessary for meaning-dependent computat ional processing  . The design of DIALOGIC ( and of its constituent modules ) was influenced by the goal of using it as the core language-processing component in a varie ty of systems  , some of which are transportable to nee domains of application  . 

The DIALOGIC system translates Engllsh sentences into representations of their literal meaning in the context of an utterance  . These representations , or " logical forms , " are intended to be a purely formal language that is as close as possible to the structure of natural language  , while providing the semantic compositionality necessary for meanlng-dependent computational processing  . The design of DIALOGIC ( and of its constituent modules ) was influenced by the goal of using it as the core language-processlng component in a variety of systems  , some of which are transportable to new domains of application  . 
Currently DIAL OCIC is a core component of four systems being developed within several diffe rent research projects at SRI  . One is the TEAM project , ~ whose goal Isto provide natural-language access to large databases through systems that are easily adaptable to a wide range of new applications  . Another , the RLAUS project , ~ is a longer-range effort to address bas ic research problems in natural-language semantics  , common sense reasoning , and the pragmatics . A third , project is investigating the problem of p roviding natural-language access to text  . ~ A fourth , in which ~ IALOGIC also plays an important ro le  , is examining the development of formal g rammars  .   5 DIALOGIC is divided into five modules coordinated by the DIAMOND executive system  . 
DIAMOND is a modification of the executive system used in the SRI speech-understanding project\[Walker  1978\] and also in a task-dialogue interpret at i on I Now working at Machine Intelllgence Corporation in Sunnyvale  , California . 
2 Sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Contract 

3 Sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Contract 

4 Funded by the Nations1 Library of Medicine under Grant IROI-LM03611  . 
5 Sponsored by the National Science Foundation under Grant  IST-8103550  . 
9596 B . GROS Zet . 1.
system\[A . Robinson , 1980\] . It provides the formal language for defining the grammar and the control for parsing Engli sh sentences and translating them into log lcal-form expressions  . 
The five modules are (1) the DIAGRAM grammar ; (2)s set of semantic translators ; (3) a set of basic semantic functions ;   ( 4  ) a scoping algorithm ( for quantifiers and sentence operators )   ; (5) a set of basic pragmatic functions . The remainder of this paper describes these components of DIALOCIC and presents an example i llust rating how they coordinate in the in terp retation of an utterance  . A description of the logical form that is the target of DIALOGIC's interpretation processes may be found in \[ Moore  ,  1981\ ]  . 

DIAGRAM is a general grammar of English . It now contains about 125 rule schemata , equivalent to about 800 individual rules . These define all common sentence typos , complex auxiliaries and models , complex noun phrases , nominalized sentences , all the common quantifiers , relative clauses , verbs with sentential complements , comparative and measure expressions , subordinate clauses and other adverbial modi fiers  . Conjunction , however , is limited to a few place-holders , pending further study of the problems it poses for constraining the number of syntact icanalyses  . A detailed description of DIAGRAM is conta in edin\[J  . Robinson , 1982\] . 
Formally , DIAGRAM is an augmented phrase-structure grammar  . The lexicon categorizes words and associates attributes with them that are used in the rules  . 
Each rule has associated with it a const ructor that expresses the constraints on its application and also a translator  ( described in the next section ) that produces the corresponding logical fo rm  . 
Phrases inherit attributes from their constituents and acquire attributes from the larger phrases that contain them  . These attributes are used to impose context- sensitive constraints upon the acceptance o fan analysis  . Before constructing a node in the parse tree corresponding to the application of aru le  , the executive invokes the rule's constructor to test for admissibility  . In addition to accepting or rejecting aru leapplication  , the constructors can assign scores that allow listing alternative analyses in a pre ferred order  . The result of applying the grammar to an a lysis of an input is one or more annotated ~ arse trees  . 
Attributes and annotations are not limited to syntactic information  . The translators , described next , specify bow the translation of a phrase in to logical form is to be defined in term so f the attributes of the words and phrases that compose it  . This coupling of syntax and semantics ( for which attribute ~ rammars\[Tienar i  1980\ ] were originally designed ) is convergent with current formal theories bf natural language that advocate construct ing a syntax and semantics that " work in tandem "\[ Dowry et el  .  1981 ; Kaplan and Bresnan ( to appear) ; Gazdar ( to appear) ; Landsbergen 1976 . \] Future work on DIAGRAM includes efforts to extend both its coverage and its formali sm  . In extending the formalism , our dual objective is to capture certain l inguistic generalizations  ( e . g .   , dative movement ) and to make the task of developing a large grammar more manageable  . To accomplish this , we are exploring the use of metarules \[ Gazdar to appear \]  . 

Followlng the syntactic analysis of an ut terance  , a sequence of semantic translators is invoked to-build the logl calform that cor responds to a llteral interpretation of the utterance in context  . The translator for each phrase-structurer u le specifies how the various constituent so f the phrase are to be combined to form an in ter pretation of the wbol ~ phrase  . It prescribes the predicate-arguments t ructures that correspond to the grammatical construction or  , more generally , the operator-oper and structures . 
D1ALOGIc , ACORE-NATURAL-LANGUAGE PROCESSING SYSTEM 97 Although the translators operate topdown ( the translator for each node in yokes the t ranslators for its children  )   , the translation is in effect built bottom-up--since  , typically , the first thing a translator for a nonterminal node does is to invoke the transla tors for each of its constituents  , usually left to right . 
However , the topdown nature of the translation process is significant  , because it means that information located above a node and to its left is available when the node is translated  . In addition to producing the logical form , the translators determine the syntactic constraints upon and preferences for ei ther coreference or noncoreference of noun phrases  , especially pronouns , following an algorithm described in \[ Hobbs  ,  1976\] . 
BASICSEM ANTICFUNCTIONS
To insulate changes in the grammar from those that occur in logical form  , the construction of the latter is isolated from the translator procedures by calls on basic semantic functions\[Konollge  ,  1979\]) . The actual construction of a logical form is done in two phases :  ( I ) ioglcal-form fragments ( if fs ) are attached to the parse tree by the basic semantic functions  ;   ( 2 ) the final logical form is assembled from these by the scoplng algorithm  . 
Lffs are assigned only to certain " nodes in the parse tree  . Usually the iff at an NP node will encode the properties held by the entity the NP describes \[ e  . g .   , "X such that EMPLOYEE ( X ) & OLD ( X ) " for " old employee "\] and the fragment for ac lause-level construction  ( e . g . , a VP ) will encode the predlcate-argument structure of the clause  , The basic semantic functions also leave markers on the parse tree to indicate such things as the type of quantifier or deter ~ iner associated with a noun phrase  . 
These markers are used by the scoplng algorithm to determine the final logl calform for the utterance  .   ( Note that the Iffs and markers left by the basic semantic functions may be viewed as further annotations to the parse tree  . ) DIALOGIC currently includes eleven basic semantic functions  . Six of these do most of the work of build lnglffs for standard noun phrases and clauses  . The others are concerned with adding such things as mode  , degree , and adverbial modification to clauses . As more precise specifications are defined for encoding these phenomena in logical form  , we expect to collapse some of this latter group . 
SCOPING OF QUANTIFIERS ANDOTHERSENTENTIAL OPERATORS The scoplng algorithm is designed to collect the logl cal-form fragments from the parse tree and produce the possible scoplngs of quantlflers and other scoped operators  . The scoplng algorithm used in DIALOGIC ( adapted from that in Hendrlx ,  1978 ) produces all the scoplngs thnt do not vlolate the hard rules of Engllsh scoplng  , and then ranks them according to a score computed by a set of speciallst critics  . Each critic is a function that returns a score for some aspect of the conflicting rules of quantification in Engllsh  ; e . g . , the left-rlght scope critic lowers the score of 8coplngs that involve permuting the left-outermost default ordering of quantlflers  . All critics receive equal weight in the present implementation  , but the design of the system does allow for d if ferential weighting  . 
The current set of critics is concerned with such things as changes in sentence order and the relatlves coplng of quantlflers of different strengths  . The scoplng of nonstandard quantlflers and of the generallzed negative  ( " not ,   . . . . no one ," " nothing , . . . . none ") remain to be done . 
BASIC PRAG MATIC FUNCTIONS
Basic pragmatic functions are intended to fulfill several roles in DIALOGIC  , all concerned with certain kinds of in determl nacles in logical form whose resolution requires pragmatic information  . The four primary uses of basic pragmatic 98 B . GROSZet-1 . 
functions in the current system are ( i ) ~ o provide a context-specl flc interpretation of certain terms that have only vague meanings in themselves  ( e . g . , prepositions llke " of " and "~ n ~" or Inherently vague verb sllke " have "  )  ;   ( 2 ) to establls h the specific relationship underlying any given noun-noun combination  ; (3) to identify the referents of pronouns ; and ( 4 ) to interpret a limited range of metonymy ( e . g . , the use of " blonds " to mean " people with blond hair "  )  . At present , only a small core of pragmatic functions is implemented  , each of which handles only a subset of the cases it is intended to cover  . 

To illustrate how the different modules ' of DIALOGIC contribute to the interpretation of an utterance  , we shall consider the example , " What SRI employees have children older than 15 years ? " The logical form for this query--the target for the interpretation processes--Is  ( lowercase is used to indicate variables , uppercase to indicate constants and predicates ) :\[ QUERY ( WH employeel ( AND ( EMPLOYEE employeel )   ( EMPLOYEES-COMPANY-OF employeel SRI ) )  ( SOME child 2 ( CHILD child 2 )   ( AND ( CHILD-0 Femploye el child 2 )   ( (* MORE * OLD ) child 2 ( YEAR 15\] This corresponds rou@hly to a formal representation for " who is each employee such that the company of the ~ nployee is SRI and some child of the employee is older than fifteen years ?" During DIAMOND ' Sparsing phase  , the parse tree in Figure I is constructed . At this polnt ~ the attributes annotating the tree encode such properties as the type of noun  ( count , mass ~ unit ) and syntactic number . These attrl butes have been used during the parsing phase to rule out certain alternative structures  . 
Once this structure is built , the translators are invoked . In combination with the basic semantic functions , the translators assign add lt lonal attributes to nodes in the tree  , encoding such information as the quantlflers ( type ~ strength , and the variables they bind ) and heads of noun phrases . For example ~ the head of the WHNP , " what SRI employees " m is a variable of type EMPLOYEE that  14 bound by a wiT-type quantifier . Attributes also encode the underlying predlcate -argument structures for verb phrases and adJectlves ~ and the iffs to be used in constructing the flnal logical form for the utterance  . 
In the sentence of Figure I , the nodes WHNP and S are annotated as being quantlfled pWHNP with a wh-type quantifier and S as a " query  . " Although every rule has an associated translator  , only some of these result in iffs being attached to nodes  . For this example ~ the nodes marked with * ein the original parse tree are the only ones for which Iffs are produced  . 
The fragment attached to each of these nodes is as follows: 
NOUN1 (* NN*employeel SRI)
NOUN 2 ( EMPLOYEE employee1)
PREDICATE (* HAVE employe e1 child2)
NOUN3 ( CHILD child2)
NCOMP((*MORE*OLD ) child2(YEAR15))
EMPLOYEE , CHILD , and OLD are " monadl c predicates that are part of the conceptual model of the domain  . * MORE emaps a predicate into a comparative along the scale corresponding to the predicate  . * NN * and * HAVE are dummy predicates that indicate the needt O invoke the basic pragmatic functions  . 
After the translation process is complete , the final logl cal form is asse Lbled by a procedure that considers alteruatlve quantifier scoplngs  ( using the quantifier-DIALOGIC , A CORE-NATURAL-LANG UAGE PROCESSING SYSTEM 99/
I / ------\
MSDET NO~D

NOUHI **
I/\
NHDNOUN 2 **\[- SN/
VPT t

I\.WHATSRI'-SB~q , OYEEHAVE-'8/\
SNHQENDPUNCT
Ji ?/ mt
Nor M3**f/----~-SN
PREDICATE ** t

I \
NP\[\
NCONFSt
NCOMP * tf

I/~-------~

Ii/\/------~\
ERADJ THAN f

II

I /--
II iI
II
CHILDER OLD THAN l$
HP f




ImUNi /-------~?"- SB
Ii-.. SYEAR
Figure IParse Tree for " What SRI employees have children older than  15 years ? " related annotations left on the parse tree  ) and invokes the basic pragmatic functions as needed  . The basic pragmatic functions use informat ion in the conceptual model of the domain to t rans form  ( * HN*employe el SRI ) -- corresponding to the noun-noun compound " SRI employee " -- into  ( EMPLOYEE-OF employeel SRI ) and ( * HAVE employe el child 2 ) into ( CHILD-OF employe el child 2 )   . 
The nodes with either quantifier orioglcal-form markings are the only ones considered by the TEAM scoplng algorithm  . Besides the WH quantifying employee1 , TEAM recognizes that a default existential quantifier must be created for  child2~ so SOME is added . The scope rules force QUERY to have the widest scope  ; this position 18 contested only if there are multiple sentent lal markers  . Both orderlngs of the WHAT and SOME quantlflers are generated  . The two result lng quantified statements correspon d to  ( WHAT employeel ( SOME child . . . ) . . . ) and ( SOHE child ( WHAT employee . . . ) . . . ) Next the scope critic functions evaluate the different scoplngs  ; only three of the critics are relevant . One critic considers the left-right node ordering and prefers the first scoplng because it comes closer to the surface form  , One critic prefers scoplngs in which WHoute copes an adjacent exlstential  ; it too upgrades the score of the first and downgrades the score of the second  . The other critic knows that default existential quantlflers need the narro west possible scope  ; it too selects the first . 
100 B . GROS Z et al

Because of the modularlzation in D~ALOGIC , changes in one part of the system reverberate very little in other components  . Changes in the constraints imposed on the phrase -structure rules in the grammar have no effect on any other part of the system  . A change in a rule itself necessitates a change in the corresponding translator  , but the basic semantic functions do not need to be revised  . 
Similarly , a change in the logical form or in the data structures within which it is implemented requires a corresponding change in the basic semantic functions  , but not in the grammar or translators . 
In addition to extending DIALOGIC as mentioned in the foregoing sections  , we are also investigating possible revisions of the translation phase  ( as currently performed by the translators and basic semantic functions  ) to allow translation into logl cal form to be specified declar at lvely  . In this new approach \[ Rosenscheln and Shleber ( to appear ) \[ , logl caltypes are associated with the phrasal categories  , and the translation of a phrase is synthesized from the translations of its immediate constituents according to a local rule  , which typically involves functional application . 

Dowty , D . R . , Wall , R . E . , and Peters , S . \[1981\] Introduction to Montague Semantics ( D . Reidel Publishing Co . , Dordrecht , Holland , 1981) . 
Gazdar , G . \[ to appear \] . " Phrase Structure Grammar , " in P . Jacobson and G . K . Pullum , eds . On the Nature of Syntactic Representation . 
Hendrix , G . G . \[1978\[" Semantic Aspects of Translation , " in Understanding Language , D . E . Walker , ed . , pp . 193-226 ( Elsevier , New York , New York , 1978) . 
Hobbs , J . \[1976\[' Pronoun Resolution , " Research Report 761 , Department of Computer Sciences , City College , City University of New York , New York , New
York ( August , 1976).
Kaplan , R . M . and Bresnan , JoW . \[ to appear \] " Lexical-Functlonal Grammar : A Formal System for Grammatical Representation  , " Occasional Paper 13 , Center for Cognitive Science , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , 

Konolige , K . G .   \[1979\[ " A Framework for a Portable Natural Language Interface to Large Data Bases  , " Technical Note 197 , Artificial Intelligence Center , SRI International , Menlo Park , California ( October ,  1979) . 
Landsbergen , S . P . J .   \[1976\] " Syntax and Formal Semantics of English in PNLIQAI  , " in COLING 76~Preprints of th___ee 6thlnternational Conference on Computatlonal Linguistics , No .  21 , Ottawa , Ontario , Canada ( June 28-July 2 ,  1976) . 
Moore , R . C . \[1981\]" Problems in Logical Form , " in Proceedings of the 19th Annual Meetlng of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp .  117-124 , The Association for Computational Linguistics , SRI International , Menlo Park , 
California ( July 1981).
Robinson , Ann E .   \[1980\] " Interpreting Natural Language Utterances in Dialogs About Tasks  , " Technical Note 21 0 , Artificial Intelligence Center , SRI International , Menlo Park , California ( March 1980) . 
Robinson , J . J . \[1982\]" DIAGRAM : A Grammar for Dialogues , " Communications of the ACM , Vol . 25, No . I , ppo 2747 ( January 1982) . 
Rosenscheln , S . J . and Shieber , S . M . \[ To appear \]" Translating English into Logical Form  , " in Proceedlngs of 20th Annual Meet in ~ of Association for Computational Linguistics Conference  , Toronto , Canada ( June 1982) . 
Tienari , M .   \[1980\] " On the Definition of an Attribute Grammar , " in Nell D . Jones , ed . , Semantic-Directed Compiler Generation . Proceedings of a Workshop , Aarhus , Denmark ( January ,  1980) . G . Goos and J . Hartmanis , eds . , Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol . 94, pp .  408-414 , ( Sprlnger-Verlag , Berlln-Heldelberg-New
York , 1980).
Walker , D . E . ( ed . ) \[1978\] Understandln ~ Spoken Languag____~e ( Elsevier North-
Holland , New York , New York ~1978).
