POOLING AND THREADING INTRANS LATION TERMBANKS
Merle D . Tenney
Automated Language Process.
Systems , 750 North 200 West.
Pro , o , Utah 84601 USA
Robert A . Russell
Weldner Communications , Inc.
1673 West 820 North,
l ~ OVO , Utah 84601, USA
Bilingual end multillngual terminology databanks ( term banks ) have proven an effective aid to translation . 
The translation problem which has been most resistant tO term bank assistance ~ however  , is that of identifying precisely those t ranslations which are appropriate for ag iven term in a SL text  . This is compounded by the related problems of SL homonymy and polysemy and TL synonymy  . The greatest challenge at the text level is dynamically specify-ing the lexicon used in the subl ~ age of a document  . The solution to this problem depends somewhat on whether termino-logy is held in one large bank  , which promotes sharing and comprehensiveness , or in many smaller banks , whiohen coura-ges independence and special i zation  . 
The principle approach to the translation identificat-ion problem here to fore has consisted in filtering outir-relevant translations on the basis of such accompanying do-cumentation as subject fie ld  , source indication , or grammat-ical code . Some organizations have developed initial capabi-lities for pooling or thread ing in order to deal with the sublanguage problem  . ~ refers to the creation of inter-nally cohesive subinventories of a database  . Thread in ~ refers to the ability to specify ( and access ) a logical file made up of a sequence of pools , in wb_ic ~ the logical keys are associated with physical records on a flrst-hit basis  . 

OuT paper further elaborates those concepts and discusses their utility in term banks designed to support translation  . 
Pools may be organized on any functional pr inciple  . They may reflect the admAnistrating body- from standards or ~ an Azat-ion throughoom pan~d iv is ? onto individual translator  . Or they may reflect a domain of applicat ion-from technical field through company product line to chapter in operations manual  . 
3oms pools are c reated to over r ide o ther more general pools  , such as SL or TL dialect pools which preempt standard  .   . langus ~ e pools . 
The object of thread in ~ is the dynsunic c reation of logic-alfi less peoift " ca lly tailored to ~ he applications at h and ? Y ~ a portant features of threading in c lude the ability to access a select batte ry of pools ~ the ability to prioriti zs these pools by their task relevance  , typically in a sequence from most specific to most general  , and the ability , in interactive applications , to modify logical file records by granting read/write access to one or more leading pools in the operative sequence ? Applicat ion programs utilize one of ' three for ~ of aocess zs ? n ~ e access  , which retrieves data solely from the firs t sequenced pool in which a term appears ! mult iple access  , which makes data available from any of the sequenced pools in whi Ohaterm appears ! and composite access  , a special case of multiple access which constructs a data complex from the full set of sequenced pools in which a term appears  .   . 
The principal motivation for pooling and threating lles in their use indirect a ids to translation-text-related g ~ ossary generation and text editing with term lookup and other interactive aids ? Tn addition  , they extend the capabilit-ies of ma Antenanoe programs  , such as glossary publication and foreign language instruction  . 
They are some drawbacks to the use of pooling and thre-Mings as pools are prolifer a ted  , the potential for redundant entries in c reases ! the problems inherent in relating fi les of -  288 -distinct types are cempounded ; and the need for taxonomie e , selectional codes and documentation , and heuristic mechanisms , though mitigated , is retained . On the other hand , use of the-se devices yields improvements in the identification of per-tinent trans lations  , in the flexibility of logical filecon -struction  , in the adaptability of available term banks  , in the organization and management of termiho logical data  , in the size requirements for diversified term banks  , in the portability of existiug termino logy resources  , and in ~ he con-comitant potential for added revenue to terminology holders  . 

Brinkman , Karl-Heinz .  1981 . , , Machine Aids to Translation . "MET AiJournal destraduoteur ~/ Tra~slator?s Journal  ,  26 ,  67-75 . 
Goetschalckx , Jacques .  1979 . .EURODICAUTOM . " Translatin ~ and the Computer , ed . Barbara M . Snell , 71-75 . Amsterdam =

Kittredge , Richard .  1978 . " Textual Cohesion within Sublangua-ges = Implications for Automatic Analysis and Synthesis  . " Paper presented at the 7th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Bergen , Norway ,  1418 , Aug . 

Masterman , Margaret .  1979 , " The Essential Mechanism of Machi-ne Translation  . " Paper read to the British Computer
Society , Jan . 1979.
Schultz , Joachim .  1980 . "A Terminology Data Bank for Translators ( TEAM )  . " META ! Journaldes traducteurs/Trans-lat0r'e Journal . , 25, 211-29 . 
Smith , Raoul N .  1978 . " Computational Bilingual Lexicography : Ala recherche dumot ~ uste  . " Computer Support to Translation , ed . Jim Mathias , 84-112 . Washington , D . C . s Foreign Broadcast Information Service . 

Z6msta , Ladlslav .   1973? " The Shape of the Dictionary for Mechanical Translation Purposes  . "IBsues in Linguistics : Papers in Honor of Henr ~ and Ren~e Kahane  , ed . BraJB . 
Kaohru , Robert B . Lees , Yakov Malkiel , Angellna Pietran-gell l , and Sol Saporta ,  912-22 . Urbana , Ill . : University of Illinois Press . 

