"YREB"ORDERLANGUAGES : ANEXPERZM~NT ALLEXICON BASED PARS ~ 
Cristlano Castelfranoni , Domenico Parisi , 01 ivteroStock
Zstituto di Pstoologia , Oonsiglio Nazionale delle Rioex ~ he
Viadei Monti Tiburtini , 509, O0157-Roma
Most of the work on natural language understand ing  ( NLU ) has been done on English . E~ish is a language with relative-lyrig id word order  , a characteristic that has influenced all NLU systems proposed so far  . These systems have dedicated only minor at tention to problems that are of major importance in lemguage e with a freer ordering like I talian  . Work on parsing partially un~ram~atioal sentences in rigid l~s  ( Hayes and Mo ~ radtan , 1980 l Charniak ,  1981 ) bears some similarity to work on p ~ rsing of " free " order language  . Tn both oases an exclusively topdown model seems inappropriate  . For instance , when considering an incomplete sentence it may still be adv is  . 
able to proceed in building some represent at ion  . The result-tng structure will then be inserted within a larger oo ~ xitivest ructure  . The sane bottom-up way of proceed?ng must necess a -rily be part of an NLU eyste ~ for " free " order languages  . 
An ATN ( Woods , 1970) type systaw , like the one developed for Ztalian ( Cappelli et al .   ,  1978) , shows definite l ~ nitat-ions even when i t is furnished with heuristics for st rate ~ selection  ( Ferrari and 8 took , 1980) based on adaptation to a coherent text . Other ideas such as passing infox ~ nation in the case of failure  ( Weisohedel and Black ,  1980 ) or relaxing con-ditions on a rasin certain oir ot vastances  ( Kwasny and Sondhei-met ,  1979 ) do not seem to be satisfying solutions fo rour px ~ bl ~  . 

In other hand , we do not agree that syntax be given a subor d inate role  , as Schank's theoretical approach implies ( though in Schank and Riesbeck's parser , ELI ( Riesbeck and Schank ,  1978) , syntax has a more important role than would be expected  )   . In any event , without enough syntax it becomes hard to an a lyze complex sentences and to explain a number of psycho-linguistic phenomena  . 
2 . WEDNESDAY , the system proposed here , is the core of an extended mechanism we are deve loping and implementing in LISP  ( flg . 1) ( see Pariei and Castelfranchi , in press ) . It is an analyzer with semantic output based on word interpretation  . 
The semantic information brought in by each word is progress-ively connected to get at the sentence's meaning according to syntact i c constraints and expectations  . Syntax is a set of instructions direct ly concerned with assembling semantic unit s  . 
LEXICON 1







Pig . 1
What is characteristic of WEDNESDAY is that syntax is not a separate component  , but is distributed throughout the lexicon . Lexical entries are composed of a declar at ivepart and a procedural part  . The procedural part is made up of syn-tacti c instructions designed to assemble the dec larative  ( se-mantic ) part of the entry with the declarative parts of the other words in the sentence  . The syntactic assembling process- 66 -allows the construction of the sentence ' s semantic network to be carried out progress ively and so it can also operate on in- complete sentences  . Furthermore , the system's output has a format which is homogenous to that of the knowledge base  ( encyclopedia )   . This means that as the sentence analysis pro- ceeds  , it is natural to have the knowledge base cont rolling the assembly process topdown  , in cooperation with the lexioal--syntactic analysis  . Clauses in multl-clause sentences are conceived as restricted search spaces for the assembly instruc ~ tions carried by the words  , and the same is true for noun spaces ( noun phrases )   . Part-of-speech word categories are in terpreted as procedures for opening and clos ing spaces as a function of context  . Therefore , part of the process is dependent on a recurs ive  ( pushdown storage ) mechanism . On the other hand there is a semantic sentence memory that is transparent to the closed- level system  . 
Being lexically based , WEDNESDAY candeal in a natural way with id io syncrasies typical of many words  . It can also deal with flexible idioms , i . e . idioms that can vary in morphology , word order , syntactic construction , semantic additions , and synonyms . Their reoojition is governed by the indiv idual lexical entries and takes place at +  . heassembling level . 
Word disambiguation is treated in a non -deterministic way  . Syntactically based disambiguation ( e . g . the word J ~ ) attempts each reading of an ambiguous word in turn and cancels inappropriate readings by testing them against syntactic well-- formednese criteria  . Encyclopaedia based disembiguation ( e . g . the word b_~ ) works through the activation of encyclopaedic nodes by the words in the sentence  . It selects that reading of an ambiguous word which activates the node " better " connected to the other activated nodes  . It should be noted that , our approach , in comparison to Small?s work on WordExpert Parsing  ( Small ,  1980) , is characterized by ( a ) non--determinism , ( b ) a more systematic recourse to syntax ,   ( c ) a separation of syntactically based word d is ambiguation from encyclopaedia based word d is embiguation  . 
-67-_J

Capelli A . , Fez Tari G . , Moretti L . , Prodan of I . , Stock O . 
" An ATN Parser for Italians Some Experiments "   . In I~o e . of the SeTenth International Conference on Com -putational Lin ~ istics  . Bergen 1978o Charniak Eo " Six topics in Search of a Parser "   . Proc ~ ofth ~ 7th IJCAI . Vancouver , 1981 Ferrari G . , Stock O . " Strategy Selection of an ATN Syntactic Parser "  . Proo . of the 18th Meetin ~ of the Association for Computat ional Linguistics  . Philadelphia , 1980 . 
Hayes Pc , Mou ~ adian Go " Flexible Parsing " . I ~ oo ~ of the 18th Meetin ~ of the Association for Computat ional Lin~ulet??so 
Philadelphia , 1980
K was ny8o and Sond heimer N . " Ungrsmmatioality and Ex~rn-~ammaticali tyin Natural Lant ~ age Understanding Syst- ems "? Proct of the  17th Annual Meeti ~ of the ACL ~
San Die Eo , 1979
Parisi D ? ? Castelfranohi C ? La comprensione dell in ~ uss J ~ io ? Turin  , Boringhieri in press , Riesbeck C ? and Schank R ? " Comprehension by Computer ! Expect-ation Based Analysis of Sentences in Context "? Research 
Report 78. Yale Univ ., 1978 o
Small S . " Word Expert Parsing : A Theor ~ of Distr ibuted Word-Based Natural L~e Understandi ~ "   . TR-954!Dept . 
of Computer Science , University of Maryland , 1980 oWeischedel R . Rnd Black J . " If the Parser Fails " , l~?c ~ of the 18th Annual Meet in ~ of the Association for Comput-ational Lin~tistics  . Philadelphia , 1980 . 
Woods W . " Transition network Grs ~ nare for Natural Language Analysis "  . Comm . of the ACM , Vol . 13, no .  10, 1970 - 68 -
