COLLOCATION ALGRAMM ARASA MODEL FOR HINAN -COMPUTER 

W . Randolph Ford
Prism Associates
?7402 York Road , Suits301
Towson , Maryland 21204
l ~, culN . Smith
GTE Laboratories , Inc.
40 Salvan Road
Waltham , Massachusetts 02254
Contrary to the long-held belief of transfo ~national E~mmarians for communication in general  , the majority cf natural langua Ee sentences which people actually use in oom-municating with a co ~ puter  , in an unconstrained mode , are not novel . As Thompson and Thompson 1981s660 obselwez " monotony of structure is the rule rathe ~ than the exception in homan--computer communication  . " Thompson 1981"41 reports in her study of such communications that  75 percent of the queries were wh-questions , 1% percent were commands , 5 percent were statements , and 1 percent were yes/no questions . 
The repetitive feature of natural language i s not a new concept  . Similar observations have been made bs for e o Damerau  1971 used collocation of lexioal items as the basis for a Marker model in an experiment fo r text generation  . Becket claims that " the wonderful feats of the homan intellect  .   .   , are based as much on memorization as on any impromptu problem -- solving "  ( 1975:62 )  . He posits a phrasal lexiconoons lst ln ~ of six major categories of lexioal phrases by which we " stitcht cget her swatches of text that we have hear ~ before product-ive processes have the secondary role of adapting the old phrases to the new situations "  ( 1975z60 ) o All of these approaches to natural langua Ee data rely heavily on the observation that many lexl cal items tend-  106 -cooccur . This surface co-occurrence is the result of what may at times be complicated syntactic and semantic interrel at-ions of language un ite  . Unfortunately , a systematic account-ing of these interre lations has not been achieved in any linguis tict heory  . The thrust of our approach is that the more of language which can be handled lexical ! y  , the easier will homan language be able to be modelled  . 
Actual data on the frequency of lexical col location are very spares  . A study of word sequences in PANALOG text has shown a surprising amount of repetition of word sequences  ( Bienstock and Smithin preparation )  .   ( PANALOG is a system for passing messages among small ~ oups in computer confer-enclng with telemall and calendar features  . See Housman 1979 . 
The data are of human-homan communication and not homan--computer cc ~  . , nunication and are thematically restricted . They therefore resemble Damerau's data .   ) A study of parts of the Brown English Corpus has been undertaken in order to get less them at ically homogeneous material  . In addition , Wizard of OZ experiments with unconstrained h  , -  . an-computer input will be-ginso on at GTE Laboratories in order to gather the more re levant human-oompute u ~ data  . 
A PANALOG text of 16,133 words chosen for study . The longest string which occurred more than once was a seven word quote from Ntetzsche  . Two six-word strings occurred twice and at length five  , one occurred three times and thirteen were repeated twice  . 
An interesting feature of these distribut ions is that the number of hapaxes  ( those strings occurring only once a tag iven string length  ) reaches a peak at length three ( see
Figure i).
- I07-
No . of HAPAX(x . 1o ') 12-ii-i 0, 9'8.
?, 6-5-4-3-2-i-
Figurei . String Length
This is a reveall ~ measure of the Amount of repetition in a text of this length  . In particular , recurring two word strings account for 40 . 8 percent of the runn ing text and re - cu~r ing three word strings comprise  8  . 1 percent of the text . 
The basic assumption of the frequent occurrence of lexic-al collocation in natul-al language texts  , especially in h , -  , an-ocm puter communication , is the basis for the development of a new type of natural language processor  . For d ,  1981 , has constructed a natural languaEe processing system for database updating  , retrieval , and manipulation t which relies critica lly on the observation that real users tend to employ a very limited set  . of lexical dtri ~ types in query i ~ databases  . 
The Ford natural language processor consists of a twostage reduction algorithm for ~ rans lating natural langua Esin-puts into basic functions which are then used to perform the query  . The first stags of the reduction changes the input words to meaning representations us in E a list of lexioal items and a meaning cor relate list  . The second stage takes as input strings of these meaning correlates and oh a ~ es them into basic llst  . 
4 09 numeric representations for words mapped down to  132 unique meanings and 1328 canonical sentence vectors mapped down- 108 - to 19 functions . This twostage reduction scheme work edeffic iently enough to respond to  93  . 8 percent of the 1697 in-put queries , including ungrammatical ones from in exper ienced users  , with a response time of 1 . 5 seconds , operating in an environment of 90K   8 -bit bytes . This compares very favorably to Thompson 1981 where only 67  . 7 percent of REL quer ies were cor rec t ly parsed with an average response time of  10 seconds . 
( Space requirements were not reported . ) Similarly , Damerau 1981 and Patrick 1981 report a success rate for TQA of 65  . 1 percent inputs cor rec t ly parsed with the time required to process a sentence typically being  10 seconds . 
The reason why the system works so well in terms of accuracy  , speed , and small storage reqairements i based on the twos tags reduction technique which  , int ~ rn , is based on the fact that a great ma~v inputs in humancomputer communic-ation are repetitious syntactically  , semantically , and lexl-~ally . Repetition is a principal characteristic of human -- computer communication  . 

Becket , Joseph , 1975 . " The Phrasal Lexicon , " in Schank , Roger and Bonnie Nash-Webber , eds . Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing  , ACL Workshop , Cambridge , HA , pp . 38-41 . 
Btenstook , Daniel and Raoul H . ~ nith . In preparation . " Lexical
Collocation in Three Types of Texts."
Damerau , Frederick J .  1971 . Marker Models and Linguistic Theol . Janualinguarum series minor 95 . Mouton : The Hague . 
Dsmerau , Frederick J .  1981 . " Operating Statistics for the Transformational Question Answering System "  , AJCL7 . 1 . :30-42 Ford , W . Randolph .  1981 . " Natural Language Processing by Cemputer-ANew Approach "  , Unpublished Ph . D . diseertation , The Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , Haryland , Hous ~ an , Edward . " Computer Mediated Communication , -Profile 3 (1979) " 14 . 

Petriok , Stanley .  1981 . " Field Testing the Transformational Question Answering  ( TQA ) System , " Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Meet in 6 of the Association for Computational ~ , pP .  3536 . 
Reiger , Chuck .  1977 . " Viewing Parsing as Word Sense Discrimin-ation , " in Dinswall , Williem O . A Surve ~ of Linguistic
Science , Greylock Publishers.
Small , Steven .  1980 . " Word Expert Parsing " A Theory of Distr ibuted Word-Based Natural Language Understanding  , " University of Maryland Computer Science TR-954 . 
Thompson , Bo ~ ena H .  1981 . " Evaluation of Ratural Language Interfaces to Data Base Systems  , " Proceed in ~ m of the Nineteenth Annual Meeting of the Association for Computat-ional  Lin6uistics   . Menlo Park , CA : Association for Canput-atlonal Linguistics , pp .  39-42 . 
Thcapson , Bo ~ ena H . and Frederick B . Thompson .  1981 . " Shifting to a Higher Gear in a Natural Language System  , " Proceed ln~s of the 1981 National Computer Conference Arlington , VA :
APIPS Press , pp . 657-662.

