COLING82, J . Horeck ?) fed.)
North . Holland Publishing Company
( ~ Arademia . 1982
KNOWLED GEREPRESENTATION
AND MACHINET P ~ ANSLATION
Susumu Sawai , Hiromichi Fukushima,
Masakatsu Sugimoto and Naoya Ukai
Development Division , Computer Systems
Fujitsu Limited
Nakahara-ku , Kawasaki

This paper describes a new knowledge representation called " frame knowledge representation-O "  ( FKR-O )  , and an experimental machine translation system named ATLAS/I which uses 

The purpose of FKR-O is to stored information required for machine translation processing as f lexibly as possible  , and to make the translation system as expandable as possible  . 
I . INTRODUCTION
Preliminary research on machine translation ( MT ) started soon after computers became available . 
MT research was prevalent in the USA during the early  1960s   . However , the conclusions of the ALPAC report published in 1966 opposed funding for MT research and resulted in I  ) the general discontinuance of MT research in the USA  . 
The effort is more concerted in countries where MT systems are more necessary than in the USA  . For example , the use of both French and English in Canada and the multilingual use of formal documents in the EEC present pressing demands for practical MT systems  . 
The SYSTRAN system ( produced by LatsecIncorporated ) has been applied in the following areas : I ) Private companies in Canada use it for translat in gengineering documents from 
English into French.
2 ) NASA used it to communicate with the crews of the Apollo and Soyuz spaceships  , translating between Russian and English . 
3 ) The EEC uses it for examining the feasibili ty of other MT systems  2  )  . 
Other systems currently being used include the METEO system which translates English weather reports into French in Canada  , and the WEIDNER and LOGOS systems produced by pr ivate firms in the USA  . Recently , there has been a revival of interest in MT systems in the USA  , partly because of significant advances being made in artificial in tell igence  ( AI ) research . 
The future development of MT systems is ensured by the total integration of high-performance computers  , newman-machine interface designs , new software methodolo-3) gies , and progress in knowledge engineering . 
The language barrier in Japan in far greater than in the EEC or Canada  , because Japanese is an isolated language . There is a large demand for document translat ion in Japan  . 
The fifth generation system project in Japan aims to build the artificial intelli -gence machine that will process natural languages  . This machine will perform language translat ion at least  90% of it automatically , such that the cost of a translation job could be reduced by  70%  . 
351352 S . SAWAI et al2 . PROBLEM SAND SOLUTION 2 . 1 Methodological problems in a machine translat ion system Basical ly  , a machine translation system consists of three components : a dictio-nary  ( lexicon )   , grammar ( translation rules ) , and the translation program ( algo-rithm ) . 
The major methodological problem in machine translation systems is how to separate the translation program from the grammatical rules  . The advantage of this sepa-ration is that the program can be used for various languages and grammars without modification  ; that is , it is language-independent . However , there are practical problems in separating the grammar from the program  , including difficulties in formulating complex rules for linguistic data and avoiding large storage requirements or heavy computation  loads4  )  . 
2 . 2 Solution by knowledge representation methodology Artificial intelligence research on natural languages and knowledge representation progressed rapidly during the  1970s   . In AI , " knowledge representation " is a combination of data structures and interpretive procedures that leads to " know-ledgeable " behavior  . A new type of machine translation system conceived by Drs  . Y . Wilks and R . Schank appeared in the early 1970s . This type of system translates input text into the knowledge representation of semantic primit ives intended to be language-independent l  )  . 
At present , the major knowledge representation techniques are predicate logic  , procedural representations , semantic networks , production systems ( PS ) , and frames . In procedural representations , knowledge is contained in procedures ( programs ) . The basic idea of production systems is a database consisting of rules  , called production rules , in the form of condition-action pairs . A frame is a predefined internal relation . 
This paper proposes an efficient knowledge representation method using frame  . 
techniques to solve the above-described problems in machine translation systems  . 
3, FKR-O
Figure 1 shows the framework of frame knowledge re -presentation-O  ( FKR-O ) 5 )  . 
In the FKR-Oknowledge representation method , a production system is combined with a procedual representation and is systematized into a state t ransition network  . Rule representation frames and control frames are provided for the efficiency of system operation  . 
3.1 Rule representation frame
Figure 2 shows Jackendoff's semantic representation of verbs  . Because Jackendoff is a linguist , he did not propose any machine translation system  , but his semantic representation provides a good framework with a clear indication of the relat ionship between the actor and the action  . It indicates that the verb " OPEN " can take two noun phrases  ; that the subject can be either of two noun phrases  , NP ( I ) or NP (3) ; and that NP(2) is an instrument , " INST "7) . 
(1 ) Node of state transition network ( 2 ) Production System ( 3 ) Procedural representation
Fig . 1
Framework of knowledge representation FKR-O.
ICAUSE(NP ( I) , ~0 posit S ~ antics(NP (3) , y , OPEN )) I~T : NP (2)
Fig . 2
Jackendoff's semantic representation
KNOWLED GEREPRENTATION AND MACHINE TRANS LATION 353 
Figure 3 is an example of the rule representation frame used in FKR-O for the Japanese verb "~"  ( to specify )  . 
The frame shows : l ) the verb name , which is the name of a node in the state transition network  ;  2 ) the relationship between the verb and one or more noun phrases  ;  3 ) the conditional process to be performed after the rules are applied  . 
Rule representation frame--Verb ; ~&
Rule NH NB NC
No , l(A ) (0) ( I)
Rule NH ! NC
NO . 2(A ) ( I)
A ( Actor )
D(Object )
I(Instrument )

Control representation frame frame
LJ , LJ ~ Rule
VA , ,\~, ~/\" FeraPree Sentation
VA co?t ~ ol\m_\] parameter\.
' ~ Rul ~ representation frame k_J
Fig . 3
Communication of frames
This conditional process includes the judgement of the conditions required for calling other frames  . 
Current FKR-O specifications do not have the " cause " concept included in Jackendoff's semantic representation  , however , procedural representation is planned for future FKR-O editions  . 
3.2 Control frame
The FKR-O system has control frames which supervise the rule representation frames discussed in Sec  .  3 . 1 . Each pair of adjacent frames communicates by a control parameter as shown in Fig  . 3 . 
The roles of the control frame are to resolve one rule frame into several subrule frames and to control the calling sequence of these frames  . This is one solution which overcomes the disadvantages inherent in production system  ( PS ) methodology ; i . e . inefficency of program execution and opaqueness of the control flow  . A con-trol frame addresses the rule frame by means of the contents of the control parameter  . If the next frame is not specified , control returns to the top-level con-trol frame called the " control nucleus "  . 
3.3 Grammatical rules
ATLAS/I is an experimental machine translation system in which grammatical rules are specified in FKR-O representation  . ATLAS/I corrently has several control frames and the several types of rule representation frames  . These are examples : l ) Noun frame Example: (   ( STATE ( NOUN ) ? STATE ( CONTROLI ) )  )   ( R ( COND ( NHX4 ) ND )   ( PARM ( 0 Wl )   )   ) A noun phrase " H4" is formed by combining a noun denoting a human being " NH "  (  ~  ) and postposition " X4" ( ~ )   . The function " PARM " is the mapping function from graph to graph which can be used by the analysis  , translation , and synthesis processes . 
2) Verb frame
Example: ( ( STATE ( OPEN ) ? STATE ( CONTROL 5 ) ) DEMON )   ( R ( COND ( H4C 7VO ) A ' )   ( PARM ( I'VOW@I@2@3 ) ) ) DEMON : PROC ; /* ACTOR AND INSTARES LOTS . * TACTOR=WORD(2); /* AWORD(*)ISTHECONTENTS . */
INST = WORD(3); /* OFTHESTACKS .*/
END ; 354 S . SAWAI et al
The surface case structure " H4  +  C7 + VO " is changed to a deep case structure " A ' + I'+VO "  . DEMON is a procedure . A noun phrase " C7" is a combination of the concrete noun " NC " ( ~# )   , and postposition " X 7"(~) . If the surface case structure is " H4  +  C7 + VO " , a verb " VO " ( open ) has an agent case " A '" and an instrument case " I '"  . A variable " WORD " designates a slot in the stack  . Figure 4 shows the structure of the grammatical rules . 
( OPEN)-Ve~(n ) fr ~
Input-patte ~ Output-pattern ( Action )   ( PrOduction rules ) 
Oe scriptlon of sequence of attribute
Z (  " " "  )   ( I "" )   (  " " "   (  " " "  )  '~ " " " "  )   ( m "" )   (  " " "  )  :  ( Action x )  3  (  " '  )   (  ' "  )   (  " '  )  ' "  )   (  " '  )   (  " '  )   (  ' "  )  :  ( Action 3 ) D~ION ~ Procedural representation of OPEN : ! i !
Rulerep~s ~ tation frays
Fig . 4
Inp . t Output
Word ( CO~ffROL 5 ) Input tape ~ Output tape I__J-r . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
? t
Control frays
Structure of the grammartical rules 3 . 4 Model of ATLAS/I Figure 5 is a simplified model of ATLAS/I which includes an input tape  , an output tape , a stack , a control section , a dictionary , a register , and grammatical rules ( rule representation frames and control frames )  . When scanning an input tape , the stack is used as a table for temporary storage  ; at reduction , it is used as a table with attributes and equivalents  . 
The dictionary is a table with words , attri-butes , and equivalents and is used as a table for lexical rules  . The word " ~ EB ", for
I1 Pr ~ uctlon rules + P ~ cedu ~
Rule ~ present at lonfrays Cont ~ l frame .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . Gram~tIcalRu ) es .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Notes : W ~ an $ a ~ r d , A means an attribute , and E~ans an equivalent . 
Fig . 5
Model of ATLAS/I example , is stored as ( p ~ , noun , Taro ) in the dictionaries . The character strings "2 ~ EB~~P ) ~ o-" , for example , are stored in the input tape . The control parameter is set in the register . 
3 . 5 In i t ia l state of ATLAS/I Model " NOUN " is set in the register as an initial value  . Grammatical rules have predefined values . The input head points to the leftmost position of the input tape  . 
The output tape is blank . The output head points to the leftmost position of the output tape  . The initial value of the slots in the stack is  ( #X ,  ?) , meaning the top of the sentence and null string ( ? )  . 
3 . 6 Flow of ATLAS/I Model 3 . 6 . 1 Phase A : sentence processing In phase A , one sentence of a text is translated . 
l ) State (1): scan
The words in the input tape are scanned by the input head and the dictionary is accessed to determine the attributes and equivalents  . When found , these attributes and equivalents are stored in the stack  , and then the input head KNOWLED GEREPRESENTATION AND MACHINE TRANS LATION  355   2  ) advances one word to the right . When the input tape is scanned , the stack is used as a table by the control section  . 
The control section scans the words of the input tape  . If a period " . " is encountered , it stops scanning and stores ( X # , @) in the stack . 
The rule representation frame that is pointed to by the control parameter is referenced  , and the control causes a translation from state ( 1 ) to state ( 2 )  . 
State ( 2 ) : reduction and code generation The control section checks if the slots in the stack are  ( #X ,  @) , ( SS , a character string ) , and ( X # ,  ~) . If so , there is a transition from state (2) to state (4) ; if not , the control section checks whether the attributes in the stack match those in the input pattern of the production rule  ( P )  . If not , the control causes a transition to the state specified by the rule representation frame  . 

If matched rule ( P ) does not exist and if the rule representation frame does not specify the new state  , there is a transition to the default state specified by the toplevel control frame called the " control nucleus "  . If matched rule ( P ) exists , the equivalents ( SE ) in the stack whose attributes ( SA ) match the attributes of the rule ( P ) input pattern are used as parameters of the rule ( P ) action function . Figure 8 is a general diagram of the organization of the grammar  . The input and output patterns are organized according to the sequence of attributes  . The action function of rule ( P ) pops the equivalents ( SE ) and attributes ( SA ) from the stack , and pushs the attributes of the rule ( P ) output pattern and the ' character strings created by this action function as the new slots  ( SA ' , SE') , whose number equals that of the rule ( P ) output pattern . The control returns ~ o state (2) . 
State (3): Frame transition
The control checks the control frame , determines the name of the next rule representation frame  , and stores this name in the register . After selection of this rule representation frame control passes to state  ( 2 )  . 
Remark : The control frame determines the termination of phase A  . Attermination , the control causes a transition to phase B . 
State (4): accept
Control pops the character string of the slot ( SS , a character string ) from the stack and writes this string into the output tape  . 
3.6.2 Phase B : text processing
The text is translated in phase B . Control continues phase ( A ) until the input head arrives at the rightmost position of the input tape  . 
All text translation processes end when the input head arrives at the rightmost position of the input tape  . 
4. ATLAS/IMACHINE TRANS LATION SYSTEM
ATLAS/I is currently used in the limited application of translating software-related reports from Japanese into English  . The number of sentence translation patterns is gradually increasing through the addition of grammatical rules and vocabulary  . 
3S 6S . SAWAI ? tal.
4 . 1 Japanese to English machine translation Machine translation involves three stages :  )  ; ~ X ) ~) o , input of the original Japanese text , trans- , ~ t . . . .
lation , and postediting of the translated
English text ( see Fig . 6).
~ rpho)icat Syntax % , English sentence i analysis ~ kCase analysis ~ . j/i
Fig . 6
Flow of ATLAS/I
ATLAS/I currently integrates three processes : analysis of an original Japanese sentence  , structural translation from Japanese into English  , and synthesis of the English sentence . The " case " of noun phrases , which is the relation of noun phrases to verbs , is checked while the syntax is analyzed . This case analysis is performed with reference to the production rules  . When the matching rule is found , case and syntactic synthesis of the English are performed  , and the synthesized English sentence is printed . These production rules are defined in FKR-O . 
The machine translation processes achieved through the use of FKR-O are delincated in Fig  . 6 by dotted lines . 
5. CONCLUSION
The major methodological problem in a machine translation system is how to separate the translation program from the grammatical rules  . In ATLAS/I , grammatical rules are stored in the new form of knowledge representation called FKR-O  . In FKR-O , a production system is combined with a procedural representation and systematized into a state transition network  . Rule representation frames and control frames are provided for efficient system operation  . 
ATLAS/I is currently operational with about 5000 words and 400 grammatical rules for translating software -related reports from Japanese into English  . 
FKR-O allows the system to gradually increase the number of sentence patterns  , and this expansion is currently underway in the ATLAS/I system  . 
6. ACKNOWLED GEMENT
The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to all those who qave continued and valuable guidance in the field of machine translation  , including , in particular , Mr . Sato , Manager of Development Division . 

Ill Barr , A . and Feigenbaum , E . A . : The Handbook of Artificial Intelligence Vo1 . l ( William Kaufmann , Inc . , Los Altos , California , 1981) 231-238 . 
\[2\] Hutchins , W . J . : Progress in Documentation-Machine Translation and Machine-Aided Translation  , Journal of Documentation ,  34 , 2 ( Jun . 1978)\[3\] Nagao , M . : Machine Translation ( In Japanese) , Journal of Information Processing , Vol . 20, No . 10 ( Oct . \]979) 896-902\[4\] Bruderer , H . E . : Handbook of Machine Translation and Machine -aided Translation  ( North-Holland , Amsterdam , 1977)\[5\] Sawai , S . , Sugimoto , M . and Ukai , N . : Knowledge Representation and Machine Translation  , FUJITSUSci . Tech . J . , 18, l(Mar . 1982) I17-134\[8\] Jackendoff . R . : Toward an Explanatory Semantic Representation , Ling . In q . , 7 (1976) 89-150 . 
