INTRODUCING COGITOLOGY
?0I , Z~onln oO V
Paoulty of Philolo ~ , Mosoov University , Moscow , USSR
In the course of discernible history it i snot too 
difficult to trace a number of events when some discoveries or inventions-techn ical by their nature-had an overall and profound impact upon the human society in  . general . Pro-bably , the most vivid example of such events is the invention of writing  . An event equal in scope and significance has to be confronted by us today  . It is the making of the computer . 
Apprehensio not only of the technical , but also of the social significance of its appearance was first expressed in  1950 when the classical work of Alan Turing Computing Machinery and Intelli ~ enoecame out  . However , it is only at the present moment that we have come close to being able to appreciate this event adequately and to actually realize the perspectives it has opened  . Now we have all the grounds to state that wi th the arrival of the computer and with lc reat-ing the programs which ensure its funct ioning  , we move from the epoch of p~vsio ally operat ing machines into the epoch of machines operat ing intelligently  . Tracing the ways of deve-lolx nent of physica lly operating machines may provide us with the knowledge which will become helpful fo r the conception of what is to be expected in the develol ~ nent of intelligent-ly operat ing machines and even for the purposeful di rection of th  ; Lapro oees ~ The afore said may be regarded as the geners l introduct-ion to the problem = und ~ discussion at the present o onferen --  302 - ce , and , ix ~ regardles e of how general it ~ be , it bears a direct relation to them . 
The conference is devoted to computational linguistics and to a considerable extits task is to elucidate how the latter is related to computational sciences as such  , to mathematics , to linguistics proper , to artificial intelligence and so forth ~ Behind these scientific disciplines lie such-although unmentioned  , yet ever-present-entitles , categories and phenomenas intelligence , thou ~ ht , consciousness , memo-r ~ comprehension , knowledge and many others which are in-di spensable for solving the problems to be di scussed  . 
Let us begin with raising the question of what is com-putational linguistics  , whether it has a clearly outlined field of research  , and why it is necessary to establish its relation to the disciplines named in the program  . It could balmily be claimed that computation a lll D~L stice is none the other than lingu is tics employing means of computation  ( hard-ware and software ) for solving strictly linguistic tasks  . The same refers to computational semantics , computational spntax ( parsing ) , and Compu ~ ations ~ phonetics ( automatic recognition of acoustic images )   . Taken as a whole as well as in its sub-divi sions  , computational linguistics is only a component in the complex domain of investigat ions which ultimately serves the purpose of building various types of intelligently operat-ing machines  . Taken as such it does not virtually exis to r  , at a ~ rate , does not require to be singled out as an auto -nomous discipline  . In point of fact , it is conceived only in the context of other scientific disciplines brought together by the common striving for solving the common task  . That is why it u ~ gently requires establi shing end defining its relat-ionships with the other participants of the mentioned complex domain of investigation  , It follows from what has been said above that  , since this new object of investigation has been singled out  , it-303-should be respectively outlined , and thus it requires defin-ing its boundaries and its theoretical foundation with suffic-ient precision  . This is to a great extent hampered by the fact that we deal here  , as has already been said , with a complex scientific formation or , in other words , with a domain of interdisciplinary stud i es  . This interdisciplinary domain has been repeatedly referred to as the cognitives c ience  . For the sake of convenience , this descriptive term should be prefer-ab ly replaced by a more compact one  , vi_~z . ? cogitolo ~? . The composition of cogitology varies wi th various authors but as its indispensable components are mentioned lin@lzistics  , psy-chology , theory of knowledge ( epistemology ) , and computer sciences . Within the framework of cogitology all these dis-ciplines do not enter into sc ientific cc clloboration in order to ~ iz emechanically or make into a whole the resu lts of examining the same object in diffe rent aspects  . Complex scientific formations are Justi fied only if they provide the investigator with new tools of cognition which cannot be pro-vided by any of the oolloborating di sciplines taken separately  . 
Such formations make severe demands in accordance with which definitions of the i r categories should be equally acceptable fo rall c clleboreting disciplines or - what is the ease-should lie outside their autonomous or specific goals  . 
Th~s computational linguistics is lingu is tics in that form which it acquires in cogitology  , being its fundamental component . In its totality , cogitology makes the theoretical found at ion for building various kinds of intell igently operat-ing machines  . 
The basic and mutually determined categories of cogito-lo ~ are intelligence  , knowledge , langu~e . None of these categories has a precise and ind is putable definition  . In this situation one has to proceed from some working definitions whose suitab leness is verified by subsequent practica l research  . 
It see ~ acceptable in these circumstances to define in telli--  304 -genoe as an inherent in lt viug organisms mechanism of generat-ing knowledge and its purposeful realization in the interact- ion of an organism with the environment of its functioning  . 
Hereby environment is meant the sum total of pb  , Tsical , social , and spiritual factors which an organism meets within the process of its vital act ivity  . 
Owi ~ to its diversity , to provide a more or less un-equivo caldefini tion of knowledge is more difficult  , a . a matter of fact , the primary goal of oo ~ to lo ~ as the theoret- icalfo and atton for fulfilling the task posed above is the description of the nature  , shape , and scope of human knowled-ge . At this stake of comin K into being , co~to lo ~ . has to deal only with those kinds of knowledge which possess the qualities of object iveness  , which are endorsed by memory , and which are discrete in form . 
All these characteristics are acquired by knowledge through the instrumentality of language  . To them it also adds interpretation of knowledge since in the endorsing it by memo-ry as well as in the process of makin K it disc reteone has to deal with choice and since the knowledge the machine operates with has to be applied to concrete realworld situations which can be interpreted in a different way ? When we speak about building intelligent ly operating machines  , two 4 , n portant factors should be taken into account . 
Hachines of this kind can-or imitate man's in tellectual activ-ities in their ent irety but are employed to perform separate aspects  , parameters , or " Jobs " of human intellect ( intellt gen-ce ) : Due to this separateness the mechanism of the ir function-ink should in swltably diffe r from the way this work is per-formed i ~ the inner tnter connections and in the context of the total complexs truo ~ turof human intel ligence ? ~ n Identificat-ion can  . be drawn here only with respect to final " products '? And  , as the history of oreat tnK physically operatin K machines teaches us  , in tell ~ gently operating machines are not bu ilt to me rely imitate some ?  . lobs " of human intelligence , but in order "- 305 -z to increase their work in ~ potentials . Besides , ~ udglng from the experience with physically operating machines with their power almost infinitely intensified where we are conf ronted with not merely technical or social problems but with the problem of the exis tence of manor of the surw lval of the life on the earth in general ~ already at this s tage in the development of intelligently operating machines ut most caut-ion is absolu tely essential  . 

