REPERENCERESOLUTION ANDSEMANTICCOHERENCE
Elisabeth Leinfellner , Ingeborg Steinacker and Herald Trost
Department of Linguistics , University of Nebraska , Lincoln , 
Nebrasoa and Department of Medical Cybernet ics  , University
of Vienna , Vienna , Austria
The problem of how to define semantic coherence in a semantic net is a least two fo ld :  ( a ) how should we structure the semantic net as to permit the combination of lexical mean ings with the semantic structure of the vocabulary as such 
D ( b ) how do we go on from here when we want to expl icates e-mantic coherence within clauses and texts ? FOr~htespecific problem it is important to show how-and how far-semant iccoherence tallies with syntactic coherence and whether we need certain trans formations in order to insure tallying  . 
For our purpose , namely , to develop a conceptual natur-allanguage understanding system for German  ( VIE-LANG ) we used Brachman?s ( Brachman 1978 ) outline of a semantic net to construct a conceptual knowledge base  . We include dideas from a " semanti . clzsd " valence theory , a " semantic Ized " dependency ~ smmar , and linguistic semantics in general . 
We will now give a short description of the semantic net as used in our project  . There is , at first , a hierarchic-al " layer " of concepts , corresponding to a categorical the-saurus system  . Each concept is structured via so-called roles through other concepts and it is here where the lexical meanings find their p lace  . Roles either resemble deep cases - 171 -in a case grammar-so far , we have identified about 50 cases - or they are other vital " constituents ' of the semantic concept to which they belong  ( e . g . properties ) . Whereas in the hlerarchioal " layer ' the relations are those of hyponomy/hypero-moray  , the relations which lead from concepts via roles to conceptual restrlot lons may be interpreted as relations of semantic compatibility  ( selectional restrictions )   , to be specified . 
There is no explicit dichotomy between syntax and se-mantics  . Syntax is seen as a " coarse " semantic ( pre- ) ordering-with loop holes which have to be bridged by transformations  . 
Each concept in the semantic net , including its roles and conceptual restr ictions  , can , therefore , be interpreted either as a semantic defini tion  , or as a semantic sentence pattern . 
The latter approach accounts for the applicability of a ? se-mant lcIzed " valence theory and a " semanticized ' dependency grammar  . 
How do we apply this system to the problem of semantic coherence in clauses and texts ? The first practical step consisted in ol asslfylng the forms of semantic coherence and integrating them into our system  . Accordingly , semantic coherence is expressed via 1 . Proforms 1 . 1 . Profornm which can be identified morphologically and morphologl cally/syntactl cally  1  . 1 . 1 . Purely morphologically : lexemes which can be ident if-ied as proforms on a purely morphological basis  ( personal pronouns , certain adverbial proforms ) . 
1 . 1 . 2 . Morphologically/syntactically : lexemes which can be identified as possible pro forms on a morphological basis but we need syntactic evidence for the decision of whether they really are proforms : possess ive pro-nouns  ( function as proforms only when isolated - non--attributive  )   , certain adverbs which may also funct-- 172 -ion as conjunctions , certain interrogative pronouns which have the same morphological shape as relative pronotuls ?  1   . 2, 1? Borderline cases , bordering on 1olo . lexemes and syntagmas which cannot be ident if ied morphologically/syn-tactically as proforms  , but of which we know from experience that they doocouz as proforms : D in ~  , tun . 
~eschehen , aus diesem Grund , etc.
1 . 2 o2o Semantic proforms per se : this group cons is ts  ( mainly ) of " synonyms ' , and , perhaps , all those lexemes which stand in a certain subconcept/superconcept relation to one another  , eeg . , like Engl , oar and vehicle . 
2 . Semantic coherence without proforms . These are de-monstrated best bI an example : In ( I ) Das Hausge hoert mlr . Leiderist das Dach ( This is my house ? Unfortunately the roof is so honbau faellg  , in bad shape ? ) we cannot apply any of the abovementioned ol assifl cat-ion criteria  , although it is obvious that semantically
Haus and Dac_._~h belong together ?
After having established this class if ication a matrix was developed which codif ies all the available morphological ~ nd syntactical information  , plus information delivered by the concept- role structure of the net  . In the matrix we find Inform-ation such as whether a proform substitutes for a noun phrase  , a dependent clause , an independent clause , a text , an adverb etc ? , or a combination of them , which preposition to expect in an answer to a question using a specific interrogative pronoun  , etc ? It has already been established ( Hobbs 1978 ) that the information contained in the morpho logical-syntactic part of the matrix is not sufficient to identify semantic coherence in -  !73 -a clause or text . Even for the proforms of 1 . 1  . it is not sufficient to rely on the gender of the preform to find the correct antecedent  . In the exe~nple- ( 2 ) Der Fischwirdauf den Teller gelegt . Dannesseichlhn . 
( The fish is put on the plate . Afterwards I eat it . ) Identification via gender provides us with the information that either Fischor Teller may be the antecedent of lhn  . 
Our concept-role structure , on the other hand , informs us that-given ordinary circumstances - only fish are to be eaten  , whereas plates are not . This is to say that morphological and syntactical knowledge give us an indication where to look for semantic coherence in a clause or text  ( syntax as " coarse * semantic ( pre- ) ordering l )  , but that we need criter-ia from the semantic net in order to be reasonably certain of what the proform stands for  , or where semantic coherence is to be found in case there are no proforms  . 
A good example of how the system VIE-LANG works is delivered by those syntagmatic adverbial proforms which stand for sentences or texts and which belong to  1  . 2 . 1 . : (3) Das Restaurant is the utegesch lossen . Aus diesem Grundessenwirzu Hause . ( The restaura unt is closed . For this reason we have dinner at home . ) On the semantic " surface " there is nothing which relates Grund  ( reason ) to anything else in either one of the two clauses  . However , from our matrix we do know that aus diesem Grund may belong to  1  . 2 . 1 and , moreover , that its antecedent can only be a main clause or a text which immediately preced-es aus diesem G ~ do The system also recognizes that Restaurant and essen belong to the same semantic neighborhood  . Thus it follows that DasRestaurantistl heute gesch lossen assume the role+CAUSE with respect to essen wir zu Hause  . 
From these examples it should be obvious that semantic coherence according to  2  , has to be based exclusively on the- 174 -concept-role structure of the net . F . i . , in example ( 1 ) semantic coherence can be made clear only when we know that Hau_~s and Dac  . . . ~ h belong together semantically . How can we achieve that ? Some scholars assume that a kind of inferencing guides us from Hau_  . .~s to Dach . In our system the lexeme " Haus " would be connected with the concept BUILDING  , in which there exists a role ROOF , which is the net-structure the lexeme * Dech ? would lead to  . Instantiation of a role always comprises the instantiation of the concept it belongs to and the value -- restriction respect ively  . The relationship between " Haus " and " Dach " becomes clear by merely accessing the net  , without any inferences at all w

Braohman R . J . : A Structural Paradigm for Representing Knowledge  , Bolt , Beranek and Newman ; Cambridge Ma ,  1978 . 
Hirst G . : Anaphora in Natural Language Understanding : A Survey  , Univ . of British Columbia TR-79-2!1979 . 
Hobbs , J . R . : Pronoun Resolution , City Univ . of New York,
Research Rep . No . 76-I ; 1976.
Hobbs , J . R . : Coherence and Coreference , SRI International ; 1978 . 

