ONVERBOSITYLEV ELSINCOGNITIVE PRO~SOLVERS
P . Otrk ~ and T . Havr Auek
Center of Biomathematics , Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences , 
14220 Prague 4, Vidensk ~1083, Czechoslovakia
The aim of the paper is to discuss several i ssues that usually occur when computation all inguistics comes into inter-actions w iths or a pidly growing s~easo fartific ial intellig-ence as it can be seen e  . g . in designing expert and consulting systems or in the area of automated programming of knowledge--based problem solving systems  . We will mention here problems of communicating knowledge between machine and researcher  ( a user of a system ) which is not an expert in programming tech-h iquevSince naturallan ~ a~eisa " natural " form for express-tng knowledge  ( and most extra mathematical knowledge actual ly exists in this form  ) it could be seemed that natural language would be also the best support for communicating knowledge through a cognitive process performed on a computer  . Is It really so ? We want to bring arguments for a rather opposite claim by po intedou ~ several formats for expressing and commun-to at in ~ scientific knowledge which differs from usual natural language ones oW hat kinds of data structures for expressing knowledge and for representing it in a computer memory we need ? For answering thi s question we have to disti~p-is hatleas t two roles of a user in the process of conmmnication with machine  . 
First of them can be called a speaker tIt characterizes the situation in which the user loads knowledge into a machine  . 
For such a situation there is important that knowledge enter --  142 -ing a computer should be precise and exact as much as possib-le  . So the data structures should enabled is ambtguation of information  . Such a requirement leads naturally to hard con-straints of input formats  . On the other hand , not only for the user convenience , it should be desirable to allow highly f reeform at of input information to avoid any a priori limit at-ions  . Thus , the system should be equipped by an effective interpreter transforming various kinds of input information into internal represent at ion suitable for potential reasoning processes  . The second role of the user in communication wi th computer can be called a listener ~ This situation is rather different from the f irst one  . Here the user has to under-stand results of computations and  ( especially in Oonsulting systems ) also various explanations resulting from reasoning processes  . These two roles can , of course , in filtrate one into another . Analogous roles can be recognized for a machine  , too . 
As a teethed for our considerations an AI prob lem-orient-ed designed for an automatic data analysis  ( called GUHA-80 ) has been chosen . The task of GUHA-80 system is to generate and develop interesting views onto given empirical data  ( recogni-zetnterest in ~ logical patte rns  )   . These views should represent relevant informat ion contained in the data and be useful for formation of hypotheses  . 
From the point of view of two abovemention edro les of user the following types of informat ion in the  GUHA-80 system could be dist tn&-ttt shed: 1  . Information coming into system could contain a  ) data ( observations on objects )   , b ) supporting knowledge ( a prior t knowledge about the problem in quest ion  , answers of questions ) . 
2 . Information coming from the system could conta in a  ) trace of computations and reasoning activi ties  , b ) results of computations , c ) explanations ( why such and such operations have been per formed  )   , cf . ~ CIN . 

Let us give a hypothetical example of user ' scommunic at-ion with  GUHA-80 system : GUHA-80: by a sing~lelinkage method using euclidian distance on the set of objects the follow ing dendro ~ amex pressing the similarity between these objects was obtained : 


Is the dendogram in accordance with your knowledge ? 
USER : No.
GUHA-80 . May I suggest another pattern using diffe rent clust-ering techniques ? 
USER : Yes.
GUHA-SO : Do you prefer some of the following techniques :  ( a table of relevant techniques follows ) It can be easily seen that in such a convers at ion different levels of understanding language are needed  . NL level will be appropriate mainly for user's answers  , simple questions etc . 
But try to express the information o ontain q d in the dend~o-gram in NL form ! Moreover  , for oommun ~ cation process from GUHA-80 to the user it will be typical a ~ raphio represent at-ion of information  ( which in many cases is more transparent than ~ Lone  )   . 
Thus the language understanding take place main ly in the cases ublb  ) i . e . when entering supporting knowledge . But for practical reasons it can be performed in a very simple levelase  . g . in very high level programm Ang languages . Examples INPUTPORNATIS ~()' . VARIABLESARE 25 . CASESAREI02 . 
VARIABLE hL % MESARE . . .   , PRINT CORRELATION So-144-/In each case , such an understanding muet lead to 1 . to the elimination of redundant informat ion and in such a way to the core of asta tement !  2  . to the possibility to work only with minimal cores of statements  . 
The reason for a second requirement is that a user experienced with the system tend ~ to rep lace syntactic sugar by an appropriates lang to minimize hie effoz ~ pa/de  . g . to punch in ~ or typing statements . 
Conclusion , We have distinguished different types of communication of scientific knowledge through a mechanized cognitive process  . It leads first to the claim that not only different levels of understanding language but also aifferent levels of verbosity e ~ eneeded  . Moreover p in some c ~ s es th e ; use of verbal information can be undesirab leoreven impossib-le  . Horeover , in many cases when understanding lance is ~- needed it would be enough to understand only a small relevant fragment of It  . - i
References :
H~ekP . , Havr~nek T . ,  GUHA-80 An Application of Artificial Intelllgenoe to Data Analysis  , in Po~ta ~ eaumel ~ Inte-llgenola ,  1982 , Vol . 1, No . 2 Chytll M . , Mathematical Methods as Cognitive Problem Solvers  , in Kybernetee 1980 , Yol . 9, 197-205 Jirk ~ P . , Loslcal and Linguistic Aspects of Computer-Based Inference Processes  , in Thel~ca ~ Ae Bull . of Math=Linguistics 35, 1981, 41-53 Skuce D . R . , Toward Co~nunlcating Qua!itatlve Knowledge between Scientists and Machines  , PhD Thesis , Dept . of EE , MoGIII
Univ ., Montreal , May 1977, 269p.
Swart out W . R . , Producin ~ ExplanatloDs and Justifications of Expert Consulting Pro~ams  , MIT/LCS/TR-251 , Massachusetts , 
Jan , , 1981, 11'/p.

