TH~LRC MACHINE TRANS LATION SYST ~= AN 0VERVI ~ OFTHE
LINGUISTICCO~ONgNTOFw ~. TAL
Winfield S . Bennett
Li ~ istios Research Center , The University of Texas at
Austin
Although there has been work on machine transla tion since the early  1950"s   , it is only in the last few years that ~ systems have become capable of p~'oductng output and - where near the quality needed for widespread use  . The LinguAe-tics Research Center ( LRC ) at the University of Texan at Aus-t in has developed a working machine translation system  . METAL , the actual translation system , produces quality E~l?sh trans-lations fo r German technical manuals  . Experiments conducted with up to 200 contiguous pa~es of text have been most en-cour t ! the LRC plans to  . have a production system by early 1983 . 
METAL is a modular system in which the lexicons , grammar , and analyzer are distinct packages , each of which may be modif-ied without affec ting the other two  . This paper will present an overview of METAL ' sltnguAsttccomponent  , giving a geners ~ overview of the scope and format of the METAL lexicons and a somewhat more detailed description of the METAL grammar  . I % will then present a description of the translation process using a simple German sentence  , and conclude with a discussion of the cur rent state of the linguistic component  , along with comaents on what improvements are necessary in the ftucther development of the systemo-  29  -
METAL Lexicons
This section will briefly describe the scope and format of the system lexicons  . METAL employs monolingual lexicons for both the source and ts ~ get langua Kes  , and bilingual lexicons to equate each source language word ' with a corresponding tar-get language equivalent  . The bilin ~ pA ~ or " transfer " lexicons permit a word in the source language to be trans lated into an ~ of variety of words in the ta rget language depending on nuanc-es of gre~mat ical context  . The lexicons e . refeature-based , consisting of a series of syntactic and semantic features and values for each lexio a lentry  . The paper will discuss this feature - based system in general  , looking at the format of both the monolingual 8J~d bil ~ ugual ( " transfer " )   . lexicons . This section will conclude with co- .   . ents on the codlnK procedures developed , but not yet fully implemented , for use in METAL lexicons . 
METAL Grammar
This section will describe the format for the gran ~ arrules used in the analysis of source language texts and the synthesis of cor responding target language strings  . METAL 8~am~ur rules are augmented context-free phrases t ructurert ~ es with a wide range of options al lowed in the au~nentation part so The METAL approach to gre ~ r is rather different from the " standard " approach found in many recent a rticles  . In the recent work by linguists such as Chomeky  . Bresnsn , and Gazd 8~ . 
the mean thrust has been to establish a theoretical framework which may then be appl ied to human lan~s ~ e!METAL?s ' app ~ coach has been the opposite  , i . e .   , to seek solution store ~ langua-ge problems and to use these solutions in the development of a theoretical framework  . 

The grammatical framework allows the linguist to devise tools when they seem appropriate  , and to discard them if they turn out to be unnecessary  . In this section particular emphas-is w ill be given to the various au~nentation par ts of the gramma rules  , particularly how these parts are used to con-strain rules  , to build syntactic trees , and to generate the appropriate word order for the target language  . This section will conclude with a discussion of METAL transformations and of the case frames mechanism  , which is used to disambiguate strings . 
Sample Translation
To illustrate the operation Of the linguistic component within METAL  , the paper will then examine some significant steps involved in the analysis and synthesis of a German sentence  . This examination will point up some of the typical problems in German-English machine translation  , and the solutions used in METAL . Using representative lexical entries and grammar ulestO demonstrate the process  , the paper will illustrate the product ion of the correct English translation for the sample sentence  . 
Conclusion ~ TAL is capable of producing quality machine translat-ion of a large number of German sentence into English  , but the system needs more development before a production version is available  , In this section the paper will describe the limit -ations on and problems with the  . METAL linguistic component in its present form  , and will outline the improvements current lyplanned to overcome these limitations and problems  . Particular-ly important in this regard is the need to develop the semant-ics of METAL from its present state into a fullscale MT semantic so-  31  -
