COLING82, J . HoreckfJ(ed.)
North-Holland Publishing Corapa ~, zy
? Academi ~1982
TULIPS-2-NATURALL ANGUAGE LEARNING SYSTEM
Michael G . Malkovsky
Computational mathematics and Cybernetics Faculty
Moscow State university


The learning of a natural language is considered to be an important aspect of man-machine communication in human language  . The methods of the Russian language knowledge representation and acquisition implemented in the experimental understanding system  TULIPS-2 are described . These methods provides for understanding utterances that contain words and structures unknown to the system wherther they are grammatical or erroneous items  , or the user's speech peculiarities . ~ In recent years the problem of man'mach ine communication by means of natural language  ( NL ) is becoming a practical one . And the designers of " large " applied sys tems have to overcome new diffi-culties in order to make such a communication areali ty and to enable the user to interact with the computer without any special training and much effort  , in a way which is convinient to him , but not to the computer . 
We think , that a socalled " restricted NL " is a mere fiction of m : d  . This term has been invented to denote a language used in acctain problem-domain and based on a NL with great restrictions on ts structure  . In this case it would be more natural to use a special formal language  , which can be quickly learned by the user and efficiently implemented  . On the other hand to learn the lexicon and the grammar of the restricted NL and above all to follow these restrictions during a continuous dialogue with the system is rather difficult for a human being  . 
If NL is really needed , the user should be offered the conditions of communication similar  ( from the information processing point of view ) to those in everyday discourse . Firstly , the restrictions , if any , should be minimized and naturally determined by the problem-domain and by the nature of tasks  . Secondly , the " listener " of the user should be able to understand the user correctly in a certain situation even if the utterance is potentially am -bigious  , incomplete , deviant or if it contains words and syntactic structures unknown to the system whether they are grammatical or erroneous  . We contend that it is necessary to consider the deviation from the language norms and other speech peculiarities of the user  . Thirdly , it should be possible for the system or for the user to suspend their conversation in order to ask the partner a question or give him some advice  . However , the specifying dia-logue should not occur very often and " ontrifles "  . Finally , the system-like its human partner-shou ld be able not only to act in an unknown situation but to acquire mere knowledge  , i . e . to learn the language and the user's speech peculiarities  . 
The experimental system TULIPS ( Malkovsky ( 1975 ) ) and its new version TULIPS-2 ( Malkovsky and Volkeva ( 1981 ) ) both were designed in consideration of the abovementioned demands  . 
The AI system TULIPS-2 implemented in PLANNER for the BESM-6 computer is intended for further experiments in the field of the computer understanding of NL and for practical use  . The system can help the user to form the conditions of a problem  . In this case the user gives the system the unformalized description of the problem situation  , whereas the system helps to specify this description and to find an adequate formal representation  . Such a flexible dialogue using vague terms and loose concepts can be ccn viniently performed just in a NL  ( Russian-for TULIPS-2 )  . 
~ ore over the TULIPS-2 system can work in problem-domains with various structures and degrees of formalization  . That is another argument for the use of NL . 
A user's interaction with the system ( via a terminal ) is composed of several seances . At the begining of each seance the user have to identify himself and to indicate the problem -domain  . This informs tion guides the " tuning " of the system for the ~ eance  , i . e . 
fetching the relevant data from the external memory  . This helps to reduce data used in conversation . On the other hand the tuning process introduces the user's speech peculiarities and specific NL items of the problem-domain  . During the analysis of utterances these peculiarities and items are looked through before all the other data  ( lexical , syntactic , and semantic ) . 
Besides , there are the following methods of data representation and handling in the system : special tags define the measure of preferability of relevant data items and procedures and influence the order of their choise during analysis  ; the lexical items and the grammar rules contain the references to procedures that can be invoked when an item or rule is being handled  ; NL metalevel items describe the means and range of the Russian language rules alternation by the system  ; NL knowledge of the system includes both basic knowledge of the Russian language and " open " set of Russian grammar rules  , Russian lexical items etc . , that can be widened in a seance by the user or by the system itself  ( " self-taeching " ) o It should be noted that the basic knowledge is formed and input into the system by its authors or by its operators beforehand  . 
Thus in a seance the system starts to learn NL , to acquire user's speech peculiarities , new terms and abbreviations having much knowledge of NL which make it possible for the system to act in unknown situations by itself  . However , change of basic knowledge can be done only with user's permission ? The methods of representation and handling of NL knowledge are important to the system's analyzer which provides for the input message understanding from the context of the conversation  . Syntactic , semantic , and pragmatic predictions are widely used on different levels of analysis  . The predictions generated from context make it possible to attribute the expected  ( predicted ) characteristics to unknown units , while the references to procedural elements provide for a flexible control  , i . e . the pos-TULIPS-2 -NATURALL ANGUAGEL EARNING SYSTEM 193 sibility of passing onto a more informative ( where predictions are more definite ) level of analysis . 
If necessary the analyzer appeales to the metalevel knowledge-invokes procedures which handle unknown units  ( words or phrases )  . 
These procedures classify such a unit ( erroneous form of a known unit or an unknown correct unit  ) and prepare the information of a unitor an error for storing  . The stored information is available both in this seance and in the subsiquent ones  . 
Sometimes a deviant form can be passed onto further higher levels of analysis  , as e . g . the module of spelling correction does . This module processes errors typical for the user working at the terminal  ( the missing , duplication , permutation of letters or an incorrect shift ) . However , usuall ~ as the result of learning ( self-teaching or teaching by user ) new items are formed and the old items are changed  . The following item types are formed and changed : NL words and phrases descriptions - lexical items and grammar rules  , NL metalevel items , control structures-tags and procedures ( e . g . special patterns for frequent and typical phrases )  . 
The methods of learning on morphological and lexical levels of Russian have been used in the  TULIPS-2 system since 1980  . The basic knowledge for these levels includes : a complete description of Russian inflexion  , a description of some rules of Russian word -formation and of different typical mistakes made by users  , a vocabulary of about 1000 stems , and vocabularies of affixes . 
REFERENCES1 Malkovsky , M . G . , TULIPS - Teachable , Understanding Natural Language Problem-Solver , in Proc . of the 4th IJCAI ( Tbilisi , ~1975)?2 Malkovsky , M . G . and Volkova , I . A . , TULIPS-2 Analyzer . Morphological level , Vestnik Moskovskogo Universiteta , Series
XV , NI (1981) 70-76.

