
SOuR"INFOR MATION AL"LANG UAGES AND MODELS . -ASEMANTICVIEW
Jangabr?ula , Jitka Svobodov ~ , Jaroslav Svoboda
Faculty of Philosop ~ y , Charles University , Prague , 
Czechoslovakia--
(1 ) In natural languages as well as in any other sign system code signs  ( semia ) are to be distinguished from epi-semis ( enunclatlvesi6us )  . 
In artificial ( " Info1~natlonal " ) systems signs are sub , so % to a symmetric dualism involving the necessity of eyn-ergy of semia in a comparatively in sIEnlficant measure when compared with signs in natural languages o ' On the other hahd  , a measure of assymetry may be established , for example , in some constituents of the tradlt-ional language of a rithletlc where even the phenomenon of " double articulation " of signs is encountered  , plemes funotion-Ing-to a limited extent-as pleremes or semlao On this ~ ocoasion  . we rely on the Common definition of the term pleme as a constituting element of the expression  , a sort of subsymbol , ~l ~ ment del ? expression ( of . J . Pohl ,  23 ,  453-468 ) ? A new definition of v leme is given on this occasion : pleme absolute  , relative ( semi-symbol ) ,  . 
The pleme constituting the cipher ( Number , quantity ) eemia is strongly dependent on the syntact i csynerg ~ v This dependence is the larger the lower is the particular numeral notation oBoth constant mathematical signs and co ' natant signs of some other " formalized '* languages have their specific sign-  277 -basis , whereas variable symbols possess a very vague meaning of mere " cipher-representatives " or " number-representatives "  , without any own defined , pre-coded systemic and specific de-notati on ? Grouped together into organized struc tures  , variables ~ m bols can function as abstracte p isemia  ( elementary and complex )  , and thus as elementary models , only for an ( advised ) recipient capable of us in ~ certain-elgor i  thm8 m for replse-lng symbols by constant signs or of transferring them into signs of natural language  . 
The icon and symptom actase pise mia for an adv ised recipient ? We can imagine a number of logical or arithmetical languages which can operate-each with regard to all others -asm et ala  . nguages . At the same time , translation algorithm may sometimes bera ther complex in view ofty Dolozica ~ diffe rences between such systems  , e?g . in the bicipher ( two-figure ) numeral notation , syntactical synergy and line ~ arrangement of plemes are encountered in a very profuse measure when compared to  , for example , the decimal notation where the symbol O when p laced to the right of a figure serves to mult iply it by  10  . 
The principle of cipherplemes is very economioz  3 plemes may have 6 permutations ( 31 - 6 )   ,  4 - 24 ,  5 - 120 ,  61 - 720 ,  10! = 3 628 000 , but plemss as letters do not constitute semia in every permutation  , e . g?ael , ale , ~, ela , ~ . le __A a . 
(2 ) We distinguish the " functional style " and the " functional language "  ( technical , scientific , logical , arith-tactical ?? .   ) based on the structural features which refer to the totality of the devices of express ion  , to the structural organization of the to tality of the devices of expressions stra ta  , registers , subsystems , sub-lances , sub-codes , varieties , " special languages " . 

Scientific subsystem and " artificial " systmn can be examined not only in contrast to other sub-systeNs  ( vertical-"socialn , horizontal - " professional " , regional .   .   . , of . J . 
Svobodov ~- C~elov ~ , Beitr ~ ezurro Nm~ischen Philologie , XIII , Berlin 1974 , Heft1/2 , 217-229) of thesane language , but also in relation to the scientific subsystems of other languages  . 
(3) Arithmetical language , Morse code ( with specific merimnatical level )   , conventional symbols used intransnLttt in8 messages by flags , etcetera , can be , entirely or partially , internationalized , ? but also " idiolectized " . 
In a natural language , some signs or categories of signs ( e . g . Shtftere , Tense , " Verbal " Aspects , of . J .  ~  . , IN : Prague School of Linguistics .   .   . , London , Oxford Univ . Press 1972 , 95-111) denote or , rather , designate the speaker's sub-Jective concept ion of ontological reality rather than ob ject-ive measurable values  . A simple example taken from planime try inspi resus to examine-even while using mathen ~ t icallan ~ uage notation - the problem of re lations between reality  , or a model ( whether mathematical or physical ) of reality , or else various potential conoeptiona of the same reality  . 
(4) In conclusion , the problem of relations between v ~' TJ . n 8 degrees of designation of the same reals i tuation as well as the problem of the relat ion between its designation by means of mathematical expression and one in a natural language is illustrated on a mathematica l model of meteorolog-ical situation whi letaking into account the concept of a fuzzy sere As farast ~ e transfer and difusion of the atmospherioal pollutien is concerned  , we describe them in two different languases ( Lasrange , Euler ) , which represent a problem , both mutually , as well as in the moment while being in terpreted into ~ natural languase  . 

And ? t is by solWJ-u8 this problem ( mal 4 ; ol'ittms ' , listo ~ instructions , organ?s ram defined by Jaro slav3 vobod a ) that we want to avoid bot Jadtetort ? on and the complete loss of ~ n formatton  . 

