GERERALIZED SYNTACTICRELATIONS AND SUBSTANTION AL A ~ TRIBUTES 
Arcady Borkowek ?
Computing Center , Academy of Sciences , Moscow , USSR
The ps per presents a conceptual frs ~ e work for natural 
lan~age analysis within which some exper iments were held and 
some ideas had been developed.
The work concerns the means of translation of natural language text into its meaning repreeantation in form of semantic network bas ingonfrwnes ?  fo~ns?1~  . The expex~ment~used Russian as1s purlanguage . 
I . The analysls is essentially vocabulary driven . Semant-toln fox ~ attor-Is Intensively used ; indeed , the formalism does not make much difference between grammar and sanant ? oe  , I % could be regarded as a Generalized syntax .   , The approach leadstO distribution of words Into classes quite different fx~nusual ~ ran-nat to al classes  , but having obviously ltnguiBt-to . meaning . 
The basic ideas are related with those of /1  /  ,  /2 /  ; the earlier variant of vocabulary struc ture is given in  /3  /  ; the Y ~ iep implementation of vocabulary and semantic networknses property lasts with In her it ance havi ~ much inooma on with 
PaL , 2 . The language description consist of Semant lc and 
Lexlevo cabularies.
2 . 1 , The entries of Semantlo Vocabulary are not lons , for ~ an abstract sez~utio network for meaning represent-ation & u ~ ented with gremma ~tnfo~natton  ,  -  49 -The vocabulary article contains the fol lowing : a  ) a reference to supernotion ! all informat ion from supernotion is relevant to actual notion  , if it is n't explicit-lyeuperoeded . The " notion-supernotion " relation imposes hierarchical structure on the set of notions  . 
b ) a list of the notion's attributes wi th corresponding Generalized Syntactic Re lations  ( GSR )  . The set of all GSRs forms the Eralmar used in an ~ ysis  . The GSR attached to attrib-ute must hold for the words  ( or phrases ) of the NL text , the first ( master ) referring an instance of the notion , the second ( slave ) referring to the attribute value . E . g . for-Russian , the ~ RECEI~ENT attribute of ~ GIVE would have a GSR demanding the slave to be an instance of ~ PF~SON and to have the form of Dative case  .   ( The dollar sign is used to dist in ~ n~sh notions from words  .   ) The attributes inherited from supernotion may also have a specification of defaul tor fixed value  , which is immediate-ly inserted into meaning representation  . 
2  . 2  . The Lexio Vocabulary contains words . Words can be si ~ i can % or auxiliary . Significant words are those , which name notions , attributes or attributes values . All other words are au ~ liary ~ they are t reated as components of analytic morpholog ical forms and are processed by prescan  . Therefore only si~ficant words are present in the vocabulary  . 
Lexio Vocabulary article contains : a ) a reference to Semantic Vocabulary within d ication of the role cl~s  ( notion Pn~e , attribute-n~n etc .   , see below ) and , optionally , a lexical function ( see /1/ ) ob ) ~ammatical attributes of the word: grammar class  , morpholo ~ cal pattern , fixed grammatical values ( such as gend-er for nouns , aspect for verbs , etc .  )  . 
3 . GSR is a logical function of master's and s lave's attributes " values  . These can be grammatical attributes from- 50 -Lexic Vocabulary or provided by presoan , attributes inherited by slave from supernotion or attributes values reflect ing the meaning of the text  . The most usual ce~es involvema to hin 8 slave+sgrammatical attributes to some g iven values or to those of master  , and demand for slave to refer a subnotion of a given notion  . However some GSRs are more sophisticated . 
3  . 1  . The grammar part of GSRs has much in common wi th Surface Syntactical Relations  ( 3SR ) of /1/ . Indeed the GSRs had been inspirited by SSRs . 
GSRs differ from SSRs in two aspects z first , they system-atioally use semantic information ! second  , GSRs usually deal with a deeper syntax level ! e , g , if the grammar part of GSR postulates a " di rect-object relation "  , its description may cover active and pass ive verbal  , participial and nominal oonstructions z "   t0 write a letter " , " a letter is written " , " the letter written by .   .   . " and " writting a letter " . 
3  . 2  . However , the GSR teohn iq~e allows different ~ ye . to describe a fra~nent of language ~ all depends on the attributes tested  . Making the 6 ran ~ arpart of GSRs trivial , one recieves a pure semantic ~ asmar . On the other hand , if the set of notions is the set of grammatical classes  , GSR~based analysis turns into tradition a l syntax analysis  . 
3  . 3  . When NL text has been transformed into a set of property lists  , fetched from the vocabularies and augmented by morphological preeoan  , there are many ways to order the applic-at ion of the relevant GSRs  , for , while each GSR is described procedurally , the description as a whole is declar at ive  . In our experiments a simplification of the parsing algorithm described in  /2 /was used . 
4  . 1  . The outlined approach demands a classifica tion of words different from one based on grammatical classes  . 
Significant words are devided into classes depending on the role they play in n~ing cor responding notions  . We dieting --51-, . 
uish four main classes-N , A ?, A and SA.
Class Ni 8 the largest ; it is comprised by words which name notion B , instances of notions and venues for some att rib-utes  . This class covers most nouns , verbs , verbial ad~ectives and numerals . It also contains a small but very important subclass of pronouns  . 
Class AV is formed by words , na ~ ng attribute together with its value . This class covers most adjectives and adverbs  . 
Class A consists of words naming attr ibutes  . Usually they are nouns o

The follow Ang words refer the same notion ~ FLIGHT in different ways : " to fly "  , " flight " , " flyln ~ ~ ustname it and a ~ e of the class N  ; ' ~ peed " is an example of class A , it nsmee an attribute of ~ FLIGHT ! " qu ick e and w quAckly " refer to the same attr ibute  , but provide av ~ ue ( Magn ) for it , these two are theme ~ . ber of class A ? . 
" Simple stories " use mostly N and AV . The words of class A are common in NL-aocess to data-basses  4  . 2oThe four th c lass i s formed by Subetant iona l A t t r i - butes  ( SA )  . As a matter of fact , their discussion was the main motivation to write this paper  . The separation of it from other classes makes it possible to process  88 " linguist - io esome text r ~ lations usually treated as " semantice and requir ing some deductive system to process them  . 
Subetantional Attributes combine the proper ties of the other three classes  . They name attribute , provide its value but focusize on an objec t - the attribute * s value  . E . K . " ca-pital " names an attribute of ~ OUNTRY  , but the focus i8 nor country neither ~ heattribute ~ name but an instance of ~ CITY  . 
nattribute has , so to say , its own substantion ' ly separated from the master  . 

Indeed , unlike attributes of class A , Subetantional Attributes may be used wi thout explicit reference to its master : e  , g , " the train goes to the capite ?" . If the master is present , the master-slave relation need not to be express-ed syntactically : " Peter ~ ave the so  . ._nn an app le . " Traditional syntax ignores the poses sive link between subject  ( " Peter " ) and object ( " son " ) in this phrase ; nor does it consider the previous one incomplete  . 
Our GSR-grannnar claims the presence of anaphora in these phrases  . ~ he first contains an unresolved reverence to some country ! in the second one the word " son " includes a reference to some " parent "   , the most probably-Peter ( i . e . 
the denotat of " Peter ").
Defiuition :
A word is Substantial Attribute if itre fers an object by naming its relation to some other object or situation  . 
In text Substantional Attribute act fas if it were bound by poses eive relation to a " v irtual pronoun " of appropriate semantic c lass  . For example , these two phrases can be yiewed 8~ and " The train goes to the capital E of- country " " Peter gave hi_  . sss on an apple " In the first phrase "1o f-country " stands for such a " virtual pronoun "  . In the second one , " virtual pronoun " occas-ionally turned to be a real one  ; while in English its use is quite natura l  , in Russian the use of posessive pronoun would have an emphatic meaning  . 
The anaphora resolution for such " virtual pronouns " iS done in the same way as for rea l  ( lexically expressed ) pro-nouns . However , it is possible to take benefit of the fac t  ,  -  53 -that " virtual pronoun " refers an ins tance of specified notion  , while for real pronoun only grammatical va luese reknown  . 
Another example : " President and wife came to capital "  ( Articles and pronouns ere dropped to reflect Russian  )  , 
This phrase is processed as " Presidentro of -country with x his wife came to capital E of -country"  . 
Indeed the wife is the wife of this pres ident  , and they came to the city , which is the capital of the country of which he is the president  . To infer this from the phrase no extra-- linguistic deduction is needed  . 
4 . 3  , The experiments have shown , that treating SAs as two words : one refering an object and another a " virtual pronoun "  , is helpful in analysis oriented on extraction of mean-Ing of the text  . In fact It deals with a more general question of the limits between " language knowledge " and " knowledge of world "  . 

I . " A Theory of Linguistic Models MEANING--TEXT " , Moscow , 1972 ( in Russian ) . 
2 . M . C . McCord " Slot Grammers ", Am . Journ . of Computational
Linguletios , V .6, n.1, 1980, p , 31.
3 . A . B . Borkowsky , G . V . Senln " Lingulstical analysis of Quelrlss to Dialogue System "  , in " Interactive Systems " ( the Proceedings of Soviet-Finnish Conference  ) Moscow , 1979e-54 -
