COLING82, ~ Horeck S , ( eft.)
North-Holl and Pub~hing Company
? Academ ~1982
CONVERSION OF AFRENCH SURFACE
EXPRESSIONINT OITSSEM ANTICREPRESENTATION
ACCORDING TO THERESE DAME TALANG UAGE
Jacgueline L ~ on
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifl que Laboratoired ' Informatique pour les Sciences del 'Homme 
Paris , France
Daniel Memmi
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Laboratoired ' Informatique pour laM ~ canique et les Sciences del '  Ing4nieur 
Orsay , France
Monique Ornato
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Equipe de Recherchesurl ' Humanisme Franqais des XI Veet X Vesiacles 
Paris , France
Joanna Pomian
Universit ~ de Paris I
Centre National de la Recherche Sclentifique Equipe de Recherche sur le traitement automatique del'histolre du Bas Moyen-Age 
Paris , France
Gian Piero Zarrl
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Laboratoired ' Informatique pour les Sciences de l ' Ho ~ Eae 
Paris , France
The work we describe here is a preliminary study concerning the automatic translation of natural language statements into the RESEDA semantic metalanguage  . A first stage of the procedure consists in marking the " triggers "  , defined as lexical units which call upon one or more of the predicative patterns allowed for in the metalanquage  . The predicative patterns obtained are then merged  , and their case slots filled with the elements found in surface structure according to the predictions associated with the slots  . 
INTRODUCTION 1 The work that we intend to present here is a prel iminary study concerning the automatic translation of natural language statements - which describe the biographies of historical personages taken into account by the RESEDA system-into the RESEDA semantic metalanguage  . 
The RESEDA project itself concerns the creation and practical exploitation of a database containing the biographies of historical personages of the late Middle Ages in France  . The most important characteristic of the system'l ies in the possibility of using inference procedures to question the database about causal relationships which may exist between the different recorded facts  , and which are not explicitly declared at the time of data entry  ( Zarri 1979 ,  1981)' . 

184 J . LEONetaL
THERESED A METAL ANGUAGE
The biographical information which constitutes the system's database is organized in the form of units called " planes "  . There are several different types of plane ; the " predicative planes " , the most important , correspond to a " flash " which illustrates a particular moment in the " lifestory " of one or more personages  . A predicative plane is made up of one of five possible " predicates "  ( BE-AFFECTED-BY , BEHAVE , BE-PRESENT , MOVE , PRODUCE ); to each predicate , one or more " modulators " may be attached . The modulator's function is to specify and delimit the semantic role of the predicate  . Each predicate is accompanied by " case slots " which introduce the predicative arguments  ; dating and space location is also given within a predicative plane  , as is the bibliographic authority for the statement  . 
Predicative planes can be linked together in a number of ways  ; one way is to use explicit links of " coordination "  , " alternative " , " causality " , " finality " , " condition " , etc . ( Zarri et al 1977) . 
For example , the data " Andr4 Marchant was named provost of paris by the King's Councilon  22nd September 1413   ; helos this post on 23rd October 1414 , to the benefit of Tanguy du Ch~tel , who was granted this office " , will be represented in three planes - that of the nomination of Andr ~ Marchant  , his dismissal and the nomination of Tanguy du Ch ~ tel  . The coding of information must be made on two distinct levels : an " external " coding  , realized manually by the analyst , gives rise to a first type of representation , formalized according to the categories of the RESEDA metalanguage  ; a second automatic step results in the " internal " numeric code  . The external " manual " coding of the three events just stated will be the following : I  ) begin+soc+BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ Andr~-Marchant
OBJ provost : Paris
SOURCE king's-council date l: 22-september-1413   date2 : bibl:Demurgerl , 2732) end+BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ Andr~-Marchant
OBJ provost : Parisdatel: 23-october-1414   date2 : bibl:Demurgerl , 2733) begin+BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ Tanguy-du-Ch~tel
OBJ provost : Parisdatel: 23-october-1414   date2 : bibl:Demurgerl , 2 73 The codein capital letters indicates a predicate and its associated " case slots "  . 
Every predicative plane is characterized by a pair of " time references "  ( datel-date 2 ) which give the duration of the episode in question  . In these three planes , the second date slot ( date 2) is empty , because their modulators ( begin , end ) specify a change of state associated with a punctual event  . " Andr ~- Marchant " and " Tanguy-du-Ch~tel " are historical personages known to the system  ; " provost " , " king's-Council " and " letters-of-nomination " are terms of RESEDA's lexicon  . The classifications associated with terms of the lexicon provide the major part of the system's sociohistorical knowledge of the period  . " Paris " is the " location of the object " . If the historical sources analysed gave us the exact causes of these events  , we would introduce into the database the corresponding planes and associate them with these three planes by an explicit link of type " CAUSE "  . 
CONVERSIONINT OTHERESED AMET ALANGUAGE 185
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODUSED
In the field of the application of Artificial Intelligence techniques to natural language processing  , from the very beginning , stress was put on the importance of semantic and pragmatic components  . In this framework , creating a formal representation of the message carried by a surface expression is usually achieved by one of two methods  . 
The first , and most traditional , respects the usual progression of the three levels of analysis  , morphological , syntactic and semantic whilst combining their results in a final interpretation : for discussion  , see for example Winograd (1972) , Woods (1973) , Marcus (1979) , etc . 
Schank and Wilks , on the contrary , put forward the idea , which was subsequently taken up by many researchers  , that a predominantly semantic analysis , with syntax relegated to a secondary role , was possible . The deep structure representation that is being created is thus used to make appropriate predict ions about the logico-semantic function of the elements  ; these expectations are progressively met during the examination of the surface structure representation  , see Schank (1975) , Wilks (1975) , etc . 
- The hypothesis adopted for our project draws more from this second method  , in that the structures of RESEDA's internal representation provide  , beforehand , a very complete framework of the predictions which are to be a guide in scanning the text to be translated into the system's metalanguage  . 
To describe our approach , we will utilize the above example . The initial text in natural language is first ( pre ) processed to obtain its constituent structure . For this purpose , we have used the French surface grammar implemented in DEREDEC  , a software package developed at the University of Quebe cat Montreal by Pierre Plante  ( 1980a , 1980b ) . This system , comparable to an ATN parser , permits a breakdown of the surface text into its syntactic constituents  , and establishes , between these constituents , syntagmatic relationships of the type topic comment  , determination and coordination . This preliminary analysis provide a context for subse-ct processing  , without necessarily removing all the ambiguities : in the same w  . see Boguraev and SparckJones (1982) . 
The ~ pecific tools that we intend to develop for this project are of two types : ag~neral procedure which can be likened to a sort of semantic parsing  , and a system of heuristic rules . 
Semantic parsing
The first stage of the general procedure consists of marking the " triggers "  , defined as lexical units which call one or more of the predicative patterns allowed for in RESEDA 's metalanguage  . Thus we do not take into consideration everyone of the lexical items met in the surface text  , retaining only those directly pertaining to the " translation " to be done  ; this is not without similarity with the " skimming " found in DeJong  ( 1979a , 1979b ) . 
However , we do not limit ourselves to a simple keyword approach  . Certain lexical items are potential triggers , but their actual triggering in a given context depends on rules using both the morphosyntactic analysis provided by DEREDEC and the sociohistorical knowledge stored in the RESEDA system  . These rules intervene at this stage to decide whether triggering should take place and to choose the predicative patterns  . In the sentence given , belong to the list of potential triggers the verbal forms : " named "  , " lost " , "granted " ; terms pertaining directly to the metalanguage : " office "  , synonymous with < post > in RESEDA , and its specification " provost " ; date elements : " september " , " october " . After applying the rules , the following patterns have been triggered : 186 J . LI ~ ON et al was named begin + ( soc+ ) BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ < personage >- surface subject of the trigger 
OBJ < post > - surface complement ( SOURCE < personage > l<social-body >- sur-face complement of the agent of the trigger  ) date l : obligatory date 2: prohibited bibl . : obligatory provost ~ ( so c + ) BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ < personage >
OBJ < post > - trigger
SOURCE < personage > l < social-body > date1 : obligatory date2 : optional bibl . : obligatory 22 september 1413 ? date a lost ~ end+BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ < personage >- surface subject of the trigger 
W date 1: obligatory date 2: prohibited bibl . : obligatory office ~ ( SOC + ) BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ < personage >
OBJ < post > - trigger ( SOURCE < personage > I < so clal-body > ) date 1: obligatory date 2: optional bibl . : obligatory 23 october 14~4 ~ date b was granted ~ begin + ( soc+ ) BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ < personage >- surface subject of the trigger 
OBJ < post > - surface complement ( SOURCE < personage > l<social-body > - complement of the surface agent  ) 
MODAL letters-of-nomination date l : obligatory date2 : prohibited bibl . : obligatory office ~ ( SOc+ ) BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ < personage >
WOBJ < post > ( SOURCE < personage > l < social-body > ) date l : obligatory date 2: optional bibl . : obligatory The second stage of this general procedure consists of examining the triggers belonging to the same morphosyntactic environment  . If there are several predicate triggers in the same environment  , and if the predicates triggered are the same- which means that the predicates and case slots must be the same and that the modulators  , dates and the space location information must be compatible-then it can be said that the triggers refer to the same situation  . As a result , the predicative patterns are merged as to obtain the most complete description possible  ; the predictions about filling the slots linked with the cases of the resulting pa~terns  , together govern the search for fillers in the surface expression  . 
CONVERSIONINT OTHERESE DAME TALANGUAGE 187 Thus , the first three tri@gers of the example , recognized as relevant to the same environment , are combined in the following formula : begin + ( soc+ ) BE-AFFECTED-BYSUBJ < personage >- surface subject of " is named " 
OBJ < post > - " provost " ( SOURCE < personage > I < so clal-body >- surface complement of the agent of " is named " date l : date a  date2 : prohibited blbl . : obligatory The units of the surface expression corresponding to the predictions of the pattern obtained are then retrieved and standardized according to RESEDA's categories imposed by the pattern  ( Andr ~ Marchant : Andr ~- Marchant , personage ; provost : provost , post ; King's Council : king's-council , social-body , etc . ) . 
Eventually , we obtain pla~e1 in Andr ~ Marchant's biography . 
The example we have shown illustrates apart icularly simple case  , in which it is not necessary to establish links between the planes created  . If we had to process the sentence " Philibert de StL~ger is nominated seneschal of Ly on on the  30th of July 1412  , in lieu of the late A . de Viry " , three planes should be generated : one for the nomination of Philibert de StL~ger  , one for the death of A . de Viry , and another one establishing a weak causality link  ( " CONFER " , in our metalanguage ) between the first two planes . Surface items such as conjunctions , prepositions and sentential adverbs can be used to infer links between planes : causality  , final-ity , coordination , etc . More precisely , in the last example , " in lieu of " is a potential trigger according to the following rule : if the main noun group of the surface prepositional phrase contains a trigger  , this phrase constitutes a plane environment and CONFER introduces the plane created  . 
Heuristic rules
The process we have sketched so far requires a corpus of heuristic rules  , to solve am ~ guitles which are left aside by the prediction system-which cannot go beyond the  5apabil ities of RESEDA's predicative patterns . 
Wes : ~ ll say just a few words about the heuristic rules designed to solve cases of anaphora  ( as in our first example , " he " , " this office " , " who ") . 
In the approach that we propose , marks of anaphora are identified during the general analysis procedure with unassumed predictions  , triggering the appropriate heuristic rules . The actual solving , after validation of the marks , brings into play a number of criteria from simple pairing off and morphological agreement to more subtle criteria  , like contextual proximity , persistance of theme , etc . Thus , morphological agreement and contextual proximity are used to replace " who " by " Tanguy du Ch~tel " in our first example  ; persistance of the meenables us to make up for the missing date of Tanguy du Ch~tel's posting by date b in the list of triggers  . 
We would like to integrate this approach , which has been purely empirical up to now , into the framework of a more general theory . Two directions of enquiry seem particularly interesting in order to develop our own phi losophy of the subject  . 
The PAL system of Candace Sidner , is a topdown anaphora resolution method which makes use of the notion of focus  ( likened to the theme of the discourse )  . By searching in the text for " focuses " which refer to a system of representation organized as a series of " frames "  , it is able to solve references . If the reference is not found by using the frames themselves  , At is inferred from other frames contained in the database  ( Sidner 1978 ,  1979) . 
188 J . LEON et al
The interest for our study lies in the fact that RESEDA already has  , aspermanent data , a certain amount of general knowledge organized in a form very similar to that of frames  . Thus , in Our example , the nomination and dismissal of Andr ~ Mar-chant refers to the context of the " civil war at the beginning of the  15th century " which is one of those frames . 
The approach used by Klappholz and Lockman depends on the hypothesis that there is a strong link between coreference and the cohesive links of a discourse  . These links , when marked progressively in the text , become the indices of a structure of the discourse  , organized as a tree structure and created dynamically  ( Lockman 1978 ~ These cohesive links ( effect , cause , syllogism , exemplification , etc . ) are very similar to the logical connections between planes in RESEDA  ( causality , finality , condition , etc . ) . 

The study that we describe here is intended to automatically attain a representation of fundamental underlying semantic relationships corresponding to a French surface expression  . These results can , in principle , be used not only in the framework of RESEDA , but in a number of different app!ications such as  , for example , automatic abstraction , paraphrase , machine translation , direct encoding of natural language documents in a factual database  . 
FOOTNOTES 1 This research is jointly financed by the " Agence del'Informatique-A  . D . I . " and the " Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-C  . N . R . S . " . The project leader is Gian Piero Zarri . 
REFERENCES\[i \] Boguraev , B . K . and SparckJones , Karen , A Natural Language Analyser for Database Access , Information Technology : Research and Development i  ( 1982 )  23-39 . 
\[2\] DeJong , G . , Skimming Stories in Real Time , Ph . D . Thesis , Yale University Computer Science Department , New Haven (1979) . 
\[3\] DeJong , G . , Predict ion and Substantiation : A New Approach to Natural Language Processing  , Cognitive Science 3 (1979) 251-273 . 
\[4\] Lockman , A . B . , Contextual Reference Resolution , Technical Report DCS-TR-70 , Rutgers University Department of Computer Science  , New Brunswick (1978) . 
\[5\] Marcus , M . , A Theory of Syntactic Recognit ion for Natural Language  ( MIT Press , 
Cambridge , 1979).
\[6\]Plante , P . , DEREDEC - Logiciel pour le traitement l inguistique et l ' analyse de contenu des textes  , manuel del ' usager , Universit ~ du Quebec ~ Montreal (1980) . 
\ [7\] Une grammaire DEREDEC desstructures desurface du franqais  , appliqu ~ el ' analyse de contenudes textes , Universit ~ du Quebec ~ Montreal (1980) . 
\[8\] Schank , R . C . , ed . , Conceptual Information Processing ( North-Holland , 
Amsterdam , 1975).
\[9\] Sidner , Candace L . , The Use of Focus as a Tool for Disambiguation of Definite Noun Phrases  , in : Waltz , D . L . ( ed . ), Theoretical Issues in Natural Language
Processing-2 ( ACM , New York , 1978).
\[10\] Sidner , Candace L . , A Computational Model of Coreference Comprehension in English  , Ph . D . Thesis , MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory , Cambridge (1979 ~\[ ll\]Wilks , Y . , A Preferential , Pattern-Seeking Semantics for Natural Language Inference  , Artificial Intelligence 6 (1975) 53-74 . 
CONVERSIONINT OTHERESED AME TALANGUAGE 189   \[12\] Winograd , T . , Understanding Natural Language ( Academic Press , New York ,  1972) . 
\[133 Woods , W . A . , An Experimental Parsing System for Transition Network Grammars  , in : Rust in , R . ( ed . ) , Natural Language Processing ( Algorlthmics Press , New
York , 1973).
\[14\]Zarri , G . P . , What Can Artificial Intelligence Offer to Computational Linguistics ? The Experience of the RESEDA Project  , in : Ager , D . E . et al(eds . ) , Advances in Compater-aided Literary and Linguistic Research  ( University of
Aston in Birmingham , 1979).
\[15\]Zarri , G . P . , Building the Inference Component of an Historical Information Retrieval System  , in : Proceedings of the Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence -  IJCAI/81   ( The American Association for Artificial Intelligence  , Menlo Park ,  1981) . 
\[16\]Zarri , G . P . , Ornato , Monique , King , Margar et , Zwiebel , Anne , Zarri-Baldi , Lucia , ProjetRESEDA/0:RapportFinal , Equipe Recherche Humanisme Franqais , 
Paris (1977).

