SYNTACTIC PRIVILEGE
Michael B . Kao
Dept . of Linguistics , University of ~ esota , Einneapolis , 
Minnesota 554 55 USA
This paper is addressed to the view of Schank and Birn-baum  ( 1981 ) that syntax has no " privileged ' position in pars-ing  . Evidently what is meant is ( a ) that syntactic parsing has no logical or temporal priority over semantic processing  , and ( b ) that syntax has been as@igned attention far out of proportion to its interest or distinctiveness  . ( The latter is not asserted outright , but seems implicit in the overall tone of the discussion  . ) In the view of the authors ( henceforth " SB') , syntactic considerations come into play in sentence u ~ derstandi ~ E only where it is needed to resolve in determinac-ies  . It is this view that I wish to subject to scrutiny  . 
Part of the case for the position that syntacting parsing is not a prerequisite to semantic analysis lies ix ~ the fact that there are sentences which can be understood without a ~ y invocation of syntactic considerations at all  . Such a case is (1) Johnatelunch . 
since it is intrinsic to the concept of eating that it is an action carried out by animate beings  ; thus , since only J = o ~_ ~ denotes such a being in ( I ) , it denotes the actor , leaving lunch to be understood as denoting whatever was ingested  . On the other hand , since animate beings are themselves i ~ gestib-le , one would presumably have to invoke at least low -level-  150 -syntactic cues to correctly parse ( 2 ) Theoanmibal sate the Rev . Dr . Abercrombie . 
It is possible , however , that SB would deny that syntax must be called even in this case since world knowledge might be capable of sorting out the roles  . One might suppose that there is a script called , ~  CANNI3AL which includes a soe Darioin-volvi ~ E putting missionaries in pots of boiling water and then eating them  ; assumil ~ that there is no other world knowledge to suF ~ eet that missionaries typically return the favor  , then (2) can be parsed a syntaotically as well . If this is so , however , then there is a problem with (3) The Rev . Dr . Aber combieate the cannibals . 
No speaker of ED~lish would interpret ( 3 ) as synonymous with ( 2 )  ; thus , even if (2) is parsed a syntactically , (3) could not be . But given that the amount of prior semantic informat-ion  ( i . e . individual word meanings ) is exactly the same in both cases , how is a decision to be made to call the syntax in the case of  ( 3 ) but not in the case of ( 2 ) ? Comparable problems will frequently a~ise with figurative language  ; so , for example , (4) The tailwagged the dog . 
is a way of saying that some expected relat ionship was revers-ed  ; and yet ~ is a good case of an asy~etriopred icate  , requiring that one of its arguments refer to a body part or extension thereof  ( such as a flag ) while the other denote an animate being of some kind  . In a case like (4) , there is no indeterminacy on purely semantic grounds as to which NP should denote which  , but the result that would ensue from process ing  ( 4 ) in parallel fashion to ( 5 ) The dogwagged histail . 
is , in effect , over ruled by the syntax . It is , indeed , only from this overruling that one would know that one was dealing-  151 -with figurative language . Assuming that ( 4 ) is parsed srsntac-tio all 7 but not ( 5 )   , we are then forced onto the following dilemma : syntax is called only where it is needed to overrule the consequences of an as Tntactic pa~se  ; but the conditions under wh?ch such a call need be made themselves depend on sTn-taottc ~ in formation  ( in this case word order cues )   , since the word-level semantic information ( all else that is available ) cannot distinguish ( 4 ) from ( 5 )  . 
What SB have done here : : is to confuse redundancy and superfluity  . Cases like ( 1 ) and ( 5 ) show that syntax is some-times redundant ; but since word-level sems nti ~ does not pro -vide a way of dist J~l & ~ Lshi ~ when it must be called and when it need not be  , syntax must be called in disorim J~tel ~ . We might call this the " fail-safe " conception of the interaction of syntax and semantics  . 
Nonetheless , SB might well answer , there is evidence that human language users ac tually do parse a syntaotically  . 
They cite the fact that someone with imper fect knowledge of a foreign language may nonetheless be able to read written ma-ter ials in the language  , using no thi ~ but word meaning and world knowledge as a guide  . But while there is no doubt that human beings are capable of doing this  , it does not follow that this is what they would do if they were not forced to ? To say that one often doesn't need a certain kind of knowledge to  CaZT7 OUt a given task does not imply that one ignores it tf one has it  . 
I would like final l7 to call attention to a problem that is not addressed at all by SB  , but which is at the very center of concern in the design of adequate natural language under -standing systems ? As SB present it  , the problem of language understanding comes down to that of ascertalnlng the meanings of  11~u/stio expressions and then interrel at lng them in appropriate w ~  . Ts . No mention is made , however , of the problem of knowlng what the expressions are to begin with  . How does one-152-know , for example , that Kreena D Dle is an expression denoting the object of perception in  ( 6a ) but not in ( 6b ) ?  ( 6 ) a . John saw the ~ reen apple . 
b . John saw the green apple tree.
Examples of this kind can be multiplied in many dlrections  . 
Pot example , in (7) a . I watched John and Mary run to the police station . 
b . I watched John and Mary ran to the police station . 
John and Mar ~ is an expression denoting the performers of the act of running in  ( 7a )  , but not in ( To ) , The kinds of examples discussed by 3B involve few multiword constituents , and those that do arise seem to be of a kind that can be handled by rath-er local recognition meohanis ~ s  ; but cases like ( 7 ) show the need in some cases to take global syntactic context into account as well  . The problems that arise in this regard are not trivial  , and as long as they exist , syntax will remain " Privileged " at leas t in the sense that it will make a major cla imon the attention of some investigators and thus conti-nuet O have a life of its own  . 
Reference:
Schank , R . and L . Blrnbaum , 1981 . Mesz~ng , Memory and Syntax . 
Dept . of Computer Science , Yale University . Res . Rep . 
No .  189 . To appear in T . Bever and L . Miller , eds . , Cog~itlve Philosophical Computational Poundatlone of 
Language . In press.

