SOME PROBLEMS OF LINGUIS TICDATA BASES
Jurgen Kunze
Zentral institut fur Spraohwisssnschaft , AdWDDR , Berlin , DDR
1. Databases , as parts of procedures
It is of some advantage to compose procedures fo rauto-matic  langua6e processing of two parts : ( i ) a logical part ( rs present ~ u ~ the algQrithm proper ) as the procedural component ;   ( ii ) an information part ( containing the specific items of info rmation and depending on concrete languages and purposes  ) as the database . 
The logical part determines the structure o f the items in the information part  , preferences between them and their contr ibution to the final result  . The information part is variable . By designing the logical part suffic iently general  , one can use it even for various natural languages  , if one combln~s it with suitable information parts  . The variability of the information part admits easy corrections and complet-ions of the whole procedure  . This is illustrated by some examples taken from word fo~n analysis  . 
2. Modular structure of logical parts.
Another important aspect is the connection between the structures of the logical part and the information part  ( database )   . If the logical part consists of some ( rather independent ) sub-procedures , the information part may be composed in as imilar way : Either a separate information part for every -  165 -module or a correspondence between modules and informations of a certain type with in one  ( or some ) information part ( s ) for more than one module . Such principles allow an easy simpl-if ication of a full version and facilita test he extension of a simple version  . 
3 . Databases as tools for establishing procedures In many cases the elaboration of procedures may be essentially facilitated by databases : the base contains either a representative sample or the whole set of objects to be processed by the procedure together with the desired results  . Combined with a certain ( mostly rather simple ) dial-ogue languages this type of databases admits an automati ~ lookup of specific types and combinations  , which is very advantageous for the elaboration , if a manual lookup is impossible ( at least in a reasonable time )  . One special aspect is the compensation of lack of la ~ Euage competence  . Furthermore the same database allows an automatic test of the fi~l version of the procedure  . This is illustrated by works on automatic hyphenation  . 
4 . Databases as tools for linguistic research The databases contain again linguistic objects together with additional informations  ( e . g . structural descriptions , classifications ) . Using a ( more sophisticated ) dialogue language one can put a lot of questions % othe database and condense the results to frequencies  , correlations , mutual exclusions and so on . This is illustrated by applications of databases to research on syntax of na % ~ rallanguages  . 
5-Other applications
Here one may consider terminological data- banks  , databases as dictionaries ox--as a mean fo r the elaboration of  ( usual ) dictionaries etc . 

