EXPLICITSE~ENCESARD SYNTACTICCOMPLEXITY
ReZuber
C ~, Pazd.s , Prance
Preneh sentence ( 1 ) can be translated into English
either by (2) or (3):
(I ) Leslieest 6tudlante
(2) Leslie Isa student
(3 ) Leslie Isawoman and Leslle Isa student It is clear however that nelther  ( 2 ) nor ( 3 ) can be consider-ed as an " exact " translation of  ( 1 )  . Sentence ( 2 ) does not carry the information that Leslie Is a woman and sentence  ( 3 ) does not carrythls-information in the same way as  ( 1  ) i the fact ~ hat Les lie is a woman Is presupposed by  ( 1 ) whereas it is asserted by ( 3  )   . In other words sentence ( 3 ) is more explg-clt than sentence ( 1 )  . Following Keenan ( 1973 ) we will say that a sentence S is more explicit than a sentence TIffS and T have the same consequences but some  , presupposition of T
Is an assertion of S.
Not only translations can be more explicit . Perinstan-ce ( 5 ) is more explicit that ( 4 ) since ( 4 ) presupposes ( 6 ) where ns ( 5 ) esserts ( 6 ) :  ( 4 ) Blllknows that Sue has phoned ( 5 ) Sue has phoned and Bill knows whether Sue has phoned or not  ( 6 ) Sue has phoned Rou Khly , defining sentences are , more explicit than " defined " sentenoes e The quest lonld ~ ch we will try to answer in this paper is the follow ~ one : are more explicit sentences -  299 -this paper is the following one : are more explicit sentences syntactically more complex ones  ( notice that ( 3 ) is syntact-ically more e o ~ a plex than ( I ) as well as ( 53 is more complex than ( 4 ) ) . 
We will show that at least for some simple languages this ie indeed the case : more explicit sentences are syntact-ically more complex  . We will consider essentially proposit-ional categorial  leaguage8  , i . e . languages in which we have only the category of sentences end the category of sential operators  . Since we will distinguish two types of consequen-ces  ,   . presupposit on 8 and assertions , our language must con-tain strongly intens ional operators  . A sentential operator 0 is 8a id to be strongly intensional iff for every possible world w and for every sentence P  , if O ( P )   i8 true et X then there exist a sentence P " w i th the same truth value as P at wend such that O  ( P ' ) is false at X ( PendP " must be contigent sentences )   . Classic modal operators ere not strongly in ten8-i One 1 ? Nowap resupposition can be defined e8 sconsequence which has an argument under the scope of a strongly opaque operator in the presupposing sentence  . More precisely a sentence S presuppose8 a sentence T iffS semantically implies T and S  i8 of the foist O ( R ) where 0   i8   8 strongly intension-el operator and R and Thaveeco-~on argument  . It can be shown that Presupposition def ined in this way  i8 equivalent to the classical definition if one accepts a negation which preserves in teneionality  ( cf . Zuber 1980 ~ . Now given ? simple measure of syntactic complexity and the above definition of p resupposition the following property for our proposition all sngunge holds : If S  i8 more explicit than T , then S is syntactically more complex then T . 

Refer ~ c@J ?
Koenan , E . L . (1973) " Presupposition in a tural logic " ,  ~  ,  57 , No3Zuber ~ R .  ~1980 ) " Note on wh~faot tve so annot assort whst the i reentential complements express "  , ~ e : antikos , ? vol ,   ,  4  , NO2-302-
