MEANINGNEGOTIATIONINDIALOGUE
Barbara Lewandowska
University of Zodz , Poland
For the sake of effective conmmication of man-machine 
type , what seems necessary is to find means to deal with complex language problems in ways that would guarantee its correct analysis and synthesis  . Such problems can be better understood when language is viewed not as a static product of interaction but as a dynamic  , meaning producing process in action . The importance of looking at ongoing conmmication in order to achieve a fuller understanding of the numerousling-uist ic and nonlinguistic devices employed in the process of human communication has been recently emphasized by many authors  . 
( Clark and Clark '68 , Halldayan ~ Hasan " 76 , Garfinkel " 72 , 
Churchill "78) ?
The meaning of an utterance : can be cons idered to be a complex that consists of the semantic level at the assumption of some idealization of data  , the pragmatic level , elicited by the context and represented as a set of rules of language use  , as well as the material referring to the knowledge of the world  . 
A correct analysis of language texts should make it possible to perform the closest recovery both of what was said and of what was talked about  . The information required to interpret and reproduce an utterance is not fully and unambig-uously encoded in the speech sign a l  , but is completed by the material contained in sets of constraints familiar to each of the interlocutors  . If the relations between the signal and the  '~ -   182 -icontent correspond to generally accepted ru les  ( syntactic , semantic , pra~atic ) , furthermore , if the relations intended by the sender are identical to those apprehended by the receiv - er  , the co~nunication is conventional ( Allwood ? 76 )  . Conversat-ion , and most explicitly , dialogue , is a continuous recover-ing of the above re lations  . The issue of whether those factors are enti rely or partly identical or different to the parti-cipants is being establi shed in the process of the whole interaction  . Hence , meaning of an utterance is not a constant but a variable the value of which is negotiated in the course of interaction  . Applying Ninsky " sterms ( ~ insk ~7"75 ) what takes place there is the process of filling in " default " val-ues in prototypes  , u~derstood here as hiersrchically organized data structures  , representing partial but " constant " knowledge , with the variable defaults , empty , prior to the concrete act of perception . This , in turn , leads either to activating familiar conventional or stereotypical conceptual frames or stimulates instantiating new data structures if the higher " constant " nodes in the structure are replaced  . A number of man-machine communication systems ( FRL-Roberts , Goldstein , KRL-Bobrow , Winograd , Norman , Kay-cf . Jirk ~" 81 for deta-ils ) work according to similar schemes , which makes it possib-le for them to inc lude sets of inference rules in their systems  . 
Inference rules underlying human as well as man-machine co~nmication can be represented in terms of data structure reconfigurations according to known typological criteria such as hyponymy  , quantification , deletions , additions , etc . Such changes can be perceived as opaque by part icipants due to the lack of transparency in the linguistic form of the utterance  . 
Another problem in this connection is that even in the simpl-est forms of dialogue  , question answering , the chain maxim , i . e . respondlng with a direct answer to the question , is- 183 -strictly followed in only a small percentage of cases  ( 12-24% of oases-Churchillop . oit .  )  . Other responses exhibit a number of forms and patterns  rangin8 from most conventional ( conforming ) to most devtant . Deviations from the direct patterns can be hierarcb/cally classified according to breach-es of conversational maxims  . 
In order then , to correctly analyse such and similar dia logues as the following  ( after Churchilop . oit .   ;  103 ) :  Speaker1: rnyare wego ingw~7 out in the middle ?
I'll gets unburned
S peaker2: What's the difference whether you're in the middle or not ?  Speaker1: You get more reflection in the middle
Speaker 2: Oh.
A system is proposed in the present paper , oomb ~ aiz ~ differ = . 
ent typological orlteria underlying infe rences in frame terms with hierarchical pat terning of conversational deviations  . 

Allwood , Jene 1976 . ~ sticCo- ,   , unioation as Action and Cooperation : a Stud ~ in Pra~natios  . Gothenburg Monographs in Linguistics 2 , Dept . of Linguistics Univ . of

Churchill , Lindeey 1978 . ~ uestion in ~ Strate ~ Les in Socio-lin ~ tist ics ? Newbury Housel ~ zbl ?  , In o ? , Rowley , Mass . 
Clark , Eve and Clark , H?1968 . " Semantic Distinctions and " Memory for Complex Sentences "  , Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology  , No . 20, pp . 129-138 o Garfinkel , Harold 1972 . "Remarks on Ethnomethodology ", in Gumperz , J . J . and Hymes D . ( eds . ) The Ethnography of Commu ~ oation . Holt , Rinehart and Winston , Inc . , New
York , pp . 301-324o-184-
Halliday , M . A . K . and Hasan , R .  1976 . Cohesion in Enrich . 
Longman Press . London.
Jirk ~, Petr 1981 . " Logical and Lin Euistic Aspects of Comput-er - ~ sed Inference Processes "  , The l~a~sBulletin of Mathemstl cal~stlos , No . 35, Unlverzita Karlova,
Praha , pp . 41-54.
Miusk ~, Marvin 1975 . " A Framework for Representing Knowledge " in Wins~n  ( ed . ), The Ps~oholo ~ of Computer Vision . 
HcGraw-~ll , New York-185-
