THERESEARCH PROJECT " ANAPHORA " ( INIT SPRESENT STATEOF
ADVANCEMENT )
F . Studnicki , B . Polanowska , E . Stabrawa , J . M . Pall,
A . ~ ao hwa
Institute of Computer Science , Jagellcnian University
Cracow , Poland
1 . The aim of the project is to work out a method of resolving automatt ca  . ~ly the anaphorio ~ euses of scertain class , in particular those used in formulating in terdocumentary croes or efsre noes in primary le Saltexts  ( statutory texts )   . By resolving an anaphoric clause of that c lass we mean the searching cut possibly all of its referends  . Thet , nplementatic n of the planned method should enable the users of the full text legal data banks to obtain in search operations  ,   8part from the do CumentS satisfying the requi rements defined in the usual querriss  , also such documents to which the former expli citly  , or even implicitly refer . The project has been planned as one composed of three parts  . A report on the results of part I was presented at the Fifth ICCH Conference in Ann Arbor in May  1981  . The present text aims at showing the main outl in es of the approach applied in part II  . To make some aspects of that part clear , however , certain references must be made to part Iv Partll I is  , as yet , at the et a ~ e of preliminary discussions . 
2 . The general approach applied in the whole of the pro-~eot is of a semantic kind  . It has been assumed , in particular , that at a tacertain level of generalization all elementary anaphoric clauses of the above class  ( let us call them the a--clauses ) have in spite of the diversity of their types  , an-273-analogous semantic structure , which can be represented by the following diagremz the elementary a-clause the anaphoric functor the argument of the anaphoric functor the standard the specification of the argument of the argument Consider the following fictitious example of a legal provision in which an elementary a-clause is inherent : " Art  .  56 . In cases when the price is to be paid in cash article  44 of the civil code should be applied . " Inart .   56 the a-functor is represented in the surface struct-ure by the phrase " should be applied "  , the argument by the phrase " article 44" , the standard by the phrase " article " and the specification by the phrase  "44"  . The role of the a-funot-or is confined to signalizin ~ the fact that the clause in question has the illocutionary status of an anaphor lc utteran-ce  , while that of the argument ( and its immediate semanticoon stituens ) consists in carrying information relevant to identifying the referende of that clause  . Four types of the elementary a-clauses , in particular the type A ( the explicitly addressing )  , the type D ( the deictio ) , the type R ( the implicitly referrlng ) and the type S ( the semantic ) are dis-tingulshed . The distinction corresponds to four types of indication met in the clauses in question  . By indication we mean the way in which referends of the a-clause are referred to by it  . 
3- The operat ion of automated reso lv ing of an a - c lause can be conce ived of as composed of four s tages  . Stage 1 con-sists in identifying an a-clause of this kind within a defin-ite document  ( article , paragraph ,   .   .   .  )  , mostly by recognizing - 274 -the phrase representing its a-functor . At the stage 2 certain of these l ~ antio properties of the analyze da-o lau ~ e  , relevant for the selection of the most appropriate search procedures  , are identified by the program ? This sta ~ e results in the generation of a formula which is a generalized semantic re-present at ion of the a@tu~ly analyzed a-clause  . Such a formula ( the SR-formula ) is built in a specific language of semant -icrepresentation  ( the SR-language )   , which is al~nguage with a drastically reduced vocabulary and a very simple syntax out lined in part Z ? At the stage  2 only the semantic propert-ies accounted fo r by the specific frame-like interpret a tion scheme TS are taken into consideration  . Stage 3 consists in utilizing the SR-formul~s , generated at the stage 2 , in auto-mated selecting the search procedures to be employed at the stage  4  . The selection is made from among a set of such pro-cedu ~ ese ~ pplied by the correspond ing program ? At the stage  4 the selected procedures are employed in the process of searching out the referends of the actually analyzed anaphorio clause  ( i . e . the documents to which it explicitly or implicit-ly refers  )   . 
4 . The simplest version of IS , to be used in interpret-ing the elementary a -clauses  , ( i . e . the a-clauses in which only a single in d ication is inherent  )   , can be conceived of as an lordered pair IT ! R  ~   , where T stands for a data structu-Ire ( called " the ladder " ) composed of 8 subsequent fields ( te~ninels ) a ~ dR for a set of rules by which the operat i on of filling out of definite term in a ls is governed ? According to the rules R two term ? n ~ ls located to the furthest left  , are destined to carry in foz ~ nation on the type of indication inherent in the actually an a lyzed elementary a-clause  . The remaining terminals ( 38 ) account each for a de ~ in ~ te semant-ic proper ty of such a clause  . 
5 . By composed ~- clauses are meant those in which more than as in ~ e indication are inherent  . Such clauses are - 275 -semantically represented by the composed fomulas of the SR-languags  , in particular by a number of filled out " ladd-ers "  , connected by the use of certain connectives of the classical calculi  . 
6 . The empirical investigations which form the subject of part II were carried cut on a representative sample of the Polish sta tutory texts of the years  1944  -  1979  . The research aimed at reconstructing all possible ways in which the semantic propert ies of all kinds of a-clauses may be re-p resented in the original texts  . Such a reconstruction was indispensable to building the algorithms of transforming the " natural " a-clauses into the cor responding SR-formulas  , as well as to the building the possibly ~ i ~ effective procedu-res of searching out there  ferend8 of the analyzed a-clauses . 
The research resulted in forming za ) the lists of words which occur in the phrases representing in the surface struc ture the correspond?ng semantic constituents of the ~- olan see of all types  , b ) the lists of words which occur in the phrases reflecting definite semantic propert ies of such clauses  , and c ) lists of grammars reconstructing the empi rically observed syntactic connections between those words  . Sucha ws~7 of presenting the results of the empiri calinvestigations inherent in part II seems most suitable for constructing the a for ementioned algorithms and procedures  . 
7  . Part III of the project is concerned with the ways of implementing of the planned method  . Only a few of the corresponding algorithms and procedures have already been worked cut by the authors  . 

