Alan K . Melby
Brigham Young University
Dept . of Linguistics
Provo , Utah 84602


One of the necessary tasks of a machine translat ion system is lexical transfer  . In some cases there is a one-to-one mapping from source language word to target language word  . 
What theoretical model is followed when there is a one-to-many mapping ? Unfortunately  , none of the linguistic models that have been used in machine translation include a lexical transfer component  . In the absence of a theoretical model , this paper will suggest a new way to test lexical transfer systems  . 
This test is being applied to an MT system under development  . One possible conclusion may be that further effort should be expended developing models of lexical transfer  . 
i . An Early Approach to Lexical Transfer Years before the machine translation community was burdened with guilt by the ALPAC report  , David Hays , former chairman of the International Committee on Computational Linguistics  , proposed a procedure for lexical transfer ( Hays ,  1963 , pp 205-208) . We will describe it , quoting pieces to preserve the original flavor . 
i . a . File of Equivalent-Choice Data " Most words .   .   . have uniform translations , but not all . " " These exceptions to the general rule must be discovered and taken into account  . The procedure is simple and straightforward . A file of equivalent-choice data .   .   . is required . " This file is prepared us in a real text . When a word is encountered for the first time , one translation is selected and entered into a bilingual glossary  . When the same word is encountered again , the human translator/editor attempts to use the translation already in the glossary  . Additional translations are added only when the one  ( s ) in the glossary are not acceptable . This procedure is supposed to avoid entering interchangeable alternatives that are onlysty listic variations  . The file of equivalent-choice datament ioned above is a record of how many times each t ranslation was used  . 
i.b . Category
Once the equivalent-choice file has been compiled  , the first step in analyzing it is to identify those words with two or more translations  ( i . e . equivalents ) . The next step is to identify whether the trans lation is governed by " grammatic category "  . 
i.c . Function
If there are two or more translations within the same category  , then the analyst looks at " grammatic function " ( e . g . subject , object of preposition , etc ) . 

I . d . Features " If there is any kind of relation in which the word has two equivalents  , the analyst continues by examining each word that governs the multiple-equivalent word  . " From the words that govern the word in question , the analyst derives " criterial classes " ( i . e . 
features to mark on the governing words in the dictionary  )   . 
i.e . End of Procedure
But what if testing features on other words is not sufficient to determine the translation ? Hays recognizes this possibility by not ing " There is no certainty  , of course , that the governors and dependents of an occurrence determine its translation  , but is seems plausible that they will often do so  . " Even following this procedure of assigning features may be anything but " simple and stra ightforward "  , and ( even worse ) it is not sufficient . 
2. Some Counter examples
Obvious counter-examples to Hays ' hope come to mind  , such as " chip " in micro-electronics ( = integrated circuit ) and ingambling ( = token to represent money )  , or " buck " in hunting ( =maledeer ) and in slang ( = dollar )  . Even older systems like SYSTRAN provide for this by prioritizing various domain-spec ific dictionaries  . 
The other situation where the Hays approach c learly breaks down is when the word is part of a fixed expression  , such as " chip off the old block " ( = like his father ) or " pass the buck " ( = avoid responsibility )   . All machine translation systems provide for this by including expression dictionaries that override word-for-word lexical transfer  . 
A variation on the expression dictionary is to key a lexical-structural transfer from a single word that affects surrounding words  . 
For example , the adjective " hungry " stimulates a transfer going into French that changes " x is hungry " to " x hashunger '  ,  . 
Unfortunately , sometimes all the tricks listed above combined still do not suffice to identify an acceptable translation  . The following two examples and some of the subsequent discussion are adapted from Melby  ( 1985 )  . 
2. a . The " plate " Example
For example , consider the word " plate " ( which can mean a household item on which food is placed to be eaten or a marker on the ground in the game of baseball  ) in the sentence
There was a negg on the plate in the context of a discussion of a baseball game in which an angry fant hrew a raweq q and it landed on home plate  . 
Then consider the sentence
She threw the food on the plate in the discussion of what a teenager did because she was in a hurry to fix her breakfast and get to school  . 
Either of these sentences could occur in a narrative of the life of a young person  ( so a special dictionary Will not help )  , and there is apparently nothing in the syntactic or lexical environment of " plate " that determines the translation  , and no idiomatic expressions are involved . 
2.b . The " rock " example
Or consider the problem of " rock " , which is a single lexical item in English with several specific translations in French  ( " pierre , roc , caillou " , etc . ) , no one of which is as general as the English word " rock "  , which would be translated differently in each of the following sentences : 
She found the rock on the beach and placed it in her pocket  . 
He climbed up and sat on the rock to get a better view  . 
While watching the parade , she gottired and sat down , not seeing the shar prock , and screamed from the pain . 
2.c . Opinions
Some claim that the above examples are far fetched and that the identification of lexical category  , grammatical function , general subject matter , and fixed expressions is sufficient to develop lexical transfer algorithms that produce acceptable translations  . 
Others say that the dynamic nature of natural languages will often present a significant number of cases where lexical transfer is not handled adequately by standard techniques  . 
Consider , for example , the search for lexical transfer criteria for the English preposition " through " going into French found in 
Bourquin-Launey (1984).
The facts are ( i ) that raw machine translation output , even after these many years of development , is seldom up to publication standards without postediting  ; and ( 2 ) there has been little development of the models of lexical transfer beyond the stage described in section one  ( which was in place already in the mid1960's )  . One reason is that the linguistic models that have been used do not include a lexical transfer component  . This can be verified by looking at Hutchin's updated survey of linguistic models in machine translation  ( Hutchins ,  1984) . 
To summarize the discussion to this point , the fact is that work in lexical models has been neglected for the past twenty years  ; the question is whether that neglect is justified . 
It seems that it would be worthwhile to at least examine the nature of the problems in machine translation output  . If it turns out that a significant portion of the problems are actually failures in lexical transfer  , then further studies of lexical transfer in the computational linguistics community should be encouraged  . 
The following section describes an ongoing effort to test the lexical transfer component of a machine translation system currently under development  . The method allows a test of lexical transfer even before the entire system is operational  , thus providing feedback as early in the life of the project as possible  , hopefully allowing design changes to be made , Jf they are needed , before they become too costly . The method could also be adapted to studies in lexical transfer somewhat independent of a particular machine translation system  . 
3 . A Method of Testing Lexical Transfer 3 . a . Origin of the Testing Project
The BSO Company is a systems house in
Utrecht , The Netherlands . The BYU-HRC is a center which promotes research in the College of Humanities at Brigham Young University  ( BYU )  , in particular providing support for research involving language and computers  . 
In 1984 , the author replied to a request for comments on the then proposed BSO machine translation project  . That reply led to discussions which resulted in an agreement between BSO and the BYU-HRC to create a text and translation database as a joint venture  . 
The specifications for the database were that it would consist :: of paired texts in French and English  , that it would include at least 500 , 000 words in each language , that the translations would be done by qualified professional translators  , and that the text type would be straightforward modern English and French avoiding texts that are literary or intentionally ambiguous  . 
BSO supplied the source documents , which were mostly public reports on agriculture , social conditions , etc . , published by the European Economic Community ( EEC ) or the
United Nations ( UN).
The documents were placed in machine readable form using the Kurzweil OCR device and transferred to a disk pack on an IBM  370/138  . 
Preliminary to the test , the database was split into two parts . A smaller part ( about 200 , 000 words in each language ) is accessible to BSO for syntactic studies . The larger part ( about 300 , 000 words in each language ) will be used for the lexical test , under BSO . The test will be executed in five steps . 
3 . b . Secret selection of sample texts From the lexical part of the database  ( 300 , 000 words of English and 300 , 000 words of French ) , BYU has selected 4 sample texts . 
Each of these samples is a coherent stretch of text of approximately  300 word tokens . 
Unless otherwise indicated , we now refer to the English version of each sample text  . 
From the 4 texts there were about 600 non-function words . Adding some " misleaders " from other sections of the database  , a list of 800 words was sent to BSO . 
3. c . Construction of trial lexicons
BSO has received the alphabetically sorted l is to f  800 English words . They do not know the context of any of the words , nor will they know whether a word is part of one of the secret sample texts or merely a " misleader "  . 
BSO is now building an English to intermediate language  ( IL ) lexicon and an IL to French lexicon . In the case of the BSO project , the intermediate representation is a formalized Esperanto  . The English-IL lexicon will have more " exits " than input words  ( estimate--1200 )  . So the IL-French lexicon will have about 1200 entries . 
The English-IL and IL-French lexicons will each be separately tested at BSO  . For this purpose , BSO will use English and IL trial input texts , especially written for this purpose by external consultants based on the  800 and 1200 word lists . In addition to the 800 words , BSO will add a few hundred function words ( articles , pronouns , prepositions , etc . ) . 
3. d . Translation using the trial lexicons.
After completion of both trial lexicons by BSO , they will be sent to the USA for overall test ing by BYU  . Two translation phases will be disting u is hed as part of the testing procedure  . 
First , monolingual students of English will trans late the four sample texts  ( see A ) into IL by mechanically following the rules contained in the entries of the English-IL trial lexicon  . We emphasize that these students will have no knowledge of IL  , which will help the mapply the rules as mechan ically as possible  . 
Second , a different group of students -- again Engl is hmonolinguals -- will translate the IL -output of phase I to French  , by mechanically applying the rules of the IL-
French lexicon ( without knowing IL or
French ) . Since the test is directed at lexical word - choice  , no complete sentences will be required for the French output  . 
The presence of an IL-version as intermediary between the two translation phases will require that the IL-output of phase Ibe converted into complete sentences before serving as input to phase If  . 
3. e . Evaluating the French output
As a final part of the whole procedure , BYU will carefully compare the French output of the above described DLT trial translation with the high-quality human translation of the text samples in the database  . Of course , this comparison will concern only lexical elements  , ignoring case endings , word order , etc . 
Where the output differs from the translat ion in the database  , a French-English bilingual will decide whether the output is an acceptable alternat ive and if not will note the discrepancy for further study by BSO  . 
4. Conclusion
Once the study is completed ( which will be years since the above procedure is only the first major phase  )  , we should know more about the types of problems to been countered in lexical transfer at later stages when the entire machine translation system is in place  . The results should identify general problems in lexical transfer that are not specific to the BSO project  . Based on the findings , we may recommend that further work in lexical t ransfer be pursued by the computation all inguistics community  . 

Bourquin-Launey , MC . (1984) Traduction
Automatique -- Aspects Europ/eens.
Paris : ADEC ,  99 , boulevard Saint-Michel (5 tharr on dissement ) ; January 1984 . 
Hays , David G .   ( 1963 ) " Research Procedures in Machine Translation " in Natural Language and the Computer  , edited by Paul L . 
Garvin , pp . 183-214. New York : McGraw-
Hill ; 1963.
Hutchins , J .   ( 1984 ) " Methods of Linguistic Analysis in Machine Translation " in the proceedings of the International 
Conference on Machine Translation,
Cranfield , England , February 1984.
Melby , Alan K . (1985) " A Text and Translation
Data Base ", a paper presented at the
International Conference on Data Bases in the Humanities and Social Sciences  , Grinnell College ,  1985 .   ( Submitted for publication in the proceedings . ) -- end of text-m
