Context Analysis System for Japanese Text
Hitoshi Isahara and Shun Ishizaki
Electrotechnical Laboratory
1-1-4 , Umezono , Sakura-mura , Niihari-gun , 
Ibaraki , Japan 305

A natural language understanding system is descr ibed which extracts contextual information from Japanese texts  . It integrates syntactic , semantic and contextual processing serially . The syntactic analyzer obtains rough syntactic structures from the text  . The semantic analyzer treats modifying relations inside noun phrases and case relations among verbs and noun phrases  . 
Then , the contextual analyzer obtains contextual information from the semantic structure extracted by the semantic analyzer  . Our system understands the context using preceded contextual knowledge on terrorism and plugs the event information in input sentences into the contextual structure  . 
i : Introduction
Despite the advanced state of syntactic analysis research for natural language processing and the many useful results it has produced  , there have been few studies involving contextual information  , and many problems remain unsolved . 
The natural language understanding system described here employs a syntactic analyzer  , a semantic analyzer treating modifying relations inside noun phrases and the relations among verbs and phrases  , that is , word-level semantics , and a contextual analyzer ( Fig . i ) . These analyzers operate in a serially integrated fashion  . Though humans seem to understand natural language texts using these three analyzers simultaneously  , we have made their methodology essentially different from their human counterparts for more efficient computing  . Our system uses a contextfree grammar parser named Extended-Lingol as a syntactic analyzer to analyze the Japanese sentences and produce parsing trees  . From an analysis of these , in turn , it obtains word-level semantic structures expressed in frame-like representations  . Finally , it extracts contextual information , using our representation from the semantic structures  . We remain far from certain at this stage whether this system represents the best realization of an engineering-based natural language understanding system  . Future plans include combining these three processes into one process and bringing the system closer to the human process  . 
Because our system uses bottom-up analysis first ( including syntactic analysis and word-level semantic analysis  )  , it can obtain not only the outline of the input sentences but also their details  , as necessary . This method is the best one in situations where the detailed information of texts are quite important  , such as Machine-Translation systems and precise question-answering systems  . Of course , in this way , we must build up a sizable dictionary of precise word definitions  . 
In our system , predictive-style processing is not used in syntactic analysis and word-level semantic analysis  . But , in the contextual analysis part , predictions from the tree structure of the contextual information are used for instantiat ion of the contextual structure  . 
We are now developing a system which can understand newspaper articles through contextual structure  ( see Fig . 2a ) . After applying the procedures outlined above , the system obtains
IInputsost0nces\] ( Nouspa 2 erart ~ cles in Japanese ) analss
L ..~ rat ~ JM .._s ~ te ,, J
Fig . l System flow chart of this paper and its applications  . 
: i ~ ~ : ~11:::69 . : : k :-~" U ( , ~ ,  9~ , I ~1~'~: b:~-'5"=~:~11' . L , "7 . ' a "4 tc ? . ~ ~ Lv ~ - ~ ~ - " .  ,~ " ~  . ~ a : Original input ( Morning edition of the
Asahi Shimbun--July 30, 1983).
THEBOMBKILLSFOURPEOPLE INCLUDING AJUDGE.
\[ Rome 29th = correspondent Hirano \]
In the morning of the 29th , at Palermo,
Sicily in Italy , a parked car exploded , which killed 4 people including a judge who had directed an investigation into Mafia crimes  , and injured about i0 people seriously or slightly . This is the fourth murder ease on judges at Palermo and is of the largest scale  . 
Judge Rocco Chinnici ,  58 , the director of the Palermopreliminary court , police body guards and others were murdered . At the moment when the judgeleft home , the bomb exploded which had been set in the car of Fiatt parked near there  . The explosion involved the residents , windows of the apartment and about I0 cars near there . 
b : The translation of the example article ( a ) from Japanese into English . 
Fig .  2 . An example of newspaper articles Fig .  3 . Some details of the input text are abbrevia ted in the figure  . 
2: Syntact i c and semant ic analys is \ [2\] Let us proceed to an explanation of the method o logies adopted by our system  , using the newspaper article in Fig . 2a as an example . 
First , the system analyzed each sentence syntactical ly  , obtaining parsing trees . Next , the system constructs a semantic structure for each phrase  . Word meanings in our word dictionary ate descr ibed in SRL  ( Semantic Representation Language ) which uses frame-like expression as shown in Fig  .  4 . Each word meaning shares a suitable posit ion in the hierarchy of concepts  . SRL enables deep semantic analysis in a flex ible way  . The formal definition of its syntax and semantics is not stated here  . In our system , a word meaning written in the lexical entry using SRL plays an important role in semantic analysis  . The interaction between the word meanings is the central issue of the semantic analysis  . The modifying relations inside noun phrases and the case relations among verbs and noun phrases are determined in the word-level semantic structure  . In Fig .  4 , three scenes ( explosion , death and injury ) are obtained by analyz in 9 the first sentence of the article in Fig . 2a . " Human " is a dummy node that means human beings  . Here , the people who died include a judge and some pol icemen  . 
There are several types of ambiguity in input text  . In sNntactic analysis , ambiguity means the exist a noe of several parsing trees  . Word-level semantics often specify which should be selected  . 
Here , we should use a kind of prediction . For example , people who are in authority could be a ? target of terrorism  ( See Fig . 2a ) . These constraints are very helpfuline lim inating ambiguity  , as well as surface syntactic information . Some of this processing is done in an interact iveway in our system  . Our system asks the user how to specify there lations between events in some decision points  . Even after the elimination of ambiguity by the word semantics  , there may be unsolved ambiguities . 
These will he eliminated by contextual an a lysis with the contextual structure  . 
3: Features of contextua l representat ion Our contextual structure fits into a trees t ructure with one root node and a number of leaf nodes  . Relations between events in a story are def ined in the structure as " scenes "  , and the relations among our structure are defined by a tree structure  . Our structure can share scenes with others . 
Leaf nodes with a shared root node have either an " and " oran " or " relationship with each other  . 
The hierarchy shown in Fig . 5 is an example . The node " terrorism involving bomb " has , as in Fig .  5 , three leaf nodes ( scenes ) -" explosion , "" damage " and " rescue " . Since those seem to occur serially , the relationship among them is an " and " re lationship  . On the ' other hand , the root node " terroristaction " in Fig .   5 has several leaf nodes -" terrorism involv ing bomb "  , " shooting " and so on . As only one of these usually corresponds to the main topic in newspaper stories  , they share an " or " relationship with each other  . 
Input events are matched not only directly w it hscenes in the structure  , but also with higher concepts in accordance wi thap redefined tree structure of a concept hierarchyllke that in Fig  .  6 . In other words , the system has a concept thesaurus . So , matching between the scene of the structure and the input events becomes flexible  . 
( terrorism involving
Fig .  3 . An example of the contextual structure,
STALE g : ~ Up ( varked)
LOCATION ) ~\[ J)P-~(Palermo)
IDCATION " M'MI\]--(Slclty)
LOCATION 49 UY ( Italy)
TIM ~29\[\] ~ J ( on the ~ orning of the 2Oth)
SCA\[?2~~~( large ) hCTOlJkJll\](humall)
NUNJEII4
INCLUS\]ON ! l~.lJ)~(judge)
JOB ~ ffJJlt:\]-~(dirccO
OBJI ~' I't ~! L~'~.( flu ; pecl , lon)
Olil M : ;' r , ~\[~ l !( or , h ~ Oh Ci?1~-V 747 ( l ~ a\[ia )) l ~ Itb(J , Ljurcd , '; erlously or sHght ; ly)
AC'\[OI ), Jill ( huJmn)
NUff ~, R~?,JtO2k ( about 10) lug .  4 . \]' ho~ord-level semantic structure extracted from the first sentence ill Fig  . 2a . 
~( A ~ ori ~ taeries ) C clo . ~mo ~ cri , . ~ , . ':: . . . . o . r , . .' . ' . -:  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
~ rrori~min ~ olvlng ~ ~ ismiovolving bo--a ~ < claim of_crime--  ) Fig . 5 The contextual structure ( upper diagram ) and its reorganization ( lower d lagram )  . 
2 45   4: Contextual structure selection process Now we have implemented two selection methods for the selection of the contextual structure  , a " two-event method " and a " title-based method "  . 
First , we will explain the " two-event method " . 
In the " two-event method " , titles are not processed by the system for selection  . In sentence processing , after two events are obtained , the system begins a search for a structure invo lving these two events as their scenes  . The use of two events helps decrease the number of possible structures during the search  . 
As mentioned previously , selection of suitable structures and scenes can be accomplished flexibly with the concept thesaurus  . 
After developing the " two-event method " , we began to implement the " title-based method "  . In the case of newspaper articles , titles have important information for the selection of suitable contextual structures  . If there is a special word ( noun or verb ) in the title , contextual representation indicated by that word is selected  . In this way , the system can almost always select suitable structures  . Newspaper titles should be written so that readers can get enough information for these lection of the topic from its title only  . The correct selection rate of our " title- based method " is shown in Table I  . 
Derivatives point to their original words , and , through them , derivatives can select suitable structure . 
Within our experience , there are no differences in the corrects e lection rates between these two methods  . In our system , at present , we use the " title-based method " because of its similarity to human behaviour  . 
5: Contextual analysis
Once a promising structure is discovered , scenes corresponding to the input events are se lected in the following manner : if an event in the input sentence matches one of the scene sal ready activated in the system  , it identifies the event with that scene . 
For example , from the article shown in fig .   2a our system extracts three events -" explosion  "  , " murder ( death ) " and " injury " . The contextual structure of " terrorism involving bomb " is then selected using its title  , and the contextual analysis begins . In the contextual analysis , first , " explosion " matches directly the first scene  ( scenel ) in the structure , " explosion " , and this event is plugged into scenel . Next , " murder " is checked comparing with each scene . 
Here , there is no scene which directly matches " murder " but one of the higher concept of " murder " is " damage "  . So the system identifies " murder " with scene2  , " damage " and plugs that event into scene 2 . In these cases there are no events already p lugged into the selected scene  , so the system can easily plug the events into the scenes  . When processing the third event , " injury " , it is quite important to determine whether - this event is the same or different front " murder "  . ( Here , " injury " also has the higher concept , " damage " . ) The determinat ion whether th is part of the input sentence is giving absolutely new in formation about a new event now being in t roduced or more precise information about the event already described is accomplished in the following manner  . When the input event is identified with one scene in the contextual structure  , the contextual analyzer begins to search for an event already plugged into the selected scene that has the same concept  ( or a higher concept ) as the input event . If there is no conflict between the values of the attributes  ( for example , ACTOR , OBJECT , TIME ) in the input event and the event found by the search  , the Table 1 . Topic selection by the " title-based method "  . 

Topic \] By title\[By subtitle Failures , , , to . ~ . io,L__ .  ! 7 6 1 = ~ _ _
Shooting 2   2 i 0 --illighjack ~ 1   6 G 0 i_Total J 1   5   0   2   1  _  5 ~_~ information obtained by the input event is treated as a detail of a predescribed event  . If this is not the case , the input event is treated as a parallel event of the events in that scene  . 
6: Conclusion
In the above sections we have proposed a system for extracting contextual information from natural language texts using a contextual representation structure as a knowledge structure  . Our structure has proven itself useful for expressing contents of Japanese newspaper artic les  . Though we propounded the method used in our system to understand natural language texts in every field  , some of its specifications such as the t reatment of titles are oriented toward special\[features of newspaper articles  . 
At present , the applications of this system are restr icted to stories dealing with terrorism  . 
For these limits to be extended , the number of the contextual structures must be increased and the concept thesaurus scale enlarged  . We believe-that the natural language unders tanding system described in this paper is f lexible enough to allow for such extension  . Computer facilities must , of course , also be taken into account . 
As our system is still in the development stage  , some parts are not yet complete . Our dictionary is still rather small . For these reasons , " the scope of this paper has been limited to processing ability for a restricted category of newspaper articles  . 
Referencei : Schank , R . C . , " Dynamic Memory ", Cambridge
Univ . Press (1983) 2: Tanaka , H . , " A Semant ic P rocess ing System for Natura l Language Understanding "  ,   ( in Japanese ) Researches of the Electro-technical Laboratory , 
NOo 797 (1979) 3: Lytinen , S . L . and Schank , R . C . , " Representat ion and Trans lat ion " , Text 2:1/3
Yale Research Report (1982) 4: Ishizaki , S . , Isahara , H . and K . H and s , " Natural Language Processing System with Deductive Learning Mechanism "  , International Symposium on Language and Art ificial Intelligence  , March 16-21 ,  1986 , Kyoto
