A COMPOSITIONAL APPROACH TO THE TRANS LATION OF
TEMPORALEX PRESSIONS INTHEROSR TTASYSTEM
Lisette hppelo
Philips Research Laboratories
Eindhoven , The Netherlands

This paper discusses the translation of temporal expressions  , in the framework of the machine translation system Rosetta  . The translation method of Rosetta , the " isomorphic grammar method ' , is based on Montague's Compositionality Principle  . It is shown that a compositional approach leads to a transparent account of the complex aspects of time in natural language and can be used for the translation of temporal expressions  . 
O . Introduct lon
It is a well ~ known fact that the translation of temporal expressions in natural languages is not a simple mapping of verbal tenses  . In ( I ) the Dutch Simple Present Tense is used while in ( 2 ) a Present Perfect Progressive Tense is the most appropriate tense to represent the time mean in ~ of  ( i ) in English . A more literal translation of the Dutch Simple Present is sometimes considered to be ill -formed  , as Illustrated by (3) . But in other cases that translation yields a perfect result  , as shown by the pair (4)/(5) . 
( i ) Janwoonthieral 20 Jaar ( Dutch : John-lives-here-already-2O-years )   ( 2 ) John has been living here for 20 years ( 3 ) * John is living here for 20 years ( 4 ) Janwoonthier ( John-lives-here )   ( 5 ) John is living here In this paper I will deal with this kind of problem from the perspective of machine translation  . More specifically , I will sketch a solution within the framework of the Rosetta machine translation project  . 
In this project translation systems are developed between Dutch  , English and Spanish , using the " isomorphic grammar " method . According to this method , the gr~mnmars of the languages are attuned to each other in such a way that a sentences is a translation equivalent of a sentence s " if s and s " have slmJlarder ~ vational histories  ( el . Landsbergen (1984)) . 
In section II will give a short exposition of the isomorphic grammar method  . Section 2 presents a theory of time in the Rosette framework  . In section 3 I will sketch isomorphic grammars for temporal expressions and illustrate them by some examples  . 
Possible extensions will be discussed in section 4 . 
1 . The Isonorphic Grammar Method 1 . 2  . H-Grammars M-grammars can be seen as a computationally viable and syntactically powerful variant of Montague Grammar  . An M-grammar consists of three components : I ) a syntactic component ,  2 ) a morphological component and 3 ) a semantic component . 
I ) The syntactic component
The syntactic component defines a set of S-trees ( surface trees ) whose leaves correspond to words , in surface order . An S-tree is an ordered tree with nodes which are labelled with syntactic categories and attribute -value pairs  . The branches are labelled with syntactic relations  , e . g . subject , object , etc . 
In the rest of this paper I will abbreviate them by specifying the top node and a characterization of the rest of the tree  , as:
CAT attribute : value , . . . ( string)
The syntactic component : defines S-trees by specifying :  ( i ) a set of basic S-trees ( also called basic expressions )   ( ii ) a set of syntactic rules . 
Starting from basic expressions larger expressions are formed by applying syntactic rules  . 
A simplistic example is shown in the left part of figure I  . The S-tree for the sentence the woman is singing is derived from the basic expressions woman and sing by applying rules RI and R  . 
The process of making an expression can be represented by a syntactic derivation tree  ( D-tree ) with the ( names of the ) basic expressions at the terminal nodes and the names of the rules that are applicable at the nonterminal nodes  . 
2) The morphological component
The morphological component relates lexical S -trees  ( the leaves of the surface trees ) to strings . So the syntactic and morphological components together define sentences  . 
I will ignore this component in this paper.
3) The semantic component
M-grammars obey the Compositionality Principle , which states that the meaning of an expression is a function of the meaning of the parts of that expression  . The basic S-trees and all other S-trees can be given a model theoretical interpretation : the basic expressions correspond to semantic values in a semantic domain and the rules to semantic operations  . 
We can represent this in a semantic derivation tree that corresponds to the syntactic D-tree and that is labelled with the names of the meanings of the basic expressions at : the terminal nodes and the names of the semantic operations at the nonterminal nodes  . 
( cf . figure i )
M-grammars must satisfy certain conditions to allow for effective analysis next to generation  . For more details the reader is referred to Landsbergen  ( 1982 ,  19~4) . 
1 . 2 . Translating with : L so morph leM-grammars The translation relation between two  ( or more ) languages is defined by attuning their grammars as follows:  ( i ) For each basic expression of a grammar there is at least one corresponding basic expression of the other grammar with the same meaning  . 
313  ( ii ) For each syntactic rule of a grammar there is at least one corresponding syntactic rule of the other grammar  , with the same meaning . 
The correspondence between rules is only required for " meaningful " rules  . Syntactic transformations can he added for each language separately and do not occur in the derivation trees  . 
In terms of derivation trees : for each syntactic derivation tree of a grammar there is at least one syntactic derivation tree of the other grammar with the same geometry and labelled with corresponding basic expressions and syntactic rules  . These syntactic derivation trees correspond to the same semantic derivation tree and are called isomorphic derivation trees  . 
Two sentences are defined as translations of each other if they have the same semantic derivation tree and therefore corresponding derivation trees  .   ( Note that the definition is given for isolated sentences on the basis of linguistic knowledge only : in fact a " possible translation " relation is defined  , possible in some context . ) Grammars that are attuned in this way are called isomorphic M-grammars if the corresponding sets of rules satisfy certain applicability conditions  , such that for each wellformed syntactic derivation tree in a grammar there is at least one wellformed syntactic derivation tree in other grammars  .   ( A derivation tree is wellformed if it defines a sentence  , i . e . if the rules are applicable . ) figure I
English 17~ Dutch - - - - - RI b2- ~ i B2 \[~ singzi\[ngen ~ -- blBI " I
I ! ~ Sn~ICOUW synt . D-trees 6m . \])-tree synt . D-tree In figure 1 a simple unambiguous-example of isomorphic grammars for English and Dutch is given  . 
The Rosett a translation systems are based on isomorphic grammars  . The semantic derivation trees function as an intermediate language  ( IL )  . Generative and analytical components can be derived from the grammars : the analytical component maps a sentence of the source language into one or more semantic D-trees  ; the generative component maps a semantic D-tree into one or more sentences of the target language  . 
In this paper the translation relation is discussed from a purely generative point of view  . The semantics will be treated rather informally and I will especially discuss the correspondence of the syntactic rules and show the development of parallel derivations of sentences  . 
2. A Time theory for Rosetta
A linguistic analysis of temporal expressions , in particular an MT approach that presumes an interlingua  , requires some level of representation that is for expressing time in natural language  . As I prefer to adheretc the current notions developed in the literature  , I will discuss the relevant data in the perspective of the model-theoretical analyses put forwardise  . g . Reichenbach (1947), Comrie (1976), Van Eyndee . ao (1985) , Oversteegen and Verkuyl (1985) , Bruce (1972) , De Vuyst (1983) . 
2.1. Temporal expressions
Temporal expressions consist of : tense , a linguistic category which consists of morphological forms of the verb  ( e . g . worked , works ) or of auxiliary verb forms in combination with certain morphological fomns of the verb which I call " periphrastic tenses "  ( e . g . has worked , is working;
Spanish : e_st ~ trabajando).
time adverbials , liugnistie categories consisting of time adverbs , prepositional phrases or time conjunction phrases . 
2.2. The time model
I will assume that all temporal expressions have a function in relating the event described by a sentence or a clause to a time model  . Vor present purposes a simplified specification of the features of the mode \] I assume suffices  . ( For definitions see e . g . Bruce ( 1972 ) ) This time model T is a partially ordered set of which the elements are called time points  . The ordering relation is "<" , meaning " earlier than " . For this model we define a notion interval . Intervals are subsets of T without any gaps or branches  . 
One of those points is called S , the moment of speech or narration . 
The " objects " to be located in T will be called events  . An event is something that can be located in time  , dependent on the temporal ingredients of the sentence that refers to the event  . For example in order to establish the truth value of John has been living here for  20 years , we need to locate the event " John's living here " in T  . 
An event is assumed to correspond to an interval E of T  . We will say that the event is located in TWhen the relation between E and S can be established  . This relation can be complex in the sense that more intervals than E and S can be involved  . Such intervals are called reference intervals . 
Intervals can be characterized by properties indica-tinge  . g . the " length " or " duration " of an interval , a particular relation to S or a part of the calendar  . 
These properties are expressed by adverbials or special  ( auxiliary ) verbs . 
The event which corresponds to the intervalE has temporal properties which are often called " Aktions art " in the literature  . Both the main verb and its arguments of the clause which expresses the event may play a role in the determination of the 
Aktionsart ( cf . Verkuyl (1972)).
Usually four types of Aktionsart are be distinguished  ( ef . e . g . De Vuyst ( 1983 ) ) as is illustrated in the following examples : ( 6 ) This book belongs to me ( stative )   ( 7 ) John is working ( activity )   ( 8 ) John wrote a letter ( accomplishment )   ( 9 ) He reached the end of the street ( achievement ) The event in ( 6 ) is durative ; it can take place at an arbitrarily long interval  . In (7) the event is durative , but it cannot be claimed to take place only at a timepoint  ( i . e . a minimal interval ) in the model ; it : Is dynamic which implies some progressor change  . The event in (8) is terminative , because the result or end is indicated ; it can be looked at from the " outside " as a unit  , but it cannot be claimed to take place at a time point in the model  ; it is dynamic when looked at from the " inside " ( activity )  . 
In (9) the event is terminative , because the endor result is indicated but J t is also claimed to take place at a time point in the model and therefore also called momentary ? There are two important types of relations between intervals : I  ) the deictic relation : relation between a reference interval and S  2  ) the aspectual relation : relation between E and a reference interval These relations are expressed by morphological and periphrastic tense  . 
2.3. Time in Rosetta
For definin ~ the translation of temporal expressions in the Rosette framework  , we have to write isomorphic compositional grammars for them  , which boils down to : a ) specifying for each language : ( i ) temporal expressions ( time adverbials etc . ) expressing properties of time intervals , ( ii ) syntactic rules ( e . g . tense rules ) that indicate how temporal expressions must and can be combined  , expressing relations between those intervals , b ) attuning these expressions and rules of the languages involved to each other ~ n the way described in section \]  . 
Before specifying these grammars in section 3 I will briefly discuss the motives for the strategy followed in these grammars and for the particular choice of reference intervals  . 
I . Tenses and adverbials cannot be translated independently : - Sometimes the translation of a tense is only correct if it occurs with a certain time adverbial  . 
Consider for example the pair ( i0 ) / ( ii ) :  ( i0 ) Janwerktbieral3jaar ( Pres . Tense )   ( 11 ) John has been working here for 3 years ( Pres . Perf . Prog . Tense ) The corresponding tense of the Dutch Present Tense in the context of the time adverbial al  3 jaarin ( i0 )  , is in English a Present Perfect Progressive Tense as in  ( I i )  . But without that time adverbial the translation is different as is  sho~1 in the examples ( 12 )  -  ( 14 ) :  ( 12 ) Janwerkt ( Pres . Tense ) (13) John is worklng ( Pres . Prog . Tense ) (14)* John has been working ( Pres . Perf . Prog . Tense ) -Adverbla \] s are not always translated into adverb-ials  . Consider for example the pair ( 15 ) / ( 16 ) :  ( 15 ) English : He has just arrived . 
(16) Spanish : E1 a cabadellegar.
In ( 15 ) the adverb Just expresses the " near past " , but in ( 16 ) a special verb a cabarde which could be considered as a part of some perifrastic tense is used  . 
Those examples are an indication that the grammars for temporal expresions should take Into accoun \ [ tenses and time adverbials together  . 
2 . Van Eynde et al ( 1985 ) give a specification of time meaning representation for machine translation  , based on a time model with three intervals , E , R and S , which results in time meaning representations that do take into account time adverbials  . 
In their time model , however , the set of aspectual relations , relations between E and R , contains next totile retrospective relation ( E before R ) the imperfective relation ( E contains R )  . This seems inadequate in view of sentences that can have both an imperfective and are trospective aspectual relation asine  . g . (10) and ( ll ) . 
The complexit : y of the aspectnal relation is also recognized in Maegaard  ( 1982 ) where a special value CONTINUOUS for the attribute RETROSPECTVE was introduced for the translation of verbal tenses  . 
Krauwer and Des Tombe ( 1985 ) make similar observations . 
I propose therefore that in the Rosetta framework I  ) a time meaning representation obligatorily will contain an a speetual relation  , i . e . a relation between E and a reference interval R ~ , which will be called perfective if E is a subset ~RE and imperfee--t ~ ve~f~R ~ is a subset of E  , and ~) t ~ at . it cant " bp tionally contain are trospective relation between RE and a time p~intRS  , which is sone " locall ? Int of evaluation " , meaning that ~( lasts until RS . 
This R_is an arbitrary point of some reference
Interval . Consider for example - ( 17 ) Yesterday John had been living there for 3 years The 3 years ( RE ) last until some point during yesterday ( Rs )  . 
If there is no retrospective relation , RS will he an arbitrary point of RF . 
Between RS and Sth ~ d~-~ctic relation is specified : Past  ( Re ' is before S )  , Present ( RS is simultaneous
W ~ s ) % r ~ : , ~ F ~ r ~ ~ Hs is ~ t ~ Ts).
So a time meaning representation of an event in
Ro set ta will e on sist of :- properties of E and R E an aspectual relation " between E and RE optionally are trospective relation between RE and 
RS-a'deictic relation between RS and SIn the next section grammars for temporal expressions will be discussed which start with a clause and apply rules that will first specify the properties for E  , then the aspectual relation and the properties for RE  , then optionally the retrospective relation and finally the deictic relation  . 
3 . Isounorphle . grammars for temporal expressions 3 . 1 . Corresp . nding rules for temporal expressions To achieve i  , ~omorphy of grammars for temporal expressions , corresponding rules for the languages of the system have to be written as was explained in section I  . These rules are applied to a clause which consists of a verb  , its arguments and an attribute Aktionsart , the value of which has been specified during the composition of the clause  . The result of the application of the rules is a clause with specified tense forms  , auxiliaries and adverbials . 
Semantically , properties of and relations between have one argument ~ a clause  , or two arguments , a clause and an adverbial or an auxiliary verb that we wish to introduce categorematically  . 
I will distinguish five classes of rules . The rules are either obligatory ( OB ) ~ meaning that exactly one of this class of rules is applied  , or optional ( OP ) . 
The rules will be applied in the following order ( from a generative , compositional point of view ) . 
I . Aktions art rules ( OP ) : the application of these rules results in a new clause with a different Aktion sart value caused by some  ( auxiliary ) verb or adverbial that is inserted into the clause  . 
If . duration rules ( OP ) : These rules insert a dur-ation adverbial into the clause  . 
III . aspect rules ( OB ) : These rules insert a reference adverbial and specify the aspectual tense forms  ( perfective or imperfect lve ) of the verbs . 
IV . retrospective rules ( OP ) : These rules are applied to a clause that contains some retrospective reference adverbial  . It inserts another , non-retrospectlve reference adverbial and adds , if necessary , auxiliary verbs and/or adverbials . 
V . deictic rules ( OB ) : These rules determine the deictic tense form of the verbs in the clause  . 
In 3 . 3 . the rules will be discussed in more detail . 
3.2. The S-trees
A clause is represented as an S-tree with a top node CL that has the following temporal attributes and corresponding value sets in all languages : 
Aktions art : stative , activity , accomplishment , achievement aspect : imperfective , perfective , unmarked deixis : present , past , future , unmarked retrospeetivity : - retro , q-retro ~ ( the underlfned value is tile initial value )  . 
A clause contains a VERB node with attribute-value pairs concerning the verb form  , which may differ over languages . 
A clause represents an event with time intervalE.
" lq ~ e other temporal expressions may be of various categories : e  . g . ADVP , PP , NP or CONJP ( a time conjunction and a clause) . 
They are marked at the top node for temporal properties by the following attributes : class : duration  , reference deixis : present , past , future ~ unmarked aspect : perfective , imperfective retrospectivity : + retro , -retro-Adverbials of the duration class will always have the value unmarked for their deixis and - retro for their retrospectivity attribute  . They indicate a property of the interval E . Perfective duration adverbials specify the duration of the event  , imperfective the duration of an interval during which the event takes place  . For example : PP class : duration , aspect : imperfective , deixis : unmarked , retrospectivity : - retro ( in three hours ) -Reference adverbials indicate properties of intervals R  . If their deixis attribute has the value unmarked , they are called absolute , indicating that there are no restrictions on the relations of the interval with S  , otherwise they are called deictic , indicating that the interval has a certain relation with S  . If their retrospective attribute has the value + retro  , they are called retrospective , indicating that the interval has the relation until to the reference point RS  . For example : deixis : past , retrospeetivity : - retro(yesterday )
Absence of adverbials
Clauses do not always contain explicit adverbials : a  ) In case of isolated clauses without reference adverbials we will assume an abstract deictic reference adverbial which indicates the moment of speech 

REF class : reference ; deixis : present ; aspect : perfective ; retrospectivity : - retro()In general , clauses or sentences occur in texts and reference adverbials can have scope over subsequent clauses  . For those latter clauses we will assume that they have abstract anaphoric reference adverbials with the properties of their antecedents  . 
b ) In case a reference interval is indicated that has the property that it ranges over the whole time axis until some reference point RS  , we assume an abstract adverbial : PAST class : reference  ; deixis : unmarked ; aspect : imperfective ; retrospectivity : + retro()3 . 3 . The rules I will now give an informal description of each type of rule containing an account of syntactic and semantic aspects and the differences between Dutch  , 
English and Spanish.
I . Aktions art rules ( OP ) . ~ley change the Aktionsart and insert ( complex ) auxilisry verbs or adverbs , and/or determine the form of the verb . Semantically , a new event is derived from the original event . 
For exmnple , an accomplishment event can be transformed into a non-term in at l ve event  . Compare : Eng: ( 18 ) CL ( John write a letter )  -->
CL (, John be writing a letter)
Du : ( 19 ) CL ( Janeen briefs chrijven ) --> CL ( Janeen briefaan hets chrijven zijn ) This is sometimes called the " locative tense " ; the rules insert : in Dutch : aanhet VERB fonn : Infinitief zijn in Spanish : estar VERB form : gerundio in English : be VERB f\[~rm:ing form They change the Aktion sart value to stative  ( due to the auxiliary )  . 
II . duration rules ( OP ) . These rules are applied to an S-tree with a certain Aktion sart value and a duration adverbial with a certain aspect value that is inserted in the clause  . The aspect value of the clause will now be perfective  . 
This rule applies the property denoted by the adverb-ial  , to the interval E0
For example: ( 20 ) CL ( John write for three hours ) III . aspect rules ( OB ) . Rules with two arguments : I ) a clause with a certain Aktionsart and aspect and  2  ) a ( possibly anaphoric ) reference adverbial with a certain aspect . They determine the imperfeetive and perfective verb forms  , sometimes with auxiliaries . 
The aspectual verb forms can differ over languages . 
English seems to have perfective simple tense forms  ; the imperfective forms are composed with the auxili-ary be  . Spanish has clear imperfective and perfective past tense forms  . In Dutch the verb fo~1 does not seem to distinguish between imperfective and perfective  . 
The aspect value of the clause unmarked has to be changed into perfective or im Perfective  . The reference adverbial is inserted into the S -tree  . 
Semantically , the property denoted by the adverbial is applied to the interval R ~ and the relation between the intervals E and REi ~ expressed  . 
Example : (21) CL ( Ayer Juanley 6 unlibro . )  ( perfective )   ( Yesterday-John-read-a-book )   ( 22 ) CL ( Ayer Juanlela unll bro . )  ( imperfeetive )   ( Yesterday-John-was-reading-a-book ) IV . retrospeetivity rules ( OP ) . Rules that have two arguments : 1 ) a clause with a certain aspect and a reference adverbial that has the retrospectivlty value + retrn  ( this may be PAST )  , and 2 ) a ( possibly anaphoric ) reference adverbial that has the retro -spectivity  w11ue -retro . They insert auxiliary verbs such as have ( hebb~jn ( Dutch )  , haber(Spanish )) , if necessary . In English have must always be inserted . In Dutch and Spanisllitis obligatory if the aspect value is perfective  . So these languages have two rules : one for perfective and one for imperfee-tive clauses  . The reference adverbial is inserted in the S-tree . 
The rules that insert have just ( English ) zoju is the bben/zijn ( Dutch ) and a cabard e ( Spanish )  , under the condition that the clause contains the abstract adverbial PAST and the aspect value perfective  , to express near-retrospectivity , be \] ong to this class . 
Semantically , these rules apply the property denoted by the adverbial to RS and express the relation until or " near ~ until " of RE  , '  ( indicated by the retrospec ~ adverbial ) to R . 

Example: ( 23 ) CL ( REF John have just read this book . ) (24) CL ( REF Juana ca bar delee reste libro . )  ( 25 ) CL ( REFJ and it boek zoj nist gelezeu hebben ) V . deietic rules ( OB ) . These rules are applied to a clause with a reference adverbial  . ( that can be anaphorie ) , \[ nserted by rules of type II lor IV . They determine present , past and future forms of the verbs , sometimes with insertion of an auxiliary verb form  , for example will for future in English , after checking if the deictic ~ alue of the reference adverbial is compatible  . 
Semantically , the relation between Ro ( a subset of the interval indicated by the reference adverbial in the clause  ) and S is expressed . The deietic relations are : present ( R ~ is simultaneous with S )  , past(RS is be for ~ df ~ ture(R ~ is after S ) . In the serHles the abstract adverb i-~als ' ~ will be deleted  . 
Example: ( 26 ) John read a book yesterday ( 27 ) * John has read a book yesterday ( 28 ) John had read a book yesterday 3 . 4 . Examples I will now give some examples of parallel derivations of sentences with temporal expressions that are translation equivalents  . I will leave out irrelevant specification of nodes  . 
Example: ( 29 ) John has been writing for 2 hours Example application of syntactic rules for English 
RI:(imperfective aspect rule)
CLA k tionsart : activity , aspect : unmarked , deixis : unmarked , retrospectivity : - retro ( John write ) + PP deixis : unmarked , aspect : perfective , retrospectivity : + retro ~ class : reference for  2 hours ) --> CL . . . , aspect : perfective, . . . ( John be writing for 2 hours)
R2: ( retrospective rule)
CL . . . , retrospectivity : - retro ( John be writing for 2 hours ) + REF deixis : present , aspect : perfective , retrospectivity : - retro , class : reference () --> CL . . . , retrospectivity : + retro ( John have been writing for 2 hours REF ) R3: ( present deictic rule for finite clause ) ~deixis : unmarked ,  . . .   ( John have been writing for 2 hours ) --> CL deixis : present ,  . . .   ( John has been writing for 2 hours ) figt ~ e2 synt . D-trees ~ t . D-tree
PP (\], ADVP CL
John write Janschrijven
Figure 2 contains the isomorphic syntactic D-trees for the English sentence  ( 29 ) and its Dutch translation equivalent : ( 30 ) Janschr ~ jftal2uur ( Dutch : John = writes-already-2-hours ) The Dutch rules differ from the English ones in that R  "1 does not insert an auxiliary for the imperfective fo~mas in English  . It results in : Janal2uurschrijven . R ' , differs from R also with respect to ~ e introoduct ~ on of the auxiliary verb  . lu Dutch it is not necessary to inser the bben /zijn if the clause has imperfective aspect  . R"2 results in : JanRE Fal2 uurse brijven . R "3 is like R3 , but infi~te ~ clauses the las-t~ve--rhis placed in second position in Dutch : 
Janschrijftal2uur.
flgure 3i~3 ~'3
R " 2pp ._l\/\R
John write Jansehrijven ( 30 ) is only one of the possible translations of ( 29 ) :  ( 29 ) is ambiguous . The be writing can also be due to some " Aktionsart  rule"--~4   ) corresponding to a an hets chrijven zijn ( R ' 4 )  . The other Dntch translation is: ( John-is-already-2-hours-on~the-writing ) The isomorphic D-trees for ( 29 ) and ( 31 ) are shown in figure 3 . 
But for 2 hours is m , biguous too and can also be a perfective duration adverbial corresponding to the Dutch  2 uur . The duration rules ( R ~ and R '5) insert them . ~ he ~ lause will now have perf ~ ectlve aspect and the retrospective adverbial PAST will be introduced by the perfective aspect rule  ( R ~ and R '6 )  . In Dutch the retrospective rule R "7 ( different f?omR " 2 but also corresponding to the English R2  ) is now applied : the one for a clause with perfective aspect that inserts the auxiliary hebben/zijn  . The resulting Dutch translation equivalent of ( 29 ) is: ( 32 ) Janis 2uuraan bets chrijven geweest ( Dutch : John ~ has-2-hours-on-the-writing-been ) The isomorphic derivation trees are shown in figure  4  . 
fig~e4
R2"' ~ R4 NP~R"4
John write
The conditions in the rules unacceptable combinations  , e . g . :  ( 33 ) * John died for a while filter out certain ( 34 ) * John was working in three hours ( 33 ) is ruled out because for a while is a perfective duration adverbial that cannot combine with achievements or accomplishments and  ( 34 ) because in three hours is an imperfective duration adverbial that cannot combine with activities and statives  . 
4. Concluding remarks
It is not possible to treat all temporal expressions and all translation problems with respect to time in this paper  , but I have sketched a solution as to how to treat them in the Rosetta framework  . I expect that other " aspectual forms " such as inchoative  , term in a-tive etc . can be added at the " Aktion sart level " or " aspect level " and that the current approach  , which allows for translation of adverbs into auxiliary verbs or combinations of them  ( and vice versa ) will be sufficient to cope with them . The time theory presented here should of course he embedded in a discourse theory about time  . The anaphoric properties should be seen as a start  . Moreover , the informal specification of the time model should be given a more formal account  . Other topics that should be elaborated are quantificational  , scope , frequency and habitual aspects , interaction of modality in the future time expressions and the time relations between matrix clauses and  ( intensional ) complement clauses or relative clauses . 

The author would like to thank all members of the Rosettate am  , particularly Jan Landsbergen and Franciska de Jong  , for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper  . 
This work was supported in part by a grant from the Nederlandse HerstructureringsmaatschappiJ  ( NR HEM )  . 

I ) I use the definition of " aspect " of Comrie ( 1976 )  , but I will take histerm " situation " as referring to the interval E in relation to the reference interval RE and consider only two possibilities : " perfective " and " imperfective " aspect  . The notion " perfect aspect " which I call ' retrospective aspect " should be accounted for by other relations  . Probably ~ by rela-ting RE to RS with the relation " until "  . 
2 ) This point resembles the point S " in Oversteegen and Verkuyl  ( 1985 )  . 
3 ) It is possible that some languages have complex deictic rules that indicate for example a " past event with present relevance "  . This is similar to a " present with retrospective PAST "  , but differs In that the interval RE is not until  , but before Re . At the moment I will Ignore the e~-x trame aning " ~ nd treat them with a deictic past rule  , because this phenomenon seems to \] lave to do with more pragmatic factors such as " distance with respect to the event from the speaker's viewpoint " or knowledge of the world like the present existence of persons or objects  . 

Bruce , B . ,  ( 1972 ) : " A model for temporal references and its application in a question answering program '  . 
In : Artificial Intelligence 3, \]-25.
Comrie , B . ,  ( 1976 ) : Aspect : an Introduction to the Study of Verbal Aspect and Rela--~d Problems  . ~am-nlverstyress,-~r ~- ~ g ~ . 
Dowty , D.R ., (1979): Word Meaning and Montague
Grammar . Reidel Vol . 7q--.~~.
Krauwer , S . and L . desTombe , (1985): " Compositionality ' . In : Dehaan , G . and W . Zonneveld ( eds . ): Formal Parameters of Generative Grammar . I . Yearbook Landsbergen , J . ,  ( 1982 ) : " Machine Translation based on Logically Isomorphic Montague Grammars '  . In : J . 
Horecky ( ed . ), COLING82 North Holland , p .  175-182 . 
Landsbergen , J . ,  ( 1984 ) : " Isomorphic Grammars and their use in the Rosetta Translation system '  . Paper presented at the Tutorial on Machine Translation  , Lugano . Philips Research M . S .  12 . 950, to appear in : King , M . ( ed . ), Machine Translation : The State of the
Art , Edinburgh Un-iv Tr-s ~\ [ Ty Press.
Maegaard , B . ,  ( 1982 ) : " The Transfer of Finite Forms in a Machine Translation System '  . In : Abstracts
COLING82, p . 190-194.
Oversteegen , L . and H . J . Verkuyl ,   ( 1985 ) : Detempore lezins structuur vanbet Nederlands : tweetij ds banden '  . In GLOT . 
Reichenbach , H . , (1947): Elements of Symbolic Logic . 
University of California Press,
Van Eynde , F . , L . desTombe and F . Maes ( 1985 ) : " Specification of time meaning for machine translation '  . Proceedings ACL conference , Geneva . 
Verkuyl , H . J . ,  ( 1972 ) : On the Compositional Nature of the Aspects . Dordrecht . 
Vuyst , J . de ,   ( 1983 ) : " A Semantic Analysis of Temporal Elements in Dutch and English '  . Diss . RUG ,


