TRANSFER AND MTMODULARITY
Pierre Isabeile & t " ~ J.l.iott Macklov ltch
Canadian Workplace Automation Research Centre
1575 Chomedey Boulevard
Laval , Quebec
Canada H7 V2 X2

The tcansfer components of typical second generation  ( G2 ) MT systems do not fully conform to the principles o  ~  G2 modularity , incorporating extensive target language information while failing to separate translation facts from linguistic theory  . 
The exclusion from transfer of all noncontrastive information \[ eads us to a system design in which the three major components operate in parallel  , rather than in seqnence . We also propose that MT systems be designed to allow translators to express their knowledge in natural metalanguage statements  . 
I . Modularity : a Basic Principle of G2 S~stems Modularity is a defining characteristic of second generati  . on machine translation systems ( hereafter C2 MT )  .   G2 systems are claimed to be based on a mode \] in which linguistic descriptions are clearly separated from the algorithms and programs that actually produce translations  . Moreover , in this mode \] . , the linguistic facts that pertain solely to the source language  ( SL ) are supposed to be clearly separated from the facts that pertain solely to the target language  ( TL )  , and from those facts that concern the lexl cai and structural contrasts between TL and S\]  ,   . Such , at Least , are the principles of G2 design , asset for tb for example in Vauquois\[i \] . This conception of MT gives rise to systems composed of three distinct and successive phases : a monolingual analysis component  , which produces a SL-dependent structural description  ( SD ) of the input text ; a transfer component , which maps that SD onto a TL-dependent SD ; and a monolingual synthesis component , which transforms that SD into a
TL output text.
As pointed out by Kay\[2\] , this classical G2 design offers a number of advantages . Ideally , it should allow the formal \[ description of a given language to serve the needs of analysis and synthesis in differently  . As well , it should allow a given analysis or synthesis component to be coupled onto other MT systems of simi  . lardesign to produce translations for other language pairs  . And finally , because the algorithms are independent of the particular linguistic descriptions  , they too should be reusable in other MT applications  . 
il . Transfer in T_yj ~ ical G2 Systems
Transl!er in G2 systems like TAUM-AVIATION\[3\] ,   ARIANE-78   \[4\] and METAL \[511 is essentially a tree-transformation system , relating the SDs of two complete translation unlts  ( generally sentences )  . 
Lexieal units ( LUs ) are not translated in isolation ; rather , transfer rules typically test the structural environment of each SLLU and  , after inserting the appropriate TL equivalent , may rearrange that structure to accord with contextual \[ constraints imposed by the TLLU  . Details of formalization aside , transfer rules ia these systems will encode facts like the following :  (  ,  . a > fP\s = +/ v:\,'VS lIknows avoir
VNP VNP1 I know conna2tre
Such transfer rules are usually deterministic : each input tree  ( or subtree ) is mapped onto one and only one output tree . Consequently , corresponding to each SLSD produced by the analysis component  , the synthesis component will receive one and only one TLSD  . In order for a correct TL sentence to be produced  , this unique structure has to be correct in all respects  . 
This conception makes it necessary for the transfer component to encode a lot of knowledge about TL grammar  . \] for example , if the input tree required by synthesis is an Aspects-type deep structure  , transfer will need to include the equivalent of the complete base component of the TL grammar  , including \] . exica L insertion mechanisms . 
A close examination of the transfer components of the three systems mentioned above shows that this is indeed the ease  . Rules such as ( la-b ) clearly state facts that belong to a description of TL : namely  , strict subcategorizat L on conditions on the insertion of savoir and connaltre  . A sizable portion of the socalled transfer rules in these systems actually deals with TL strict subcategorization requirements  . 
In addition to incorporating TL linguistic descriptions within transfer  , these systems also make use of impoverished TL grammars for synthesis  . For example , none of the systems mentioned accesses a fullfledged TL dictionary during synthesis  . It has long been a truism in MT circles that synthesis is much easier that analysis  . This is hardly surprising , when sonm ch of tile work of synthesis has been passed over to transfer  . This move has at least on the translator /lexicographer is greatly increased  ; and ( b ) the translation relation is implemented in a highly directional fashion  . Analysis and synthesis become totally different tasks  , each standing in a different relationship to transfer  . 
In order to remedy these defects , we favour a more rigourous adherence to the principles of  G2 modularity : all information which is not strictly contrastive should be removed from the transfer component and returned to synthesis  , where it belongs . This would allow G2 systems to fully benefit from the advantages of modularity that Kay has noted  . It would also ease the burden on those who must write the transfer rules  . 
On the other hand , such a move would make the transfer phase nondeterministic  , and this may lead to severe efficiency problems . If , as in typical G2 systems , transfer and synthesis are applied in sequence , communication between the two components will be effected through tree structures representing complete translation units  . The use of non-determin-istic rules at transfer would mean that local translation ambiguities would then generalize to these complete units  . For exalaple , if tranfer no longer selects between savoir and connagtre for the translation of know  , or between cheveux and ~ for the translation of hair  , then at least four different French SDs will be transmitted to the synthesis component for any SL SD containing both know and hair  . 
One possible solution to this problem is to have analysis  , transfer and synthesis operate in parallel rather than in sequence  , while providing the three components with the means to exchange partially specified tree structures at each stage of the processing  . This is probably what Arnold et al\[6\] have in mind when they suggest that transfer should be viewed as a relation between two generating devices  . 
We have recently begun developing a system that seeks to implement such an approach  . We have chosen PROLOGII ( Universit ~ d'Aix-Marseille ) as the implementation language , in order to take advantage of the handling of partial information in a time-independent manner that is offered by unification-based formalisms  ( cfKay\[2\] )  . PROLOGII also has built in facilities for parallel processing  . Though our system is still in the embryonic stage  , it can already translate in both directions between English and French  , or simply enumerate pairs of sentences that are translationally equivalent  . 
III . Transfer Rules as Metalanguage Statements Assuming that the scheme outlined in the prece -ding paragraphs takes us somewhat closer to the ideals of  G2 modularity , we can no wask what content is left for transfer rules to express  . 
Since a good measure of compositionality is a prerequisite for transfer to be possible at all ~ the tranfer relation  ( trf ) has to be recurslvely defined in terms of relations between progressively smaller subparts of the SDs representing complete translation units  , up to the level of basic LUs . Depending on the degree of composition all ty involved  , three classes of rules can be distinguished . 

First , there will be rules of purely compositional translation  , ie rules which define the translation of some type of unit as a function of the translation of its parts  . Rule (2) , for example , states that the translation of an NP is a function of the translation of its components  . 
(2) trf(np(Det , Adj , N ) , np(Det ' , N ' , Adj ')):-trf(Det , Det ') trf(Adj , Adj ') trf(N , N ') . 
Second , there will be rules dealing with purely noncompositional cases  , such as those of (3): (3) a ) trf(n(chair ) , n(chaise )) b ) trf(v(know ) , v(savoir )) trf(v(know ) , v(connaltre )) c ) trf(nom(n(pressure) , n(gauge )) , nom(n(manom~tre ))) . 
Example ( 3a ) states a simple correspondence between basic LUs .   ( 3b ) illustrates a case where transfer leaves a choice for synthesis  , as discussed above . 
Example ( 3c ) is meant to illustrate the possibility of purely noncompositional translation involving an SL phrase  . From the translator's point of view , pressure gauge is a unit ; SL-internally , however , we seen or eason to consider it an idiom ( cf the possibility of conjunction , as in pressure and temper at nre ~) . 
We need a third type of rule to handle partly compositional translation  , " ie cases in which the translation of some but not all of the subphrases are required for the translation of the whole expression  . To express the restructuring that takes place when miss is translated as manquer ~  , for example , we would need a rule like (4): (4) trf(s(Subj , vp(v(miss ) , Obj )) , s(Subj ' , vp(v(manquer ) , pp(p(~) , Obj ')) :- trf(Subj , Obj ') , trf(Obj , Subj ') . 
Notice that in the transfer rules given in (2)-(4) , just as in those of G2 systems in general , translation facts are cast in terms of the specific linguistic theories embodied in the analysis and synthesis modules  . This has a number of serious disadvantages : ( a ) in order to be able to directly contribute to the development of the transfer component  , the translator/lexicographer must assimilate all the details of the specific linguistic theories on which analysis and synthesis are based  ;   ( b ) descriptions of translation facts have no independent status with respect to the analysis and synthesis modules : changes to the linguis tic descriptions of SL and TL will likely force changes to the transfer rules  , creating potential consistency problems ; and ( c ) translation rules are unlikely to be portable to other systems  . 
Natural bilingual dictionaries state translation facts in an altogether different manner  . 
The information they contain is expressed in what essentially amounts to metalanguage statements  , like the following : ( 5 ) a ) " chair " translates as " chaise " in French b ) " pressure gauge " translates as " manom ~ tre " c ) "sbmissessth " translates as " qqchmanqueqqn " Translators obviously manage to express a good deal of translation knowledge in terms of such statements  . 
One way to ease the burden of the translator involved in MT would be to build into the system a capability to automatically interpret statements like those of  ( 5 ) in terms of rules like those of ( 3 ) - ( 4 )  . In fact ,   G2 MT systems already possess much of the knowledge required to build SDs out of the quoted expressions in  ( 5 )  . For (5a ) , little more than SL and TL dictionary lookups are needed to produce  ( 3a )  . 
To handle cases such as ( 5b ) the system wouid only have to access its regular grammar rules  . Obviously , other cases will arise where such a simple scheme would lead to the generation of spurious rules  . For example ~ if not supplemented by additional cons-traints  , an equivalence might be created between the English adjective ~ and the French noun lumi ~ re  . 
However , it does not seem difficult to imagine motivated principles that would automatically take care of such incorrect equivalences  . 
Cases of partly compositional translation raise more interesting problems  . In order to produce (4) from (5e) , relations must be established between the subparts of the two quoted expressions  . Sb , stl ! , ~ and j~lare clearly meant to be interpreted as metavariables  . Sl !) must be linked to ihg ~ , so that if the first takes some expression as its value  , then the second take stile translation of that expression as its value  . The clue to this link , of course , is the fact that ~ is itself the translation of sb  . 
We are currently working on a scheme that will interpret translation rules expressed as simply as those in  ( 5 )  , and allow them to be fed into the transfer component of the MT system mentioned at the end of section II  . Though many difficulties remain to be resolved , the research program we have described does have the merit of addressing the shortcomings that result from the insufficient modularity of  G2 systems . At the very least , we hope to stimulate theoretical reflect ion upon the translation component of MT systems  , which has not until recently received the attention it deserves  . 
IV . References\[I \] Vauquois , B . , La t raduct ion automat ic~__~ Grenoble , Documents delinguist : Lque quantitative 29 , Paris , Dunod ,  1975 . 
\[2\] Kay M . , Functional Unification Grammar : a Forma-lism for Machine Translation  , Proceedi ~ of
COLING-84, 75-78, 1984.
\[3\]Isabelle P . , Bourbeau L . , TAUM-AVIATION : Its Technical Features and some Experimental Results  , Computational Linguistics , ii : i ,  18-27 ,  1985 . 
\[4\] Vauquois B . , Boitet C . , Automated Translation at Grenoble University , Computational \[ Linguistics , ii:I ,  2836 ,  1985 . 
\[5\] Bennett W . , Sloeum J . , The LRC Machine Translation System , Computational Linguistics ,  1\]:2-3 ,  111-121 ,  1985 . 
\[6\]Arnold D . , & a\] . AMU1 View of the ~ C , A > , TFramework in EUROTRA , Proceedings of the Conference on Theoretical Issues in Macline Translation of Natural Lansuages  , Colgate University ,  114 ,  1985 . 

