PHONOLOGICAL PIVOT PARSING
Grzegorz Dogil
Universit ~ t Bielefeld
Fakult ~ t fur Linguistik
und Literatur wissenschaft
D-4800 Bielefeld
West Germany
There are two basic mysteries about natural language  . The speed and ease with which it is acquired by a child and the speed and ease with which it is processed  . Similarly to language acquisition , language processing faces a strong input-data -deficiency problem  . When we speak we alter a great lot in the ideal-ized phonological and phonetic representations  . We delete whole phonemes , we radically change all ophones , we shift stresses , we break up intonational patterns , we insert the pauses at the most unexpected places  , etc . If to this crippled ' phonological string ' we add all the noise from the surroundings which does not help comprehension either  , it is be wildering that the parser is supposed to recognize anything at all  . However , even in the most difficult circumstances ( for-eign accent , louden vironment , being drunk , etc .   ) we do comprehend speech quickly and effic iently  . There must be then some signals in the phonetics tring which are particularly easy to grasp and to process  . Ic all these signals ' pivots ' and parsers working with these signals I call'pivot parsers '  . 
What are then the pivots in the phonetic string ? I am not proclaiming any here sy by saying that the pivots should correspond to the most audible parts of the phonetic string  . If we look at the intensity tracing of speech we will notice a fairly regular sequence of peaks  . At the lowest prosodic level , the level of the syllable , these peaks correspond to the vowels forming syl labic nuclei  . In my view , the parser will orient itself for e mostly on these vocalic peaks  . That is to say , the parser in my model is a ' jumper ' which recognizes the best audible units of speech- vowels building syllabic nuclei - and disregards everything else  . Such a parser is definitely very Fast but i t is also very inefficient  . Having recognized just a string of vowels we do not have enough information to find a word which contains these vowels  . Or does anyone subconsciously'know'which word the string of vowels /  . a . a . i . e . / corresponds to ?! The parser needs defi-ni tely more information  , but how much more ? This is where my hypothesis about ' ideal prosodic types ' comes into play  . 
In Dogil : 1985 , I argued that at each level of prosodic organizat i on there exist prototypical  , unmarked structures which manifest themselves not only in patterns of all natural languages but are also clearly visible in the areas of external evidence such as language acquisit ion  , language loss , and language change . 
Here I will argue that these ' ideal prosodic types ' play an important role in language processing  . 
At the lowest prosodic level-the level of thesy llable-such an ideal type is constituted by a CV syllable  . That is , the prototypical , unmarked sylla-ble consist of a single consonant followed by a vowel  . 
There is plenty of evidence for this prototype ( cf . 
Clements & Keyser : 1983, 28ff . , Ohala & Kawasaki:1984, 115-119) . For example : - there is no language which would not have CV syl-lables  , but there are many languages which have only CV syllables - phonological rules which oblite rate syllabic structure usually spare CV syl lables-CV syllables are acquired as firs t in the process of language acquisition-CV syllables are preserved even in the most severe forms of motoraphasia  ( cf . Dogil : 1985 ) -historical syllabic restructuring rules tend towards the creation of CVsyl\] ables  . 
All this evidence clearly illustrates the proto-typical character of tl\]isuni t  . i claim that this unit is also essential For p re-lexical parsing  . What the parser essentially does is recognize CV syllables in the string  . I propose it does this in the follow-ingway : -- The parser searches for the first intens itypeak and once it has found it its tops there  . As I said before these intensity peaks are cotermi-nous with vowels  ( most sonorous sound types ) forming syllabic nuclei . The parser goes back in 10 msec . 
steps making a diphone ! of the vowel and the consonant preceding it  . This gives a diphonic repre-sentation of CV syl lables  . The difference between the diphones canner in my model and in all other models is that my scanner works backwards starting at the peak of the vowel  . 
-- The parser recognizes the syllable . Strictly speaking it recognizes only the unmarked  , proto-typical CV part of the syllable . These prototyp-ical CV's are stored as diphones in the diphone dictionary  . If the syllable contains other units , for example if it is CC VCC syllable ( like in the name ' Planck ' ) these other units will be disregarded , and only the CV ( /la/of/plaok / ) will be available after the initial parse  . 
-- Having identified the syllable the parser makes its first hypothesis about the word that this syllable is a part of  . 
-- The parsing strategy is carried on by jumping to the next intensity peak  , i . e . the next vowel . 
Consider a simple example of a parse by a syllab ic pivot parser of a German sentence " Ich gehe zumMax-Planck-lnstitut "- I am going to the Max-Planck- 
Institut : ( I ) \[? g geet summaks plaok ? institut\]I did some simple speediting which monitors the ' Diphones ' are defined as transitions from the middle of one phone to the midpoint of the preceding one  . 
615 function of my parser . From the phonetic string in ( 1 ) I clipped off the parts of the onset and the cod as which according to the pivot parser are not processed on the initial parse  . The resulting string in ( 2 ) was fully recognizable . 
(2)\['?igetsuma\[a?1t ; tu\]
Actually it strongly reminded of fast/casual German speech  . 
When I clipped off these parts of the string which the pivot parser considers relevant - i  . e . consonants immediately preceding the vowels - the string was not recognizable any more  . Consider the transcription in ( 3 ) :  ( 3 ) \[ i ~ eeumak saqkins Iut \] Actually , some of my informants claimed that it was not a sentence of their language  . Needless to say the string was not recognizable when the vowels were ob-literated  . 2 Given all the grammatical , contextual and background knowledge that we possess when parsing strings  , the syllabic vivot parser might be actually suffi-cient for comprehension  . Even if it is insufficient in the form that I have presented it so far  , it is fast enough to incorporate a number of repair strategies that can make it suffic ient for comprehension  . I will just mention some of these possible repair strat-egies without going into any detail  . 
1 . Phonemic Restoration Strategy-recovers sounds which are adjacent to the CV pivot  . For example , in case the syllable/la/in our example sentence did not contain enough information to recognize the corresponding name ' Planck '  , the consonant/p/preceding/la / and the consonant / ~/ following/lad would have to be recovered by this repair strategy  .  ~ 2 . Pivot parsing at higher prosodic levels-for instance recovering ' ideal types ' at the level of the foot or the prosodic word  . As I understand it this is exactly what T aft : 1984 has proposed . Another pos-sible method here is finding the patterns of intona-tional morphemes and pauses and matching these to the I did this speech editing using the SPED software on PDPI i  . I thank Carla Coenders of the MP l for assisting mein speediting  . 
Warren : 1970 , who first argued for the Phonemic Restoration Strategy  , replaced the first phoneme/s/in a word like ' legislature ' with a coughing sound of about the same intensity as the speech  . 
He then presented this word to subjects , and asked them to indicate wherein the word the cough occurred  . The subjects were unable to accurately locate the cough  . More important , the missing phoneme was completely'restored ' ; that is , it was not perceived as missing . The subjects heard the/s/in'legislature ' , and the cough was heard as background noise . Hence , a listener can generate phonemes ( given contextual information ) that do not exist in the speech string . He can do this , I would predict , only in these positions that are outside of the CV pivot  . If we replaced some part of the pivot with noise , the subjects would not be able to restore it- just as it was the case with my example  ( 3 )  . 
6 16 dialogue structure ~ as was proposed in Gibbon : 1985  . 
3 . Faking advantage of the language specific phono-tactic constraints - for example  , the fact that in a language long vowels may occur only in open syllables takes a great load off the parser which has discovered along vowel ?  4  . Allophonic fixing of constituent boundaries . l-his sort of parsing strategy is central in Church's:  1983 phonological parser , which I will have something to say about later  . Obviously , because all ophones are a very much language speci ficmatter  , the allophonic parser is also language spec if ic  . 
5 . Using higher level representational knowledge ( mor-pho-syntactic and semantic knowledge ) in order to repair the result of the prosodic pivot parse-for example  , if we parse a word like export with a nini- tial  ( i . e . ' nouny'stress ) in a syntactic position of a verb , we will probably not think twice about its prosodic ' noun in ess ' but interpret it as a verb  ( cf . 
Cutler & Clifton : 1984) . I guess we use the similar strategy to recover suffixes which are initially not parsed  . 
Most of these parsing strategies presented above are language specific  , and I do not see them as alter-natives to my pivot parser but as additions to it  . 
The pivot parser which orients itself on the prototypical linguistic units is obviously universally appli-cable  . 
The pivot parser is fast . It is definitely faster than the finite state parser developed by Church :  1983  . Church's parser also divides the string of speech into the sequence of syllables  ( and metrl calfe et )   . However , instead of prototypical pivots it uses the constraints that the syllable imposes on the d istribution of all ophones  . It is tuned to the analysis of these phonetic features which are typical of syllable in it ial and syllable final positions  . Church has shown that his method greatly reduces the number of competing syllabic analyses compatible with a given utterance  . Nonetheless , some unresolved ambiguity a-b out the correct syl labic segmentation persists des~pite the effect of the phonotactic constraints  . Note that the syllabic pivot parser does not give rise to any ambiguity of this sort  . The strings are syllabi-fied to the ' idea l ' CV chunks  . 
Church's parser is slower than the syllabic pivot parser because it has to wait until it reaches the syllable final position ~ in order to fix the boundary of the recognition unit X This  , in turn , makes the parser very inefficient and , actually , inadequate given the input-data-deficiency problem that I discussed at the beginning of this paper  . The syllable final position that Church's parser critically depends upon is the most vulnerable position for phonological obscuration processes  ( cf . Dressler : 1984) . 
These processes which weaken , obliterate or even delete syllable f in a lallophones are very operative in natural  ( particularly fast/casual ) speech . Thus , if these processes apply and the positions which Church's parser depends on are not there anymore  , the parse will break down . I am concluding then that Church's All psycholinguistic experiments  ( cf , Frauenfelder : 1985 for an overview ) speak against this waiting strategy . Actually the words are recognized long before ( 23 phonemes before ) their final segments have been processed . 
language specific allophonic parser is slower than my universal syllabic pivot parser and that it also faces a strong inefficiency problem  . 
Similar problems apply to all the phonemic parsers  . 
As an example let us discuss a parser assumed in the widespread Cohort Model of word recognit ion  . The parser implicit in the Cohort Model is a sequential cate-gorial  , correct , phonemic parser ( cf . Frauenfelder : 1985) . Its purpose is finding the ' uniqueness point ' for word recognition  . Let us assume ( after Marslen-Wilson:1984 ,  141-142 ) that the word to be recognized is " trespass " . Given the phonemic information , we can determine the point at which " trespass " becomes uniquely distinguishable  . There are many words that begin with/i re/ , and at least two that share the ini-tial sequence/ires /  ( trestle , tress ) . But immediate-ly following the/s/only " trespass " remains  . The discrimination point for this word is therefore at the / p/  . It is here , and no later , that an optimal system should discriminate the word  . 
Now , what is the strategy of the pivot parser to recognize a word like " trespass "? First it will find the intensity peak and recognize it as the vowel / e /  . 
Then it will bind the consonant preceding this vowel and recognize it as/tr/  . I assume that/~r/isamo-no segmental affr icate  . The parser will recognize the first syl lable as/ire / and make a first hypothesis a-b out the word  . The cohort of compatible words will include a ll the words in Marslen-Wilson's cohort  , plus some more words that have the initials y llable/sire /  ( strength , stress , stretch ) . Then the parser will jump to the next intensi type ak and recognize it as the vowel / a /  . It will bind the preceding consonant and recognize it as / p/  . No witpossesses two syllables / ~ re/and/pa /for the next hypothesis as to word recognition  . This is actually enough as there is just one word in English containing these two syllables in that order-this word is " trespass "  . 
The whole procedure lasts approximately 400msec . , and 4 segments have to be recognized until the ' uniqueness point ' has been reached  . Hence , nw parser is possibly not less efficient than the sequential phonemic parser  , and its uniqueness recognition point does not come later than predicted by studies connected with the Cohort Model's phonemic parser  ( cf . Carlson , Elenius , Granstrom and Hunnicutt : 1985) . 
Obviously syllabic pivot parser : requires a dif fer-ent structuring of the lexicon than the standard phonemic structuring implicit in the Cohort Model parser  . 
Let us imagine a lexicon which is organized according to the CV syllabic pivots  . In order to foster our imagination I will compare such a lexicon to a warehouse  . Imagine that words are the spare parts that the machines  ( sentences ) are made of . All the spare parts have screws that keep them together  . Imagine now that these screws are the prototypical CV syllables  . 
Our warehouse ( lexicon ) is organized according to which screws ( CV syllables ) fit which spare parts ( words )  . If you need as pare part ( a word ) , but you know only what type of a screw ( CV syllable ) you have in it and what type of machine ( context and sentence information ) it might be used in , the warehouse admin-istration ( the parser ) will provide you with the spare part you have been looking for  . I have been told that warehouses organized according to this principle ac-tually exist  ( in industry ) and that they work much more efficiently than the warehouses which list the details of all of theirs pare parts  . 
There is , however , one major advantage which my parser has over any phonemic parser  . Phonemic parsers require that all decisions on the sensory input are always made correctly  . That is , every single phoneme in the string must be correctly recognized  . Given the deficiency of the input string which I kept mentioning through my paper  , tiT is correctness requirement may never be fulf illed  ( except may be in a psycholinguistic lab )  . 
Even in the most idealized and artificial laboratory situation the acoustic manifestation of many phonemes depends upon the context  . For example , the second formant of / d / in the syllable / di/has arising transition  , whereas in/du/it has a falling one . A parser which takes no account of the vowel in the syllable cannot be expected to realize that arising and a falling transition are cues for the same phoneme  . 
My parser does not face this sort of problem be : cause the phonological properties it is tuned to are the most salient ones from the perceptual point of view  ( cf . Marcus : 1981 ) and are best preserved in phonetic strings . 
I have presented to you an idea of what a fast parser which requires the minimum of phonlogical ly invariant information might look like  . This parser works in a sequentially-looping manner and the decisions it makes are non -deterministic  . It is universally appli-cable , it is faster , and it seems to be no less effi-cient than other phonological parsers that have been proposed  . 

Carlson , R . , K . Elenius , B . Granstrom , & S . Hunnicutt : 1985 , Phonetic and orthographic properties of the basic vocabulary of five European languages  , Fran-co-Suedois Symposium , Grenoble , April 2022 . 
Churc-dh~8-3- , --~- Fi-gaT#structure ~ A method of takinad vantae q ~ c constraints  , ln-~na University Linguistic Club__ Clements  , G . N . & J . Keyser : 1983, CVP honolog ~ L , MIT
Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts.
Cutler , A . & Ch . Clifton , Jr .  : 1984 , The use of prosodic information in word recognit ion  , in H . Bouma & D . G . Bouwhuis ( eds . )  , Attention and Performance X : Control of Lan ucLu_a ~ Processes  , Erlbaum , Hills - ~ , N . J . 
Dogil , G . : 1985 , The oQr~c of markedness in nonlinear h\]~_onololp_ ~ jt  , Hab ~- il . , Un Tverslta ~ Blelefeld ~ Dressler , W . : 1984 , Explaining Natural Phonology , ~ Yearbook I . 
Frauenfelder , U . : ~  , Crosslinguistic approaches to lexical segmentation  , ~-special issue on Cross language Psycholinguistics  , Gibbon , D . : 1985, Prosodic parsing above the word . 
DGfS Hambu_b_ur ~, February 1985.
Marcus , S . : 1981 , Acoustic determinants of perceptual center ( P-center ) location , ~ on and psychoz_-30 .  247-256 . 
Marslen-Wilson , W . : 1984 , Function and process in spoken word recognition : A tutorial review  , in H . 
Bouma & D . G . Bouwhuis ( eds . )  , Attention and Performance X , Erlbaum , llill sdale , N . J . 
Ohala ~ H . Kawasaki : 1984 , Prosodic phonology and phonetics , ~ Yearbook I ,  113-127 . 
Taft , L . A . : 1984 , Prosodic ~ aints and lexical pars in 9 strategies , unpublished Ph . D . disserta-tion , University of Massachusetts at Amherst . 
Warren , R . : 1970 , Perceptual restoration of missing speech sounds , Science 167 ,  393-395 . 

