Linguistic Bases For Machine Translation 1)
Christian Rohrer
Institut ff ~ rLinguistik
Universittlt Stuttgart
Keplerstraf3 e17
7000 Stuttgart 1
My aim in organizing this panel is to stimulate the discussion between researchers working on MT and linguists interested in formal syntax and semantics  . I am convinced that a closer cooperation will be fruitful for both sides  . I will be talking about experimental MT or MT as a research project and not as a development project  . \[ l \] A . The relation between MT and theoretical linguistics Researchers in MT do not work with linguistic theories which are ' on vogue ' today  . The two special issues on MT of the journal Computational Linguistics  ( CL 1985 ) contain eight contributions of the leading teams . In the bibliography of these articles you don't find names like Chomsky  , Montague , Bresnan , Gazdar , Kamp , Barwise , Perry etc . \[2\] Syntactic theories like GB , GPSG , LFG are not mentioned ( with one exception : R . Johnson et al (19850 . 165) praise I . FG for its ' perspicuous notation ' , but do not ( or not yet ) incorporate ideas from LFG into their theory of MT  )  . There arc no references whats oever to recent semantic theories  . 
On the linguistic side one notices a similar lack of interest in MT or in the theory of translation in general  . In the latest books on G/3 , LFG or GPSG one will look invain for any references to the theory of translation  . Or , to give another example , look attile research goals of the recently created Center for the Study of Language and Information  ( CSLI ) at Stanford . The aim is to develop " integrated theories of language  , information and computation " . ( CSLI Report No . 84-16, p . 2) . At CSLIphilosophers , linguists , computer scientists and psychologists collaborate intensely on numerous projects  , however MT is not among them . 
There is only one notable exception ( M . Kay ) which confirms the rule . None of the other 40 staff members has ever been involved in an MT project  . 
This does not mean that there is no research in translation going on at all  , quite on the contrary . A growing number of countries are creating chairs in the theory of translation  , there are symposia on the theory and practice of translation  ( L . Grlthls et al .  1978) , and there exist in numerable papers on practical problems of translation  , which are written primarily for interpreters and teachers of a second language  . The efforts in tiffs are a can be characterized by keywords like contrastive linguistics and literary theory  . Within contrastive linguistics the emphasis lies on lexicology  .   ( Typical examples which are discussed are pairs like Engl  . to know , Fr . savoir , connattre , Ital . scala , Germ . Leiter , Treppe . ) Yet , there is little detailed formal work on e on trastive syntax  . ( For an exception see Hawkins (1986)) . The results in eontrastive linguisticsira general and in contrastive lexicology in particular will certainly be of great value for writing transfer dictionaries and specific transfer rules  . The research undertaken in this area , however , has not produced sufficient results to build a coherent formal theory of translation on  . Finally there is the philosophical tradition , best illustrated by Quine's famous ' Meaning and Translation '  ( 1959 ) and Montague's Universal Grammar' ( 1970 )  . In this context translation means translating from a natural language into a logical language  . This sort of translation has had an enormous influence on semantic theories used in linguistics but again there are very few connections with MT  ( for an exception see
Landsbergen (1982)).
( l ) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Why is the resolittle interaction between MT and theoretical linguistics ? Most MT projects were setup as development projects  . There was just not enough time or money to do basic research  . 
MT projects were often directed by computer scientists who underestimated the complexities of natural anguage  . 
Analysis grammars for MT were often written in a formalism which made communication with the non = initiated impossible  . 
Theoretical linguists thought and still think that MT is too difficult  , that high quality MT is impossible . Some argue on the basis of syntax : if we don't even have a satisfactory syntax for comparatives in English  , how can we translate English comparatives into German  . Some argue on the basis of semantics : satisfactory semantic analyses exist only for very small fragments of natural anguages  . How are we to translate German tense forms into French tense forms  , if nobody has yet presented an adequate semantic description for French tenses  . 
Linguists seem to Imvea one-sided ( lop-sided ) perspective , working nearly exclusively on analysis . In LFG one parses sentences and builds up functional structures  , in GPSG sentences are parsed and translated into formulas of intensional logic  , hardly anyone knows how to generate from fstructures or from logical formulas  . 
If there is little research on generation , there is even less on transfer . Under the influence of Chomsky and ( to a smaller extent ) Moatague linguists started the search for Universal Grammar  . Transfer , however , presupposes the comparative study of two ( or more ) langua~les . Linguists working with recent syntactic theories don't seem to be interested in questions  like:\[3\] Is language A syntactically more ambiguous than language B ? If a string S is ambiguous in language A  , is there a string S ' in language B which presents the same number of ambiguities ? Is it really easier to translate between two languages which are closely related  ( say Italian and French ) than between distant languages ( ay Japanese and German ) ? Under what conditions it ions it possible to translate on the basis of syntactic structure  , and under what conditions do we have to use semantically based transferules ? C  . What can we do to stimulate interaction between MT and theoretical linguistics ?  1 would like to argue that MT should be based on a linguistic theory which can be expressed in a formalism whose formal properties are well understood  , in other words , a formalism for which there exist results on decidability  , generative capacity and recognition complexity . The linguistic theory itself , independent of its formalisation , should be well accepted within the linguistic community  . Possible candidates for such theories are GB , GPSG , LFG etc . \ [4\] What are the advantages of working with such a theory ? The MT linguists can use directly analyses which have already been proposed for the phenomenahe is trying to describe  . If a linguist writes a GPSG grammar for a fragment of English and wants to include coordination  , he can just use the analysis proposed by I . Sag et al (1984) . 
He can discuss the insights expressed in his own analyses with linguists outside the MT groups  . 
Since the formalisms which are used for expressing linguistic theories are closely related  ( Shieber ( 1985 ) has even shown that the formalisms , in which the different UGs are expressed , are interredue ible to a large extent ) , a particular analysis can be transferred from one theory into the other  . The treatment of long-distance dependencies ( wh-movement ) in LFG for instance looks formally very similar to that in GPSG  . 
Linguists working outside of MT could use the implementation f 
LFG , GPS Getc . as grammar testers.
Theories like LFG , GPSG offer a well-defined interface to semantics . To name just one particular problem we are working on at the moment  , it thus becomes possible to test the adequacy of an analysis of the French tenses and of the English tenses by writing transfer rules which map a semantic structure  , which represent she temporal information contained in a small French text  , into the corresponding semantic structure for English  . 
In UGs the lexicon plays a central role . A lot of linguistic information is located in the dictionary entries  . The rich lexical information collected by contrastive linguists could be incorporated into a transfer lexicon written according to the principles of UGs  . 
(2 ) Advantages for the computer scientist and linguist If linguists can write their grammars in a formalism whose mathematical properties are well understood  , then the programmer will have fewer problems implementing the grammar  . Results on formal properties of grammar formalisms can guide the programmer in his search for appropriate algorithms  . Furthermore , in the same way in which a linguist working within LFG can benefit from the intuitions expressed in linguistic analyses within GPSG or GB  , a programmer implementing LFG can benefit from insights contained in implementations of related formalisms  . It is therefore not surprising that F . Pereira (1981), W . Frey and U . Reyle (1983), L . Karttunen (1985) and J . Calder et al ( 1986 ) all use " gapthreading " for implementing long -distance dependencies  . The authors are working with different theories ( Extraposition Grammars , LFG , Helsinki Unification Grammar ( HUG ) and Unification Categorial Grammar ( UCG ) ) and different programming languages ( Prolog and Lisp ) and nevertheless the algorithm they chose is the same  . Let me give you a further example . In the Prolog implementation fLFG by D6rre and Eisele ( this volume ) there are some problems with negative and disjunctive constraints  . Such constraints are linguistically well motivated but difficult to implement  . Now if anybody within the UG community comes up with a good implementation f negative and/or disjunctive feature specification  , then this new implementation can be incorporated . 
Results on recognition complexity may help to locate the source of the complexity and suggest ways to reduce complexity either by modifying the linguistic theory or by showing that the " worst case " is linguistically  ( empirically ) irrelevant ( in other words , the " worst case " will never arise in practice ) . 
A famous example , where the linguistic theory was changed after a proof of its generative power had been found  , is Peters and Ritchie's work ( 1973 ) on the generative power of TG and the subsequent change of the theory  ( constraints on deletion rules )  . 

For GPSG Peters and Uszkoreit ( 1983 ) have examined the role of metarules and essential variables  ( variables which range over all strings of terminal and nonterminal symbols  )  . They proved that unconstrained Metarule Phrase Structure Grammars have Turing machine power  . This result has led to intense research for constraints that are linguistically motivated and descriptively adequate  . 
For LFG there is a conjectured result by Berwick : certain Lexical-Functional Grammars can generate languages whose recognition time is very likely computationally intractable  , at least according to our current understanding of algorithmic complexity  . " ( Berwick 1982, p . 98 ) Conclusion : Basically any argument in favor of a declarative  , simple , expressive , flexible linguistic formalism with a rigorous mathematical foundation can be adduced here  . 
D . Possible objections against using Unifl catian Grammars  o1' other recent linguistic theories for MTA rethere linguistic phenomena  , which make it impossible to use UGs for parsing and generation ? Someone might argue that in MT there exist specific problems  , which have never been taken into consideration by theoretical linguists  , and which cannot be handled with UGs . Personally I hope that whatever additional problems may arise can be handled in the transfer component  . If UGs provide us with the tools to write adequate grammars for individual anguages  , why should it not be possible to use these grammars for MT ? R  . Johnsonetel . consider the possibility of assuming a current linguistic theory and implementing it directly for EUROTRA  . They reject this solution " because there is not sufficient practical evidence of a single theory that encompasses translations between all pairs of the Community languages "  ( 1985 , p . 165) . This rejection can be interpreted at least in two ways :  ( a ) there is no linguistic theory in which all the languages of the Community have been described  ,   ( b ) recent linguistic theories have not been used for  ( automatic ) translation between all pairs of the Community languages  . Of course , both interpretations are correct ; however , on the basis of this argumentation e could reject any existing linguistic theory as insufficient for MT  . This reasoning , however , would force us also to reject any new linguistic theory because there would be even less " practical evidence "  . 
So far only fairly small grammars have been written and implemented in the UG formalism  . What will happen if these toy grammars develop into big grammars with very large dictionaries ? Won't we need special control mechanisms ? Since the UG formalism is well understood  , I can't see why one should have more problems if the grammars get bigger than with any other formalism  . We hope that the contrary will be the case , namely that there will be fewer problems . 
There is still another side to the problem of " toy grammars "  . 
Theoretical linguists have been working with a fairly narrow set of data  . An ambitious young linguist today is more likely to propose the  127th version of the passive construction than to write a detailed grammar for complex NPs like " die Eiufuhrvon Juteaus Ll~ndern der dritten Welt zum Ausgleich des Nord-Stid-Gefalles "  . Will theoretical linguist severs it down and actually write big grammars ? Why has there been no grammar writing project since the attempt by R  . Stockwell et al ( 1968 ) to collect all TG analyses into one grammar ? UGs have been used for analysis  , but there are practically no results for generation  . This lack of experience in generation is a serious drawback for the whole field of computational linguistics  . Fortunately the situation is gradually changing . The organizers of the International Workshop on Language Generation  ( Stanford 1984 ) write : " More papers in this subfield\[ generation \] have been published in the last four years than in its entire previous history  . " hiMT generation has played a minor role . In a system like SUSY ( Maas 1985 ) for instance there is no explicit grammar for the generation of German  . The Japa Bese Government Project for MT has a well developped generation component  ( Nagao M . et al (1985)) , but it is difficult for the linguist to find out how this generation grammar would look in a declarative format  . So , even if there are no results on generation with UGs we are not much worse off than any body else working with another linguistic theory  . 
The most serious objection 1 see concerns the transfer component . 
I have been advocating the use of linguistic theories which can be expressed in well-defined formalisms  , bnt so farthere doesn't seem to exist a theory of transfer for UGs  . Well this is not entirely correct . M . Kay claims that his Functional Unification Granlmar  ( FUG ) " provides an opportunity to encompass within one formalisna and computational system the parts of machine translation systems that have usually been treated separately  , notably analysis , transfer and synthesis . "(Kay , 1984, p . 75) . 
E . Conclusloz ~
MT as a research project cuts across traditional disciplinary and institutional boundaries  . Theoretical linguists , lexicographers and computer scientists must cooperate in order to solve some of the problems of  ( machine ) translation . Grammllr S and dictionaries used ill MT should be based on linguistic theories which are widely accepted in the linguistic community  . The linguistic theories should be expressed in for nlalisms that fulfill the requirements of a good programming language  . An open and transparent discussion between linguists and computer scientists will lead to a realistic assessment of the possibilities and prospects for MT  . We should avoid are interpretation of the motto' tradut to retraditor c '  . 
Footnotes 1 Support for work on this paper w , ~ provided by a grant from the BMFT . 
2 The choice of names and of theories is for exemplifl catory purposes  . We do not try to be exhaustive in any sense . No evaluation ia implied by the presence or absence of any particular name  , theory or publication . 
SFortunately the ~ fituation is changing now . Since Chomeky's Piss Lectures there is a growing interest in comparative syntax  . Maybe some day a theory of translation will emerge from the theoretical and practical insights from these comparative studies within the framework of GB  . It is too early to construct today a theory of translation on the basis of GB  , unless this theory made reference to GB only in a metaphorical sennelike E  . Nidadid in his proposal to use the Aspects model for translation and to do transfer on " deep structures "  ( Nidr .  (1969)) . 
4 Ia the following \] will use the term Unification Grammar  ( UG ) aa hyperonym for GPSG , LFG , FUG , IIPSG etc . , i . e , for grammars which have a contextfree skeleton and an operation of unification  . In grammars of this type ~ syntactic rules and lexlcal entries can be expressed as sets of attr ibute-value pairs  . The value of an attribute can again be a set of attributes and values  . Later on I will argue for the use of UG a for MT . Thia does not mean that GB or Joshi's Tree Adjoining Grammars could or should not be used for experimental MT  . I just happen to have a personal preference for UGs  . 

Berwic ~ ( 1 982~ ' Computational Complexity and Lexical Functional Grammar '  , 
AJCL 8, 34, pp . 9?-199.
Calder__J . et aL(19861, Problems of Dialogue Parsing , MS . , Center for
Cognitive Science , Edinburgh.
(1981) , Lectures on Government and Binding : tile Plea Lectures  , 

FLey ~ W . , Reyle ~ U ~ (198S ) , ' A Prolog Implementation of Lexical Functional Grammar as a Base for a Natural Language Processing System '  , Proceedings of the First Meeting of the Association fo ~' Computational Lingulstice  , Piss , pp . 52-57 . 
Gazdar J . et al (1985) , Generalized Phrase Stueture Grammar , Oxford . 
Griihs L . et a L ~ (19781 , Theory and Practice of Translal ; ion , 
Nobel Symposium 39, Stockholm.
tIawkinsJ .  (19861 . A Comparative Typology of English and German U z d f y l n g t h e 
Contrasts , London , Sidney.
Johnson R . et al (1985) , ' EUROTRA : A Multilingual System under Development '  , 
CLll , pp . 155-169.
~A . K . Lev L . S . Takahashi M = (1975) , ' Tree Adjunct Grammars ' , J . Getup . 
and Sys.Sc.10, pp . 136-163.
~ resnan J ~ (19821 , ' Lexical-Functional Grammar : A Formal System for Grammatical Representation '  , in : Breanan ~ J . ( ed . ) , The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations  , Cambridge Mass . , pp . 17S-281 . 
Karttuner h ~ L .  (1985) , tIUG : a Development Environment for UG a , MS . , Stanford (19841 , * Functional Unification Grammar : A Formalism for Machine 
Translation ', Coling 84, pp . 75-7S.
Landsberen J .  (19821 , ' Machine Translation Based on Logically Isomorphic Montague Grammars '  , Coling 82 , pp . 175-181 . 
Mass II . (19851, ' ZurEnt wlcklungy on SUSY-11', in : U . Klenk ( ed . ) Kontextfreie Syntaxen und verw and te System e , Linguistische Arbeiten , Tabingen , pp . 107-ll T . 
(19701, ' Universal Grammar ', Theorla 36, pp . 373-398 . 
~' d .  (19851 , t The Japanese Government Project for MT ' , CL 11 , pp . 91-110; Nida F, .  (1969) , ' Science of Translatlon ' , Language 45 , 3 , pp . 483-49S . 
Peters , P . S . , Rit ~ R . W .  (1973) , ' On the Generative Power of Transformational
Gramraars ~, Inf . So . 6, pp . 49-83.
Pereira F_:(19811 , ' Extrapoaition Grammar ' , CLI , pp . 243-256 . 
(1959) , ' Meaning and " translation ' , in Brewer ,  11 . ( ed . ), On Translation , Cambridge Mass . , pp . 148-1~'2 . 
Shieber S .  (19851 , ' Separating Linguistic Analyses from Linguistic Theories '  , 
Ms ., Stanford.
Stockwell R , et al (19681 , Integration of Transformational Theories on English 
Syntax , Los Angeles.
Uszkoreit H . Peter ~ (19831 , Essential Variables in Metarules pSRI Tech . 
Note S05.

