A DESCRIPTION OF THEVES PRASPEECH PROCESS ING SYSTEM 
Rolf Haberbeck
FU Berlin
FB Germanistik
D-tO00 Berlin 33
TU Berlin
FB Informatik
D-tO00 Berlin10

The VESPRA system is designed for the
processing of chains of ( not connected
utterances of ) wordforms . These strings
of wordforms correspond to sentences
except that they are not realised in
connected speech . VESPRA means :
Verarbeitung und Erkennungges prochener
Sprache ( processing and recognition of speech )  . VESPRA will be used to control different types of machines by voice input  ( for instance : noncritical control functions in cars and in trucks  , voice box in digital telephone systems , text processing systems , different types of office workstat ions  )   . 
I .
The VESPRA system consists of five components :
I ) the noise reduction unit ;  2 ) the phonetic feature extraction and pattern recognition unit  ; 3) an ATN grammar , a dialog model and a model of the controlled machlne  ;  4 ) a machine control and dialog generation uni t  ;  5 ) a user friendly software development environment  . 

In difference to common speech processing systems VE SPRA has an integrated noise reduct i on unit  . This noise reduction unit is context sens it ive  . Depending on the type of noise several types off ilters will reduce the noise corresponding to the actual situation in which the system is used  . Analog and digital filtering methods wi ll be used  . Noise has been up to now a big problem which made a wide use of speech processing systems impossib le  . The noise reduction is triggered by the actual state of the machine and the general acoustical environment  . VESPRA will be able to recognize 500 wordforms speaker dependent and 100 wordforms speaker nonsensitive . 
An ATN grammar processes all meaningful sentences on the basis of these word forms  ( including reduced forms of syntactical , semantical and pragmatical processing is s to red in the dialog memory or compared with the content of the dialog memory  . The interpreted command input is processed by the model of the actual state of the contro lled machine  . If a command by the user is in conflict wi th the general state of the controlled machine VESPRA informs the user by voice output or by visual output  . The voice output will be realised by LPC coded speech and is included in the VESPRA system  . The visual output depends on the possibili ties offered by the controlled machine  . If a command by the user is not in conflict with the general state of the controlled machine the VESPRA system : jives an instruct ion to the controlled machine  , lheinter face between VESPRA and the control led machine is designed in a way that allows to connect various types of sensors and actors to VESPRA  . 
There is a feedback control between the lexica l  , syntactical , semantical and pragmatical processing uni t and the phonetic extraction and pattern recognition unit in order to optimize the phonetic processing and the processing of the chains of word forms  . 
The dialog model and the model of the control led machine control the noise reduction uni t  . Tile chains of wordforms may consist often wordforms in the maximum  . After the command input by the user is Fini shed the VESPRA system or the controlled machinereacts within  0  . 3 seconds . 
A user I ~ riendly software developmental system that runs on a main frame or a workstat ion gives a noninstructed user  ( engineer ) the possibility to modify certain uni ts of the VESPRA system within a certain lim it of complexity  . 
This developmental system may modify the parameters of the following units : - lex ical  , syntactical , semantical and pragmatical processing ; -dialog model and dialog memory ; -model of the actual state of the machine ; -machine control and dialog generation . 
No special knowledge in linguistics or in formation science is required to use this developmental system  ,  3 . 
The VESPRA system will not only be realised as a software simulation on a main frame computer  ,  . The main goal is to build a hardware module which can be used for several purposes  . This system will be developed in cooperation with several research irlstitutions and major industrial companies  . This project is financed by the industry and the federal research and technology depar tment  ( BMFT : Bundesminister for
Forschung und Technologie).
FeIlbaum , K . : Sprachverarbeitung und Sprach Obertragung , Springer-Verlag , 
Berlin , 1984.
Wahlster , W .: Nat Orlichs prach liche
Argumentation in Dialog systemen,
Sprlnger-Verlag , Berlin , 1981.

THEVES PRASY STEM v
SPEECHNOISE
NOISEREDUCTION ~ PHONETICFEATUREEXTRACTION AND SEGMENTATION i  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
PATTERN RECOGNITION AND CLASSIFICATION
LEXICAL , SYNTACTICAL , SEMANTICAL.~_
AND PRAG MATICAL PROCESSING
DIALOG MODEL ANDDIAL OGME MORY q
MODEL OF THE ACTIIAL STATEOFTHE
CONTROLLED MACHINE l , -- MACHINE CONTROL ANDDIAL OGGENERATION

CONTROLLED MACHINE
IPARAMETERSOF\[HESYSTEMCOMPONENTS
MENUEGUIDED MODIFICATION OFTHE~i ~
