TBMS : Domain Specific
Text Management and Lexicon Deve\]opment *
S . Goeser and E . Mergenthaler
University of Ulm FRG

The definition of a TextBase Management System is introduced in terms of software engineering  . That gives a basis for discussing practical text admini-stration  , including questions on corpus properties and appropriate retrieval criteria  . Finally , strategies for the derivation of a word data base from an actual TBMS will be discussed  . 
l . Introduction
Textual data are a sort of complex data object that is of growing importance in many applicat ions  . 
Research projects from such different fields as history  , law , social sciences , humanities and lin-guistics but also commercial institutions are dea-ling with vast quanitities of text  . At Ulm University for instance , a machine-readable corpus of spoken language texts has been built up  , with the purpose of support For psychotherapeutic process research  . 
The corpus is administered by a TextBase Management System  ( TBMS )  , that integrates the functions of archiving , processing and analyzing an arbitrary amount of text  ( MERGENTHALER 1985 )  . 
Several sys Lmns satisfying the TBMS definit ion were conceived independently in the late seventies  . 
THALLER (1983) reports a system CLIO , a TBMS with a highly differentiated data base component and a method base providing c ~nputerized content analysis and comfortable edi ting  . LDVLIB ( DREWEK and ERNI 1982 ) is mainly a text analysis package , where database management and text processing play a subordinate role  . APC-suited TBM-system , ARRAS ( SMITH 1984) , supports comfortable text inquiry by concordance and index functions  , but has no text base component . Finally there are two TBM-systems for commercial use  , MIDOC ( KOWARSKI and MICHAUX 1983 ) and MINDOK\[INFODAS 1983 ) which have a database component and allow extensive processing of text  , but no kind of text analysis at all . 
2. Definition of a TBMS
From the point of view of a TBMS-user , who is supposed to be a non-programming appli cation-field worker  , the system is an instrument to take up , to control and/or to analyze his or her individual texts for domain-dependent purposes  . Consequently , a system intended to manage a text bank has the fol-lowing tasks :  1  . Input and editing of texts according to numerous points of view  . 
2 . Management of an unlimited number of text units on a suitably sized auxiliary storage device  . 
3 . Management of an unlimited amount of information concerning the text units  , their authors , and the related text analyses . 
4 . Management of an open quantity of methods for edi ting and analyzing stored text units  . 
5 . Assistance for interfaces to statistical and other user packages  . 
6 . Assistance for a simple , dialogue-oriented user interface when the tasks mentioned in points I to  5 are supplied or performed . 
The tasks mentioned in point 1 belong to the domain of text processing . The term text processing system can be used if sufficient user assistance is provided  . 

The task of managing an unlimited number of text units on an auxiliary storage  ( point 2 ) is the object of long term data maintenance . The stored sets are grouped in files and put into magnetic storage  . If , in addition , it is possible to administer the datasets with the access methods provided by the operating system  , then we will speak of a data maintenance system or a f\]e management system  ( e . g . , Archive with BS2000 from Siemens and Datatrieve with VMS from Digital Equipement  ) o The tasks mentioned in point 3 concern the management of a database including all of its services  . 
These tasks are fulfilled by general data base management systems  ; the classic functions of such systems are the description  , handling , take up , manipulation , and retrieval of data . Data structures can be classified as hierarchic , network oriented , or relational . 
Point 4 refers to a collection of methods that , given computer assistance in the user's selection of methods  , can be termed a method base . Further assistance , such as method documentation and parameter input , is provided by the method base management system . Point 5 , on interfaces , is a subset of the tasks described by point 4 . 
All of these tasks are collected in point 6 with regard to the user interface . Thus the TBMS is an integrated overall system consisting of file management system FMS data base management system DBMS text management system TMS method base management system MBMS user rA  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . data user acquisitionr~5 user database user inter- . 
face request database out p~ut ~ ex-~~ys 3 man ~ egement of text 4 text ~'""" analysis package characte- analysis 
TBS text method base text acquisition text J ~ base ~ output base 
Figure 1 managed by the DBMS and of the methods provided by the MBMS is made in accordance with the kind of texts managed by the FMS  , it is legitimate to des-cribe the overall information system as tailo ~ nade  . 
The following definition of the entire system is made  , in analogy to the definitions of the individual components  , in order to ensure that our terminology adequately reflects this state of affairs : ? ext base management system = TBMS 
Branch : Linguistic data processing
The TBMS is an information system that can administer texts and information on texts  , and that makes texts accessible by integrating techniques from linguistic data processing and text processing  . It features a homogeneous user interface that assists in the take up  , pro- . 
cessing , output , and analysis of text units.
A System Architecture I ( top level) , which represents one way of realizing a TBMS is shown in Fig  . I . 
The TBMS differs from document retrieval systons by containing i ~ o additional components : text processing and method base  . It is true that the emphasis , as far as retrieval in the IBMS is concerned , is still on data retrieval ( for requests made according to the author of a text  ) and on document retrieval ( for text references to be determined according to internal textual features  )  . Fact retrieval is nonetheless an integral component of all the plans for a TBMS  , even if systems able to cope with large quan-ti ties of material from colloquia \] speech ares till not ready for production  . However , this should not be a basis for differentiat ing within a TBMS  . ideal-lyfact and document retrieval are to be integrated in one system in order to provides at is factory user assistance  . 
3. Text Base Management
The practical management of texts can roughly be separated into management of texts or text sets  ( as complex string objects ) and of text-related informa-tion usually not being part of the text  . This infor-mation may be pragmatical such as identification and attributes of the text producer  ( s ) or a description of the communicative situat i on the text originated from  , or it may be semantical , specifying some mapping of the text on a formal representation  . For both kinds the method base will provide adequate analysis procedures  . 
ATBMS is in different with regard to the completeness of a text corpus  , but it supports the more ambitious handling of an open corpus in a special way  . 
The characteristic of an open corpus is that i t is an excerpt from a parent population which is continuously being expanded without being tied to the goal of completeness  . An example is the collection of fully transcribed short psychotherapies  . It is possible to expand this corpus to include every newly undertaken treatment without ever reaching a state of completeness or representativeness with respect to the text type " short psychotherapy "  . The quality of completeness can only be approximated if there are features limiting the composition of the corpus  . Thus a collection oF diagnostic first inter-views has a higher degree of completeness if it consists of equal parts on the features " sex "  , " age " , " diagnosis " , and " social strata " . An example of a completely closed corpus is the Bible  ( see
PARUNAK 1982).
The degree of completeness of a corpus also influen ~ ces the strategies for handling the results of text analyses  , such as a semantic mapping . There are two principal approaches . In the one , all the available results of analyses are stored completely with the text or indirect re lation to the text  . In the other , parts of the corpus are processed algorithm i -cally as needed  . As detailed by PARUNAK (1982, p . 150) , users with open corpora tend to use the algorithmic version  , while the storage of existing results from previous studies is often preferred for Most of the text-related information  , be it semantical or pragmatical in nature , can be applied in different ways . First , all of them is clearly of an immediate interest to the system user  , who is concerned with a given text . For example , a psychia-trist examining the verbatim protocol of a treatment hour will be interested in its content and in the patient' smedical history  . He or she might be provided with a weighted semantic category list  , a high frequency word list and , as an attribute , the pa-tient's ICD-diagnesis . 
Secondly , text-related information can serve within TBMS as an additional criterion  ( beside text identi-fication and a suitable pre-segmentation  ) for re-trieving texts from FMS . In our TBMS-implementation , the following features do have that retrieval func-tion : text type Given a certain class of destination features a text type can be defined by a set of attribute-value pairs  . Intui-tivly a text type differentia ted that way corresponds to a communicative si tuation  . 
attributes For each participant in a communica-t ion  , a set of feature-value pairs specifying relevant properties is reserved  . 
4. Deriving a Word Data Base
A word database ( WDB ) is , formally spoken , a rela-tion ranging over lexicographical features  . Every tupel in a WDB specifies a class of feature values being characteristic for a single word form  ; one or several tupels may be organized in a subset of what has been called a lexical entry  ( see HESS , BRUSTKERN and LENDERS 1983 ) oLexical features to be considered here are word form  , lemma name , word class , frequency of the wordform and some grammatical features  , partially depending on the particular word class  . 
Empirically , a WDB is " based " on one or more commu-nicative situations  , that is , it is accumulated with respect to an approprfately sized  ( see MERGENTHALER 1985 ) text corpus . Note that situations like , for instance , a psychoanalytic treatment do in fact limit colloquial lexical domains to some degree  , simply by imposing thematical restrictions on the text drawn from it  . 
text unit speaker text size theme
A text seen as string object can be organized h ierarchically  , containing ( not necessarily continuous ) substrings such as utterances or segments , which we call text units . 
selects among speakers of a given ( dialogic ) text to be specified in current word forms on the basis of a semantic category list  , textual identification units can be selected according to the weight of a category  .   2 The relationship between such situation-based domains and the WDB derived from it will be worked out in more detail as follows  . 
As lexical TBMS-component , a WDB will usually support the method base in analyzing textual proper-ties  . We only mention , that most computerized content analysis procedures will operate on raw and lemmatized text  , yielding different results . The WDB in our TBMS-implementation ( see Table I ) is due to its application in psychotherapy protocol analysis  . 
The most important procedure in deriving a WDB is automatic lemmatization  , defined as providing one pair < lemma name , word class > and optionally in-flectional features for every word-form-in-text  , dealing with mass text , the primary objectives in lemmatization will be first  , to have an efficient procedure , second , to have least user assistance and third , to minimize the error rate with respect to the resulting WDB  . These objections are tightly linked to a resolution of word class and lemma name ambiguities  ( homographies ) by analyzing context . 
This seems to be obvious with regard to effic iency and user support  . We also stress upon a significant decrease in error rate  , in order to avoid interac-tive lemmatization that goes along with wellknown consistency problems  . 
All current lemmatization procedures ( see e.g.
KRAUSE and WILLEE 1982 ) combine static cmnponents designed for lexicon lookup and dynamic components trying to analyze entries not yet contained in the lexicon  . Static lemmatization surely will works uff iciently well in all cases where an appropriate lexicon can be provided and a constant domain asserts congruence between this lexicon and the on-coming vocabulary  . Dynamic lemmatization , however may become a crucial task in case of non -specific  , ' fuzzy'domains " like psychoanalytic talks . This is simply a question of the size of vocabulary  , which is up to a ~ i me not covered by the lexicon  . For any given lexicon , this uncovered vocabulary will be more extensive for fuzzy domains than for specific ones  . 
While unconstrained lexicon access and morphological word analysis are clearly deterministic in nature  , context related lemnatization requires a sort of in deteminism on word level  . That is , some kinds of lexical pattern 3 should be recognized by the lemma-tization algorithm and become stored in the lexicon for la ter access  . This leads us to a matrix descrip-tion of contextual lelmatization  ( Table 2 )  . 
The dynamic component is applied to those word fonns-plus a two sided context of several words -for which no corresponding pattern is avai lable in the WDB  . In order to avoid misleading lemmatizational in kage between dynamic and static component is built up  . A pair < lemma name , word class > , is gener ~ ated dynamically and will be accepted only if the lemma is element in the WDB  . Otherwise , an interactive procedure , the lemmatization dialog , will be initiated . 
appro-ach static procedure determi-nondetermi-n isticnistic 
WDB-entry : WDB-entry : word pattern dynamic morpholog  , syntact . 
analysis analysis
Table 25. F ~ nal remark
The current implementation of the TBMSULM TEXTBANK  , being finished in 1986 , is on a SIEMENS7 . 550 - Dmain frame under BS 2000 operating system . Further work on the ULMTEXTBANK will include extensions of the method base by robust parsing and rule based content analysis methods  . 
I ) The illustrating technique used here short ly is as follows : Individuals are represented by trian-gles  , dynamic elements as rectangles and static elements as ellipses  . The system detail is enclosed in a frame . Controlling operations are indicated by a broken line  , reading operations as uninterrupted linescoming from above and writing operations as going to below the frame  . Comunicating elements are linked with doublel in es  . Lines extending to the frame indicate , that all the dynamic elements contained within it relate to the outside  . See Mergen-thaler ( 1985 ) for a more detailed description . 
2 ) The feature theme is actually not a part of the retrieval system but of the method base  , since its
I lemma name 2 variant meanings identification 3 reference to inflected forms 4 semantic description ( planned )   5 frequency of occurrence 6 grammatical features as following ) 
WORDKIND
In oun 7 negation 2 verb B article 3 adjective 9 preposition 4 adverb I0 conjunction 5 pronoun 11 interjection 6 numeral 12 other
MOR PHOLOGY OF LEMMA

B 1.G
IR simplex ( s ) compound ( c ) affixal derivation a ) s adjective derivations verb derivations nominal numbers abbreviations proper name c adjective derivation cverb derivation cnominal number c  , abbreviation c , proper name c , adjective derivation c , verb derivation a , nominal number a , abbreviation a , proper name
WORDORIGING ENDER PARTICIPLE
I foreign I mascul in I have 2 dialect 2 feminine 2 he 3 neutral
INFLECTED FORMS
I inflected form 2 variant meanings identification 3 reference to lemma names 4 semantic description ( planned ) 5 frequency of occurrence 6grammatical features ( as following ) 
RELATIVE FOR MSNUMBERS idiminutive isingular 2 comparative 2 plural 3 superlative 3 plural only
MORPHOLOGY CASE/MODE
I pres.particip.Inominat./indicat.
2 past particip.2 genitive/conjunct.
3 pres.tense 3 dative/imperat.
4 past tense 4 accusative 5 infinitive
Table 1 graphs contextually , the straightforward approach of rewrite rules operating on word class categories won't work except the inventory of those categories is extremely differentiated  . For example the rule AD+X+NOUN--->AD+AD+ NOUN is correct only if NOUN is the head of an NP and X is not a present participle or  ( in English ) a noun within that NP . We suppose that a sufficient different iation may be achieved only with some kind of semantic pattern  . 

Drewek , R . and Erni , M . : LDVLIB . A(new ) Software Package for Text Research . Vortrag ALLC-Conferen-ce , Pisa 1982 . 
Hem , K . , Brustkern , J . and Willee , G . : Maschinen-lesbare deutsche W~rterb~cher . Niemeyer , T(~bingen 1983 . 
INFODAS : MINDOK . Ein Informations system auf Klein-rechner nzur Erfassung  , Verwaltung und Retrievaly on Dokumenten und Daten  . ( Ausgabe2 . 0) INFODASGmbH,
K ~ In 1983.
Kowarski , I . and Michaux , C . : MIDOC : A Microcomputer System for the Management of Structured Documents  . 
Information Processing ~3:567-572 (1983).
Krause , W . and Willee , G . : Lemmatizing German Newspaper Texts with the Aid of an Algorithm  . In : Computers and the Humanities 15: 101-113 ( 1983 )  . 
Mergenthaler , E . : Textbank Systems . Computer Science Applied in the Field of Psychoanalysis  . Springer :
Heidelberg New York (1985).
Parunak , Dykevan , M . : Data Base Design for Biblical Texts . In : Bailey , R . W . ( Ed . ): Computing in the Humanities : 149-161 , North Holland , Amsterdam 1982 . 
Smith , J . : ARRAS User Manual . State University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill NC ,  1984 . 
Thaller , M . : CLIO : E in fU hrung und System Uber blick . 
Manual , G~ttingen 1983.
* This work has been supported by the German Research Foundation within the Collaborative Research Program  129  , Projekt B2 . 
Authors address :
S . Goeser , lic . phil and Dr . E . Mergenthaler , Dipl .  -

Sektion Psychoanalytische Methodik
Universit ~ tUlm
Am Hochstr ~88
D7900 ULM
