Collative Semantics
Dan Fass
Computing Research Laboratory
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces , NM , USA 88003
O . Abstract
This paper introduces Collativc Semantics ( CS ) , a new domain-independent semantics for n ~ tural anguage processing  ( NLP ) which addresses the problems of lexieal ambiguity  , met (> nymy , various semantic relations ( conventional relations , redundant relations , contradictory relations , metaphorical relations and severely anomalous relations  ) aud the introduction of new information . We explain the two techniques CS uses for matching together knowledge structures  ( KSs ) and why semantic vectors , which record the results of such matches , arc informative enough to tell apart semantic relations and betile basis for lcxical disa  . mbiguation . 
1. Introduction
Collative Semantics is a new domain-independent sem  , ~ n-tics for NI , P . This paper foeusses on CS , describing tile main issues it addresses ( lexical ambiguity , mc tonymy , semantic relations , introduction of new information ) and general details of its knowledge representation  , knowledge structures , techniques for matching together knowledge structures  , and the way it records the results of matching in semantic vectors  . 
CS hasl ) een implemented in a natural language program eaiic d  recta5 which has been described in detail clsewher c ( Fass ,  1986) . Briefly , the program produces semantic representations of single sentences requiring lexical disambiguation and met  ( > nymic infereneing . While processing such sentences recta5 computes semantic vectors for the matches between pairs of word senses which are rich enough to discriminate between instances of conventional relations  , semantically redundant relations , contradictory relations , metaphoric M relations and severely anomalous relations between word sense pairs  . Semantic vectors also record the assertion of new information  .   Meta5 can process all the example sentences given in the next section  . 
2 . Semantic Relations , Novel Information and Meto-nymy In this section we provide brief descriptions of those semantic phcnom cn a considered by CS  , except lexical ambiguity , starting with semantic relations . Conventional , metaphorical and severely anomalous relations can all be described using the terminology of Richards  ( 1936 )  . The subject term is the " topic , " the term it is compared to is the " vehicle , " the similarity or resemblance between them is the " ground  , " and any difference or dissimilarity is tile " tension  . " We also adopt Perrine's ( 1971 ) four fold classification of metaphors into combinations of explicit and implicit topics and vehicles  . 
In a metaphorical relation there is tension between the topic and vehicle because the topic term is not a type of vehicle term  . What is salient ( Ortony , 1979) is given by the context , a salient property of the vehicle is found and an analogical match discovered between it and u property from the topic  . The remaining properties of the topic and vehicle have similarities and differences and  , although these are not central to recognising the metaphorical relation  , the higher the proportion of differences to similarities the " better " the metaphor  . 
For example , in the metaphorical relation between ' cal " and ' drink ' ill  ( 1 ) " The card rank gasoline . " the topic is ' ear ' and the implicit vehicle is ' animal '  , the agent preference Wilks , 1975) of ' drink ' . The tension is caused by a car ( the topic ) not being a type of animal ( the vehicle )  . What is salient in tiffs context is the action of drinking  , given by the main sentence verb . The salient property of the vehicle is one referring to the salient action  , i . e . that an animaldl ' ink spot-able liquids . An analogical match is found between tile salient property of the vehicle and a property of the topic : animals drink potable liquids as carsuse gasoline  . The ground is the expending of liquid . Matching the remaining properties of the topic and vehicle  , some pairs of properties are the same ( animals and ears are both bounded , three-dimension alnd solid ) but other pairs express differences ( animals are living , cars are nonliving ; animals are composed of flesh , cars are made of metal ) . 
Illa conventional rclation there is no tension because the topic term is a type of vehicle term  . The sMient property of tile vehicle matches identically with a property from tile topic  . .
There is a high proportion of similarities to differences amongst matches of other pairs of properties of the topic and vehicle  . 
For example , ill the conventional relation between ' man ' and ' drink ' in  ( 2 ) " Themalld rank beer . " the topic is ' man ' and the implicit vehicle is again ' animal '  , the preferred agent of ' drink ' . Aman ( the topic ) is type of animal ( the vehicle )  . What is salient is drinking so the salient property of animals is again that they drink potable liquids  . An identical match is found between animals drinking potable liquids and mend rinking potable liquids  . Of the remaining properties of animal and man matched together  , a large proportion are similar and very few are different  . 
A severely anomal on ~' ~ relation has the same tension between topic and vehicle a ~ a metaphorical relation : the topic term is not a type of vehicle term  . A salient property is found in the vehicle but it does not find an identical or analogical  . 
match with any property from the topic . A high proportion of the remaining properties of the topic and vehicle matched together are different and few are the same  . 
Our description of semantically redundant and contradictory relations is based on Katz's  ( 1964 ) definitions . Whether the assertion of a particular property onto a subject term is a redundant relation  , contradictory relation or new information is a function of tile knowledge already in the term's dictionary entry  . 
A contradictory relation is one in which a modifier asserts a property onto a subject term which is incompatible with a property already in the subject term  , e . g . 
(3) " John McEnroe is female . " where the assertion\[sexl , femalel I from the adjective clashes for John McEnroe  . 
A semantically redundant relation is one in which a modifier asserts a property onto a subject term which is identical to a property already in that term  , e . g . 
(4) " John McEnroei smale . " is redundant if the dictionary entry for John McEnroe already contains \ [  sex1  , male 1\] , the same as the property asserted by the adjective  . 
If for sentence (4) , the dictionary entry of John MeEn roe does not previously contain \[ sex\]  , male 1\] , then the property asserted by the adjective is recognised as new information  . 
Metonymy is a figure of speech in which the name of one thing is substituted for that of another related to it  ( Lakoff ~: Johnson ,  1980) , for example artist for art form as in ( 5 ) " John played Bach . "  ( - - the music of Bach ) and ( 6 ) " Tedreads Steinbeck . "(~ the writings of Steinbeck ) . Other types of metonymy include container for contained as in  ( 7 ) " Mary drank the bottle . " (~ the liquid in the bottle ) , and co-agent for activity in ( 8 ) " Lcndl played Wilunder . "(~ tennis with Wilunder) , and part for whole ( also known as synech doche ) . 
3 . Knowledge Representation and Knowledge Struc- tures The knowledge representatiou  ( KR . ) of Collative Semantics is a hierarchically structured semantic network with word senses as the nodes  . Every node is also a sense-frame , the KS of Collative Semantics , socalled because sense-frames are framelike structures representing individual word senses  . This arrangement of a semantic network with framelike structures as nodes is common to many frame-and scmantic network-based systems  ( e . g . Bobrow ~ Winograd , 1977; Roberts 2z Goldstein , 1977; Brachman , 1979; IIirst ,  1983) . 
In developing our set of arc labels we have taken note of research at the epistemological level of semantic networks  ( Brachman , 1979) so , for example , we distinguish between ' super instance ' which denotes membership of ~ n individual within a class of individuals from ' supertypc'which denotes membership of a class of individuals by a class of individuals  . 
Much like Quillian's (1968) planes , sense-frames are composed of other word senses which have their own sense-fl ' ames  . 
There are no semantic primitives in the sense of Schank's  ( 1973 ) Conceptual Dependency or Wilks ' ( 1975 ) Preference Semantics . In CS word senses perform the function of semantic primitives  . They are used to capture broad gcneralisations among groups of words or word senses  ; to represent the meanings of individual word senses  ; to represent the underlying meaning of sentences and their parts  ; to support lexical disambiguation ; to support inferencing of various kinds ; and to support the discrimination of semantic relations  . 
In the next section we explain how semantic primitives arc used in Preference Semantics to do lexical disambiguation and how word-scnses arc used in CS to do the same  . 
4. Techniques for Matching Together Knowledge

Section 4 explains the two techniques used for matching together KSs in CS : computing a graph relation and cell-Computing a graph relation is developed from Wilks '  ( 1975 ) technique for computing satisfied and violated preferences in the Preference Semantics System  . The 80100 semantic primitives are organised into a directed graph  ( see Wilks 1977 , Appendix A for details ) in which they appear as nodes . The arcs are unlabelled but appear to denote set inclusion  , e . g . 
MAN , the class of human beings , belongs to * ANI , the class of animate entities . A path searching algorithm operates overtile directed graph  . Its source and destination odes are two semantic primitives  . Satisfied preferences are paths describing set inclusion  ; violated preferences are paths describing set exclusion  . 
Computing a graph relation is a path search algorithm which operates over CS's hierarchically structured semantic network  . Its source and destination odes are two word senses in that network  . Five kinds of path ( or graph relation ) are sought between those nodes . Two of the paths describe types of set inclusion and hence are the equivalent of a path for a satisfied preference  . The remaining three kinds of path are equivalent oaviolated preference and describe types of set exclusion  . 
Computing satisfied and violated preferences i the basic mechanism for doing lexical disambiguation in Preference Semantics  . Collativ c Semantics has at least ~ he disambiguation power of Preference Semantics because computing a graph relation produces paths describing set inclusion and exclusion over directed graphs with practically the same hierarchical organisation  , but whereas the nodes in Wilks'digraph area restricted set of semantic primitives  , the nodes in CS's digraph are an unrestricted set of word senses  . 
The result of computing a graph relation is recorded in a five-column graph relation array where each column corresponds to one of the five kinds of set inclusion or exclusion  . An initialised array contains all zeroes . If computing a graph relation is used and a particular path is found then a  1 is added to the appropriate column of the array . This is a very different way of recording the result of a path search from Preference Semantics  ( the importance of recording results is considered in the next section  )  . 
The second matching technique in CS , cell matching , is u type of multiple comparison algorithm for matching together KSs  . A multiple comparison algorit \] amisa technique used to match together the elements from two sets  ( often within two KSs ) by isolating a pair of elements from the two sets and matching those elements together in some way  . 
Theories of metaphor in linguistics and psychology which compare two terms in a metaphorical relation presuppose some kind of multiple comparison between their elements  . Those elements have been termed " features , " properties " and " attributes " ( amongst others ) and usually have been contained within KSs , normally some type of frame . For example in linguistic semantics , Levin ( 1977 ) attempts to discriminate metaphors from other semantic relations by matching together sets of semantic features and in psychology  , Ortony ( 1979 ) discusses metaphor as matches between attributes within two schemata  . Different kinds of match between elements are considered important  . Ortony differentiates " identical " matches of attributes from " similar " matches based on some " structural isomorphism " between the knowledge associated with the two attributes  . Similar matches are seen as especially important ometaphor  . 
Cell matching takes as input two lists of elements called cells  . A pair of cells are isolated from the two lists using a set of structural constraints and matched together  . Ascells are composed of word senses , CS's first matching technique , corn-puting a graph relation , can be used to match cells together . 
Five different kinds of match are tried between cells  , corresponding to the two types of set inclusion and three types of set exclusion  . These include , to use Ortony's terms , identical and similar matches . 
The results of cell matching are recorded in a seven column cell-match array  , where each column correspond to a different kind of cell relation  . The first five columns correspond to the five types of set inclusion and exclusion  . 
Some cells from the two lists fail the structural constraints and cannot be matched at all  . The last two columns record such cases . An initialised cell-match array contains all zeroes  . When matching two lists of cells together , each occurrence of a cell relation between pail's of cells adds  1 to the appropriate column of the array until all cells have been account ad for  . A cell-match array , then , records the complete match of two lists of cells . 
5. Recording the Results of Matching Together
Knowledge Structures
Section 5 explains how the results of matching together sense-framesuing computing a graph relation and cell matching are recorded in semantic vcctors  . Semantic vectors arc informative enough to tell apart semantic relations between word senses and  1  ) e the basis for lcxical disambiguation . 
In other approaches to lcxical disambiguation their record of the results of matching together KSz cannot be uscd to adequately discriminate semantic relations  . In Preference Semantics , the record of the result of the path search algorithm is binary : either a satisfied or violated preference  . A binary choice is inadequate because a single satisfied preference could be a literal  , redundant , contradictory or contrary semantic relation and a single violated prcference could be a metaphorical or severely anomalous one  ( see Fuss ~ Wilks ,  1983) . The same cri-ticism can bcmade of marker passing  ( e . g . Quillian , 1968; Charniak , 1981; Iiirst ,  1983) , in which lexical disambiguation is done by an intersection search algorithm which finds the shor-test path between two nodes in a directed graph  . The record is a single path , but a single path cannot be used for discriminating among semantic relations  . And in numerical weighting schemes ( e . g . Waltz & Pollack , 1985) which " takes place on , ~weighted network of associations , where ' activation energy ' is distributed over tile network based on some mathematical function of the strength of connections "  ( Ibid , p . 54) , the numerical weights on nodes and edges cannot be used to distinguish semantic relations  . 
Semantic vectors are informative nough to be the basis for lexical disambiguation and tell apart semantic relations between word senses because they contain graph relation arrays and cell match arrays  . 
Graph relation arrays are used heavily for lexical disambiguation because a graph relation array records two types of set inclusion  , equivalent to a satisfied preference in Preference Semantics  , and three types of set exclusion , equivalent o a violated preference . It can bcused for lexieal disambiguation just as Preference Semantics uses satisfied and violated preferences  . 
Cell match arrays record the multiple comparison of elements in two KSs in terms of seven different kinds of match  . A semantic vector usually contains two or more of these arrays  . 
Cell match arrays can be used for differentiating semantic relations because each relation produces a distinctive pattern of nnmbers in the columns of the arrays  . See ( Fuss , 1986) for examples . 
6. Summary
The knowledge representation and knowledge structure Collative Semantics is similar to that of many existing frame-or semantic-network based systems  . What makes CS different and able to address the issues it does  ( le?ical ambiguity , meto-nymy , semantic relations , introduction of new information ) is the techniques it uses for matching together knowledge structures and the recording of those matches into semantic vectors  . 
7. Bibliography
Bobrow , D . , & Winograd , T . (1977) " An Overview of KRL , A Knowledge Representation Language . " Cognitive Sci ~ enee , 1, pp .  3-46 . 
Braehman , R . J .   ( 1979 ) " On The Epistcmological Status of Semantic Networks  . " In N . V . Findler ( Ed . ) Associat ive Networks : Representat ion and Use of Knowledge By Computers  , New York : Academic Press , pp .  3-50 . 
Charniak , E .   ( 1981 ) " Passing Markers : A Theory of Contextual Influence in Language Comprehension  . " Technical Report CS . -80, Dept . of Computer Science , Brown Univ . ,
Providence , Rhode Island.
Fuss , D . C .   ( 1986 ) " Collative Semantics : A Description of the Meta5 Program . "Memorandum MCCS-86-23, Computing Research Lab . , New Mexico State Univ . , New Mexico . 
Fass , D . C . & Wilks , Y . A . (1983) " Preference Semantics , Ill-Formedness and Metaphor . " American Journal of Computational I Singnistics  ,  9 , pp .  178-187 . 
Hirst , Graeme ( 1983 ) " Semantic Interpretation against Ambiguity . " Technical Report CS-83-25, Dept . of Computer
Science , Brown University.
Katz , J . , l . (1964) " Analyticity and Contradiction in Natur . ~l Language . " In J . A . I"o dor ~ J . J . Katz ( Eds . ) The Struc-tu re o f Language : P~eadings in the Philosophy of Language  , Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice II all . 
Lakoff , (\] . , & Johnson , M . (1980) Metaphors We Live By,
London : Chicago University Press.
Levis , S . R . (1977) The Semantics of Metaphor , Baltimore :
John Ilopkins University Press.
Ortony , A . (1979) " Beyond Literal Similarity . " Psychological
Review , 86, pp . 161-180.
Perriue , L . (1971) " Psychological Forms of Metaphor . " College
English , 33, pp . 125-138.
Quillian , M . R . (1968) " Semantic Memory . " In M . Minsky ( Ed . ) Semantic Information Processing , Cambridge , Mass :
MIT Press , pp . 2\]6-270.
Richards , I . A . (1936) The Philosophy of Rhetoric , London :
Oxford University Press.
Roberts , B . R . , & Goldstein , I . P . (1977) " The FRL Manual , "
MITAI Memo 409.
Schank , R . C .   ( 1973 ) " Identification of Conceptualizations Underlying Natural Language  . " In R . C . Schank & K . M . 
Colby ( Eds . ) Computer Models of Thought and Language , San Franscisco : W . Il . Freeman , pp .  187-247 . 
Waltz , D . L . , & Pollack , J . B .   ( 1985 ) " Massively Parallel Parsing : A Strongly Interactive Model of Natural language Interpretation  . " Cognitive Science , 9, pp .  51-74 . 
Wilks , Y . A .   ( 1975 ) " A Preferential Pattern-Seeking Semantics for Natural Language Inference  . " Artificial Intelli-gence , 6, pp .  53-74 . 
Wilks , Y . A .   ( 1977 ) "Good and Bad Arguments about Semantic Primitives  . " Communication and Cognition , 10, pp . 


