
Language interaction ( LI ) as a part of inter-
personal communication is considerably inf luenced by 
psychological and social roles nf the par tners and 
their pragmatic goals . These aspects of communica-tion should be accounted for while elaborating advanced user-computer dialogue systems and develop -ing formal models of LI  . We propose here a formal description of communicative context of Li-situa-t ion  , namely , a system of indices of LI agents ' interest in achieving various pragmatic purposes and a system of contracts which reflect social and psychological roles of the LI agents and conventio-nalize their " rights " and " duties " in tlle LI-process  . Different values of these parameters of communication allow us to state possibility or / and necessity of certain types of speech acts under certain conditious of LI-si tuation  . 
1. INTRODUCTION
ELEMENTARY CONTRACTS
ASAPRAG MATIC BASISO FLANGUAGE INTERACTION
E.L . Pershina
A\[Laboratory , Computer Center
Siberian Division of the USSR Ae . Sei.
Novosibirsk 6300 90, USSR goals . The valuet of this threshold is in divldual for each agent in different communicative situation  . 
The values of these indices are generated under the influence of different psychological  , ethical , pragmatical and other factors . The degree of importance of each factor is determined by individual characteristics of each agent and may vary during the LI-p rocess  . Hence the values of relevancy indices may a lso vary  . 
We consider interpersonal communication as join t activity of LI agents  ( X and Y )   . Each agent hash is own plan of behaviour wh ich is represented here by a system of goals  ( G . X or G . V ), i . e . certain pragmatic and communicative tasks to be realized  . 
The system of goals of the agent , for instance , G . X , may contain both the goals initiated by X himself and the goals initiated by his partner Y  . Formation of the system of goals by the agent X is associated with the twu following communicative metagoa is :- kl is an inclusion of ago alg into the partner's system of goals G  . Y ;  --  k2 is an inclusion of a goalgin to X's own system of goals G  . X . 
Language interaction is considered as a process aimed at accomplishing one of these metagoals  . Each agent chooses a mode of achieving metagoa lsiu response to socially determined relat ions between him and his partner  . These relations are described by a system o f contracts  (  \ [1 \ ]  ,  \ [2 \ ]  ,  \ [3 \ ] )  . In this paper we propose a formal descript ion of some elementary contracts formed by combination of basic relations between the partners  . 
2. THESYSTEMOFRELE VANCYINDICES.
In order to describe agents ' positions wi th respect to a potential goalgweint roduce three indices being individual for each agent : - INT  ( X , g ) is a degree of X's interest ( necessity , desirability ) in achieving tile goalg ; this index may be either positive or negat ive  ; -CST(X , g ) is a cost of achieving tile goalg , i . e . the efforts to be made by X for achieving g  ; this index is always positive ; -BEN(X , g ) is a benefit which may be derived by X from achieving g  ; BEN(X , g ) = INT(X , g ) - CST(X , g ) . 
We consider some threshold t which , in general case , shou hl be exceeded by BEN(X , g ) ( BEN(X , g > t ) for including the goalg into the X's sys tem of  3  . DOMINATION AND DEPENDENCY 3 . 1  . In order to map contracts onto communicative level of the LI we introduce several types o felementary contracts formed by combination of basic domination cud dependency relat ions between the partners  . These relations control over the process of forming the system of goals  , i . e . they influence upon the choice of the modeo fachieving the metagoals  . The domination relation fixes LI agent's " rights " and " duties " in achieving metagoa lkl  , i . e . in including a goal into the partner's sys tem of goals  . Dependency controls over achieving the metagoal  k2  . The " rights " and " duties " of the agent in the process of goal formation are represented by a set of rules known to both the agents  . These rules belong to a set M which represents the agents ' mutually coordinated beliefs about the world  . 
3  . 2  . Elementary contracts of the first type are based on the domination of X over Y for all the goals of the class G '  . This relation allows X to oblige Y to inc lude any goalg ~ G'into Y's system of goa ls  , if the proposition BEN(Y , g ) > tl belongs to t be set M , tl being the minimum value of index BEN(Y , g ) which is necessary for X to achieve the metagoalkl =  ( gEG . Y .  )  .   1'he value of tl is determined by the whole complex of constituents of complete contract which determines the level of cooperation  , i . e . the degree of coordination of agents'act ions  , coincidence or conflict of their in terests  . So , provided that ( X > Y , G ' , tl ) , g ~ G ' and BEN(Y , g ) > tl , it is sufficient for X to let Y know of metagoalkl =  ( g ~ G . Y ) being included in the system G . X for the go alg to be included into the Y's system of goals  . 
The second type of elementary contracts is characterized by tile absence of domination of X over Y  ( X  ~ Y , G' , t2 ) : in general case it is not sufficient for X to let Y know of metagoalk I =  ( gEG . Y ) being included in G . X . For X another way of achieving kl based on the va lues of some other constituents of the cont ract should be chosen  . 
3  . 3  . Elementary contracts w bich regulate ach i evement of tile metagoal  k2 are based on the dependency relation : ( X < Y , G ' , t3) . If X depends on Y , it is necessary for him to get Y's per miss ion for inclusion of a goal g ~ S ' into the X's system of goals  , or the proposition BEN(Y , g ~ G . X ) > t3 should belong to the set M , where t3 is the necessary value of index BEN for V to include a goal into his system of goals  . 

The absence of dependency ( X ~ Y , G ' , t4 ) allows X to include any goal g66 ' into his system of goals without Y's permission  . But the index BEN(Y , g ~ G . X ) has to exceed the value t4 being determined by the level of cooperation between the partners  . 
3 . 4 . The basic *' elations aren't mutually exclusive or interdependent : the domination of X over Y in the class G ' doesn't exclude the domination of Y over X in the same class G ' and doesn't presuppose the Y's dependency on X  . The complete contract includes decomposition of the set of potential goals into classes  , for each of which the given relations are defined on the part of X as well as on the part of Y  ,  4 . NEUTRALITY , COOPERATION AND CONFLICT 4 . l . Basie relations reflect certain social and psychological roles of the LI agents  . The absence of these relations between the partners leaves the modes of achieving the metagoals to LI agents ' choice  . These modes are divided into three groups , according to the degree of mutually accounting for each other's intercs?s  . These groups determine three types of contracts : neutral  , cooperative and conflicting ones . There exists the follwing set of modes : admissibility/in admissibility of deformation of the basic relations  , possibility of reciprocal concessions , usage of additional information stimulating a successful achievement of the agent's goal  . This stimulus may be positive ( plus-stimulus ) or negative ( minus-stimulus )  . 
4,2  . The neutral contract presupposes the in admissibility of deformation of tile basic relations  . 
In case of absence of domination of X over Y(X ~ Y , G' , t2 ) it is necessary for X to make Y be interested in achievement of a goalgEG ' for realizing the metagoalk I =  ( E6G . Y ), i . e . to make the value of index BEN(Y , g ) > t2 . Neutral contracts allows X to use one of two possible means : a  ) to let Y know of some information increasing the value of the index BEN  ( Y , g ) ; and b ) to let Y know of a goal g ' being included in the X's system of goals  , with BEN(Y , g')+BEN(Y , g)>t2 . Provided that the proposition BEN(Y , g ) < t2 belongs to the set M and it is impossible fur X to use one of the two means mentioned above  , X has to give up the meta-goalkl = ( g~G . Y ) . 
In case of ( X~Y , G' , t4 ) the neutral contract commits X to take Y's interests into account  . X may include a goalg into G . X if this goal is harmless for Y ( INT(Y , g ) > O) . If the value of the index INT(Y , g ) is negative , it is necessary for X to guarantee some compensation for presupposed damage  , i . e . to include a goal g ' into G . X . with BEN(Y , g ~ G . X ) + BEN(Y , g'6O . X)>t4 . Otherwise X has to give his go algup . 
So neutral contracts provide the accomplishment of the metagoals by means of basic relations and by using plus-stimuli  . 
4 . 3 . Cooperative contracts are characterized by rec iprocal " credit "  , i . e . mutual concessions are possible . Each agent may allow infringement of his interests  . The degree of infringement is determined by the level of cooperation and is fixed in the values ti of relevancy indices  . Cooperative contracts allow modification of basic relations  , it is possible for any agent not to do his duty or to In case of X > Y the inclusion of a goal into the system G  . Y is possible if the value of the index CST ( V , g ) is far less than t5 and the value of tile index BEN ( X , g ) is more than t6 , where t5 and t6 are determined by the level of cooperation . If the value of index CST(Y , g ) is more than t5 but X doesn't give up the metagoalkl = ( g~G . Y , then X may use plus-stimulus , i . e . compensation of presupposed damage . 
In case of X~Y it is possible for X to achieve the metagoalk I =  ( gEG . Y ) without using any stimulus , if the value of the index CST(Y , g ) is less than t5Provided that CST(Y , g)>t5 , X has to use plus-stimulus for including the goal g into the G  . Y system . The partner Y , on his turn , has to include the goalgin to his system of goals  , if CST(Y , g ) < t5 and BEN(X , g ) > t6 . 
Cooperation permits the modification of the basic relation X < Y  , it means that it is possible for X to include a goalgin to his system of goals in spite of the value of the index BEN  ( V , gQG . X ) being less than t2 . In other words , Y may give permission for X's inclusion of the go alg into the system G  . X in spite of BEN(Y , gEG . X ) < t2If the value of the index BEN(Y , g ~ G . X ) is far less than t2 then it is necessary for X to use plus-stimulus : to promise the inclusion of the goalg '  , with BEN(Y , gEG . X ) + BEN(Y , g ~ G . Y)>t2 . 
In case of X <? it is necessary for X to take into account Y ' x interests : to include a goal with INT  ( Y , g6G . X ) > O . Provided that INT(Y , g ~ G . X ) < O , it is necessary for X to guarantee compensation for success of the metagoal  k2=  ( g~G . X ) . As for ? , it is possible for him to a/low some infringement of his interests : X may include a goalgin to G  . X , if the value of index BEN(Y , gEG . X ) is not much less than t2 . In this case X may succeed in achievement of tile metagoal  k2=  ( g~G . X ) without using of plus-stimulus . 
4 . 4 . The conflicting contracts allow agents to use minus-stimulus and to break tile basic relations  . 
The break of elementary contracts based on X's domination over V is characterized by Y's refusal of including the goalgin to his system of goals in spite of X's demand  , if the value of the iadex
BEN(Y , g ) is less than tl.
As for , X it is possible for him to use a minus--stimulus for achieving the metagoalk \] =  ( g ~ G , Y ) in both the cases X > V and X Y . Minus-stimulus is X's promise to include a goalg ' into G  . X with BEN(Y , g'EG . X ) being far less than t2 . This promise induces Y to inclade the goalg into G  . Y in order to avoid accomplishment of the goalg ' . Under a conflict for achieving the metagoalk2 = ( gEG . X ) it is possible for X not to get Y's permission for including a goalg into G  . X in both tile cases X < Y and X ~ V . Conflicting contracts allow X to include any goal without taking into account Y's interests  . If it is necessary for X to get Y's permission for achieving the goalg  , he may use minus-stimulus to force assent out of Y  . 
5. CONCLUSION
Above we have discussed certain aspects of communicative context of LI : the agents ' systems of indices of relevancy  , basic relations forming elementary contracts and three types of contracts regulating the process of goal formation  . These aspects of goal formation reflect some social and psychologica \] roles of the LI agents  , It is convenient for us to consider LI to be aimed at forming agents ' systems of goals in order to map " rights " and " duties " of agents onto communicative level and to state possibility or / and necessity of a cer tain type of speech acts in tile process of goal formation  . 
Fop accomplishment of tire metagoalkl ( in clu--sion of a goal into Y's system of goals  ) it is necessary for X to perform a speech act which may be named " inducing "  . The particular type of inducing speech act is determined by the relation which holds between X and Y  . X's domination over Y allows X to perform a speech act which may I renamed " order "  , otherwise X performs a speech act " request " . It " it is necessary fat ' X to use add it ional information  , the type of speech act performed by X is determined by tile type of information to be chosen in accordance with tile types t'cont ract : neutral and cooperative contracts al low X to use only plus-stimulus  , that is X performs a speech act of the type " tempt at im V '  . Conflicting contract allows X to perfo rm a speech act " threat " which is character i zedl  ) yase of minus--stillluius . 
X's dependenry upen Y makes it necessary for X to perform a speech act of tile type " ask ing permission " fer in  ( :lusion of ag'o al into his system G . X . If this goalg is relevant for X , then " asl?ing permission " i , aybe X's " asking permission " for doing something ill favour of X  ( " May I collie in ?" )   . If the goal is relevant for Y , then X performs all " offer " ( " What about a cup of tea ?" , " May I see you home ?" ) ' rile proposed systelll of nol : Jons is af irst step towards formalization of tire aspects of communica  . 
tire context discussed above . The task for future work is to extend tile nomenclatare of clen leatary contracks and to specify for laaJ means for representation of social and psychological roles of the LI agents  . 
REFERENCES 1 . Airenti G . , Bara B . t  ~ . , Cotombetti M .  (1984)  . 
Planning and Understanding Speech Acts by In terper-sonal Games  , ill : C ~ omputatioaal Models of Natural Language Processing  , Bara B . G . and Ou Jda G . ( eds .  )  . 
Amsterdam : North-lloil and , 1984, p.9--27.
2 . Narin'yani A . S .  (1984)  . Towards an Integral Model of Language Competence  , in : Computation a\[Models of Natural Language Processing  , Bara B . G . and Guida G . ( eds .  )  . Amsterdam : North-tloll and , 1984, p .  275-295 . 
3 . Narin'yani A . S . , Simonova O . P .  (1985)  . The Structure of Communicative Context of Dia logue Interaction  , Prec . ACL Europe-85, Geneva , 1985 . 

