LINKING PROPOS rFIONS
DoS . Brae & R.A . Smit
Rotterdam School of Management , Erasmus University , P . O . B . 1738, NL-3000 DRR otterdam , The Netherlands . 
This research was partially funded by the Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Pure Research  . 
KEYWORDS : Semantics , Subordinating conjm\]ctions , Language processing , Language universals . 

The function words of a language provide explicit information about how propositions are to be related  . We have examined a subset of these function words  , namely the subordinating conjunctions which link propositions within a sentence  , using sentences taken from corpora stored on magnetic tape  . On the hasis of this analysis , a computer program for Dutch language generation and comprehensien has been extended to deal with the subordinating  , ; conjunctions . We present an overview of the underlying dimensions that were used in describing the semantics and pragmatics of the Dutch subordinating conjunctions  . We propose a Universal set of Linking Dimensions , sufficient to speeify the subordinating conjunction  . , ; in any language . This ULD is a first proposal for the representation required for a computer program to understand or translate the subordinating conjunctions of any natural language  . 
I . Introduction
Languages provide speakers with the means to express propositions and to link these propositions  . Propositions are expressed in language by means of clauses  . These can form sentences in themselves , or they may be linked together within one sentence  , either attim same level or embedded one within the other  . It is this last category of linking , by means of subordinate conjunctions , in which we are interested . Tile questions that weask are : Do languages provide a systematic way of expressing the possible subordinating links between propositions ? If they do  , which dimensions cat \] be used to capture the means that are provided in all languages for these links ? What is this Universal set of Linking Dimensions ULD  ) ? We have at l : empted to provide a systematic description of the subordinating conjunctions  ( SCs ) in Dutch . It is this description that we will use to propose a UI  . D . At the top level we have divided the SCs into just four types : inferential  , temporal , causal and manner SCs . This is fewer than the dozen or so types found in the traditional and modern grammars  , which give a ' flat'taxonomic tree , making all tile obvious distinctions at the first level  . At each branch in the taxonomic tree , we have tried tomal ( e as few divisions as possible , in order to make tile motivation for each split clear  . 
These four categories were chosen because they enable quite different kinds of relationship to be setup between a main and a subordinate proposition  . They each indicate a different function that the subordinate event/state has in relation to the main predication  . The most abstract relationship is that of inference  , in which the speaker uses the subproposition to give the grounds for his belief concerning the truth status of the main proposition  . The other three types indicate more than simply a relationship between beliefs propositions  )  ; they convey the speaker Vs beliefs about relationships that exist qn reality ~  . Two of these are quite specific : time and cause . Tilefourth category of SC , manner , also serves to indicate that there is a relationship ' in reality ' between the sub and main events/states  ; however , this relationship is one that depends highly on the schema that the observer uses to codify what hesees  . 
We will now describe the subtrees for each of these four types of linkage  . The meanings of the Dutch SCs , taken from VanWijk and Kempen 1980) , have been determined using : sentences taken from a Dutch corpus  ( Uit den Boogaard , 1975; shown as e . g .  1 . 2345) ; the authoritative Algemene Nederlands e Spraakkunst- 
ANS ( Geerts et al , 1984.
2. Inferential linkage
An inference relationship exists between two propositions when the truth value of one can be deduced from the other  . The grounds for the deduction are left open . They may be based on some causal model of reality: 
If metalisheated it expands.
But they can also be purely definitional : If two angles of a triangle are equal  , their opposite sides are equal . 
The types of inferential linkage depend in the first instance on tile truth statas of the main proposition  . 
This may be either true , probably true but with the possibility of an escape  , hypothetically true or counterfactual . A false main proposition is not indicated by an SC but by the use of the past tense and/or a modal auxiliary verb  . 
True . If the main proposition is true , then the inference relation from the sub proposition may be used  , denied or deemed h'relewmt . 
The tm-e of the inference is indicated in Dutch by the 
SCaangezien(since):
Derector had be slot endeschooltes luiten a angezien her verbod was overtreden  . ( ANS , p . 655 )   ( The principal decided to close the schools in c . e the ban had been contravened . ) It has been , and still is , customary to classify a angezien as a causal SC ( ANS , p . 655) . This is incorrect . Causal SCs can be topicalized , inferential SCs cannot . The reason for this distinction is that causal SCs say something about reality  , whereas inferential SCs are used to make an inference  . This making cannot be topicalized . Aangezlen , however , like non-temporal since , cannot be topicalized , so it is not causal : * llet is a angezienh et verbod was overtreden  , dat derector be sloot deschooltes luiten . 
An inference relationship \] nay be denied using the SC hoewel although  )  . Then the normal inference is from the sub proposition to the falsity of tile main proposition : Hoewelher verbod was overtreden  , be sloot derector deschoolniettes luiten . 
( Although the ban had been contravened , the principal decided not to close the school . ) The irrelevance of any inference relationship is indicated by ong each t  ( whether . . . or not : Ong each to fhetver bod was overtreden , zouderector hebben be slot endeschoolte sluiten  . 
( Whether the ban had been contravened or not , the principal would have decided to close the school  . ) the main proposition is not certainly , hut only probably , true , then an SC can be used to indicate the ci rcumstances under which the main proposition may indeed by false  . Such SCs provide an ESCAPE from the speech act being made in the main clause  . This speech act may be an assertion , in which case the escape is from the truth of the main proposition  ; but any other type of speech act , such as a promise , may also be escaped from . The escape may be either when the subproposition is true  , with ten zlj ( unless ) , or when it is false , using mtts ( provided that ) : Deoecumenezal niets lagentenzijhetges prek met 
Israel . . . wordt gevoer d .  (2 . 3040 )   ( Ecumenism will not succeed unless there is a dialogue with Israel  . . . ) Jongeren kennen een normale behoefte aan gezag en normen  , mits zijer dez invan we tente on tdekken .  (5 . 3341 )   ( Youngsters have a normal need for authority and norms  , provided they can discover their sense . ) Hypothetical linkage . If the truths of the main and subpropositions are unknown  , an inference relationship from the subto the main proposition can be shown by using either als or lndlen  ( if )  . Of these two SCs , als is the more common , but it is ambiguous between several uses ( see below )  ; indlen is more formal and emphatic : Als/Indien hetver bod is overtreden  , z alde rector de schools lutten . 
( If the ban has been contravened , the principal will close the school . )
Figure 1. INFERENTIALSCs
Truth of the Main Proposition
I 1 probably I true unkown or false truelEscape fr ? mSubP '  , fits Use?f the inference I or opposite ,   , , , to the Main Proposition
SubP . opposite HYPOTHETICAL
ESCAPE-ESCAPE+DENIED IRRELEV ANTUSEDm/tstenz / ja/s/  ) nd/enhoe we/oncj each taange z/bn provided unless if though whether or not since Counterfactuals  . Just as with the true inferential linkages , the counter factual inference may be simply used or denied  . The inference , in this false world , may be used to infer a main proposition which is true in this false world but false in the actual world : If Evehadn't given Adam the apple  , he wouldn't have eaten it . 
The inference may also be denied to give a main proposition which is true in both worlds : Even if Eve had ntt given Adam the apple  , he still would have eaten it . 
This is a semifactual . The same SC , als ( if ) , is used both for hypotheticals and counter / semi-factuals  . This is not the case in all languages , e . g . Polish , Japanese . 
In order to indicate that the subclause does not correspond with the truth status of the sub preposition  , the tense of subclause verb is placed one step further into the past than would normally be the case  . That is to say : if the tense would normally be past  , past-perfect or present-perfect then it is set to past-perfect  ; otherwise it is set to past , With the true counterfactuals ( as opposed to the semifactuals ) the fact that the main the main proposition is indicated by using the past-future  , i . e . using the past form of the verb zullen as the auxiliary finite verb form: 
AlsIkgeldhad , zoulkoprelsgaan.
( If Imoney had , would It ravelling go . ) Moreover the simple ( or perfect ) past can also be used to indicate connter factual ity: 
Alslk geld had , glngtkopreis.
( If I had money , I went travelling.)
Alslk geldge had had , ha dik meer gere isd.
( If I had had money , I had more travelled . ) The ANS(p . 468 ) provides no rule for choosing between using the simple  ( or perfect ) past and using the modal auxiliary zullen . There are , however , systematic differences ( Nteu wlnt ,  1984) . More problematic is that the simple past tense may indicate one of two things : the TimeOf Reference  ( TOR ) is in the past or we are dealing with a counterfactual  . This ambiguity can be resolved by the context : if the TOR is already in the present  , then the past tense indicates counterfactual i t y  . 
Summarizing , we find four types of inferential linkage , depending on the truth value of the main proposition : true : the inference from a true subproposition may be used  , denied or deemed irrelevant ; probably true : this truth can be escaped , either from the subproposition or from its negation  ; hypothetical inference from a subproposition whose truth is uncertain  ; counterfactuals : an inference from a sub proposition that is known to be false  , to either a false or a true main proposition . 
3. Temporal linkage
The temporal SCs specify the time of the main predication in relation to the time of the event indicated in the subclause  . The system we have used to represent the dif ferent possible temporal linkages is based on two dimensions : the relative temporal order of the main and subevents  , and the place of the main event within this restr icted time range  . 
Relative temporal order . A subclause introduced by a temporal SC is used to restrict the time during which the main proposition is true : the time of the main event may be at a time that is either earlier than  , or later than , the time of the subevent , or it may be coincidental with the time of the the subevent  . 
The position within the range . The place of the main event within this restr icted time range is the second dimension  . It may be either : at some time within the proximity of the subevent l-either immediately adjoining the subevent  ; - or in the vicinity of the subevent time . 
at sometime within an interval . The way the bounds of this time interval are Indicated depends on the relationship between the TOR and the interval itself  . 
If the TOR is to fall within the interval , then the duration of the subevent determines the interval  . 
Otherwise the TOR marks one bound of the interval , the other bound being set by the time of the sub event  . Again this category has two alternatives : either the main event occurs at some moment within the interval  ; or it occurs for the whole of the interval , in which case the event must be able to have a duration or be repeatable  . 
These four different places within the time range  , together with the three ways of specifying the range  , give twelve different possibilities for indicating the time relationship between the main and subevents  . 
It is not to be expected that any language will have SCs to distinguish between all these twelve possible temporal linkages  . In Dutch three of the relationships cannot be expressed using an SC  . Moreover , the subdistinctions made in the second dimension are not always made  . 
Figure 2 . TEIVIPORALS ~ RDINATING CONJUNCTIONS Relation Main event in Main event in interval of main to proximity of sub : of TOR & subevent : sub event  . Next to Nearby Sometime Durative
Earlier than : voor to tdat ( before )   ( until ) to en/als Coincidental:wanneer/nuterwljl zolang  ( when )   ( while )   ( as long as ) 
Later than : zodranadatAnds sinds ( as soon as )   ( after )   ( since )   ( since The difference between the four SCsals , to en , wanneer and nu requires an explanation : teen is used to set the TOR to some point before the time of utterance  , and so only occurs when the TOR is in the past ( ef . the use of when as discussed by Kamp , 1981) . The TORIs set to the time of the subevent ; nu is used when the TOR has already been fixed , and an event , the subevent , which happens to be coincidental with the TOR , is a cause or reason for the main event ; als and wanneer are used : for a temporal coincidence after the TOR  , without bringing the TOR forward ; to indicate a repeated or repeatable temporal coincidence  . 
Wanneer ( when ) , which hardly ever occurs in spoken Dutch except as an interrogative  , is temporal . Als(if ) is not confined to a temporal role , being used also for manner and inferential linkages  . So its use puts the burden of interpretation onto the addressee  . 
We have seen that the temporal linkage is specified on two principle dimensions : the time range to which the main event is restricted may be before  , after or coincidental with the time of the sub event  ; the time ; of the main event may be related either directly to the time of the subevent  , or it may fall within an interval . In the former case the proximity may be indicated  . In the latter case the main event may be considered to occur once in the interval or during the whole of the interval  . The interval itself is bound between the subewmt and the TOR  , unless the TOR falls within the time period of the subevent  , In which case the interval is equivalent to the duration of the subevent itself  . 
4. Causal linkage
A temporal linkage is not the only relationship that can be indicated in reality between the sub and main propositions  . A causal linkage can also be made from the sub event or state  , to the main event or state . 
There are two main types of causal linkage : teleological and at eleological  . 
An ateleological cause Isa purely physical link , i . e . 
mechanistic , in the sense that no will is posited . The mechanism operates inevitably , e . g . gravitation that controls the motion of the planets  . E . g . 
Depeehdag voor de NS ward glsteren nog gecompleteer d  , oord a top betcentraal station in Utrechttwee machinisten vana anslulten de posttreinen biJbet wlsselen vantrelnal lebei precies in de verkeer destapten  .  (1 . 5847 )   ( The day of troubles on the railways yesterday was even more complete  , because at the central station in Utrecht two drivers of connecting posttrains  , when changing trains , each stepped into the incorrect train . ) An ateleologleal ink may also be proportional : the more there is of some subproperty the more there will be of the main property  , as in : Dedagen lengen naarmated enachten korten  . 
( The days lengthen as the nights shorten . ) At eleological link , on the other hand requires that a will be present  . They are volitional . The being that exert stlds will has two components of interest : a perception of his own state and an awareness of his own goal  . There are , correspondingly , two types of teleological cause : reason and motive  . Reason is primarily state controlled , e . g . 
ttetk wamhem voor dath ij , jutstom dath ljzoge wo on mogelijk wildedoen , zichzoonge wo onvoel de .  (4 . 1610) ( He realized that he , just because he wanted to behave as normally as possible  , felt himself to be so abnormal . ) Motive is primarily goal controlled , e . g . 
Deregering heef that be drag v and este unverhoog d opd at dearms tenge en honger zull enlij den  . 
(Donaldson , 1984, p .  195 )   ( The government has increased the amount of the support so that the poorest people will not suffer from hunger  . ) Note that the description of the goal state is not true  , as it has yet to be achieved . The standard way of indicating this is to use the conditional auxiliary  ( zullen will ) in the subordinate clause . As an illustration of the contrast : ' feeling ill ' is a reason forgoing to be d  , ' to get better ' is a motiw . ~ forgoing to be d . 
Figure 3. CAUSALSCs nol_
IPr?p?rti?nalii=?no yes
PHYSICAL PROPORTION AL doo ~ at naa/mat ~ because according as 
Teleological ?!? yes\[Subproposition is goal in oyes ? REASON MOTIVE  ( znd atom datop dat because because so that Omd at may be used either for a teleological reason or for an ateleological mechanistic link  . As a result do or datis used to emphasize an at eleological cause  . In , e . g . 
Because there were several new dancers in the troupe  , the form of the ballet ( was ) changed . 
because would be translated by do or datto indicate that the new dancers themselves caused the change  ; wherea somd at would indicate that the choreographer made the change to accommodate tile ballet to the new dancers  . 

We have found that there is a distinction between mechanistic and volitional causal linkages  . Mechanistic links may also be proportional . Volitional , or teleological , links may be based either on reason or on motive . 
5. Manner linkage
The fourth and last type of linkage is the least specific  . 
The subproposition indicates something about the manner of the main proposition  . A manner SC is used to add a descriptor , which includes the subevent or state , to the main proposition . The principle distinction to be made is whether this subevent/state actually exists or is  ( perhaps ) imaginary , i . e . whether the subproposition is true or of unknown truth value  . 
True subproposition . If the subproposition is true , then either the manner of the main proposition is specified as being restricted to the same as the manner in the sub : Hij speelt vioolzoals hi \] pianospeel t  . 
(He plays violin in the same way as he plays piano  . ) or the sub proposition is an addition to the main one : Hij speelt viool evenals zijn vader dat heeft gedaan  . 
( He plays the violin , just as his father did . ) Nontrue subproposition . If the subproposition is false or of unknown truth value then also f is used : Hij speelt viool also fhiipian ospeel t  . 
( He plays the violinas if he plays the piano . ) Whether the sub proposition is false or merely of unknown truth value must be determined using the context  . The speaker can indicate a false value by using the past tense  , just as with conditional counterfactuals : Hij speelt vioolals of hi \] piano speel de  . 
( He plays the violin as thoughe played the piano . ) Figure 4 . MANNERSUBORDINATING CONJUNCTIONS
Subproposition : True Non-true
Restriction zoals ( same way as )
Addition even als ( just as ) also f(as though ) 6 . Conclusion . 
In this analysis of the semantics of Dutch SCs , we have concentrated on the main aspects in order to distinguish the wood from the trees  . We have ignored SCs that arear chaic , dialectal or formal . We have also ignored secondary uses of certain SCs  , e . g . that the temporal SC terw l j l ( while ) can be used to highlight a contrast . We believe that this is not prejudicial to our case  . 
Secondary uses are just that ; they are not different meanings , as we have argued elsewhere for the nonstandard uses of if  ( Br ( e&Smit ,  1985) . 
The definition of the meanings of the Dutch SCs is specific enough to be implemented in a sentence generation program  . We have demonstrated this using Kempen's Incremental Procedural Grammar  ( Hoenkamp ,  1983) . Our extension ( see Br(e , Smit & Schotel ,  1984 ) allows a user to enter two or more propositions and the type of relationship between them  ( inferential , temporal , causal , manner ) . Then it asks questions corresponding to the semantic tree for the corresponding type of SC  , in order to select the appropriate kind of SC(e . g . 
hypothetical , denial , etc . ) . The program then uses the selected kind to find the correct SC in Dutch  . So the selection of the kind of SC is independent of the language  ; the actual SC is selected from a table of SCs built up from the semantic definition of each SC within one language  . Our program can also take a sentence as replacing the linking SC by its language independent semantic definition  . The important point is that the definition of the kinds of SC is language independent  . 
We set out with the aim of establishing a Universal set of Linking Dimensions  ( ULD ) that speakers use in linking propositions . It is the semantic trees that provide us with the ULDs  . There are two levels at which we could hypothesize universality  . The first , the strong hypothesis , is that the trees are the same in all languages . Then the kinds of SCs should be the same in all languages  . 
For Dutch and English this is more or less the case  . The differences in the SCs in the two languages come about in the different ambiguities that arise because the same SC is used for more than one kind of relationship  ( e0 g . 
als ==> if/when , since ==> slnds/aangez len ) . As these ambiguous uses are not the same in the two languages  , difficulties arise for translation programs , l lowever , this does not negate the strong hypothesis . 
If it does turn out that there are languages with SCs that cannot be defined using these trees  , then a second , weaker , thesis may hold , namely that the building blocks from which the trees are made  , are the same in all languages . That Polish and Japanese have SCs specifically for counterfactual inferences  , leads us to suspect hat it is this second thesis that will be found to hold  . It will provide tlm basis for constructing a means for representing the functions performed by SCs in all languages in linking propositions  . 
In either case , why is it that people relate propositions using the ULD ? Is it because their brains are so constructed  , or because their minds reflect the nature of the environment in which they find themselves ? Is the ULD a natural or artificial phenomenon  ( Simon ,  1981?

Brae , D . S . & R . A . Smit 1985, Nonstandard uses of if . In The proceedings of the 2nd Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  . Geneva : 218-225 . 
Brae , D . S . , R . A . Smit & H . P . Schotel 1984 . Generation and comprehension of Dutch subordinating conjunctions by computer  . In O'Shea , T . , ed . , Proceedings of the 6th European Conference on Artificial Intel Ilgence . Elsevler , Amsterdam : 205-208 . 
Dik , S . C .  1981 . Functional grammar . Foris , Dordrecht . 
Donaldson , B . C .  1984 . Dutch reference grammar . Nijhoff,

Geerts , G . , W . Haeseeryn , J . de Rooij , & M . C . van den Toorn , eds , 1984 . Algemenene derlandses praakkunst . 
Wolters-Noordhoff , Groningen , Holland.
Hoenkamp , E . C . M .  1983 . Eencomputer model van despreker : psychologlsche nll ngulst lsche aspecten  . 
Ph . D . thesis . Katholieke Universitelt van Nijmegen . 
Kamp , H .  1981 . A Theory of truth and semantic representation . In Groenendijk , J . A . G . , T . M . V . 
Janssen , & M . B . J . Stokhof , eds , Formal methods in the study of language , vol . I . Mathematisch Centrum,
Amsterdam : 277-322.
Nieuwint , P . J . G . M .   1984 Werkwoordstij den in nederlands e " counterfactuals  "  . De Nleuwe Taalgids , 77(6):542-555 . 
Simon , H . A . 1981 Sciences of the artificial . 2nd ed . MIT press , Cambridge . 
Ult den Boogart , P . C .  1975 . Woordfrequentles vanges chreven enges proken Nederlands  . Oosthoek,
Scheltemaen Holkema , Utrecht.
Wijk , C . van & G . Kempen 1980 . Funktle wo orden : een inventarisatie voorh et Nederlands  . Review of Applied
Linguistics , 47, 53-68.
