TESTING THE PROJECTIVITY HYPOTHESIS
Vladimir Pericliev
Mathematical Linguistics Dpt
Institute of Mathematics with CempCentre
lll3Sofia , bl.8, BULGARIA
Ilarion Ilarionov
Mathematics Dpt
Higher Inst of Eng & Building
Sofia , BULGARIA

The empirical validity of the projeetivity hypothesis for Bulgarian is tested  . It is shown that the justification of the hypothesis presented for other languages suffers serious methodological deficiencies  . 
Our automated testing , designed to evade such deficiencies ~ yielded results falsifying the hypothesis for Bulgarian : the nonprojective constructions studied were in fact grammatical rather than ungrammatical  , as implied by the projeetivity thesis . Despite this , the projectivity/non-projectivity distinction itself has to be retained in Bulgarian syntax and  , with some provisions , in the systems for automatic processing as well . 
1 THE PROJECTIVI rYHY POTHESIS
Projectivity is word order constraint in dependency grammars  , which is analogous to continuous constituency within phrase-structure systems  . In a projective sentence , between two words connected by a dependency arc only such words can be positioned which are governed  ( directly or indirectly ) by one of these words . Or , in other words , a sentence is projective in case there are no intersections between arcs and projections in its dependency tree diagram  . 
Thus , for instance , sentence ( i ) is projective , whereas sentence (2) is nonprojective :
He took the book He the took book
We might note that sentence (2) is ungrammatical.
The projectivity hypothesis , originally propounded by Lecerf ( of . e . g . Lecerf 1960) and later gaining wide acceptence , amounts to the following : Natural languages are projective in the sense that the nonprojective constructions in them are ungrammatical  . 
And this has an important consequence . Thus , taking into account the self-evident fact that ungrammatical phrases do not occur in texts  , in the processing of texts we can rule out from consideration the non-pro-jective parses on the basis of ungrammatios lity  . Pro-jectivity thus serves as a filtering device , shown further to be of extremely powerful nature ( op . oit . ) . 
To estimate the usefulness of the projectivity hypothesis for each particular language requires the conduct of extensive empirical testings  . On the basis of statistical accounts from inspection of texts French was reported by Leoerf to be almost  lO0  . " ~ projective . The same would be true , according to him , for other languages like German , Italian , Dutch etc . , although the material available Cat the time ) was not sufficient for statistical processing . English is also believed to be a projective language : in  30   000 phrases only two nonprojective ones were found ( Har-per and Hays 1959 )  ; in Kareva (1965) somewhat different , but still result in the same vein was obtained ( using different notation ) : from lO 000 phrases of connected text 620 were found to be nonprojective . 
Such investigations can be seen to be bound toge -ther by their ar~h to the testing of the projectivity hypothesis : texts are explored and statistical accounts are made of the correlation between projective and nonprojective phrases  . The very rare occurrence in such texts of nonprojective sentences is interpreted as a confirming evidence  . Such studies represent what we shall further on refer to as " the textual approach to the testing of the projeotivity hypothesis "  ( or simply , " the textual approach ") . 
2 DEFICIENCIES OF THETEXTUAL APPROACH
The textual approach , in addition to the fact that it involves the tedious task of inspection of thousa-nds of sentences  , suffers serious methodological shortcomings which can be summarized as follows:  ( i ) Irrelevancz of data . The data the textual approach presents in justification of the hypothesis is  , strictly speaking , irrelevant . Knowing that non-pro-jective phrases do not occur in texts  , naturally , gives us no formal right to infer that such phrases are ungrammatical as well  . 
( ii)I ~ is_ . u~fi_c~en_ . c ~ of data . The data provided by this approach is insufficient to justify even a__wea-ker claim to the effect that nonprojective structur-es do not occur in texts  . To justify this latter claim further steps in addition to direct inspection of certain  ( immaterially how large ) corpora of texts should be made . In particular , a justifiable justification would have to involve both further factual confirmation  ( e . g . demonstration that predictions from the hypothesis in fact comply with actual data  ) and " systematic " confirmation ( demonstration that the hypothesis is consistent with other linguistic principles  , facts , etc . ) ( of . e . g . Baths 19 Bl : Ch . 9; also ?3 below) . 
( iii ) Heuristic futility . The textual approach is heuristically futile in the sense that  , being confi-ned to a mere registration of nonprojective constru-ctions within specific texts  , we have no way of knowing whether the structures encountered  ( if some are at all encountered ) are all the nonprojective structures in a given language  , and if not , how many more are there , and which exactly they are . 
3 TESTING THE PROOECTIVITY HYPOTHESIS FOR BULGARIAN The considerations given in ?  2 seriously under-mine the credulousness of the results obtained for other languages following the textual approach  . What was important for our investigation however was to evade these methodological deficiencies in the study of Bulgarian  . Accordingly , we had to address not texts , but rather what we had to do was to generate all logically admissible nonprojective structures lity  . 
It was appropriate to a eeomplieh our testing in two phases : preliminar ~  ( manual )  ~  , in whieh the plausibility of the prejeotivity hypothesis was to be estimated for the Bulgarian language  , and test in q~i4e zr ( automated tsst in A ) , in which the nonprojective structures in Bulgarian were to be automatically generated  , and then checked for gra-mmatieality /ungrammaticality  . 
3.1 Preliminary testing
The preliminary ( manual ) testing comprised : ( i ) factual testing , and ( ii ) systematic testing ( cf . ? z(ii )) . 
In the factual testing it was inspected whether certain predictions from the projectivity hypothesis are consistent with actual data  . lhat is , we take an arbitrery nonprojective situation , say , a situation of the form : (3) .  /  . 
X1X2X3 and then , subatituting X1 , X2 , and X3 with approp-riate word class e a , check whether the resultant construction is wellformed in Bulgarian or not  . 
In the systematic testing it was inspected whe -ther the projectivity hypothesis in fact fits in with other known word order principles  , rules , etc . 
( of univers ~ qlor language-specific nature).
By way of illustration , consider the generally recognized universal principle : In all languages there exist classes of words occupying a rigidly fixed position in the sentence  ( the particular words and positions of course being language-specific  )  . On inspection , this prineiple turns out to contradict the projectivity hypothesis  . This is so , since such situations may occur in which this fixed position of certain words leads to non -projeetivity  . Thus , one manifestation of this principle in Bulgarian syntaxia reflected in the fact that the verb sam ' be'never occurs in sentence-initial or eentenee-final position  . Now , assume that we have a three-word sentence containing be in which moreover :  ( a ) bego-verna another word , X2 , X2 being positioned to the left or right of be ; and ( b ) X2 governs X3 ,   X3 being obligatorily positioned to the right of X2  . This being the ease , three structures are theoretically admissible , two projective and one nonprojective : (4)~(5) .  (6)  . ~_  . ~  .   .   .   .   . ~  . ~ ' ? , ~ . ~ .  ~ _ ~ ,
X2 X3 be be X2 X3 X2 be X3
However , structures (4) and (5) will be ungrammati-eel , as predicted by the principle mentioned ( notice the position of be )  . This latter fact , in turn , pre-dicts the grammatioality of the nonprojective structure  ( 6 )   ( knowing of course that there is no-thing to for bid in Bulgarian the occurrence of three-word sentences containing be  )  . As another illustra-tion , this mode of testing would have to lead to the discovery of non-projectivities of the type : " Aj~_~-oedure is discussed whish  .   .   . " in English which are due to the sentence-in i tial position of the subject in the English sentence  . 
In summary , the results obtained from our preli-minary testing showed the implausibility of the hypothesis for Bulgarian : we easily found numerous and diverse kinds of counterexamples to it  . We further noticed that the counterexamples belonged  , informally speaking , to two stylistic layers which could be labeled a8 stylistieally marked and stylistically unmarked . 
3.2 Test inq proper
As a next step in our investigation , the non-pro-jective constructions in Bulgarian had to be generated  , and then assessed for well-formed neas . More specifically , nonprojectivity in triples and quadruples was to be examined  ( insofara a non-projeotivity in more than four -words constructions is reducible to triples or quadruples  )  . 
in triples , there are two possible nonprojective situations , viz . ( the mirror-images ): (7) . /"_~( a)------'" . 
X \]. X2 X3 X3 X2 X1
In quadruples , these nan-projective situations are 30 in number . That is , the total number of non-pro=jeetive situations is  32  . The number and content of constructions in Bulgarian conforming to these situations will be language-specific  , i . e . it will depend on the specific Bulgarian word classes and the po-ssibilities for their mutual positioning  . E . g . the constructions conforming to situation ( 7 ) will be the set of all triples X1   X2   X3 such that X2 governs X1  , X1 being positioned to the left of X2 , and X1 governs X3 , X3 being positioned to the riqht of X1 . 
Then , a program was written in BASIC implemented on the Bulgarian micro computer " Pravetz "  ( a machine compatible with Apple 11 ) which generated the constructions conforming to the nonprojective situations  , lheinput to the program was a fragment of the dependency grammar for Bulgarian given in Pericliev  1983  . In particular , 30 rules were stored , each rule e one iting of a pair of word classes , a master and a slave , and their mutual position ( s ) . Fer obvious reasons the rules were not arbitrarily chosen  , but rather it was required that they be maximally diverse in syntactic nature  . That is , they included pairs of notional and/or functional words  ( particles , pro-nouns/adverbs introducing clauses , paired conjunctions , duplicating parts of the sentence , etc . ) . The generated constructions were then inspected for wellformedness  . 
The results from our experiment may be summarized as follows  . From about 3\[ ) 0 nonprojective constructions generated , approximately 15% turned out to be ungrammatical . The remaining part of the constructions were grammatical  . As already expected , they could be classed into two groups according to their stylistic value : stylistically unmarked and stylistically marked constructions  . 
The unmarked constructions , informally speaking , included diverse kindsoi ' structures : some questions  ( with the question particle li'do ' or with li to ge-th or with a notional questioning word  )  , some exclamatory sentences ( with structure of questions )  , di~subordinate clause , most often objective and attributive clause , is positioned somewhere in the main clause ) , sentences containing clitice ( be , short po-ssessive and dative pronouns , etc . ) , various constru-ctions with " strongly linked " parts  ( paired conjun-ctions/p articles , duplicating parts , Bulgarian equivalents of more . . . than , such . . . that , etc . ) and many othera~"T'he rati-~"6&tw-6e-~styli-~&lly unmar-ked and stylistically marked constructions was about  1:5  . 
4 DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
In principle , a hypothesis , in empirical scien-cessuch as linguistics , may be said to be : Ca ) absolutely true ( i . e . true without exceptions ) , ( b ) on the whole true ( i . e . true , but with certain exceptions ) , and ( e ) false . 
The projectivity hypothesis would hove been us a -bleas a filtering device  ( in Bulgarian ) if it fell under cases ( a ) or ( b )  , ease ( b ) presupposing further that there is a list available of all exceptio-ns  . The results obtained however unambiguously class it undercase  ( c )  . Indeed , the great majority of nonprojective constructions in Bulgarian are wellformed rather than unacceptable  , as implied by the hypothesis . This seems to be the only correct conclusion , despite the fact that the results themselves should not be considered as absolutely final  , this being due to the following circumstances : ( 1 ) We did not in fact inspect literally all admissible non-pro-jectivitie a but only those that were obtainable from the fragment of grammar stored for the experiment  ; and ( 2 ) the presense/absense of projectivity significantly depends on the conventions chosen for dependency arcs distribution  . Still , our investigation on the whole is to be viewed as sufficiently reliab-le  ( another experimental testing in which a larger grammar was used end slightly different notation where linguistically justified gave similar results  )  . 
Another point deserves special attention . Despite the fact that nonprojective structures in Bulgarian are grammatical  , the prevalent part of them are " stylistically marked "  . Whatever that means , the latter circumstance implies that , quite probably , such constructions will not occur in some kinds of texts at least  . Our chances to pinpoint such texts to a great extent depend on our understanding of the constructions in question  ( the label " stylistic mar-kedness " in itself is no great progress in this direction  )  . So we focused our attention on these constructions  , having already completed the experimental testing described  . The preliminary results of this latter study were quite intereating i non-pro-jeetivity in fact turned out to finely describe sentences with a special type of logical emphasis in 
Bulgarian , characterized by: ( i ) presense of both nonprojectivity and contrastive ~tress  ( CS )   ( in contrast to other emphatic sentences in Bulgarian  , having a CS and " normal " , projective word order ) ; ( ii ) preaense of CS on , on one of the words ( immaterially which ) from the nonprojective " inter ~ val " ( an " interval " is constituted by a pair of words connected by an arc such that intersects with a projection  )  ; the nonprojective constructions in this sense contrast with other emphatic constructions with projective word order  , which can take a CS on ( iii ) having synonymous constructions of two types : with a projective word order and CS  , or such analogous to the English cleft sentences ( " It is he who . . . , where the underlined words are connected by an-- -- are  )  ; perhaps , not by coincidence the latter con-struction e , both in Bulgarian and in English , are nonprojective ;   ( iv ) having a relation to the topic comment distinction  ; more specifically , one of the words from the nonprojective interval ( immaterially which ) is necessarily the comment of the sentence ( though , na-turally , not each comment requires non-projeetivity ) . 
These findings rehabilitate the projectivity // nonprojectivity distinction  ( thogh not the hypothesis ) for Bulgarian syntactic the ~: non-projectivi-ty happens to be the word order part of s very general mechanism for formation of sentences with lo~gi calemphasis  . Thus , though Bulgarian is generally characterized as a free word order language  , sentences with logical emphasis are not with a " free "  , but rather with a precisely specified word order coinciding with nonprojectivity  . 
As to the need to retain the above distinction in syntactic processors of Bulgarian  , things will be determined by the concrete applied goals : some small applications can certainly ignore non-projec-tive structures  ( their emphatic part )  , whereas robust systems cannot do without them . That is , the former systems would have to keep the distinction and the latter reject it  . Still , it will not be surprising if the distinction might be usefully acco-modated even in the latter case  . However , this needs further investigations , mostly in the line of textual linguistics : the study of context  , topic/comment , etc . One is reminded in this train of thought of the remark of the philosopher K  . Popper to the effect that a scientific investigation begins and ends with problems  . 

Botha R . , 1981 , The Conduct of Linquia_ticI__nn-uq ~ , Mouton : The Hague . 
Harper K . and D . Hays ,  1959 , The use of machines in the construction of a grammar and computer prog-ram for structural analysis  , R apport UNESCO . 
Kareva N . ~ 1965 , A classification of non-projec-tive constructions  , Scientific ~ Technical Informa-tio___En , No . 4 ( in Russian ) . 
Leeerf Y . , 1960 , Programme deeconflits , mod & ledes conflits , Tr_aduction automati__2 . ~, l , No . 4?
Perioliev V . , 1983, ~~ in Bul ~~ and in Enliq ~( Ph . D . Dissertation ; in Bulgarian ) ~
