' TOWARDSDISCOURSE-0RIENTEDNON MONOTONICSYSTEM
, Barbara Dunin-K ~ plicz Witold Lukaszewicz
, Institute of Informatics
Warsaw University
P.O . Box 1210
00-901 Warszawa , POL AND

The purpose of this paper is to analyse the phenomenon of nonmonotonicity in a natural language and ? o formulate a number of general principles which should be taken in % o consideration while constructing a discourse oriented nonmo-notonic formalism  . 

F'or the purpose of this paper we assume that to understand a discourse is to specify all the conclusions derivable from the discourse i tself knowledge about the world and knowledge of language use  . 
To complete discourse-connected conclusions , a number of various linguistic phenomena must be resolved  . The solution of such problems as anaphora , quantification , negation and so on , should be regarded as full right conclusions . 
The reason is that this purely linguistic information is necessary for obtaining the essential one  , describing the external world under conside -ration  . 
The measure of quality of any discourse analysis system is the adequacy of its inference capabilities to those of human language users  . 
This implies that any such a high quality system must provide some mechanism modelling common sense reasoning  . 
In everyday life we are continously forced to accept various conclusions which we are prepared to reject when our knowledge increases  . 
The ability of drawing such cancellable inferences , beliefs in AI terminology , makes common sense reasoning nonmonotonic in the sense that the set of derivable conclusions does not increase monotonically with the set of premises  , as in standard logics . 
Earlier experiences have proved that ad hoc nonmonotonic tools were ineffective  . They have seemed to work for the simplest cases only  . 
Since they lacked theoretical founds \[ ions , their behaviour has been unclear in more complex situations  . 
Recently there have been a number of attempts to formalize various nonmonotonic mech-anisms  ( see ( iI ,  1980)  , ( AAAI ,  1984\ [ ) )  . 
In this paper we analyse the phenomenon of nonmonotonicity in a natural language  . We also formulate a number of general principles which should be taken into account while specifying a discourse-oriented nonmonotonic formalism  . 
It is well recognized that ordering of discourse utterances is essential for its understanding ~ On the other hand  , logical systems lack mechanisms capturing this property  . If follows , therefore ~ that to model the dynamic nature of a discourse  , some kind of struciuralization is needed . Avery natural , both computationally and conceptually , discourse structuralization has been suggested by Kamp  ( Kamp ,  1981) . 
According to Kamp , a discourse is represented a SaD ( is course ) R ( epresentation ) S ( tructure )   . 
Reughly speaking , DRS is a sequence of D ( is course ) R ( epresentations ) ~ DR is nothing else than a partial mode I ~ describing discourse objects and their tel\ [ aliens  . AORS is constructed as follows . V ~' e start with the emp by DR . Each discourse utterance extends the actual DR by adding appropriate information contained in the utterance  , qFo construct any DR , some kind of reasoning mechanism is needed . V ~' e postulate the application of the nonmonoton ic inference system for that purpose  . 
NON MONOTONICITY
INDISCOURSEUNDERSTANDING q~o show the universa lity of nonmonotonicity in a natural language  5 we shall present a number of examples concerning various linguistic phenomena commonly occurring in a discourse  . 
One should be aware that analogous treatment of such different concepts as  , for instance , anaphora and presupposition is inappropriate . 
Anaphora , as well as quantification or negation are purely surface phenomena  . One must resolve ~ them while processing a discourse  , but their solutions lead to conclusions describing the discourse rather  , than the external world under consideration . For this reason we shall refer ? othose conclusions as surface conclusions  . 
Presupposition , on the other hand , as well a Stimeline COn Struction , conditionals or various conversational rules , concerns conclusions describing directly the world being represented by a discourse  . Vgeshall refer to those conclusions as . ~eneral conclusions . 
Our purpose is not to review all the linguis tic phenomena dealing with nonmonotonici t y  , but to demonstrate that ( i ) both kinds of conclusions are subject to inval idation  ,   ( ii ) canceliable conclusions of both types can be supported either by semantic or pragmatic sources  . 
This leads to an important observation that nonmonotonicity exists on various levels of discourse understanding  , viewing both processing method and data to be processed  . 
Surface conclusions
The following examples of pronoun anaphora and quantification show that semantic-based as well as progmatic-based surface conclusions can be invalidated  . 
Example i ( pronoun anaphora )   ( i ) The Vice-President entered the President's office  . He was nervous and clutching his brief case . 
504 " l~h is example is from ( Ascher , 1984) . There are semantic reasons supporting the conc lusion that the Vice-President is the one who is nervous given the information that he has a meeting with the President  . " I'h is conclusion can be , however , overturned by adding (2) After all , he couldn't fire the Vice-President wi thout making trouble for himself with the chairman of the board  . 
Example 2 ( pronoun anaphora )   ( 3 ) Peter ' WaSsitting in a room . When John entered the room he seemed nervous . 
Although there are two possible referents of " he " in  ( 3 )  , it is pragmatically well motivated that " he " refers to " Peter "  , This follows from Gricels Cooperative Pr inciple  . Assuming that the speaker is obeying it , he should replace ( 5 ) by the unmistakable ( 4  ) Peter was sitting in a room . Entering the room , John seemed nervous . 
if it were the case that John had been nervous.
l q e v e r t h e l e s m , this preferred coreference is inval-idated if ( 4 ) is extended to ( 5 ) Peter was sitting in a room . When John entered the room he seemed nervous . He was afraid of Peter . 
(quant i f i ca t ion )   ( 6  ) There are three menin a room . Every man loves a woman , ~ here are clearly two possible paraphrases of ( 6 ) :  (  ?  ) " Phere are three men in a room . q ? here is a woman such that she is loved by each of them  , (8) There are three men in a room . For each man there is a woman such that he loves her  . 
Applying his " ordering principles " , based on the observation that humans are used to handle infor-mation from left to right  , II in tikkain ( Ilintikka ,  1977 ) convincingly suggests that ( 8  ) is prag-matically preferred reading for ( 6  )   . Never the-less , this conclusion may be overturned , lP or instance , it ( 6  ) is extended to ( 9 ) " l ~ here are three men in a room . Every man loves a woman . Hername is Melinda . 
Example 4: ( quantification )   ( 10 ) Arifle has been given to all soldiers , From among two possible readings of (10) , the one asserting that different rifles have been given to differents ot diers should be semantic-ally preferred ? But this in terp retation is imme-diately inv~lidated when  ( 10 ) is replaced by ( 11 ) Arifle has been given to all soldiers . 
It has turned out to be broken.
General conclusions ' l ~ he following examples of presupposition illustrate that semantic-based as well as prag-matic-based general conclusions are subject to cancella tion  . 
( presupposition ) (3 . 2 ) John regrets that he didn't w in the prize . 
(12) presupposes that John did not w in the prize.
Nevertheless , this general conclusion is immediately inval i dated when  ( 12 ) is extended to ed to ( 3 . 3) John regrets that he didn't w in the prize . 
In fact , he doesn't know that he did.
Example 6_ ( presupposition )   ( 24 ) " If I had money I would buy a rifle to de-fend yeu from the Wolf "  , Red Riding Hoodmaid to her Grr and mother . 
(14) presupposes that RRH had no money.
This follows from the pragmatic rules of interpretation of counterfactuals in English  .   "\]2he cancel ~ ability of this conclusion is easily seen  , if ( 14 ) is extended to ( 15 ) " If I had money I would buy a rifle to de-fend you from the W ' olf "  , RRH said to her CTr and mother . In fact , RRHWaS cheating her . 
5 he had money , but she wanted to buy herself a new dress . 
According to the presented examples , nonmo-notonicity is not a local phenomenon . It exists on various levels of discourse analysis  . It seems , therefore , that no high quality discourse under-s t and ing system can i ~ nore this fact  . 
q?OWARDSADI~SCOURSE-ORIEN'J?ED
NON MONOG ) ONIC FOR MALISM
Although a great number of various nonmono-ton ic  ( nm , for short ) formalisms can be found in AI literature , none of them seems to be fully appropriate for the purpose of discourse under-standing  . In our opinion , only default logic pare tially captures the expressive power of natural language  . \] Deriving from Minsky's frame concept , this formalism has turned out to be useful for various natural language applications  ( see ( Dunin--K ~ plicz ,  1984)  , ( Mercer , Reiter ,  1984)  . 
Default logic has been introduced by Relier in ( P . eiter , 1980) to model default reason in_q , i . e . , the drawing of p laus ib le conc lus ions from in com-plete information in the absence of ev idence to the contrary  , f typical example of default reasoning is the inference rule " < Pypically birds fly "  . If " l ~ weety ise bird , then in the absence of evi-dence to the contrary  , we normally assume that q ~ weefy flies . But we are prepared to reject this conclus ion  , if we learn the ft ( Dweety is a pinguiru In default logic the rule about birds is repre-sen\[ed by the fol lowing default : bird  ( x ) : M flies ( x ) /flies ( x ) with the intended interpretation : " for each individ-ualx  , if x is a bird and i is consistent to assume that x flies  , then it may be assumed that x flies " . 
In default logic lhew or ld under consider at ion is represented as a default the ~  , i . e . a pair consisting of a set of first-order formulae  , the axioms of the theory , and a set of defaults . De-faults extend the information contained in axioms by sanctioning plausible  , but not necessarily true , conclusions . 
A set of formulae derivable from a given de -fault theory is  ; called an extension of the theory and is in terpreted as a set of beliefs about the world being * h ~ delled  . ( see ( Relier , 3_980) fop details) . 

Specifying an m discourse-oriented formalism is a difficult problem  .  "\] ) he first step is to determine all its relevant properties  . In this section we shall try to accomplish this point and to discuss some weaknesses of default logic in this respect  . 
The first problem is to choose an appropriates tandard logic as a basis of the constructed system  . Although the majority of existing nm for-mali sms are based on classical first-order logic  , it is well recognized that to capture the structure of natural languages  , at least intensional logic , preferable with tense operettors , is required . 
It should be , however , stressed that for computational reasons some compromise between adequacy and simplicity is necessary  . 
The next step is to add a nonmonotonic deductive structure to the chosen monotonic logic  . 
This amounts to the following task . Given a the-errA , i . e . , a set of formulae descr ib ing relevant information about a world  , determine a set E ( A ) of conclusions nonmonotonically derivable from A  . The general idea is to identify this set with the set of conclusions monotonically derivable from some extension of A  . For this reason lD ( A ) is called an extension of A , and is interpreted as the set of plausible conc lusions about the world under consideration  . 
Defining a language and nm deductive structure , determines an m system . But to make the system applicable for di scourse processing  , a number of additional factors should be taken into consideration  . 
~ irst , a semantics mus\[be specified . In particular , a model regarded as an m description of a real world under consideration should be defined  . 
Second , a method of determining whether a conclusion can be inferred from a given set of premises should be specified  . Because nm derivability depends not only on what can be proved  , but also on what cannot be proved , there are technical problems involved here . In particular , even if the system is based on semi-decidab le first-order logic  , its proof theory is generally undecidable .  "\] ) his means that some kind of heuristics is necessary  , and the system will sometimes arrive at mistaken conclusions  . 
Nevertheless , it is often sufficient to consider only models with finite domains limited to the individuals explicitely occurring in the discourse  . 
In such a case , the logic we are dealing with is , in fact , the proposition alone . " I ~ henm formal-ism based on propositional logic is  , of course , decidable . 
" l ~ hird , belief ___ . ~s\[evision ~ that is a method of reorganizing world model when new information leads to incons is tency should be specified  .   ( \[' his very difficult problem has been marginal ly treat-ed in the most of existing nm systems  , On the other hand , since each discourse utterance mod-ifies the actual world model  , beliefs revision seems one of the central problems of discourse analysis  . 
Fourth , the existence of extensions should be guaranteed  . Although this demand seems obvious , it iS not satisfied in many existing nm formali sms  , in particular ~ in Reite~s default logic , An example of a discourse , whose representation in lqeiter's system lacks an extension  , can be found in ( Lukaszewicz ,  1984)  . " l ~ his paper pre~-sents also an alternative formalization of default logic which satisfies the above postulated proper-ty  . 
Fifth , the system should ~ model common sense reasoning  . In terms of extension , this means that such an extension should contain those discourse-connected conclus ions which would be drawn by humans  . In our opinion , none of existing nm formalisms fully captures this requirement  . The detailed discussion of this hypothesis can be found in  ( Lukaszewicz ,  1986)  . 
In the majority of nm systems the notion of an extension is defined in a way admitting the exist-fence of many different extensions for ag iven theory  , q ~ his poses the question of how to define the set of conclusions derivable from such a theory  . ' l ~ here are two possibilities . First , to view each extension as an alternative set of beliefs one can hold about a world under consideration  . 
In fact , this solution has been adopted in default logic . Second , to identify the set of conclusions with the intersection of all extensions  . Both solutions are reasonable but have different interpretations  , q ~ he first represents what an agent beliefs about a world  , the second , wh~t an outside observer would know about the agent ~ beliefs  , given the set of the agent's premises about the world  . 
In our opinion , the second solution is better motivated in di scourse processing  , q ~ h is follows from the fact that both the speaker ' and the hearer try to achieve a common representation of a discourse  . " l~h is would be impossible , if each of them accepted a different extension . 

AAAI ( 1984 ) Non-Monotonic Reason infi Worksh of )   , New Paltz , NY , October 1719 ,  1984 . 
AI (1980) Artificial Intelligence . Vol .  13/1,2 . 
Ascher , N . )  ( 1984 ) Linguistic Understanding and Non-Monoton icReasoning  . In AAAI-84, pp .  120 . 
Dunin-Ktplicz B . ,  ( 1984 ) Default Reasoning in Anaphora Resolution . Prec . 6th ECA !, pp .  157-166 . 
Hintikka J . ,  ( 1977 ) Quantifiers in Natural Languages : Some Logical Problems II  . ~- tics and Philosophyi , pp .  153-172 . 
Kamp H . ,  ( 1981 ) Aq?heor ~ of Truth and Semantic Represent at ion  . Formal Methods in th___ee StudyOf
Language , Amsterdam , pp . 277-322.
Lukaszewicz W . , (1984~) Considerations on Default
Logic . In AMI-84, pp . 165-193.
Lukaszewicz W .   ,   ( 1986 ) Formalization of Knowledge and Ignorance : An Introduction to Non-monotonic Reasoning  , C ___ CA . __I\[~to appear . 
Mercer R . , Reiter , R . ,  ( 1982 ) The representation of Presuppositions Using Defaults  . B . g . University . 
~ I'echnical Report 82-i.
Reiter R ., (1980) A Logic for Default Reasoning.
Artificial Intelligence 13/i , 2, pp . 81-132.

