ATHEORY OF SEMANTICRELATIONS FOR LARGES CALE NATURALL ANGUAGE PROCESSING 
Hanne Ruus
University of Copenhagen
Institut for nor disk filologi
and Eurotra-DK
N jals gade 80
DK-2300 Copenhagen S
Ebbe Spang-Hanssen
University of Copenhagen
Roman skinstitut
and Eurotra-DK
N jals gade 80
DK-2300 Copenhagen S
Even a superficial meaning representation of a text requires a system of semantic labels that characterize the relations between the predicates in the text and their arguments  . 
The semantic interpretation of syntactic subjects and objects  , of prepositions and subordinate conjunctions has been treated in numerous books and papers with titles including words like DEEP CASES  , CASEROLES , SEMANTICROLES and SEMANTICRELATIONS . 
However , no generally accepted set of case roles has emerged from all these investigations and discussions  . A comprehensive exposition is given by H . L . Somers (1983) . 
We see one basic problem with most systems of semantic cases : the labels are not clearly differentiated  . Consequently it is not possible to use the labels in a consistent way  . We think that the missing differentiation has one principal source : many different aspects of meaning related to predicates and their arguments are treated by the same description : THE ASSIGNMENTOF CASEROLES ? We propose that at least the following aspects are kept apart : feature descriptions of arguments : arguments are classified according to +- concrete  , +- animate , +- stuff etc . 
temporal and aspectual features of predicates : predicates  , notably verbs and adjectives , are classified according to +- durative , +- action , +- process , +- stative . 
-the semantic relations established by the predicates  . 
In this paper we concentrate on the semantic relations established by predicates : what are they  , what are their characteristics , how do they group the predicates . 
One example will suffice to show how conflicting criteria make case label assignment impossible : Suppose we use some wellknown labels to describe the following sentence : 
Peter gave John the letter
AGENTRECIPIENTPATIENT
Yet with that kind of labels we get into trouble as soon as we want to describe such a simple sentence as 
Peter took the letter from John ? AGENT PATIENT ORIGIN ? RECIPIENT 
Obviously , criteria : location : there is a conflict between two causality :  ( AGENT PATIENT ) and ( RECIPIENT ( GOAL ) ORIGIN ) To which of the two criteria should we give the priority ? It is not so that the causer  ( agent ) is always origin of some object trajectory as with ' to give '  . As a matter of fact , the predicate ' to give ' has always been used as a model  ( cf . the word ' dative ') . 
The causer may well cause that objects move not away from him but towards him  , as with ' to take ' . In general , we could speak of two different streams or directions  , one at the spatial level ( the location of objects )  , i another at the causa \] level ( an influence going from one entity towards another entity  )  . 
To ensure the self-consistency of a system we appeal to the following two principles :- we use the mathematical notion of relation : a predicate establishes a relation between pairs of units or one unit is related to itself by a predicate  , -we use few clearly distinguished semantic units  . 
Some units are relators . They establish relations between other units . The relators are the predicates , the other units are their arguments . When we try to characterize the different kinds of relations  , it is important to keep in mind that the arguments are related BY the predicate  , not TO it . 
we base our system of semantic relations on one semantic unit DIRECTEDNESS  . The directedness concerns some object that may be oriented TO and/or FROM some other argument  . 
The directedness may be situated at four semantically different  , abstract levels : an influential , alocational , a qualificational levels there is an add it ional non-directed relation ? In the case of non-directedness the object is related to another argument that is semantically marked in the relevant dimension  . 
2 o PRESENTATION OF THE SYSTEM 2 . 1o SURVEY The system we propose looks l ike this : influential : object orig  . 
qualificational : object origogo alref-term location a\]: object orig  . goal ref-term pertinential : object orig . goal ref-term The arguments of one predicate can have labels belonging to at most two dimensions : influential and one more dimension  . 
Examples :
He brought us a new car influential : orig . objectio cational : goal object
The car came from Paris \] . ocation a \]: object orig ~ In qualificat ional  ,  \] . ocational and pertinen-tial , if \[ he dimension is present , there must be at least one argument that is ' object ' and at least one argument that has one of the three other values : origin  , goal or ref-term . The dimension has no meaning un\]ess there is an ' object ' related to at leant one of the three reference points  , in each of these three dimensions an object may be situated on a directed line  , i . e . with respect to an origin or to a goal or to both  . 
Or it may be situated , without any direc--tional idea , with respect to a reference po:\[nt that is neither originn or goal  , and which we call just ref-termo
She lives in Paris locational : object ref-term Ref-term is negatively defined as a reference point which is neither origin nor goal  . It may be characterized positively , however , since a reference point , if it is neither origin nor goal , will normally be some noticeable object in proximity  . This characteristic is important when we try to apply the terms origin  , goal and ref-term in the non-locational dimensions  . 
In influential , the argument that is origin can also be an impl icit object  , i . e . the influential relation may be reflexive : one argument is related to itself  . Examples :
She turned round influential : orig.
She turned the page influential : orig . object 2 . 2 . THEDIMENSIONS We use the dimension ' in f luential ' to express an influence going from an origin to an object  , as in the example just quoted . The concept of ' origin ' at the influential level is close to the traditional ' agent '  , yet somewhat wider . It is not , as the latter , linked to the concept of action , but rather to that of causality . In every sentence there is an ' object ' to which something happens  , in a much smaller number of sentences there is an indication of what or who makes the thing happen  . We need not always , however , fill out ' object ' of influential , since it will be the same as ' object ' in whatever other dimension is present  . 
We use ' qualificational ' to express relat ions between arguments some of which are not referential objects : 
IIe is a teacher qualificational : object ref - term 
She became president qualificational : object goal The arguments that are qualifi cations are easy to distinguish from other arguments by the fact that they cannot be referred to with a pronoun  . They are not independent discourse entities , but they are attributes of some discourse entity . 
We use ' locational ' , as already illustrated , to exDress spatial relationships , and also obvious metaphorica \] uses of space ? Finally  , we use the dimension ' pertinential ' to express more abstract relations  . We take the Latin word ' pertinens ' in the meaning ' concerning  , referring to ' . Thus the constituting idea of this level is just the idea of referring or relating an object to some other object  . Defined in this way , pertinential can serve us as the unmarked dimension  , i . e . the dimension we can use whenever the more narrowly defined dimensions do not suffice to describe the relations between the arguments of some predicate  . In some cases a pertinential relation may be directional  , namely when there is a precedence between the arguments : 
Peter suffers from pneumonia pertinential : object : orig  . 
The gun is used for shooting pertinential : object goal some kind of proximity  ( belonging-to , similarity or the like):
The house belongs to Sarapertinential : object ref-term 
Peter resembles Napole on pertinential : object ref - term  3  . PROCEDURE FOR ASSIGNING LABELS
A . ISTHEREANORIGINOFINFLUENCE ?
IF THEREISONLY ONE ARGUMENT AND the meaning of the verb implies that this argument is origin of a directed stream of energy  , then assign the label ' origin of influence ' , else assign the labels ' object of influence': a  . He works in f . : orig . 
b . The eggboils inf .: obj.
IFTHEREISMORETHANONE ARGUMENT AND there is an influence relation such that one argument is directed towards another  , then assign to the former the label ' origin ' , and to the latter the label'object':c . He boils the egg in f . : orig . object d . She will so on come to Copenhagen ( no assignments ) e . They send her to Copenhagen in f . : orig . object f . He uses the gun for shooting in f . : orig . object g . We have no money ( no assignments ) h . He called him a fool in f . : orig . object B . ISTHEREAQUALIFICATION ALDIMENSION ? if there are arguments that are not referential  ( i . e . they cannot be referred to with a pronoun ) , then assign the appropriate qualificational labels : h  . He called him a fool qual . : ref-term C . IFTHEREISNOQUALIFICATION ALDIMENSION , THENIFTHEREIS ALOCATION ALDIMENSION , assign the adequate locational labels : d . She will sooncome to Copenhagen locat . : object goale . They send her to Copenhagen locat . : object goal f . He uses the gun for shooting ( no assignments ) g . We have no money ( no assignments ) D . IFTHEREISNOQUALIFICATION ALDIMENSION , ANDIFTHEREIS NOLOCATION ALDIMENSION , 
ANDIFNOT ALL ARGUMENTSH AVEGOT
INFLUENTIAL LABELS , THEN assign the adequate pertinential labels to arguments that are not origin of influence : f  . He uses the gun for shooting pert . : object goalg . We have no money per t . : ref-term object In order to save space , we have not indicated all the cases in which assignments will not take place with the given examples  . 
The proposed system has been tested on the following material : examples of verbs from the different verb classes of tradition such as communication verbs  , mental verbs etc . 
all Danish and French verbs that have different surface syntactic complement realisations  . 
-all Danish verbs and verbal nouns in a text on Information Technology  . 

Anderson , John M . 1977: On Case Grammer.
Prolegomena to a Theory of Grammatical
Relations ? Croom Helm , London.
Jackendoff , Ray 1976: " Toward an Explanatory Semantic Representation " in Linguistic 
Inquiry , vol . 7(i ), pp . 89-150. MIT
Press , Cambridge , Mass.
Ruus , Hanne and Ebbe Spang-Hanssen 1982: Argument Relations and Predicate Types for EUROTRA  . Report ET-10-DK for EEC , DGXIIIB . 
Somers , H . L .   1983: An Investigation into the Application of the Linguistic Theories of Valency and Case to the Automated Processing of Natural Language  , CCL-UMIST Rep . No . 
83-9 ; will be published as : Valency and Case in Computational Linguistics  . Edinburgh
University Press , Edinburgh 1986.

