SITUAT\]Or ~ JAL
Selkl Akama
Fuj its uI.td.
2-~-19, Shin Yokohama,
Yokohama , Japan
INVESTIGA-I-ION\[Jl-PRES UPI-~\[ . Jbl IIUIX , I
Masahlto Rawamor I
Sophia University,
2 Kieicho , Chivodaku
Tokyo , Japan

This paper gives a formal theory of presupposition using situation semantics developed by Barwise and Perry  , We will slightly modify Barwise and Perry's original theory of situation semantics so that we can deal with nonmonotonic reasonings which are very important for the formalization of presupposition in natural language  . This aspect is closely related to the formalization of incomplete knowledge in art if icial intelligence  ,  1 . Introduction In constructing a natural language understanding system we face  , serious problems in syntax , semantics and pragmatlcs , From a computational point of view , pragmatics especially poses the greatest problem . At present there exists no appropriate theory of pragmatics for natural language  . A few approaches proposed so far seem to offer linguistic or computational difficulties in their foundation  , for they never give a computational mechanism for pragmatics in an effective way  . 
In understaqding the meaning of a natural language we use both the knowledge for the language and the socalled world know ~ Most of the inferences used in natural language can be dependent upon the latter  . Many researchers , however , have ignored in their formalism this aspect of natural language reasonings  . 
We believe that a desirable formalism must include two important devices : firstly a representation of world knowledge : secondly  , an inference system involved in the world knowledge  . 
The form e , " has already been realized in many A\] systems , while the latter cannot be found in most systems . As for the latter , " although there are such non-classical systems as nonmonotonic logics and fuzzy logic  , a more suitable inference system for incomplete knowledge is definitely in need  . And linguistic observations have shown that traditional model theoretic formalisms are inadequate in this respect  . 
Presupposition is essential In understanding natural language  . The possibility of suspending presuppositions of a sentence shows that presupposition has lobe undarst obd as an inference in an incompletely perceived world  . Hence constructing a theory of natural language reasonings as presup  . 
position calls for one " Incorporating nonmonotonic reasonings  , From such considerations we choose Situation Semantics  ( henceforth SS ) developed by Barwise and Perry ( 1983 ) as a basis of our theory . In SS the meaning of a sentence is represented as a relation between the situations in which the sentence is uttered and the situations described by such utterances  . We take presuppositions to be information about the described situations consistently restricted by the uttered situations  . 
In section Z we review presupposition briefly . The subsequent sections will provide a theoretical foundation for it on the basis of  5S  . 
2, Presupposition
Before formalizing pr(~supposition , we shah consider the important question : " what is a presupposition ?" The answer to this question Is the kev to the construction of a formal theory of presupposition  . 
We find in the literature-several definitions of presupposition  . For example , many philosophers and linguists assume the definition generally represented as follows :  ( Def1 ) A presupposes 8 iff ( i ) A entails B 00 -A entails B This definition leads the undesired conclusion that BIsa +  . autology . Clearly an improved definl'tion is in order . 
Karttunen ( 1973 ) gives the following as an alternative : ( IDef2 ) A ~ tically presupposes B relative t q a set of assumed facts C iff it is riot acceptable to utter AIn the context Cunless Centails B  , This definition says that a presupposition is an entailment of the sentence in a context  . Regretablv , nowever , there are no formal definitions for such terms as ' entails '  , ' relative to ' , Gazdar (1979) , ' on the other hand , gives the following definition . 
( Def3 ) praBmatic presupposition is entailed bv the context in favour of the weaker requirement hat they be consistent with the context  . 
There he further gives the fallowing informal definitions of essential terms in the above definition@s follows  , ( Def3 . 1 ) A sentence A is entailed bvaset of sentence B Just in case A is true in every possible world in which all members of B are true  . 
( Def3 . 2 ) A sentence A is consistent with a set of sentences  8 just in case A is truetn some possible world in which all members of B are true  . 
Thus Gazdar's definition crucial v depends on the notion of consistency  . 
Althoughllis definition seems to be more plausible than the other definitions based en entailments  , as it enables us to accommodate the socalled projection prob ! emate as e  , yet It is not'entirely free from shortcomings , HIS theory is based on possible-world semantics , which is not quite adequate as a natural language semantics  . The Inappropriateness of such a theory is discussed in BarwJse and Perry  ( 1983 )  , Akama (1986) in detail . From a computational point of view , especially many of its deficiencies can be stated  , To say the least possible-world semantics seems to fail to deal with partial information in an ef fective way  , And in theories in this tradition only restr icted statements can be derived from its model that is  , accessibility relations affect logical structures in the model  . Moreover although unrealistic objects may be possible in a model  , they are not suitable for a computational paradigm  . 
In computer science Mercer and Relter ( 1982 ) formulated presupposition , more or less In Gazdar's spirit , as an inference generated from a pragmatic rule , namely , default rule . Since their formalism ts based on first-order theory  , similar shortcomings as in the case of passible -world semantics can be pointed cut  . It is , however , interesting to notice its flexl biiity in the application to knowledge representation  . 
To overcome the abovementioned difficulties in traditional theories  , we introduces SS as an underlying theory for presupposition below  ,  3 . Formal Theory of Presupposition We are concerned in this section with formalizing the notion of presupposition within the framework of SS  . 
Our theory is a little different than the version presented In Barwise and P  ( ~ rrv ( 1983 ) or Barwise ( 1985 )  , for we Introduce some modifications in the theory so that we can accomodate presupposition in natural language  , More specifically , our formalism assumes a nonmonotonic relation between events called plausibility  orderin9  , as opposed to the monotonic'persistence' relation assumed in Barwise and Perry  ( 198\] )  . As a consequence , our theory is not only capable of treating presupposition In an elegant way  , but is able to deal with default and autoepistemic reasonings as well  . 
3 , 1 Outline of Situation Semantics  n this section we review brief ly some basic points of SS  . 
Here we mainly follow the formalism recently introduced in Barwise  ( 1984 ,  1985 ) rather than the original one in Barwise and Perry  ( 1983 ) since it is simpler and more comprehensive . 
The most attractive idea of SS is the shift of attention from ' truth conditions to ' information conditions '  .   $5 can be said to be an attempt at explicating the nature of language focussing on the following two aspects :  ( 1 ) under what conditions a sentence can be used to convey information  . 
(2 ) what information the sentence conveys under those conditions  . 
A situation S can contain information in virtue of some constraint the holds between types of situations  . We denote types of situa . tions as S,S' . . . . We wr i te s:S If s i tuat ion s is S , A type of situation S is realized if there is a real situations such that  , s : S , There are three categories of objects across situations : namely  , individua . ~ denoted as : a , b .   .   .   . ; relations : r , s .   .   .   . : and Io cat ~ L1 .   .   .   . Corresponding to each category , there are purely abstract , sort or dummy . 
entities called in determinates that stand proxy for genuine objects  . We represent in determinates by So , $ b .   .   .   . ; $ r . $ r ' .   .   .   .  ; $\], $1'  .   .   .   . Anehorin 9 is a function that assigns individuals , relations , and locations to the indeterminates . 
For example , the following is a type of situation where a is in relation R to be b : " 
S-($s\]ln$s:at$1:R . a , b : 1\] where R , a , and b denote some respectively specific relat ion and individual  , and $ s and $1 are indeteminates . 
Given an anchor that assign 1' to $1 , the following can be a real situation where a and b are in the same relation R : in s : at \] ': R  , a , b ; 1 . 
A Constraint is a relation holding between types of situation  , S -> ~ r , we read it as S involves S ' . Intuitively this means that if S is realized  , that is , there is a real situations : S , then there is a real situations ' such that s ':S'  . 
Given any constraint and any anchor f for some or all of the parameters in S  , the result of replacing the parameters by appropr iate values will give rise tean actual constraint  . 
To wit , if
S~S'isactual , then so is
S(f ) ? S'(f).
We call the latter an instance of the former ,   t4ere we can extend the involves relation to a three -place relation as 
S#S'/B wh here B is the backcj round conditions on the situations in which constrain  ( between S and S ' holds . 
Let R be n * l-place relation taking n + l objects al  .   .   .   .   . an * l . 
Suppose parameter-free type
S-\[$ slin$s : R , al .   .   .   .   . an , Sam1;i \] ( l-0 or 1) is realized . \]f$an*lJs an environment constant , that is , it Is fixed in some way , then it only takes n objects and a truth value to determine the same proposition  . 
In the abovementioned remark of involves relat ion  , B corresponds to an environment constant . Parametric Informa-tion is relative to some assignment to parameters in a type of situation  . 
Barwise ( 19 B ~ ) uses the two distinct terms for ' meaning ' , namely , situation meaning and situation-type mean in  9  , The former is used for talking about the meaning of particular situation  , while tile latter Is for the meaning of a certaint vPe of situation  . We can ident l f v situation meaning with information  , so a particular state of affairs has as i tuation meaning  . 
And understanding 4he situation meaning of particular mental state requires an understanding of the situat ion-type meaning of that type of state  , as it normally functions in the external life of the agent  , Here If we take into account a congnitive state of the agent we need two parallel sets of constraints  , one on some activity A and the other on cognit ive activity about A  . ' ~, More formally , let #S,#S' .   .   .   . be types of situation of the mental state for a fixed agent  . Also tile agent is able to construct #0: #S~#S ' , Usually we assume the following diagram of constraints between mental situations and situations  , that is , 
S#S't#S~#S'
Here we assume there exists a homomorph JsmF from a collection of types of situation to a col lection of corresponding types of situation of mental states  , namely there is an F such that F ( s)-flS , This generates that an agent can interpret real situations in various ways  . Thus involve relation relation between reals ituations and mentalsi % uations can be regarded as an inverse of F  , namelv F-'(#S)-S . According to the abovementioned definitions we can eost ruct some types of situation of mental state in the effective way  , If there is no agent , as is the case in a knowledge system ,  #S is considered as self-referential statement on fie  . We think its foundations are more or less cotroversial  , \] nSS an inference is an activity that attempts to use facts about the world to extrac t additional information  , information implicit in the facts , A sound inference then is the appropriate chain of information  . 
3, 2. Formalism of Modified SS
There are two main features to be taken into account when providing an appropriate definit ion for presupposition in natural language  , One thing is to accommodate a lack of complete information  . The other thing is to accommodate the agent's bel ief context  , fhe former is called ' default ' and the latte rautoe pistemic ' respectively  . Although they appear to be independent of each other in their involvement in presupposition  , our formalism is capable of dealing with both of them  . 
Our modification of SS is mainly concerned with revising the involves relation between situations  . As we said at the outset of this chapter , instead of the partial ordering of information , namely ,  ~  . nccA ~ e assumed in the original version of Barwise and Perry  ( 1983 )  , we shah introduce the plausibility ordering ,  -( , satisfying the following conditions : ( 1 ) A-B implies Ac_B ( =_ is an ordinary monotonic relation )  , ( Z)A ~ A ( reflexivity) ,   ( 3 ) A - ( B and B- ( C impl lies A-C C ( transitivit v )   , Although the exact nature of ' the plausibili tyordering is rather vague  , its intuitive meaning is that any information  , whether correct or incorrect in the actual , is of use in the model for

For instance , we presuppose by __ defau\]t in a certain cogn it ive state towards the world  . Presuppositions are appro-priate interpret at ions of information depending on the agent even i fit includes both information and misinformation  , We now revise the theory of constraints on the basis of the plausible chain of information introduced above  . 
We assume the following conditions on the modified involves relation :  ( 1 ) If B is fixed , then if $1$ S2/B and 62~SS/B then $1~SS/B , (2) If S?S'/B and B '"( B , where B'isco_ompatible with S , then S . ~ S'/B' . 
(\]) If S~)S'/B and B'-(B , where B ' is not compatible with S , then Se-S'/B' . 
(4) If S~S'/B then Sisc . ompatible with B , that is , SUB is coherent . 
(5 ) If S?S-~/B and f is a coherent anchor for some of the parameters of B  . then S(f ) ~ S'(f)/B(f ) . 
(6) If S~S'/B where B has no parameters , and if B is realized by some real situation , then S~S'is actual , (1) If SeS'/B and B-(8' , then S~S'/B'or S~It is to be noticed that condition  ( 7 ) means that certain parametric constraints can a ffect a truth condition as information increases  . In the original approach JnSS it is nontrivia l to represent any nonmonotonic it v in the effec tive way  . 
We now define presupposition in the framework of SS as below:  ( Def ~ ) A ~ B in tile background condition C iff
A-)B/C and - A , ~ B/CJ r  #A n#B ~ where A , B denote type of situation of the world and IIA , t/B , types of situation of the agent's mental states relative r  . gA , B . 
In the definil ; i on we of course assume the involve relation satisfies ' the above mentioned seven conditions  . And if there is no agent in the krlow ledge sV stem  ,  #A is part of ' A since any knowledge base is itself coherent structure in the I~ruth e o n d i t i o n  . In such a case presuppositions correspond to the default as loog as we adopt ordinary inference system  . 
We can formalize va-ioust ~ pesill presuppositions bvmaking use el ' this definition  . For example , this definition predicts we can do valid inference from rnJs information arid do invalid inference from correct information  . The inferences carried out by human being have manv demonstrai:ive characters related to t be cognitive processes of information of the world  . 
Here we shall regard any information to be used bvt be agent as a presupposition in a certain context  , 
I ~. Conclusion
I ~ eehanizing presuppositions in natural language is Lr~emosl  . importanl :, task Furpragmatics . Furthesake of partiality or inf'eL'matiun presented in a sen Leoce  , SS is more suitable than arl lodel-L heol'et Jc selrlaatigs  . In eLIr ~ , l'eat meate very information is considered useful tbo ~ Jw  ( 9 dispense with such ae ideal principle as persistence of information  . 
~._.! ~ e Feren?es
Akama , S . (1986) , " Methodology and Verii'ial ) ilit Vin Montague Grammar " , to appear in Prec . of COLING 86 . 
Barwise , 3 . (1984) , " the Sit , ua Lionin Lofich I_og Jc , Meaning arid Informabion " . \[: SLI Report 84-2, Sl ; anford, . (1985) , " the Situatior ~ in Logic If : Conditionals and Conditional klfe\['matien'  , CSi\[Report 85-21 , Stanford . 
Barwise , 3 . and Perrv , 3 . (198_), Situations and ALtitudes , Boston :
MIf Press.
Gazdar , G . (1979), ~ t\[cs , New York : Academic Press . 
Karttumeo , L . (1973), " Presupposition of Compound Sentence ",
E@tiele_r\]#~,4,169-193.
Mercer , R . E . and Railer , R , (1982) , " The Representation of Presup--positions Using Default "  , Technical Report 82-1 , Department of Computer Science , the University ef British Columbia . 

