Learning the Space of Word Meanings
for Information Retrieval Systems
Koichi HORI , Seinosuke TODA and Hisashi YAS UNAGA
National Institute of Japanese Litera ture 
1  -16-10 Yutakacho Shinagawaku Tokyo 142 Japan Abstract : Several methods to represent meanings of words have been proposed  . However , they are not useful for information retr i eval systems  , because they cannot deal with the entities which cannot be universally represented by symbols  . 
In this paper , we propose a notion of seman U espace . Semantic space is an Euelidean space where words and entities are put  . A word is one point in the space . The meanings of the word are represented as the spaee configuration around the word  . The entities that cannot be represented by symbols can be identified in the space by the location tile entity should be settled in  . We also give a learning mechanism for the space . We prove the effectiveness of the proposed method by an experiment on information retr i eval for the study of 
Japanese literature.
1. Introduction
There have been no theories of semantics we can rely on for building a large information retr i eval system  . The defect in the existent theories is the lack of explanation of the mechanism for adjust ing to tile realworld the formal symbolics ys tems used in the theories  ; the only tMng they explain is the relation between natural language and the formal system  . 
Those theories assume the existence of fixed and universal one-to-one relations between the basic elements in the formal system and tile entities m tile real world  . For example , both Montague semantics and the situation semantics assume that we can represent he dog named Morris in the realworld as some symbol like MORRIS in the formal system and that the relation between Morris and MORRIS is fixed and universal  \[3  , 2\] . 
However , when we consider an information retrieval system  , especially in the field of study on literature , we encounter problems where the assumption does not hold  . One problem is that there are entities that do not have universal symbolic representation  . For example , when a researcher discovers a new entity ( or notion ) in literature and writes a paper on that entity  , the paper must be stored in the database but we do not have appropriate keywords for that entity  . When tile entity becomes wellknown in later years  , it may be named , for example , ' over there is m ' . However at the time tile entity is discovered and does not have the name ' over there is m '  , we must representile entity by a fixed set of symbols  , but it is not easy . Another problem is that the range of what is meant by a symbol differs among the users of an information retrieval system  . For example , we cannot identify the fixed meaning of ' romant icism '  . Every user assumes different meanings of ' romantic is m ' and it is not easy to control the meaning  . The latter problem has been considered in the studies of fuzzy meanings  , but , so far , the former problem has not been con-sidered m the studies on semantics  . 
In order to solve the abovementioned problems , we propose a notion of semanties pace and the learning mechanism of the space  . Our assumption is that the entities which could not be represented by a fixed set of symbols can be identified in some semantic space by the location the entity should be settled in  . Although whether this assumption is universal lyvalid is problematic  , we have proved that this assumption is effective in information retrieval systems in the field of studies on literature  . We believe that the fieht of literature in c ludes essential problems and has jnst enough complexity to give as evidence for a general d is cussion on semantics  . 
The semantic space is an Euclidean space where entities and words are scattered  . Tile crucial point of our idea is that the axes of the space are not given beforehand but are generated through learning from retrievals y : ? tem  . Since tile axes of t , he space are not given beforehand , the system can adjust the configuration , of tile space for absorbing new entities . 
In chapter 2 , we describe in detail the notion of semantic space  , explaining what are the entities and words in an information retrieval system for lit  , era-Lure studies , and we show how the meanings of words are represented in the space  . 
In chapter 3 , we describe tile learlting mechanism of the semantic space  . Generally speaking , in tile studies on machine learning , it . has been revealed that the mechanism for contro lling the learning process is important  ; without such mectlanisms , the result of tile learning becomes Leogeneral or too specific  . Ill the learning process proposed ill this paper , we use a user's satisfaction as tile e ontrol lhlg criterion for ' learning  . The result of the learning is a semantic space that just mirror stile world of literature existing in the user's mind  . The reason we use the term ' learning ' instead of ' acquiring ' is that the information the system gets is not tile direct exprcs  . -sion of the meanings of words a user ' has in his mind but indirect and partial i~t form a Lion give uLhrong h the interaction between a user and the information retrieval system  . 
Ill chapter 4 , we evaluate L he effectiveness of the proposed ideas through all experiment  . IL is shown LhaL entities that could not be ret rieved by conven-tional keywords can be rctrie  . vedinour ' system . 
In chapter 5 , we refer to related works and summarize our cont ribution  . 
2. Semantic Space
Before giving formal discussion , we first give an example of semantic space . Fig . 1 shows an example of semant ic space for ph i losophical issues illartificial in tell igence  (  *  )  . 
We call findill the space shown in Fig . l , the book titled " Goedel , Escher , Bach " written by Hofs-tadt cr , as on . e entity . It has an internal ID to point to tire info rmation actually store dill bibliogr'aphieal database  . Since whaL is mentioned in the bookt ~ as relat i on with Goedel  , l , ~ , seher and Bach , ( ~ oede I , F , sch . er and Bach are loea Led near the book . It , must be noted tila Ltiler ' eha : ! ~ been no assurance  , in previous l , heories , that Goedel denotes the famous maLhema Lician everyone knows  . However , in our semantic space , Goedel cannot be arbitrm ' y things because tile entity is bounded by other entities  , some of which are pointed to actually stored in formation ill database  . ' Filebook "(? , oe del Fischer Bach " describes some new notion . Since tile notion was not known before the book was published  , tile not . toll does not have a universal name . We must . 
read the whole thick bookt , okn . ow exactly what the notion is . In other words , symbols t , ore present t . hcnotion are ectual to the whole book itself . However , we can determine tile position of the uotion , because we know the notion has relation with wholism  , redue Lionism , mu , Goedel , Esther , l : laeh and so on . 
qlill ~ du ? lism /
Descartes oppo , t ~/ paradigm ~ .   . . I monism / ~ s~entlflc , ?/ ir , evolutioni/Iii/ii
I/I ? K Lihni ~ i it
E/IllmLI ? wholism reduction is m ? Goed et i  ~ Esther 
Goedel ~ Boch ~1 Esch ~ it
Bach I ~ iii procedm-ult
Prolog Jii II if ii declorative fi

Fig . I An exomple of semontic spoce (*) Fig .   1 is an explanatory example for the readers who are not familiar with Japanese literature  . The semantic space made by our system is for Japanese literature and is authorized by the researchers in that field  . The real example is given in chapter 4 later , the name will be put in the position just above the book of H of stadter  . Until then , the notion is identified as Some blank space above the book  . 
A user who wants to get a paper or a book on the same notion as one written in H of stadter's book can find the notion in the space by look ing at the configuration of the space  . 
One might think that we can represent the new not ion intensionally  . However , in practical informa-tion retrieval sys tems  , it is difficult to fix the set of primit ives for representing intension  . 
One might also think that identification of the location is similar to making conjunct ion of several keywords or to using a thesaurus  . However , our semantic space has the prominent feature , which is absent in using keywordser thesaurus , that a user can embed his own ideas of meanings in the space  . 
The only criterion for determining the space organi-zation is a user's satis faction  . Every user has his own space in our system , and the system designer doesn't care whether one direction in tile space denotes ISA rela tion or synonymic relation or else  . Eventile user himself may not know what kind of relation tile axes represent in the space  . However , as far as the user hash is own idea about how one entity is related with other ent it i es  , the semantic space mirror stile world in the user's mind  , and the axes ( may be in local subspace ) as a result play the role of representing the relation between the entities such as ISA relation  , synonymic relation , temporal relation , spatial rela-tion , or a more complex relation . 
So far , we have already described the main ideas of semantic space through an example  . Now we give formal discussion . 
The first question is what is the dimensiou of the space  . The dimension of the semantic space is not g iven at first in principle  . The dimension is deter-milled as a result of space synthesis  . Mathematical theories for calculating the d i mension are given in theories of multi-d imensional synthesis developed in the stud ies of statistics  . In our implementation , we limit the dimensions to three for the sake of simpli-city of the system  . Moreover , we give one fixed meaning to one dimension , that is , we give tile meaning of symbolization to the vertical axis  . At the bottom of the space , titles and authors of papers are arranged . At the top of tile space , words which users use are arranged . Attile middle of the space , writers and literary works and some control led notions such as " stylistics ' arear ranged  . The reason we named tile vertical axis " symbo lization ' is that the upper space is a more symbolized world from tile viewpoint of a bibliographical database  . 
The second question is what words and entities are  . In our semantic space , we don't make clear dis-tine tion among the terms " entity '  , ' notion ' and ' word ' . Whatexistill our space are , in any way , just symbols . But conventionally , we call the symbols that are used by users , ' words ' ; the ones that are ' entities ( papers )' , the ones that denote writers ' entities ( writers )  '  , the ones that denote works'entities ( works )  '  , and others , ' notions ' . As for the symbols that denote writers and works  , they are con-trolled by an independently deve loped database for authentication  . 
The third question is what is meaning . We define the meaning of one symbol as the space configuration around the symbol  . Moreover , we extend tile notion of symbol to ally point in semantic space  , so that we can treat entities for which a symbol is I~ot assigned  . Ill other words , we identify a symbol with a point in space . For example , what the location for ' H of stadterism ' means is something between wholism and reduet ionism  . You can under-stand what'something between ' in the previous  sei1-tence means by looking at the configuration of tile neighbor space  . For example , if you see neighbor " Prolog ' between ' decla rative ' and ' procedural '  , you know that " something between ' mean stile same kind of relation as ' Prolog ' between " declarative ' and ' pro-cedural '  . It must be noted here that tile same symbol can be put in more than one location  . This allows a symbol to have several mean ings depending on context  . 
The last question on the semantic space is what the distance is  . The measure of distance exists in the user ' smind  . This is notel usion but essence . 
There is no explaining by what measures one researcher on literature judges that  . one entity is near another entity . It is because each researcher has his own measures that original papers can be written \[ personal discussion with some researchers on litera-ture \]  . Since the semantic space is built for each user  , the papers of the authors who have a quite di fferent semantic world from that of the user may not have " proper " location in the semant ic space  . 
Sut that causes little problem , because such papers do not interest tile user much  . 
3. Learning the Space
The outline for the use and learning of semant ic space for an information retrieval sys tem is as follows:  1  . A user gives a query to the information ret rieval system  . The query is recognized as a sequence of words . Parsing of the query sentence is not done . So users generally give what they think are keywords for search  . For example , a user who wants a paper on the influence of Goetheoil modern Japanese literature asks the system ' Goethemodern Japanese literature '   . 
2 . The system searches in the semantic space for the same word stile user gave  . If such words are found , the system presents to the user the neighbor spaces of the words  . If no such words are found , the system presents an overview of the whole space  ( mainly the middle space , i . e . the space for writers and works ) . 
3 . The user selects some subspaces that attract him . 
4 . The system shows the details of tile bottom spaces of selected subspaces  . 
5 . The user selects papers from among those shown in the bottom spaces  . 
6 . The system re-constructs the semantic space so that the selected papers in step  5 are located in shorter distance and selected subspaces ill step  3 are located in shorter distance , and the nth . esystem put stile query words in the location above the selected papers  . 
We have implemented a system called
ML0 ( Model Learner version 0 ) that realizes the above mentioned steps . Fig . 2 shows the configuration of the system . The system is written in Lisp and P\]\[,/I . 
Tile monitor monitors all tile functions of the system  . It has special variables named * in consistent and * attention  . 
qn consistent is the variable for storing a pair ' of entities for which the distance in the semantic space is different from the estimated distance  . The estimation of the distance is done as follows  . When the initial semantic space is built , the distane c between two papers is estimated , with some normalization , by the inverse of the number of occurrences of same words in tile titles  , and the dist . a nee between two ~ n-m ~ .   .   .   . ~ user communication ~~- ~ T~"\[controller r ' L___  .   .   .   . J ~, ~ i ! I i "''--~"' user
Imanipulator ~ reconstructor\[i'T'I ( semantic ) ~_space 1: q dalabase access controller\] .   .   .   .  ' . flow of contrail
Fig . ?_ Configuration of the system entities ( other than papers ) is estimated by the inverse of tile number of the papers which include both entities in title  . When tile semantic space is reconstructed , the distance between entities which a user selected is estimated to some fixed small value  , and the distance between entities which the system presented  , but only one of which the user selected , is estimated to some fixed large value . The monitor judges that a user is satisfied if the real distance ill semantic space is tile same as the estimate distance  . 
When the monitor detects the user's dissatisfaction  , i . e . the difference between the real distance and the estimated distance  , it registers in * inconsistent the pair of ent it ies which caused the problem  . 
* attention is the w ~ riable for limiting the space for consideration  . The monitor monitors the spac . e only ill the scope of * attention . This improves the efficiency of search and reconstruction  . 
The monitor triggers the space reconstructor after one session of query and answer if * in con -sistent has value  . 
The space reconstructor plays the role of recon -struc Ung the semantic space so that the user can be satisfied  . It uses a heuristic procedure for space reconst ruction mentioned below  . 
1 . Select one pair from * inconsistent . ( In the current version of tile system , the pair which caused tile largest inconsis tency is selected  . ) 2 . Inspect tile density of the neighbor space for each entity ill the pair  , and decide to move tile entity with less dense neighbors  . 
3  . Enumerate the posiible new positions for the mov ing entity  . ( Ill the current version of the system , there are eight new candidate positions around another entity where the distance between the two entities is equal to the estimated value  . ) 4 . Select from among them one position which causes the least new inconsistency  . 
5 . Check new inconsistencies and register them in * inconsistent  . 
6. Go to step 1.
The monitor monitors the whole reconstruction process and stops the process by raising the th reshold to judge the inconsistency when it judges that the reconstrnetion takes too much t ime  . 
Fig . 3 shows an example of the process of space reconstruction  . Ill Fig . 3(a ) , the distance between the entities A and B was 10 . Let's assume that a new estimation for tile distance is  5  . The reconstructor looks around the neighbors of both entities  , and decides to move tile entity B because then e igh bors of B are less dense than those of A  . The reconstruc-tor selects one position that causes the least new inconsistency  , from among eight positions around A , for B to be placed in . In Fig . g(b ),\]:3 is placed to the left of A . New inconsistencies ill the scope of * attention such as inconsistency about B and G are checked and registered in * inconsistent  . After a few 3"77
CooEo G

O ~......... ~0 B
DoAo FoH(a )
CooEo G
BD?oFoH(b )
Go Coo EoBoA
HoOD ? F ( c)
Fig . 5 An example of space reconstruction process Fig , 4 An example of initial semantic space ( a horizontal section ) trial loops to decrease in consistency , the space settles in the configuration shown in Fig  . 3(c ), which includes no inconsistency . 
Of course we can use more mathematical methods ( e . g . matrix transformation of distance ) for space reconstruction . However , the abovemen-tioned heuristic procedure works more efficiently than mathematical methods  , because so many pairs causing in consistency are not detected at once due to the limit at ion of attention and rather small density of the world of literature  . 
4. Evaluation
First of all , we estimated the size of the semantic space . The number of writers studied in the field of research on Japanese literature is about  1900  . The number of works studied is about 2200 . Fortunately , these numbers are almost fixed . The number of papers written in that field in a year is about  5000  . 
However , interest of one researcher is limited to less than one tenth of them  . 
We then confirmed , by asking some researchers and by analyzing the process of manual editing of research paper catalogues  , that almost all notions in research on Japanese literature can be placed in posi-tions among writers and works  . For the notions that cannot be placed among wr iters and works  , about 100 notions such as dialectology were prepared for building an initial space  . 
Finally we carried out an experiment by us ing the implemented system  . Estimating the size of the semantic space for one user  , we made an initial space in which 50 writers were registered . For building the initial space , we made a 50*50 distance matrix for the writers based on tile information from tile titles of  '53563 papers written in the last ten years . The initial space made by tile system is shown in Fig A  . 
' Pile initial space itself is interesting enough for ' literature study  . We can know from tile spacetile striking fact that tile poet named Bashou in the seventeenth century has a strong relation with many modern novelists  . We can also infer that many researchers have special interest in female writers  , finding tile subspaee where ancient and modern female writers are clustered  . 
We asked a researcher on Japanese literature to search papers based on a complex query  . One query was " on the process of transform at ion of fables into written forms  , how fables were transferred among people , ecology of fables "(*) . Looking at the semantic space , he first roughly enclosed in the space about ten works which he thought to be related to " fables "  . Glancing at the bottom space of them , where 1337 papers ( written in the last ten years ) were scattered , he could point out 112 papers which matched the query . 
The selected papers which included intilet it leswords such as nature  , development , transfer , fabliza-lion , or generation were gathered into one subspace by the system after the session  , and the user's query was registered above tile subspace  . This means that , next time , the system can give the answers to the ( * ) The query was given in Japanese . This is a tran Mation made by the authors subspace  , new papers on tiles a menotion . 
The greatest merit of the semantic space was that the system could tell tile user what it knew about the things related to the user's request  . In conventional systems which depend on key words  , users must imagine what words the system knows ; in fact , tile subject of the experiment could not give proper keywords for the complex query  . In contrast with this , the at ~ ility of the user to point out the subspaccs he wants by just glancing at the who le presented space was more than we expected  . 
5 . Related Works ' ? he most related work is R ieger's\  [7   , 8 \ ]  . He also made some kind of semantic space from the infer ~ marion of relations among words  . However , he made thc space based only oil tile frequency of cooccurrences of words ill sentences  . Our semantic space carl have more realil , y about meo , nings than his , because symbols that are actually connected to entities stored in tile database exist in ourst  ) ace . 
In the sense of treating entities which do not have symbolic represeul  , ation , conneetionist models\[4 , 9\] have some relation with our approach . 
l lowever , it seems that thee on neetionists have not yet realized the process of yielding symbols on con~nection networks that can represent such abstract notions as dealt with by our sys tem  . 
From the methodological point of view , methods developed in the studies of multi- dimensional syn-thesis in statistics are related to ours  . The reason we have developed methods to ca lculate tile space independently from those methods is similar to one menUoned by Lebowitz  \   [6  \ ]  . That ix , we are no L interested in mathematical rig idness of the process of analyzing data  , but in modeling what occurs mtile human mind . 
1 , 're in the viewpoint of information retr i eval sys-teens  , there are many more requests than those answered by our approach  . They include treating structures of key words more explicitly  , understand-ingtile user's intention from his query\[l\]  , or making co-operative responses \[5\] . However , the previous studies on those problems star tedign oring tile most basic problem of unders tanding and learning the meanings of one word  . Our work can give an assured starting point for ' those further studies  . 
6. Conclusion
We proposed to represent the meanings of words in space  . We gave a learning mechanism fortile space . We proved tile effectiveness of the proposed methods in an information retrieval sys tem  . 
One of the reasons we chose the field of Japanese literature was that there was strong demmldf romth  . e researchers in that field to make a useful system  ; systems based on conventional keywords did riot work welt for the field of literature  . 
Another reason is that the field offers good examples of entities for which universal symbolic representation is difficult  . 
To apply our method to other fields , we must solve only two problems . One problem is to select symbols to be put ill tile initial space  . In literature , works and writers played tile role . Ti ~ e other problem is to determine criteria for space configuration  . We used a user's satisfaction witt l the answers from the information retrieval system a stile criterion  . If these two problems are solved , our method can be applied to any domain . " l'hcs cproblems douot seems odifficult . 
From the viewpoint of artificial in tell igence  , the . 
semantic space Rives a basis for studies on abduetion an  . danalogy . The dise overy of blank spaces nr . -rounded by symbols carl lead to discovering of new ideas by mac\]tines  . Siuce we can measure semantic similarity directly by distance in semantic space  , wc can make analogical reasoning based oil that similar-  . 
ity . For the same reason , from the linguistic point of view , the semantic spac , ee ~ l be useful for under .   . 
standing metaphorical expression such as " Hofs  .   . 
tadter is Prolog between procedural semantics and declarative semantics "  . 
References\[ll Allen , ,L:Recognizing Intentions from Natural Language Utterances  , in Brady , M , ,Berwiek , R . C ( eds . ): CoTn puta-tlonal Models of Di ~ eou'me . MIT Press (1983) 121 Barwize , J . , Perry . J . : Situaiians and Altit , udes , M1T
Press (1983),\[3 J Dowty , D . R , et al : Introdw:tion to Montaque Sranantics,
D . Ridel Publishing (19111)\[41 Feldman , J . A , : Conneetionist Models and Their Applications Introduction  , Coynilive So . brace , Vol . 9, pp .  1-3(1985) . 
\[5\]Kaplan,J . : Cooperatiw . ? Responses from a Portable Natural
Language Database Qury System , in
Brady,M . ,Berwick,R . C . ( eds ): Computational Models of
Discourse , MIT Press (1983).
\[6\]LebowiLz,M . : Categorizing Numeric Information for ' General . .
ization , Coffnlfive Science , Vol , 9, pp . 285-308 (1985) . 
\[?\]Rieger , B , B , : Procedural Meaning Representation by Connota-tive Dependency Struetures  . An Empirical Approach to Word Semantics for Analogical Infereneing  , Prec . COL-mc . a2(1982)\[8\] Rieger , BB , : Semaa Lie Relvance and Aspect Dependency in a Given Subject i  ) omain ; Contents-Driven Algorithmie Processing of Fu'zzy Word meanings to Form Dynamic Stereotype Repre ~mntations  , Prec . COLING84 (1984)\[9\] Rumelhart , D . E . : Feature Discovery by Competitive Learning , Cognitive Selence , Vel . 9,pp . ?5-112 (1985) . 

