\]' he Commercial Application of
Natural Language\[nLerfaces
Harry Tennant
Computer Sciunee Center
Texas ins L ruments
Dallas , Texas
! don't think that natural language interf faces are a very good idea  . By that \[ mean conventional natural language interfaces -- the kind where the user " types in a question and the system tries to unders t and it  . Ohsure , when ( if ? ) computers have world knowledge th , ' ~ t is comparable to what humans need to communicate with eact rother  , natural language interfaces will be easy to build and  , depending on what else is available , might be a good way to communicate with computers  . But today we are sooooo of at away from having that much knowledge in a system  , conventional natural language interfaces don't make sense  . 
There is something different that makes more sense----NL Menu  . It is a combination of menute chnology wi th natural language understanding techno logy  , and ite\]iminates many of the deficienc ies one finds with conventional natural language interfaces while retaining the important benefits  . 
~ inceae on vew Lional natural language inter face invites the user " to type in whatever he wants  , it is based on the assumption that it will be able to understand just about anything that the users are likely to say  . All systems today deal with limited domains of : discourse  . I am convinced that users are likely to type in al \] kinds of things  . The probability is high that users will not be understood  . 
The yeou \] d be taught the limitations of linguistic and concepLu ~\] coverage of the system  , but : a major motivation of building naJ tural language interfaces is t : o allow ef fective use without t ~' aining or retra ining  . So , it doesn't seem like a very good idea . 
The assumption behind NLM enu is the opposite . It assumes that there are alikinds of th ~ ngs that the users would like to ask but that the coverage is so limited that i ? is best to reveal the coverage  ( limitations ) to the user ' . He then ( : an find quickly that what he wanted ? oask cannot be asked of this system  , so he'll give up quickly , minimizing his frustration . Or he might find that what he wanted to ask can be asked and the system helps him  , ask it in the way it will understand . There is another importar rL advantage : there may be things that the user did not imagine that he could ask about  . NL Menure vea\]s these to the user encouraging him to make full use of sysLem capabiliti es  , Conventional natural language systems do not . 
NLN enu works by displaying a collection o fmenus of words and phrases on the screen  . 
The user builds sentences by selecting words and phrases from the menus  . \]-hemenus are driven by a parallel parser which maintains all parses of the sentence f ragment constructed so far  . A Fter each word or phrase is selected , the parser looks ahead in the grammar for all the phrases that could come next for each parse  . A new set of menus is constructed with these phrases  , which are then displayed ? othe user for hi snext selection  . In this way , the NL Henu system is constraining the user to constructing only those  , ' ententes that are parsabie with the grammar  . By including semantic constraints , one can also constrain the user to the conceptual coverage o ? the system  . In our " current implementations , we use semantic grammars so syntactic and semantic constraints are conveyed simply  . 
Many other techniques can be imagined.
Because the NL Menu technique rests on the same technologies as conventional natural language interfaces  , they have ' L he same expressive power --- one can say the same range of things with ei the rapproach  . But since NL Menu is a system-initiated d i a log  , the system always knows what the user is try ing to express  . This makes it very easy to mix natural lanquage  ( sentence building ) with other-interface techniques such as graphical input  , for rnfi\]ling and others . 
For " example , in an application involving airports , when the user was about to enter the location , a map popped up , the user pointed at the area of interest , then the map went away and the coordinates of that \] oeation were textually inserted in to the sentence  . The user then continued building the sentence  . This allowed the use of text where appropria te  ( specifying run way lengths , location names , e~c .   ) and graphics where appropriate ( specifying locations )   . 
It . seems ? ome that there is much more that user interfaces ~- angain from natural language research  . For exeJmple , cooperative response is a good idea independent of whether an original query was expressed in English or a formal query language orth rough some other means  . 
Similarly , repeated reference is important in any extended dialog  . Discourse objects should remain available for terse reference  . There is nothing that limits repeated re ference to natura \] language dia\]ogs  . Ideas based on focus and dialogs ~ ruct : ure can be app\]ied to dia\]ogs mediated throu !\] hall sorts of interface languages  . We seem to be concentrating on reproducing the form of human communication and ignoring the substance : large vocabularies  , concept creation through reference , modifica Jtion and analogy , mechanisms I : hat use context to gainte rseness and allowing dia \] ogs to accomodate the nonlir ~ ear characteristics of human thought  . Natural \] anguage researc \] h has much more Lo offer " the world than simply a means fo r interpreting type written commands  , yet we as a field have accomplished litt le toward influencing the other user inter face technologies  . 

