Q&A : Already a Success ?
Gary G . Hendrix
Symantec Corporation
Cupertino , CA 95014 USA
When Prof . Wolfgang Wahlster ( the organizer of this COLING-86 panelon " Natural Language Interfaces : Ready for Commercial Success ?"  ) sent out invitations to pane lists , he stated that his goals were " to evaluate three natural language interfaces which were introduced to the commercial market in  1985 and to relate them to current research in computational linguistics  . " For comparison , he has asked each of uspane lists to answer a standard set of questions  . These I will answer , but first let me set the stage by answering two logically prior queries  . 
00) What is your commercial system ?
Our system , called Q&A , was introduced by Symantec in September of 1985 . Q&A is an integrated package for the IBM PC/XT/AT and compatibles  . Its major modules are a file management system , a report generator , a word processor ( which was used to compose this document )  , a spelling checker and " the intelligent assistant " or " IA  . " The IAlets users manipulate databases and produce reports by issuing commands in English  . 
Note that Q&A is NOT sold as a natural language interface per se  , but as an integrated business-productivity tool . 
0 ) Why did you give your natural language subsystem such a pompous name ? Our marketing department made medo it  . 
The Wahlster Questions i ) How successful is your commercial system ? How many copies have been sold ? Q&A's monthly sales are measured in thousands  . SoftSel , the major US distributor of software for microcomputers  , publishes a " hotlist " every two weeks ranking its best selling products  . 
Q&A has been in the top i0 since February of this year , and has been as high as number 2 . 
At the time of this writing , it is number 3 , below onlyd BASEIII and Lotus 123 . 
Are they being used on a regular basis ?
Hundreds of people use Q&A everyday , and thousands use it frequently . Although we have not conducted a rigorous survey , straw polls indicate that about half the active Q & A users use the IA on a regular basis  . ( Many people use the product mostly for WP . ) Are there cost-benefit analyses ? No , but with a $299 suggested retail price in the U . S . market it doesn't take much analysis to justify the cost  . Since Q&A integrates modules for filing , reporting , writing , and spelling along with the IA , the prorata price of the IA is only $60 , which can often be recovered by answering a single question ! H as the system been empirically evaluated ? Q&A has been reviewed by every major  ( and most minor ) publications addressing the IBMPC market , and has received consistently high reviews . Infoworld gave Q&A a 5 disk rating -- its highest . PcWeek has called Q&A the " quint essential management tool  . " Q&A was the first software product ever featured in DerSpiegel  ; it took honors as the software " product of the year " in Australia  ; and it received an unprecedented 2-part review in the New York Times . 
Q&A was also evaluated by the National
Software Testing Laboratories , widely considered to provide the micro computer industry's most objective testing  , in a comprehensive survey of file management systems for IBM PCs  . Results were published by Software Digest in February  ,  1986 , in a 68-page report covering both evaluations and methodologies  . Q&A received the highest overall evaluation ever given to any product in any category  , and was tops in the critical areas of ease-of-use and ease-of-learning  . 
In fact , Q&A was tops in all categories except speed , where it placed second against a system that keeps all its data in RAM rather than on disk  . 
How well do users adapt to system limitations ? Users have been remarkably forgiving of natural language limitations  , as measured by calls on our telephone supporthot line  . The chief complaint about the IA is not its language limitations  , but its speed on floppy-based systems . ( On an EBMAT with hard disk , performance is not an issue . ) What are the main areas of a_p_plication ? Among the most popular in a straw poll were : customer lists  , personal records , simple inventories , expense reporting , bibliographic data , tax records , project records , job costing , employee records , enrollments , real estate , church records , prospect tracking . 
2 ) What are the most important factors for success of a NL interface ? The key is to realize that users do not care about NL interfaces -- they only want to get a job done  . Thus the important thing is to help the user accomplish his task  . 
To help users do their jobs , Q&A provides both a NL interface and formal interfaces  . 
Some customers like the formal interfaces so well they never bother with the IA  . ( This troubles me , but I take consolation in the facts that these users are in the minority  , they appear to be happy , and we charge the same whether they use the IA or not  . ) As forgetting the job done through NL , good are clearly important . Yet I was a mazed to discover that users are often content to find ANY English phrasing that will retrieve the data they need  , and don't seem too worried if their most natural way of phrasing a request doesn't work  . 
For a generic database product , being able to port to new sets of data is a necessity  . 
Q&A's IA is adapted to new databases primarily through automatic means : The IA uses information from the database itself to extend its vocabulary  . Users can also provide additional vocabulary manually through the TEACH module  . This module is composed of eight subsystems for giving the IA " lessons " about words that will be used with the new database  . 
Far more human-factors effort went into the development and testing of TEACH than into any other part of Q&A  . But the results are mixed . While , we believe we have produced by far the most easi lyported NL system on the market  , at least 10% of our customers contacted in a straw poll indicated that they were intimidated by the TEACH lessons  , and therefore are shunning the IA in favor of the formal systems for manipulating the data  . 
There are no provisions in Q&A for modifying the underlying grammar rules  . This is because Q&A has been designed as a product for end-users  , not as a system-building tool for programmers or linguists  . If some users are intimidated by even the simple vocabulary acquisition lessons of the Q&A TEACH module  , it seems obvious that allowing users to modify the grammar would court disaster  . 
3) Isn , tit too early for commercial NL systems ? Q&A sales reports seem to indicate otherwise  . 
4 ) Will customers lose interest in NL if overblown expectations cannot be fulfilled now ? In advance of Q&A's introduction  , Symantec's whole management team was worried about inflated expectations  , and a concerted effort was mounted to meet this challenge  . Of course , we did all we could to make the NL capability robust  . But we also undertook the task of educating the microcomputer industry infrastructure BEFORE introduction  . This was done through countless interviews with industry analysts  , financial people , authors , distributors , retailers , lecturers , the press , consultants , and executives from various hardware and software firms  . Through their influence , these people help set the expectations of the market  . 
To my surprise and relief , most of these industry insiders seemed to expect less from NL than Q&A delivers  . We are benefiting from the backlash to AI being oversold previously  . 
As for the customers themselves , they divide into two groups , with different expectations . 
Those who have not used computers befored on't know what to expect  . If anything , they think these " electronic brains " already use 
NL . So even if they are sometimes disappointed by the limitations of today's NL systems  , the disappointment is less than it would be using conventional interfaces ? Those who already use computers either don't care about NL  ( because they take pride in having learned formal systems  ) or they are encouraged by how much CAN be done with NL  . 
We have been pleased to find that many power users of micros choose the IA rather than Q&A's query -by-example system ? These users appreciate the power of natural language  . 
There is , of course , great room for improvement in commercial NL systems  . Early attempts like Q&A are useful in educating the market about NL's potential and in setting reasonable expectations for future products ?  5  ) Is it just a tremendous amount of engineering to transform a research system into a commercial product or is it much more  ( e . g . new concepts , algorithms ) ? The answer to this question depends upon what the " product " is  . To turn a research system into a language development tool for programmers involves mostly straightforward engineering  .   ( Yet such a tool could be important in the right nichemarkets  . ) Creat ing a v iable end-user product for the mass market is another story  . In this arena , product marketing ( i . e . , designing a product from the user ' s point of v iew to fill a real need  ) and craftsmanship are even more important than the enabling technology  . 
To produce Q&A , Symantec devoted only limited resources to the development of the NL analysis system per se  . Far more time was devoted to human-factors and performance issues  , which are not generally important in
NL research systems . Considerable intellectual attention was focused on TEACH  , on extracting NL related information from the database  , on parse-time error handling , and on developing robust parsing methodologies . 
And all of these activities were dwarfed by the efforts to develop the database  , report generator and word processor with their concomitant support software ?  6  ) How will the market for NL interfaces evolve ? ( Gee , I wish I really knew ! ) The fact that Q&A is so high on the sales charts is not likely to escape the attention of other developers of software for micro-computers  . Because part of the program's success is clear ly attributable to the IA  , it is reasonable to expect other micro computer p layers to begin incorporating NL in their products also  . 
Lotus Development Corp . recently bought GNP , the developer of a natural language interface for  123  . Thus , the most visible player in the micro computer software industry has announced its interest in the NL area  . If Lotusbrand name , natural language interfaces will have received a major endorsement  . 
Another factor is that personal computers may so on reach significantly lower price points  . 
When high-resolution micros with a megabyte of memory and fast processors  ( 80386 or 68000 family ) reach the $ i000 level , another markettier will open , attracting a new and larger group of people to computers  . This group is distinct from the number-hungry group that made spread sheets popular  . It will be more symbol-oriented , wanting word processing and access to online ( or CDROM ) data . NL interfaces can play a pivotal role in reaching this potential market  . 
I think NLP will be widely used to help do sophisticated spelling and grammar checking in support of word processors  . In the short term , this application of NLP may be more important commercially than NL interfaces  . 
Speech input , as usual , is " just around the corner . " 7 ) Should commercial systems be designed for main frames  , AI work stations or micros ? Obviously , microcomputers are too small for
NL systems . So I advise all of you to concentrate on main frames  . Better , build your own special hardware to support NLP . 
8 ) Is it a market advantage to be multilingual ? THE advantage of NL systems is understanding one 's mother tongue  . What good is an English NL system tome if I only speak German ? I would be better off with a formal system ! 
Each major natural language defines a separate market  . To reach all these markets requires a system for each tongue  . 
Symantecclearly recognizes the importance of translating Q&A into multiple languages  . 
F&A , the German language version of Q&A , is already in an advanced state of development , and work has begun on other languages . 
9 ) What research seems most important for improving the quality of commercial products ? In " Natural Language Processing : The Field in Perspective "  ( Byte ,  9/81) , Earl Sacerdoti and I sketched three types of NL systems  . Q&A belongs to the most primitive of these three types  . I do not believe that the technology , the hardware or the market is ready for the more advanced types of NL systems  , but it i ~ upon these types that our basic -research energies should be concentrated  . 
As for applied research , it would be useful to focus on database transportability  . TEACH is clearly the weak link in Q&A . 
Also , now that thousands of people have NL systems , our community desperately needs to discover how they are really being used  . 
symantech as a great deal of anecdotal resources to do anything approaching a thorough study  . ( And besides , the study needs to be done by psychologists , not our crew of computer and language hackers . ) i0) How do you assess the role of . . . 
NL ~ eneration : After Q&A has interpreted a user's input  , its proposed response is presented in English so that the user may be advised about what Q&A plans to do  . We believe this feedback is essential , and that this and other applications give NL generation abright future  . 
Cooperative response qeneration : This is an obvious next step--simple  , cheap and useful . 
Speech act recognition : Some steps in this direction have already been taken in Q&A  ( as in " I wish I k new the time " )  , but I believe we are a long way from having any viable commercial system that incorporate a meaningful theory of speech acts  . 
User model in q : Anything other than the most superficial modeling probably requires too much memory for today's micros  . 
~ resentation lanquaqes & newt/fp_@s of qrammars : Those that are not just fads could have an impact in a few years  , but I don't see them impacting the next generation of commercial products  , at least not on micro computers . Personally , I weary from seeing the same old ~ tuffred one each year in a new programming language  . I suppose some progress is made in this process , but it seems pain fully slow . It would be better to focus more of our community 's resources on natural language problems  , rather than on polishing programming language techniques  . 
Multimedia communications : A big opportunity exists today for mixing pointing with NL input  . There are obvious applications when dealing with l and maps or other representations of space  . 
one More Question : What does it all mean ? The early indications are that the market is enthusiastically accepting Q&A and its NL component  . Within a year we should know whether NL ability of the kind incorporated in Q&A is simply a passing fador is perceived by the market as providing real value  . If the latter is the case ( and I believe it is ) , then the market will begin to demand NL capabilities in more and more products  . Either way , there will be much exciting work to do . 
Acknowledgment : Major contributions to the design /implementation of the IA were made by Dan Gordon  , Brett Walter and Denis Coleman . 
