COMMUNICATIVE TRIAD
ASASTRUCTURALEL EMENTO FLANOUAGE INTERACTION
F.G . Dinenberg
AI Laboratory , Computer Center
Siberian Division of the USSRAc.Sci.
Novosibirsk 6300 90, USSR

Researches on dialogue natural language interact ion with intellectual " humancomputer " systems are based on models of language " human-to-human " interaction  , these models representing descriptions of communication laws  . An aspect of developing lan-guage interact i on models is an investigation of dialogue structure  . In the paper a notion of elemen-tary communicative triad  ( SR-triad ) is introduced to model the " stimulus - reaction " relation between utterances in the dialogue  . The use of the SR-triad apparatus allows us to represent a scheme of any dialogue as a triad structure  . SR-triad structure being inherent both to natural and programming language dialogues  , SR-system is claimed to be necessary while developing dialogue processors  . 
1. INTRODUCTION
In earlier papers devoted to interpersonal interaction iFrank  , 1981; Levinson , 1 981\] much attention is paid to studying the role of speecbact  ( SA ) in dialogue structure . Considering SA as a principal functional e lement of language interaction  ( LI ) is of special importance for developing natural language models which are to be pract ically applied to human computer natural-- language interaction  . 
We proceed from the statement that there are not solitary performed speech acts in real communi-cation  , SAs are interconnected and involved in a general LI structure \[ Wunderlich  , 1980\] . 
Within the framework of our approach to the formal \[ description of dialogue structure a notion of SR-triad reflecting the " stimulus-reaction " relation between utterances in the dialogue is proposed to construct a more adequate representation f dialogue structure  . Representing any dialogue as a triad structure ( T-structure ) in contrast to previous analysis \[ Hunds nurscher , 1 981\] is characterized by distinguishing three phases in the interaction of the type " stimulus -reaction "  . First we shall consider different roles of speech acts in the dialogue T-structure  . Then we shall introduce three types of relations between SR-triads  ( intersection , imbedding and succession ) and discuss dialogues with a complicated structure which is represented by combinations of these relations and reflects diffe-rent strategies to attain some goal  . 
2. SR-TRIAD AND ATY POL OGY OF SAS
Any dialogue is considered to be a sequence of SAs distributed in time which is charaterized by: a  ) a change of roles of the speaker and the hearer between communication participants  ( further designated as X and Y ) and b ) certain relations between

Each SA is aimed at accomplishing whole complex of goals/tasks  . The discussion of their content is not re levant to the purposes of this paper  . So we confine our discussion to one goal ( g . X ) only asso-ciated with some SA of the author X  ( SA . X ) . The very fact of producing an SA which " in itiates " g  . X raises before the addressee Y a communic at ive task to react to this goal  , i . e . to close g . X positively or nega-tively . Thus between SA . X and the following SAs of Y there appear " s timulus-reaction " relations  . Between an initiation and a closure of g . X there may take place intermediate interact ions aimed at accomplis-hing the communic at ive task by Y  . The intermediate SAs of Y are associated wi th goals subordinated to the communicative task  , and the intermediate SAs of X which are react ions to the corresponding SAs-stlmuli of Y are associated with the initiating SA  . X by the goalg . X and aimed at explanation , support-ing , correction of the goal or some other components of tile SA  . X content . 
2 . 1  . In the capacity of the basic structural e lement of dialogue interaction  , SR-trlad is pro--posed which reflects th reefollowing phases of the interaction these phases being associated with any goal initiated in the dialogue  . 
The first ~ hase is a speech act SA 1 . X by means of which its author X induces his dialogue partner Y to realize some communicative goalg  . X ( initiation of g . X ) . 
The ~ #cond phase is represented by a positive or negative reaction  SA1  . Y of Y to this goal ( clo-sure of g . X ) . 
The third ~ hase is a reaction SA 2 . X of X to SAI . Y which may be positive ( acceptance ) or negative ( rejection ) as well . Often SA 2 . X may be absent in real dialogues that means an acceptance of Y's reac-tion by default  ( as it follows from the completion of the in teraction or from the transition to the in itiation of ' a new goal  )   . Ir respective of the explicit/implic it form of expression  , this phase is considered as a regular organ izing component of the interaction process  . 
2  . 2  . Let use numerate principal types of speech acts reflecting the roles of the SA in the dialogue T-structure and introduce symbols to designate them in schemes  . 
(1 ) An initiating SA is a primary initiat ion of the goal  ( see the designation in fig . la ) .  *  )   ( 2 ) An initiative-reactive SA is an init iation of an intermediate goal without t rying to close the principal goal  , for example , the author of the given SA has not suffic ient information for generating a reaction to the principal goal  , or the information at the author's di sposal is considered by the author as non -authentic  , gives rise to doubt , needs correction etc . Such an SA is aimed at some component of the content of the previous SA  ( the connection with this component is des ignated by a dotted line  ( see fig . lb )) . 
(3 ) A reactive SA is a positive or negative reaction  ( to the goal ) reflecting the second phase of an SR-tr i a d  ( fig . lc ) . This reaction may be * ) Here and further ( in schemes ) a horizontal line represents a goal with which the role of the given SA is connected in an SR-triad  ; aline representing a subordinated goal is shown to wer than that repre-senting the princ ipalgoal  . 
232 recognized by X as final : an SA of type ( 4 ) follows and the goal is closed , otherwise the reaction is not final : an SA of type  ( 5 ) follows . 
(4 ) A completing SA reflects the third phase o fan SR-triad and contains the acceptance o f the previous positive or negative react ion of the part-ner  ( fig . ld ) . 
(5 ) A re-initiating SA ls a re-initiat ion of the goal which means rejection of the reaction to the given goal and ptays a double role in the dialogue T-structure : such an SA simultaneously reflects the thi rd phase of one triad and the first phase of the other triad which follows it immediately  ( fig . li) . 
In any dialogue complex SAs representing the combinations of the enumerated structural types are possible  . Let us llst some of them: ( 6 ) An initiating complex SA is a primary in i -tiation of the goal with a complication  , e . g . with a motivation ( fig . If ) . 
(7 ) A reactive-initiative complex SA is ac lo-sure of the goal with a complication  , for example : a ) a positive closure with a counter-condi tion  ; b ) a negative closure with a motivation ( fig . lg ) . 

Y--1-1\]-% abcdifg
Fig . 1
If the interaction phases corresponding to the types  ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) are expressed implicitly and follow by default  , then they are designated in the structural schemes by a dotted arrow  . 
2  . 3  . The elementary SR-triad describes the structure of a minimal interaction  ( e . g . question-answer , inducement-refusal etc .  )  . The structural schemes given in fig . 2 illustrate the positive ( a ) and negative ( b ) closures of the goal in a minimal interact ion : SAI  . XSAI . VSA2 . X\[~'\]SAI . XSAI . VSA2 . X\[~\](a ) ( b)
Fig . 2
SA1 . X is an initiation of a certain goalg . X by X . 
SA1 . Y is a positive ( a ) and negative ( b ) reaction of Y to g . X . 
SA2 . X is an acceptance of Y's reaction by X ( may be expressed implicitly )   . 
In the elementary SR-triad each SA is s imple  , without a complication . SR-triads describe both the dialogue fragments and simplest dialogues  . The latter do not seem to be rare or artifi cial\[cf  . Hunds nur-scher , 1981 J , they are entirely typical , e . g . in communicative situation with random unknown partners :  ( a ) SA1 . X : What is the time , please ? SAi . Y : Twenty minutes past four . 
SA 2. X : Thanks.
(b ) SA 1. X : Have you a cigarette ?
SAI . Y : Unfortunately not.
SA2 . X : Excuse mel 3 . THETYPESOFRELATIONS BETWEENSR-TRIADS In the general case the dialogue T-structure is descr ibed by a system of SR-triads which are connected with each other by the relations of inter-section  , imbedding and succession . 
3  . 1  . Let us consider the above types of the relat ions on examples of dialogues with a compli -cated T-structure which consists of two SR-triads  . 
The intersection of SR-triads represents the T-structure of a dialogue containing a motivated refusal which is a negative react i onto the goal g  . X initiated by SA 1 . X ( e . g . to a request ) . This reac-tion includes a motive of there fusal satisfying ?  ( see a structural scheme given in fig . 3 )  . 
SA 1. XSAI . YSA 2. XSA 2. Y\[~\]
Fig . 3
SAt . Y is a negative reaction to g . X with the initiation of a reason aimed at the component C of the SAI  . X content . 
SA2 . X is a positive reaction to the reason with the removal of the goalg  . X . 
SA2 . Y is an acceptance of X's reaction to the reason by Y  ( possibly by default )   . 
In any real dialogue the refusal may be expressed indirectly  , i . e . SAI . Y contains only the reason for non-performing the action to which Y is insured  . 
The imbedd in ~ of SR-triads characterizes the T-structure of the dialogue containing an initiating complex SA  , consists of the initiation of g . X with a motivation ( e . g . giving an argument for the goalg . X ) . In this case four kinds of the goal closure are possible  ( flg . 4(a-d )) . 
SA1 . XSA1 . YSA2 . XSA1 . XSA1 . YSA2 . Xa)b ) SA 1 . XSAI . ? SA2 . XSA1 . XSAI . YSA2 . Xc ) d)
Fig . 4
To illustrate these schemes , let us give the following variants of the dialogue : *  ) SA1 . X : Would yougo with me , it is very necessary form e . 
SA \]. Y : ( a ) Agreed , I'm all for it.
( bCertainly not and you needn't it.
(c)I'lgo , though I think it unnecessary.
( d ) I know it's necessary for you but Ishan't go . 
SA 2. X : I see.
The succession of SR-triads describes the following cases :  ( a ) the dialogue in which goals are initia ted and closed in turns  ; the connection between these goals is not cons idered in the T-structure  ( see fig . 5 )  . 
~ L
SA 1. XSAI . VSA 2. XSA 2. YSA 3. X
Fig . 5
SA1 . X : What is the time of K rasnod arflight ?* ) Certain artificiality of the examples is due to the trend to adduce " pure " Illustrations which are not complicated by components beyond the scope of the schemes considered  . 

SAI.Y : It is at sixo'clock in the afternoon.
SA 2. X : How much does the grown-up ticket cost ?
SA2.?: Sixty five roubles.
SA 3. X : Thanks.
( b ) the dialogue containing the re-init lating SA2  . X . The re-lnit lating . X means the rejection of V's reaction to g . X , initiated in SA 1 . X ( see fig . 6 )  . 
SAI . XSAI . YSA 2. XSA 2. YSAS . X
Fig . 6
SA 1. X : Come here , please.
SA 1. ?: No , Ishan't.
SA2. X : Now then , be quick l
SA 2. Y : Well , I come.
SA3 . X : Good for you ! 3 . 2  . More complicated dialogue T-structures represent combinations of the above types of the relations between SR-triads  . These dialogues include intermediate speech acts : each SA initiating a subordinated goal opens an intermediate SR-triad wh ich complicates the dialogue structure  . Thus , for example , in a dialogue the speech acts of X , which are connected with the principal goal initiated by the SAI  . X , may be defined as " insisting " or " persuading "  . This is the case if Y " offers resis- tance " to X  , i . e . Y objects , expresses doubts or advances counter-a rguments  . Let us mention as an instance a similard ialogue see the scheme in fig  . 7 )  . 
SAI . X : Let's go to the lecture about Sldorov . 
SA1 . Y : No , I doubt whether it will be interesting . 
SA2 . X : Well , to be sure , Ivanov will deliver the lecture himself , there will be slides and tape-records . 
SA 2. Y : When does it begin ?
SA 3. X : In an hour.
SA3. V : Agreed.
SA4 . X : All right ! g ~ X_- .   .   .   .   .   . g . X + .   .   .   . 

I?Iababe abcabab
SAI . XSA 1. YSA 2. XSA 2. VSA 3. XSA 3. YSA 4. X

SAI . X is an initiating g . X ( offer.
SAI . V is : ( a ) an attemp to close g . X ; ( b ) an initiation of the reason ( doubt . 
SA2 . X is : ( a ) a disagreement with the doubt of Y ; ( b ) advancing the counterargument to
SA1 . V ( b ; ( c ) re-initiating g . X which means rejec-tion of the refusal , \[ by default \] . 
SA2 . Y is :\[ a ) an agreement with the counter-argu-ment of X\[by default\]  ;   ( b ) an acceptance of X's disagreement \[ by de fault \]  ;   ( c ) a requirement of supplementary information . 
SAS . X is: ( a ) an acceptance of Y's agreement with the counter-argument \[ by default \]  ; ( b ) an answer to Y's requirement . 
SA3 . ? is: ( a ) an acceptance of X's answer\[by default\ ]   ;   ( bapositive reaction to the principal goalg  . X ( agreement . 
SA4.X is a completing SA.
In the above communicative situation the patt i-his principal goalg  . X : X may initiate g . gnotatonce but " to pave the way " for it , for instance , to let Y know of the lecture , to elucidate the degree of his interest and , if necessary , to raise it , i . e . 
to construct a sequence of auxiliary SAs and then to advance the principal SA  . X ( offer) . The T-structure of a similar dialogue interact ion may be represented by the scheme in fig  . 8  . 
SAI.KSA 1.?SAZ . XSA 2. YSAS . XSA 3. YSA 4. X
Fig . 84. CONCLUSION
The above SR-triad , being timbasic structural element of language interaction  , reflect stile inter-connection of SAs according to the type of tile " stimulus - reaction " relation  . It is of special importance for us to di stinguish the third phase which means that the positive or negative reaction of a par ticipant to a certain goal initiated by his partner becomes final only after the acceptance  ( approval of this reaction by the initia to r of the goal  . It should be noted that even a positive c lo-sure of g  . X by Y does not always satisfy X , e . g . a prompt agreement is interpreted by X as thought less and insufficiently reasonab le  . 
The acceptance of a reaction by a dialogue par ticipant may happen at different levels of the interaction  . Thus if Y gives advice to X's request ? or an advice  ( there are no violations at the communicative level  ) buttile content of tile advice ( socalled extra communicative information does not satisfy X  , then he looks in the content of the advice for the reason of initiating a further dis--cussion  . Tlle above offered apparatus for describing the dialogue T-structure with the use of additional means reflecting the character of a connection between the goals can  , apparently , be applied for integral multilevel structural representation of LI  . 
In the paper we have limited ourselves to the consideration of a dialogue  ( or a fragment of a dialogue subordinated to one goal  , its development , achievement or removal . However , except the dialogue connectedness with respect to goal  , other types of SAs connectedness in a dialogue may be discussed  , e . g . a thematic one . The dynamics of the develop-ment of the theme does not always correspond to the development of the goal  . The introduction of the notion of the theme and the investigation of its relations to the goals will allow us to represent a thematic structure to accompany the T-st ructure of a dialogue or to be combined with it  . 

Frank D .  \[1_981~ . Sevensins of Pragmatics : Theses about Speech Act Theory  , Conversational Analysis , Linguistics a . Rhetoric , In : Possibilities and Limi-tationso f Pragmatics  . Amsterdam , 1981, p . 225-236 . 
Hunds nurscher F . ~ On Insisting . In : Possi-bilites and Limitations of Pragmatics  . Amsterdam , 1981, p .  343-358 . 
Levinson S . C . ~ The Essential In a de-quacies of Speech Act Models of Dialogue  . In : Possi-bilities and Limitations of Pragmaties  . Amsterdam , 1981, 0 . 473-492 . 
Wunderlich D .  ~19800)_: . Methodological Remarks on Speech Act Theory . In : Speech Act Theory and Pragma-tics . Dordrecht etc . , 1980, p . 291-312 . 
