Knowledge Structures for Natural Language Generat lon ~ 
Paul S . Jacobs
Knowledge-Based Systems Branch
General Electric Corporate Research and Development 
Schenectady , NY 12301 USA

The development of natural language interfaces to Artificial Intelligence systems is dependent on the representation of knowledge  . A major impediment to building such systems has been the difficulty in adding sufficient linguistic and conceptual knowledge to extend and adapt their capabilities  . This difficulty has been apparent in systems which perform the task of language production  , i . e . the generation of natural language output to satisfy the communicative requirements of a system  . 
The Aceframe work applies knowledge representation fun-damentals to the task of encoding knowledge about language  . 
Within this framework , linguistic and conceptual knowledge are organized into hierarchies  , and structured associations are used to join knowledge structures that are metaphorically or referentially related  . These structured associations permit specialized linguistic knowledge to derive partially from more abstract knowledge  , facilitating the use of abstractions in generating specialized phrases  . Thls organization , used by a generator called KING ( Knowledge IN tensive Generator )  , promotes the extenslbility and adaptability of the generation system  . 
1 Introduction
The task of natural anguage generation is that of producing linguistic output to satisfy the communicativer quirements of a computer system  . The principalimitation of existing programs which perform this function is that they fail to realize a sufficiently broad range of requirement so demonstrate a convincing linguistic apability  . This drawback seems founded in aspects of the systems which hinder the development of a large base of knowledge about language  . A great deal of knowledge is required to produce any given utterance  , yet much of this knowledge cannot easily be exploited across a range of utterances  . 
Partial success in generation systems is often achieved by applying linguistic knowledge to particular domains  . Exem-plary of this success are text generation program such as PROTEUS  \[6\]  , and Ann\[15 , 14\] ; as well as generation components of online systems  ; for example , in HAM-ANS\[5\] , UC\[9 , 11\[ , and VIE-LANG\[4I . These systems , while embodying a variety of generation techniques  , erve to illustrate the importance of the command of specialized constructs and the ability to utilize specialized knowledge in generation  . A close examination of the knowledge used in such programs  , however , reveals that a great deal of linguistic information seems to be encoded redundantly  , thus impeding the use of generalizations in " scaling up ~ the systems  . 
The UNIX 2 Consultant system \[22\] is a program which answers questions from naive users about he UNIX operating system  . Scaling up the user interface required a generator which could produce responses such as the following :  1  . ' Chmod'can be used to give you write permission  . 
2 . Youdon't have write permission on the directory . 
3 . You can't get write permission on the directory . 
4. You needether net access.
' This paper is based on the thesis research conducted while the author was at the University of California  , Berkeley . The research was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research under contract  N00014-80-C-0732  , the National Science Foundation under grants IST-8007045 and IST-8208602  , and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  ( DOD )  , ARPA Order No .  3041 , Moni-tored by the Naval Electronic Systcras Command under contract 

5. Youdon't have ether net access.
The PHRED generator initially used by UC \[11\] produced output such as the above by treating each verb use as an independent specialized construct  . This allowed no benefit to the system of abstract knowledge about the use of the verbs  , nor of applying its knowledge about one specialized construct to another  . This difficulty proves to be a major handicap in building largescale generation systems : A key element is to facilitate the exploitation of generalizations while still providing for specialized uses  . In order for the UC system to have this capacity , the linguistic knowledge representation used had to be redesigned  . 
This knowledge-based approach has led to the design and implementation of the Ace knowledge representation framework  \[12\]  . Ace is a uniform , hierarchical representation system , which facilitates the use of abstractions in the encoding of specialized knowledge as well as the representation of referential and metaphorical relationships among concepts  . A general-purpose natural language generator , KING ( Knowledge IN tensive Generator ) f10\] , has been implemented to apply knowledge in the A ceform  . The generator works by applying structured associations  , or mappings , from conceptual to linguistic structures , and combining these structures into grammatical utterances  . This has proven to be a simple but powerful mechanism  , easy to adapt and extend , and has provided strong support for the use of Ace knowledge structures in generation  . 
While this presentation describes the Ace knowledge structures from the point of view of language production  , the representation framework is designed to be unbiased with respect to language analysis or generation  . 
The discussion which follows focuses on the representation of linguistic and conceptual knowledge in Ace  , using as an example knowledge about the verbs " give "  , " take " , " buy " and " sell " . The examples show briefly how information is encoded in Ace which enables the generator to produce dative constructs such as " Johns old Mary a book ~ and specialized forms such as " John gave Maryakiss "  , making use of abstract knowledge about events such as giving  . These verbs provide a good testing ground for a representational framework  , as they may be characterized by certain linguistic generalizations while appearing in a variety of specialized constructs  . 
For further examples and a description of the generation algorithm used by KING  , the reader is referred to \[10\] . 
2 Ace Fundamentals
I have suggested that the development of extensible and adaptable natural language systems depends on a knowledge representation framework within which generalizatlons are effectively exploited  . This is the primary goal of the Ace framework . The starting point of Ace was an implementation of a knowledge representation called KODIAK  \[21\]  , which was extended to include explicit structured relationships between language and meaning  . This section presents the basic knowledge representation principles behind Ace  , and provides an example of how conceptual knowledge is used to relate knowledge about selling to knowledge about gi~ng  . 
2.1 Basic Principles
Many knowledge representation systems , however different they appear superficially , may be shown to have the same SUNIX is a trademark of AT&TBell Laboratories not on the question of formal power but on the nature of the knowledge which must be expressed  . The Ace knowledge representation provides a framework for expressing essential linguistic knowledge in a form suitable for encoding within are presentational formalism  . 
The following principles guide the encoding of knowledge important in the generation task : o Principle  1  . Inheritance of Conceptual Relations . 
Concepts in memory are organized into a hierarchy of categories  , in which more specific concepts in her it " features " from more general concepts  . This inheritance is a representational tool which has been employed throughout the history of Artificial Intelligence  ( e . f . \[18,19,2,3\]) . 
The question of what exactly is inherited , however , can be answered in a variety of ways . A cetakes advantage of structured inheritance , ( of .  \[3\]) , in which concepts linked to a particular structure may inherit from supercategories of that structure  . For example , knowledge about the seller of a sell in 9 action may be inherited from knowledge about the giver of a giving action  . 
*, Principle ~ . Proliferation of Conceptual Categories . 
Individual concepts are themselves categories , and any concept about which there is particular knowledge is considered to form a category  . Thus categories proliferate : Probably , there are far more conceptual categories than there are lexical items in the system  . For example , it will be shown later in this section that it is reasonable to postulate a concept specifically for the action of paying money in exchange for merchandise  , although there is no lexical item corresponding to this concept  . The lexical term " pay " is associated with a more general concept  , that of providing money in exchange for virtually anything  . The lexical term " give " may be associated with a general giving concept  , but giving to charity , giving an idea , and giving a chance are distinct concepts with distinct linguistic manifestations  . For example , the use of the verb " give " without object or indirect object as in " Bill gave " and " I gave at the office " is a linguistic phenomenon which appears almost exclusively when referring to charitable giving  . 
e Principle 3. Explicit Referential Relationships.
There are a range of conceptual relationships important in language use which are not easily described as factual or ontological relationships  . The one which is considered here is the view relationship  , which helps to determine how concepts may be used in express-i  . ng other concepts . The concepts of giving and taking may be related to the concept of a transfer-event  , but the instantiation of the abstract giving and taking concepts cannot be factually inferred from the instantiation of transfer-event  . For example , " John gave five dollars to charity " does not imply that a charitable organization took the five dollars from John  . " Mary took the money from John " does not imply that John gave Mary the money  . In many circumstances , however , the same event may be described using " give " or " take "  . For example ,   ( 1 ) " John gave Mary five dollars for the book " may imply  ( 2 ) " Mary took five dollars from John for the book " . Representing giving and taking as views of transfer-event permits the encoding of knowledge about describing transfer-events without re- ~luiring a given event to be classified as giving or taking  . These views may thus represent he knowledge that " John took < x > from Mary " and " Mary gave John < x > " might be used to describe the same event  . Such views will be shown to be useful in determining how linguistic structures are used to refer to events  . 
The next section describes the basic elements of the hierarchical framework of Ace  . 
2  . 2 S t ruc tured Asuoc ia t lons in Ace Ace makes use of a notation in which there are two types of entities : objects and structured  associations2 A structured association is a relation among two or more objects which also relates corresponding objects associated with the related objects  . 
The most common structured associations in Ace , taken from the KODIAK representation , 4 are the DOMINATE , or " D " , relation , which associates a subcategory with its parent category  , and the MANIFEST or " m " relation , which associates a category with an aspectual or role  . This hierarchical system is analogous to is a -links and slots in other similar representation systems  ; the motivation behind KODIAK was to preserve the ideas behind frame-based representations while clarifying the semantics of a " slot "  . For a comparison of KO-DIAK with other research , see Wilensky ( forthcoming ) . 
The term ROLE-PLAY , also taken from KODIAK , is used to indicate corresponding concepts across structured associations  . For example , the assertion ,   ( DOMINKI ' E action selling with ( ROLE-PLA Yactor seller ) ) indicates that selling is a subcategory of action  , with seller playing the role of actor . A graphical representation of this relation , with the ROLE-PLAY implicit , is illustrated in figure 1 . 
Figure 1: The selling action
Structured associations with RObE-PLAYs are the basic mechanism for organizing knowledge mAce  . The next section describes how these associations are used to represent basic knowledge about buying and selling  . 
2 . 3 The Commerc ia l T ransact ion Example I have proposed that generalizing about linguistic constructs such as the dative form in " John gave Maryadollar "  , " Johntold Maryastory " , and " Johnsold Mary a book " , seems to depend on the representation of concepts uch as giving  , telling , and selling . This section presents the foundation for the encoding of selling in Ace  . 
Consider the concept of the commercial transaction  \[7\]  . 
The commercial-transaction represents an event in which a merchandise object is exchanged for legal tender  . The essential knowledge about this event may be represented by classifying the commercial -transaction as a complex-event  , composed of at least two simpler events , ct-mer chandise . .transfer and or-tender-transfer . Each of these two subevents is a kind of transfer -event  , and is thus used to associate roles of the commercial-transaction with roles of transfer -event  . This knowledge is captured in figure 2 . 
Figure 2 illustrates the important knowledge that the merchant receives the tender fl ' om the customer  , and the customer receives the merchandise from the merchant  . Concepts such as merchant , cu, . itomer , merchandise , and tender are aspectuals of the commercial -transaction  ; that is , they " This term , and the idea of using general structured associations as a language processing tool  . are due to Wile . sky . 
4 These associations , as well as m~my of the ideas here , have evolved during a series of seminars among the Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research group  , led by Rohart Wile asky . Other participants in these discussions were : Richard A Iterma ~ b Margaret Butler  , David Chin , Charley Cox , Marc Laria , Anthony Maida , Jameshl ~ tin , James Mayfield , Peter Norvig , Lisa Rau . au'd Nigel Ward . 
5 55 are specific oncepts whose meaning is undetachable from the commercial-transaction event  . However , much of the knowledge about these concepts , such as the recipient and source roles , is inherited from other concepts . As in other framelike systems\[19 , 2\] , this organization allows roles of a concept obe inherited in this manner  . The ROLE-PLAY relationship in Ace , however , permits more than this simple form of inheritance : It allows for the semantics of aspectuals to be defined in terms of other aspectuals  . For example , the meaning of the merchant aspectual of the commercial-transaction here is represented in part by the ROLE-PLAY relation which links this aspectual to the source of the d-merchandise -transfer and that which links it to the recipient of the st-tender-transfer  . 
The assertions above form an im : portant core of knowledge about commercial-transactions  . This knowledge is important Figure 2: The commercial-transaction event in the way language is used to describe such events  . For example , it will be shown in section 4 that the knowledge that merch and is e and tender play object roles is linked to knowledge about transitive verb forms  , so that phrases such as " bought a book " and " paid five dollars " conform to a general rule  . 
The next section discusses how concept such as buying and selling  , used to refer to the commercial-transaction c- cept  , are represented in Ace . 
2.4 Actions as VIEWs of Events
I have proposed that verbs such as " give " and " take " refer to the actions giving and taking  , and thus refer indirectly to the general transfer -event concept  . The motivation for this analysis is to facilitate the representation f knowledge about the roles which giver and taker play  , thereby enabling " John gave Mary a book " and " Mary took a book from John " to describe indirectly the same event  , as " All gave Frazierapunch " , and " Frazier took a punch fl ' omAli " may indirectly describe the same event  . 
The commercial-transaction event is generally described using the verbs " buy "  , " sell " , and " pay " . "Sell " and ' ~ pay ~ behave similarly to the verb " give "  ; " buy " , behaves more llke " take " . For example , " Johnsold Mary a book " , and " Mary paid five dollars for the book " both use the dative form  , and " John bough the book from Mary " exhibits a structure identical to " John took the book from Mary "  . The representation of the concepts buying and selling in Ace relates these concepts to giving and taking so that knowledge about expressing giving and taking may be used also for buying and selling  . 

The concepts giving and taking in Ace are related to the transfer-event concept by a structured association called a VIEW  . Inspired by the notion of a view in earlier knowledge representations  \[17  , 2\] , the AceVIEW is applied to metaphorical and analogical relationships  , similar to those described in \[16 , 8\] . VIEWs are used to represent knowledge about concepts which may be used in expressing other concepts  . 
The Acenetwork in figure 3 represents the basic knowledge about giving , taking , buying , and selling . In this hierarchy , the structured association view1 between transfer-event and giving DOMINATEs the structured association  view3 between ct-merch and ise-transfer and selling , and view2between transfer event and taking DOMINATES view $ between st-merch and ises transfer and buying  . 
The representation i figure 3 demonstrates on a small scale how the hierarchical arrangement of VIEWs is used in the encoding of structured associations  . Structured associa- . 
tions such as view1 between transfer-event and giving DOM~INATE other more specific relations  , such as view 3 . Note that this makes the explicit representation of ROLE-PLAY relations for  view3 unnecessary , as the relationship between merchant and seller in  view3 is specified by the relationship between source and giver in  view1  . 
The representation of the selling concept is a simple example of how Aceen codes abstractions which may be used in language processing  . The abstraction here is the relationship between a general category giving and a general category transfer-event  . There are two ways in which this abstraction may be used :  ( 1 ) A more specific association may be represented as a subcategory of the abstract association  . This is the case in the selling example presented here  . In this case , knowledge about the abstract association may be used in applying the specific association  , thus knowledge about expressing an abstract concept may be used in expressing a more specific concept  . This allows much of the same knowledge to be used for phrases involving " giving " and " selling "  . 
(2 ) A concept which is associated by another VIEW with the abstract concept may then also be expressed using the abstract VIEW  . This is the case with expressions such as " give a punch "  ( cf . section 4 . 3) , which takes advantage of the abstract action as transfer-event view in combination with the transfer-event asgiving VIEW  . 
The next two sections discuss the application of the Aceframe work to the representation of linguistic knowledge and to the representation of the knowledge which associates linguistic and conceptual structures  . 
Figure 3: The hierarchy of VIEWs 3 Basic Grammatical Knowledge The principles outlined in section  2  . 1 motivate a representation in which knowledge is dispersed throughout a hierarchy  , with a greater number of structures , each containing more limited information . Linguistic knowledge in Ace is organized into a hierarchy which incorporates this type of organization  . 
In fact , the same knowledge representation language is used to encode both linguistic and conceptual knowledge in Ace  . 
The linguistic hierarchy provides for a simple set of basic linguistic templates  , with little redundancy and relative ase of extension  . The following principles of linguistic representation are suggested : Princ@h  ,  $ . Inheritance of Linguistic Features . 
Sets of features which are common to a certain class of templates need not be specified independently for each template in the class  . Thus , if there is a set of features shared among passive sentences ~ or among prepositional phrases  , these features belong by defaul to any template in the class  . This eliminates the need for fully specifying the structure of phrases which have specialized properties or meaning ? o Principle  5  . Proliferation of Linguistic Categories . 
In order to take advantage of the inheritance of features  , there must be a wide range of classes of iinguls -tictemplates which share sets oi features  . Often these categories depart from the traditional syntactic las-sifications  . Requiring that a template b camember of a unique category in the case of a gerund or nominalization can prove difficult  , as these may inheritcer ? rain attributes fl'om verbs and certain attributes from nouns Thus any template may inherit features  , including structural descnptmns , from multiple categorms . 
Categories are arranged hierarchically , so each category inherits from all its ancestors in the hierarchy  . 
o Principle 6 . Distinguishing Grammatical Relations from
Grammatical Patterns.
A great deal of linguistic information seems associated with structural relationships between linguistic on stit-uents which are dependent neither on their order in a surface structure nor on the precise nature of the structure in which they appear  . For example , the relation between subject and verb retains its linguistic features regardless of how the subject and verb appear in any surface structure : The agreement between subject and verb in ~ John was given the book by Mary " is the same as in a Was John given the book by Mary ?" as is the conceptual recipient role which John plays  . Such information does not pertain to a particular surface structure  , but to any surface structure in which a noun phrase and verb are in the subject verb relation  . In " Johnkissed Mary on the cheek " and " The kiss on the cheek pleased Mary "  , the role of % n the cheek " as it relates to " kiss " is independent of whether the prepositional phrase is part of a verb phrase or noun phrase  . In general , structural linguistic relationships are not limited to those which are directly linked to constituent order  , and thus a more general facility than a syntactic pattern is required to represent these relationships  . 
o Principle 7. Uniformity of Representation.
Linguistic knowledge is knowledge , and thus cart be encoded using the same representational framework as conceptual knowledge  . The same structured association ~ used in the conceptual hierarchy can be used in the linguistic hierarchy  , u Having such uniformity of representation has the practical vahm of facilitating the interaction of conceptualnd linguistic structures  . 
S The use of a knowledger presentation laguage to encode syntactic knowledge for file purpose of semantic nter pretation ha  . ~been pracoriced with KL-ONE \[20\] and its successors , also favoring uniformity of ' representatiom Such t  ; ystcms have not been used , to my knowledge , to encode associations between conceptual nd linguistic knowledge  . 
The discussion which follows demonstrates how linguistic knowledge may be encoded using the framework described in the previou section  , and discusses the effect of property inheritance on linguistic knowledge representation  . 
3  . 1 Mu l t ip le Inher i tance in the Ace L in - gu istic Hierarchy This section shows how the structured associations of Ace  , and particularly the capacity for multiple inheritance  , are used to encode some of the linguistic knowledge used in the construction of simple sentences  . 
~$.1.1 Verb phrase ~ i ~ Ace
Verb phrases provide a good example of the use of a linguistic hierarchy because they exhibit a variety of surface forms while obeying certain regularities  . One type of verb phrase is the dative-vp , a verb phrase made up of a constituent dvp-indir , which includes the verb and noun phrase corresponding to the indirect object  , followed by the nonn phrase corresponding to the direct object  . The treatment of the dv poindir as a separate constituent is done to facilitate the handling of other dative forms ? Figure  4 shows how knowledge about the dative verb phrase pattern is encoded in Ace  , as well as how this dative-vp is positioned in the verb phrase hierarchy  . The pattern dvp-pattern represents the ordering of the constituents of the verb phrase j while t ' he relation dvp-indir is used to represent the relationship between the dative verb and indirect object  . Section 4 will show how this relation is associated with conceptual knowledge ? By allowing aspectuals which represent patterns and pat ? tern constituents oplay multiple roles  , the representation flinguistic knowledge as shown in figure  4 shows how knowl . -edge about infinitives , gerunds , and verb phrases is distributed in the Ace hierarchy  . The various verb phrase patterns fall beneath the verb phrase template  , as do the gerund phrase , infinitive phrase , and finite , verb phrase nodes , in order to dative ~ , stcans ~? col~j
Figure 4: The verb phrase hierarchy produce a finite verb ~ hrasela node lower ill the hierarchy must be instantiated  , this hmrarclfical organization permits the gerund phrase and infinitive phrase to have the same lin -guiqtic structure as the verb phrase  , modulo the for e1 of the verb part . An instantiated verb phrase in A cethns inherii , smost of it , ~ internal structure from one category , for example dative-vp , and its external behavior from another , for exam ? pie , finite-verb-phrase . The verb ~ phrase category ! tself plays no external syntactic role---there is no pattern in which a con?stituen lJ belongs to the verb-  . ph , ' ase category and to no lower category ~ although theoretically there could be  . The effectiy corganization of information ~ , bout verb phrase stems directly from the application of the basic knowledge x ~ presentatio a principles of Ace~olinguistic knowledge  . 

This section has shown how a hierarchical representation is used to encode linguistic relations  . The next section concentrates on how the representation of explicit referential relationships links this linguistic knowledge to conceptual knowledge  . 
4 Associating Language and Meaning
Section 2 . 1 presented the foundations of the Ace framework and its application to meaning representation  , proposing that concepts be hierarchically org anlzed  , linked together via structured associations . Section 3 described how linguistic knowledge can also be hierarchically organized within this framework  , and how features can thus be inherited through linguistic categories  . The idea of a linguistic relation was proposed , to distinguish structural relationships from ordering relationships in grammatical constructs  . Naturally , the knowledge required to produce correct and appropriate utterances in-c\]  , udes both of these classes in addition to the links which 
DIU Ol ; ne ClasSes ~ oge~ner.
4.1 Basic Principles
The goal of taking advantage of explicit referential knowledge  , discussed in section 2 . 1 , along with the framework presented in the previou sections  , suggests two principles directed towards the association of linguistic and conceptual knowledge : ? Representation Principle  8  , Correspondence of Linguis-tic and Conceptual Structures  . 
Linguistic structures , uch as lexical terms , linguistic categories , and grammatical structures , are directly as-soclated with conceptual categories  . General linguistic categories in Ace , such as verb-indir-relation , correspond to general conceptual categories , such as transfer-event . Specific lexical terms , such as " buy " and " sell ' , are linked to more specific oncepts , such as buying and selling . Grammatical structures , uc has the modifier-noun relation , are associated with conceptual relations , such as MANIFEST . 
? Representation Principle 9 . Association of Linguistic
Feature stuith Conceptual Attributes.
The structured association permits the relation of lin-istl caspectuals with conceptual spectuals via ROLE-AY  . Linguistic features , uch as dvp-pattern and ivp-verb as described in section  3 are represented as a spec-tunis in Ace , as their status depends on the template of which they are apart  . The association of these features with conceptual ttributes goes along with the association of the template with a concept  . For example , the indirect object feature iobj is an aspectual of verb-indir-relation  . The linguistic feature i obj is linked to the conceptual ttribute recipient  , an aspectual of the transfer-event concept . The direct object feature obj , an aspectual of verb-obj-relation ~ is linked to the conceptual object concept  , an a speetual of the simple-event concept . Thus linguistic features have conceptual correlates  . 
The next section describes how these principles are realized in the association of language and meaning in Ace  . 
4 . 2 L ink ing L ingu is t i c and Conceptua l S t ruc - tu res Us ing REF The main tool for representing relationships between linguistic structures and conceptual structures in Ace is a structured association called REF  . The REF association , designating " referential " relationships , i similar to VIEW , except that it joins language to concepts instead of concepts to concepts  . 
The linguistic knowledge presented earlier has included information about how verbs and their objects or indirect objects may appear in surface structure  . The knowledge us-sential to build these structures  , however , is contained in the correspondence btween linguistic relations and conceptual entities  . This information is presented in figure 5 . 
The diagrams in figure 5 illustrate how the syntactic structure of the dative verb phrase is associated with its conceptual structure  . The verb part and noun phrase in the ivp-pattern in the top diagram belong to the verb-indir -relation  , which associates with the indirect object the concept of recipient  . 
This diagram presents a slightly abbreviated version of the Ace representation given in section  3  , a sivp-verb and ivp-np are associated only indirectly with the verb-indir-relation via the ivp-relation aspectual  . 
The etructured assoeiation between the verb-obj -relation and the simple-event concept in the lower diagram of Figure  5 links the object of the verb in the dative verb phrase to the object of the simple event  . In this association , as in the association of the verb-indir-relation with the transfer-event  , the verb part dvp-verb is associated via ROLE -PLAY with the event itself  , rather than with any aspectual of the event . 
Like the pattern-concept pair \[1 l \] or the unification grammar template \[13  , 1\] , REF is a means of associating linguistic structure with conceptual structure  . The template , however , is replaced with an explicit structural link in the knowledge Figure  5: Knowledge linking verb phrases to events network . This makes it easier to perform the knowled l~e -driven aspects of generation because no querying or complex matching is necessary  . The use of the REF association also facilitates incremental generation by encoding knowledge about referential relationships a structured associations at various levels in the Ace hierarchy : The construction of a complete sentence involves the combination of structures derived from a number of REF associations  , each of which refines those structures already active  , e4 . 3 Knowledge About Spec ia l i zed Const rue The examples given in the previousection are simple illustrations of the use of associations between language and meaning at a variety of levels  . These levels become specially apparent in the representation of knowledge about specialized constructs  , whose meaning can be only partially represented as associations from more general linguistic structures  . 
~ Those familiar with KL-ONE and other similar e presentation la-guag ~ will observe that he A ce representationed s to avoid matching by assuming that he concept be in generated from is assigned to a specific category  . Thus some of the work done by template matching in systems such as PHRED is done during the classification fa concept in Ace  . This is consistent with the Proliferation f Conceptual Categories  . principle : the generator need not obtain conceptual information that is more specific than that contained in the category in which a concept has been classified  . 

The means in which specialized knowledge is encoded varies according to the particular construct  . The " give a hug " expression is interesting because there is no single syntactic structure which can be identified with the specialized interpretation  , yet intuitively the specialized meaning seems tied to the use of the verb " give " in conjunction with the object " vug "  . While the metaphorical connection between the hug -ging action and the giving action is dependent on the " acting upon is giving " metaphor  , this " hugging is hug-giving " metaphor must also be associated with the particular lexical items " give " and " hug "  . Figure 6 shows how both objectives may be accomplished : The link between hug-giving and hug-transfer is labeled  view1" to indicate that it is DOM-INATEd by the structured association between giving and transfer-event  . This association , view 1 , relates the source of the transfer-event to the giver or actor of the giving  . By inheritance and ROLE-PLAY , view I ' associates the giver of the hug-giving action with the source of the hug-transfer event  . 
The views view ? and view3 represent metaphoricals socia-tions that actions may be VIE We das transfer-events from the actor to the object  .   View3 indicates the correspondence between the object of an action or event and the recipient of the transfer  , and between the event and the object of the transfer  .   View2 represent she relationship between source and actor  . 
The association between the hug-transfer event and the hugging action  , labeled view g , 3" allows the inheritance of the knowledge that the source of the hug-transfer corresponds to the actor of the hugging action  , that the object of the hug-transfer corresponds to the hugging action itself  , and that the recipient of the hug-transfer corresponds to the object of the hugging  . The view 2 , 3' association is DOMINATEd by both view2 and view3 and thus inherits their ROLE-PLAYs . 
Knowledge about specialized constructs , uchas " givingahug " , makes use of abstract structured associations between language and meaning just as knowledge about selling makes use of knowledge about giving  . In this way the Ace representation is used to take advantage of generalizations it heen coding of specialized knowledge  . 
Figure 6: Knowledge used for " giving a hug " 5 Summary and Conclusion The knowledge framework for language generation presented here shows how generalizations may be effectively exploited in the representation flinguistic knowledge  . The application of the Ace framework to the representation f knowledge about selling shows how knowledge about giving may be used to represent information used in constructing utterances with the verb " sell "  . The example of " g!vingahug " is used to demonstrate how the notion of a mew captures knowledge about metaphorical constructs  . The representation embodies a uniform , parsimonious encoding of conceptualnd linguistic knowledge which seems to promote the extensibility of natural language systems  . 
References\[1\]D . Appelt . TELEGRAM : a grammar formalism for language planning  . In Proceedings of the ? Ist Annual Meeting of the Association  . for Computational Linguistics,
Cambridge , Massachusetts , 1983.
\[2\]D . Bobrow and T . Winograd . An overview of KRL , a knowledge representation language . Cognitive Science , 1(I ), 1977 . 
\[3\]R . Brachman . et . al . Research in Natural Language Understanding . Technical Report 4274, Bolt Beranek and
Newman , 1979.
\[4\]E . Buchberger and H . Horacek . The generation component of the system VIE-LANG . In First International Workshop on Language Generation  , Burg Stettenfels , 
West Germany , 1983.
\[5\]S . Busemann . Topicalization and pronominalization : extending a natural anguage generation system  . In Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence , Pisa , Italy , 1984.
\[6\]A . Davey . Discourse production . Edinburgh University
Press , Edinburgh , 1979.
\[7\] C . J . Filhnore . Topics in lexical semantics .  1977 . 
\[8\]D . Gentner . Structure-mapping : a theoretical framework for analogy  . Cognitive Science , 7, 1983 . 
\[9\]P . Jacobs . Generation i a natural language interface . In Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Karlsruhe , Germany ,  1983 . 
\[10\]P . Jacobs . A knowledge-based approach to language production  . PhD thesis , University of California , Berkeley ,  1985 . Computer Science Division Report

P . Jacobs . PHRED : a generator for natural anguage interfaces  . Computational Linguistics , 11(4), 1985 . 
P . Jacobs and L . Ran . A ce : associating language with meaning . In Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Pisa , Italy ,  1984 . 
M . Kay . Fanctional Unification Grammar : a formalism for machine translation  . In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , 
Stanford , California , 1984.
K . Kukich . Knowledge-Based Report Generation : A Knowledge Engineering Approach to Natural Language Report Generation ~ PhD thesis  , University of Pittsburgh ,  1983 . 
K . Kukich . Semantic and syntactic on straints in natural language stock reports  . In proceedings of the $ Sth annual meeting of ASIS  ,  1982 . 
G . Lakoff and D . Johnson . Metaphors we Live By . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , 1980 . 
J . Moore and A . Newell . How can MERLIN understand ? In L . Gregg , editor , Knowledge and Cognition , Erlbaum Associates , Halsted , New Jersey ,  1974 . 
M . R . Quillian . Semantic Memory . Bolt Beranek and Newman , Cambridge , Massachusetts ,  1966 . 
R . B . Roberts and I . P . Goldstein . The FRL Manual . 
Technical Report AIM-408, MITAILab , 1977.
N . Sondheimer , R . Weischedel , and R . Bobrow . Semantic interpretation using KL-ONE . In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Palo Alto ,  1984 . 
R . Wilensky . KODIAK-a knowledge representation la-guage . In Proceedings of the Sizth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society  , Boulder , Colorado ,  1984 . 
R . Wilensky , Y . Are , s , and D . Chin . Talking to UNIX in English : an overview of UC . Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery  ,  27(6) ,  1984 . 

