Linguistic Knowledge Extraction from Rea l Language Behavior 
R . Shirai and T . Ilamada
(Department of Electrical Engineering , Waseda University)
(3-4-10hkubo Shin Juku-ku Tokyo Japan)
Abstract--An approach to extract linguis -ticknowledge from real language behaviori s described  . This method depends on the extraction of word relations  , patterns of which are obtained by structur ing the dependency relations in sentences cal led Kakari-Uke relation in Japanese  . As the first step of this approach , an experiment of a word classification u tilizing those patterns was made on ti le  4178 sentences of real language data . A system was made to analyze dependency struc ture of sentences ut i  1 izing the knowledge base obtained through thi sword classification and the effect iveness of the knowledge base  ~4as evaluated . To develop this approach further , the relation matrix which captures multip le interaction of words is proposed  . 
1. Introduction
In natural language processing , one of the major problems to be solved is how to describe linguistic and semantic knowledge in thesy e\]tem  . If wense no particular technique and capture the behavior in real I anguage as it i s  , the number of FU\]es . 
concepts and relations to be arranged may expand so much ? But those things contain all essent ial and primitive elements of language that we want to find out at \] east  . In this Paper , it is considered to extract primitive e lements from real linguistic behavior  , and apply the elements to analysis sentence . As the above-mentioned elements , we use a relation between words .   ( lt is called Kakari-Uke relation in Japanese  .  )

John opened the do or vith this k e ~, tNST
Fig . l9ependency Relation Structure ( Kakari-Uke Relations )  2 . Clustering of Words 2 . 1  . Clustering Method The process of the word c lassification based on the pattern of re lations is done as follows  . First , numbers of sentences are provided and Kakari- Uke relations are given to them  . We call those sentences text data . 
Next we get the source side and the sink side pat tern of relations for each word appearing in the text data  . Then we calculate a distance between words . The dislance is defined as a cor respondence between the patterns themselves and the frequency of each relation making the patterns  . Words are classified by a clustering a lg or ithm using this distance  . 
The distance has two types ; one for the source side patterns and theo ther for ' the sink side patterns  . For each word , two clustering processes are applied cor responding to those two types ot distances  . In this paper , the dependency strt . lcture is called as the knowledge base . 
2.2. Re . suls
We made an experiment of word clustering on the  4178 sentences of text data quoted from computer manuals  . In this experiment , a special treatment was taken for compound words to ensure information  . 
There are many compound words in Japanese sentences which are made by combining words and act as one word  . They are called Fuku9o-go in Japanese . If we great them all as different from each other  , many words appear rarely , so that the relating pat . terns of each word cannot be captured suffic iently  . 
Because of this reason , we adopled a mechanism that replaces compound words by a normal one including the same mean ing grammatical roles in grammar as the fo rmer  . 
This mechanism can work automatically as a part of the system  . 
A stile result of this experiment , it was observed as expected that semantically related words tend to be combined  , t to wever , some words which have different meaning are combined with a well classified word group  , and several well classified groups are combined  . Not only synonyms , but also the words similar in some parts as the extension of tile words  , and also the words which have a common part in the upper concept tend to be combined  . It is interesting that antonyms tend to be combined with each other  . It was also found that words contained in the same group belong to the same part of speech a lmost always  . 
253 3 . Sentence Analysis 3 . 1  . Sentence Analysis System ESSAY We made ESSAY ( Experimental System of Sentence Analysis ) which analyzes the dependency structure us ing the knowledge base  . 
We show the outline of this system in Fig . 2  . 
Using the knowledge base , ESSAY analyzes the dependency structure of sentences  , if those patterns are used 3ust as they were obtained : from the text data , they can only cover the relations which have appeared in the text data  . But the clustering process allows thesys tem to cover more relations than appeared in the text data  . 
, ";U , Sentences i
Rel , tion Candidate I-_zz\i , -'
I ~: wlua ~ ion_j
GOn , ', " , " o'o '"(
Fig . 2 General Flow of ESSAY ***~* SENT . NO . = 4: INPUTIS .   , ~I-3-1-I-~VSAM~D ~ ( The relation solparameters about privacy security of VSAM catalogue ares ho~nIn Flg  . l-3-1-1-4 . l ~ WORDCOMBINATION = 1 * ~* SYNONYM COMBINATION = 1 * EVALPOINT = 90  -~-~  1-   3  -  1 - l -4 I ~ ( In Fig . l-a-I-I-4 ) - - - VSAM ~ ~ ~ o ! ( of VSAM catalogue ) ---~ Zf ( Privacy sae curlty )  - - - ~ !  ( about ) ---J ~~~ ~! ( of parameters I--~ ( the relatlon ~ )   ( are shown ) Fig . 3k Sample of Analysis Results
We made an experiment of sentence analysis with ESSAY  . The knowledge base was organized from the 4i78 sentences of text data quoted from computer manuals  . The input sentences we provided for the test were not contained in the sentences used for knowledge base organization  . A sample of the analysis result is shown in Fig  . 3  . There is a possibility that a Bunsetu ( a kind of phrase structure element ) has several ways of possible division in to words and Euzoku-qo  . The system tests some combinations of thosed ivisions  . In this figure , EVALPOINT indicates the value evaluated for each structure that is calculated from the likelihood of each relations const ructing the structure  , we can express the conclusion as follows : t_ . -( ul_o . t ~? u ~- tn ~ No NIO 0 r --- , ' ---vithout Usin ~ ruzoku-Ko~f
I ~--'-- Us , rig Fu2oku-~o'10177.
40-/Ax , '" x , ~50~~', , , .
0 L_2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 I 0
Sentence Length ( Nulber of Bunsetsu )   $1: The experiment us done undertt ~ oconditions ustn8 and ulthout using Fuzoku-$o for Inalysis in order to exulne the effect of Fuzoku-go  . 
$2: Tim rate a tuhlch the analysts succeeds.
$ 3: The order of correct candidate In the a ~ lysis results  . 
$&: The rate at vhlch the correct candidate is ranked first  . 
Fig . 4 Analysis Results of every Sentence Length a ) There is a problem that the long sentence with many Bunsetu often makes too many combinations of relation candidates  . 
b ) There are some cases that no result is obtained because only a part of words does not have are lation candidates although all of others have the correct relations  , c ) It is difficult to describe a paralle l relation using relations between two words  . 
Therefore , it is difficult to analyze a sentence containing parallel relations  . 
d ) The rate at which the analysis succeeds depends on the length of the sentence  . As the sentence becomes longer , the rate becomes lower . The average of the rate was about 40 percent . 
This result is shown in FIg . 4.
4 . More Complica Led Data Structure ESSAY dec ides the relations according to the connect i on only between two words  . 
The other parts of the sentence taken or ole in this decision at all  . But the relations complicatedly interact to one another in actual sentences  . In this section , we describe how to deal with the interact ion of the relations to provide a wider g round for judging propriety of relat ions  . 
( he ) ( to school ) ( by bus ) ( goes ) ~ t ~ ; t ~ - ~* ,  6 ~ ~? <  ( he )   ( to school )   ( at 6 o'clock )   ( goes )   ( a ) 
RIR2R3R , l11/



R ~( b)
Fig . 5 Relation Natrix 4 . 1  . Co-occurrence of Relations There are word ~ relating to more than two other words at the same time  . As shown in Fig . 5(a ) , four kinds of relations appear in the text data  . If more than two kinds of relations appear at the same time  , the frequency of relations are counted . Then frequency table is expressed by a matr ix called relation matrix shown in Fig  . 5tb ) . 
The element Mi imeans frequency of Ri its el f  , and timelement Mij means frequency of appearance of both Ri and RJ at the same t ime  . This matrix is obtained for each word that have been reIated with more than two words a t the same time  . Utilizing this matrix , we can get wider ground for . judging propriety of relations . When the relation " go- ( to 1-school " is obvious , seeing element M2i and Mi2 ( i #2 ) of the matrix , we can gel probability of each relation Ri in this situation  . 
4  . 2  . Effect of the relation Matrix Using th is matrix  , the ground for judging propriety of there lations becomes wider ' and the number of candidates can be effectively redticed  . Secondly , because each relation becomes more reliab le  , it is expected to get relations according to the sentence meaning  . 
5. Conclusion
We haw ? . introduced a bottom tip approach of organ ization for a linguistic knowledge base  . For the organization of knowledge base , continuous human effort has been requi red  . The vocabulary of the knowledge base depends on the quantity of text data  . 
l , inguistic knowledge base organized in thi smanner may not be  . so powerful as tho . ~ e constructed analylically . But such method may open an automatic w ~ iy of the knowledge acquisition and there may be a possibilty to discover rules and propert ies which we have never noticed  . 
REFERENCE\[1J Bobrow , D . G . , and Winoqrad , T .  1977  . An overview of KRL , a knowledge represent at on language . Cognitive Science 1:3-46 . 
\[2\]Uoods,U . A .  1973 . Progress in natural understanding : An appl ication to lunargeology  , AFIPS Conference Proceeding 42 , 1973 National Computer Conference . Montvale N . J . : AFIPS Press , 441-450 . 
\[33 Quillian , M . R .  1968 . Semantic memory . In
Minsky , 227-270.
\[dJ Fillmore , C .  1968 . The case for case . In E . Bach and R . Harms ( Eds . ), Universals in linguistic theory . New York : Holt , Rinehart , and Winston ,  1 -88  . 
\[5\] Katke , W .  1985 . Learning language using a pattern recognit i on approach  . The AI magazine Spring , 1985 . 
\[6\] Shirai , K . , Hayashi , Y . , Hirata , Y . , and Rubota , J .  1985  . Database formulation and learning procedure for I  ( akari-Uke dependency analysis .   ( in Japanesel The transaction of informat ion processing society of Japan  , 
Vol . 26, No . 4, 706-714.

