On the Use of Term Associations in Automatic Information Retrieval 
Gerard Salton *

It has been recognized that single words extracted from natural language texts are not always useful for the representation of information content  . Associated or related terms , and complex content identifiers derived from thesauruses and knowledge bases  , or constructed by automatic word grouping techniques  , have therefore been proposed for text identification purposes  . 
The area of associative content analysis and information retrieval is reviewed in this study  . The available experimental evidence shows that none of the existing or proposed methodologies are guaranteed to improve retrieval performance in a replicable manner for document collections in different subject areas  . The associative techniques are most valuable for restricted environments covering narrow subject areas  , or in iterative search situations where user inputs are available to refine previously available query formulations and search output  . 
I . Introduction
Computers were first used for the processing of natural language texts over  30 years ago . 
From the beginning it has been recognized that the individual words contained in the texts of written documents could be used in part to provide a representation of document content  . At the same time it was generally accepted that certain words  , or word sets , would not produce meaningful content identifiers . In particular , some quite broad words , such as the term " computer " used to identify computer science literature  , would be useless for distinguishing one document from another  . Other very specific terms would be so rare that no single item in a collection might reasonably be described by such a very rare term  . 
To improve the operations of text processing systems  , it has been suggested that the original document vocabulary be expanded by adding related or associated terms not originally present in the available text samples  . Two main types of vocabulary relationships can be recognized in this connection  , known respectively as and ~ relations . \[ I \] The paradig metric relations cover term associations  , such as synonyms and hierarchical inclusion , that always exist between particular terms regardless of the context in which these terms are used  . For example , a paradigmatic relation exists between the name of a country  ( say , France ) and the capital city ( Paris ) . Syntag . -matie relations , on the other hand , are relations which are not valid outside some specified context  . For example , a cause-effect relation may be detected in certain circumstances between " poison " and " death H  . 
Department of Computer Science , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 . 
This study was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants IST  83-16166 and
IST85-44189 , fied by using precoustructed dictionaries , or thesauruses , containing schedules or groupings of related terms or concepts  . The syntagmatic relations , on the other hand , must be derived by analyzing particular text samples and extracting the term relationships specified in these texts  . 
Various methods are outlined in the next section for utilizing paradigmatic and syntagmatic term associations in text processing systems  , and the effectiveness of the methods is assessed using available experimental output  . 
2. Associative Text Processing Methods
A ) Thesaurus Operations
A thesaurus is a word grouping device which provides a hierarchical and/or a clustered arrangement of the vocabulary for certain subject areas  . Thesauruses are used in text processing for three main purposes  \[2\]: a ) as authority lists where the thesaurus normalizes the indexing vocabulary by distinguishing terms that are allowed as content identifiers from the remainder of the vocabulary  ; b ) as grouping devices where the vocabulary is broken down into classes of related  , or synonymous terms , as in the traditional
Roget Ws thesaurus ; c ) asterm hierarchies where more general terms are broken down into groups of narrower terms  , that may themselves be broken down further into still narrower groups  . 
When a thesaurus is available for a particular subject area  , each term found in a document can be used as an entry point into the thesaurus  , and additional ( synonymous or hierarchically related ) terms included in the same thesaurus class as the original can be supplied  . Such a thesaurus operation normalizes the vocabulary and provides additional opportun-ities for matches between query and document vocabularies  . The vocabulary expansion tends to enhance the search recall  ( the proportion of relevant materials actually retrieved as a result of a search process  )  . 
When the subject area is narrowly circumscribed and knowledgeable subject experts are available  , useful thesaurus arrangements can he manually constructed by human experts that may provide substantial enhancements in retrieval effectiveness  . Table 1 shows the average search precision ( the proportion of retrieved materials actually relevant  ) obtained at certain fixed recall points for a collection of  400 documents in engineering used with 17 search requests . In that case , the performance of a manually constructed thesaurus  ( the Harris Three thesaurus ) is compared with a content analysis system based on weighted word stems extracted from document and query texts  . The output of Table 1 shows that at the high recall end of performance range  , the thesaurus provides much better zetrieval output than the word stem process  . 

Average Search Precision
Recall \] Weighted Word Harris Three
Stems Thesaurus--i . iI . 9563?3 l . 7986?5 l . 6371?7 l . 4877?9 I . 3426  . 9735 + 2%  . 8245 + 3%  . 7146 +11%  . 6012 +19%  . 4973 +31% +13%
Sample Thesaurus Performance ( IRE Collection , 400 documents , 17 queries )
Table 1
While the use of thesauruses is widely advocated as a means for normalizing the vocabulary of document texts  , no consensus exists about the best way of constructing a useful thesaurus  . It was hoped early on , that thesaurses could be built automatically by studying the occurrence characteristics of the terms in the documents  , and grouping into common thesaurus classes those terms that cooccur sufficiently often in the text of the documents :  \[4\] " the statistical material that may be required in the manual compilation of dictionaries and thesauruses may be derived from the original texts in any desired form and degree of detail  . " Later is was recognized that thesauruses constructed by using the occurrence characteristics of the vocabulary in the documents of " a collection do not in fact provide generally valid paradigmatic temn relations  , but identify instead locally valid syntagmatic relations derivable from the particular document environment  .   \[5\] To utilize the conventional paradigmatic te~l relations existing in particular subject areas  , the vocabulary arrangements must effectively be constructed by subject experts using largely adhoc procedures made up for each particular occasion  . The thesaurus method is therefore not generally usable in operational environments  . 
B ) Automatic Term Associations
While generally valid thesauruses are difficult to build  , locally valid f ~ Km~di ~ aILig / l can be generated automatically by making use of similarity measurements between pairs ofte ~ mlsbased  , for example , on the number of documents in which the terms cooccur in the documents of a collection ? The number of common sentences in which a pair of words can be found may also be taken into account  , as well as some measure of proximity between the words in the various texts  . Using similarity measurements between word pairs , term association maps can be constructed , and these may be displayed and used by the search personnel to formulate useful query statements  , and to obtain expanded document representations .  \[6,7\]
Documenl Dz vectors D3
Or ( a ) \] erms osslgne0 to documents r 2 r ~ r ~% To r7   . . . .
3  0   0   2   0   6 i 0   0 I 3   2 o 2 o 2   3   0   4 OOi 2 iO 3 IO Term-Document Matrix Showing Frequency of
Terms A ~; signed to Documents ( b)
T2rD
D , "2363 r,
I4
Term-Document Graph for Matrix of Fig . l(a)

Nozzle , Propulsion
Chomber Ejeclion
Fluid ( c ) Term Association Map
Term-Document Matrix and Graph and Corresponding
Association Map(from\[8\]p .51)
Fig . 1 is Shown in the matrix of Fig . l(a ) . Fig . l ( b ) shows the corresponding document-term graph where a line between term T  . and document D . 
represents the correspond in ~ term assign men ~ appears in Fig  . l(b ) . Given the assignment of Figs . l(a ) and ( b ) . term associations may be derived by grouping sets of terms appearing inte  rm4J4 similar contexts . For example , and T_may be grouped because the set eappea ~ jointly in documents DI and  D2  ; similarity terms T 1 and T 6 appear in a ocuments D 1 and D 4  . The grouping operations may be used to obtain a term association map of the kind shown in Fig  . l(c ) , where associated temDs are joined by lines on the map  . 
The operations of a typical associativ ~ system are illustrated in Fig  .  2 . 
\ [7\] The original query words are listed on the lefthand side of Fig  .  2 , and the derived associated terms are shown on the right  . The value of a given associated term -- for example  , " Interunational Organizations "-- is computed as the sum of the term association values between the given term and all origilm l query tez~s  ( 0 . 5 for ~ IUnited Nations " plus 0 . 4 for " Pan American Union " in the example of Fig  .  2) . Finally the retrieval value of a document is computed as the sum of the common term association values for all matching terms that are present in both queries and documents  . Many variations are possible of the basic scheme illustrated in Fig  . 2; in each case , the hope is that valid term associations would make it possible to achieve a greater degree of congruence between document representations and query formulations  . 
UNITEDNATIONS (1 . 5) ~ INT . ORGA niZATIONS (0 . 9) nl 5"~// INT , ~~/ COOPERATION < 0 . E ) 0 . 5UNITEDNATIONS ~ I3INT , RELATIONS (0 . 9) 0 . 5 0 . 5 LEAGNE OF NATIONS (0 . 5) 0 . 5 0 . 4NT . LAW (0 . 3) 0 . 3 pAN . AM . UNION ~\[ PEACE (0 . 7) 0 . 21 ANAMUNION (1 . 5)
Document 1:
Document 2:
UNITEDNATIONS 1.5
LEAGUE OF NATIONS 0.5
PAN . AM . UNION 1.5
INT . COOPERATION 0.8 4.3
UNITEDNATIONS 1.5
PAN . AM . ONION 1.5
INT . LAW 0.33.3 ( from Giuliano\[6\])
Fig . 2
In practice , it is found that the use of term associations can improve the search recall by providing new matches between the term assigned to queries and documents that were not available in the original query and document  . 
In addition , the search precision can also be enhanced by reinforcing the strength of already existing term matches  . \[5\] Unfortunately , the experimental evidence indicates that only about  20 percent of automatically derived associations between pairs of terms are semantically signifi -cant  ; the associative indexing process does not therefore provide guaranteed advantages in retrieval effectiveness  . 
Table 2 shows a typical evaluation output for a collection of  400 documents in engineering used with 17 search requests . The output of Table 2 shows that the automatic term associations provide an increase in average search precision only at the high recall end of the performance range  . Overall , the average search precision decreases by 13 percent for the collection used in Table 2  . \[8, p .  130\]
Average Search Precision
Recall Weighted Word
Stems ? i ? 9563?3 . 7986 ? 5  . 6371  . 7 ?4877 ,9  . 3426
Automatic Term
Associations . 7385 -23%  . 5844 -27% ? 5187 -19% ? 4452 - 9%  . 3 794   +11%   -13% Sample Associative Indexing Performance ( IRE Collection , 400 documents , 17 queries )
Table 2
More recently other vocabulary expansion experiments have been conducted using associated terms derived by statistical term cooccurrence criteria  . \[910\] Once again , the evaluation results were disappointing : \[10\] h Our results on query expansion using the NPL data are disappointing  . We have not been able to achieve any significant improvements over nonexpansion  . We have repeated previous experiments in which the query was expanded  , and the resulting set of search terms then weighted  . . . Once again the results have been conflicting . . , " The conclusions derived from the available evidence indicate that the vocabulary expansion techniques which add to the existing content identifiers related terms specified in a thesaurus  , or derived by term cooccurrence measurements , do not provide methods for improving retrieval effectiveness  . Generally valid thesauruses for large subject areas are difficult to generate and the automatic term cooccurrence procedures do not offer adequate quality control  . Efforts to enhance the recall performance of search systems must therefore be based on different techniques designed to generate indexing vocabularies of broader scope  , including especially word stem generation and suffix truncation methods  . 
C ) Term Phrase Generation
The vocabulary expansion methods described up to now are designed principally to improve search recall  . Search precision may be enhanced by using narrow indexing vocabularies consisting largely of JL&I ~ Bp ~ replacing the normally used single terms  . Thus " computer science " or " computer programming " could replace a broader term such as '  tcaleu1~tor " or " computer " . The recognition and aesiguent of term phrases poses much the same probems as the previously described generation of term associations and the expansion of indexing vocabularies  . In particular , an accurate determination of usefulte ~ , l phrases , and the rejection of extraneous phrases , must he based on syntactic analyses of query and document texts suppl ~ nented by semen=tic components valid for the subject areas under consideration  . Unfortunately , complete linguistic analyses of topic areas of reasonable scope are unavailable for reasons of efficiency as well as effectiveness  . In practice , it is then necessary to fall back on simpler phrase generation methods in which phrases are identified as sequences of cooccurring terms with appropriate statistical and/or syntactic properties  . In such simple phrase generation environments quality control is  , however , difficult to achieve . 
The following phrase generation methods are of main interest : a  ) statistical methods where each phrase \] ~ ( the main phrase component ) basa stated minimal occurrence frequency in the texts under consideration  , and each phrase exhibits another stated minimal occurrence frequency  , and the distance in number of intervening words between phrase heads and phrase components is limited to a stated number of words  ; b ) a simple syntactic pattern matching method where a dictionary search method is used to assign syntactic indicators to the text elements  , and phrases are then recognized as sequences of words exhibiting certain previously established patterns of syntactic indications  ( e . g . adjective-noun-noun , or preposition-adjective-noun ) ; \[1112\]c ) a more complete syntactic analysis method supplemented if possible by appropriate semantic restrictions to control the variety of permitted syntactic phrase constructions for the available texts  .  \[13 , 1 4\] When statistical phrase generation methods are used  , a large number of useful phrases can in fact be identified  , together unfortunately with a large number of improper phrases that are difficult to reject on formal grounds  . For example , given a query text such as " h ~ nophilia and christmas disease  , especially in regard to the specific complication of pseudotumor formation  ( occurrence , pathogenesis , treatment , prognosis ) ' it is easy to produce correct phrase combinations such as " christmas disease " and " pseudotu-morformation "  . At the same time the statist : i-cal phrase formation process produces inappropriate patterns such as " formation occurrence ' ~ and " complication formation "?  \[15\] Overall a statistical phrase formation process will be of questionable usefulness  . 
Table 3 shows a comparison of the average search precision results for certain fixed recall values between a standard single term indexing system  , and a system where the single terms are supplemented by statistically determined phrase combinations  . The output of Table 3 for four different document collections in computer science  ( CACM )  , documentation ( CISI ) ~ medicine ( MED ) and aeronautics ( CRAN ) shows that the phrase process affords modest average i ~ provements for three collections out of four  . 
\[15\] However , the improvement is not guaranteed , and is in any case limited to a few percentage points in the average precision  . 
The evaluation results available for tile syntaxbased methods are not much more encouraging  .   \[16\] The basic syntactic analysis approach must be able to cope with ordinary word ambiguities  ( I mll p base , army base , baseball base ) , the recognition of distinct syntactic constructs with identical meanings  , discourse problems exceeding sentence boundaries such as pronoun referents from one sentence to another  , 
Recall . I . 3.5 .7.9


CACM 3204
Single I
Terms_\]Phrases . 5086 I . 5427  . 367 2I . 3971  . 2398 \]  . 2527  . 1462  . 1462  . 0711  . 0759 +6 . 8%
CISI 1460
Single_Ten , s Phrases . 4919  . 4590  . 3118  . 2999  . 2320  . 2222  . 1504  . 1283  . 0739  . 0630 -8 . 6%
MED 1033

Terms Phrases . 8038  . 7970  . 6742 ?7064  . 5447  . 5529  . 4082  . 4166  . 2057  . 2056 +1,6%


Term ~ Phrases . 7526  . 7540  . 5184  . 5385  . 3714  . 3989  . 2301  . 2431  . 1313  . 1328 +4 . 1% Comparison of Single Term Indexing with Statistical Phrase Indexing for Four S~iple Document Collections 
Table 3 plex meaning units in ordinary texts . An illustration of the latter k in disfurnished by the phrase " high frequency transistor oscillator "  , where it is important to avoid the interpretation " high frequency transistor " while admitting " transist or oscillator " and " high frequency oscillator "  . A sophisticated syntactic analysis system with substantial semantic components was unable in that case to reject the extraneous interpretations " frequency transist or oscilla -tors which are high  ( tall ) " and " frequency oscillators using high ( tall ) transistors " .   \[17\] In addition to the problems inherent in the language analysis component of a phrase indexing system  , a useful text processing component must also deal with phrase classification  , that is the recognition of syntactically distinct patterns that are semantically identical  ( " computer programs " , " instruction sets for computers " , " programs for calculating machines ") . The phrase classification problem itself raises complex problems that are not close to solution  . 

In summary , the use of complex identifying units and term associations in automatic text processing environments is currently hampered by difficulties of a fundamental nature  . The basic theories needed to construct useful term grouping schedules and thesauruses valid for particular subject areas are not sufficiently developed  . As a result , the effectiveness of associative retrieval techniques based on term grouping and vocabulary expansion leaves something to be desired  . The same is true of the syntactic and semantic language analysis theories used to generate a large proportion of the applicable complex content descriptions and phrases  , and to reject the majority of extraneous term combinations  . 
The question arises whether any retrieval situations exists in which it is useful to go beyond the basic single term text analysis methodology  , consisting of the extraction of single terms from natural language query and document texts  . This question is examined in the remaining section of this note  . 
3 . The Usefulness of Complex Text Processing Three particular text processing situations can be identified where term association tech-nl ques have proved to be useful  . The first one is the wellknown ~~ process where initial search operations are conducted with preliminary query formulations obtained from the user population  . Following the retrieval of certain stored text items  , the user is asked to respond by furnishing relevance assessments for some of the previously retrieved items  ; these relevance assessments are then used by the system to construct new  , improved query formulations which may furnish additional  , hopefully improved , retrieval output . In particular , the query statements are altered by adding terms extracted from previously retrieved items that were identified as relevant to the user's purposes  , while at the same time removing query terms included in previously retrieved items designated as nonrelevant  . 
The relevance feedback methodology represents an associative retrieval technique  , since new query terms are obtained from certain designated documents that hopefully are related to the originally available formulations  . 
Relevance feedback techniques have been used with vector queries formulated as sets of search terms  \[9  ,  1920\] , and more recently with Boolean queries .   \[21\] The effectiveness of the feedback procedure has never been questioned  . 
Table 4 shows typical evaluation output for four different document collections in terms of average search precision atten recall points  ( from a recall of 0 . I to a recall of 1 . 0 in steps of 0 . I ) averaged over the stated number of user queries . The output of Table 4 applies to Boolean queries with binary weighted terms  .   \[21\] The improvements in retrieval precision due to the user feedback process ranges from  22% to 110% for a single search iteration . When the feedback process is repeated three times j the improvement in search precision increases to  63% to 207%  , Evidently , the user relevance information which applies to particular queries at particular times makes it possible to find a sufficient number of interesting term associations to substantially improve the retrieval output  . 
A second possibility for generating improved retrieval output consists in limiting the analysis effort to the ~~  1   9 ~/ ~ instead of the document texts . In a recent study , term phrases were first extracted from natural language query texts using a simple  , manually controlled , syntactic analysis process . These query phrases were then recognized in document texts bY a rough pattern 
Original Boolean Queries
First Iteration Relevance

Third Iteration Relevance

Medlars 1033 ClSI 1460 CACM 4204 In spec 12684   30 queries 35 queries 52 queries 77 queries 0  . 1798 0 . 1159 0 . 2065 0 . 4322 (+11o %) 0,6334 (+207%) 0 . 1118 0 . 1367 (+22%) 0 . 1827 (+63%) 0 . 2550 (+42%) 0 . 3217 (+79%) 0 . 1522 (+31%) 0 . 1933  ( +67% ) Average Search Precision at i0 Recall Points for One Iteration and Throe Iterations of Relevance Feedback  ( 4 document collections ) 
Table 4 ples of terms occurring in the same phrases of documents  , and pairs and triples of terms occurring in the same sentences of documents  .   \[22\] Whenever a phrase match is obtained between a query phrase and a document text  , the retrieval weight of the document is appropriately increased  . 
An evaluation of such a manually controlled syntactic phrase recognition system based on query statement analysis reveals that substantial improvements in retrieval effectiveness are obtainable for the phrase assignments  , compared with the single term alternatives . Table 5 shows average search precision values at five recall levels for  25 user queries used with the CACM collection in computer science  .   \[22\] On average the query analysis system raises the search precision by  32 percent . 

Average Search Precision
Weighted Weighted Single
Single Terms Terms and Phrases 0 . 555 0 . 625 0 . 271 0 . 355 0 . 211 0 . 265 0 .  064 0 ? 085 0 . 038 0 . 060 +13% +31% +26% +33% +58% +32%
Average Search Precision for
Query Statement Phrase Analysis ( CACM Collection , 25 Queries )
Table 5
The special processing described up to now is user related in the sense that user query formulations and user relevance assessments are utilized to improve the retrieval procedures  . 
The last possibility for the use of complex information descriptions consists in incorporating stored JgRO_~renresentations covering particular subject areas to enhance the descriptions of document and query content  .   \[2325\] Various theories of knowledge representation are current  , including for example , models based on the use of frames representing events and descriptions of interest in a given subject  . 
Frames designating particular entities may be represented by tabular structures  , with open H slots " filled with attributes of the entities  , or values of attributes . Relationships between frames are expressed by using attributed that are themselves represented by other frames  , and by adding links between frames . Frame operations can also be introduced to manipulate the knowledge structure when new facts or entities become known  , or when changes occur in item relationships , There is some evidence that when the knowledge base needed to analyze the available texts is narrowly circumscribed and limited in scope  , useful frame structures can in fact be intellectually prepared to enhance the retrieval operations  . \[26\] However , when the needed topic area is not of strictly limited scope  , the construction of useful knowledge bases is much less straightforward and the knowledge-based processing techniques become of limited effectiveness  . It has been suggested that : in these circumstances  , the system user himself might help in building the knowledge structures  . \[27\] While this remains a possibility , it is hard to imagine that untrained users can layout the subject knowledge of interest in particular areas and specify concept relationships such as synonyms  , generalizations , instantiations , and cross-references with sufficient accuracy . In any case , no examples exist at the present time where user constructed knowledge bases have proved generally valid for different collections in particular subject areas  . In fact , the situation appears much the same as it was thirty years ago : it seems quite easy to build locally validte ~ association systems by ad hoc means  ; these tools fail however in somewhat different environments  , and do not furnish reliable means for improving text processing systems in general  . 
For the foreseeable future , text processing systems using complex information identifications and term associations must therefore be limited to narrowly restricted topic areas  , or must alternatively be based on simple user inputs  , such as ~ ocument relevance data , t : hat can be furnished by untrained users without undue hardship  . 
References\[i \]\[ 2\]  \[  3\]  \[  4\]  \[  5\]  \[  6\]  \[  73  \[  83 J . CoGardin , Syntol , in Systems for the Intellectual Organization of Information  , S . Artandi , editor , Vol . 2, Rutgers University , New Brunswick , NJ , 1965 . 
M . E . Stevens , Automatic Indexing : A State of the Art Report , NBS Monograph 9\] , National Bureau of Standards , Washington , 
DC , 1965.
G . Salton and M . E . Lesk , Computer Evaluation of Indexing and Text Processing  , Journal of the ACM ,  15:1 , January 1968 ,  8-36 . 
H . P Luhn , Auto-Encoding of Documents for Information Retrieval Systems ~  , M . Boaz , editor , Modern Trends in Documentation ,  1959 ,  45-58 . 
M . E . Lesk , Word Word Associations in Document Retrieval Systems  , American Documentation ,  20:1 , January 1969 ,  27-38 . 
L . B . Doyle , Semantic Road Maps for Literature Searchers , Journal of the ACM ,  8? 1961 ,  553-578 . 
V . E . Giulianoj Automatic Message Retrieval by Associative Techniques  , in Joint Man-
Computer Languages , Mitre Corporation
Report SS-10, Bedford , MA , 1962, 1-44.
G . Salton , Automatic Information Organization and Retrieval , McGraw Hill Book Company , New York ,  1968 . 

Evaluation of Feedback in Document
Retrieval using Cooceurrence Data , Jl . of Documentation , 34:3, September 1978, 189-216 . 
S . E . Roberts , n , C . J . van Rijsbergen , and M . F . Porter , Probabilistic Models of Indexing and Searching , in Information Retrieval Research , R . N . Oddy , S . E . Roberts , n , C . J . 
van Rijsbergen , and P.W . Williams , editors,
Butterworths , London , 1981, 35-56.
M . Dillon and A.S . Gray , FASIT : A Fully
Automatic Syntactically Based Indexing System , Journal of the ASIS ,  34 ,  1983 ,  99-108 . 
G . Salt , n , Automatic Phrase Matching , in Readings in Automatic Language Processing , DoG . Hays , editor , Am . Elsevier Publishing
Co . BNew York , 1966.
R . Grishman , Natural Language Processing , Journal of the ASIS ,  35 ,  1984 ,  291-296 . 
P . J . Hayes and J . G . Carbonell , A Tutorial on Techniques and Applications for Natural Language Processing  , Technical Report CMU-CS-83-158 , Carnegie Mellon University , 
Pittsburgh , PA , 1983.
J . L . Fagan , Automatic Phrase Indexing for Text Passage Retrieval and Printed Subject Indexes  , Technical Report , Department of
Computer Science , Cornell University,
Ithaca , NY , May 1985.
G . Salt , n , The Smart Retrieval System-
Experiments in Automatic Document Processing , G . Salt , n , editor , Prentice Hall Inc . ,
Englewood , Cliffs , NJ , 1971, 207-208.
K . SparckJones and J . l . Tait , Automatic Search Tel ~ Variant Generation , Journal of Documentation ,  40:1 , March 1984 ,  50-66 . 
C . D . Paice and V . Aragon-Ramirez , The Calculation of Similarities between Multiword Strings using a Thesaurus  , Proc . RIAO-85 Conference , Grenoble , France ,  1985 ,  293-319 . 
J . J . Rocchio , Jr . , Relevance Feedback in Information Retrieval , in The Smart System Experiments in Automatic Document Processing  , Prentice Hall , Inc . , Englewood
Cliffs , NJ , 1971, Chapter 14.
E . Ide , New Experiments in Relevance Feedback , in The Smart System-Experiments in Automatic Document Processing  , G . Salt , n , editor , Prentice Hall Inc . , Englewood
Cliffs , NJ , 1971, Chapter 16.
G . Salt , n , E.A . Fox and E . Voorhees,
Advanced Feedback Methods in Information Retrieval  , Journal of the ASIS ,  36:3 ,  1985 ,  200-210 . 
A.F . Smeaton , Incorporating Syntactic
Information into a Document Retrieval Stra-tegy : An Investigation  , Technical Report , Department of Computer Science , University
College , Dublin , Ireland , 1986.

M . Minsky , A Framework for Representing
Knowledge , P.H . Winston , editor , The
Psychology of Computer Vision , McGraw Hill
Book Co ., NY , 1975, 211-277.
R.C.S chank and R.P . Abels , n , Scripts,
Plans , Goals and Understanding , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , NJ ,  1977 . 
R . J . Brachman and B . C . Smith , Special Issue on Knowledge Representation , SIGART
Newsletter , No . 70, February 1980.
M . K . di Benigno , G . R . Cross and C . G . de Bes-sonet , COREL-A Conceptual Retrieval System , Technical Report , Louisiana State
University , Baton Rouge , LA , 1986.
W . B . Croft , User Specified Domain Knowledge for Document Retrieval  , Technical Report , Computer Science Department , University of
Massachusetts , Amherst , MA , 1986.
