Plurals , Cardinal / ties , and Structures of Determination
Christopher U . Habel
Universiti~t Hamburg , Fachbereich Informatik
8 chliJterstr . 70, D-1000 Hamburg 13

This paper presents an approach for processing incomplete and inconsistent knowledge  . Bea is for atteoking these prob\]ems are ' structures of determination '  , which are extensions of Scott's approximation \] attice a taking into consideration some reguirements from natural language processing and representation of knowledge  . The theory developed is exemplified with processing plural noun phrases referring to objects which have to be understood as classes or cots  . Referential processes are hand \] ed by processes on ' ReferentialNets '  , whicherea specific knowledge structure developed for the representation of object -oriented know \] edge  . Problems of determination with respect to card in a Iity assumptions are emphasized  . 
I . Introductory remarks
Most approaches to ' proceesing reference ' are concerned with the case of singular NPs and deal with the complications of plurals on \] y periphericolly by remarks af the kind " The plural case can be considered analogously  . " But such hopes are only partially justified : the plural case is worse and therefore more interesting  . 
In the present paper I wlll discuss some spsclfl c prob\]ems of  ( in ) definiteness with respect to plurals from an AI point of view  . The heart of any knowledge-based system ( KB $ ) -manor machine-is his/her/Its knowledge base  ( KB )  , containing differentypes af knowledge ( cp . 
sect .  2) . The KB reflects the KB5' view af the world ; in other ( e . g . 
dackend off's , 1983) words : a projected world .   ( O/ring emphasis to projected worlds and thus to mental models leads to a psychological foundation of semantics  . ) The case easiest ta manage is that of a complete and consistent KB  . But in normal life-of manes well as machine- thia almost never occurs  ; the knowledge is incomplete or inconsistent ( or both )  . There are some reasons ( cp . sect 3 ,   , t ) to see both types of problem as clase \] y connected  , as twin problems , abbreviated by I&l . It is important to extend the KBS'faculties with regard to the maintenance af I&l  . This includes :- Recognition and detection of I & l-Correction of I&l  , i . e . forcing completeness and consistency-Dealing , i . e . arguingar ' thinking ' , with Incomplete or inconsistent knowledge . 
These tasks for maintaining I&l is of specific importance in processing reference  . 
2. \] he frame of representation
In representing the knowledge about the world ( not linguistic knowledge ) of a KBSI distinguish three types , hnawledge of facts , knowledge of ru/~and knaw/ed\]e af objects , which is represented by ' ReferentialNets ' ( Rei N )  . The formal objects , which can be under a tood as internal ( armental ) proxies for entities of the real ( or other possible ) world ( s ) are called ' Referential Objects ' ( Raf O )  . RefOB can be seen as under determlned formal objects  ( UFCO ) in case of incompleteness , or as over determined ( OFOs ) in case of inconsistency . 
For representing the knowledge of a KB $ and the meaning of utterances I use a propositional ' e a mant t c representation language '$ RL  . Far processing , e . g . storing and retrieving , referential relations SRL contains a pectfic ' descriptian operators '  , which are from a formal point of view variable -binding  , term-making operators . Here I will neglec the details of 5RL and exemplify only those 8RL-concopta which are involved in knowledge about objects ( cp . Habel , 1986) . The tatellty of R af Os and their properties ( see below ) for manet-like knowledge structure : the Ref ~rentialNet  ( Rei N )  . ReINs are based on three types of formal entities : the world  , design Mions af Ref Os , i . e . terms \[ as opposed to formulas ) of 8RL and attribute ~ to RafOs and dssignation a . From a formal point of view ( Habel ,  1985 ,  1986 ) these ( double-attributed ) ReiNs form a relation with AAR efNc ( R-ATT x REF O ) xD-TER xD-ATT
Remarks : 1 . REFO is the set af all referential objects at a specific point aftime  ( In eglectlme-in decos in the present paper )  ; D-TER , R-ATT , D-ATT are the set of 8RL-expreseions of the types ' designating term ' , ' attribute to RefOs ' , ' attributes to pairs of RefOs and D-terms ' . 
2 . Bracketing RefOs and their attributes reflects that in AAR efNs the  1 st component is functional dependent of the 2nd  . 
A first example will illustrate the concepts of the ReiN:  (  1  ) John's children will travel a broad during their summer vacation  . 
leads to the following entries in a ReIN ( only the most relevant parts are formulated ; attributes are omitted in the present sect . ) : ( I ') r . I--'John'r . 2--ALLx : child_of(r . 1, x ) ""- SOHEx : trave\](x , r . 3, r . 4) r . 3 - - " a broad " r . 4 - -" duringr . 2' a summer vacation "

I . There are proxies for objects in a narrow sense as wa I\] as for some in a wider sense  , e . g . w . r . t , locations(r . 3) or time ( r . 4) . Their SRL-designaticos will nat be formalized here  . 
2 . " ALL " is the intenstonal cass-building operator  , which differs from the formula-making universal quantifier  . "SOME " is the indefinite pluro \] term-maklng analogy to the definite " ALL "  . ( On " SO tIE " , tlle definite descriptor " IOTA " and the indefinite " ETA "  , which are used in (5') , cp . Hahel 1982, 1986) . 
3. ItefNs : Under-and over determinetion
In the following I will mainly deal with proxies for concrete objects  , especially persons . A first analysis of the situation in question shows that a hearer of  ( I ) possesses a RefOre presenting " John's children " without the abligation to knew more details about them  . e . g . , though s/he does not have to know how many they are it is passible to refer to them definitely  . 
With the introduction of the additional concept ' attribute of eRefO'it is possible to deal with the I&l problem  ,  1 . e . the problems a funder - and overdetermination of formal objects  . ( Furthermore , the use of attributes leads to knowledge representations which allow easy and quick access to the objects in question  , e . g . in anaphora resolution and generation ) . A more adequate analysis of ( I ) should lead to a representation , which represents the plural explicitly ( and not only implicitly via " ALL " ) :  ( 1" ) card ~2--r . 2--ALLx : child_of(r . l , x ) human-Jusing a cardlnality attr/Dute to the Ref Or  . 2 which represents the essential property that r . 2's realworld counterpart is assumed to consist of more than one human being  ; the sertal attribute " human " , which will be , used here only , exemplifies another type of attribute , namely ~ rtal attribut ~ By this attribute mechanism I represent the meaning of numerals  , e . g . 
" dahn's two cars " leads to card = 2-r . 9 ~ ALLx : cor(x ) & ew n(r . l , x ) In text generation the communicative goals determine which designation  ( s ) and R-ATTs are used to form the content of the message  . 
What counts as determinate depends an the type of attribute in question  . 
Each type of attribute possesses its own cotaf completeness and consistency conditions  . In the case of cardlnallty , the determinacy condition is given by ( 2  ) ~rdinalit ? Condition :
Each set has exactly one cerdinolity.
This eondition defines the idaal-state of the cardinality attribute which a system as pires to  . The actual knowledge with respect to cardine \] ity concerns a ' rarlge of pesslble cordlna \] lttes '  . From this follows what under - and over determinotion  ( I&l ) are :- in the case of under dotarmination some cerdinalities are pessible  , eg . 
the cardtnallty Is greater or ague 12 , but the exact value is unknown , in the determinate ~ only one cardinolity is possible  , i . e . the exact cardinality is known , -In the case of overdetermination more than one cerdinality is assumed  , which violates the cerdinality condition . 
I wlll go on with do hn's children: ( 3 ) The boys will visit France . Hory and Sue will go to Italy . 
Analogously to (  1  ) the ReiNhas to be extended to: ( 3' ) cord ; ~' t ~ r . 2---ALLx : chllr . L_of(r . l , x ) cord ~2--r . 5 ~ ALLx : child_of(r . 1, x ) & boy(x )
SOMEx : visit(x , ' France ') cord ~ . 2 ~ r . 6 -- ALL x : child_of(r . I , x ) & girl(x )
CONTAINS(r . 7)
CLASS('Mary','Sue')card--,2~r . 7 ~ SOMEx : visit(x , ' Italy ')
Remarks : 1 . " cord(r . 6 )  ~  2" because t lspess l ble that there ere further daughters of John  . Note , that o\]l bays -" cord(r . 5) ~ . 2"-visit France but only some girls , namely those represented by r . 7, visit Italy . 
2 . I assume that the competence of calculating attributes is used in the maintenance of ReiNs  . By this " cord(r . 2) ~ . 4" is calculated from cord(r . 5) and cord(r . 6) . 
3 . There exists an operator " IS_CONTAINED " duo\] to " CONTAINS "  , which I neglect in this paper ( ep . Habel , 1986) . 
r . 7 con be seen as determined wlth respect to cordinoilty since an exact value is assumed  , whereas r . 2, r . 5 endr . 6 are under determined . As a \] est example for cordinality computations , let us take the input ( ~ r ) John has four or five children . Three of them are girls . 
That leads to the following changes in the ReiN : ( 4' ) cord := 5---r . 2 ALLx : chlld__of(r . 1, x)~CONTAINS(r . 5)
CONTAINS(r.6)
ALLx : child_of(r . i , x ) & hay(x ) cord == 2-r . 5 ~ SOMEx : visit(x , ' France ') ALL x : child_of(r . l , x ) & girl(x ) card , = 3 . -- r . 6 ~ CONTAINS(r . 7)

In a first step ( corresponding to the first part of the input ) cord ( r . 2) is satto , 1 or , 5 , In a , second ( inferential ) step card(r . 2 ) is computed to `5 based on the cerdinalities of r . 5(>_2) and r . 6 (=3) . In a third step card ( r . 5) cant ) e computed to exactly 2 . 
New we turn to over do terminotton , i . e . inconsistencies . Suppose someone tells the KBS ( or " you ) :  ( 5 ) The oldest , Peter , travels to Spain . 
What is there to do now ? Where are the problems , hew are they noticed , and how can they be solved ? Before rejecting ( 5 ) wlth " That lsim possible ! " let us discuss the changes in the REIN :  ( 5' ) cord = 5 ~ r . 2 ~ ALLx : child_of(r . l , x ) card > 5--~~ CONTAINS(r . 5)
CONTAINS(r . 6) card := 2--r . 5 - - - - - card ~5"/ card=:5~-r . 6 card=2--r . 7 ~ -- card-1---r . 8=---~
ALLx : child_of(r . 1, x ) & boy(x)
SOMEx : visit(x,'France')
CONTAINS(r.8)
ALLx : clli\]d_of(r.1, x ) & girl(x)
CONTAINS(r . 7)
CLASS('Hary ', ' Sue ') ' Peter "
IOTAx : oldest(x , r.2)
ETAx : visit(x,'3 pain')

The newly created RefOr . 8 is integrated in the ReiN by two links : on the one hand via CONTAINS from r  . 5" the bays " ; this link is inferred by use of knowledgo about Christian names in English  . On the other hand via the oldost-eonnect lont or . 2 . Thus the cordlnalltles of r . 2 and r . 5 ( In 4') have to be changed , which is rcolized by assigning o second cardinolity attribute  .   ( This reading of the sentence end interpretation of the net assumes a third son  , " Peter " , which v lslts Spain only . Note , that the inheritance about visiting France can be blocked via the  3rd designation of r . 8 . 
The points of inconsistency or ever determination can be \] coated at the cardinality of r  . 2(" card = 5" vs . " eard > 5") and of r . 5("card=2"vs . 
" card,~3") . What is reasonable to do now ? There are several posel biltties : - Reject the newest input  . But why should " card=5" be preferable to " cord>5"   ( or " card = 2" to " cerd ~3" ) ?- Try toeo \] va the inconsistencies . Ask other people or undo inferences . 
-Try to live with inconsistencies . Be aware that reasoning conbed angerous . 
Why is it convenient and pessible to fol\]ow the third strategy ? On the one hand  , though there are inconsistencies with respect to the cerdine Hty of r  . 2 and r . 5 , these inconsistencl a aore localized and do not infect the whole KB  .   ( This strategy of marking inconsistencies and thus avoiding infections of the KB  , i . e . putting inconsistencies in quarantine , follows 8elnap (1976)) . Therefore the system is justified In answering questions with regard to other ports of the ReiN  . 
On the other hand , locating paints/cress of inconsistency and waiting for future information con\]Pad-by means of inferences - to the solution of the inconsistency in question  . One possible correction of the inconsistencies in  ( 5' ) cou\]d be ~ chieved by detecting that the informant su~d different concepts of ' daughter  '  , e . g . ' daughter ' , 's depted daughter ' , ' step daughter ' . In the pre ~ . ~ nt example the " updating of the boys ", i . e . the new " cord(r . 5) ~ 3" , was not given explicitly but was inferred from the male Christian names ' Peter '  . It is possible that the inference in question , which uses common knowledge about Christian names  , was misleading , because John's oldest daughter is nicknamed , she is " a girl named Peter " ( as Russoll's wife , who was known as Peter Spence ) . 
B . e~ac_k~1 . Another way of analysis , namely concerning designations but not cerdinalities  , leads to a different solution with respect to r . 8 . Peter can be seen as a person visiting both France and Spain  . Note , that this reading would also be baaed on a careful analysis of card  ( r . 5) . 
2 . The parallel example in Carman would les deither not to an inconsistency at all or to another type of inconsistency since gender-informatiea of the article would distinguish between two cases : " Der~lteste  , Peter . . . "(' dor ' ~' masc . ') leads also to (5') , but the possibilities for the solution of the over do termination mentioned above are not usable in this case  . " Die~lteste , Peter . . . "(' die ' ~' fern . ') leads to linkage of r . 8tor . 6 , " the girls " , and no inconsistency of cardinality would appear . But , most hearers would be suprised with the strange
Christian name of the girl.
The similarities and differences of under - and over determination  , i . e . the justification of the twin-concept I&l , can be seen best by discussing the appropriate response to question sllke " How many children does  , John have ?" . On the one hand with respect to on undard a termined case  , e . g . 
(6) card ~5 r . 2' ALLx : chiId_of(r . l , x ) induced by " John lies five or more children " . 
In the case of under determination ( 6 ) the KBS knows that it has incomplete knowledge and therefore it is justified in answering " Five or more  , but I don't knowex ~ ctly " . In the case of overdetormination ( 5 ) the KBS knows that it has inconsistent knowledge . Therefore it should warn the question er , e . g . by responding wlth " Presumably five or more , but I have contradictory information " . Note , that it would be reasonable fary outous a the concept of " John's children " in a similar way if you only have the information in question  . 
634. Structures of determinnt len
From a formal point of view the cerdinelity attributes ore examples of approximation structures similar to the information lattices introduced by Scott  (  1970 )  ; cp . Belnep (1976) . The lower part of the structure of determination ( see Fig .  1 ) , " UD-CARD " , represents the undard a termined end the upper one , " OD-CARD " , the over determined cardinelities . The determined cases are represented by the " D -CARD " level  , which is the symmetry axis of the structure . D-COrd is the set of singletons over the set N of natural numbers  ( including zero )  ; UD-CARD consists of the not-singleton elements of the power-sat of N with the partial ordering induced by the set inclusion  . OD-CARD is built up by introducing a ' dual to each UD-CARO'element  , which Is symbolized by square brackets "\[_\]" . 

Ix , , 3\]//oo-o . o\[1,2\]\[1,3\]\[2,3\]\[2,4\]01 . . . . . ._ 2 3) ,'1 .  5)  . . . CARD\1,21, 32,32, 4I , 2, 3I , 2, 4\ oo-CA . oXEIx ~3 Fig .   1 : Approximation structure CARD of cordinelity attributes The D-CARD element stand for " the cerdinality is exactly then which forms the singleton in question "  . UD-CARD represents eset of possible cardinelities  . The minimal entity in the approximation structure  , namely N , holds no relevant information , since " Card=N " stands for " the Ref O has a cardinolity "  , and this ia true for ellRefOs . (' Cord'iso set of cardinalities ' cord ' . ) Oetting input from communication or inferential processes  , leads to climbing up the structure , which reflects the enrichment of information with respect ocardinality  , or to no change in knowledge about the attribute . The ideal-level is reached at the D-CARD-level : an exact cardinelity is assigned  . Further input causes ( in the good case ) no changend in the bad case of inconsistency climbing up into the OD-CARD-rogIOn  . 
The structure of determination does not possess lattice properties  ; only the UD-CARD end the OO-cord parts are lattice-like  . The sudden change at passing from UD-CARD or D -CARD to inconsistent OD-CARDs destroys the lattice properties  ( see below )  . 
The approach of structures of determination , which is exemplified here with the case of cordinality attributes  , can be ussdanalogously with respect to other types of attributes  . The base of ell such structures erelattices , e . g . those of eart alattributes , which conbe interpreted as approximation lattices  . This means that climbing up the lattice can be understood as increasing information  . ( Note . that he ALL-element in this Interpretation is the bottom-element  )  . In e(half ) formal way , a structure of determination is built up from e Scottien approximation \] etttco  ( AL ) by the following method : 1 . Delete NIL from the approximation lattice AL . 
2 . Devide the rest in the level of determination ( La D ) which ia formed by the direct neighbors of the ( now deleted ) NIL end the undardatermined part of the lattice ( UD-AL ) which is given by those elements of AL whicher e neither NIL nor in LaD  . 
3 . With respect to UD-AL construct a dual counterpart of over determined lements  . This Iscalled OD-AL . 
'1 . Olue OD-AL with UD-AL via the level of determination LaD  . 
5 . The ordering relations can be defined in the canonical way  . 
As mentioned for the case of cerdlnn \] lty attributes such structur ~ of determination do not possess lattice properties  . This is proven in Hebel (1986) . The same phenomenon is observed by Belnap ( 1976 ) with respect to his set of episternic stete ~ , E . The lattice properties ereviolated at the passage to inconsistency  ( everdator minetion )  . 
Nevertheless , the most relevant properties of Scott's approximation lattices else hold for structures of determination  , especially the emplietivity by/nput ( using Belnap's terminology )  . On every important difference between Scott's approach and determination structures concerns the NIL  , which is the (!) failure element of ALs . In contrast , structures of determination contain many different failure elements  , namely all beyond the level of determination . Thus a condensed history of informing end dts informing is abbreviated by the OD-ettribute  .   ( A cherercterize tion of Scott's epprasch could be : " All failures ere equal  , namely disastrous . ") Repair processes , whiche . g . can be triggered by Input from an especially competent or believable informant  , e . g . with respectomy example by do hnhimself , levitoc limbing downward in the structure . Note , that repairing is informing of a specific type . In contrast to normal informing it leads downwards  ; this changing of the direction demands a specific prior decision based on the experience that something was going wrong  . 
I conclude this section with ere mark on over determination : Overdstermined objects eree specific type of/mpossl'ble objects  ( cp . 
Rapeport 1985) , which constitute test case for every semantic theory  . 
' Impossibility ' or ' non-existence ' ( as used in some approaches to this topic ) refer to the realworld and not to projected worlds  , which are in the mind . 
5. Conclusion
In this paper I have only dealt with I&l problems concerning the subtype of referential knowledge  . Obviously , esimilar approach is appropriate for the other subtypes of knowledge  , i . e . for other formal objects . ( Notice that assentia \] properties of RefOs , such as cerdinalfty , can also be seen as port of factual knowledge . ) In the case of factual knowledge undardetermine tionr over dater minetion concerns truth values  . Belnep's ( 1976 ) four-valued logic with e lattice-theoretic semantics has influenced the concepts of the present paper from e logical point of view  . 
Same types of ReiNsend of structures of determination ere implemented as parts of prototypicol text-understanding systems by the KIT-projects at the Technical University Berlin  . 

Belnep , H(1976): " Ho we computer should think " , in O . Ryle(ed ): Contemporary aspects of philosophy . Oriel Press : 8 tesks fleld . 30-56 . 
Ilobe I , Ch . (1982): " Referential nets with attributes " , in .  6 . Herecky ( ed ): COLiNO-82 , North-Holland : Amsterdam . I01-06 . 
Umbel , Ch .   (  1985 ) : " Referential nets as knowledge structers " , in T . 
Bellmer ( ed ): Linguistic Dynamics . da Oruyter : Berlin .  62-84 . 
Flobol , Oh . (1986): Prlnzl piender Re for ontie \] lt~t . Springer : Berlin . 
dackendoff , R . (1983): Semantics and Cognition . HIT-Press :
Cambridge , Mass.
Ropoport , W .   (  1985 ) : " Melnongian semantics for propositional semantic networks "  . Prec . 25rd Meeting of the ACL . ' t3-8 . 
Scott , D .   (  1970 ) : " Outline of a mathematical theory of computation "  . 
'1th Ann . Princeton Conf . on Information Sciences & Systems .  169-76 . 

