l ) is ambiguation and Language Acquisition
through the Phrasal Lexicon *
Abst , ' act
UriZcrnik
Michael G . Dyer
Artificial Intelligene el . aboratory
Computer Science Department
3531 Boelter Hall
Univelsity of California
Los Angeles , California 90024

1.1 Phrasal Parsing
The phrasal approach to language processing emphasizes the role of the lexicon as a knowledge source  . Ratl tcr than maintaining a single generic iexical cntu for each word e  . g . , take , the lexicon contains many phrases , e . g . , t_ake on , ti~ke to the streets , take to swimming , take over , Old , Although this , ' tl ) proach proves effective in parsing and in generation  , there are two acute problems which still require solutions  . 
First , due to the huge size of the phrasal lexicon , cspecia Ily when considering subtle meanings and idiosyncratic behavior of phrases  , encoding of \] exical entries cannot be done manually  . 
Thus , phrase acquisition must be employed to construct the lexicon  . Second , when a set of phrases is morphosyntactically equivalent  , disanlbiguation must be per Ibrnted by semantic means  . These problems are addrescd in the prograniRI NA  . 
1. Introduction
The phras:d approach to language processing \ [ Beckcr75  , Searle 79 , Pawley 83 , Filhnore 86\] emphasize stile role of tile lexi . ~con as a knowledge source . Rather than maintaining a single generic lexical entry for each word e  . g . , take , 110 lexicon con--tains many phrases , e . g . , take on , take to the streets , take to swirmaing , take over , etc . Ahhough this approach proves effective in parsing and in generation \ [  Wilensky84\]  , there are three acute problems which still require solutions  . First , due to the huge size of the phrasal lexicon , especially when considering subtle meanings and idiosyncratic behavior of phrases  , encoding of lexical entries cannot be done manually  . Thus , phrase acquisition must be employed to construct tile lexicon  . Second , parsing require , '; phrase disambiguation ( resolving ambiguity ) . 
When a set of phrases is morphosyntactically equivalent  , disam-bignation must be perfonned by semantic lncans  . 
In previous papers we have reported strategies for acquiring phrases in context  , which include creating syntactic patterns \ [ Zernik85a  \] , attd attaching semanlic on cepts for these patterns\[  Zernik85b  \] . In this paper we discuss how acquisition and parsing processes interact with one another  . 
Parsing involves reading chmses in text and instantiating \[  CharniakS0\] their corresponding concepts in tile context . The phrasa lexicon provides the linguistic database  1"o1" parsing . A lexical entry , a phrase , is a triple associating a linguistic pattern with its concept and a situation  . The basic parsing cycle is demonstrated in 1 ) recessing the following paragral ) la . 
SI : vet years \]: tried to \] . ocatemy high school teacher , when \] ~ ranJll to herill the street . 
The phrase ran into is parsed relative to the contcx test ablished by the first clause  . Assume that the lexicon contains at single phrase described in form  . ' dlyas : phrase patterll : Person lrun into Person2   sltllll\[\[01n Person ldid not plan to see Person2 COIICel ) t : Person lmeets Person2 accJ do . rltal\]y . 
Tim clause is parsed in four stcps : ( 1 ) The lmttern is matched succcssft , lly agains the text . Con- . 
scquently , Personland Person2 arc bound to the speaker and the teacher respectively  . 
(2 ) The situation associated with tile pattern is validated using the context  . After reading the first phrase the context contains two concepts :  ( a ) the speaker has a goal to scetile teacher , but ( b ) he has no feasible plan to accomplish the goal . 
(3) Since both (1) and (2) are successful , then the pattern itself is instantiat cd , adding to the context : the , s ' pea/cermet the teacher accidentally . 
(4 ) Steps ( 1 ) - ( 3 ) are repeated for each lexical entry . If more t it an one entry is instantiated , then the concept with the best match is selected . 
Phrase situation , distinguished form phrase concept , is Jnt lO-duced in our representation since it solves two problems :  ( a ) ind Lv ambiguation it provides a discrimination condition for phrase selection  , and ( b ) in acquisition it allows the incorporation of the context of the exanlple as part of the phrase  . 
11.2 The Modeled Phenomenon
The program R1NA   \[7mmik85c \] is designed to parse English sentences by reading text and producing tile corresponding concepts in the context  . However , RINA's lexicon is incomplete , and unknown phrases in the text might be encountered and * This research wa '  , ; supported in part by a grant fiom the rl'A Fotmdation  . 
247 processed . RINA's objective is to acquire these phrases from examples in context  . Thereafter , RINA's lexicon , augmented by these dynamically acquired phrases , facilitates parsing and generation of further sentences  . In the scenm ' io below , RINA encounters the new phrase to throw the book : User : The mobstereluded prosecution for years  . 
Last month , they threw the book at him for income-taxe vasion . 
RINA is familiar with the words throw and book ; however she does not know the figurative phrase itself  . RINA engages in a dialog with a user in order to acquire that phrase  . 
RINA : The prosecutor propelled a book at him ? User : No  . The Judge threw the book at him . 
RINA : The Judge threw the book at him . He found him guilty . 
Initially , RINA attempts to interpre the text using the literal phrase to throw an object at a person  . When this interpretation fails , RINA forms a hypothesis about the new phrase . At each stage , RINA spells outher new hypothesis to let the user knowher state of knowledge and provide counterexamples if necessary  . As the user wovides examples , RINA's hypothesis about the new phrase is upgraded  . Later on , RINA is able to use this phrase in parsing further sentences : User : The dean of the school threw the book at John  . 
RINA : He punished him.
Four issues must be addressed in modeling this behavior  . 
(1) The syntax of the new phrase . How can the program determine the scope and variability of the new phrase ? For example  , should the new phrase for throw the book at him accep the sentence throw a volume at him ? Is the prepositional phrase for income-taxe vasion incorporated as a mandatory part of the new phrase ?  ( 2 ) Literal interpretation . What is the contribution of senses of single words in forming the meaning of a new phrase ? Would the learner come up with the same meaning if he heard the hypothetical phrase the judge threw the book to him ?  ( 3 ) The context . What is the contribution of the context in forming both the syntax and the meaning of the new phrase ?  ( 4 ) Disambiguation . Once acquired , what facilitates the selection of appropriate meanings for lexical phrases ? For example  , how can the program come up with two different meanings for the following pair of sentences :  S2: The Judge decided to throw the book at him . 
$ 3: The judge decided that Mary threw the book at him . 
1.3 The Program
The program consists of four components : ( 1 ) Phrasal lexicon : This is a list of phrases where each phrase is a declarative pattern-concept -situation triple  . 
(2) Case frame parser : In parsing , case frames\[ Carbonel184\] match the text with syntactic and semantic phrase properties  . Unification \ [ Kay79\] accounts for phrase interaction . 
(3 ) Pattern Constructor : Learning of phrase patterns is accomplished by analyzing parsing failures  . A pattern-modification action is associated with each failure situation  . 
(4 ) Concept Constructor : Learning of phrase concepts is accomplished by a set of strategies which are selected according to the context  . 
Schematically , the program receives as input a sequence of sentence-context pairs from which it refines its current pattern-concept-situation hypothesis  . The pattern is acquired from the sentence , while the concept and the situation are derived from the context  . 
1.4 The Pattern Representation
Three sample phrasal patterns as they are represented in RINA's declarative lxicon a reg iven below  . 
Pl:?x:person<take:verb on > ? y:person
P 2: ? x:person throw:verb < the book > < at ? y : person >  P3: ? x:person ask:verb?y:person?z:inf-phrase These patterns actually stand for the following slot-filler objects : 
Pl : ( subject ( var ? x ) (class person ) )  ( verb ( root take ) (modifier on ) )  ( object ( var ? y )   ( class person ) ) ) 
P2: ( subject ( var ? x )   ( class person ) )  ( verb ( root throw ) )  ( object ( marker at ) (var ? y ) (class person ) )  ( object ( determiner the ) (noun book ) )
P3: ( subject ( var ? x ) (class person ) )  ( verb ( root ask )   )   ( object ( var ? y ) (class person ) )  ( comp ( var ? z ) (form infinitive )   ( subject ? x ) ) This notation is described in greater detail in \[   Zernik85a\]  . 
2. Phrase Disambiguation
There are syntactic patterns which are not unique to one lexical entry  . Therefore , phrases cannot be selected unambiguously merely through syntactic patterns  . Thus , ambiguity must be resolved by semantic means . For example , for the pattern run into there are two distinct senses  , as shown in the following sentences $4 and $5:   $4: For years I tried to locatemy high school teacher  , but I could not find her address . 
Last week Iran int 0 her in the street.
S5: My client was driving carefully . Your client rsnlnto his Merce des on a redlight . 
These senses are referred tomnemonically as fortuitous-encounter and vehicle-collision respectively  , t lowever , also a literal interpretation exists for run into as shown in  $6 below : $6: Driving home , I became hungryso Iran into a

The meaning of the clause in $6 is produced literally out of its constituents , meaning " move-quickly to the interior of a setting "  . 
Although ambiguity in sentences $4-$6 does not pose any problem for a human reader ( who knows English phrases )  , a computer program ( and a second language speaker ) might experience difficulty in discriminating the appropriate sense in each case  . 
Ambiguity is resolved in each case by matching phrase si-tuations with the context  . The first lcxical phrase depicts fortuitous -encounter:situation  ( act ( p trans ( actor ? x )   ( to ( proximity-of ? y ) ) ) )  ( result ( attend ( actor ? x )   ( to ? y )   ( object ( eyes-of ? x ) ) ) )  ( plan ( mode negative ) ) concept ( act-of situation ) Figure 1: Phrase P4-Fortuitous E , l counter The situation of this phrase is given in terms of phms and goals  . 
It requires that tim context satisfy three points :   ( 1 ) ? x moves to the proximity of ? y . 
(2) As a result , ? x is able to see ? y.
(3 ) ? x has not planned that outcome ( seeing ? yist , ncxpected ) . 
The concept is given in terms of the act itself ( concept is ( act-of situation )   )   . The second phrase depicts vekicle-collision : pattern ? x : vehicle run : verb < into ? y:thing > situation  ( $ vehicle-oollision ( vehicle ? x )   ( thing ? y ) ) concept ( propel ( object ? x )   ( to ( location-of ? y ) ) ) Figure 2: Phrase P5- Vehicle Collision $ vehicle-collision represents he following situation :  ( 2 ) ? x is involved in a moving script ( Scar-riding , $ ice-skating , etc . ) (2) ? x moves into the location of ? y . 
(3) As a consequence of (2) , a preservation-goal of ? x ( citber preserve-health or preserve-social -control  ) is th warted . 
Again , the concept itself points to a single element within the si-tuation  . 
Partial Matching of Situations
When severa lexical patterns match a sentence , the phrase whose situation matches the context is selected  . However , the situation prescribed by the phrase does not always exist in the context prior to reading the text  . For example , consider the way the situations of the phrases P4 and P5 above match tim context in this paragraph : $4: For years I tried to locatemy high school teacher  , but I could not find her address . 
Last week Iran into her in the street.
The plan/goal scenario established in tim context prior to the reading of the phrase in the sentence is:  ( 1 ) There is an active goal to see the teacher . 
(2) No plan is available to achieve this goal.
This context does not match the situation of vetticle-collision since there is no indication of an accident  ( riding a car on the one hand , or accident repurcussions on the other hand ) . I to we ver , t be other situation is not perfectly matched either  ( i . e . tile outcome of the encounter is not in the context  )  . Thus , phrase selection must be accounted for by partial matching  . The best match is selected-fortuitous-encounter in his example  . 
3. Phrase Interaction
Besides the surrounding context , phrase disambiguation is also influenced by phrase constituents  . We describe this aspect in two cases . Interaction of a phrase with its cornplement and interaction of a phrase with an embedded reference  . 
3 . 1 Indirect References-the Utility of Selectional Restrictions The selection of a phrase sense could rely on an embedded reference  . For example , consider the sentence : 87: A yellow Mercedes ran into my caroi ' ~ ared l ight  . 
being read relative to two lexical phrases P4 and t'5   ( fortuitous-encounter and vehicle-collision respectively  ) :
P4: ? x:person run into ? y:person
PS : ? x : vehicle run into ? y : thing
Due to the type of the reference ( i . e . , a yellow Mercedes is a vehicle ) , the phrase P5 ( vehicle collision ) is selected , i Iowever , the type of the reference might lead to an incorrect selection  . For instance consider the sentence : $8: Your clien tranintom year on a redlight . 
Here the type of the reference your client is l ) erson . This type causes the inappropriate selection of P4   ( where we know flom the contex that P5 is the appropriate selection )  . Tb is reference is an example of the phenomenon we call indirect reference  ( see also \[ Hershkovits85\] and \[ Fanconnier85\]   ) Although the speaker in $8 said your clien the actually meant your c\] . ient'scar , which refers to an instance of a car . Thus , the referent is re-fen'ed to indirectly through another object  . Two pairs of examples illustrating indirect references are: 
S9: She like shorses.
Sl0: She like stuna fisll.
Slh John listened to Mozart.
g12: Usually , I listentomy parents.
In $9 , the reference horses could mean any activity related to horses such as riding hor  . ~es or watching horses . Ontile other hand , in S10 the activity is probably eating t una fish . 
in S11 , the reference Mozart does not refer to the person Mozarthimself  , rather it refers to the . sound of his music . On the other hand , ill S12 my parents refers actually to my parent's ad-v ice  . Thus , a reference might refer to an object which merely represents he intended referent  . 
Therefore , categories of lexical items as they appear in the text  , or selectional restrictions \ [ Chomsky65\] present a very weak method for disambiguation , and generally should not provide the only key for phrase selection  , in fact , the identity of referents for indirect references inust be resolved through the embedding phrase  . The identity of the phrase itself is determined by the context  , as shown in the previou section . 
3.2 A Coml ) lement-Taldng Phrase
Ambiguity appears also in complement-taking phrase such as ask  , promise , instruct ~ inform , etc . Consider tile following set of sentences : S13: John asked her if she was having hulch . 
S14: The judge asked Mary to approach the bench.
S15: Mary asked the judge to give her a break.
Although they all involve the word ask , in each sentence ask appears in a different sense  ( query , command , and appeal , respectively ) . What is the representation f the phrase for ask , and how are these sentences disambiguated ? Two extreme approaches to lexical representation are : knowledge of the word ask and all of its possible interactions  . This model is best presented by the word-expert approach\[  Rieger77\]  . In this model , general linguistic knowledge is encoded repeatedly in individual words  . 
(2 ) Maintain a lexical entry for each phrase sense . Clearly this second extreme is not feasible since it is impossible to predict all possible situations in which ask might appear  . 
In RINA , there are two lexical entries , representing two basic senses of ask . 
P 6: pattern : concept : ? X ask ? y?z:question -sentence ? x in form ? y that knowing ? z is a goal of ? x 
P 7: pattern : ? x ask ? y?z:infinitive-phrase concept : ? x in form ? y that ? z is a goal of ? x Accordingly  , the meaning of a sentence is constructed in two steps :  ( a ) The syntax of the complement determines whether to select  P6 or PT . In S13 ,   P6 is selectedue to the question form of its complement  . In S14 and S15 ,   P7 is selecte due to the infinitive form of its complement  . 
( b ) The meaning of the phrase is constructed by interpreting the concept relative to the context  . 
The context in both $14 and S15 is the asymmetric a luthority relationship . Thus , the asking act in S14 is taken as an authority-decree , while in S15 the same asking act is interpreted as authority -appeal  . It is important to distinguish between these two meaning so that the parser can maintain the appropriate expectations in each case  . 
In conclusion , the lexicon must ensure that linguistic clues ( such as the syntactic form of the complement ) be exploited in constructing the meaning . However , the lexicon should not contain meanings which could be inferred by general world knowledge  . 
5. Phrase Acquisition
So far , we have assumed the existence of necessary phrases in the lexicon  . However , in reality a program might encounter new phrases in the text  . Thus , the program must accomplish two objectives : ( a ) pm'se the text in spite of the unknown element , and ( b ) acquire the unknown element for future encounters . 
Consider the situation in which the figurative phrase is first encountered  . 
User : The mobstereluded prosecution for years.
Last month , they threw the book at him for income-taxe vasion . 
RINA : The prosecutor propelled a book at him ? User : No  . A judge threw the book at him . 
RINA : The judge threw the book at him . He found him guilty . 
And later on:
User : The dean of the school threw the book at John  . 
RINA : He punished him.
There are three stages in the acquisition process :   ( 1 ) Apply the literal interpretation . 
(2) Acquire the figurative phrase.
(3 ) Generalize the new phrase beyond the specific context  . 
Literal Interpretation
In the absence of the appropriate phrase in the lexicon  , RINA utilizes other available knowledge sources , namely ( a ) the literal interpretation and ( b ) the context . The literal interpretation is given by the phrase : pattern ? x : person throw ? y : phys-obj < at ? z : person > concept  ( act ( propel ( actor ? x )   ( object ? y )   ( to ( location-of ? z ) ) ) )  ( purpose ( thwart ( goal p-goal )   ( goal-of ? x ) ) ) 
Figure 3: Propela Phys-Obj
This phrase describes propelling an object in order to hit another person  . Notice that no situation has been specified . General phrase such as take , give , catch , and throw do not have a specified situation since they can be applied in many situations  . * The literal inteq3retation fails by plan/goal analysis . In the context laid down by the first phrase ( prosecution has active-goal to punish the criminal  )  , " propelling a book " does not serve the prosecution's goals  . In spite of the discrepancy , RINA spells out that interpretation , The prosecutor propelled a book at him ? to notify the user about her state of knowledge  . 
The Trial Context
The user's second sentence , ( a Judge threw the book at . him ) , and specifically the reference a judge , brings in $ trial ( the trial-script ) . This script involves five entities : ( a ) Judge , ( b ) Prosecutor , (c ) Defendant , ( d ) Alleged-Crime ,   ( e ) the Law regarding that crime and its punishment . The script involves a sequence of events : ( a ) The Prosecutor says ( mtrans ) his arguments . 
(b ) The Defendant says his arguments.
( c ) The Judge decides ( select-plan ) either : ( i ) Punish ( thwarts a goal of ) Defendant . 
(2) Do not punish him.
Figure 4: The Acts in $ trial
This script is used in forming the elements of the lexical phrase  . 
( a ) The phrase situation is taken as the script itself  . 
( b ) The pattern is extracted from the sample sentence . 
(c ) The concept is extracted from the script.
Forming the Pattern
Four rules are used in extracting the linguistic pattern fl ' om the sentence :  $13: Last month , they threw the book at him for income-taxe vasion . 
( a ) Initially , use an existing literal pattern . In this case , tile initial pattern is : ? x:person throw:verb ? z : phys-obj < at ? y:person > 
Figure 5: The Initial Pattern * Notice tile distinction between preconditions and situation  . While a precondition for " throwing a ball " is " first holding it "  , this is not part of the phrase situation . Conditions which are implied by common sense or world knowledge do not belong in the lexicon  . 
250  ( b ) Examine other cases in the sample sentenece , and include in the pattern cases which could not be interpreted by general interpretation  . There are two such cases : ( 1 ) Last month could be interpreted as a general time adverb  ( i . e . : last year he was still enrolled at UCLA , the vacation started last week , etc . ) . 
(2 ) For income-taxe vasion can be interpreted as a element-paid-for adverb  ( i . e . : hepaid dearly for his crime , he was sentenced for a murder he did not commit , etc . ) . 
Thus , both these cases are excluded.
( c ) Variablize references which can be instantiated in the context  . In our case ? x is the Judge and ? y is the Def Endant  . 
They are maintained as w triables , as opposed to the other case : ( d ) FrEEze references which cannot be i aslantia tcd in the context  . No referent is fonnd for the reference the book . 
Therefore , that reference is taken as a frozen part of tile pattern instead of the case ? z : phys-obj  . 
The resulting pattern is : ? x:person throw:verb < the book > < at ? y:person > 
Figure 6: Tile Resulting Patt Ern
Forming the Concept
In selecting the concept of the phrase , there arc four possibilities , namely the events shown in Figure 4 . The choice of the appropriate one among these four events is facilitated by linguistic clues  . A Sopposed to the phrase they threw the book to him which implies cooperation between the characters  , the phrase they threw the book at him implies a goal conflict between the characters  . Since this property is shared among many verbs , it is encoded in the lexicon as a general phrase : pattern ? x:person ? v:verb ? y:physobj < at ? z : person > concept  ( act ( propel ( actor ? x )   ( object ? y )   ( to ( location-of ? z ) ) ) )  ( purpose ( thwart ( goal p-goal )   ( goal-of ? x ) ) ) 
Figure 7: Propel At , a General Phrase
Notice that rather than having a specific root , the pattern of this phrase leaves on t the root of the verb as a variable  . Using this phrase concept as a search pattern , the " punishment-decision " is selected f , ' om $ trial . Thus , the phrase acquired so far is : pattern ? x : person throw < the book > < at ? y:person > concept  ( select-plan ( actor ? x )   ( plan ( result ( thwart ( goalp-goa \] . )  ( goal-of?y ) ) ) ) ) situation ( $ trial ( judge ? x )   ( defendant ? y ) )
Figure 8: The Acquired Phrase
Phrase Generalization
Although RINA has acquired the phrase in a specific context  , she might hear the phrase in a different context . She should be able to transfer the phrase across specific contexts by generalization  . RINA generalizes phrase meanings by analogical mapping  . Thus , when hearing the sentence below , an analogy is found between the two contexts . 
S I6: The third time he caught John cheating in an exam  , the professor threw tile book at him . 
The trial-script is indexed to a general authority relationship  . The actions in a trial are explained by the existence of that relationship  . For example , by saying something to the Judge , tile Defendant does not dictate the outcome of the situation  . He merely informs the Judge with some facts in order to influence the verdict  . On the other hand , by his decision , tile Judge does determine the outcome of the situation since he presents an authority  . 
Thr Eesimilarities are found between Ihe $ trial and the scene involving John and the professor  . 
( a ) The authority relationship between ? X and ? y . 
(b ) Alaw-violation by ? x.
(c ) A decision by ? x.
Therefore , the phrase situation is generalized fiom the specific trial-script into the general authority -decree situation which encompasses both examples  . 
6 . Presupposilions as a Phrase Situallon A message might be conveyed by an utterance beyond its straightforward illocntion  . That message , called tile presul ) posi-tion of the utterance , is described by Keenan ( 1971 ) as follows: ( see also \[ Grice 75\] and \[ Fauconnier 85\] Ch .  3 ) : The presuppositions of as EntEnce are those conditions that the world must meet in order for the sentence to make literal sense  . Thus if some such condition is not met , for some sentence S , then either S makes no sense at allor else it is understood in some nonlitcral way  , for example as a joke or metaphor . 
Despite this definition , presupposition has been studied as a means for generation and propagation of implications \ [  Gazdm'79  , Karttunen 79\] . In general , the effort is to compute the part of the sentence which is already giwm  , by applying " backward " reasoning , i . e . : from the sentence the king of France is bald determine if indeed there is a king in France  , or fro , n the sentence it was not John who broke the glass  , determine whether somebody indeed broke the glass  . Rather than use presuppositions to develop further inferences  , we investigate how presuppositions are actually applied according to Keenan's definition above  , namely , in determining appropriate utterance interpretations  . In the phrasa lexicon , we equate presul ) position with phrase situation . 
7. Conclusions
Dyer (1983) on the one hand , has outlined the use of contextual expectations in disambignation  . In his model , the lExi-con , and expectations in partieular , were expressed procedurally rather than delaratively  . Wilensky (1984) on the other hand , developed the notion of the d E clarativ E phrasal lexicon  . I to we verh is model failed to distinguish explicitly betwEEn a phrase and its contextual expectations  . In our model , within the declarative phrasa lexicon the meaning of lexica I entries is separated into a concept and phrasal situation  . Contextual expectations take part in learning as well as in parsing  . In learning , the concept is associated with the salient element  , while expectations are associated with the surrounding context  . In parsing , only successful nmtch-ing of expectations in the context enables the instantiation of the concept  . 
2 51  \[  Becker75\]  \[  Carbonel184\]  \[  CharniakS0\]  \[  Chomsky65\]  \[  Fauconnier85\]  \[  Fi1Imore86\]  \[  Gazdar79\]  \[  Grice751  \[  Hershkovits85\]  \[  Km'ttunen79\] 

Becker , Joseph D . , " The Phrasal Lexicon , " pp .   70-73 in Proceedings Interdisciplinary Workshop on Theoretical Is'sues in Natural 
Language Processing , Cambridge , Mas-sae husets ( June 1975) . 
Carbonell , J . G . and P . J . Hayes , " Coping with Extragrammaticality , " pp . 437-443 in Proceedings Coling 84 , Stanford California (1984) . 
Charniak , El , C . Riesbeck , and D . McDermott , Artificial Intelligence Programming , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , 
New Jersey (1980).
Chomsky , N . , Aspects of the Theory of Syntax , MIT Press , Cambridge MA (1965) . 
Fauconnier , Gilles , Mental Spaces : Aspects of Meaning Construction in Natural 
Language , MIT Press , Cambridge MA (1985).
Fillraore , C . , P . Kay , and M . O'Connor , Re-gularity and Idiomaticity in Grammatical Constructions : The Case of Let alne  , UC Berkeley , Department of Linguistics (1986) . 
Unpublished Manuscript.
Gazdm ' , Gerald , " A Solution to the Projection Problem , " pp . 57-87 in Syntax and Semantics ( Volume 11: Presupposition )  , ed . 
Choon-Kyu Oh David A . Dinneen , Academic
Press , New York (1979).
Grice , H . P . , " Logic and Conversation , " in Syntax and Semantics ( volume 3: Speech Acts ' )  , ed . P . Cole J . Morgan , Academic
Press , NY (1975).
Hershkovits , Annette , " Semantics and Pragmatics of Locative Expressions  , " Cognitive
Science 9(3) (1985).
Karttunen , L . and S . Peters , " Conventional
Implicature , " in Syntax and Semantics ( Volume 11 , Presupposition ) , ed . C . K . OhD . Dinneen , Academic Press , NY (1979) . 
\ [Kay79\]  \[  Keenan71\]  \[  Pawley83\]  \[  Rieger77\]  \[  Searle79\]  \[  Wilensky84\]  \[  Zernik85a  \] \[  Zernik85b  \] \[  Zernik85c \] Kay , Martin , " Functional Grammar , " pp . 
1 42-158 in Proceedings 5th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistic Society  , Berkeley , 
California (1979).
Keenan , Edward L . , " Two Kinds of Presupposition in Natural Language  , " pp . 4452 in Studies in Linguistic Semantics , ed . Charles Fillmore D . T . Langendoen , Holt , Reinhart and Winston , New York (1971) . 
Pawley , A . and H . Syder , " Two Puzzles for Linguistic Theory : Native like Selection and Native like Fluency  , " in Language and Communication , ed . J . C . Richards R . W . 
Schmidt , Longman , London (1983).
Rieger , Chuck , " Viewing Parsing as Word
Sense Discrimination , " 511 , Department of Computer Science , University of Maryland , College Park , Maryland ( January 1977) . 
Searle , J . , " Speech Acts and Recent Linguistics , " in Expression and Meaning , ed . J . 
Sem'le , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge (1979) . 
Wilensky , R . , Y . Arens , and D . Chin , " Talkoing to UNIX in English : an Overview of
UC , " Communications of the ACM 27(6), pp . 574-593 ( June 1984) . 
Zernik , Uri and Michael G . Dyer , " Towards a Self-Extending Phrasal Lexicon , " in Proceedings 23rd Annual Meeting of the Asosociation for Coml ) utational Linguistics , Chicago IL ( July 1985) . 
Zemik , Uri and Michael G . Dyer , " Failure-Driven Aquisition of Figurative Phrases by Second Language Speakers  , " in Proceedings of the 7th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society  , Irvine CA ( August 1985) . 
Zernik , Uri and Michael G . Dyer , " Learning Phrases in Context , " in Proceedings The 3rd
Machine Learning Workshop , New-
Brunswick NJ ( June 1985).

