SPEECHACTSOFASSERTION
INCOOPERATIVE INYOR MATION ALDIAL OGUE
I.S . Kononenko
AI Laboratory , Computer Center
Siberian Division of the USSRAc.Sci.
Novoslblrsk 6300 90, USSR

Dialogue systems should provide a cooperative informational dialogue aimed at knowledge sharing  . 
In the paper speech acts of assertion ( SAA ) are assumed to be the means of achieving thi sgoal  . A typology of SAAs is proposed which ref lects certain cognitive aspects of communicative situation at differents tages of mutual informing process  . Infor-mation constituents of the type assertions are for-mally described to represent a current cognitive state of the speaker's knowledge base  , each proposi-tion in it being character i zed by a subjective veri--similitude evaluation  . The general scheme of infor-mation flow in the cooperative dialogue is consi- dered  . With regard to this scheme the dialogue func -tions of SAAs are discussed  . 

We must strive to provide dialogue systems with ability to interact with tile user in the kind of cooperative human-like dialogues of informa-tional type  . By this type of a dialogue we mean a mutual informing activity of interaction participants -- similar to Car \] son's  ( 1984 ) dialogue game of information sharing-aimed at enriching the stock g of shared  ( mutually coordinated ) knowledge . Our tenet in this study is that SAAs are performed in dialogues to approach the general goal of shared knowledge  . The proposed typology of SAAs reflects their dialogue functions and contribution i to the information flow process  . 
Performing an SAA the speaker X conveys to the addressee Z the information about some actual si tua-tionS  , i . e . about some part of the ' world ' which a topic of the dialogue refers to  . It is assumed here that appropriateness of the SAA is determined by conditions formulated in terms of contextual proper-ties of the current communicative situation inclu-ding knowledge  , beliefs , evaluations and goals of interaction partic ipants  ( van Dijk ,  1984) . Certain cognitive aspects of eommunic atlves i tuation are considered to be a necessary precondition for SAA performance and simultaneously a part of SAA in teg-ral content  . 
To simulate the cognitive situation and repre- sent information constituents of SAA content in a participant's  ( for example , X ' s ) knowledge base two cognitive components are defined  . Let X be a set of utterances P whleh represents a current cognitive state of X  ( denoted as X : P )   . A cognitive component X : Z is disting u is hed in X which is a reflection of in X  ( X's beliefs about Z's knowledge including Z's beliefs about his partner X's state of knowledge  )  , i . e . a set of utterances of the form P = Z : P ' . Then tile rest of X is X's own knowledge about the world  . 
NowM may be defined as a set of utterances simultaneously contained in X  , Z , X : Z and Z : X ( a weak definition of M) . 
2 . COGNITIVE ASPECTS OF COMMUNICATIVESITUATION Tile nucleous of integral content of tile SAAi sa propositional structure  , in the simplest case , a proposition P which represents S in a generalized and semantically structured form  . Besides P , the SAA content reflects the following aspects of communica-tive situation wh ich make up a cognitive background for SAA generation : I  ) the speaker's state of knowledge about S , i . e . 
tile state of X , which includes X's evaluation of his own knowledge  ;  2 ) the speaker's beliefs about the addressee's knowledge  , i . e . the state of X : Z . 
2 . 1  . Participant's knowledge . To reflect tile subjective nature of a participant's knowledge each proposition P in his individual knowledge base is provided with a verisimilitude evaluat ion  ( v-evaluation which indicates a degree of biscertain-ty of whether or not P is an adequate description of S  . It is convenient to interpret the vevaluat ion on the numerical scale  ( 04 v ~ l ) rather than in terms of the traditional t ruth values  ( Truth , Falsity , In de-finiteness ) . This allows representation of various degrees of belief and comparison of the partici-pants ' knowledge : X's certainty is more  , much more , less or equal to that of Z . The contlnuality of v-evaluation does not exclude selection of v-interval sembracing pragmatically and psychologically non--dist inguished scale values  , each interval corresponding to a type of cognitive state of the participant  . 
Different cognitive states of X are interconnected by relations regarding information flow between the cognitive components of X  . These relations are expressed in terms of the following set of rules l:  ( I ) X : P --> X : ( P , vx )   ( 2 ) X : Z : P - - ~ > X : P ( 3 ) X:Z:P--->X:Z : ( P , vz ') , in special casev z ' = ? (4) X : Z : ( P , vz ' --> X : ( P , vx ) , in general case Vz ' ~ Vx (5) x : ( P , vx)-->x:x:(P , vx ) Note that (4) is an amplification of (2) , (5) represents the reflexivity of X . For an explanation of the meta-value '?' in  ( 3 ) see section 2 . 2  . To each rule 1- ( 5  ) corresponds its counterpart for Z : ( I ) '- ( 5 ) ' It should be born in mind tlmt X : P does not imp ly X:Z : P  . 
and Z are related to M by rules (6) and (7) , the latter corresponding to a stronger de finition of M  . These statements are valid if their p remises are explicated in the dialogue  ( see section 4 )   . 
(6X:P&Z:P&X:Z:P&Z:X:P-->M:P (7) X : ( P , vx)&Z:(P , vz)&X:Z:(P , Vz')&Z:X:(P , vx')&
Vx = Vz : : Vz '= Vx ' = V- . -> M : ( P , v1 . The utterances of the form X : ( P , vx in the cognitive state representations are not provided with v-values which in this case are taken for  1  . 

The cognitive states of the X : ( P , vx ) type dif-ferIn vx-values2: vx = l*-X is quite certain that PIs true of S  ; vx = O*-Xiscertain that P is false of S  ; Vx > 0 . 5* or v x < 0 . 5* - X i s inc l ined P to be evaluated pos i t ively  ( P is rather true than false ) or negatively ; Vx = 0 . 5*-both ( positive and negative ) evaluations are equally possible ; this inter-val is a domain of full uncertainty  , resulting either from the absence of any information in support of or against Por from there being much evidence both in favour of and against P  . 
The cognitive state X : ( P , vx ) is a precondition for the performance of an SAA by X  ( SAA . X ) . Another necessary precondition is X's belief that Z does not dispose of the information about S to be conveyed by the SAA  . X . The wellknown formulation " it is not obvious to X that Z knows that P "  ( Searle , 1969 ) needs specification since it permits several interpreta-tions  . 
2 . 2 . 1 gnorance types . We distinguish four ignorance situations defined by comparing the current state of X to that of X:Z  . 
A-ignorance . X : ( P , v x ); X : Z + P . Considering P , X believes that P is not considered ( or simply not activated ) in Z . 
B-ignorance . X : ( P , vx ); X:Z : ( P , vz '); X:Z:X:(P , vx ') , Vx'#Vx or vx '= ? P is considered by both X and Z  . 
g believes that v-value of P in Z is Vz ' ( which is , possibly , not equal to Vx , by rule (4)) . X believes also that the correct Vx-value is unknown to Z  , i . e . V x'6 Vx/V x '= ? ( '?' has been introduced into knowledge representation apparatus as a meta-value of v -evaluatlon to account for just this very case of ignorance  )  . 
C-ignorance . X : ( Pi , vix ), vkx > 0 . 5*; X:Z : ( Pi , viz ), viz ~0 . S *; X : Z : X : ( Pi , vix ') , vix '+ vix/vix '= ? X believes that the state of Z corresponds to disjunctive un-certainty : there is a set Pi of alternative pro-posit ional descriptions of S in  Z3  , none of them evaluated as considerably more ver isimilar than the rest  . In Xv-values of the alternatives are dist ri-buted in such a way that one of them  ( vkx ) is posi-tlve . In X's opinion , Z is ignorant of this distribution . 
D-ignorance . x : ( q , vlx ), vl x > 0 . 5*; X : ( P , v2x ) , V2x = l*-vlx ; X:Z + Q ; X:Z : ( P , Vz') , Vz'>0 . 5*; X:Z:X:(P , V x ') ,   Vx'~V2x/Vx ' = ? The propositions contained in X and ( in X's opinion ) present alternative descriptions of S . 
The type of ignorance determines a communicative goal of the SAA  , this goal subordinated to the general goal of the cooperative dialogue  . By SAA performance , X intends to change Z so as to bring about Z's beliefs of S into line with his own knowledge  , i . e . to approximate Z to X ( or , at least , Z:X to X , if S has to do with the ' mental world ' of X , i . e . X ) . This intention , in its turn , determines 2 . n * denotes n and the scale values close to n . 
3 . The v-values of the alternative propositions are bound by correlation ~ vi~l *  ( < is the case when not all the alternatives are known  )  . 
516 a type of operational change of Z : a ) to include information about S in Z ( an inclusion operation )   ; b ) to exclude wrong information about S from Z ( an exclusion operation )   ; c ) to select one of the alter-native descr iptions of S contained in Z  ( a non-elementary select lonoperation carr ied out by means of several exclusions  )   ; d ) to correct wrong informa-tion about Sconta in ed in Z  ( a non-elementary correction operation carr ied out by means of exclu-sion and inclus ion  )   . 
3. SAATY PES
The information about the cognitive situation is incorporated in the integral information  ( information package-IP ) to be conveyed from g to Z by the performance of an SAA  . The information consti-tuents of the SAAIP are distributed between the three sections representing the states of M  , X : Z and X . Their content is formed in accordance with the ignorance situation as X sees it by the moment of SAA generation  . It is the content of M , X : Z and that determines a type of the given SAA . 
3 . 1  . Basic SAA types . In the A-ignorance situa-tion a proposit i on P and corresponding evaluative information Vx is put by X under Z's consideration  . In the B-ignorance situation it is evaluative information only that is introduced to Z  . 
An opposition by the type of information introduced by an SAA  ( propositional + evaluative vs . evaluative ) allows two basic SAA types , namely , Statements ( S-SAA ) and Evaluations ( E-SAA) , to be distin-guished . 
Statements . S-SAA is based on the assumption that P is not considered in Z  . BVS-SAA performance , P is put under Z's consideration ad Vx-value of P is communicated to Z  . In general case , M is empty ( with respectoS ) : the topic P hasn't been yet initiated in the dialogue  . 
S-SAAIP : ( a ) M : O(b ) X : Z + P ( c ) x : ( P , vx ) Different Vx-values determine the S-SAA subtypes : In definite Statements  ( vx = 0 . S *), Uncertain Statements (0* < vx < 0 . 5* and 0 . 5* < vx < l *) and Certain
Statements ( vx = 0* and vx = l*).
Examples : ( 1 ) It seems that John is going to leave for Par is tomorrow  . 
(2) I am certain that Jack has passed his exam.
(3) I don't know whether it will rain , < but I ' II take myumbrella . > (4) I don't think she is married , < so it is not foolish for him to try to meet her again  . > Evaluations . E-SAA is performed in the communicative situation when P has been already activated in M  , i . e . the topic P is under consideration in the dialogue  . No new propositional information is introduced by E-SAA  . The goal of X is to introduce Vx-value which is not contained in Z : X  , in X's opinion . 
E-SAAIP : ( a ) M : P ( b ) X : Z : ( P , V z ') ( c ) x : ( P , v x )( d ) X : Z : X : ( P , vx ') , Vx ' ~ Vx/Vx '= ? There are Positive Evaluations ( Vx > 0 . 5*), Nega-tive Evaluatlons ( vx < 0 . 5*) and Indefinite Evalua-tions(Vx = 0, 5*) . The consideration f possible oor-relations of vx and vz ' allows distinguishing a number of E -SAA subtypes that are shown Inflg  . 1  . Of special interest here are Acceptance and Approval corresponding to Vx = Vz '  . The distinctions between these two subtypes as well as their dialogue functions wil l be discussed in section  4  . 
Examples : (5) Z : I am leaving for Paris.
X : a . I see !/ Areyou ? I didn't know that . 
( Acceptance ) b . I know that already.
(6) Z : It looks like John has got married.
X : a . Really he has !< I've got to kno whis wife . > ( Strong Confirmation ) b . I don't think so , < he used to be a staunch bachel or . > ( Weak Denial-Doubt)c . I wonder !/ Hashe ? I didn't think so . 
( Doubt , vx = 0 . 5 *) 3 . 2 . Non-elementary SAA types . In certain communicative situations X perform speech acts which may be called non -elementary : their informational content may be divided into several components  ( sets of information constituents ) each representing the content of some elementary ( basic ) speech act . In the situations of C - and D-ignorance the non-elemen-tary SAAs  ( Correction and Selection ) are performed , their information packages being the combination of IPs of the basic SAAs described above  . 
Selection ( pick ) . P-SAA is a means of selection in the C-ignorance situation  . In the simplest case M contains a set of two propositions  ( P , Q ) and knowledge that only one of them is adequate to S  , i . e . M : ( P/Q , I*) . By P-SAAX positively evaluates Q . 
It means a negative valuation of P , in accordance with the implication (( Q , vl ) --> ( P , v2) , vl = l*-v2) . 
so , the P . -SAAIP is a combination of two E-SAAIPs , one of them introducing the positive evaluation of Q and the other negatively evaluating P  ; a constituent ( b ) is added to the P-SAAIP and w-values are spec if ied  . 
P-SAAIP : ( a)M : ( P , Q ) ( b)M : ( P/Q , I *) ( e)X:Z : ( P , o . 5*) ( d ) X : z : ( q , o . 5*) ( e)X:(Q , vlx ), vlx > 0 . 5* ( f ) X : ( P , v2x ) , V2x = l*-vlx(g ) X:Z:X:(Q , VIx ') , v l x ' 4 v l x/v l x ' = ?( h ) X : Z : X : ( P , v2x') , V2x'=l*-vlx'/V2x'=?
For example: ( 7 ) Z : Has Smith gone away on businessor stayed in London ? X : I e has stayed  , < Is a whimy esterday . > Correction . C-SAA is performed to correct Z in the si tuation of D-ignorance  . M contains P which is characterized by a posit ivev-evaluatlon in Z  . 
Assuming that P is inadequate to S , X evaluates P negatively and introduces Q , P and Q being alterna-tive , in X's oplnion , i . e . X : ( P/Q , I *) . X believes that this presupposition will be accepted or approved of by Z  ( included in Z ) and thus become an element of M . The C-SAAIP combines the E-SAAIP ( Negative Evaluation in the Denial mode ) and the S-SAAIP ( with positive evaluation of Q being in t ro-duced  )   ; a constituent ( d ) is added to the C-SAAIP and v-values are specified  . 
C-SAAIP : ( a ) M : P ( b ) X : Z : ( P , V z ') , Vz '> 0 . 5*(c ) X : Z + Q(d ) X : ( P/Q , I *)( e)x:(q , vlx ) , vl x > 0 . 5* ( f ) X : ( P , v2x ) , v2x = l*-vl x(g ) X@:X : ( P , vx ') , vx ' ~ v2x/vx ' = ?
For example: ( 8 ) Z : You stayed at : home yesterday , I believe ? The nomenclature of non-elementary SAAs may be expanded bF inclusion of alte rnative statements  ( combination of S-SAAs )  , selective statements with a non-siugle choice ( combination of E-SAAs ) etc . 
4. INFOR MATION FLOW ANDS AACONTRIBUTION
In this section we consider the process of information flow in the cooperative informational dialogue antidiscuss the role of the basic SAAs in this process  . The prohlem of information flow is partially analyzed by Carlson  ( 1984 ) who make suc-cessful use of the table and private lists metaphor  . 
However , the information flow scheme proposed here seems to be more general as far as it takes into account not only the propositional but also the evaluative constituents of the participants ' knowledge  . This allows distinguishing a stage of mutual coordination of evaluations in the scheme  . Figure 2 shows several variants of the dialogue flow of which certain stages are represented by Statements and 

At the beginning of the dialogue the set Mi sempty  ( in l )   . The cognitive state of X corresponds to A -Ignorance  . This determines the appropriateness of S-SAA and formation of the communicative goal of the cooperative partner X  , namely , to inform Z about S . X performs an S-SAA by means of which information about the current cognitive situation is conveyed from the speaker X to his addressee Z  . As a result of S-SAA performance the cognitive situation changes in the following way : P is entereding : X and  , consequently , in Z ( by rule (2)) and in X : Z ; then P is entered in M ( by ( 6 ) ) and is contained there as a topic of tile dialogue  ( further the question of P will not be closed unt ill its v-evaluatlon will be coordinated by the participants  )   ; X : ( P , vx ) is entered in Z and X : Z ; so , in accordance with (5) and (7) , X's assumptions about S become mutually known to the partiel pants  , i . e . M:X : ( P , Vx) . 
The further course of the dialogue is deter- mined by the state of Z and by a type of in for ma-tional contract between X and Z  ( see the notion of a contract in Narin'yani -Simonova  ,  1985)  . This notion regards informational relat ions which hold between X and Z  , e . g . a dominancy of X over Z , a subordinacy of X to Z or a neutrality between X and Z  . These relations determine a degree of Z's confidence in X and a degree of Z's self- confldence  . 
Let us consider several variants of the fur ther progress of the dialogue  . By variant 1 , provided that an index of Z's confidence i shigh enough  , av-evaluation of P is formed in Z on the basis of Vx  . 

By variant 2 , the formation of v z does not depend upon vx . In any case , the states of Z ( by rule ( 4  )  '  ) and of Z:X ( by rule ( 3 )   , In the B-ignorance mode ) change resulting in the preconditions for E -SAA  . Z . 
The E-SAA . Z is immediately aimed at the alteration of X:Z  . By the performance of E-SAA , Z explicates the state of Z including V z , after that X:Z : P , vz ) , and the content of M changes correspondingly , i . e . 
~: z : ( P , vz).
The subtype of E-SAA . Z is determined by Vx and V z correlation . In case of Vx = Vz = V the subtype is Acceptance ( variant 1: Z accepts X's viewpoint on S ) or Approval ( variant 2: having the same assumptions about S , Z approves of X's viewpoint ) . The coinci-dence of X's and Z's viewpo ints is now fixed in M  ; this involves the corresponding change of M ( by rule ( 7: the topic P is closed and the constituent ( P , v ) is entered In M . So the interaction is successfully completed  ( curl by achieving the general goal of the cooperative dialogue : the stock of shared knowledge is enriched by new mutually coord i-nated information about the world  . 
In case of Vx+Vz the subtype of E-SAA . Zis Confirmation or Denial . It is obvious that Strong Evaluations are aimed at changing the vx-value in X  . 
As for Weak Evaluations which express Z's doubts  , their goal is determined by a degree of Z's self-confidence : if this index is re latively low  , it is only X : Z that Z pretends to change ; besides , he , probably , makes an indirect request for an additio- nal information which should allow him to change Vz for a more certain value  . 
After Confirmation or Denial a stage of coordinating evaluations begins  . On recieving E-SAA . Z , X may change Vx-value thus creating preconditions for the next in tinturn E-SAA  . X . In this case ~3 includes the E-SAA . X and the corresponding cognitive background . Provided that Z informationally dominates over X , a new v x-value is equal to V z-so , the goal of the dialogue is accomplished ( curl . If nobody changes his v-value after one exchange of evaluative information  ( i . e . after the sequence of S-SAA . X and E-SAA . Z ) ,   ~3 is an argumentative interaction in the course of which one or both the participants try to prove their viewpoints by introducing an additional supporting information  ( there are complex speech acts in ~3 )   . The non-argument a-tive insisting is not peculiar to the cooperative dialogue  , it would meangoing out into a kind of a conflict  ( nut 2 )  . The above variants of the dialogue flow demonstrate significant distinctions between Statements and Evaluations as to their dialogue functions  . The S-SAA is usually an initial dialogue move opening a topic of the dialogue  . A secondary S-SAA function is to be an answer to a certain kind of questions  ( What's happened ? What's known about John ? )  . Thls option is presented in the scheme by the dialogue beginning variant  A1 which includes a question of Z . 
The E-SAA is a response by Its very nature . It reacts not only to the explicit assertive moves in the dialogue but also to the implicit assertions  , e . g . to semantic presuppositions of the previous speech acts  . In this case the E-SAA . Z follows ~2 including some SA . X , e . g . a yes/noqnest lon of X which expresses just the lack of evaluative information  ( vx = 0 . 5*) . The E-SAA . Z may also be performed in the context of the precedlngSA  . Z which has introduced P as a non-asserted propositional constituent John's arrival  ( SA . Z ) . John arrived ( E-SAA . Z ) . )  . 
The result of SA . Zin A2 is a cognitive state including Z:X : ( P , V x ') , V x '= 0 . 5* s ince X's v iewpo int on S i s not exp l i c i t in the d ia logue  ( not con-tained in M ) but is merely assumed by Z . 
The scheme of information flow discussed in this section accounts for functions of the basic SAAs in the cooperative dialogue  . It appears to be directly extendible for the analysis of functions of the non-e lementary SAAs  . 
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURERESE ARCH
In this paper we have presented a new theore-t ical approach to a formal description of SAA func-tions in the cooperative informational dialogue  . It differs from the previous approaches in several ways : - two cognitive components in a participant's knowledge base are defined to represent his own knowledge as contrasted to his beliefs about his part-ner's state of knowledge  ; the rules are introduced describing the information flow relations between these components  ; -propositional and evaluative constituents are distinguishe dill individual knowledge representation  ; u notion of v-eva/nation is introduced and types of cognitive states described  ; -a cognitive background for SAA performance is represented by one of four types of ignorance  ; -a typology of SAAs is proposed which distinguishes between basic and non-elementary SAAs  ; for each SAA type a formal representation of its informational content is given  ; -a scheme of information flow Js presented which shows different dialogue functions of SAAs  ; in this scheme a stage of introducing propositional and evaluative information and that of coordinating evaluations are considered  . 
The limitations of the paper did not allow us to present a description of the socalled particular SAAs which are opposed to the general SAAs described here by the scope and character of the propositional information under evaluation  . 
The current description can be extended in a variety of ways : an additional research is required to define the non-elementary SAAs as a subclass of complex speech acts  ; the dialogue scheme is also to he extended to include the non-elementary SAAs  ; the question of how to design a dialogue model allowing for types of informational contracts between the participants deserves further attention  . 

Carlson L . ~ Focus and Dialogue Games , in : Cognitive Constraints on Communication , Vaina L . and Hintlkka J . ( eds . ) . Dordrecht : Reldel , 1984, p . 295-333 . 
~ A . van (1984) . Dialogue and Cognition , in : Cognitive Constraints on Communication , Valna L . and Hintikka J . ( eds . ) . Dordrecht : geidel , 1984, p . 1-17 . 
Narin'yani A . S . , Slmonova O ~ The Structure of Communicative Context of Dialogue Interaction  , 
Proc . ACL Europe-85, Geneva , 1985.
Searle J . R .  (1969) . Speech Acts . An Essay in the Philoshy of Language . L . etc . , 1969,-171 p . 
/Acceptance )   ( Approval ) " ~ Vx = V zq //\[ ( vx < O . 5, zv ' < o . 5) I(vz'<vx1--~z'!\[(vx < O . S , , z ' > O . ~) I , . ~~" '>? '5 \ ] __  . _\l--vz '<~< ~\]__\,~> o . ~ . v,,<o . ? . ~____Ivx < v ~? ~ iI ? 5 < v x <1vz ' lIvy ' < : , vz ' < v ~ ~0 . 5 < Vz ' < Vx\]-Vz < Vx < O . , 5VX < I-Vz ' < Vz ' 1, ': ig . \[:E---SAA subtypes  I ? ut2   1 ~: PL____\]z : ( p , v ~) , : x : p , v x ) II z : x : z : ( p , vz ) , '\] Vz ' ~ Vz/Vz - 9

Fig . 2: The scheme of information flow in the cooperat ive~nformational dialogue  . 
cognitive states;
SAAs ; /kigaps in the scheme ; combination relation . 

