Domain Dependent Natural Language Understanding
Klaus Heje Munch
Dept . of Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
DK-2800 Lyngby , Denmark
A natural anguage understanding system for a restricted domain of discourse-ther modynamic exercises at an introductory level-is presented  . The system transforms texts into a formal meaning representation language based on cases  . 
The semantical interpretation f sentences and phrases is controlled by case frames formulated around verbs and surface grammatical roles in noun phrases  . During the semantical interpretation of a text , semantic constraints may be imposed on elements of the text  . Each sentence is analysed with respect o context making the system capable of solving anaphoric reference such as definite descriptions  , pronouns and elliptic constructions . 
The system has been implemented and succesfully tested on a selection of exercises  . 
1 Introduction
This paper describes a natural language understanding system for the domain of naive thermodynamics  . The system transforms exercises formulated in ( a subset of ) Danish to a somewhat " adhoc " chosen meaning representation language  . 
Given the representation f an exercise , a problem solver shall deduce its solution in a subsequent computation  . 
The weakest demand on tim system is that it transforms texts into representations wl fich are " equivalent " to the texts  . 
The ultimate demand on the system and the problem solver is of course that exercises are solved correctly  . 
The system consists of three parts dealing with respectively morphology  , syntax and semantics . The morphological and syntactical analyses are domain independent and only related to the natural language  . The semantical analysis is dependent on both the natural anguage and the specific domain  . During the semantical nalys is of an exercise , syntactic structures are transformed into a set of logical propositions arranged as  ( implicitly ) in the exercise . After having completed the semantical analysis , a language independent representation exists . The semantic omponent does not include an inferential mechanism for deducing the progress in the r-modynamic experiments  . Therefore , it may regard a text as being ambiguous . For instance , it may not be possible to determine the referent of an anaphora unambiguously without considering common sense reasoning  . However , such ambiguities will be solved by the problem solver  , which uses domain-dependent knowledge as well as common sense knowledge  ( see e . g . ( Hobbs , Moore 1985)) , and operates with an interval-based representation f time  ( Allen 1984 )  . 
This paper considers only the semantical interpretation of sentences  . The semantical analysis is based on a compositional principle similar to the one used by Katz and Fodor  ( 1963 )  . It claims that the semantical interpretation of a sentence is obtained by replacing its words or phrases with their semantic representations and combining these according to the syntactic structure of the sentence as well as the context  . The interpretation is controlled by a case grammar  , which consists of case frames . The case frames relate syntactic structures to a case system and place semantic on straints on their constituents  . In examining if constraints are fulfilled during the analysis  , a static world knowledge is used . The most important component of the world knowledge is an isa hierarchy which organizes all concepts in the dogmin of discourse  . The world knowledge is called " static " , since it does not contain " dynamic " information such as implications or preconditions of actions  . 
During the semantical interpretation , the context in a text is considered . Connections between elements of the text is established by resolving anaphor as due to definite nouns and pronouns  . The system resolves ellipses too . 
2 Meaning Formation in Sentences
Semantically , a text is regarded as a specification ( denotation ) of a series of propositions . In natural anguages , propositions can be expressed not only by sentences  , but also by other syntactic structure such as noun groups  , infinitive phrases and embedded sentences . Thus a single sentence may express several propositions  . The goal in understanding a text is to extract its propositions and specify them in a formal anguage  . 
A sentence can be characterized as the basic independent structure in the language  . Relating language to formal logic , the meaning of a sentence can be described by a predicate which is identified by the head verb of the sentence  . The arguments of the predicate are denoted by the constituents of the sentence  . Such a representation is the basis for both systemic  ( Winograd 1983 )  , c&se ( Fillmore 1968 ) and lexical-functional ( Bresnan 1981 ) grammars . 
3 Meaning Representation
The meaning representation language is based on a case system  ( Bruce 1975 ) inspired by Filhnore's notion of deep cases . 
Basically , a text is represented by a list of propositions , each consisting of a proposition type corresponding to a predicate name  , and a list of cases corresponding to the arguments of the predicate  . Contradictory to Fillmore's notion , proposition types are not verbs , but abstract concepts defined in the case frames of a case grammar  . Furthermore , cases show semantic relationships between proposition types and abstract concepts  . The case system ( set of cases ) is chosen in a somewhat adhoc way . The cases , which are supposed to be necessary in order to describe the domain of thermodynamic exercises  , are included . The cases and their use are explained below : object object being affected by an action or event  , or being described . 
in strinstrument for action.
stuff materia force the thing or event forcing an action  . 
action action being referred to.
attrphysical attribute.
referent the object being referred to in a description  . 
reason reason for event.
direction direction of change.
descr description of object.
spatia Lloc " spatialocation " , includes a object , which describes a physical ocation , a relation to the location and a direction ( from/to/at )  . 
value_loe " value location " , as spatial_loc , but including a value . 
tempora Lloc " temporal location " , includes an indication of time and a relation to this  . 

Besides the case system , the meaning representation language includes elements which make it possible to introduce or define physical objects  , to connect or refer to objects , actions or events , and to relate propositions temporally . The syntax of the meaning representation language is: 
Meaning -- Meaning_elem *;
Meaning elem ~ obj def ( Obj_iden , Context_rel , Obj type ) ! proposition ( PropAden , Prop type , Cases);

Prop_iden = identifier
Context_rel = refer ! introd ;
Prop_type=string;
Obj_type=stuffobj ( string ) single_obj ( String )  ; 
Cases = Case *;
Case = object ( ObjA den ) instr ( Obj_iden ) ! action ( Prop_iden ) attr ( string )  !  .   .   . 
Notice that it is possible to reference proposit ions and object definitions through their identifiers  . ' Context ret'specifies whether an object is introduced in the text  ( introd ) or being referred ( refer )  . 
As an example of the representation language consider the sentence : " The calor imeter contains  100 g water with the temperature 50 C ' . The corresponding representation is : obj_def(e , ret~r , single_obj(calorimeter )) obj_def(W , introd , stuff_obj(water )) proposition (1 , obj attr_val , < object ( W ) , attr(temperature ) , valuelee(at , equal , 50C ) >) proposition (2 , contain , < objeet(C ) , referent ( W ) > ) Ilere the calor imeter and the water are defined as physical objects and denoted by the identifiers C and W respectively  . 
The cMorimeter is indefinite form , it is referring , and the referent cannot be found . The proposition type " obj_attr_val " relates an attribute of an object to a value or quantity  . Finally , the proposition type " contain " relates an object  , which contains , to an object which is contained . 
4 Relating Syntax to Cases
The transformation from syntactic structures to the meaning representation language is controlled by a case grammar  . 
The case grammar specifies the correspondence between syntactic representations  , based on sm ' face grammatical roles of t ) hrases and sentences , and case representations . 
The semanl ; i ( : alanalysis of a sentence is based on its head verb  , while the analysis of a noun group is be based on the head noun and also on adjective descriptors  , genitive determiners and prepositional phrases . For each head verb , head noun , etc , , tile case granlmat ' contains a case frame . A case frame consists of the following parts : cases  , selection , constraints , extract and presence . The " cases-part " states what a phrases hall be transformed into by means of proposition types and cases  . The " selections " relate elements in the case frame to syntactic constituents  . " ConstrMnts " contain semantic constraints on elements of the case frame  . " Extract " makes it possible to extract elements fi'om compound  , or complex , semantic elements , and finally , " presence " specifies whether e onsti Lu ents are mandatory  , elliptic or optional . 
As an example of a ease frame consider the verb to " rise " in combination with " temperature " or any other physical at-tribute  . Some examples of sentences contann ngrise are " The temperature rises  5 degrees " " The temperature of the liquid rises from  50 to 55 degrees " " The temperature rises " Observe that in the first sentence the object with the mentioned temperature is denoted by an elliptic reference  . In the analysis of the sentence , it has to be found using the context , i . e . the previou sentences . A case frame for " rise " is shown below . Here the selections " subject " , " sdir " and " prep " refer respectively to the subject  , the direct object and prepositional phrases in a sentence  . The constraint ' is_a(x , y ) ' means that x is of type y according to the taxonomy  . ' has_attr(o , at ) ' means that the object o has the attribute at . 
rise : proposition et xange cases : object ( O ) , attr(At ) , valueAoc(to , equal , Rv ) , value_lee ( from , equal , Sv ) , valueAoc(relative , equal , Gv) . 
selection : subjeet ( Subj ) , sdir(nv ) , prep ( from , Sv ) , prep(to , Cv ) , prep ( with , Rv) . 
constraints is_a(At , physical attribute ), is . _a(O , physical object ) , has_attr(O , it ) extract ex_attr(Snbj , it ) , ex_obj(Subj , O) . 
presence obligatory ( At ) , elliptic ( O ) , optional ( Sv ) , optional ( Gv ) , optional ( R . v) . 
Notice that the subject , which besides being a compound structure consisting of an attribute and an object  , may alternatively take form of an attribute only  ( because O is ellipsed )  . 
The constituents of the subject are extracted by the exatt randex_obj predicates  . 
The semantical analysis of a syntactic structure is carried out in a mixed bottom up-topdown way  . The formation of the meaning of a phrase progresses bottom up  , while the control of its constituents ( select km of them and constraints on them ) progresses topdown . Cenerally , when a case fl ' ame is applied in the analysis of a phrase  , the elements specified in the selection-part are matched with the constituents of the phrase  . If an element has the same syntactical role as a constituent  , the constituent is analysed , while possible constraints are imposed on it . The result of the analysis is a list of proposit ions derived fl ' oln the phrase as well as the semantic element which the phrase denotes  . 
To illustrate the semantical analysis consider the sentence : " the liquid in the container is transferred to the calorimeter "  . 
Suppose the sentence is analysed in isolation , so that the definite descriptions cannot be solved  . The case frames needed to analyse the sentence are : transfer : proposition transfer cases : object  ( O )  , spatial_lee(goal , in , G ) selections dir(O ) , prep(to , G) . 
constraints : is_a(O , physical object ) , is_a(G , contai~ter) . 
presence obligatory ( O ), elliptic ( G).
calorimeter : object ( calorimeter).
container object ( container).
liquid stuff ( liquid).
in : proposition contain cases : object ( O ) , referent 0 ~) selection head(R ) , prep(in , O ) constraints : is a(O , container ) , is_ . a(l~ , physical object ) presence : obligatory ( O ) , obligatory ( R ) . 
The syntactic structure of the sentence can be depicted as a tree where each node is numbered : sentence  , iverb . 2s dir . 3 sent ~ f . 4 transfer NH
Det .5 Head . 6nh_pf .._.
the liquid PF to NH prep . lOpf_ke . ltDet . 12 Head . 13 in NH the calorimeter
Det . t ~ 4 ~ ead . t 5 the container
The sentence analysis selects the case frame for the verb " transfer "  . The case frame claims the mandatory occurenee of a direct object O which must be a physical object  . Thus O node 3 . When analysing the corresponding noun group , the case frame for the head noun " liquid " is used at first  . The constraint of the noun group ( being a physical object ) is full-filled , thus the analysis proceeds . The determiner combined with the head noun determines the context dependency of the liquid as referring  . Since the referent cammt be found , an object definition is generated , though marking the object as referring . 
The prepositional phrase of the noun group is analysed by first selecting the case frame for the preposition " in "  . In this frame , it is claimed that the head noun must be a physical object  . This is already known to be true . Furthermore , the head of the prepositional phrase must specify an object in the class " container "  . Thereafter the container is defined as an object and a proposition of type " contain " is generated  . The result of the analysis of the noun group is the object identifier denoting the liquid and the " contain " - proposition  . 
The rest of the analysis will not be commented . The representation of the sentence is : obj_def ( L , refer , stuff_obj(liquid )) , obj_def(Co , refer , single_obj(container )) , proposition (1 , contain , < object ( Co ) , referent ( L )>) , obj_def(Ca , refer , single_obj(calorimeter )) , proposition (2 , transfer , < object ( m ) , spatial_loc(goal , in , Ca)>) . 
5 Context-Dependent Analysis
The context-dependentaaly siscovers resolution of the most importantypes of anaphoric references  . The system resolves the following types of references in a text : identic  , synonymous , pronominal , adverbial , modifying and some of the el-liptic references . Examples of these references are : Identica ca lorimeter contains helium  , and the calorimeter . . . 
Synonymous a calorimeter contains helium , and the gas Pronomiala ' calorimeter contains helium  , and it . . . 
Adverbial in the calorimeter is gas , and there is also . . . 
Modifying the calorimeter is heated to 50C , and the heating . . . 
Elliptic the calorimeter contains gas and the bucket  ( contains ) water . 
Elliptica calorimeter contains water . The temperature ( in the calor i meter or of the water ) is 50C . 
During the semantical analysis , the references are resolved as soon as they are met  . In order to be able to do this , the leftmost context of a text must be reachable when analysing a phrase  . The leftmost context is all propositions derived from the text so far  . 
The system uses no special features for delimiting the scope of referred objects  . When a reference is to be solved , the objects and events specified in the leftmost context are examined  . An object or event , which full fills the constraints specified in the case frame and which matches possible syntactic features  ( gender and number )  , is claimed to be the token referred to . The resolution of synonymous references ( for instance of g as in : " A container contains llelium  , and the gas . . . ") uses the isa hierarchy . 
6 Example
The following exercise is considered : " A cupper calorimeter with the heat capacity  75 J/K con- . 
tains 300 gt ) araflln . The temperature i , ~18C . A cupper block with the mass 100 g is heated to I00 C , where upon it is transferred to the calorimeter ~ where the temperature becomes  22 C . The specific heat of eupper is 337: l/kg*K . i , ' ind the ~ zpecific ~62 heat of paraff in . " The system generates the representation shown below  . 
The propositions are separated into time- dependent and time-independent propositions  , the former are related temporally . 
object specifications : 1 . obj_def(C , calorimeter ) 2 . obj_def(P , stuff_obj(paraffin )) 3 . obj_def(L , block constant attributes : 4 . consist_of(object(C ), stuff(cupper )) 5 . obj_attr = val(object(C ) , attr(heatcapacity) , quant(75 , J / K )) 6 . obj_attr_val(object(P ) , attr(mass ) , quant (300 , g )) 7 . consist_of(object(L ), stuff(cupper )) 8 . obj_attr_val(object(L ) , attr(mass ) , quant (100 , g )) 9 . obj_attr_val(stuff(cupper ) , attr(spec_heat ) , quant (387 , J/kg*K )) 10 . obj_attr_val(object(P ) , attr(spec_heat ) , quant ( question ) ) time-dependent propositions : 11 . contain ( object ( C ), referent ( P )) 12 . obj_attr_val(sp_loc(at , in , C ) , attr(temperature ) , quant (18 , C )) 13 . heat ( object ( L ) , value_loc(to , equal , quant (100 , C )) 14 . block_transfer ( object ( L) , sp_loc(goal , in , C )) 15 . obj_attr_val(sp_loc(at , in , C ) , attr(temperature ) , quant (22 , C ) ) Some points worth of noticing are the resolution of the el-lipsed object  ( location ) in the second sentence of the exercise ( proposition 12 ) and the resolution of the identic reference ( the calor imeter ) as well as of the pronoun ( it ) in the third sentence ( proposition 14 )  . 
7 Conclusion
The system described in this paper transforms thermodynam-ical exercises expressed in Danish into a formal meaning representation language  . In order to accomplish this , morphology , syntax and semantics are considered . Most important is the application of the case grammar formalism  , in which semantic on straints can be imposed on phrases  , causing ambiguities in a text to be removed . The case grammar have a clear , well-defined structure and is easy to extend , also to other domains . 
For varied selections of the rmodynamical exercises  , the system has derived correct meaning representations  . Thus the goal has been accomplished . Currently , the problem solver is under development . 

Allen , J . F . 1984 Towards a General Theory of Action and Time . Artificial Intelligence 23: 123-154 . 
Bresnan , J . 1981 An Approach to Universal Grammar . Cognition 10:39-52 . 
Bruce , B . 1975 Case Systems for Natural Languages . Artificial Intelligence 6: 327-360 . 
Fillmore , C . 1968 Tile Case for Case . In : Bach ~ E . and Harms , R . , Universals in Linguistic Theory . tlolt , Rinehart and Winston , New York . 
Hobbs , J . R . and Moore , R . C . ( eds . ) 1985 Formal Theories of the Common sense World . Ablex , Norfolk , New Jersey . 
Katz , , / . j . and Fodor , J . A . 1963 The Structure of a Semantic Theory . Language 39:170 4210 . 
Winograd , T . 1983 Language as a Cognitiw ~ Process . 
Addison-Wesley , Reading , Mas~.
