DEGREES OF UNDER STANDING
Eva Haji~ov ~ and Petr Sgall
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University
Malostransk@n ? 25
Praguel , Czechoslovakia
i . Introducti Ono
Along with " static " or " declarative "
descriptions of language system , models of language use ( the regularities of communica-tive competence  ) are constructed . One of the outstanding aspects of this transfer of at-tention consists in the efforts devoted to automatic comprehension of natural language which  , since Winograd's SHRDLU , are presented in many different contexts . One speaks about understanding , or comprehension , although it may be noticed that the term is used in different  , and often rather unclear , meanings . 
In machine translation systems , as the late B . Vauquo is pointed out ( seen ow Vauquois and Boitet ,  1985) , a flexible system combining different levels of automatic analysis is necessary  ( i . e . the transfer component should be able to operate at different levels  )  . The human factor cannot be completely dispensed of  ; it seems inevitable to include postedition , or such a division of labour as that known from the system METEO  . Not only the semantico-pragmatic items present in the source language structure should be ref lected  , but also certain aspects of factual knowledge ( see Slocum ,  1985 , p . 16) . It was pointed out by Kirschner (1982, p . 18) that , to a certain degree , this requirement can be met by means of a system of semantic features  . For NL comprehension systems the automatic formulation of a partial image of the world often belongs to the cere of the system  ; such a task certainly goes far beyond purel inguistic analysis and descrip-tion  . 
Winograd ( 1976 ) claims that a linguistic description should handle " the entire complex of the goals of the speaker "  ( p . 269,275) . It is then possible to ask what are the main complex and what are the relationships between understanding all the goals of the speaker and having internalized the system of a natural language  . It seems to be worthwhile to reexamine the di fferent kinds and degrees of understanding  . 
2. Understanding the sentence.
Segmentation r disambiguation and identi-f ication of units of the individual levels are the main tasks of the elementary steps of understanding an utterance  . 
( i ) The lowest step consists in the seg_iIment at ion of the continuous flow of sound into individual phones  ; their sequence can be understood as consisting in subsequent points of a feature space  , the individual feature values of the space corresponding to the dis-tinctive features  , which have to be identi-fied . Disturbances oi \] this level may be due to noise or top hysiological irregular it i es  . 
On the phone , in a crowded room , the utterance I don~t understand you may mean that the hearer is unable to identify the uttered phones  . 
( ii )  -  ( iii ) A phoneme may consist of several phonic variants , and a string of phonemes can be decomposed into morphs  , each of which corresponds to a morpheme ; the latter is a feature space again , the values of the features here being the semes ( preterite , geni-hive , plural . . . . ) . Thus , if F ( a sequence of phones ) is ( the phonetic shape of ) an utter-ance , Phone , Phoneme , Morph and Morpheme being the sets of all phones , phonemes , morphs and morphemes , respectively , of the language 1 described , we can write : F ~__( f \] ~ . ? . , fn \] , where 1~n , Pisal\[lapping of Phoneon to Phoneme Morph C Phoneme ~  ( i . e . Morph is a proper subset of the set of all str ings of phonemes \] 
MC Morphx Morpheme
Phoneme ?' = x ~ Phoneme@;
A , gm  ~ . . . . .   . ~ s ~ or ph(x = ~ l . . . . . mp ) ; thus Phoneme ? is the set of strings of phonemes that constitute strings of morphs  . The disambiguation identifying the string of morphemes conveyed by x can only be made  , in the genera \] case , after the syntactic patterning of the sentence , its meaning and its fitting into the co-text and situation has been grasped  . The steps of understanding thus cannot be performed in a uniform order  ; they are 2 checked by means of trial and error . 
( iv ) If one is reading without paying much attention , one " wakesup " when one's more or less subconsc ious interpretation encounters an obstacle  ( e . g . with a garden-path sentence ) ; one realizes that it is necessary to go back . i . n the text to where one's atten-tion was der ai led  , and read again , paying due respect not only to ( surface ) syntax , but also to understanding on the higher degrees . 
( v ) If the hearer understands the linguistic ( literal \] meaning ( or , reaches a dis-ambiguation of the utterance ) , s/he understands e . g . this letter as the Objective of ( i ) and as the Actor of ( 2\] ; further detours ( using criteria from higher degrees ) decide on the role of planes in a token of ( 3 )  . 
(1) This letter I got only today.
(2) This letter came only today.
(3) Flying planes can be dangerous.
The level of linguistic meaning ( tecto-grammatics , underlying structure ) is language specific and comprises the the ta roles  ( deep cases , valency slots \] as well as the topic/focus articulation  ( which is semantically relevant for the scopes of operators and for presuppositions  )   ; see Sgall et al . ( in press\] . 
without knowing the situation it isimo-poss ible to tell who is referred to by I in  ( 1 )  , what is . meant by this letter , and so on . 
Thus , considering the sense of an utterance ( i . e . , of a token of sentence in a discourse \] to consist in a combination of the meaning of the sentence with the specification of the reference oi_-- the expressions it contains  , we come to a further degree of understanding , illustrated by Areyou speaking about the let -teryougot from my brother ?  . This step leads us beyond the system of language , which has no means to identify the objects referred to  . 
In the protctypical situations of communica-t ion I is understood  , since who hears the utterance \] knows who utters it  . You , here , now , we ( and thus also your , up to now .   .   .   . ) are similar , although they are not delimited as for the range of reference  . Without knowing the situation , the hearer also is unable to specify the reference of this letter  , the house , a friend of mine .   .   . The sense of utterances can be identified only by means of non---linguistic clues  . 
3. Understand in q in communication.
(vi \] The ident i f icat ion of reference is conditioned by non-linguistic factors  , with all expressions not having a unique reference  . The main factor is the speaker's assumption concerning the hierarchy of salience  ( prominence ) of the items in the heater's memory . As Haji ~ ovl et al (1982; 1984\] point out , it refers to the most salient item , the table to the table activated by having occur-red in the focus  ( comment ) of a preceding utterance ( or by situation , common interest ,   . ? .  \]  ( vii ) The next degree concerns habitual connotations , a possibly intended inference , see Winograd (1976 ,  275\] , regular cognitive relationships ( cf . ~frames ~ and " scenarios '\] , and issues connected with conversational max- -ims and stone walling  , see Joshi et al ( 1984 )   ( viii ) Non-habitual inferences are placed along a scale of complexity  , cf . Hintikka (1975) , so that an elementary use of intel-lect ( proper to most human beings , though not quausers of a language \] may be dis tinguished  3 from conscious intellectual effort . 
Another hierarchy of inferences , concerning the difference between " what I am told " and " why  , starts with the distinction of direct and indirect speech acts  , and continues with that between illocution and perlocution  , including further degrees of the type " He he ?" -" He wants to achieve this and this by my reaction  ; but for what purpose ?" ,   .   .   . 
4. Conclusions.
The theory of language cannot be exclusive-ly based on language understanding  . Coming back to the question put in ? i , we find that among the degrees of understanding only those from ?  2 immediately concern the structure of language , and even with them factual knowledge plays a big role  . The degrees ( vi ) to ( viii \] i and thus also " the entire complex of goals " of the speaker goes far beyond the domain of linguistics  , contrary to Winograd . 
A theoretical account of language is a necessary ingredient of a model of comprehension  ; it allows us not to use ad hoc solutions , which at a later stage could prevent a useful generalization of the comprehension system  , its adaptation to new applications , etc . 
When evaluating a linguistic the orvone should ask whether it can be embedded in a theory of communication  ; an economical ac--count of topic and focus makes it possible to describe the meaning of a sentence as a procedure instructing the hearer how to change the contents of her/his memory  , and thus to connect the handling of sentence structure with that of the patterning of a discourse  . 
Notes 1 We neglect the cases where a phone func-tions in different contexts as a variant of two dif ferent phonemes  . 
2 Disambiguat ion was discussed in the frame of neural-net linguistics and cognitive science by Schnelle  ( 1984 , esp . 12); cf . hisex . Per Patien that teeinen Wachtraum VS . 
Die Kaserne . . .
3 Other aspects of inferencing are studied as based on logical entai lment  , leading from the sense of an utterance-cf . 2Iv ) -to the proposition ( a function from possible worlds into truth values  )  ; the specification of reference mostly is tacitly assumed to be present in a proposit ion  . For an analysis of belief sentences and other " propositional " attitudes  , as well as of such paradoxes , a ~ that of the Liar's and for contradictions such as those concerning round squares and similar expressions it is indispensable to work with a clear difference between  ( a ) the level of linguistic meaning ( disambiguated underlying structure \] ,   ( b \] the layer of sense ( including the specification of reference \] , and ( c \] the psychological domain of context ( requiring a description of the relatives al ience of the items in the speaker's and heater ' smemories \]  ; cf . Sgall et al ( in press , Ch . l\] . 

Haji ~ ovlE . , Sgall P . and J . Vrbovl (1984\] , Topic , Focus and How to Identify Them , Groningen Arbeitenzurgermanistischen
Linguistik 25, 121-143
Haji ~ ovlE . and J . Vrbovl (1982\] , On the Role of the Hierarchy of Activation , in COLING82 ( ed . J . Horeck ~), Prague , lO7-113 Hintikka J . \[1975\], Impossible Possible
Worlds V indicated , Journal of Phil.
Logic 4,475-484
Joshi A . , B . Webber and R . M . Weischedel \[1984) , Preventing False Inferences , in Proceed-dings of Coling 84 , Stanford , 134-138 Kirschner Z .  (1982) , A Dependency-Based Analysis of English for the Purpose of Machine Translation  , Explizite Beschrei-bung der Sprache und automatische Text-bearbeitung IX  , Prague Schnelle H .  (1984) , Programming of NetLinguistic Processes , GENET 17 a , Bochum Sgall P . , Haji~ov ~ E . and J . Panevov ~( in press\] , The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and Pragmatic Aspects  , Reidel ( Dordrecht \] and Academia ( Prague \] Slocum J .  (1985) , A Survey of Machine Translation , Computational Linguistics Ii , 117 Vauquois B . and C . Boitet (1985\] , Automated Translation at Grenoble Universit v , Com-putational Linguistics ii , 2836 Winograd T .  (1976\] , Towards a Procedural Understanding of Semantics , Revue inter-nationale de philosophie ,  260-303
