A Word Database for Natural Language Processing
Brigitte Barnett
Hubert Lehmann
Magdalena Zoeppritz
IBM Scientific Center , Tiergarten stral3 e15 , 6900 Heidelberg , Federal Republic of Germany Abstract : The paper describes the design of a fair sized lexical database that is to be used with a natural language based expert system with German as the language of interaction  . Sources for entries and tools for constructing and maintaining the database are discussed  , as well as the information eeded in the lexicon for the purposes of syntactic and semantic processing  . 
1 Introduction
The intent of this paper is to show some aspects of a computer dictionary geared towards the natural anguage component of an expert system  . The dictionary is organized as a database to integrate tile various aspects of lexicographic work and  , at the same time , enable fast access from a parser . 
Work on the lexicon was long neglected-both in theoretical linguistics and natural anguage processing projects - so we felt that a principled approach was over due  ( cf . Sedelow (1985) for a survey of related work ) . In the past two years , we concentrated therefore on the formulation of criteria for establishing syntactic features which have to be coded in the lexicon  , and we will report here on some of our findings . 
This will be preceded by a brief overview of the aims of our overall project and a short description of the prototypes y-stem we are building  . We will then describe the design of our lexicographic database including the criteria for selecting sources of the vocabulary and some of our tools for editing and querying  . 
The main objectives of the project Linguistics and Logic Based LegalExpert System  , which is a Joint Research Project between the University of T/ibingen and the IBM Scientific Center Heidelberg  , are to design and implement a natural language based knowledge acquisition and query system and to build a legal expert system on its basis  . It consists of the following components : ? The dialog component controls the interaction with users and contains among other things an explanation component and a component for preparing system output for display and for eventually generating natural language explanatory texts  . 
In a socalled user profile , as much information about a user is kept as necessary : to improve answers and explanations  , one must know certain things about the user , mainly about heror his knowledge in current sessions  . 
For example , one may want to avoid explanations about details the user already knows  . 
? The deductive component is activated by user queries  , by input of new knowledge , and by requests of the Natural
Language Analyzer.
? The knowledge manager administers the actual knowledge base in the working area as well as its permanent version in the database  . It is the only component allo-wed to update the permanent knowledge base  . It loads knowledge from the database into storage and requests consistency checks for new knowledge  . With the exception of the lexical database , the Knowledge Manager also accesses the database on behalf of other system components  . 
? The SQL Data System ( IBM ( 1983 ) ) maintains the database which is a repository of facts and rules :  . linguistic knowledge , e . g . dictionary and grammar ? common sense knowledge , including a thesaurus ? legal knowledge ( law , rules from commentaries and decisions , legal strategies ) ? cases ? user profiles ? The natural anguage analyzer and its dictionary are extensions and modifications of the existing User Specialty Language system  ( USL ) developed at the Heidelberg Scientific Center ( Lehmann , H . , N . Ott , M . Zoeppritz (1985), M . Zoeppritz (1984)) . USL is a natural language frontend to SQL/DS ( IBM 1983 ) operational in six languages . Within the scope of this project , it will be enhanced to suit the requirements of a natural anguage  ( German ) based expert system . This means that it must be able to deal with both running texts and queries and to translate them into their corresponding logical form  . 
The Natural Language Analyzer consists of the following parts : - a sentence separator splitting texts into sentences  , ? a pre-parser for dictionary lookup ,   . the parser and the routines for semantic analysis  , ? routines for the generation of the logical form from intermediate structures  ( cf . Guenthner and Leh-mann (1984) for a description ) , ? routines for semiautomatic generation of thesaurus extensions  ( Wirth , R .  (1984)) . 
As a specific application , the area of German traffic law was chosen for the expert system which shall be used in two modes : for consultation by a legal expert and as a tutor for law students  ( cf . Alschwe et al . (1985) for details) . 
2 Description of the Dictionary
Within such an environment , a fairly large-sized and detai-led dictionary is needed  . Aspects of its design , the structure in the database , and the editing and querying facilites will be discussed  ( cf . also Barnett (1985)) . The expected size of the dictionary within the scope of the project is estimated to be some  20  , 000 entries . Its current size is some 12,000 ent-ries . 
435 2.1 Word Database
Because we must be able to handle a large number of words in this project  , we felt that it would be necessary to admin i -strate them in a more appropriate form than the usual file organization and that a relational database would be the best tool for dealing with lexical information because of the following advantages : ? excerpting rammatical information according to speci-fic features  ; ? links to related information ot necessarily kept in the same table  ; ? easier control of updates ; ? many types of integrity checks ; ? automatic backup so that , in case of a systems break down , a consistent status remains available ; ? another great advantage of database technology is concurrency capabilities which prevent users working on the same table from getting in each other's way  . ; ? and , within the realm of this project , the possibility to link to the Natural Language Analyzer  . 
2.2 Scope
The scope of the information contained in our dictionary is geared towards the processing of natural language by computer  . Lexical information must therefore be more detailed and more explicit than in standard dictionaries intended for humans  . Also , a computer dictionary is of no value unless it matches the grammar and the needs of the semantic processing  . 
We started with the coding of morphological and syntactic information  , since we felt to be on rather stable ground there  . We will report on some of the difficulties we encountered-many of them not unknown to theoretical linguistics-in the next section  . 
Semantic information is coded primarily in the form of meaning rules  , but we have not included these in our lexical database yet  , as we are still experimenting with different kinds of information and representations before we go to large scale coding  . We also hope that , at least to some extent , the acquisition of such information can be automated  ( cf . the approach taken by Wirth (1984)) . 
2.3 Sources
For the purpose of our particular application , we need to cover the vocabulary occurring in German traffic law  . 
However , to meet the goal of general applicability , it is also necessary to include the core of the general German vocabulary  . We will try therefore to code the relevant legal words based on texts from this very domain  . In addition - and this is the greater problem- we must try to define which words pertain to the common vocabulary  . 
As a first step , we have compiled a preliminary list of the 4000 most frequent German words from an existing frequency dictionary  ( Meier ( 1967 ) ) and news texts . 
Later , we will make frequency counts of representative samples of texts to arrive at a more reliable list of words  . 
? IBM Germany has a dictionary of 70 , 0 00 entries containing morphological and hyphenation information  . 
436 ? The vocabulary of the application area , i . e . from the legal domain , stems from the following sources : ? A collection of relevant court decisions  ( from our study partner )  , ? A number of accident descriptions collected from newspapers  , ? A few word lists used for document retrieval from both the Legal and Public Relations departments of 
IBM Germany.
? We plan to investigate to what extent machine -readable dictionaries or legal texts can be used for an automatic or semiautomatic aquisition of lexical and grammatical information and of common sense knowledge  . 
2.4 Layout of the Dictionary Relation
In our word database , every word constitutes an entry , and most columns in the entry contain information concerning a particular word  . Even though semantic aspects are not coded in this particular version  , one may regard the codes as a representation of a word's morphological and syntactic meaning  . Some words have more than one entry : to code multiple entries becomes necessary when different grammatical feature sets have to be assigned to one lemma  . 
All words are contained in a single table or relation  . One could also envisage a separate table for every part of speech  ; however , this would be rather in convenient , as it would be impossible to compare grammatical phenomena cross different categories  . Also it may be desirable to look at words of the same root but belonging to different parts of speech  . 
With this necessity in mind , we designed an overall , general relation which would contain all words . In order to treat the words individually and according to their specific needs  , a socalled " view " was defined for each part of speech  . The present structure of the relation is described in Figure  1  . 
2.5 Tools and Aids
To facilitate coding and to ensure its accuracy , we use the following tools : Editing : A Dictionary Editor  ( a menu-driven program running under ISPF ( IBM 1982 ) interacting with the SQL/DS database ) was developed to facilitate adding , updating , deleting , and checking of entries at the terminal . 
Under this editor , a specific set of menus and help panels was implemented for nouns  , verbs , and adjectives . Whereas the main menus contain only shorthints to the grammatical information as a sort of reminder to the lexicographer  , help menus give more detailed examples for the individual codes  . 
Subpanels , as extensions to the main panel for input , and error messages also assist the lexicographer . Codes arc ve-rified by the Dictionary Editor to keep down the error rate  . 
Queries , Reports , and Files : Independently of the Dictionary Editor  , the lexicographers work with the standard database interfaces ISQL  ( IBM 1983 ) and QMF ( IBM 1983 , 1984) to query , extract , recover , and to view the contents of the word database . QMF is used to select information and to format , display , and write reports . -The style of data display is easy to understand  , so that persons who are not experts in data processing but are competent linguists can examine and alter the linguistic description according to General Description Field in Database Noun Verb Adjective 
Lermna ( may not be empty )
Current number of entry
Part of Speech

Morphological codes
Morphological codes

Possible complement(s )
Prepositions governed : alternating or cumulative
Up to 4 adverb iMs
Complement Clauses introduced by " dab ~
Complement Clauses : hKinitive introduced by " zu "
Logical Subject of infinitive clause
Complement Clauses introduced by " ob "
Different for each part of speech :
Different for each part of speech :
Different for each part of speech :
Different for each part of speech :
Obligatory Comllcments
Subject Area
Source : User id of who coded ; origin of entry
Frequency Count
Source of Frequency Cmmt
Level of Style
Stem for 1st Entry:
Secondary Stems : 11yphenation
Date of last Update 5 additional , not yet used fields
WORT Infinitive Nominative
CONT  
CATNVERB
M ORPII1 Declension code Sets of suffixes MORPtI2 Alternative declension Syntax dud scope of stems
SYNTA 1.. Valency
SYNTA2-5 Preposition Preposition
SYNTB 14 place/temporal/modal place/temporal/modal SYNTB5 case/preposition case/preposition SYNTB6 case/preposition case/preposition SYNTB7 case/preposition case/preposition SYNTB8 case/preposition case/preposition
SYNTB9 Gender Separable Prefix
SYNTB 10 Alternate Gender Reilexivity
SYNTC 1..Inl per somd Subject only
SYNTC2Usage of Participle
SYNTC 3. ox
SIJItJECT xx
SOURCE x x
FREQ xx
FREQS xx
STYLE x x
XREF Nominative Singularl mq nitive without ~- ( e ) n " , without separatl c prefix XREF ( cont'd ) Plural Furmlmler fect , Past Participle'I'RINN xx
I ) ATUMx x141, F2, F3, F4,1;5 ....
Positive #

Scope of stem form
Declension class

Preposition place/temporal/modal case/preposition case/preposition case/preposition case /preposition not used attributively not used adverbially not used predicatively xxxxx 
Positive ( kadation xx
Fig . i : Structure of the Word Relation their particular needs  . 
It is part of the work of a lexicographer to account for all grammatical constructions within which a word may appear  . To achieve this , the lexicographers consult standard dictionaries such as Duden  ( 1976-1981 ) and Brockhaus Wahrig ( 1980 . . 1984) , but most importantly , they consult the texts mentioned above in the form of a concordance which we generate dynamically  . 
3 Syntactic Information
The restrictions on cooccurrence with other words ( or phrases ) is what we consider to be syntactic information . 
Here we include information on government ( or valency ) and on adverbials ( or attributes ) which serve to subclassify the various parts of speech  . Our work is based on the work of Fillmore (1968) , Gross (1984) , Heidolph et al (1980) , Steini ~ (1969) , Bierwisch (1963) , Helbig and Schenkel (1975) , Sommerfeldt and Schreiber (1977 ,  1980) , and on
Zoeppritz (1984).
For the practical work on a dictionary , it is of ut most importance to make fully explicit the criteria for the different classifications used  . Such criteria are notoriously difficult to extract from theoretical as well as practice  . .oriented works . 
3, 1Government
German verbs can be classified according to the objects they gover n  ( accusative ( A )  , dative ( D ) , genitive ( G ) , prepositio-nal object ( P ) , predicate noun or adjective ( N )) . We decided to include also the subject ( N ) among the complements go . .
verned by the verb . A similar classification can be carried out for adjectives  ( they govern cases as well as prepositions ) and for nouns ( which govern prepositional attributes ; genitive attributes are not coded but admitted for every noun  )  . 
While some of the complements may be missing in a sentence  , others must be regarded as obligatory , and this must be coded in the dictionary as well . So we code two features indicating the maximum and the minimum of complements of a given word  . This is illustrated by the adjective iiberlegen ( superior ) which gets the maximal code DP and the minimal code ZZ  ( nil ) :  ( D )   ( P ) Paulistunsim Weitsprung fiberlegen . 
( Paul is superior to us in the long jump.)
Paulistim Weitsprung/iberlegen.
Paulistuns fiber legen.
Paulist fiberlegen.
There are a number of problems in determining what complements can be governed by a given verb  . We will discuss here the problcm with datives , and in the section on adverbials we will discuss the problem of how to distinguish between adverbials and prepositional objects  . 

It was noted by case grammarians ( but also to some extent in traditional grammar ) that datives perform different functions ( " semantic roles " )  , and that only some of them should be regarded as sube a tegorizing the class of verbs  ; the others are sometimes called " free " datives which are exemplified by ethical : Wirf mirdie Vasenicht weg  . 
(Be sure not to throw the vase away ) possession : Paul brach mirden Arm . 
(Paul broke my arm ) benefactive : Paul fiber set ztemir den Brief ( Paul translated the letter for me ) responsibility : Die Vaseistmirzer brochen . 
( The vase broke during the time I had it ) ( cf . also Heidolph et al ( 1980 ) for a discussion and We gener ( 1985 ) ) . 
Freedatives are never obligatory , but all other criteria so far are only semantically motivated and are-particularly in the case of the benefactive-not very well defined  . But still , freedatives can be taken into account by the grammar and can thus be attached to any suitable verb  . 
3.2 Complement Clauses
In accordance with Bierwisch ( 1963 ) and Heidolph et al ( 1980 )  , we consider complement clauses as filling the positions of nominal complements  . The complement clauses we consider are daft ( that ) clauses , ob(whether ) clauses , and infinitive clauses ( pure infinitives and infinitive clauses introduced by zu  ( to ) ) . Bierwisch was first in subcategorizing German verbs according to the implied subjects of the infi-nitive clauses they govern  . Consider the following examples in English
John permitted Paul to leave
John persuaded Paul to leave
This is problematic , however , with some verbs in German when the infinitive clause contains modal verbs  . Consider
Erflehte sie an zugehen ( he begged her to leave ) with the implied subject sie , and
Erflehtesiean , gehenzud firfen ( He begged her to be permitted to leave ) with the implied subjecter . This shift of implied subject must be coded in the lexicon  ( for verbs like diir fen )  , so that the code can be used by the syntax rules for complex verbs  . 
A second problem concerns cases where an implied subject cannot be found in the matrix clause as in 
Paulordnetean , den Saal zurfiumen ( Paul ordered the room to be cleared ) Esistverboten , den Rasenzubetreten ( it is forbidden to walk on the lawn ) There are two different phenomena involved : The dative governed by verbieten  , would be the implied subject , but candidate for implied subject . If there is no suitable candidate in the context , we get a generic interpretation , and we code our complement features accordingly . 
3.3 Adverbials
Our approach to adverbials is closely related to the one taken by Steinitz  ( 1969 ) and Heidolph et al ( 1980 )  , which-tous-seems far better motivated than e . g . the classification in Brockhaus Wahrig ( 1980-1984 )  . Certain types of adverbials we consider to be governed by certain verbs  , nouns and adjectives , and these are hence used for subcategorization . 
They include adverbials of place : Paul wo hnt in Heidelberg  ( Paul lives in Heidelberg ) direction : Paulgehtnach Heidelberg ( Paul goes to Heidelberg ) modality : Paul be nimmt sich schlecht ( Paul behaves badly ) measure : der Vortrag dauerteine Stunde ( the lecture lasts one hour ) It has been our tendency to code adverbials only when they are obligatory  , but this certainly does not cover all the information ecessary  . 
A further problem concerns the decision between adverbial and prepositional object  . Criteria for this distinction have been described by Steinitz  ( 1969 ) and Heidolph ( 1980 ) : they mainly involve observations on the role prepositions play-their variability and whether they have retained their meaning  . Consider
Paul stood on the table
Paul insisted on the table
In the first case , we could have near , under , by , etc . instead of on whereas in the second case , we do not have a choice . 
3.4 Coding Example
The following example shows the test questions and corresponding coding decisions for verbs and adjectives  . The sample for misiiber legen , that appears as verb with separable prefix in the meaning ' to cover '  , as verb with inseparable prefix in the meaning ' to reflect '  , and as an adjective meaning'superior ' . 
Tests for iiber legen ' to cover ':
Prefix : separable or not ? legtfiber--hat fiberge legt--fiber zulegen 
Full government :
Paullegt Mariaeine Jackefiber
Dative can be left out:
Paul will eine Jacke fiberlegen
Accusative cannot be left out : * Paullegt der Maria fiber * Paul legt fiber 
Coding for ftber legen ' to cover '
Stem : leg
Prefixi ~ ber
Word class : VERB
Government : nominative dative accusative
Obligatory : nominative accusative
Testing for iiber legen ' to reflect ':
Prefix : separable or not ? er fiber legt--hal : fiber legt--zu fiber legen 
Full government :
Paul fiber legt sichein cFrage
Dative can be left out:
Paul fiber legteine Frage
Accusative can be left out as well :
Paul fiber legt
Does the dative have to be reflexive ?* Paul fiber legt unseine Frage The accusative can be replaced by zu-infinitive  , dad and ob-clauses : Paul fiber legt ( sich ) , Mariazube suchen Paul fiber legt ( sich) , daber Maria be such en will Paul iiber legt ( sich )  , ober Maria be such en will The implied subject of infinitive clauses is the main clause subject : Paul fiber legt sich  , Mariazube suchen
Paulbe sucht Maria
Coding for i it berlegen ' to : reflect ':
Word class : VERB
Stem : iiber leg
Government : nominative dative accusative
Clauses : infinitive , as accusative implied subject is nominative dad -clause as accusative ob-clause as accusative 
Reflexive:dative
Obligatory : nominative accusative
Testing for iiber legen'superior':
Full government :
Paulist Mariairn We its prung fiberle gender uns allen im We its prung fiberlegene Paul 
Prepositional can be left out:
Paulist Maria / iberle gender unsallen fiber legene Paul 
Dative can be omitted as well:
Paulist fiberlcgen?-der fiberlegene Paul Zu -infinitives  ( marginally ) and dad-clauses are possible in lieu of the prepositional  . Clauses in uoduced by obare not allowed , not even with negation . 
Paulist Maria darin fiberlegen , daber welter springen kann * Paulist Maria ( nicht ) darinfiber legen , ober weiter springen kann Diese Schriftist and erendarin/iber legen  , leichterles barz use in The subject of infinitive clauses is the head of the adjective : der darin  , springenzu kSnnen , /iberlegene Paul
Paulist fiberlegen
Die Schriffist de randeren darin/iber legen , besserles barzuscin
DieSchriftistt ) esserles bar
The preposition may not be omitted : * Paulist Maria / iberlegen  , welter springenzu k6nnen The adjective can be used in predicative and attributive position : Paulist fiberlegen  . --derfiber legcne Paul
Coding for i ~ berlegen ' superior '.
Word class : ADJECTIVE
Stem : iiberlegen
Government : dative prepositional
Prepositions : inbei
Clauses : infinitive as prepositional daft-clause as prepositional Restrictions : no restrictions to predicative or attributive use  4 Semantic D~ovmation When dealing with semantic information wc should distinguish between the information needed for obtaining a  ( if ' possible ) disambiguated logical form and the information needed to draw inferenccs from this logical form  , even though-at least in parto this information may be id cntical  . 
Among the former we include a concept lattice ( or hierarchy ) and selection restrictions which both are special cases of the meaning rules w cuse to represent common sense and domain knowledge  .   ( For a dctail cd discussion of our approach to knowledge reprcs cntation  , el . Guenthncr/Lehmann/Sch6nfeld , 1986) . All of this information we encode as Prolog tcrms  , and we also store these in SQL/DS , but separate from the word relation described above  . 
We give an example here of thcconccp thierarchy currcntly used in our Natural Language Analyzcr  . (" bt " stands for broader term , the period in the third rule in die at csa compound tcrm  ) : bt ( angek lagt , mensoh ) . 
bt(fahrz:mg , for t be we gungsmJ ttel).
bt(fort be we gungsmittel , hergestelit , objekt).

This hierarchy is used in conjunction with the selection restrictions listed below to disambiguate sentences  , to recover ellipses , and to resolve anaphoric references .   ( The format of the selection restrictions is : Lemma  , reading , state vs . 
event , list of restrictions for the respective complements  , including an indication whether the verb is distributive  ( dist ) or collective on a given complement ) : verb ( abbremsen , l , event , nom(dist , fortbewegungsmittel) . nil) . 
verb ( abbremsen , 2, event , nom(dist , mensch).

Wirth ( 1984 ) has described a procedure to extend a concept hierarchy and selection restrictions from text on the basis of given sentences  . In his procedure , human intervention is still required , and it seems doubtful at this point whether a fully automatic procedure is feasible  . Further , one observes a certain discrepancy between linguistic usage and logical behavior of certain words  . We are investigating ways to overcome these problems  , but a discussion of them has to be left to forthcoming publications  . 
5 Conclusions
We have described the design of a lexical database to be used with a natural anguage based expert system  , discussed a number of problems we encountered when coding syntactic information for words  , and also mentioned where add-tional work needs to be done in order to achieve a comprehensive dictionary for language processing  . 
By November 1985 , we coded morphological and syntactic information for some  5  , 500 nouns , approximately 3 , 000 verbs , and 3 , 500 adjectives . Our next steps are to fully integrate the lexical database with the rest of our prototype to improve our concordance programs  , and to continue the development of criteria for syntactic subcategorization  . 

We want to thank B . Endres , A Franzke , S . Goeser , D . 
Jacob , E . Latniak , W . Pietschkc , S . Ritzenfeld , G . Schfilzke , A . Storrer , and especially K . Horlfinder for the work they did in developing the Dictionary Editor  , coding dictionary entries , and for their help and suggestions in formulating criteria for coding  . Without them , this paper would not have been possible . 

Alschwee . B . , A . Blaser , He . and tlu . Lehmarm , W . Seh6nfeld ( 1985 ) : " Einju fistisches Experten system it natiir lichs prach lichem Dialog-ein Prujekt berich U  , Proceedings of the International GI Congress ' 85 , Munich , W . Brauer , B . Radig ( eds . ): Wissens basierte Systeme , Informatik-fach be riehte 112 , Springer Verlag , Berlin Heidelberg New York Tokyo . 
Barnett , B .   ( 1985 ) : " A German Dictionary for a Linguistics and Lo  #c Based LegalExpertSystem "  , E . O . Lippmarm ( ed . ): Proceedings of the ELS Conference on Natural -language App fieations  , IBM Danmark A/S , September 1015 ,  1985 , section 1 hl-19 . 
Bierwisch , M . (1963): Grammatik des deut sehen Verbs , Studia Gram-matiea II , Akademie Verlag , Berlin . 

Brockhans Wahrig (1980 ( Vol . l)-1984 ( Vol . 6)): Demsches W6rterbueh in sechs B ~ inden , Wiesbaden , Stuttgart . 
DUDEN (1976 ( Vol . 1)-1981 ( Vol . 6)): Dasgro BeW 6rter buchder deutschen Spraehe , Biblingraphisches Institut Mannheim/Wien/Z firich , 

Fillmore , C . J . (1968): The Case for Case , Universals in Linguistic Theory , Holt , Rinehart and Winston , Inc . , New York Chicago San Francisco Atlanta Dallas Montreal Toronto London  . 
Gross , M .   ( 1984 ) : " Lexicon-Grammarnd the Syntactic Analysis of French "  , Proceedings 10th Interuational Conference on Computational Linguistic  ,   22nd At ~- nual Meeting of the Association for Computation all finguisties  , Stanford University , California , July 26 ,  1984 . Morristown : Association for Computational Linguistics  ( order from Dr . D . E . Walker , Bell Communications Research , 445 South Street , MorristownNJ 07960) ,  275-282 . 
Guenttmer , F . , tIu . Lehmann ( 1984 ) : ~ Amomatic Construction of Discourse Representation Structures ~  , Proceedings 10th International Conference on Computational Linguistic  ,   22nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Stanford University , California , USA , July 26 ,  1984 . Morristown : Association for Computational Linguistics  ( order from Dr . D . E . Walker , Bell Communications Research , 445 South Street , MorristownNJ 07960) ,  398-401 . 
Guenttmer , F . , It . Lehmann , W . Schfnfeld ( 1986 ) : " A theory of representing knowledge " , IBM Journal of Research mid Development , Vol .  30
No . 1, pp . 39-56
Iteidolph , K . E . , Fl~nig , W . und Motsch , W . (1980): Grundz(igeiner deutschen Grammatik , Akademie-Verlag , Berlin , second edition (1984) . 
Ilelbig , G . -Schenkel , W .   ( 1975 ) :  W6rterbuch zur Valenz und Distribution deutscher Verben , VEB Bibliographisches Intitut , Leipzig . 
IBM (1983): SO l . , Data System , General Information , GH24-5013 , International Business Maelfines Corporation , Endicott , New York . 
IBM ( 1982 ) : Interactive System Productivity Facility , General Information , GC34-2181 , International Business Machines Corporation , Cary , 
North Carohna.
IBM (1983 , 1984): Query Management Facility , General Information GC26-4071 , International Business Machines Corporation , San Jose , 

Lehmann , H . , N . Ott , M . Zoeppritz ( 1985 ) : " A Multilingual Interface to Databases " , IEEE Database Engineering Bulletin , Vol . 8, No . 3, New

Meier (1967): Deutsche Sprach statistik , Georg Olms Vedags buch hand-lung , Hildesheim . 
Sedelow , S . Y . (1985): ~ Computational Lexicography " , Computers and the Huma ~ fities 19 ,  97-161 . 
Sommerfeldt , K . -E . , Schreiber II .   ( 1977 ) : W~Srter huch zur Valenzmid Distribution deutscher Adjektive  , VEB Bibhographise hes Intitut , Leip-zig . 
Sommerfeldt , K . -E . , Schreiber H .   ( 1980 ) :  W6rterbuch zur Valenztrod Distribution deutse her Substantive  , VEB Bibfiographisches lnstitut , 
I , cipzig.
Steinitz , R . (1969): Adverbial-Syntax , Studia Grammatica X , Akade-mie-Verlag , Berlin . 
Wegener , H . (1985): Der Dativim heutigen Deutseh , Narr , Tlibingen . 
Wirth , R .   ( 1984 ) : Halbautomatische Erweiterungeines bestehenden ' Iqmsaurus  , diplomathesis , Heidelberg University and Fachhoehsehule

Zoeppritz , M .   ( 1984 ) : Syntax for German in the User Specialty Langua -ges System  , Niemeyer , Tiibingen . 
