Two Approaches to Common sense Inferencing for
Discourse Analysis.
Marc Dymetman
Universit 6Scientifiquet Mtdicale de Grenoble
Grouped ' E tudes pour la Traduction Automatique B . P .  68
38042 Saint Martind'H ~ resFRANCE

The dominant philosophy regarding the formalization of Common sense Inferencing in the physical domain consists in the exploitation of the " tarskian " scheme axiomatization <-> interpretation borrowed from mathematical logic  . 
The common sense postulates constitute the axiomatization  , and the realworld provides the " model " for this axiomatization  . 
The observation of the effective activity of linguistic ommunication ad of the common sense inferencing processes which are involved in it show the unacceptability of this scheme  . 
An alternative is proposed , where the notion of " conceptual category " plays a principal role  , and where the principle of logical adequation of an axiomatization to a model is replaced by a notion of " projection " of a conceptual structure onto the observed reality  . 
1 . Common sense Inferencing in context : Common sense and tile linguistic process  . 
1.1 Disambiguation ad Common sense.
Let's consider the following text fragment : " Marych ~ opped the plate on the table  . It broke . " fT . Winograd ) It is quite clear that the disambiguation f the pronominal lexical reference of " if '  ( table or plate ) involves , in addition to the syntactic and semantic constraints  ( where " semantics " is taken in a narrow sense of " formal semantics "  ) a certain understanding of the natural structure of the described events  . This understanding , shared by all members of the linguistic community  , we can name it " Commonse use " . 
In the case at hand , common sense informs us that : i ) a plate dropped on a table will in all likelihood collide with the table  . 
ii ) when such a collision happens , it is not unlikely for the plate to break , but quite abnormal for the table to break . 
This shared Common sense knowledge is taken into account at the pragmatical discourse level both by the speaker and the hearer  , and allow the speaker to reconstruct , with the help of Gricean-type conventions of communication  , the meaning intended by the speaker and therefore the correct pronominal reference : " it " refers to the plate  . 
1.2 Linguistic Acceptability and Common sense.
The disambiguation problem just considered is closely linked to the problem of the linguistic acceptability of a text fragment  . In the following example , the acceptability/unacceptability of the2 texts is due to the possibility/impossibility on the part of the listener to reconstitute a direct causalink between the first element and the second element of each text : " John's parachute had teared to pieces  . He crashed on the ground . "*" John's parachute had got damped by the rain . He crashed on the ground . " 1 . 3 Reconstitution f the information implicit in discourse and common sense  . 
The previous example showed already a relatively limited form of implicit information reconstitution ia piece of discourse : the text fragment was acceptable if it was possible for the listener to restore an implicit causal link in the text at hand  . Here is now a more impressive example of implicit information reconstitution by the listener of a piece of discourse  ( fig .  1) . 
Here , the reconstitn tionf the information simplicitely contained in the original text makes use of at least  3 different domains of comreon sense :- common sense in the physico/biological domain : to fall  , to collide , disruptive consequences of collision , to be hurt , to die . 
-conma on sense in the psychological domain : a murder consists in an intentional killing  , i . e . with a plan the goal of which is the death of somebody  . 
-common sense in the social domain : the way in which society treats crime  . 
" John was condemned to deat . .h by th , e court . He had puslted his Wifeout of the Window of t . heir 1Oth floor apartment " Implicit modellzatlon reconstruct x  , d by the listener :- do hm~pusheshis wife out of the lOth floor window-she fells fr ~ thl  10th floor to the ~ ound , ~ a thering speec all the ~ lle-she collid as v lolent l ~ with the ground-shei ~ Seve ~ el ~httrt she dies on Inqulr ~ I ~ made-  ( he in qulr ~ demonstrates the Intent lonallt V of do h ~'$ actacoUrt ~  eet5 o ~ drenders It ~ verdict : do Miscondemned to death for the et~der of his wife  . 
Figure 1
This example may serve to remind us of the easiness and the swiftness with which we are able to reconstruct a complex set of ia for ntations implicit in a piece of discourse fi'om our mastery of Common sense in a variety of domains simultaneously  . However , iu the previously given examples , only the " physical " domain C natural phenomena " ) was made use of , and in the remainder of this paper , we will essentially restrict ourselves to this domain of Common sense  . 
2 . The dominant model for Common sense Inferencing in the physical domain  . 
A considerable interest has arosen recently in A . I . for Common sense modelizations of natural phenomena  . The articles of Pat Hayes < Hayes 1978> seem to have set the tone for the philosophy presently predominant in the domain  , of which the collections of papers < Hobbs , Moore ( eds ) 1985> and < Hobbs et at . 1985> can provide recent examples . 
The outlines of this attitude-which we call the Direct Interpretation approach  ( DI approach ) -towards Conuu on sense are the following : - The relation between theory and predictions i conceived  , as similar to what it is in " scientific " physics  , but rite natural laws which are encoded in the theory are different : essentially they are of a nmre " qualitative " and less " name ricar'kind  . 
-The inferential procedure is made in t be deductive mode  ( in the sense of " deductive logic " , opposed to " inductive ") . 
~Like " scientific " physics , " naive " physics should be able to predict-in a deductive manner-the greatest possible number of phenomena from the smallest possible number of general " natural laws "  , -" Naive " physics is a strictly objectivist physics : it describes reality " as it is ": to be valuable  , the laws and the consequences of the laws must be " true "  . 
-The description of the physical world is done through an axiomatization  , typically in first-order logic , which respects the " tarskian " schema of semantical adequation of a logical theory to its model  . In this schema , borrowed from mathematical logic ( fig .  2 . a ) , the realworld is supposed to provide a model for the axiom adzation  , which is a set of axioms representing physical laws which are verified in the model  ( fig .  2 . b):0 x0yPolnt(x)APolnt(y)Ax . y //"> 31z StralghtLine(z )
AInc(x,z)AInc(y,z)\[~2: model of Plene

In Aer pretttion Axlomet lc theory of . . . . . . . . ,
Plane Geometry
Figure 2aobj
On ( ob~surf ) A Top ( surf vol ) ~ IF ~
A31 iqFull ( volliq ) flottable ( obj )   (  -  ) Supports ( vo lobj )   ( Pat Hages ) 
Theory Hodel
Figure 2b3 . 1 . Deduction or Induction ? 3 . 1 . 1 . The linguistic examples given in section 1 demonstrate how difficult it is to consider the common sense inferences which appear there as a process of purely deductive type  . 
Thus , to take example 1 . 3 , there is no logical necessity to the sequence of implicit events reconstructed by the listener : these informations are not deducible from the explicit informations " John was condemned by the court " and " John had pushed his wife out of the window ": May be there was a safety net in place  , and may be John murdered a policeman3 days later , and so on and so forth . . . 
Actually , the analysis of the type of inferencing which are involved in the reconstitution of implicit informations in the examples of section  1 is complicated by the fact that Common sense is not alone in the picture here : pragmatical conventions of communication come also into play and exploit the elements of pure common sense knowledge which are the ~ beliefs of the speaker and the hearer  ; place is lacking here for full discussion of this problem  , but let's be satisfied with the following brief comments : At the level of discourse pragmatics  , several types of intersentential " syntactical " relations between two contiguous declarative statements are possible : Cause  , Parallel , Exemplification , Explanation . . . .
< Hobbs 1984 > . In the case at hand , it is the syntactical relation of Explanation which is realized between the first statement " John was condemned by the court " and the second statement " John had pushed his wife out of the window "  . 
This relation of Explanation can only be validated ~ Common sense Inferencing is capable to provide a " natural " explicative chain between the first statement and the second statement  . 
Finally , the speaker and the hearer share conventions ( in the sense of Grice's " conventional implicature " < Levinson  1983> which allow them to " agree " about which of the admissible reconstructions is the intended one  , perhaps with the help of a common evaluation of the degree of " naturalness " of the different admissible even emcntial chains  . 
At any rate , the common sense inferencing level per se-which is exploited by the pragmatic level-seems difficult ore concile with a purely deductive process  . 
In fact , the type of common sense inferencing used in the examples of  1  . 3 presents certain striking similarities with the two following inductive/recognitive processes  ( by order of increasing complexity ) : If I observe a bikeleaning behind a tree trunk hiding its central parts from me  ,   1 will have no difficulty to induce the existence of a unique bike  , and not of 2 bike-halves placed in this exact position by a male volentaes the te  . 
In a movie , a sequence of two shots , the first one showing a woman writing a letter , the second one showing a man reading a letter will be interpreted as having a certain structural unity : it is the same letter  , it has been sent by t be woman and received by the man  , etc . . . ( Here again , as cinema is a communication medium , one must take into account not only the common sense level  , but also pragmatical conventions ) . 
3 . 1 . 2 . Several attempts have been made recently to extend the standard eduction mechanisms of logic into " nonmonotonic logics "  . These attempts have been relatively successfull in accounting for several types of " default reasoning "  , but I am not aware of any application of these techniques to the extended " gestalt-type " reasoning exemplified in  3  . 1 . 1 . 
3 . 1 . 3 . One of the other problems with the deductive approach of figure  2 is due to the difficulty there is to maintain the coherence of the thousands of axioms likely to be involved in any serious attempt to axiomatize any common sense domain  , at least if one supposes & s direct a relation of interpretation as the one in figure  2  . 
The coherence of such an axiomatization is easy to guarantee in planar geometry-for instance-  , thanks to the fact that the structure of the RxR model is mathematically limp id  , and that he correctness of the axiomatization is assured by its adequation to its model  . Quite other is the situation when we endeavour to use " reality " as our model  , for we have no clear idea of the structure of this model prior to our attempt at an axiomatization  . 
3.2. Common sense observed.
Another important difficulty with the approach of fig  .   2 is due to its stricly " objectivist " character , i . e . its insistance that Common sense formalizations should strictly respect the " reality " of natural phenomena  . 
However , numerous psychological studies have unambiguously shown that our intuitive comprehension fphysical phenomena differs considerably from the objective  ( scientific ) physical state of affairs . Thus , the following experiment has been reported < Mc . Closkey 1983>: a sample of " naive " subjects were asked what they believed is the trajectory followed by a ball thrown horizontally  . The results wem: 5 % of the subjects believed that the ball travels first in a straight horizontal line  , then falls straight down . 
3 5 % of the subjects believed that it travels first horizontally in a straight line  , then curves down for a while , then falls straight down . 
3 0% of the subjects believed that it begins to curve down immediately but eventually falls straight down  . 
(The scientific answer is that he ball follows a downward-oriented curve  ( close to a parabol a ) all the while )  . 
The many observations of this kind make it difficult  , if not downright impossible , to establish a system of physics which is at the same time " naive " and " objective "  , unless one considers that naive physics does not necessarily have to copy the common sense tructure which is observed in human individuals  . This attitude might be admissible-at least theoretically -  , if one were attempting to give robots some understanding of the external world  , but not if one seeks to modelize the processes which are at the root of linguistic ommunication  , for these constantly make use of common sense abilities actually present in Man  . 
3 . 3 . The diversity of phenomena accounted for by Common sense  . 
Perhaps the most important source of troubles with the deductive approach of section  2 has to do with the fact that , contrarily to " scientific physics " , Common sense is not free to delimit its experimental domain in an " ideal " way  . It has to give an account , at its own level , of our cn : de experience of the world , as it presents itself " naturally " , whether or not this experience conforms to universal physical aws  . But this experience is extremely varied and undisciplined : for instance  , although most physical bodies show a " natural tendency " to " fall " if unsupported  , this is neither the case with spinning-tops , nor of moving bicycles , nor the case of mercury in an upsided own the rmometer  , nor clouds , nor planes , nor the case of the Moon , etc . . . 
It is difficult to imagine that there exist universal qualitative " naive " postulates from which one might deduce at the same time \]/  . 0 . titon one hand the unstability of a pencil setup on its point  , and on the other hand the stability of a spinning -topor of a bicycle in movement  . 
Also , many phenomena which Common sense has no trouble giving an a posteriori account for are impossible to deduce from general laws  , not only Common sense laws , but often ~ laws to o ( in this instance , they are impossible or very difficul to deduce in practice  , but more rarely in principle ): for instance , the fact that a stone dropped into water will produce such-and-such as plash  ( a complex physico-mathematical fact )  ; or , more dramatically , the fact that a cherry kernel planted into the ground will produce a cherry-tree  , or even the fact that a moving bicycle is highly stable  ( even the experts do not seem to agree on the exact reason why it is so  )  , etc . . . 
However , although all these phenomena are impossible to deduce from general physical aws  , Common sense succeeds in partially InRtJy . aliag them and them a posteriori with the help of general principles and schemata  . 
(An enlightening discussion of the opposition between deduction and motivation in the domain of lexical semantics an be found in < Lakoff  1985>  . ) Let's give an illustration of what is to be understood by this a posteriori " structuration " of experience : our understanding of the behaviour of a spinning-top  . 
512 4 . Structuration of Experience : the Spinning-Top , I ~ and without claim to psychological ccuracy ( no experimental verification was made )  , Fig .   3 gives an idea of what an intuitive structuration faspinning-top could look like : - Oo~te dobJ ~ ot  , s ~ J mn ' ~ trtca ) avouc ~ dana xll-setup right on it = po ~- hav~9 ~ fastrot att on a movement ~ rotm ~ Its = xts- th taxiso scillates around theyert ~ ald ~ rect ~- tht " rotm no ~ lml ~ etul " fl = low ~  . y ~* ri ~ ll ~ ut-t ~ o " ~ tl qe ~ tstteed/notes " arefl~tk ~  9 a gak , ~ teach other : a ) " naturalt ~ nden ? V " of the object to fall dow ~ b  ) t~nder ~ 9 of the lxls to Ira U?~se to the vertical dtre?t ~ on this last te Mer~VIs in Irel MI on of meaoto at ~- I acreas ~ g ~ etth Its " ? ausl ": the rotattonil rhove mea ~ of the object ~ rou~d its axis 
Figure 3
Once structured in this manner , the spinning-top phenomenon is not any more a raw experience  , but has become an informed experience : what we can call  , following < Lakoff 1985 > a " natural category " . 
Several point should be noted :
The structure of Fig . 3 has only a remote connection to the actual mechanical structure of the phenomenon : there is no physical sense in speaking about a " tendency to stay vertical "  , and it is very problematical from the physics point of view to divide the phenomenon i to causes and consequences  . 
The spinning-top category has been structured with the help of a process of metaphorical importation < Lakoff  , Johnson 1980> of preexisting conceptual structures ( which are categories too , but of a more abstract type , see section 5) , most notably the structure of " two antagonist tendencies fighting against each other "  . This type of sUncture seems to be of wide use in language and thought and has been extensively studied by Len Talmy < Talmy  1985>  . 
Another imported conceptual structure which has served to build the spinning-top category is the category of " natural impetus loss " which specializes here to a structure of " rotational impetus loss "  . ( For a related notion , see the discussion of " Ohm's p-prim " in < DiSessa  1980>  )  . 
TILe structure which has been given totile spinning-top category is " explicative "  ( and " predictive " ) for a whole class of behavion rs of the spinning -top : thus  , file fact that it is impossible for the top to stay vertical if it is no trotating  , the top's stability loss with time ( because of the loss of rotational impetus )  , etc . . . 
Tile structure of the spinning-top category is , in an essential way , nest-experimental : for an observer without experience of gyros copic-type behaviour  , the top should have " fallen " and it would not have constituted a priori a special category  . From tilest and point of such an observer , a cartoon showing a " spinning-top " losing its balance in the same way as a penset on its point would have been perceived as the normal thing and would have constituted a dynamic category  ( see section 5 ) built with tile parallel-event construct ( which is an abstract category ) out of 2 subcategories : " l ~ tll of an unbalanced body in contact with a surface " and " rotative movement of asymetrical body around its axis "  . What happens when the first actual spinning-tops experiments are observed is the fact that the observer becomes aware that this possible structuring of the experiments has to be rejected -it obviously does not fit the observed facts - and that a new " reading " of the experiments has to be built : a new category must be created  , which ~ in a novel manner , on the one hand the rotational movement and on the other hand the natural tendency of the top to fall  , by rendering these two factors causally dependent in the way given in fig  .  3 . 
5 . An alternative to the Direct Interpretation Approach  . 
In the remaining space , we would like to point out to another direction that research on Common senselnferencing could pursue  . This will be done with the help of a " speech analysis metaphor "  . This metaphor should really be justified by a careful analysis of the inferencing processes that are at work in the modem generative approach to linguistics  ( as exemplified e . g . in < Kay 1979>) , which space does not permit to be given here . Such an analysis would show that generative syntax-although it can indeed be reinterpreted in FOL  , in abou the same way as a high-level-language program can be reinterpreted in machine code- really relies on a quite different approach to interpretation than the tarskian theory/model approach  . Namely , the same linguistic input can be interpreted by different competing  ,  5 1 1 ~ ~  . Adding new predeflned structural descriptions to the linguistic theory  ( i . e . the grammar ) will increase the range of the accepted linguistie-imputs  , whereas adding axioms to a logical " theory of the world " decreases the range of accepted situation-inputs  . 
5 . 1 . A speech-analysis Metaphor for Common sense In femncing  . 
The main features of the metaphor are illustrated in fig  . 4: st,'uct~e"read"b~l the hm~lv "( .  -  . $ ~ eech cleat n . -  .  ' ) 5\[ ruct ~ Q~r to d " b ~ thin oble rue t ~ ( ' ituolionir ~ thtreal ~ or li ~ J words ~ , i , ple conceptuale QXeg ori , shigher level ~ truetures 0   0 higher level conceptual categories
Figure 4
In the metaphor , a parallelismade between : The unanalysed real world  , wltich Common sense " observes " and has to " make sense " of  . I The unanalysed acoustical string , which the linguistic agent ( here tile hearer ) " observes " and has to " make sense " of . 
Tile FD ( Functional Descriptions < Kay 1979> ) of words are the elementary " blocks " out of which the linguistic structures are built/The simple conceptual categories  ( e . g . cat , dance ) are the elementary blocks out of which higher conceptual structures are buil L The higher level FDs  ( e . g . those corresponding to VP ) are used to build more complex linguistic structures  .   ( There is really only a difference of level between this case and the preceding one  . )/ The higher level conceptual categories ( e . g . the parallel-events category , the time-sequence-of-events category ( see section 5 . 3 ) ) are used to build more complex conceptual structures  . ( Same remark as before . ) The linguistic structure " projecls " onto the sound-chain  . There must be some " fit " , batit need not be perfect : the sound-chain may be nolsy and lacunary/The conceptuals ~ ructure " projects " onto the observed situation in the real world  . There must be some " fit " , but it need not be perfect : in fact the interpretative fredom is much more important here then in the speech-analysis cae  ( see section 3 . 2) . 
5 . 2 The different dimensions along which categories can be ordered  . 
One can distinguish 4 axes along wich conceptual categories can be ordered in formally : Along file complexity dimension  , one can place , from simple to complex , categories representing : " simple objects ": a chair  , an apple " simplevents ": to eat " complex objects ": a pair of shoes  , aroad network " complex events ": a spinning top  , a planeflying Alongtile abstraction dimension , one can place , from concrete to abstract , categories representing : " concrete " categories : an apple  , a cat more " abstract " categories : freef all of physical bodies  , quantity-conserving pouring " abstract " categories : an oriented graph  , causal sequencing of events categories representing : fixed categories : John's bicycle more productive categories : an apple productive categories : causal sequencing of events The fourth axis  , that of staticity/dynamicity is discussed in next section  . 
5.3 How new categories are formed.
The metaphor of section 5 . 1 between commonsense inferencing and the process of linguistic interpretation permits to transpose the generative approach of syntax to the plane of common sense inferencing  ( fig . 5): tniUalblsi$ofst ; bUt ? ~ te ~ or % $ ~ eat'O ? ri'$a:2-ant . agoni ~ ct-tendenclese:dPopplngb:naturol-i ~ petus-loss  9: ~ Pir~lng-~o Pc : tlme-s ~ quenclng-of-eu~nt $ L : john-takes-spinning-top-then-drops-it d : toking-object-in-hands 
Figure 5
In this figure , there appear several types of categories : - i ) The categories belonging to the " initial basis of staticategories "  . 
They constitute the initial structural " stock " from which new categories are formed by the process of generation  . In fig . 5 a , c , etc . . , are the categories two-antagonist-tendencies , tme-sequencing of events , which form the basis upon which higher categories are built  . 
- ii ) The categories belonging to the " extended basis of staticategories "  . 
They are obtained through integration and coordination of several already existing static categories  . An example that we have already seen is the example of the spinning-top category  , which integrates ( among others ) the structures of two-antagonist-tendencies , natural-impetus-loss , and other structnres which we have not spoken of , as for instance that of abstract-containment . 
Static categories , contrarily to dynamicate gories ( eeiii next ) , correspond to classes of reproducible phenomena , which , once structured into a conceptual category , become of general utility for common sense processes and therefore need to be memorized permanently  . For instance , once the spinning-top category has been formed to account for the experiences one has had of effectively observed spinning-tops  , this category becomes of a general utility to : 1 ) identify a spinning-tophenomenon as an instance of the spinning-top category  . 
2 ) infer properties of this phenomenon thanks to the previous identification of the category  . These properties are not directly perceivable in the phenomenon  , but are described in the structure of the category which has just been identified  . 
In the same way , to take a simpler example , once the staticategory of bicycle has been identified in a real situation  , the perception of a fuzzy spot on the bicycle's front is sufficient o infer immediately the presence of a head lamp which is not directly perceivable  ( gestalt-type rocessing )  . 
Thus , the stock of already existing static categories serves to give structure to new categories of phenomena  . We have seen in section 4 . that these structures are , in many cases , necessarily post-experimental and cannot be O_? . d . u . f , g ~ a priori . 
The existence of categories preexisting to the experiencing of new phenomena permits to the active observer to L ? C  . 0ggJ ~ in the experience of a phenomenon the presence of simple or complex categories which are already known by him  . 

Thus , if the observed phenomenon had been different ( for instance if the top behave differently from what is the actual case  )  , other preexisting structures would have come into play : there would be in any case adaptation of the modelization to the observed experience  . The difference with the philosophy of section 2 appears clearly here . 
- iii ) The " dynamically produced categories ".
Dynami categories ( wbich we have also called " theorizations " ) differ mainly from static categories in that dynamicate gories only " serve once " to structure an actually present concrete situation which is irre producible  ( by definition , for it is " this " situation here and now ) . They are therefore created on the spot and are only temporary structures  . For instance , the dynamicate goryt of fig .   5 corresponds to the concrete situation " John takes the spinning-top in his hand then drops it on the ground ": The structuration f this category is partially shown on fig  .   5: it is a category formed by integration of the categories spinning-top  , taking-object-in-hands , ropping with ( and " under " ) the productive category time-sequencing-of -events  ( we do notel aborate here on the question of what happens to a ~ top when it is taken in hands !  )  . 
Space is lacking here for us to give a detailed is cussion of dynamicategories and of the inferencing processes which manipulate hem  , which discussion must be postoned to a later study  , but let us just give another illustration , related to the example of section 1 . 3: " John was condemned to death . . . " . In this case , the speaker , who is supposed to have been the direct " observer " of the situation  , has built a dynamicategory which represents his understanding of the situation he has observed  , and which is an integration of the dynamic a tegories " John pushes his wife out of the window "  , " shefalls from the 10th floor to the ground " , etc . . , themselves constituted from static categories : " pushing "  , " falling " , " dying " , etc . . . Furthermore , it is this dynamicategory ( or a part of it ) that he tries to transmit to his listener through an efficient linguistic coding which is highly elliptical  , and it is this dynamicategory ( or a part of it ) that ire listener succeeds in reconstructing . 
The principal feature of the process of formation of new categories  , whether static or dynamic , is that it is not basically a process of dg . O . afd Jflll , but a process of of structures . This recognition is done . on the basis of a set of p . arlia! . 
informations about the phenomenon , which is what gives it its status of ~ . This is a crucial fact that cannot be detailed here  . 
Let's only give one example : A sufficiently old child will ~ the abstract category quantity -conserving-interpouring in an ~ situation where Peter pours some wine from a bottle into a glass  , although the invariance described by the category is not directly observable by her-indeed younger children  , who do not yet possess this category , or a more abstract one over which this one is built  , are not aware of this conservation , see<Piaget1979> . 
Conclusion.
We have tried to demonstrate he difficulties there are to apply a DI  ( direct interpretation ) approach to the formalization of our common sense understanding oE the natural world  . From a confrontation with linguistic phenomena and linguistic methodology  , we have advocated a more indirect approach to interpretation  . Work on a formal framework for this approach is currently under way  . 
Disessa , Andrea .  1983 . Phenomenology and the evolution of lntuition ~ in  ( Gentner , D . and Stevens , A . L . ) Mental Models , Lawrence Erlbaum

Hayes , Patrick J .  1978 . The naive physics Manifesto , ISSCO , Geneva . 
Hobbs , Jerry .  1984 . On the Coherence and Structure of Discourse , SRI Hobbs , Jerry . and Moore , Bob .  1985 . Formal Theories of the
Common sense World , Ablex , Norwood.
Kay , Martin .  1979 . Functional Grammar , Berkeley Linguistics Society . 
Lakoff , George .  1985 . Women , Fire and Dangerous Things . What Categories Tell Us About The Nature of Thought  . , University of
Chicago Press.
Lakoff , George . and Johnson , Mark .  1980 . Metaphors we live by,
University of Chicago Press.
Levinson , Stephen .  1983 . Pragmaties , Cambridge University Press . 
McCloskey , Michael .  1983 . Intuitive Physics , Scientific American , April 1983 . 
Piaget , Jean .  1979 . L ' ~ pist ~ mologie Gdn # . tique , Presses Universitaires de
France , Paris.
Talmy , Len . I985 . Force Dynamics in Thought and Language , University of Chicago Linguistics Society . 

The author wishes to thank Len Talmy , Jerry Hobbs , Stan Rosenschein , Jane Robinson , Cbristian Boitet , Bob Moore and Pat Hayes for ideas , discussions and comments . 
