Combining Deictic Gestures and Natural Language 
for Referent Identification
Alfred Kobsa , Jfirgen Allgayer , Carola Reddig , Norbert Reithinger
Dagmar Schmauks , Karin Harbusch , Wolfgang Wahlster
SFB 314: AI-Knowledge-Based Systems
University of Saarbrficken
D-6600 Saarbriicken 11
West Germany
Abstract
In virtually all current natural language dialog systems  , users can only refer to objects by using linguistic descriptions  . However , in human face-to-face conversation , participants fre=quently use various sorts of deictic gestures as well  . In this paper , we will present he referent identification component of XTRA  , a system for a natural language access to expert systems  . XTRA allows the user to combine NL input together with pointing gestures on the terminal screen in order Io refer to objects on the display  . Information about the location and type of this deietic gesture  , as well as about the linguistic description of the referred object  , the case frame , and the dialog memory are utilized for identifying the object  . The system is tolerant in respect o impreciseness of both the deictic and the natural language input  . The user can thereby refer to objects more easily  , avoid referential failures , and employ vague everyday terms instead of precise technical notions  . 
Keywords : Deixis , referent identification , NP analysis , parsing 1 . Introduction Various aspects of referent identification by hearers have been investigated in the last few years : It has been studied as a process of noun phrase resolution and attribute comparison  ( Lip-kis1982 )  , as a planned action ( Cohen 1981 ,  84) , as a process which depends on focus ( Grosz 1981) , context ( Reichman 1981) , the mutual beliefs shared between speaker and hearer  ( Clark & Marshall 1 . 981 ) and the modality of linguistic communication ( telephone vs . teletype , cf . Cohen 1984) , and as a process which is prone to various sorts of conversational failure  ( Goodman 1985 )  . In all of these studies , natural language is the only conversational medium  . For identifying objects under discussion , the hearer can therefore only utilize the NL descriptions provided by the speaker  , and information about the previous dialog and the task domain at hand  . 
In face-to-face conversation , however , participants also frequently use extralinguistic means for referent identification  , in particular , various sorts of deictic gestures ( such as pointing at something by ones hand , finger , pencil , head or eyes ) . One This work is part of the SFB 314 Research Program on AI and Knowledge-Based Systems and has been supported by the German Science Foundation  ( DFG )  . The authors would like to thank J . Rink and W . Finkler for their help in preparing the manuscript  , Email address of the authors : surname % sbsvamuucp ~germany  . cs net the identification process for both the hearer and the speaker  , as well as avoiding referential failures . Certain technical innovations in the last few years  ( e . g . , high-resolution graphic displays , window systems , touch-sensitive screens , input via a pointing device such as the mouse or the light-pen  ) have made it possible for computational linguistics to also experiment with and study a certain class of these deictic gestures  , namely , t actile gestures for identifying objects on a terminal screen  . 
From an application-oriented perspective as well , such an ability is certainly a desirable characteristic for natural language dialog systems  . In current systems , referring to visual objects involves the user either to employ unambiguous labels displayed together with the objects  ( cf . Phillips 1985) , or purely linguistic descriptions which sometimes become rather complex  ( e . g . the " bright pink flat piece of hippopota musface shape piece of plastic " in Goodman  1985  )  . In Woods et al (1979) , a combination of deictic and natural language input has already been envisaged  , but solely with restricted flexibility . Since an analyzer for pointing gestures is independent of a particular language  , one might also consider transferring it to other NL dialog systems  . 
In this paper , we will present he referent identification coin ponent of XTRA  , a system for a natural language access to expert systems currently under development at the University of Saarbrficken  . In its present application domain , XTRA is intended to assist a user in filling out his/her annual with holding tax adjustment form  . The system will respond to terminological questions of the user  , extract from the user's natm'al-language input the relevant data that is to be entered in the application form  , and verbalize the inferences of the taxexpert system  . During the dialog , the relevant page of the application form is displayed on one window of the screen  ( for a simplified example , see Fig . 1; only the tax form is visible to the user ) . 
For referring to single regions in the form , to the entitie stored therein , or to larger regions which contain embedded regions  , the user can employ linguistic descriptions ( which we will call descriptors )  , pointing gestures with a pointing device ( mouse )  , or both . From now on , the noun ' delctic ' will refer to the use of a pointing device  , and the term'deictlc expression ' to the use of a descriptor plus a deictic  ( such as ' these deductibles '+ deictic )  , or of a deictical one . 
illB fihler's (1982) terminology , the kind of deix is used illour situation is a dcmonsU'atioadoculos  . The objects on tile display are visually observable  , upon which the user and the system share a common visual field  . In Clark & Marshall's (1981) terms , they are in a situation of physical coprese , ~ ce . The retbre , object sont be display need not be introduced by the use  , , but can immediately be referred to by a descriptor  , a deictic , or both . 
In many cases , however , neither kind of reference will be precise . Referential expressions , on tile one hand , will often apply to more than one region in our form  ( as is the case when the user employs the term ' the deductibles ' in order to refer to specific deductible sums such as dues for the membership in a professional organization  )  . Deictic gestures , on the other band , are also often imprecise in that they arc not aimed at the region in which the user actually wants to refer to  . Reasons for this might be in attemiveness , an oversized pointing device , or the user's intention not to hide the data entered in the respective field  . 
Another factor of uncertainty is the pars-pro-to to deictic  . In this case , tile user points at an embedded region when actually intending to refer to a superordinated region  . This is particularly the case when a form region is completely partitioned into a number of embedded subregions  . 
Therefore , in our nrodel , we utilize several sources of information for identifying the region the user probably wants to refer to : the descriptors/he uses  , the location and the type of his/her pointing gesture  , intrasentential context ( case fi'ames ) , and the dialog context . The information from each of these sources alone may be ambiguous or imprecise  . Combined , however , they ahnost always allow for a precise identification of a reter-ent  . 
2 . Knowledge sources of the system 2 . 1 . The tax form and the form hierarchy During the dialog with tile user  , the system displays the relevant page of the income tax form on tile terminal screen  . As is illustrated ill Fig .  1 , such a form consists of a number of rectangular regions  , which may themselves contain embedded regions , etc . 
We will abbreviate these regions by R1, R2, etc . The user can apply deictic operations to all regions  . 
For representing hierarchical relationships between regions  , the system maintains an internal form hierarchy . Every region ill the form has a corresponding element in the form hierarchy  . 
Hierarchical relationships between form elements can then be expressed by father-son relationships within the form hierarchy  . 
There are two reasons for introducing such a hierarchical order :- Geometrical reasons : If region Rj is geometrically embedded in region Ri  , then the element in the form hierarchy corresponding to Rj becomes a son of tile element corresponding to Ri  . An example is given in Fig .   1 where regions R2 and R3 are geometrically embedded in R1  . Hence , their con'e-sponding elements in the form hierarchy are subordinated to the element corresponding to  R1  . 
- Sema . ntic reasons : In many cases , there is a semantic oher-ence betwee . n regions in tile form not directly expressed by the geometrical hierarchy  . For example , see regions R15 and R16 , and regions R33 and R34 in Fig .  1 , which intuitively form units within the form for which no direct geometrical equivalents exist  . Therefore , socalled abstract regions are introduced in the form hierarchy to which conceptually coherent regions call be connected  . These regions even need not be geometrically adjacent and can be subordinated to more than one abstract region  . In Fig .  1 , abstract regions are denoted by the symbol ' AR '   ( as e . g . AR48, the father of R15 and R16) . It is , lot surprising that abstract units in the form hierarchy are often directly related to higher level representational elements in the conceptual knowledge base of the syst cn r  ( cf . section 2 . 3 . ) . 
Moreover , we discern two types of bottom regions : Labd regions contain the ofticial inscriptions on the form  ( e . g . LR9 tbr ' Professional Expenses') , value regions contain tile space for the user's data  ( e . g . VR28 for educational expenses ) . From now on , we will no longer distinguish between the tbrmas displayed on the screen and tile form hierarchy stored in the system  . Since a close relations lfip between both structures exist  , no problems will arise thereby . 
2.2. The pointing gestures
Following Clark et al (1983) , we will call the region ( s ) at which the user pointed to the demonstratum , and tile region which s/he intended to refer to the referent  . Three cases can then be discerned : a ) The demonstratum is identical to the referent . 
b ) The demonstratum is a descendant of the referent ( pars-pro-to to deixis )  . In this case , the referent may be a geometrical or an abstract region  . 
c ) The demonstratum is geometrically adjacentotile referent  . 
This occurs when the user points below tile referent  , to its right , etc . ( e . g . , by inattentiveness or because of not wanting to hide the data entered in the respective region  )  . 
In most cases , obviously , the location of a deictic does not identify its referent  , but only restrains the set of possible referential candidates  . Therefore , information about the pointing gesture usually has to be combined with information from other knowledge sources  . 
Another observation was that mos ! subjects use several types of pointing gestures differing in exactness  . Their c boice seems to depend on tile size of the target region  . The larger tile referent and the more subregions it contains  , the vaguer is the pointing gesture . Therefore , our system allows the user to choose among several degrees of accuracy in his/her deictic  . The user's decision , in turn , is taken into account when the system has to choose between referential candidates differing in size or to the degree of cmbedment  ( cf . section 3 . 1 . 2 . ) . 
2.3. The conceptual knowledg cbase
Ill our system , conceptual knowledge is represented by a frame -based language that shows a strong resemblance to Brachman's  ( 1978 ) KL-ONE . The general part of tile representation contains concepts and attribute descriptions of concepts  . Attribute descriptions mainly consist of roles and value restrictions fbr possible role fillers  . Ill Fig .  1 , concepts are depicted by ovals and roles by small circles  ( the figure has been somewhat simplified )  . 
For object concepts ( as e . g . ' MEMBERSHIPFEE ' and ' ORGANIZATION ') , attribute descriptions specify the properties of tile objects described by the concept  . For action concepts ( as e . g . ' PEIYSICAL TRANSFER','ADD'etc . ), they specify the case frame . 
General concepts can be ordered in a concept hierarchy  , allowing the attribute descriptions of concepts to be inherited fl ' om the superordinated concepts  . In Fig .  1 , the bold arrows denote such superconcept relations  . More specific concepts can be defined by introducing additional attribute descriptions or by fi~r therrestraining the value restrictions of role fillers  . It is possible for\\\\,\,agent'\!i'\ . ! i
OF MONE 5x ) ~ PRCNAL , ?~,-~ x, . v t ~ . ,~ GI IAR ITABLE \[ ~ ~ FESSIO \ ~ 2tf ORGANIZATION ~ ~ , ORGANIZATION j ~) ~ EMB , FF  ~

Knowledgei
Base(~~6)
ADD1
I~\Lexicon , ~( R14) ii='"--% , ,( r ~ 16) i "' , ( R3 61
F"!i ~( AR51) iii(AR51)i(R34)


Struct m'es ~ R9/~RI3 .   .   .   . ~' VR2 ~$/'/ .  /  . ~' ~" Alt'48"~~F-R 16 .   .   .   .   .  ~'  VR26 \[ b ~ R 16-  - - -!~  Vn29 RZ/R ~0~'"~'a ? ~"*- An 49<~" vn 17   .   .   .   . ~ vR2 ~
F,?("'~R12~R3,I.AR~1~33 ... ..* VR 43
R31 ~ R53~R34-~VR 44
Form ~ n 3   ~1 Deductibles ~2 Professional Expensqs , 13 Educational expenses R 142 50 . 00, 15 Professional organ_ ~_ . Z , member , s ~ ~ A ' ~'17 Bu . ,  .   .   .   .   .   . I1~LT/:~ . 
i , . . p/l,j ~ v . ,, p : ~__t,~ .   .   .   . := Other Deductibles . ;,\] . . . .\]  .  ;': . ~, 31 Ch , rltable organl ~4 . ation ~: ;! . ~; i:":': . . ": . . !  . - . . , ? ,
Mcm~1~3~t40'00 non.,,..o-.:..___j__~~~?.?0
R3 80,08
Hierarchy " CanI add my annual $15 . 00 ACL dues to these membership fees?"Fig .   1: The knowledge sources of the system thus inheriting the properties of several superconcepts  . 
Natural-language input of the user containing new facts relevant to t tax adjustment  , as well as data entere directly into the form , cause slructures of the general part to be m div Mualized  . 
Individualized concepts ( depicted by ovals with lateral strokes in Fig .  1 ) and individualized attribute descriptions are thereby created  . In Fig .  1 , the individualized structures express the facts that the user spent  $80 and $40 as professional organization and charitable organization membership fees  , respectively . 
Concepts and roles can be linked to elements in the tbrmbier-archy if they conceptually correspond to a region in the form  . 
\[ n Fig .  1 , t br instance , the concept ' NUMBER ' is associated with regions  R16 and R34  , amongst others , and the concept ' PROI" . ORGAN . MF , MB . FI';E'with region AR 48 . 
2 . 4 The f lmct inna l - semant ic s t ruc ture Belbre individualizations of the conceptual knowledge base are created  , the natural--language input of the user is first mapped onto individuaizations of theso : called t imctional-semantic structure  ( FSS )   . The task of the FSS ( cf . All gay cr & Rcddig 1986 ) is to express the syntactic and semantic relationships bc-lween the constituents of the input sentence  . It is also represented in a Kl , -() Nl ' ~- like scheme . Amongst other things , the word stem entries in the lexicon determine which parts of the FSS are to be individualized  , l ) uring this process , inlormation about the location and the type of the occuring pointing gestures is assigned to the nmm phrases to which flmy belong  . Fig . 
1 shows part of the individualized leSS generated by the input sentence  . 
The . I " SS forms the starting point t br the referential analysis of tile natural qanguage input  , i . e . the mapping onto individualized structures of the conceptual knowledge base  . This task is perlbrmed by an interpreter using appropriate mapping rules  . 
2.5. The dialog memory
Our current provisional approach is to regard tile dialog memory as a structured I is ~ containing individualizations of the concepts in the conceptual knowledge base  . When arc fi'r-ent is recognized as not having been lnc  . ntioned before ( because it is not contained in the clialog memory  )  , the respeclive concept is individualized , linked to the referent , and entered as the most relevant element of the dialog memory  . In Fig . 1 we assume that regions tt_16 , R34 , AR48 and ARSI , amongst others , have been addressed betbre . Thus the concepts PROF . ORG . MI '; MB . FEE , CItAR . ORC ; . MEMB . FEE and NUMBER have been individualized and linked to these regions  . 
3 . Referent identification processes In a user ' sNI  , input , a deictic can be used at any position where a noun phrase or a  ( locative ) adverbial phrase is to be expected . 
From a syntactic point of view , a deictic can serve two functions :- it supplements a syntactically saturated escription  , i . e . takes the form of an additional attribute . 
-it replaces a syntactically obligatory constituent  ( e . g . the head of a noun phrase ) . 
The position of a deictic may be before , within , or after a noun phrase . Syntactic vicinity is taken into account if an ambiguity occurs in embedded noun phrases  . 
In the XTRA system , t bursources of int brmatl on are utilized in order to identify the referent of a deictic expression : The location of tile user's pointing gesture  , the descriptors/he uses , case frame restrictions , and the content soft be dialog memory . The three former sources can be found in the lunctional-semantic structure  , the latter source in the individualized part of the conceptual knowledge base  . RetErent identification , then , is perlormed in the following order : a ) Generation of potential referents by the most appropriate knowledge source  . Source--specific partial plausibility vat-ues are thereby assigned meach generated candidate  . Only deictic , descriptor and case . ti'ameare considered in fills step , lhedialog memory is only used in step ( b ) . 
b ) Re-ewduation of each candidate by consecutively considering the inlbrmation from all other knowledge sources  . 
c )   ( ) vcrall evaluation by considering all partial plausibility assignments  ; sel . ection of ' the candidate with the highest plau -sibilily factor  . 
In the tbllowing section we will describe howtile most appropriate knowledge source for refi : rent generation is selected and how referential candidates are generated  . Since we arc pattien larly concerned with referent identification through pointing gest m ' es  , we will only descrihe the referem generation strategy of the deix is analyzer  ( also of . Allgayer I986) . For generaling candidates through descriptors and ease flames  , we use Ihe " classical " way leading from the lcxi convia the FSS oww to individualized concepts in the conceptual knowledge base and to the form hierarchy  . In section 3 . 2 . , we then describe how lllc deixis analyzer rc -evahmle  . s candidale supplied by descriptor and case fi'ame analysis  , and how candidates generated by the deixis analyzer are reevaluated by considering the intormation of all other knowledge sources  . The example depicted m Fig . 
1 , to which we constantly refi : r to in the upcoming section  , was chosen to demonstrate that , in many c'ases , all , or nearly all of these knowledges om'ccs are necessary to correctly identify a referent  . 
3 . 1 . Generating potential referents 3 . 1  . 1  . Deciding for the most appropriate knowledge source In orde  . r to restraintile computational complexity of tile identification process  , it nlust be decided first whether eferential can didates shouM be generated by analyzing the pointing gesture  , the descriptor , or the case fi ' anm of the user's input . To assure that only a small number of candidates nmst be reevaluated in the subsequent steps  , it is certainly advisable to choose the knowledge source which yields the smallest set of plausible candidates that still contains the refe  . rent . The evaluation of each knowledge source is performed according to the following criteria : - Deix is : The quality of au  , mr's deictic for candidate generation is inversely proportional to the number of regions con-lained in the demonstratum and the number of ancestors of the demonstratum  . A deictic to R3 in Fig . 1, for instance , will yieldless candidates th . an adeictic to R34 . 
-Descriptor : If a descriptor does not contain a head  , it cannot be used for candidate generation . Otherwise , its quality is inversely proportional to tim number of subconcepts of its conceptual representation and tile number of regions linked to these concepts  . E . g . , tbr the representation iFig .  1 , tile descriptor ' number ' will yield by far more candidates than the descriptor ' membership fi ~e'  . 
3 59 -Case frame : The quality of a case restriction for referent generation depends on the quality of the selection restriction concept of the corresponding role in the conceptual knowledge base  . This quality can be computed in the previous manner mentioned  . In Fig .  1 , the selection restrictions for the ADD concept do not seem to be profitable for candidate generation  . 
3 . 1 . 2 . Generating candidates by analyzing the user's pointing gesture As was mentioned above  , our system allows for the use of several types of deictic gestures differing in precision  . A socalled deictic fieM is associated with each type of pointing gesture  , its size corresponding to the degree of exactness of the deictic  . An example for three differentypes of pointing gestures is given in Fig  .  2 . 
Educational expenses
Fig . 2: Three types of pointing gestures
A deictic fiekt may either be completely contained in a basic region  ( as is the case for deictic1 in Fig .  2 ) or overlap two or more basic regions ( deicties 2 and 3 , respectively ) . All basic regions that are overlapped by a deictic field serve as first referential candidates in our system  . The ratio of that part of a region covered by a deictic field in relation to the size of the total region yields the plausibility value for the region  . Deietic 3 , for instance , generates R18 , R16 , R17 and R15 as first candidates , in order of descending plausibility ( cf . Allgayer 1986) . 
In a second step , the system accounts for the possibility of pars -pro-to to deixis  . All regions semantically or geometrically su -perordinated to any of the current candidates are also considered as candidates  . The plausibility assignment of a superordinated region depends on its type  , the plausibility of its candidate subregions , and the type of pointing gestur employed by the user  ( the vaguer the pointing gesture , the higher is the plausibility of the superordinated regions  )  . In Fig .  2 , regions AR49 and AR48 would be added in the case of deictie 3  , both with higher plausibility than any of the first candidates  . This upward prop , ~- gation through the hierarchy can be applied iteratively  , yielding even more candidates ( the valuation function smoothly declines thereby to render high-level regions less plausible  )  . The resulting set of candidates has to be reevaluated by the processes cribed below  . 
3 . 2 . Re-evaluatlng the set of candidates 3 . 2 . 1 . Re-evaluation by analysis of the pointing gesture If the optimization process of section  3  . 1 . 1 . decided that descriptor or case frame analysis were the most appropriate knowledge sources for candidate generation  , analysis of the deictie is employed in our system for reevaluating the candidates supplied by these components  . This evaluation process is rather similar to candidate generation described above  . For example , as deictic3 in Fig . 2): If the desciptor analyzer generated AR 48 , AR 51 , R16 and R34 as potential referents ( since the descriptor was ' membership fee ' , see below ) , the deix is component would assign high plausibility values to the former  , and very low ones to the latter . 
3 . 2 . 2 . Re-evaluation by descriptor analysis This process determines to what extent he conceptual representation of the descriptor applies to the current candidates  . Each candidate is tested as to whether the representation f the descriptor  , a subconcept of this representation , or ( if existent ) the restriction concept of the value slot of one of these concepts is linked to the candidate  . The more concepts in between the representation f the descriptor and the linked sube on cept  , the lower the new partial plausibility assignment  . Let us assume for our example in Fig . 1 that the deix is analyzer , in order of decreasing plausibility , has generated regions AR 49 , AR 48 , R18 , R16 , R17 and R15 as potential referents . If the descriptor is ' these membership fees ' , the descriptor analysis will prel ~ rARt8 and R16 , since a subconcept of the representation f this descriptor is linked to  AR48  , and the restrictiou concept of its value slot is linked to  R16  . 
3 . 2 . 3 . Re-evaluation by case frame analysis This process determines to what exten the selection restriction concept of the respective slot in the conceptual representation of the verb applies to the referential candidates under investigation  . This evaluation process is performed almost identically to that of the descriptor  . In our example , high plausibility would be attributed to regions R16 and R18  , since the concept NUMBER ( the restriction concept of the relevant slot of the concept 
ADD ) is linked to these regions.
3.2.4. Restriction by dialog memory
This process determines whether a referent has recently been mentioned by checking whether or not an individualized concept connected with it is contained in the dialog memory  . The better the position of such an individualized concept in the list  , the better the plausibility of the candidate . In Fig .  1 , we assume that both the profession alnd the charitable society memberships and their values have been addressed just recently  . Therefore , in our example , high plausibility values are assigned to regions R16 and AR48  . The overall evaluation will then select R16 , it having obtained the highes total plausibility . 
4. Discussion
Our system demonstrates that spatial deixis is a valuable source of information for identifying referents which also can be investigated and utilized in natural anguage dialog systems with pictoral display  . Three reason sum up the advantages of using pointing gestures : They save the speaker the generation  , and the hearer the analysis of complex referential descriptions and thus simplify the natural language dialog  ; they often allow for reference in situations in which linguistic reference is simply not possible  ( think of referring to one out of a dozen similar objects  )  ; and they permit hespeaker to be vague , imprecise , or ambiguous , and to use everyday terms instead of precise technical terms unknown to him/her  . 
In natural language dialog systems , deix is analysis can be combined well with standard methods for referent identification  . 
Sonre of the identification processes ( e . g . , tests with case frame , descriptor and dialogmenmry ) are rather similar to the classical methods used i branaphor and ellipsis resolntion  . Others , such as the generation and evaluation of candidates by the deix is analyzer  , are typical with respect to this particular kind of conversational medium  . 
It should be pointed out , however , that out' environment for spatial deixis is , in several ways , somewhat simpler than those occurring in person -to-person dialogs  ( cf . Schmauks 1986) . 
The deictic fie M is only two . dimensional , nd the objects that carl be pointed at a reclem 'ly separated from each other  . Compared to real-life situations , the number of possible referents i relatively small  . " Left " and " right " xrman the same thing for the user and the system  ( which is not the case , e . g . , in face-to-lace conversation ) , i Iowever , this relative simplicity neecinot bear h ' awback  . Instead , one might regard our environment as a study in vitro  , eliminating a number of uncertainty t~tctors so that tile essential characteristics of spatial deix is become more salient  . 
Another question is whether the deictic behavior of sul~jects who use a poiming device is the same as that of subjects who touch the display with their fingers  ( and thus , whether deix is via a pointing device is a valid sinmlation of t actile deixis  )  . One might argue , e . g . , that people point more precisely with a mouse than with their lingers  , or vice versa . We are currently conducting an inibnnal experiment to answer these questions  . In any case , only the propagation functions are perhaps all ~ :cted  t0y a change of tile deictic medium , whcreas the referent identitica-lion processes will remaintile same  . 
Attempts are currently being made to also integrate visual ancl conceptual salience in our model  ( cf . Clark et al 1983) . When a point in gesture is ambiguot xs , it appears that region set off by boMfi'ame or coloring  , as well as regions containing important data tbr tile task domain are preferred  . We expect his preference to be laken into account in the evahmtion processes of tile deixis analyzer  . Another possibl extension which w cwou M like to invesd gatcis in replacing the strategy described in section  3  . 1 . 1 . by a certain form of incremental referent identification  . 
There is strong empirical evidence ( e . g . Goodman 1985 ) that people begin with referent identification immediately alter receiving initial information about it  , instead of waiting tm til the speaker's reti ~rential ctisterminated  . Since all components described above are strictly separated  , it appears basically possible to also use them in an incrmnental identification process  . In one-processor systems , however , great care must be taken that the knowledge source first adresse does not block the system by generating too many candidates  . Therefore , some process controlling will be necessary , either by ressource limitation or by taking into account he heuristics listed in section  3  . 1 . 1 . 

Allgayer , , J .   ( 1986 ) : Eine Oraphik komponente zurhttegra-lion von Zeige handlungen in nat fir lichs prach liche KI -Systeme  .  16 . GI-Jahrestagung , Berlin , FRG ( in print) . 
Allgayer , J . und C . Reddig ( 1986 ) : Systemkonzei ) tion zur Ver-arbeitung kombinierters prach licher nndgestischer Refer-entenbeschreibungen  . SFB 314, Dept . of Computer Science , University of Saarbr Qcken , FR Germany . 
Brachman , R . J .   ( 1978 ) : A Structural Paradigm for Representing Knowledge  . Report No . 3605, Bolt , Beranckattd
Newman Inc ., Cambridge , MA.
Biihlcr , K . (1982): The Deictic Fie M of I . , anguage and De-ictic Words . A bridged translation of K . B/ihler (1934): Sprachtheorie , part 2 , chapters 7 and 8 . In : R . J . Jarvella and W . Klein , eds . : Speech , Place , and Action . (\] hich--ester etc . : Wiley . 
Clark , II . I 1 . and C . R . Marshall ( 1981 ) : Definite Refi:rence and Mutual Knowledge . hi : A . K . Joshi , 13 . l , . Webber and I . A . Sag , eds . : Elements of Discourse Unde . rstanding . Cambridge : Cambridge Univ . Press . 
Clark , lI .  11 . , P , . Schreuder and S . Buttrick ( 1983 ) : Common Ground and the Understanding of Demonstrative Reference  . .Journal of Verbal Le . arning and Verbal Behavior 22, 245- . 258 . 
Cohen , P . R .   ( 1981 ) : The Needfox " Referent Identification as al ' lanned Action  . Proceedings of the 7th hrter national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Vancouver , 
Cda ., 3136.
Cohen , P . R . (1984): The Pragmatics of R . efe . rring and the Modality of Communication . Computational Linguistics 10, 97-146 . 
Goodman , B . A .   ( 1985 ) : Repairing Reference Identification Failures by Relaxation  . Proceedings of the 23rd ACI,
Meeting , Chicago , 1I ,, 204-217.
Grosz , B . J .  (11 . )81 ) : Focusing and Description in Natural Language Dialogues  . In : A . K . Joshi , B . L . Webber and \[ . A . Sag , eds . : Elenrents of Discourse Understanding . 
Cambridge : (\] ambridge Univ . Press.
Phillips , B . , M . , J . Freiling , J . ii . Alexander , S . L . Messic . k , S . Rehfnss and S . Nieholl ( 1985 ) : An Eclectic Approach to Building Natural \ [ , anguage Interfaces . Proceedings of tile 23rd ACt , Meeting , Chicago , IL ,  254-261 . 
Lipkis , Thomas (1982): AKL-ONE Classifier . Proceedings of the 1981 KL-ONE Workshop . Report No . 4842, Bolt , Beranek and Newman Inc . , Cambridge , MA , 128-145 . 
Reichman , R .   ( 1981 ) : Plain Speaking : A Theory and Grammar of Spontaneous Discourse  . Report No . 4681, Bolt , Beranek and Newman Inc . , Cambridge , MA . 
Schmanks , D .   ( 1986 ) : Formular deixis und ihre Simulation auf dem Bildschirm  . Ein Uberblickaus linguistischer Sicht . Memo No . 4, Sonderforschungsbereich314, Dept . 
of C mnputer . q cience , University of Saarbrficken , FRG . 
Woods , W . A . , R . J . Brachman , R . J . Bobrow , R . R . Cohen and J . W . Klovstad (1979): Research in Natural I , an-guage Understanding : Annual Report . TR 4274, Bolt,
Beranek & Newman , Cambridge , MA.

