When Mariko ~ alks ~ o Siegfried
Experiences from a Japanese/German
Machine Translation Project , -
l)ie ~ marl6sner
ProjektSEMSYN , Ins~i ~ uL fiir Inform~t~ik
Universi L~t S~u ~ gar L , Herdweg 51
D-7000 SLu ~ Lgar ~1
WesL Germ ~ H~y

In this paper we will report on our experiences from a  2   1/2 year project that designed and implemented a prototypical Japanese to German translation system for titles of Japanese papers  . 

An american study published in Nature , 308 (1984)-evaluated cir . 9000 Japanese scientific papers .   75 percent of them are published exclusively in Japanese  , only a 5th of Japanese papers are currently evaluated from Western refereeing and information services  . The main conclusion of the study was , that the general opinion all important Japanese stuff would be published in English is not true  , at least for the applied sciences . From this background and from the Japanese success in a lot of fields of modern technologies stems a wider interest in having access to Japanese material and in having help to overcome the language barrier  . 
Die Inforaation stach no logie en dihr Einflu Oauf die Rusbildungind on UGR  . 
)is Graphgraamatik ale Gonerierungo-gerkzeug balm Vorstehenyon Rildern  . 
in Terminal mithochg or tigen Graphik-Funkti0non ~ desair sine see hr fach on rozass or raalister t gird  . 
Faktoran zur Beoin flussung vangartungen und Vorbesearunganu on Progromman  . 
Die Strukturdos Dialogszwiechan Sgstaa-Inganiaur und Saft ~ are-Inganlauro DisEntuicklung van gerkzau genzur Einach ~ tzunoder Vorarbeltungsleistung ? 
DerGt and punkt do sManagers.
EIn Entuurf , der BurBins Sprache zur Speziflkation van Cemputer harduaroabgoati wmtwird  . Die Falietudie beldar Simulation van Mlkro = Prozesaoren van BIt-SIIce-Typauf dar Ebone dec Regiater Obartragung  . 

III . tFrom Japanese to German via flTL flS/II and SE fl SYN  1  . SEMSYN-a Japanese/German translation system The project  SEMSYN-83 -SEMSYN is an acronym for SEM anticSYN the sis- has produced a system for the generation of German from semantic representations  . The combination of this generator with the ATLAS /g-System of the Japanese cooperation partner FUJITSU may be seen as the first Japanese to German translation system  . 
Die Soain flussung der Zuverl ~ is sigke it und dot Quel~t~tvan Software mitainsm Sgstem zur Untarst Otzung dar Entuicklungairulna = Computer  . 
4~29, B609=57=5 Z
The analysis of the Japanese input-currently at most titles of scientific papers from the field of information technology - and its transformation into the semantic representation is the task of ATLAS/II  . SEMSYN's part is to produce a correct and understandable German text for these semantic representations  . 
2 . The overall design of the SEMSYN-Sv stem SEMSYN's generation from  , FUJITSU's nets to German surface structures is done in three main steps  . 
The first step is to transform the semantic net delivered by FUJITSU into an expression of our own frame representation language-the socalled IKBS-descriptions  . IKBS stands for
I ' ( ( DEVELOP -- INST -> COflPUTER )   ( SUPPORT--OBJ->DEVEL OP )   ( SUPPORT--INST->SVSTEfl )   ( GIVE--INST ~> SYSTEM )   ( QUALITY--POSSESSOR->SOFTWARE )   ( RELIfl BILITV--ENUfl->QUALITY )   ( GIVE -- GOAL->RELIABILITV )   ( GIVE - - OBJ -> FlFFECT )   ( * NIL--ST->R F FECT ) ) Ill . : SEMSVN's interface with OTL flS/II ( TIT-gi ) Instantiated Knowledge Base Schemata . This transformation does not only lead to a more structured representation  , it helps as well to keep the generation modul somewhat independent from the special form of the FUJITSU interface  . 

The second - , and probably most important-step is to decide in which way the content of the semantic represen-tation should be uttered as German text  . The output of this step is a functional description of the intended utterance in grammatical terms ORS = Instantiated Realization Schema  )  . 
The IRS description completely determines the German output  . Its terminal elements are root forms of German words and their syntactic features  . 
: NG ( : HERO " Beoinflussunq " )   ( : FERTURE $ ( : gET DEF )   ( : NUOSG ) )  ( : POBSflTTR ( : NG ( : HERO ( : NO-CONJUNCT ( : NGS ( : NG ( : HERD " Zu verl ~ ssi ~ keit " )   ( tFERTUREB ( sNUffSG )   ( = DET DEF ) ) )   ( = NO ( : HERD " Quell = l = ' )   ( : FEATURES ( : NUM 86 )   ( IOET DEF ) ) ) )  ( : COBB " und " ) ) )   ( : FER rURES ( : gET DEF )   ( : NU fl PL ) )  ( : POSSRTTR ( : PG ( : PREP " yon " )   ( : POBJ ( : N6 ( : HERO " Software " )   ( : FERTURES ( : NUM SG )   ( : BETZERO ) ) ) ) ) ) ) )  ( : QUBLIFIERS ( : PG ( : PREP " mit " )   ( = POBJ ( : NG ( : HERO " Sq stem " )   ( : FEBTUREB ( : BETINDEF )   ( : COSDnT ) )  ( : POSSRTTR ( = PG ( : PREP " zu " )   ( : POBJ ( = NG ( ~ HERD " UnterstOtz unq " )   ( : FEflTUREB ( INUM SG )   ( ~ DET DEF ) )  ( = POSSBT TR ( : NG ( : HERD " EnL gicklunq " )   ( = FEBTUBEO ( : BET DEF )   ( : BUffSG ) )  ( : QUBLIFIERS ( = PG ( = PREP "= it " )   ( : POBJ ( : NG ( : HERD " Computer " )   ( : FEATURES ( : DETINDEF )   ( = CRSDRT ) ) )   )   )   )   )   )   )   )   )   )   )   )   )   )   ) 
I .: IRS-Deocription For TIT-B1
The third step-the generator-front-end SUTRA-S- -takes the IRS description and produces a corresponding syntactically and morphologically correct German surface structure  ( Emele & Momma ,  1985) . SUTRA-S is an extended reimplementation of the program SUTRA that has been developped by Busemann in the HAM-ANS project  ( Busemann ,  1982) . 
3 . Generation from frame descriptions 3 , 1 The frame description language The formal definition of SEMSYN's frame representation is as follows : < IKBS-DESCR > :::  ( A < FRAME-NAME > )   ( A < FRAME-NAME >
WITII . < SLOTS & FILLERS > )   ( THE < SLOT-NAME>FROM < IKBS-DESCR > ) < SLOTS & FILLERS > :== (   ( < SLOT-NAME >= < IKBS-DESCR > )   . . .   ) Conceptually we distinguish the following three main classes of frames :  1  . Case schemata for verb concepts or actions ( among these are all those frames that have case roles as slots  )  . 
2 . Concept schemata for noun concepts or " picture producers "  . 
3 . Relation schemata-ENUMERATION , PURPOSE- , SCOPE-
Relation etc.
( THE : OBJECT
FROm ( 0 GIVEgITlt ( : GOBL = ( fiNE RUMERflTIOR gITH ( : RRGL = ( RRELIABILITY )   ( AQUALITY ) )  ( : POSSESSOR = ( RBOFT gRRE ) ) ) )  ( : INSTRLIHENT = ( THE : INSTRUMENT
FROM(fl SUPPORT g ; (TH ( : OBJECT = ( n DEVELOP frITH ( : IN$TRUffERT = ( gCOMPUTER ) ) ) )  ( : INSTRUMENT = ( gSVSTEII ) ) ) ) )   ( : OBJECT = ( ANR FFECT ) ) ) ) Ill . ! Frome-Ooscr!pt ! on For TIT-BZ___With in this scope the repertoire of the semantic represen tat  ) on includes : -" classical " case roles ala Fillmore  ( agent , object , method , instrument source , goal . . . .  ) -roles for the further specification of actions ( manner , place , time . . . ) - roles for the further specification of concepts  ( name , concern , specialize . . . ) - ways to quantify and attribute concepts - modality  ( e . g . not , possible . . . ) . 
-conjunctive and disjunctive ENUMERATION.
3.2 Knowledgebases during generation
SEMSYN's main generation phase may be viewed as communication between two knowledge bases : General knowledge about principal possibilities for realizing the semantic structures - the so called realization schemata - and specific knowledge mainly about diverse possibilities for lexicalization of semantics vmbols  . The latter is stored within the semantic to German dictionary SLEX  ( R Osner ,  1986) . 
3.3 Object-oriented implementation
The general knowledge about possible realizations has been implemented using the FLA VOR system of the LISP machine  . 
The classes of tile frame representation correspond to flavor classes  . Realization schemata and the knowledge about the realization of roles are defined as flavor methods  . This object-oriented architecture has shown to be very flexible  . It supported experimenting with the system and its step-by-step improvement  3  . 4 Realization schemata Frame descriptions as used in SEMSYN are recurs  ) restructures and so is-in general-the control structure in SEMSYN's generation  , In other words : the same decisions have to be redone on each level of embedding  , tn embedded frames of course some decisions are already restricted by the context  . 
What will be the syntactic form of the text generated for such a frame ? At least for case schemata we have as first alternative the choice between the realization types : CLAUSE and : NG  ( noun group )  . For semantic structures from titles we used as default to generate a noun group  ( a toplevel case schema was lexicalised as noun )  . Only in a few cases we had titles that had to be generated as questions like " What is a model of  . . . ?' . 

If the general syntactic form has been decided upon  , there are more choices : a clause for example could be realized as an active or a passive clause  . Within a noun group the at-tribute could be realized as a relative clause or in the form of a prepositional group  . 
= NG as Title-Default =
Ole Baoinrlussung der Zuverltu slgke it und dar Quolttatvan Software matainu=System zur Unterst Utzung dar Entaicklung niteinom Computer  , = NG uith ~ PREFER-RELATIVE-CLAUSES*:Oia Boain Fluosung de PZuvarl ~ saig kait und darguallt & tvanSoL = w are Biteinem Systel pB it dam die Entgtcklung matainamComputar unterstGtztgird  . 
= CLAUSE in paeuive voice =
Die Zuverl ~ astgkait und die Quoltt ~ tvan So?tuara gird mitmiriam System zur Untarstetzung der Entuicklungmt to inemComputer beeinfluBt  . 
= CLAUS Eulthanonymous Agent =
Manbae inftuOt die Zuverl~s aigkatt und die Quotlt ? tvan Software mitainem System zur Unter at Utzuny dar Entuicklun  9 Bitalbum Computer . 
IlL : Different Realisations ror TIT-81
These decisions are done with respect to several factors  . 
One is the type of the actually filled roles . If a case schema for example has an : OBJECT , but no : AGENT , we prefer the passive construction in a clause realization  . On the other hand stylistic preferences could be another factor  . In the above case a preference could be to avoid passive  , so we would take the realization schema " ACTIVE with an anony musagent of " man '"  . 
In titles these preferences come from global switches  . In real text they could come from the context . 
3.5 Role realizations
For frames without roles - the socalled terminal structures - the realization is more or less the lexicalisation of the semantic symbol  . After this , process control and the produced IRS structure is given back to the surrounding frame or the top level  . 
If there are roles , there is some more work to be done . 
Some fillers of roles are realized as distinct structures of their own  ( most lv noun groups )  . They could be uttered for themselves . 
Other roles only lead to changes in the IRS structure of their frame :- decision about syntactic features : fillers of a:NUMBER role maye  . g . lead to the pluralization of the noun group of the modified frame  . 
-creation of noun compounds as head of the actual nominal group : the filler of a : NAME role may become a prefix  ( " alas SEM SYN-Projekt ' )  . This holds as well for the terminal filler of a : SPECIALIZE role  ( variant : realization as an adjective )  . A negative : MODALITY could-in a noun group realization-lead to the prefix " Nicht -'  . 
For those frames that have roles with realizations of their own this procedure recursively repeats for the frame descrip--tions of the fillers of those slots  . 
For realized role fillers it has to be decided how their IRS-structures hall be integrated in the overall structure  ( mostly as prepositional group ) and which syntactic features could additionally be inferred  . 
4. Inferring of missing information
SEMSYN's generation modul starts from a semantic representation that was designed to be language independent  . For the primitives used-especially for the semantic relations expressed by the arcs in the semantic net-this may be true  . 
On the other hand the data delivered to us bv FUJITSU are not really universal representations  . The fact that the semantic nets are derived from Japanese is recognizable if one looks at the information that is not explicitly represented  . 
In Japanese number or definiteness of nouns or t ime of verbs normally is not expressed- correspondingly our data do not have semantic correlates for these features  ( except in the rare case when they have been expressed in the Japanese original  )  . The Japanese reader infers the missing information from the context  . In titles there is no such context available . 
For correct and acceptable German on the other hand we need determiners and our nouns need a number  . Therefore we had to develop heuristics to reconstruct this information  . 
Some examples of such heuristics : - a nominalized case frame has to be realized with definite article in singular  ( " Die Generier un 9nat Qrlicher Sprache " )  . 
-the : OBJECT role of a nominalized case frame should be realized in definite and plural  ( " Die Generierung van Titelo ' )  , except in cases with an exception information in SLEX  ( " Die
Wartung van Software ").
-concepts that have a : NAME role will be realized definite and singular  ( " pie Fourier-Transformation " )  . 
If no heuristic is applicable and if no SLEX information is found we use as title defaults ' indefinite ' and ' singular '  ( " ~= n

5. Concluding remarks
Our current concern is to broaden the applicabil ity of SEMSYN's generator for German : On the one hand we are experimenting with the generation of full texts  ( e . g , newspaper stories ) , on the other hand we are extending the repert oir e offeasible semantic structures that mav serve as input for the generator  . 

S EMSYN-83 has been funded by the West German Ministry for Research and Technology  ( BMFT ) from July 1983 till February 1986 . Special thanks to all the colleagues that col- laborated-for shorter or longer periods - within this project : Kenji Hanakata  , Joachim Laubsch , Arek Lesniewki and Shoichi


Busemann , S .   ( 1982 ) " Problemeder automatischen Generierung deutscher Sprache "  , HAM-ANS Memo8 , 
Universit ~ tHamburg
Emele , M . & S . Mamma ( 1985 ) " SUTRA-S-Er we iter ungeneines Generator-Front -Ends fuerd as SEM SYN-Projekt '  , Studienarbeit , Inst . f . Informatik , Univ . Stuttgart Laubsch , J . , R Ssner , D . , Hanakata , K . , Lesniewski , A .   ( 1984 ) " Language Generation from Conceptual Structure : Synthesis of German in a Japanese/German MT Project "  , in : COLING-84 , 
Proceedings , Stanford
R Ssner , D .   ( 1986 ) " SEMSYN-W is sensquellen und Strategien beider Generierung van Deutschausember semantischen Repr ~ isentation '  , in : Batori & Weber ( Eds . ) Neue Ans~itze in Maschineller SprachUbersetzung : Wissensrepr~sentation und Textbezug '  , Niemever Verlag , T ( ~ bingen Uchida , H . & K . Sugiyama ( 1980 ) " A machine translation system from Japanese into English based on conceptual structure "  , in : COLING-80 , Proceedings , Tokvo , S .  455-462
