A Compositional Semantics for Directional Modifiers 
-Locative Case Reopened-
Erhard W . Hinrichs
Bolt Beranek & Newman Laboratories
I . Abstract
This paper pre , ' Jents a model theoretic semantics for directional modifiers in English  . The semantic theory presupposed for the analysis is that of Montague Grammar  ( cf . Montague 1970 ,  1973 ) which makes it possible to develop a strongly compositional treatment of directional modifiers  , Such a treatment has significant computational advantages over case-based treatments of directional modifiers that are advocated in the A ! literature  . 
2. Case-based Treatments
Among natural language processing systems which attempt to incorporate spatial information  , the following strategy seems to prevail . Directional or locative modifiers are treated either as corresponding to slots in case "/ rames in the canonical lexical representations of verbs  ( cf . Celce 1972 , Hendrix , Thompson and Slocum 1973) , or as corresponding to conceptual cases in the ( meta-linguistic ) conceptualization of actions ( Schank 1975 )  . 
Casebased approaches to the semantics of direct ional modifiers can be characterized as weak ly compositional in the following sense : In a verb phrase such as fly to Chicago the preposi tional phrase contributes semantically the meaning of the NP Chicago ' as the direction a lor locative goal of the action associated with ~  . he verb phrase . However , the directional preposition to itself does not make a semantic contribution at all to the meaning of the verb phrase as a whole  . Instead , to merely serves as a syntactic marker for a semantic entity  , namely a locative or directional case whose meaning cannot be separated from  , but rather is an integral part of a given verb frame or conceptual structure  . By contrast , the semantics of directional modifiers that I will be advocating in this paper is strongly csm positional in the sense that directional prepositions serve as autonomous syntactic and semantic units  . Consequently , each word in a phrase such as fly to Chicago contributes its own  , independent meaning to the meaning of the phrase as a whole  . 
This strongly compositional analysis of directional modifiers has a number of crucial computational advantages over case-based approaches  . Consider how inferences between sentences such as  ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) can be handled by the two types of approaches . 
(I ) Johnwent to New York.
(2) John was in New York.
In Schank (1975, p . 53 ) sentence ( I ) corresponds to the conceptual structure in ( 3 )  . 
(3)\[~ New York
John ~-% - ~ PIRAte ~ Johne - ~- ~
L . X ( 3 ) be should read as : " John is at some time in the past  ( p ) engaged in an act of physical transfer ( PTRANS ) whose object ( o ) is John and whose direction ( D ) is from some location X to New York . " The fact that ( 1 ) implies ( 2 ) is expressed by attaching to the bi-direc tional arrow in  ( 3  )   . the structure in (4) . ( of . Schank 1975, p . 54) (4) John ~ LOC(N . Y . ) Schank calls the r-lin/c ( v for result ) between structures ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) an inference . However , the term inference is really a misnomer because the association between structures such as  ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) is merely a matter of stipulation but does not follow from any general principles or axioms that would constrain the language of conceptual structures  . For that matter , there is nothing in Schank's system that prevents a link between  ( 3 ) end a structure which expresses that John does not reach the location New York  . In the analysis we will develop below , on the other hand , the inference between ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) follows logically from the semantics of motion verbs such as go in conjunction with the semantics of directional modifiers  , Consider next the issue of how easy or difficult it is to upscale natural language systems whose treatment of directional modifiers is case- based  . Assume a case-based system in which only those verbal frames or conceptual structures are implemented that relate locative or direct ional case to verbs of motion  . Now imagine that we ! want to extend coverage to verbs such as wave which  , as illustrated in (5) , allow directional modifiers such as to , (5) The President waved to the reporters . 
Since wave , unlike verbs of motion , does not entail a change of location for the agent involved  , a new verbal frame or conceptual structure would have to be introduced into a system which only covers motion verbs  . Moreover , locative or directional case would have to be reintroduced into the system as well because in a case-based system the specific effect of a given semantic case has to be determined for each m dividual frame or conceptual structure  . This is a direct consequence of the weakly compositional semantics of suctl systems and in turn leads to an highly redundant method of upscaling  . Since my analysis of directional modifiers is  , by contrast , strongly compositional , upscaling becomes much easier . In the case of extending coverage to a verb like wave  , all that needs to be added is the lexical semant ics for the w  . ~ r b itself , while the semantics of directional modif iers can remain untouched  . 
Finally , consider how a case-based approach to direct ional modifiers fares with respect to phrases such as the ones given m  ( 6 )  . 
(6) From Russia with Love
To New York and then to Atlanta
Since in case-based systems locative or directional case is a relational notion and is crucially dependent on a verbal frarae or conceptual structure  , it becomes impossible to assign an interpret at iont overbless phrases as in  ( 6 )  . One strategy for extending case-based systems to such verbless phrases would consist in supplementing the relational notion of di rectional or locative case by a non-relat ional counterpart which does not depend on some verbal frame or conceptual structure  . But the resulting account of locative or di rectional case would once again be highly redundant since essentially all of the cases in the system wouh i have to be split into are lational and a non-relational version  . 
2, Motion Verbs as Location Predicates
In their literal sense , locative use to and to Zvavd typically modify motion verbs such as wal ~  , ru  ~ , drive , slither , move etc . An adequate treatment of the directional modifiers themselves is  , therefore , closely connected to a semantic account of such motion verbs  . In Hinrichs ( 1985 ) I argue that motion verbs should be treated as stage level predicates in the sense of Carls on  ( 1977 )  , namely as predicates whose arguments refer to s tages of individuals  . Stages are connected to individuals in Carls on's ontology by a realization relation R  , which associates a given individual with all of the  ( spoils-temporal ) stages at which that individual is present . 
Motion verbs such as move can be understood as prototypical examples of stage-level pred icates  , since such verbs predicate something about the spatio-  . -temporal location of one or more objects . Following Hiurichs (1985) , I interpret a motion verb like move in terms of a three-place stage level predicate move +  , whose first two argument positions range over individual stages realizing th ~ referents of the object and subject NPs  , respectively . Fallo ~ ing Davidson (1977) , the rightmcstargument position r~n ~ , es over events , or more specifically over even l and object NPs are engaged in  . Thus , move + ( xs )   ( ys )   ( es ) should be read as : " the referents of xs and ys are engaged in an event stage es realizing an event of moving  . " As is customary in Montague Grammar , I express constraints on lexical meaning in terms of meaning postulates that constrain the set of possible models of semantic interpret at ion ? The meaning postulate in  ( 7 ) states that an event stagees which realizes a moving event spatio-temporally includes  ( symbolized as K ) at least the location of the referent denoted by the object argument  , i . e . ySKes . 
This does not exclude the possibility that the location of the referent of the subject NP can be contained in the event stage as well  , but this is not required for move , as (8) shows . 
(7) VxS , yS , e "\[ move + ( xS ) (yS ) ( es ) ---> yS~es\] ( 8 ) John moved the troops . 
Of course , different motion verbs will have different properties with respect to how the locations of the event stages relate to the stages that realize the individuals involved in these event stages  . Consider verbs likes lither , walk , and run which in my framework are analyzed as two -place stage level predicates  . For these predicates the location of the event stage is equal to the location of the agent  , i . e . the referent of the subject NP . This can be enforced by a meaning postulate as in  ( 9 )  . 
(9) VxS , es\[8+(xS)(es)-->xS = es\] , where ~ translates slither , walk , run , etc .   . 
The lexical entailment associated with the verb move to the effect that the location of the referent of the object NP changes can be captured by the meaning postulate in  ( 10 )  .   ( The symbol s < and #~ used in ( 10 ) stand for temporal precedence and spatial inequality  , respectively . )(10) VeS , x~ , y" , x ?\[ R(x  ~ , x ?) & move +( x ~)( y ~)( e ~) --> ax ~\[ R(x ~ , x ?) & x ~ < x ~ & x ~ ~ . x ~\] 3 , The Semantics of to and toward Now Ileta t0-phrase   , as a modifier of untensed verb phrases ( IV *) , operate semantically on the event stages in the denotation of the unmodified verb phrase in such way that the event stages in the denotation of the resulting IV * phrase constitute a spatio -temporal path  ( in the sense of Cress well 1978 ) between some specified point of origin to the location of the term combining with to  . The translation of to is given in (11) . 
(11 ) to translates as XPXPXllXXiP\[kyIS12\[R ( 12 , Yi ) &
PATH(il , lr , 12) & P(xi ) ( ll)\]\]
The formula following the lambda abstractions in ( 11 ) introduces an individual stage /2 realizing an individual object yi which is the one bound by the noun phrase  ( NP ) combining with to to form the IV * modifier . The second conjunct in the formula asserts that the denotation of the event stage located at l  1  , which is to be bound by the translation of the IV * phrase that the to-phrase combines with  , qualifies as a spatio-temporal path ( a notion formally defined in Hinrichs 1985 ) between some point of origin Ir and the spatio -temporal location of the point of dest in at ion  . Finally , the third conjunct asserts the truth of the unmodified IV * phrase that the to-phrase combines with  . It is this last conjunct that automatically guarantees the inference from sentence such as  ( 12 ) to sentence such as ( 13 )  . 
(12) Fangs slithered to the rock.
(13) Fangs slithered.
Using the translation for to suggested in (11) , sentence ( 12 ) receives the reduced translation in ( 14 ) according to my analysis . 
1Al l the meaning postu la tes appear ing in th i s paper ore formulated In the language of extensional logic developed in Hinrichs  ( 1985 )  , (14) ~ Iea , ei\[R(eS , ei ) & PAST ( e5) & 3xe\[R(xS , f)&2 x?V z?\[roek'(z ?) & ~ za\[R(zS , z ?) & slither '( x e )( es)&
PXTH(eS,lr,ZS)\]~x ?= z?\]\]
Paraphrasing (14) , it says that there is an event stage realizing some individual event of Fangs's lithering such that that event stage lies in the past and the spatio-temporal location of the event stage constitutes a path between some implicit point of reference lr and the location of some unique rock object  . The point of reference lr occurs as a free variable in the formula in  ( 14 )  ; lr is to be understood as an indexical parameter similar to the notion of a reference point proposed by Reichenbach  ( 1947 ) for the interpretation of tenses in English . 
Notice that the notion of a path in the translat ion of to in  ( 11 ) and hence also in the translation for ( 12 ) given in ( 14 ) is defined to hold of the process making up a particular event  . Moreover , due to the postulate in (9) , the referent of the subject NP , when it combines with a motion verb such as sli the r to the rock  , is realized by a stage spatio-temporally co -extensive to the path denoted by the to phrase  . This fact guarantees the inference between sentence such as  ( 12 ) and ( 15 )  . 
(15) Fangs was at the rock.
For other classes of verbs the same type of inference  , namely identifying the path with the position ( s ) of the referent of the subject NP , cannot be drawn . For sentences such as ( 16 ) we do not want to claim that the stages realiz ing John make up a path to Boston  . Rather it is the object NP , in this case an event term , that constitutes the path . The same is true of (17) ; it is the ball whose locations constitute a path to the location specified in the to- phrase  . 
(16) John made a phone call to Boston.
(17) Carol set the ball to Lucy.
Let us now turn to the treatment of the preposit ion toward whose lexical translation rule is given in  ( 18 )  . 
(18 ) toward translates ask PkP keakxl P ( kyI31\[R ( l , yi)&31'\[PATH(I' , lr , \])) & es_< , 1'& Ir < es & P ( xi )   ( eS )  \ ] \ ]  ) The translation for toward constrains the value of the event stage variabless in such a way that es has to be spatio-temporally contained in some initial segment of a path l ' from some implicit point of origin Ir to the location I of the referent  . 
of the NP with which toward . The requirement hat the value of es has to be an initial segment of such a path follows from the condition that the implicit point of origin Ir has to be properly contained in es  . Proper containment is necessary in order to avoid that the value of es could be equal to the point of origin  , in which case an object could count as moving toward another object if the spatial location of the first object remains unchanged  . 
Using (18), sentence (19) is translated as in (20) . 
(19) Fangs slithered toward the rock.
(20) 3eS , ei\[R(ee , ei)&PAST(es)&3x~\[R(xa , f ) & ~ x?\[Vz?\[rock ' ( z ? ) <--> xO=zo\]&3 za\[R ( ze , z ?) & slither '( xS , es)&31\[PATH(1 , 1r , Zs ) & es_~ 1  &  1 r < eS\]\]\]\]\] The translation in ( E 0 ) says that there is an event stage realizing some individual event of Fangs's lithering such that that event stage lies in the past and the spatio-temporal location of the event stage constitutes the initial part of a path between some implicit point of reference Ir and the location of some unique rock object  . Sincees in ( 20 ) is an initial part of a complete path to the rock  , the truth of a sentence such as ( 12 ) entails the truth of ( 19 )  , but not vice versa . Moreover , (12), but not (19), entails (15) . 
4 . The Aspeetual Effect of to and toward Apart from supporting the relevant inference pat terns between sentence such as  ( 12 )  , (15) and (19) , an adequate analysis of to and toward should also account for a systematic difference in Sentences such as  ( 21 a ) which involve the preposition to describe atel is events or  , in the terminology of Vendler (1967) , activities . 
Sentences such as (21b ) , on the other hand , refer to telic events or to accomplishments in Vendler's classification  , (21) a . John walked to the library . 
b . John walked toward the library.
These a speetual properties can be demonstra ted by examining the cooccurrenee restrict ions of the sentences in  ( 21 ) with temporal modifiers such as in an hour as in  ( 22 ) and with for an hour as in ( 23 )  . 
(22) a . John walked to tile library in an hour.
b . * John walked toward the library in an hour.
(23) a . Johu walked to the library for an hour.
b . Jo hu walked toward the library for an hour.
As first pointed out by Vendler , only relic events or accomplishments can occur with temporal modifiers such as in an hour  . Modifiers such as for an hour can occur with both activities and accomplishments  . However , when modified by temporal for , only activities as in ( 23 a ) can be interpreted as describing a single event  . If temporal for occurs with sentences that descr i be accomplishments as in  ( 23b )  , such sentences have to be interpreted in some special fashion to make them semantically acceptable  , (23b ) , for example , can best be understood as referring to an ite rative event  , namely of John's repeatedly walking to the l ibrary during the period of one hour  , Since doing something for x amount of time means doing something during most if not all sub intervals of the interval x  , sentence such as (24) , which refer to a telic events or activities , can be characterized as being temporally homogeneous  . 
(24) Fangs slithered toward the rock.
To do something in x amount of time , on the other hand , means to do something at some unique interval within x  . Since relic events or accomplishments can be modified by temporal in  , they , in contrast to activities or a telic events  , can be described as being temporally heterogeneous : telic events such as  ( 25 ) come about overtile course of some unique time interval I '  , i , e . not at some subinterval of I ' or at some in terval properly containing I '  . 
(25) Fangs slithered to the rock.
If my analysis of directional toward and to is an adequate one  , it should predict that verb phrases formed with directional toward refer to temporally homogeneous events  , while verb phrases formed with to refer to temporally hcterogenous events  , Due to the way in which I have defined toward as an initial subpart of a path to the projected point of destination  , the reference property of temporal homogeneity associated with toward can  , in fact , be reconstructed in the following way . Let us assume that there is a location It which qualifies as an initial segment of a path from a putative point of originrt to a dest ination d  . 
Moreover , let us assume that r2 , the temporally final bound of l / , is in turn the temporally initial bound for alocation  12 which forms the intial part of a path from r 2 to d . Then it follows that lf+l2 , the spatio-temporal sum of lt and l2 , is also an initial segment of a path from rI to d  . This is precisely what is required to stake the semantics of toward homogeneous  . 
Since my account of motion verbs and directional toward does predict that sentences such as  ( 26 ) correspond to a telic and semantically homogeneous events  , my analysis can support inferences from sentences such as  ( 26 ) to sentences such as ( 27 )  . 
(26 ) United Flight 342 has moved toward Logan Airport for the last fif teen minutes  . 
(27 ) United Flight 342 moved toward Logan Airport ten minutes ago . 
Inference patterns between sentences such as ( 26 ) and ( 27 ) are , in fact , highly relevant for database interface systems that process spatial information  . Imagine that sentence ( 26 ) is presented to a database that monitors plane movements  . If the system does not have the capability to infer that the event described in  ( 26 ) is true at any subinterval of the fifteen minutes mentioned in  ( 26 )  , the United flight in question would erroneous ly not be counted when the answer to a subsequent query such as  ( 28 ) is computed . 
(28 ) How many planes moved toward Logan Airportten minutes ago ? If we compare the semantics of toward with the semantics of to as defined in  ( 11 )  , it turns out that to is heterogeneous in its re ference in the same way as accomplishments  . Recall that the semantics of to is defined in terms of a complete path between a point of or ig in and a point of destination  , Since for any given path there do not exist any sublocations within that path that themselves would qualify as a path between the same two locations  , the heterogeneons reference property of to follows automatically  . 
5. Conclusion
In order to make an even stronger case in favor of my analysis of directional modifiers  , I would have to demonstrate how it can be genera lized to locative prepositions other than to and toward  . 
Even though I cannot discuss this issue in detail in the present paper  , I should like to point out in conclusion that the notion of a PATH plays an important role in the treatment of other directional prepos itions such as between  , along and across . In the case of across the path seems to be bounded by two locations on tile peripherie of the referent of the NP across is combined with  ; i . e . across the meadow specifies some path extending from one end of the mead ow to the other  , Notice , however , that the two locations that mark the two endpoints of such a path cannot be chosen arbit rarily but in some sense have to be " opposite each other "  . Undoubtedly , various pragmatic considerations enter the p icture if one wants to make this requirement of oppositeness formally more precise  . Thus , it appears that the notion of a path has to be complemented by additional constraints  , if one wants to account for semantically store complex prepositions such as across  , Even though I will have to leave the formulation of such additional constraints to future research  , it should be obvious from these brief remarks that the notion of a path is a central notion for the semantics of directional modifiers in general  ,  6 . List of References Carlson , Gregory N .  (1977) . Reference to Kinds in ~ . 
University of Massachusetts dissertation.
Celce-Murcia , M .  (1972) . P ~ rad ~ for Sentence Recognition . 
Technical Report HRT-15092/7907 . System Development
Corporation . Santa Monica , CA.
Cresswell , Maxwell (1978) . ' Prepositions and Points of View ' . 
Lin~istics and Philos Qp_hz Vol . 2.1, pp . 141.
Davidson , Donald (1967) . ' The Logical Form of Action Sentences ' . 
In : Reacher , Nicholased . The Lo ~ of Decision and Action . 
Pittsburgh : University of Pittsburgh Press , pp .  81-95 . 
Hendrix , Gary , Craig Thompson , and Jonathan Slocum (1973) . 
' Language Processing via Canonical Verbs and Semantic 
Models '. Proceedings of IJCAI-73.
Hinrichs , Erhard (1985) . A Compositional Semantics for Aktionsarten and NP Reference m ~  . Ph . D . 
dissertation , Ohio State University.
Montague , Richard (1970) . ' Universal Grammar ' . Theoria 38, pp . 

Montague , Richard (1973) . ' The Proper Treatment of Quantification in Ordinary English '  , In : Hintikka , J . , J . Moravcsik , and P . Suppesads , A ~ proaches to Natural ~ . Reideh Dordrecht . 
Reichenbach , Hans (1947) . Elements of ~~, Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Schank , Roger (1975) . Con_~?'e~tual Information Processing . 
North-Holland : New York.
Vendler , Zeno (1967) . ~ uistics in Philos ____ ? op_hz . Ithaca : Cornell
University Press.

