Acquisition of Kowledge Data by Analyzing Natural Language 
Yasuhito Tanaka
Himeji College
I-\]-12 Shinzaike Honmachi
Himeji City Hyogoken
670 JAPAN
Sho Yoshida
Kyushu University
6-10-I Hakozaki Iigashiku
Fukuoka City Fukuokaken
812 JAPAN
I . Introduction
Automatic identification of homonyms in kana-to -kanji conversions systems and of multivocal words in machine translation systems cannot be sufficiently implemented by the mere combination of grammer and word dictionaries  . This calls for a new concept of knowledge data . What the new knowledge data is and how it can be acquired are mentioned in the paper  . 
In natural language research , active discussion has been make within the framework of knowledge and samples of knowledge  . 
2. Phases of Natural Language Study and Knowledge
Data\[phase1\]
In the initial phase when natural language had not been fully clarified j the authors made an attempt to analyze the language with the help of word dictionaries and grammar alone  , and to build a new system from the results . We , however , encountered a great number of homonyms in kana-to -kanji conversion  , as well as multivocal words and other problems in machine translation  . This was because the grammar and dictionaries were too simple  . In other words , wi+/T ( ~ i ) where ~ i is a word and/T is a conversion system  . 
\[ phase2\]
There are some possible means for solving the problems encountered in Phasei  . They include the following : analyze the word frequency  , limit the number of words in use , limit the contents of the words in use , limit the fields and limit sentences . 
This helps remove , or at least minimize , homonyms , multivoeal words and ambiguities . A system with limitations , however , involves too many difficulties to be readily accepted  . 
\[ phase 3\]
In vocabulary , no words are used independently.
One should define and use words by clarifying the characteristics  , coverage and conditions of words . 
This may be expressed as follows : ~ iIPiI ' Pi2 ' Pi ~' . . . . . ' Pin?/T ( ~ iIPil ' Pi 2 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . Pin ) = yj where ~ i is a word ; and Pil ' Pi2' . . . . . ' Pin are the limitations of ~ i " The set of Pil  '   Pi2  ~  . . . . . ' Pin should be low in number and simple . 
Different approaches have already been proposed as to what is necessary for clarifying the conditions for the coverage of words in Phase  3  . Some examples are semantic markers , semantic categories and thesaurus . However , the author ~ put emphasis on the relationship of words  , though recognizing such other forms of approach . 
\[ Knowledge Obtained from Words\]
Words and sentences provide knowledge shown in Table I  , from simple to complicated in order . How much of them are usable as dictionaries ( books ) ? How much are usable as machine-readable dictionaries ? In Table I  , machine-readable dictionaries have already been established for I  . " Word-related Attributes " . Classified vocabulary lists have been prepared for Thesaurus Structure in  2~ but there is almost nothing for the other attributes  . 
Therefore , an attempt to build a sophisticated system would be unsuccessful if no basic knowledge data is available  . 

Table I . Knowledge Obtained from Words \] Word-Related Attributes  1  . 1 Word Attributes Words , parts of speech , pronunciation , accent and k an a representation 1 . 2 Long Unit Words and Technical Terms 2 Word-to-Word Attributes ( 1 )   ( Preconditions )  2 . 1 Broader/Narrower Rank Relationship ( Thesaurus
Structure ) 2 . 2 Antonyms and Negatives 2 . 3 Partial/Whole Relationship 2 . 4 Sequential Relationship 2 . 5 Comparative Relationship ( size , height ) 3 Word-to-Word Attributes ( 2 )   ( Preconditions )  3 . \] Case Relationship 3 . 2 Relationship Based on the Synchronism of
Sentence Components 3 . 3 Idiomatic Expressions 4Word-to-Word Attributes ( 3 )   ( Preconditions )  4 . 1 Association-Based Relationship 5 Sentence Relationship 5  . \] Sentence-to-Word Relationship 5 . 2 Sentence-to-Sentence Linkage 3 . Is it Possible to Define Word Coverage and

Since every word may be linked with an infinite number of words  , one may wonder if it is impossible to define word coverage and conditions  . It would also take a great deal of time and trouble to examine all the words that are almost infinite in number  . 
If , however , one actually examines some of tlle words , we will fine that every word is linked with a limited number of words  . 
Table 2 . Each Word is Linked with a Limited Number of Words  001 Denwaokakeru 0\]8 Denwaomigaku 002 Denwaokiru 0\]9 Denwaoukeru 003 Denwao mochiager u 020 Denwaotochosuru 004 Denwaoko wasu 02l Denwaokakenaosu 005 Denwaonigiru 022 Denwaomotsu 006 Denwaomotsu 023 Denwaomotaseru 007 Denwaokairyosuru 024 Denwaokiku 008 Denwaotsukuru 025 Denwaganaru 009 Denwaose is a kusuru 026 Denwaotsutaeru 0\]0 Denwaokumitateru 027 Denwadehanasu 0  ; I Denwaokai setsusuru 028 Denwa derenrakusuru 012 Denwaohiku 029 Denwanideru 013 Denwaotekkyosuru 030 Denwanokoe 014 Denwaouru 03\] Denwanobuhin 015 Denwao hanbaisuru 032 Denwanokane 016 Denwaokau 033 Denwanoryokin 017 Denwaokonyusuru 034 Denwanoberuoo , o ? i ,   ,   ,   ,   , o ? o ,   , ? Take the word , " denwa " ( meaning telephone in English ) as example , lit has a limited number of characteristics such as a means of communication  , a substance , a place , and so on . The function as a means of eo~imnication and the characteristics of tile telephone are unique to the telephone  . 
In this particular meaning , it is a simple and finite task to count the different relationships between words  . It is , however , extremely difficult to count the word-to-word relationships for the general meanings such as a substance and a place  . 
However , it is possible to organize the major relationships without much effort  . 
The only approach would be totabulate the words having peculiar relationship to specific words and the relationship between specific words and words of high usage frequency  , and thus use system-preset defaults for other words  . 
Such words as " takai " ( meaning high ) and " utsukushii " ( meaning beautiful ) are used frequently . 
In some cases , therefore , it is difficult to determine the coverage and conditions of individual words  . 
Such cases must include general grammar and the meaning of words most frequently used in " takai " and " utsukushii " must be defined in the word -to-word relationships together with the conditions of any special meanings of high and beautiful  . Words of low frequency and high frequency are dependent on individual rules  ( conditions based on word-to-word relationship ) and general grammar . 
4 , A quisition of Knowledge data 41 Method by extracting and segmenting Kanjistr ings Authors and S  . Mizutani of Tokyo Women's Christian College mechanically extracted the four-character kanji strings from some JICST abstract files  , extracted meaningful concept co ~ ) inations from them ~ and classified them into 45 categories . Thus , after examing 78 , 000 four character kanji strings ,  28 , 0 00 different kinds of knowledge data was obtained from  32  , 000 types of kanji strings in net . This approach is promising because it allows easy expansion in quantity and consists mainly of mechanical processing  . 
In addition , an attempt to reorganize a total of 887 , 000 data ,  200 , 000 innet , is underway . An atten~t to apply the same idea to the three and five character kanji strings is also being made  . 
449 Example \]
T~/~Pv@:~.~T~Pv ~-? ~ J ~
Tga/o Pvkai cho-jin in Tniyori Pvshaahin-hantei 42 A quisition of knowledge data based on word-to -word synchronism In this ease  , Japanese sentences should be analyzed to extract connections and obrain knowledge data  . Analysis , however , takes a great deal of time and involves ambiguity  . This suggests an approach which simply extracts independent words handles them  , if present in the same sentences , as candidates for knowledge data because of mutual relation  , and extracts meaningful knowledge data based on frequency and manual procedure  . 
\[ Example\]
A boyth rows aball.
boy throws b ~ i I throws boyball
To extract such re ~ . ships and reorganize them sequentially . 
4 3 A quisition of knowledge by syntax analysis This is a method which analyzes the sentences that are input with word dictionaries and grammar  , builds syntax element & ~ extracts connections from them  , and thus , extracts knowledge data . This method is theoretically pertinent but not practical because it leaves the problem of a tremendous increasing number of syntax trees  . It would be very effective if a great amount of knowledge data were available and some of the ambiguities from syntax analysis were reduced  . Since , in Japanese sentences , long-unit terms are used as they are , it is also necessary to subcategorize them automatically  . 
Otherwise , a variety of knowledge data would result and it would be trouble some to systematize knowledge data  . 
X X daigaku ( university) , XY daigaku ~% daigaku general terms basic concept term This sort of concept was presented by some manufacturers engaged in the research and development of machine translation  . It is however only in the planning stage . There has been no news reporting
Fig .  2 . Method of Obtaining Knowledge by Syntax Analysis llnput Japanese\[sentences\]-F ~ educe Build a ~ nalReduce amblgultles !\] ~ ies ~" " treesys is ~! o ~ n latl ' 
It . . . . . .
Inspect obtained \] knowledge "\] 5 . Applications of Knowledge Data ( I ) To develop high quality Japanese word processors . 
(2) To improve the quality of machine translation.
(3) To reduce the ambiguities of syntax analysis.
(4 ) To apply knowledge data in handwritten character and voice recognition  . 
6. Conclusion
The systemization , a quisition and construction of knowledge data are a step towards the next jump in Japanese processing systems  . Indeed , the knowledge data still has a number of problems to be solved  , but prospects for the future are rather bright . 
References ( l ) In anaga & Konishi , Terms for Computer-Based Processing of Kana Characters AL  76-39   ( in Japanese )  . Material of Engineering Workshop of Electronic Communications Society  , 1976 (2) Shizuo Mizutani , Overview of Word Structure ( in Japanese) . Iwanami Japanese Language Dictionary ( 3rd Edition )  , March 1980(3) Masaaki Yamanashi , Meaning and Knowledge Structure : Theoretical Study of Meaning Expression Models from Linguistics  ( in Japanese )  . 
Mathematical Science No . 240, June 1983.
