KINDTYPESINKNOWLED GEREPRESENTATION
K . Dahlgren
IBH Los Angeles Scientific Center
11601 Wilshiro B1.
Los Angeles , California 90025
J . McDowell
Department of Linguistics
University of Southern California
Los Angeles , California 90089
Abstract Tiffspaper describes Kind Types ( KT ) , a system which uses common sense knowledge to reason about natural anguage text  . KT encodes some of the knowledge underlying natural anguage understanding  , including category distinctions and descriptions dlffer cntiating realworld objects  , states and events . It embeds an ontology reflecting the ordinary person's toplevel cognitive model of realworld distinctions and a database of prototype descriptions of realworld entities  . KT is transportable , empirl cally-based and constrained for efficient reasoning in ways similar to human reasoning processes  . 
I . The problem A model of the semantic knowledge of concepts underlying natural anguage is definitional rather than assert lonal in that it contains general descriptions of objects and their relations  , as opposed to facts about specific objects ( Levesque 84 ) iPart of competence in English is the knowledge that a nelephant is an animal  , and therefore it moves on its own . Competence also involves knowing particular things about elephants  , uchas that they have trunks . This general description of the elej ~ hant concept is part of common sense knowledge and belief  . 
We will call this the cognitive model . In order to implement it , a computer system must represent what speakers of a language believe about the world and their named concepts  , rather than represent heactual world . A complete computer model of the cognitive model would represent the common sense conceptual scheme presupposed by a particular culture and language  , in tb is case , urban American English , Knowledge of a natural anguage implies knowledge of a kind of theory of the environment used by a culture  . In learning a language a child learns the category cuts recognized in that theory fBerl in  72l I Dou?herty 7g   )  . Assuming that knowledge of word meaning is not differently represented than other kinds of knowledge  ( Tarnawsky 82 )  , KT is designed to encode the world viewem bodied in natural language as ordinary knowledge  , while retaining the autonomy of combinatorial semantics and of syntax  . KT does not provide all the meaning , but it yields an interest ~ ing and transportable portion of it  . 
The work reported here addresses two major problems  . First , the knowledge associated with a concept does not always give necessary and sufficient conditions for deciding whether an object falls under the concept name  . The problem is to find a systematic way of predicting which concepts can be reasoned about using first order logic directly and simply  ( as a conjunction of predicates ) and which ones require default logic . 
Second , the cognitive model models the actual world , which is open and continuous ( Hayes 85) . The potential concepts and relations between them are infinite  . Nevertheless , humans manage to reason without cognitive overload  . Can the computer model be systematically constrained using predictions paralleling those employed by humans in reasoning about the actual  world7 Consider the following database of facts ( assertions ) and axioms ( definitions )  . The language used is irrelevant ; any system isomorphic to first order logic will have the same deficiency  . 
l ) FACTS


Student of ( mary , john).
Teacher of ( john , mary).

V x Teacher(x ) ~ Human(x).
Vx ~ tyTeacher(x ) ~ Teacher of(y , x).
A question-answering system with the above database of facts and to answer  ( 3 )  . 
2) Does Mary have a student ?
Who is Mary's student7
Is Mary human ?3) Is Mary touchable ?
CanMary move himse If about 7
What does Mary do ?
Are John and Mary part of an institution ? The questions in  ( 3 ) can be answered by a system which has a taxonomic hierarchy with features at the nodes  , such as KL-ONE ( Brachman and Schmolze 1985) . If Mary is human , Mary is physical object , which has the feature " touchable " . Similarly , since Mary is an animal , she can move herself about . KT employs such a taxonomy , and it is called an ontology to reflect the fact that KT reasons with such information as though it were true and complete  , in contrast to generic information whicl is probabilistle  . The ontology is is unique to KT and is based upon results in cognitive psychology  , linguistics and philosophy . 
Another deficiency of tile database in ( l ) is that it knows nothing about John , Mary and their relationship , even though English speaker share descriptions of the typical objects in the sets defined by the predicates Human  , Teacher and Student . For example , it would be desire a bloif the system could respond as follows:  4  ) IsMary intelligent ? -- Probably so . 
IsMary articulate 7 -- Probably so.
Does John listen to Mary 7--Probably so.
lsMary educated ?-- Inherently so.
What does Mary do ? -- Inherently , teaches.
The questions in ( 4 ) reflec the kind of things that average people think of when confronted with the predicates  ( 1 )   ( Dahgren 85 )  . Why not have the AI system infer similarly ? In order for such information to be useful  , the system needs to know that " intelligent " is a probabilistic feature associated with the predicate Teacher  . Therefore , if to ld~lntelligent ( mary ) it should be able to reason that ( 5 ) while reasoning that ( 6 ) is definitely inconsistent . 
5 ) ~lntelllgent ( mary ) A Teacher ( mary )  6 )   ( Remainder ( X/2 )  = 0 ) A Odd number ( X ) A system needs the capacity to reason with prototype information assn-elated with concepts  . But the vastness of such information is an obstacle to its use in common senser as oning systems  . The strategy employed in the KT system is to take advantage of the high degree of structure in prototype information in order to constrain it  . Different types of kinds , such as artifacts , natural kinds and persons , are associated with predict-ably differentypes of information  , and KT exploits these constraints . 
II . Diversity in the Lezicpt / The task of representing meaning for sorts  ( common nouns ) attd predicates ( verbs and adjectives ) themselves , has been impeded by several philosophical problems which are yet to be resolved  . The traditional approach , decomposition i to conjunctions of other predicates  , is notoriously defective . There is no principled way to select or limit the number of other predicates  . Suppose the meaning of a ~ n ~ N_ le is represented as  ( 7 )  . 
7) Apple -~ . Fruit ( P , edVGreen ) Al ' , otmd A Sizel0 Why not add Grows on trces ? The proposal to justify the addition of fur-thor predicates by the contrast with the moaning of other words has been rejected on a number of grounds  ( Dowty 79 )  . 
Predicate meaning representation is difficult because the domain of the cognitive model is the actual World  , which is both open and unknown to a large extent . I-h , mans can never be totally expert about the actual world  . And , the knowledge o1 predicates used by speakers of a natural language varies with expertise  , how precise the predicate itself is , and context . Some psychologists maintain that the the inherent openness of the actual world is dealt with cognitively by making clear  ( though possibly inaccurate ) category cuts , and then reasoning about categories of objects , including the unclear cases , using prototypes . ( P , osch , elal 76) ( Smith and Medin 80) . This view implies diversity of representations of predicate meanings across the lexicon  . Some types of predicates will have criterial features  , ODDNUMBEI'~ , others , such as names and natural kinds , LEMON , will not . 
Because it represents sort and predicate meaning with prototypes  , and because it uses first order logic , KT differs in theory and results from system such as KL-ONE  . In KL-ONE , concepts are defined by the lr roles ( descriptive lements ) and their subsuming concepts ( those concepts superordinate o them in the taxonomy  )  . The concept ELEPHANT is defined by role sets describing facts such as " has  4 legs " , and by its attachment o MAMMAL . The claim is that all and any instantiation of the ELEPHANT concept has  4 legs . In contrast , descriptions in KT are probabilistic . The system accepts elephants with 3 legs , though it knows that elephants inherent fy have 4 legs . It accept seggs which are brown , even though it knows that eggs are prototypically white  . Further , in KL-ONE , since the descriptions arc meant to be defining , non-defining associated information is not encoded  . By contrast , KT encodes a great deal of information usually associated with a concept  , without the hn-plicit claim that it applies to all instantiations of the concept  . ELE-PHANT can have features " forgetful " , " lmnbering " and so forth , without claiming that all elephants have those features  . 
Another implication of the prototype model is that the content of features is seen as essentially limitless  . In contrast , the semantic net model assumes that there is a manageable set of primitive concepts whose size is much small cr that that of the English lexicon  , that these are explicitly connected . In KT , only ontological relationships are stated as rulcs  . The relationships between specific descriptions can bcderived through problem-solving  , but is not encoded . For example , in KL-ONE , the fact that both clouds and eggs are white is directly stated by a link from both CLOUD and EGG to WHITE  . In KT , that both have a color is stated in the kind type PHYSICAL OBJECT  , but that they both have the same color is reasoned at runtime  . 
The diversity of information KT accepts is constrained by kind types  , which predict that associated with ELEPHANT are leatures describing parts  , because ELEPHANT is in the kind type PHYSICAL OBJECT  . On the other band , ELEPHANT does not have features describing its mode of construction because it is not intile kind type AI ~  . ' I'IFAC'F . Thus , the KT system predicts limitless numbers of possible descriptions which are constrained by types deriving from correlational constraints of the actual world  . 
The KT system differs from most other representations of the common sense knowledge underlying natural angtmge in taking the content of descriptions from psycholinguistic studies  . Because of its empirical basis , KT responds to queries in a natural and human-l ikeway  . 
Though other formalisms could be used to represent empirically-derived models of human common sense knowledge  , KT lends itself to represent-ins the diversity of information found in the data because it allows a vlr-tually unlimited number of features  , while organizing them with the kind types . 
III . The Kind ~~ KTreads geography text , and shows its understanding of the text by answering questions  . Text understanding demonstrates the usefulness of the system  , but many interesting problems in that area of resemch are not addressed by this work  . KT is written in VM/PROLOG . It uses a parser , a first-order logic translator and a metainter preter dew : loped by Stabler and Tarnawsky  ( 19851 . It employs a set of databases which representhe common sense ontology  , tim generic features for sorts , type information for the generic features , and kind types for the ontology . Below is a sample text representative of the
English KT understands.
Samling_Text John is a miner who lives in a mountain town  . His wife raises a chicken wholays brown eggs . The company-owned clinic is near the mine . The nurse monitors the health of the miners . She approves of
John's diet.
111 . 1 Tim Ontological Schema To capture ontological constraints  , KT employs a toplevel conceptual schema , some of which appears in Figure 1 . It is intended to mirror tile average English -speaker's beliefs about whattile major category cuts of the environment arc  , that is , aeomlnoos cnge ontology . 
Figure 1The Ontological Schema
ENTITY ~ ( ABSTRACT vILEAL )  &  ( INDIVIDUAL vCOLLECTIVE ) ABSTRACT ~ IDEAL VPROPOSITIONAL vqUANTITYv\] RREALREAL ~  ( PHYSICAL vTEMPORAL vSENTIENT )  &  ( NATURAL v SOCIAL ) PHYSICAL ~ ( STATIONARY v NONSTATION ARY )  &  ( ANIMATE vINANIMATE ) NONSTATIONARY--SELF MOVING VNONS ELFMOVING
COLLECT\]VE~MASSv SET vSTRUCTURE
STATIONARY~~MOVEABLE
TEMPORAL ~ STATIVE v NONSTATiVE
NONSTATIVE ~ ( GOAL v NON GOAL )  &  ( PROCES SvACTIVITY vMOTION ) 
PROCESS ~ POSITIVE v NEGATIVE
ACTIVITY ~ OCCUPATION ALvINTER ACTIONAL
OCCUPATIONAL ~ AGRICULTURAL vMINING MANUvIRADE v SERVICE vEDUCATION INTERACTION AL~POSSESSIVE v ASSISTIVE v  CONIACTtA4  . 
VCON FRONTATIONAL
MOTION ~ ( FAST v SLOW )  &  ( TOWARD vAWAY ) Timgoal is to encode all ontology which is consistent with an ernpirically verifiable cognitive model  . As much evklence as possible was derived from psychological rcs carch  . The schema was developed to handle the predicates found in  4100 woldso\[geography text drawn from textbooks . 
Despite the complexity of constructing a computer model of the ontology  , two commonly-useds in rplifieations , binary trees and planar branching in trees , w crerejected . First , though binary trees have simpIi-lying mathematical properties  , they arc not likely to be psychologically real . People easily think in terms of more than two branches  , such as FISH vs BIRD vs MAMMAL , and so on , off of the VEWI'EBI ~ . A'I'E node . 
Secondly , most representations a sume that each node has a unique parent  . But cross-classification is necd cd shlce coln n\ ] oo sensc  rt2lso?ling US eS it . People understand , for example , that entities cress-classify as individuals or sets and real or abstract  . T iffs means that at each node , more than one plane might be needed for branching  . Cross-classifl cation is handled as in ( McCord 85 )  . A type hierarchy is generated which pernfits each node to be cross-classified in !! ways  . In the toplevel rule of Figure 1 each entity must be classified both ways , as either ABS'I'RACT or ILEAL , and ase it her INDIVIDUAL or COLLECTIVE . ' lhis corresponds to the claim that cng ni lively there is essentially a palallel ontological schema for collectives  . For example , people know that herds consist of animals , so that herds are real and concrete . Thus we have the parallel ontology Iragments in ( 8 )  . 

INDIVIDUAL COLLECTIVE
ENTITYENTIIY
ABSTRACTRE Al_ABSTRACTREAL/J
CONCRETECONCRETE //
ANIMAL ANIMAL //
CO ,_~WHERD
Inheritance of properties works differently for tile collectiv cs than it does for individuals  . Because cow is under ANIMAL , " cow is a kind of animal " is true . In contrast , ! to Ld attaches to ANIMAL , but " a her disa kind of animal " is not true . A herd consists of animals . We have found that though there arc gaps among the collectives  , a surprising mnnber of types of entities lmve collective names in English  . For example , plop-cross-classification involves SOCIAL vs NATURAL  . Entities ( or events ) which come into being ( or take place ) naturally must be distinguished from those which arise through some sort of social intervention  . 
ARTIFACT is one of the SOCIAL nodes . The distinction needs to be made high up in the ontology because it affects most kind types  . For example , events may either be SOCIAL ( p_arty_ ) or NATURAL_ ( earth-guake )  .   ( Section IV expands upon the justifications for the ontology  )  . 
The ontology also assumes the possibility of multiple attachments of instantiations to nodes  . Thus the representation is actually a lattice rather than a tree  . For example , an entity , John , is both a HUMAN with the physical properties of a mammal  , and is also a PERSON who thinks . 
The latter makes John very similar to other sentient such at institutions and social roles  . Instead of loading all of that complexity into a single HUMAN node  , we make the SENTIENT~NON-SENTIENT distinction hightip in the hierarchy  . There is ample philosophical ( Straws on 53 ) and psychological ( Gehnan and Spelke 81 ) support I or this decision . Any actual person is attached to both the HUMAN and PERSON nodes in the ontology  . 
1II . 2 Generic Information In the generic features database  , each sort is represented as a predicate with two arguments  . The first is a list of prototype features and tile second is a list of inherent features  . A prote-type feature it typically associated with as or tor tuedicate  . Most entities ' have more prototypical features than inherent features  . From our sample , a miner is typically " male " ; an orse is typically " female " ; atown typically has " houses " , Uasquare II , Ilafountain " , and so on , hlherent features are are rationally unrevisable properties of a sort or predicate  . 
Thus , aman is inherently " male " , a wife is inherently " married " , a house is inherently " house-slzed " . From our sample , a miner inherently " works in a mine " , a nurse inherently is " educated " , a town inherently contains " buildings " , and so on . 
IlI . 3 Feature ~ I~y ~ The lu'ototype features are represented by the same set of predicates osed to represent the inherent  1eatures   , thus achieving SOO leeconolly bl the rules . Nevertheless , then mn ber of predicates needed to encode the inherent and prototype features is theoretically limitless  . Fortunately , a small and manageable set of 33 feature types encodes a great deal of inforlnation  , although not exhaustively . The features themselves were chosen empirically to correspond with psycholingulstic data gathered by l  ; ' . esch et al (1976) , Asher aft ( 1976 ) and Dahigren ( 1985a ) When asked to list prototypieal Ieatures of various concrete objects  , subjects tend to name features which fall into a small n unr ber of types such as SIZE  , COLOR , SHAPE , and FUNCTION . 
Similarly , a few types of feature such as STATUS , SEX , INTERNALTI ~ . AITANDI ~ . ELAT1ON are named for social roles . 
Notice that a feature type such as SIZE or COLOR may be inherent for one sort but only prototypleal for another  . For instance , while blood inherently has COLOP , " red " , a brick is only prototypically " red " . While a brick inherently has SHAPE " rectangular paralle hJpitmd "  , bread is only prototypically " loaf-shaped " . In some cases , a sort has a feature type both inherently and prototypically  . For example , a doctor has the inherent FUNCTION " treats sick peot ~ le " and the prototypical FUNCTION " console sick people "  . 
I11 . 4 Kind q'ypcs as Metasorts Most knowledge representation systems permit any combination of the features in descriptions  . KT limits these combinations by taking advantage of several important ontological constraints affecting the possible realworld objects and therefore possible combinations of features in common sense knowledge  . Objects 1 all into kinds . In particular , natural kinds exist because their member share some underlying trait  , while artifacts and social kinds exist because l social convention Schwartz  ( 1979 ) Dahlgren ( 1985b )  . We call classifications of kinds KIND TYPES , so that NATUP , ALKIND constitutes one kiud type , ARTIFACT another , and so on . Kind types constrain the eomnlonsense knowledge base in several ways ? First  , each kind type is understood in terms of certain predictable feature types  . NATURALKIND is conceived primarily in terms of perceptual features  , while ARTIFACT adds functional features . Second , there is a correlational structure to the features of reai-world objects  . Given that an object is a absent ( eg . " feathers ") . 
Associated with each node in the ontology is kind type information encoding feature types entities attached at that node may have  . Entities may be described by features falling into a some or all of these feature types  , and no others . Inheritance up the tree ensures that any lower node has all the feature types of higher nodes on any path to ENTITY  . For instance , any node under PItYSICAL may have certain feature types  , and any node under AP , TIFACT may have those inherited Item PlIYS-1CAL   , as well as fu , 'ther feature types , as below : PIIYSICAL-Shape . Size , Color , Material rl ' exture , Odor , lt as parts , Part of AF . TIFACT-PHYSICAL \], Function , Operation,
Construction , Owner
At each node , only certain feature types are applicable . Conversely , each feature known to KT is classified by type as a COLOR  , SIZE , FUNC-TION , INTERNAL TRAIT or other . Cohn ( 1 9851 describes the econ-onry of the use of sorts in logic programming  . In the KT system , sorts and predicates appear at the terminal nodes of the ontology  . In addition , the kind types employed by the system represent metasorts  , in that they constrain the possible ty_~es of sorts recognized by the system  . 
I11 . 5 Encoding the Common Sense Knowlcdgt ~ The representations described above will be illustrated with the sort nurse  . Nurse is attached to the ohtology in axiom 9 ) nurse ( X ) -+ role ( X )  . 
From this axiom nurse inherits SENTIENT , SOCIAL , PHYSICAL , REAL , INDIVIDUAL and ENTITY tronlthe ontology , In the generic ? database , the axiom ( 1 01 lists the prototype and inherent Ieatures of nurse  . 
10) marse ( caring , female , educated , asslstant , help(X , Y ) & person(Y ) & sick(Y )) . 
Notice that the last inherent feature is in the form of a PP  . OLOG clause . 
This makes it possible to use the whole complex feature as input to the English grammar in order to \[ ormnlate an English response to a question such as " What does then urse do ?"  , or " Does the uurs chelp people T " . 
The feature typing database classifies the features as follows : relalion  ( assistant )  . 
inter onltrait(caring).



The kind types predict that as a I ~ . OLE , nmse will have certain types of features . Inherited from the SENTIENT kind type are feature types INTERNALTP  , AIT (" caring ") and GOAL (" tries to help ") . Inherited from the SOCIAL kind type are feature types FUNCTION  ( " takes care of patients " ) and REQUIREMENT ( " license " )  . In addition , RE-LATION type features ( " assistant " ) are predicted with a ROLE , IV . The Inference Mecharfism Built into the natural anguage component by Stabler and Tarnawsky is a mctainter preter which solves queries of all axioms active in the system  . This permits us to query ontological and generic information as welt as textual information  . The translation of tile first sentence of Sample Text is as in  ( 11 )  . 
11) miner(john & town ( town 220)
The problem solver derives t11o answer stoqneries as in ( 12 . matching logic translations of tile queries , which are in ttm form of Prelog goals , to the database . 
12) Is Johnaminer 7-- Yes
Does John live in a town 7-- Yes
In addition , KT is able to n lake a number of inferences from the text which are not directly stated there  . The inferences are drawn from various aspects of the common sense knowledge built into KT  . 
IV . I Inheritance Using the ontological database anti tile same problem solver  , the KT system deduces taxonomically inherited information about the entities mentioned in tile text  , as in (13\]-(14) . 
13) What is a miner 7--Aminer is a role , sentient , concrete , social , individual and an entity . 
14 ) What does a miner do ? -- A miner digs for minerals  . 
What is digging 7-- a goal-oriented , natural , nonm cutal , real , tem . tmt ' alctivity If an entity has dual attachment , for example as a human and as a role , or as a place antias an institution , then KT explains inheritance relations along both paths of the ontology  . A clinic is both a social place and an institution  , and so when asked (15) ,  15 ) What is the clinic ? KT replies both that " A clinic is an institution  , sentient , physical , real , collective , structure . " and that " A clinic is a social place , place , inani-nmte , physical , stationary , social , real , individual . "Direct ontological question such as ( 16 ) are also answered : 16 ) lstile clinica social place ? -- Yes
Is the clinic collective ? -- Yes
The inheritance path is followed in answering such questions  , so that the system call answer not only queries of node attachments at to the terminal nodes of the ontology  , but at all higher levels . 
IV . 2 Coln1 ~ let q . a . D ~ l-hmon ) plc_'tc . l(nowlcd~gc_"In reasoning with this schema , the system knows which valid inferences it can derive ontologically  , and th crefcre definitively , and which knowledge is incomplete . For example , KT knows that it knows the following for certain :
V x Human(x ) ~ Thinks(x)
VxT eacher(x)--lluman(x )
It also knows that if something is HUMAN , it is not AIISTRACT . When asked " Is the teai : her abstract ?" it answers " No "  . Thus it handles the exclusivity of sets called for by Hcndrix  ( 1979 ) and Teoenbaum ( 1985 )  . 
On the other hand , it knows which information is incomplete . With generic descriptions , KT knows that it only knows at the la'obabilistie lvel  . 
I tasked , " IsMary intelligent ? " itrcs pouds " Probably so  . "' lhis reflects the fact that most English speaker share a prototype of teachers as intelligent  . The logic works this way . If a question is ontological , KT gives d clinitive ( yes/no ) answers . If the question is generic , the answer is qualified as either prototype or inherent  . If no attswcr can be derived to a non-ontological question  ; KT responds " 1 don't kt to w . " Thus KT makes the open world assumption except with regard to ontological classifica  . 
tions . Tills ability to reason about incomplete definitions is shnilar to Levesque's proposal for incomplete databases  ( Levesque 84 )  . 
IV . 3  Prototy_p_c_'_ag~tlnhgj2Efit   Fea!31res KT answers queries concerning features of the entities in the text  , both directly and by types of features . 
Direct feature queries are of the form (17) . The form of the answer depends upon whether the feature is prototypical or inherent  . 
17) Is the miner rugged ?-- Probably so.
Is the clinic a place ?-- Inherently so.
Does the chicken layeggs 7-- Inherently so.
A retile eggs white 7--Probably so.
tIow is digging done 7--Probably with a shovel.
Where is digging done 7--Probably in the earth.
IV . 4 Overriding Features Genmqe information is handled differently from ontological information  . First , it is tentatively inferred , and checked againstile current knowledge base of information built up from the reading tile text  . If anything ill the tcxtnal database conflicts with a generic inference  , the latter is overridden . K'F takes the text as the authority , and if the text says that an entity has a feature contradicting those in its oom monsense knowledge of the entity  , the text's claim comes first . For example , Salnplc Text says that the eggs are " brown " , which overrides the prototypical generic l caturo " white " which is listed for c~g  , as in (18) . 
18) Are the eggs brown ? -- The text says so.
The cancellation takes place simply by matching to the textual dalabase first  . Sbnilarly , if a text said that a nelephant had three legs . the KT system would reason that it had three legs  , and not the inherent four that elephants have . By overriding inherent features , KT gets aronnll the cancellation problem which arises when features are viewed as logically necessary  . If " has four legs " is taken to be a logically necessary feature  , augthree-legge delephant forces a contradiction , or special processing for exceptions ( Brachman and Schmolze 1985 )  . The KT system accepts both facts as true , with no contradiction . This particular elephant has three legs , and elephants inherently have four legs . 
In attempting to match to both the textual and generic databases  , tile possibility of infinite recursion arises . This is true in principle for the human reasoner , as well . KT prevents in finite recursion by limiting infer -enccs to a depth of  5  . 
Because of the feature typing , KT can answer queries as in (19) . 
19) What color are tile eggs ?
What function doestile clinic have ?
Feature typing classifies " brown " as of type COLOR  . When KT looks first at the translation of the text to see whether it contains an assertion which states a color fortile eggs  , it must distinguish tile facts in the text which arc relevan to the feature type queried  . With respecto Sample Text , in order for KT to answer " What color are tile eggs ? "  , KT must know that " brown " is a CO l . OR . Without feature types , KT would not contrast " white " with " brown " . 
KrI'de duce sets of lacts , as well as individual facts . When qn mied for a type of feature , sucllas FUNCTION , KT responds with all functions listed for a sort . For example , clinics protoly pically have both outpatient and emergency ' functions  , and Krl'lists both when queried for funclion . 
For sorts which are structural , that is , concrete objects and institutions , KT is able to describe tile structure . If asked " What structure does the clinic have ?" , KT answels that typically it has a hierarchy of head-asslstant-clientele and has roles of doctor for head  , nurse for assislant nnd patient for clientele . Similarly , if asked " What structure does the lish have ?" , KT answers , inherently it has these parts : fins , 1 tail , 1 head , 2 e y e s , scales . When KT lists parts , bare plurals mean an unspecified numober greater than one  . 
IV . 5 Kind " l~'t~es The kind types are useful in both parsing and infer cnc-lug for text understanding  . In the parsing phase , kind types can be used four ways . First , verb sense ambiguity can be resolved by ' the kind types of subject and object head nouns  . In a sentence with the verb take , knowing that the subject is a vehicle forces the choice of the one sense of the verb  , and knowing that it is a human forces another . Secoudly , KT can reason the other way around , and use selection restrictions on verbs to infer the kind types entities referred to in the sentence  . Consider sentence (20) . 
20) ABCsuedtileman.
Using kind types for selection restrictions , KT infers that the entity named ABC is a SENTIENT  . Given the further information in (21) , KT infers that ABC is an INSTrI'UTION and not a PEP  , SON , because the verb ~ requires an INSTITUTION as object  . 
21921) Theman had joined ABC illegally.
Thirdly , certain anaphoric references can be resolved using kind types  . 
When verb selection restrictions classify the entity referred to by a pronoun as in a certain kind type  , then possible antecedents are correspondingly constrained  . Consider the relationships in (22) . ~ corefers with milk because , when intransitive , s ~ requires a LIQUID as subject . 
22) The cat drank the milk . It spilled.
Fourthly , attachment ambiguities for prepositional phrases can be resolved using kind types  . Consider sentence (23) . 
23) John bough the lock in the afternoon.
It is syntactically possible for the prepositional phrase in the a Iternoon to modify the lock  , the verb phrase or the whole sentence . Since afternoon is in the kind type TEMPORAL , KT can resolve this syntactic ambiguity , and attach the prepositional phrase so that it modifies the whole sentence  ( Dahlgren and McDowell ,  1986) . 
IV . 6 Summary of Inference Mechanism In summary , predications used to derive inferences in the text are found in five aspects of common sense knowledge : a  ) Ontological Schemab ) Verb and adjective selection restrictions c ) Generic Information d ) Typing Information e ) Kind types In using KT , queries drive these inferences . After a text such as the Sample Text has been read  , KT can respond to queries and seem to understand the text in a more human-like way using the various aspects of knowledge indicated above  . Below are listed some queries and responses . 
Q : Who is John ?
A : The man who lives in the town.
- - - Prototypical town has people living in it.
- - - Prototypieal male person is a man ( not a boy).
Q : W as the town built ?
A : Yes.
--- By ontology of artifacts
Q : Who built the town.
A : People.
--- By ontology of artifacts
Q : Does John wear pants 7
A : Probably so.
- - - By prototype database.
Q : Does John eateggs.
A : Yes.
- - - Because ggs are food .
Q : What does health think 7
A : Health doesn'think.
- - - By kind types.
Q : Does John look like a clinic 7
A : N o.
--- By ontology database.
Q : Does John live in a ' tent 7
A : Probably not.
- - - By prototype of town
Q : Does John have a function 2
A : Yes , --- By kind types
IV . Basis for the Common sense Knowledge_Results in linguistl cresearch underline the importance of category distinctions  , such as those between abstract and concrete objects  , and persons as opposed to other objects . These actively affect sentence interpretation and generation  . 
The sentence " The rock read the book " must either be interpreted as anomalous or metaphorical bceause only persons read  . These constraints provide an empirical basis for the ontology  . Cognitive psychological re-ontological categorization in cognitive development was consulted in constructing the schema  ( Kei 179 )  . Gehnan and Spelke's results suggested placing SENTIENT higher in the schema  ( Gehnan and Spelke 81 )  . 
Graesser and Clark's studies were the basis of the verb ontology  ( Graesser & Clark ,  1985) . Psycholingulstie research in the prototype theory provided descriptions of the actual prototypes hared by English-speakers for a number of these categories  ( Rosch , cta176) ( Dahlgren 85) . 
The ontological schema was developed in two steps . First , the verbs from the corpus o\[geography texts were classified accotdlng to selectional restrictions  ( SRs ) oo subjects and objects . Second , the mini-real categories needed to a ceomodate these Sl ~  . s were arranged in a hierarchical schema . Certain SRs , such as HUMAN , ANIMA'Iff , CONCRETE , were expected . Others were surprises . Some verbs required complement shat were marked for PLACE  , and others required either subjects or objects to have certain mnveability Ieatures  . q ' hese are summarized below . 
STATIONARY : normally immobile , attached to the earth , moved only at great effort . 
SELFMOVING : normally in motion or designed for motion  , in some eases with no apparent initial source . 
NONSEL FMOVING : normally immobile but can be moved with slight effort  . A source for the motion is expected , usually something

One other interesting result from this stage of tire project is that an mnber of vcrbs take el the raPROPOSITIONAL or a SENTIENT subject  . Both a book and a person can say something . 
Once the set of categories had been established , the next stage was \[ it-tingtllem into a hierarchy from which inheritance of features c  ( mM be computed by KT . There were several constraints guiding this process  . 
First , we wanted the ontology to be as compact as possible  . Second , we wished to minimize nonexistent leaf nodes . Third , we preferred ttmt the system infer too little than too much  . Daring this process it was also necessary to decide which of the Sl ~  . s represented true category cuts in an ontological schema and which were merely features on individual exieal items  . The guiding principle here was that if the distinction under examination  ( i . e . ANIMATE/INANIMATE ) pervaded some subtrce , then it was assigned to a branching point . But if some distinction was needed in isolated parts of the tree  , then it was represented as a feature . For instance , we found that the INDIVIDUAL~COLLECTIVE distinction pervades the lexicon and must be a pr imary cut in the ontology  . Many verbs select only INDIVIDUAL ( rn in 21 ~ clc ) or only COLLEC ' IIV t ~ ( stamj ~ ede ) subjects or " objects . Properties which were assigned 1eature status were items like EDIBLE and SIZE . 
The NATURAL/SOCIAL distinction was placed high on tile tree because human intervention pervades the world  . All abstract entities ate products oItile human mind  , but every category of real entities , including events and states , contains dozens of examples of the products of society  . 
We therefore reserved the term ARTIFACT for irranimat cman made objects to distinguish them from natural inanimate objccts  . ' I he SENTIENT ~ PHYSICAL distinction is also fairly high  . SENTIENF is often placed as a subordinate nf ANIMATE  , but in common sense reasoning , the properties of people and things are very difIerent  . The NATURAL/SOCIAL distinction applies to SENTIENT just as it does to PHYSICAL  . ANATURAL , SENTIENT entity is a PERSON , that is a man , woma ~ whereas a SOCIAL , SI~NTI \] JNT entity is a ROLE , seoretary ~ miner , president . A collection of PERSON is a BODY , crowdI , Ags nob_ . A collection of ROLE is an INSTITUTION , hosim p~l~school . The INDIVIDUAL/COLLECTIVE cut had to be made at the level of ENTITY  ( the highest level ) at the same place as the AIJSTRACT/REAL cut . This was not the only place where multiple distinctions applied  ( see Figure I )  . 
Our term COLLECTIVE applies to all collections of entities  , classified into three subgroups . True collectives are sets in which each member of tile set is identical to all tile others  ( l_lcrd~t_nob , m ~ p_w ~ lLIIgR\[) . Masses are collections whose members are referred to only in terms of measurable units  ( saskd ~__ water )  , Finally , there are structures where the members have specified relations  , such as in institutions ( school , cot npanz ~ It was consideration of both the constraints listed above  , and the as-slgnments of SRs to feature or node status that led us to aband on both binary branching and planar trees as useful representational devices  . 
While it was possible to model some distinctions as binary  , others required more than two branches . For example , ABSTRACT entities which divided into IDEAL , PP , OPOSH'IONAL , QUANTH'Y , and IRREAL , all of which have equivalent status as SRs . 
Figure ill Terminal Nodes in the ~ c\]len la
Example Rule bush PLANT ~ REAL & INI ) IVIDUAL & I'IIYSICAL & NATURAl . . & ANIMATE & STATIONARY bear ANIMAL * REAL & INDIVIDUAL & PtlYSICAL & NATURAL & ANIMAqE & NONSTATIONAR % & SELFMOVING mountain PLACE ~- REAL&INDIVIDUAL & PIIYSICAL&STATIONARY & INANIMATE mountain NATURAL PLACE ~ NATURAL & PLACE village SOCIAL PI~\[ACE~-PLACE&SOCIAL stone MINERA ~  , -REAL & INDIVIDtJAt & PIIYSICAL & NA'IUI ~ AI . &INANIMATE&NONSTATIONARY & NNSEI . FMO VING Santos PERSON , -REAL & INDIVIDUAL & NA qURAL & SENTII'N 1' car VEIIICLI : . --AIVH FACT & SEI . FMOVING & PIIYSICAL & SE t . FMOVING radio AICIIFACT-~ARTIFACT& NONSEL FMOVING secretary ROLE * RE Al  . , & INDIVIDUAL & SENTIENT & SOCIAL book DISCOURSE * ABSH~  . ACT&COLLECTIVE & PILOPOSITIONAL We were still faced with the fact that many entities still seemed to straddle the hierarchy  . Is an individual human a PRIMATE or a PERSON , or both 7Is a hospital an INSTITUTION or a PLACE , or both ? If we were to establish a hierarchy which would reflect these differences  , we would end up with a very large and unwieldy schema with huge gaps  . 
Therefore , we deekted on multiple attachment for those entities which re  ( mlred it . This decision was justified as well by examioation of the texts which revealed that a human teeing was generally dealt within a context as either a person or a physiological being  , but rarely as both attim same time . Figure IIlgiw : sexamples of some nouns , their assignment to categories and rules by which terminal nodes in the schema are generated from higher  . .level nodes . Figurel II shows only a few examples of terminal no desirt the schema  , However , every path through the ontology re-suits in a terminal node which is named and which represents a unique class defined by inheritance of features up the tree  . Tetmina\[node names distinguish the individuals from the collectives  , For instance , the collective node corresponding to I'LANI' is FLOP  , A . The individual node corresponding to DISCOURSE is PROPOSH'ION  . Similarly , STUFF is the collective nfMINERAl_ , INSTH'UTION is the collective of ROLl ? , and BODY is the collective of PERSON , etc . 
The types of features which occurred in the data at each node in the ontology were the basis of the kind types  . It is a nemp Meal fact that feature types are correlated in relation to ontological classifications  . At each node in the ontology is a kind type encoding certain sets of properties that any entity classified at that node may have  . Inheritance up the tree ensures that any lower node has all the properties of higher nodes on a single path to ENTITY  . For each property at a node , a set of values applies . 
While the values for items such as COLOR are fairly obvious  , we have had to construct value ranges elsewhere . For SIZE , weltave started with the set microscopic , l ~ in y , small , handle able , medium , large , huge , building-sized , skyscraper-sized , mountainous , region-sized ! , which is a reality-oriented scale to be applied loosely  . The kind types were extracted empirically from the generic data after all the features were typed  , by inspection of types of features associa \[ ed with sorts and predicates at each node of the ontology  . 
The texts in the corpus describe lifestyle and industry in wlrious countries  . Generic descriptions of the nouns in the text were drawn frot n the psycholinguistic literature  , to the extent possible . (( Rosch 76); ( Ashcraft 76); ( Dahlgren 85)) . For P , OLE , we used generic descriptions of social roles collected by Dahlgren and partially published in  ( Dahlgren 85 )  . For PHYSICAL we used generic descriptions from ( Ashcraft 76 )  . For those nouns where no data existed , generic descriptions were created cen-forming to the types of information generated by subjects for similar nouns  . We do not consider this a defect of our system , since we are not trying to argue for the psychological reality of any particular generic description  , but merely for the efficacy of a reasoning system which uses them  . The decision to place features in the prototype list or the inherent list for a sort or predicate was decided by two judges  . It is a research goal to verify judgments experimentally  . 
Coeclusjot ~ hi conclusion , KT encodes an ontology which omdels the top level of typical t ~' nglish speaker's cognitive model ef the actual wolld  . 
It employ several differentypes of information to reason in human-like ways about text that it reads  . In addition to the onlolng y , iI uses velb selection restrictions and generic in\[ormatlon associated with COI leel  ) ls . 
By enlploying systematic constraints in the form of kind types as so eialed with nodes in the ontology  , KT reasons efficiently . All of lheinformation KT uses is drawn from empirical studies of human cognitive psychology  , linguistics or the corpus of text which KT reads . Because of this empirical basis , and the breadth of the ontology , KT is a transportable syslcm which is potentially useful for understanding any text of a general  , literal nat'tn'e , 
REF\]7 RENCES
Ashcralt , M . II . Property norms for typical and a typical items lrom  17 categories . Mere 9% Z9qd Cogttition , 6:227-32, 19"18 . 
Brachman , P-_l . and J . G . Schmolze .  1985 . An overview of the KL-ONE knowledge representation system  . Cogt\]i Live Science 9: 171-210 . 
Berlin , B .  1972 , Speculations on the grow thofethnobotanical nomenclature  . \[5938 uagc:3ndSo?i~tZ1:41-86 . 
Dahlgren , K . 1985a , The Structnle of Social Categories,
Cogni Livq_Science 9:379-398.
Dahlgren , K . 1985b . Kind types in lexieal representation . To appear . 
Dahlgren , K . and J , McDowell .  1986 . Using eotn monsense knowlcdgeto disatn biguale , To appear . 
Dougherty , J . W . D .  1978 . Salience and relativity in classification
Axeerica REt\[)~mlo~isb 5:66~80.
Dowty , David R .  1979 . WtA?1M ~! an ! #g ~! B ! Montaugpe G\[a ! nAwi . 
Durdrecht , lloll and : D . Reidel Publishing Company Gehnan , R . and E , Spelke .  1981 , Thoughts About Animate and Inanimate Objects , in S'ecia ) CDg !! i ) . i'ceD ~ wel~acj ~, cds . J . II . Flavell and L . P , oss , p .  43-81 . 
Graesser , A . and L . Clark .  1985 .   Strtt?1urps anctI ' recettures i ~\[ _In3plieit fZnowle_d~g ? .   . Norwood , New Jersey : Ablex . 
Hayes , P . J .  1985 . The second naive physics manifes to . 
In For_u ) al\[l'heur_i ? so/tlaq . Co3nmonsetlye World , eds . J , P, . Hobbs and R . C . Moore . Norwood , N . J . ; Ablex . 
Hendrix , G . G .  1979 , Encoding Knowledge in Partitioned Networks , in AsspciativeNet ~' or k_s , ed . N . J . Findler , p . 51-92 . 
Keil , F . C .  1979 . Se !! mjltic and ( . ~onceptual Develo3 Eneot . 
tlar wu'dU Press.
Levesque , 11 .  1984 , The logic of imcotnplete knowledge bases , in_QvL Cot ~ cEph , alM ? ~ ! eling . eels . M . L . Broclie , J . Mylopeulos and J , W . Sehmidt . New York : Sp tiog cr-Ver lag . 
McCord , M .  1985 . The Icxical base for set nantic int cr pretatital in a prolog parser  . Wetkshop on the Lexicon , Parsing and Seuaantie Interpretation . CIJNY Graduate Center . 
Rosch , I3 . , Mervis , C . B . , Gray . W . D . , Johnson . D . M . & Boyes-Braem , I ', 19/6 . Basic objects in natural categories . _C__ogeiliv c_l\[sychql qgy 8:382-439 . 
Smith , Edward E . and Medin , Douglas L .  1985 . Catcgories and Concepts . tlarvard U . 
Stabler , E . P , , Jr . , and G . O . Tarnawsky .  1985 , NLP rolcg---A prolog-based natura language facility  , To appear . 
Strawson , P . C , 1953 . In divkluals . London : Methuen . 
tTarnawsky , G . O .  1)82 . Knowled & e Semantics . Unpublished
NYU Dissertation.
Tenenbautn , J . D .  1985 . Taxonomic reasoning . Prec , IJCAI . 

