SENTENCE ADVERBIAL SINASYSTEMOFQUESTION
ANSWERING WITHOUT A PREARRANGED DATA BASE
Eva Koktova
Hamburg , West-Germany
Abstract
In the present paper we provide a report on a jo int approach to the computational treatment o fsentence adverbials  ( such as surprisingly , presumably or probably ) and focussing adverbials ( such as onl ~ or a __E least , including negation ( not ) and some other adverbial expressions , such as for exam E_ ~ or inter alia ) within a system of question answering wi thout a prear ranged database  ( TIBAQ )   . 
This approach is based on a joint theoretica l account of the expressions in question in the framework of a functional description of language  ; we argue that in the primary case , the expressions in question occupy , in the underlying topic-focus articula tion of a sentence  , the focus-initial position , extending their scope over the focus , or the new information , of a sentence , thus specifying , in a broad sense of the word , how the new information of a sentence holds . On the surface the expressions in question are usually moved to scope-ambiguous positions  , which can be analyzed by means of several general strategies  . 
1. Introduction
The present paper provides a report on the in tegration of sentence adverbials  ( such as surprisingly , presumabl ~ or probably ) and focussing adverbials ( such as only or at least , including negation ( not ) and certain other adverbial expressions , such as for example or inter alia ) into a system of question answering ( factual information retrieval ) without a prearranged database , i . e . with a database consisting only of input technical texts in natural langage  ( TIBAQ )   . ( Throughout this paper , the expressions in question will be joint ly referred to as CA expressions  .   ) The presence of CA expressions in natural-l anguage sentences  ( the functioning of these expressions being c losely connected with the topic-focus art iculation  , or communicative perspective , of a sentence ) is one of the outstanding features in which natural-languge-sentences differ from their corresponding logical formulas  ( or their equivalents in various knowledge -representation systems  )   , marking the dynamic and pragmatically based character of verbal communication  , in contradistinction to the static , inventory-like character of logical fo rmulas  . 
In the present paper we propose to treat CA -expressions on a joint syntactico-semant ic account  , namely in terms of a single adverbial complementation  ( Complementation of Attitude )   , by means of for all of the properties wh ich they share from the viewpoint of the synthesis and analysis of sentences : essentially  , we argue that the scope of CA expressions extends primarily over the focus  , or the new information , of a sentence , and that CA expressions are usually moved on the surface to various scope-ambiguous posit ions  , which can be disambiguated by several genera l strategies concerning the topic-focus a rticulation of a sentence  ( these strategies are used in the algori thm of analysis of CA expressions  )   . The class of CA expressions is supposed to be open-ended  , bat the majority of them can be listed . 
2 . Computational and Theoretical Background 2 . 1 Computational background . 
The experimental system of automatic question -answering T\[BAQ  ( Text-and-Inference Based Answering of Questions  , cf , Sgall 1982 , Hajicova and Sgall 1984 ) has no prearranged database , its input consisting only of naturall anguage sentences  ( statements ) from technical texts . The inference rules of the system a requi te simple and operate on the automatically gained underlying representations of sentences  ; on the one hand , they are intended to account for slightly d ifferent formulations of statements and questions  , and on the other , for an enrichment of the database by new , derived statements ; in this sense ,   T1BAQ should be viewed as a system where the stock of data is compiled and updated automatical ly  .   , without specific human efforts and wi thout the necessity to employ the knowledge of the extralinguistic reality correspond ing to the statements  ( cf . 
also D . Hays ' notion of automatic encyclopedia ) . 
The major challenge of TIBAQ consists in removing the necessity for the user " to cope with the computer system "  , whereby the burden of the communication between man and computer is shifted closer to the computer  . 
The system is based on the universal express ive power of natural language rather than on domain-specific phenomena  ; the first experiments dispense with the analysis of the factual knowledge cor responding to the sentences of the input text  , thus not being committed to the " actual " s tructure of the world  . 
There are four major procedures in TIBAQ : al iguistic analysis of the inference ru les operating on the output of the linguist icanalysis  ; a look-up for appropriate answers , and a synthesis of answers . Every underlying representation of a sentence corresponds to a relative y independent piece of information  , which makes it possible to account for the scoping properties of operator-like expressions  ( ranging from to CA expressions ) in a uniform way ; the interconnections between the single under lying representations are assured by means of pointers in the lexicon  , and registers . 
In the look-up for the appropriate answer , a key role is played by the topic-focus art iculation of both the statements and the questions  , since only such a statement which coinc ides with the question inter alia in its topic-focus articulation can provide a full answer  ; otherwise ( in case the topic-focus articulation of the statement is " reverse " to that of the question  ) the answer is considered as partial , and is prefixed with " I only know that .   .   .  "  ( this asyrrrnetry between topic and focus be ing clue to the " exhaustive-listing " character of the information conveyed by the focus  )   . 
2.2 Theoretical background
The linguistic-theoretical background of TIBAQ is provided by the Functional Generat ive Description  ( FGD ) as elaborated by the linguistic team of the Faculty of Mathematics and Physics of Char les University in Prague  ( cf . Sgall et al .  1969 ; Hajicova and Sgall 1980 ; SgalI et al . in press ) . FGD can be characterized as follows: ( i ) FGD is a multilevel ( stratificational ) system of explicit description of language  , consisting of a generative component and of several levels of description  , which are ordered from meaning to sound and re lated by a complex interplay of cases of homonymy  ( ambiguity and synonymy on the basis of the asyrm ~ etriedualism between form and funct ion  . 
( ii ) The conception of linguistic meaning in FGD is narrow  ( literal meaning ; cf . Sgall 1978 and 1983) , providing a general ( universal ) basis for different applications . In FGD , only those distinctions are taken into account which are supposed to be directly s tructured by the system of natural language  ( cf . de Saussure's and Hjelms lev's " form of content "  )   , and they are kept apart from the distinct ions of the domain of the extralinguist i c  , cognitive ontological ) content . 
( iii ) \]' lie conception of meaning in FGD involves also certain pragmatic distinctions  . Most important of them is the topic-focus ar iculation  ( TFA ) of a sentence , which includes the partitioning of a sentence into topic  ( conveying the old/given/salient/pres . upposed/contextually bound information ) and focus ( conveying the new/contextually non-bound info rmation  )   , and the deep word-order of a sentence , which is formally accountable for by the le ft-toright ordering of the nodes of the underlying dependency tree  . TFA is connected with the organization of human memory  , or with the stock of knowledge shared by the speaker and the hearer at a given point of d is course  ( the stock is supposed to be changing even dur ing a single discourse  , cf . 
Hajicova and Vrbova 1982).
We assume that by means of the deep word-order of a sentence  ( i . e . without taaking recourse to salva veritate paraphrasing or to such devices as prenex quant ifiers  ) it is possible to directly describe the scoping properties of natural-language quantifiers such as many_  ) as well as of CA expressions : generally , the expressions standing in the underlying representation of a sentence to the leftex h ibit wide scope over the expressions stand ing to the right  . 
3 . Underlying Properties of CA Expressions 3 . 1 The unmarked case . 
We argue that in the unmarked case , CA expressions ( which can be viewed as specifying , in a broad sense of the word , how the information conveyed by the focus ho lds-e  . g . it surprisingly holds , it probably holds , it does not hold , it for examp LLeleholds ) occupy the focus-initial position , extending their scope over the rest of the focus of the sentence  ( this " rest of the focus " may consist of syntactically different elements  , e . g . it may but need not contain the verb , it may contain one or more complementations , etc . ; for example , if there are four elements in a sentence ( the verb and three complementations )   , they can be arranged into 15 different distributions of elements in the topic and the focus of the sentence  )   . 
Our basic claim can be illustrated by the surface sentence  1 as derived from the simplified underlying representation la  , where the slash (  /  ) indicates the topic-focus boundary of the sentence and the arrow indicates the scope of the CA expression in question  ( p ~_ ~ )   . 
1 This train will go ~ to York.
la This train will-go/p ~ oba ~ to York.
I #3.2 Marked cases.
In addition to the unmarked case , CA expressions may occur in several marked cases of underlying occurrence and scope in terp retation  , cf . ( i)-(vii ) below . 
( i ) In the tol)ic of a sentence , CA expressions occur very rarely and exhibi t idiosyncratic scoping properties  ; for exain ple , not has in is scope usually the verb ( belonging to the topic )   , while the other focussing adverbials ( such as only_have in their scope their a nedia tely following  ( noun ) phrase ( belonging to the topic )   . If there occurs another CA expression in a sentence  , we speak of the topic-focus occurrence of CA expressio  , ns in a sentence , in which case the scopes of the two CA express ions do not overlap  . In this case , it is possible that a single CA exl ) ression occurs twice in a sentence , cf Only_Tel ~ is preoccupied only_with computers  . 
( ii ) Certain CA expressions ( such as also or a L~gs_kn ) can occur both in the focus-initial posi ion as the only element of the focus of a sentence  , exhibiting an underlying backward scope wh ich extends over TeKLLy-has a minicom puteral so  . In answers to 2es-no questions , practically any CA expression may occur as the only element of the focus  , cf . Will Terr Zcome ? Oh ( he will come ) certainly , ( iii ) In wh-questions , the wh-element ( which is supposed to belong always to the focus  , though it need not necessarily occur as the most corrrnunicatively dynamic element of the focus  ) stands in the scope of the CA expression wh ich stands on the surface ilr ~ nediately be foreor after it  , cf . Where exactly are Z_Qu-~ . 
( iv ) In case of coordination of CA expressions , all of the CA expressions involved are assumed to have the same scope  , cf . The last attempt ~ unexpectedly and frust ratingly ~ has failed  . 
( v ) CA expressions frequently occur on the mult iple occurrence  ( cluster ) with the hierarchical type of scope in terp retation  , where every of the CA expressions involved has in its scope  , on a recursive principle , the rest of the focus , cf . The train Koes surprisingly ~~ to York . 
(v i ) CA expressions occur also on the multiple occurrence  ( cluster ) with the intra cluster type of scope in terp retation  , where the CA expression to the left has in it sscope the CA expression to the right  , cf . This train ~ oes not surprisinlg ~ y_to York  . 
(v i i ) CA expressions occur also in parenthetical cbunks of sentences  ( " after thoughts " , which do not belong to the basic structure of a sentence  , being detached from it by a comma , semicolon , hyphen , brackets , or even full stop ) , irrespective of whether there occur any CA expressions in the basic structure  , cf . 
Terry likes to ~ especially basketball on Sunday_s  . 
4  . Surface Properties of CA Expressions and the Analysis of Their Scopes In this sec tion  , we describe the cases of scope-unambiguous and scope-ambiguous surface positions of CA expressions in a sentence  , and there will be also proposed strateg ies of the analysis of the scope of CA expressions  , especially in cass of the scope-ambiguous surface positions  . 
4.1 Scope-unambiguous positions.
We assume that , in English , all postverbal positions of CA express ions are scope-unambiguous  , indicating the topic-focus boundary of a sentence  ( as placed immediately before the CA express ion  ) and simultaneously also the scope of the CA expression  ( as extending forward , over the expressions which follow it on the surface  , usually up to the end of a sentence ) , cf . 1 as derived from la ( see 3 . 1 )  . 
This strategy of resolving the scope of CA expressions in such a straightforward way i sapplicable also in case of the occur rence of two  ( lexically distinct ) CA e :: pressions in a sentence . If the CA expressions stand side by side , first of all their type of scope in terp retation should be specified  ( cf . 4  . 3 )  , but if one of them occurs in a scope-7O the relatively new elements of the topic unambiguous  ( = postverbal ) position and the other in a scope-ambiguous position  ( such as the sentence-initial or the preverbal position  , cf .  4  . 2 )  , the multiple occurrence of CA expressions on the hierarchical scope interpretation i s involved  , the scope of the CA expression in the scope -unambiguous position being resolved in as t raightforward way  , and the scope of the CA expression in the scope -ambiguous position  ( hierarchically ) extending over the CA expression in the scope Z unambiguous position plus the follow ing expression  ( s )   , cf . 2 and 3 as unambiguously derived from 2a . 
2 Probably , the train collided on lE with a truck . 
3 The t ra in p robab ly co l l ided on l Z w i th a truck  . 
2a The t ra in co l l ided / p robab ly o ~ w i th The only exception to this strategy is constituted by the topic-focus occurrence of CA expressions as mentioned in  ( i ) of 3 . 2  . 
4.2 Scope-ambiguou ~ positions.
In English , there are several types of surface movement o fCA expressions to scope-ambiguous posit ions  ; these types carl be combined to yield cases of complex scope-ambiguity  , and a single surface position may be ambiguous between two or more types of surface movement  . Moreover , the multiple ocurrence of CA expressions involves the ambiguity of surface clusters of CA expressions between the hierarchical and the intra cluster scope interpret at ions  ( cf . 4  . 3 )  . 
The types of surface movement of CA express ions can be described as follows:  ( i ) The movement ( from any underlying position ) to the surface sentence-initial posit ion  , to the preverba\[position or to the sentence-final position  , cf .  4 , 5 and 6 , each of which is derivable from 4a , 4 bor 4c . 
4 Probably , train 2178 goes to York.
5 Train 2178 probably goes to York.
6 Train 2178 goes to York , ~.
4a/Probably train 2t 78 goes to York.
t4 bTrain 2178/probably goes to York.
4cTrain 2178 goes/probably to York.
J ( ii ) The movement of every CA expression of a clus ter on the hierarchical type of scope in terp retation to different scope-ambiguous surface positions  , cf . 7 as derived e . g . from 7a . 
7 Surprisinglx , train 2178 ~ goes to
York.
7 a Train 2178 goes/surprisingly pro~ably
L--~to Yor >
The whole cluster of CA expressions on the h ierarchical type of scope interpretation  ( unlike the clusters on the intra cluster type of scope interpretation  ) essentialy cannot be moved as a whole , cf . 8 as hypothetically derived e . g . from 8a ) . 
8* Probably ~ , train 2178 goes to York 8a Train 2178 goes/probably r ~ to Y or :4 In cases ( i ) and ( ii )   , but also in cases ( iii ) , ( v ) , ( vi ) and ( vii ) , as we shall see below , a common strategy of the analysis of the CA expressions involved should be used  , which is based on the determining of the e lements of the topic of the sentence by means of certain crieria  . The rest of the elements of the sentence shou ld be considered as belonging to the focus  , i . e , as standing in the scope of the ( rightmost ) CA expression of the sentence . This strategy is based on the following pr inciple : if the words or phrases under examination  ( typicaly , the verb or a complementation consisting of a simple  ( noun phrase ) are contextually bound , i . e . if they refer to an entity which has been re levantly mentioned in the previous co-text  , or if they are connected by associative l inks to previously mentioned entities  , or if they exhibit general lexical mean ing  , or if they are permanently activated in the memory of the speaker and the hearer  ( s )   , they probably belong to the topic of the sentence  , from which it follows that they stand outs ide the scope of the CA expression in quest ion  . 
Otherwise they belong to the focus and stand in the scope of the CA expression in question  . Let us refer to this strategy as the contextual strategy for a more exact fo rmulation of such a strategy  , cf . 
Hajicova , Sgall and Vrbova 1984).
( iii ) If a CA expression has in its scope the focus of an embedded clause  , it may be moved within the embedded clause , or it may be " raised " to the beginning of the complex sentence  , cf . 9 as derived from 9a . 
9 Probably , Terry wants to earn money so that he could buy a minicomputer  . 
9a " Ferry wants to a rn money so that he cou ld buy / r KLobab_~fl_y - a min icomputer  . 
Also in this case , the scope of the CA expression in question shou ld be resolved by means of the contextual st rategy as described above in  ( ii )   . 
( iv ) The whole focus ( consisting of a focussing adverbial and an expressions standing in its scope  ) may be moved to the beginning of the sentence , especially if the focussing adverbial ex tends over the Subject of the sentence  , cf . I0 as derived from 10 a . 
10 OnlETerry will run through at unnel.
1 0a Through at unnel will-run/~LTer ry4 In this case the scope of the CA expression in question can be resolved by means of taking in to account the lexical type of the CA express ion involved  ( focussing adverbial ) and its surface position ( sentence-initial position not detached by a comma from the rest of the sentence  ) as extending over the immediately following ( noun ) phrase . Let us refer to this strategy as the lex ical-positional strategy  ( for another variant thereof , cf . 
( v ) below).
( v ) Focussing CA expressions may be moved to the postphrasal position  , i . e . after the phrase which stands in their scope  . In this case , the CA expression in question may occup yei ther the sentence-final position  ( cf . II as derived from lla , or , in case the whole focus has been moved to the beginning of the sentence  , a sentence-medial position ( after the Subject noun phrase )   . 
11 Terry has a dog for his pleasure only.
l la Terry has a dog/on_q ~_Z for his p leasure  . 

In the former case , the scope of the CA expression in question can be resolved again by a variant of the lexica l-positional strategy  ( a focussing adverbial standing in the sentence-final position not detached by a comma from the rest of the sentence has in it sscope the immediately preceding  ( noun ) phrase )   . 
In the latter case , the scope of the CA expression in question can be generally resolved by means of the contextual strategy  , with one exception : if there ocurs an auxi liary in the sentence  , a clue for the resolution of the scope of the CA expression is provided by the fact that in this case the CA expression stands immediately after the Subject noun phrase  , i . e . before the auxiliary ( in contrast to the scope-ambiguous preverbal position of CA expressions  )   , cf . 12 vs .  13 . 
1 2 John particular l Z will like these ri tuals  . 
13 John will . particularly like these rituals ,   ( vi ) The scope of the CA expressions also and a Ra in if they standalone in the focus cf  . ( ii ) of 3 . 2  ) should be resolved by means of the contextual strategy  , with the exception that there is sought are latively new element of topic of the the sentence  , cf . the second sentence of 14 as derived from 14 a . 
14 Terry has a minicom puter . But l lenry has a minicom puter also . 
14 a Henry has a minicom ) uter/also.
(v i i ) It should be brought to attention that every of the cases  ( i )  -  ( vi ) should he considered as multiply ambiguous i fa complex  ( noun ) phrase standing in the scope of a CA express ion is involved  , namely in that the scope of the CA expression may extend over the whole complex  ( noun ) phrase , or over a subconstituent there of embedded at any depth of the complex phrase  , yielding an embedded focus . In this case , the CA expression is obligatorily moved before the whole complex phrase  . 
714.3 Resolving multiple occurrence.
( i ) If there occur in a sentence two occurrences of a single CA expression such as not L~espec ially  ) as not standing side by side , or if there occurs not as not immediately preceding another CA expression  , the topic-focus occurrence of ca expressions is involved  ( cf . ( i ) of 3 . 2 )  . 
If there occur in a sentence two or more lexica lly different CA expressions  , out of which at least one is moved to a scope -ambiguous position  ( i . e . which is not standing side by side with the other CA expressions  )   , the multiple occurrence of CA expressions w ith the hierarchical scope interpretation is involved cf  . 2 and 3 of 4 . 1 and 7 of 4 . 2 )  . 
This case should be distinguished from the case of the occurrence of a parenthetical chunk of the sentence containing a CA express ion in addition to the occurrence of a CA expression in the basic structure of the sentence  ( cf . vii ) of 3 . 2)  . 
( ii ) In case of the occurrence in the sentence of two or more CA expressions standing side by s ide  , the type of their multiple occurrences hou ld be resolved according to the followings trategy :  ( a ) If the leftmost CA expression is a focussing or likelihood CA expression followed by a sentence adverbial  , the multiple occurrence with the intrac luster interpretation is involved  , cf . not surprisingly , at least probably . , probably correct l Z . 
( b ) Otherwise the multiple occurrence with the hierarchical scope interpretation is invo lved  , cf . surprisingly not ( to Brooklyn ) , probably at least ( Terry ) ~ not onlz ( computers )   . 
(For lack of space we cannot present here the a lgorithm of analysis  .  ) 6 . Lexical Properties of CA Expressions The c lass of CA expressions should be considered as open-ended due to the existence of the product ive  ( morphological and syntactic ) means for the formation of new CA express ions  ( cf . e . g . the adverbial ending_LJ . Zor the formation of new CA expressions by syntactic derivation : t_oomy_surpriser to the surprise of my_brother  , etc .   , similarly as the classes of expressions of other complementations  ( Time , Place , Manner ) are open-ended , with the exception that the majority of CA expressions can be listed  ( we have empirically listed over 300 of CA expressions , but the list canot be presented here for lack of space  )   . Thus , Complementation of Attitude should be v ie we das one of the finite tools of natural language by means of which it is possible  , in a functional description , to economically account for the infite and changing reality of natural language  . 
The ( open-ended ) class of CA expressions can be divided into two immediate subclasses  , lamely , sentence adverbials and focussing adverbial s  )   , each of which can be further divided into several groups  ( for example , sentence adverbials can be divided into at titudinal disjuncts  , and expressions of likelihood ) . Sentence adverbials semantically differ from focussing adverbials essentially in the following respects : i  ) Sentence adverbials , unlike focussing adverbials , essentially exhibit full lexical semantics  , being salva veritate paraprasable by means of clauses containing lexically correspond ing adjectives or verbs  ( cf . 
surprisingly-it is surprising that ) . Out of focussing adverbials , only not is so paraphrasable ( cf . it is not the case that ) . 
Such paraphrases should be viewed as scope -ambiguous in the same way as CA expressions s t and ing in the surface sentence-initial position  . 
( ii ) Sentence adverbials ( with the exception of non-factive at ti tudinal disjuncts and expressions of like lihood can be salva veritate omitted f roma sentence  , while the other CA expressions cannot : the i romission would at least partly change the truth conditional character of the sentence  , cf . the necessity to use such " hedges " as most Ly_ ~ ~ not onlza_atleastL paartly  , first of all , etc . in answers to questions like IsPretoria inhabited by black-Yes L mostly/not only /first of all  .  )  . 
( iii ) The distribution of sentence adverbials is restricted : they esentially cannot occur in ~ es-no questions and commands  , and they cannot occur in every type of embedded ( dependent ) clauses ( e . g . 
in restrictive relative clauses , in conditonal clauses , etc .  )  . 
( iv ) On the/multiple occurrence of CA express ions with the hierarchical and intraclus terscope interpretations  , sentence adverbials and focussing adverbial sexhibit reverse scoping relations  . For example , with the hierarchical scope interpret at ion  , style disjuncts exhibit wide scope over factive attitudinal disjuncts  , which in turn exhibit widescope over non- factive attitudinal disjuncts  , which in turn exhibit widescope over expressions of likelihood  , etc . With focussing adverbials , for example at least exhibits wide scope over almost  , etc . 
7. Conclusion
In the present paer we have described the init ial stage of the work on the integration of about three hundred adverbial expressions  ( such as surprisingly , probably , briefly , ~ ~ at least L for examp . .l_9 . 
etc .   , specifying , in a broad sense of the word , how the focus , or the new information of a sentence , holds ) into the analysis and synthesis of sentences within a system of automatic quest ion-answering without a prearranged data base  ( TIBAQ )  , connected with the Functional Generative Description of language  . 
In particular , we have argued that the expressions in quesion occupy  , in the primary case , the focus-initial position and that the ir scope extends over the rest of the focus  , or the new information , of a sentence , their behaviour being economically accountable for in terms of a common type of adverbial complementation  ( Complementation of Attitude ) as embodying the open-ended character of the c lass of these expressions  . 
On the surface , these expressions exhibit surface movement t oscope-ambigtlou  8 positions ( typically , to the sentence-initial or to the preverbal position  )   , which makes it possible to propose several general strategies for the analysis of these expressions as concerns their scope  . 
References :
Bartsch , R . 1972. Adverbial semantik.
Attlena eum-Ver1ag.
Bellert , 1 .  1977 . On Semantic and Distributional Propert ies of 
Adverbs . Linguistic ~8/2, 33'1-350.
Ilaicova , P ; .1973. Negation and Topic vs.
Comment . Philnloogica Pl~sia 16, 81-94.
tlaieova , E .  1983 . On Some Aspects of Presupposiions of Quest ions  . P . 
Kiefer ( ed .  )  , Questions and Answers , Dordrecht : Reidel , pp .  85 -96  . 
llaieova LE . and P . S ~ all 1980 . A Dependency Based Specification of Topic and Focus  . Journal of Linguistic
Calculus 12, 93-140.
k ~ ova ~ Era . and . ~ . _Vrbova 1982 . Or ~ the P . ole of the llierarchy of Activation ill the 
Process of Natural Language
Understanding . COLING 82p ~,_
Proceedings , Praba : Academia and Amsterdam : North-Ilo ll and  , pp .  107-114 . 
Hajicow ~, E . and P . Sgall 1984. Text-and-
Inference Based Answering of
Questions . P . Sgall ( ed.,
Contributions to Functional
Semantics L and ~ ad~e_
Comprehension , Praha : Academia , pp.

Hajicova , E . , P . Sgall and J . Vrbova 1984 . 
Topic , Focus , and llow to Identify Thegn . W . Abraham ( ed . ), Groninger
Arbeitenzurgermanistischen\[ , ij ! ~ , Rijksuniversiteit
Groningen , pp . 121-141.
Koktova , E .  1983 . Towards the Semantics of Sentence Adverbials . First Conference of ACL-Eur%p_9~_ Proceedings , pp .  74-80 . 
Koktova , E . inprint . Sentence Adverbials in a Functional Descrip tion  . To be published by Benjamins . 
Lakoff , G . 197. Adverbs and Modal Operators.
University of Michigan : mimeo.
Materna , P . and Sgall , P .  1980 . Functional Sentence Perspective , the Question Test and Intensional Semantic . s . 
Journal of Linguistic Calculus 1-2 ,  141-160  . 
Platek , M . , J . Sgall and P . Sgall 1984 . A Dependency Base for a Linguistic Descrip to n  . P . Sgall ( ed . ), Contribu Lions to Functional S ~
Semantic stand ~ N_e
Comprehension , Praha : Academia , pp.

Quirk , R ., S . Greenbaum , G . Leech and J.
Svartvik . A Grammar of Contemporary
En~\[_sl ~. London : l , ongmans.
Sehreiber , p .  1972 . Style Disjuncts and the Performative Ana lysis  . Liny :: ~ istic
In E~!~Zy_:3/3,:/21-348.
Sgall , p . 1978. Towards a Pragmatically
Based Theory of Meaning.
Bulletin of Mathematical L in2gu jstics 30  ,  43 -60  . 
Sgall , P . 1982 . Natural Languge Understand-ing and the Perspect ives of Question Answering  . COLING82L Proceedi~s , Praha : Academia and Amsterdam : North-llol l and  , pp .  257-272  . 
Sgall , p . 1983 . Relevance of Topic and Focus for Automatic Question Answering  . V . 
Kiefer , ( ed .  )  , Questions and Answers I ) or drecht : P , eidel , pp .  257-272  . 
SgalI , P .  ,  . Nebesky , A . Goralcikova , and E . 
llajicova 1969 . A Functional A~z1) roach to S#ntax . New York : Elsevier . 
SgalI , P . , E . l lajicovaantiE . Benesova 1973 . 
~ Cj_FOCLIS and Generative Seman-tics . Kronberg/Ts . : Scriptor . 
Sgall , P . and E . II ajieova 1977-78 . F'o cuson
Focus . ~ e Bulletin of
Mathematical Linguistics 28 ,  5 -34  , and 29 ,  23 -41  . 
Sgall , P . E . Hajicova and J . Pane vovain print . The Meaning_of a Sentence in Its Semantic . and Prag~mticAspects . 
To be published by Academia ( Praha ) and P . eidel(Dordrecht ) . 
Strang , 13 .  1971 . Modern English Structure ? l , on don : I-\] . Arnold . 

