Natural
Panel
Language Interfaces - Ready for Commercial Success ? 
Wolfgang Wahl ~ tor ( chair )
Department of Computer Seienco
University of Saarbrfick on
16600 Saarbrficken 11
Fed . Rep . of Germany
Pane lists : aal nmG . Carbone \] l , Gary G . Hendri ? , Marry Tnnnant The goal of this panel is to evaluate three natural anguage interfaces which were introduced to the commercial market in  1985   ( cf . Carnegie Group 1985 , Kamins 1985 , Texas Instruments 1985 ) and to >' elate them to current research in corn putational linguistics  . Each of the commercial systems elec-ted as a starting point for the discussion  ( see Wahlsler 1986 for a functional comparision ) was developed by a wellknown scientist with considerable research experience in NL processing : Language Craft TM by Carnegie Group  ( designed undertile direction of . \] . Carbon cll ) , NL Menuby Texas Instruments ( designed untler the direclion of II . Tennant ) , and Q&ATM by Symamec ( designed under the direction of G . Hendrix ) . 
This discussion coln plements a panel at COLING 84-   ( see SparckJones et al 1984 )  , which debated the proposition that database query is no longer a paradigmatic problem to r computational linguistics  . 
A commercial success of NI , imerfaces could have a great value to our tield . When thousanct ~ of users appreciate the capabilities of NI  , interlaces , computational linguists have something to be proud of  . The economic interest might pushfbrward then e . eded basic research and secure its funding . For the first time in the history of computational linguistic stile large user comumnities of NL system sold as mass products provide a basist brserious empirical research on the dialog behavior of realend-users  . 
The discussion may in lluenc . e computational linguistics as a basic science by t be ussing it to actual needs and by pointing out new problems which are typically identified when NL interfaces are transle  . rred out of research laboratories . 
I ask cd tile pane lists to discuss the following questions in par--ticular : I  ) How successful are the comnmrcial sysems ?-\]\[ low many copies have been sold ?- To what extent are they being used on a regular basis by the customers ? How much money do they save ? Are there any cost-benefit analyses ? Are the systems empirically evaluated in a cmnmer-cial environment ? Which evaluation methodologies are used ? How well do current users adapt to the limitations of the syslems ? What are the main areas of application ?  2  ) Wha are the most important factors for successo faNL interf ? tce : -- the linguistic and conceptual coverage ? its robuslness ? the degree of portability and transportability ? the qualily of tools l bradapting the systems to a new altplication ?  3  ) Isn't it too early t bracommercialization fNL systems ?  4  ) l ) on't you see the danger that tile customers lose interest in NL processing for ever if their ow : r blown expectations cannot be fulfilled by the systems currently available ?  5  ) Is it just a tremendous amount of engineering to trans-ff  ) rm are search system into a commercial product mr is it much more  ( e . g . new concepts , algorithms , data structures ? )  6 ) How do you see the evolution of tile market for NL interfaces ? What are your market for cast hypotheses ?  7  ) Should commercial systems be designed for main frames  , powerful AI workstations or personal computers ? 8  ) Is it a market advantage if the system is multilingual  ( e . g . if there exists not only an English version but also a French  , German , Spanish and Italianone ) ? 9 ) What cm'rent research in . computational linguistics and artificial intelligence seems most important tbrim proving lhequality of the current products ?  10  ) Considering the next generation of commercial NL sy-stems  , how do you assess the role of-NL generation - cooperative response generation speech act recognition -- user modeling-hybrid representation languages  ( e . g . KL-TWO,
KRYPTON )- new types of grammars ( e . g . FUG , GPSG , LFG,
TAG)-multimedia communication ( e . g . luixtures of text , gra-phics , gestural input ) . 

Carnegie Group ( 1985 ) : The Language Craft TM Manual . Release 2 . 0 . Pittsburgh , iA . 
Kamins , S . (1985): Instruclion Manual Q&A . Version 1 . 0 . 
\]) oeunnent No.:1-001. Cupertino : Symantec.
SparckJones , K . , Bates , M . , Carbonell , J . G . , Fliekinger , D . , McKeown , K . R .  (1984 . ): Natural Language and Databases , Again . In : Proc . of COLING 84, Stanford , CA . , p . 182-193 Texas Instruments ( 1985 ) : Natural Language Menu User's Guide . Digital Systems Group , Dallas , Texas . 
Wahlster , W .   ( 1986 ) : The Role of Natural Language in Advanced Knowledge-Based Systems  . In : Winter , H . led . ) : Artificial Intellig c , ~ Pe and Man-Machine Systems .   ( Lecture Notes in Control and Information Sciences  , VoI .  80) , Berlin , tIeidelberg , New York , Tokyo : Springer , p .  62-
