Lexieal Database Design:
The Shakespeare Dictionary Model
H . Joachim Neuhaus
Westf ~ ilische Wilhelms - Universit ~ it , FB 12
D-4400 Mfinster , West Germany
1. The Data
The S'hakesp gareDt'cit bnar ~/ ( SHAD ) project has been using structure database since 1983  . The system is implemented on a PRIME 250-II computer using standard CODA SYL--DBMS software and related tools  . The project has been able to draw on a vast repository of computerized material dealing with Shakespeare and the English lexicon  . 
Initially , it was part of the " Sonderforschungs bereich I00 Elektronische Sprach forschung " sponsored on the national level by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft  . The research team has been directed by Marvin Spevack and H  . 
Joachim Neuhaus , now bo that Mi inster , and Thomas Finkenstaedt , now at Augsburg . Spevack's O'o raplete and Syateraah'c ~ on cordanoe to the Workso /  , ~ hakospeare ( Hildesheim and New York ,  1968-1978 ) and Finken staedt's Ohronalogt ~ alEn\]h ) hDich on arj / ( Heidelberg ,  1970) , both in machine readable form , were used in a computer-assisted lemmatization procedure  ( Spevack , Neuhaus , and Finkenstaedt 1974) . 
A chronologically arranged dictionary , where entries are sorted according to the year of first occurrence  , makes it possible to " stop " the development of the recorded English vocabulary at any desired moment and to compare  , for instance , Shakespeare's vocabulary with the corpus of English words recorded up to  1623  , when the F , ist Fohb appeared ( Neuhaus 1978) . The set of words in Shakespeare can be compared with the complement set of words available in Elizabethan English  , but not attested in Shakespeare's works . In this way there is a systematic integration into the total vocabulary  . As a result , our database model can easily be expanded or transfered to cover larger or different vocabularies  . 
In order to present the complete Shakespeare an vocabulary and to disengage SHAD from dependence on a single edition of Shakespeare  , the data were expanded to include all : Jtage directions and speech-prefixes in all quartosup to and including the F  , 'r , ,t Foho ( Volume VII of the ~ omple ~ eando ? yaJ ! emait ~ Ctoncordance to the Workso/S'hakesI  , eare ) , and the " bad " quartos ( Volume VIII ) . 
Volume IX presents all substantive variants , producing a composite Shakespeare anvocabulary in modern and eventually old spelling  . 
In analysing this material a strict differentiation between vocabulary level and text level has been observed  . 
Further data-preparation on the vocabulary level concentrated on formal properties of Shakespe are an lemmata  , such as morphological structure , or etymological background . There is a complete morphology for all lemmata ( ca .  20 , 000 records ) , which gives detailed structural descriptions of derivations  , compounds , and other combinations , as well as all inflected word forms , as they occur in the text . The etymological data include word histories and loan relations  , again supplemented by chronological data . Content-oriented criteria were used in a taxonomi classification of all lemmata  ( Spevack 1977 )  . On the whole , there are more than thirty fields of information in the origina lemma-record file  . For the multidimensional analysis and presentation of these resources it seemed natural to use database concepts  . 
Due to a special intervention of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the support of the Ministry  , which we both gratefully acknowledge , we could implement our first database in 1983 on a newly installed PRIME 250-II computer . The PRIME DBMS software , which we use , is actually one of the first commercial products which closely adhered to the CODASYL network data model  . 
The design started with a database schema for Shakespearean word-formation and etymology  . Since then the system has grown steadily including no wathesaurus structure and a link to the text itself  . The database is accessed in batch modeu : ~ zing the FORTRAN and COBOL interfaces  , and interactively with the VISTA query language and report generator  . Of course , in a first implementation not only the database schema itself  , but the preparation of files , and the programming of the database creation job have to be carried out  . The first word-formation database was established in three separate steps  . The total time needed to complete the job was about  17 hours . Physical design is especially important in large databases  . Our Mi inster team was interested in that aspect from the very beginning  ( DSge 1984 )  . 
2. Prelirainary Design Considerations
Linguists and lexicographers a relate comers to the field of database applications  . Database software has been available since the early  1960's   . The early 1970's brought a wide variety of commercial products and a consolidation on the conceptual side  , which ultimately led to standardization , design philosophies , and specifications of " normal forms " . At that time lexicographers still used the concept of an archive when talking about new technologies  , uchas Barnart (1973) , Chapman (1973) , and Lehmann ( 1973 ) at the 1972 International Oon/grence on Le$1~ojzraphy in EnC/tsh . 
Similarly , in the late 1970'% we witnessed preparations for a Stanford Computer Archive of Language Materials  . There is nothing wrong with the idea of an archive  . But a database is should only be used as a technical term  . Perhaps " databank " may be used instead of " database " when talking about files of data  , or archives in a conventional sense . The As ~ oosal : an/or lh'terary and . L : nym ' ~ hvOorayult'ny may have had this clarification in mind when naming its specialist group " Structured Data Bases "  . 
Although hierarchical data models and network models had been available since the early  1960s   , and relational architectures since the early 1970s   ( Codd 1970 )  , software implementations were not generally accessible in university computing e entres due to high cost  , and lack of special support . Although the M finster computing centre had the hierarchical IMS software  , a product of IBM , it was not made available for our project . Looking back from today , that may not have been a handicap for at least two reasons : lexical relationships are only rarely hierarchical in a natural sense  , and , more importantly , hierarchical systems do not have a common standard  . There is no migration path from one software product to another  . Since a Shakespeare database will have a rather long life cycle  , and was mean to be a model for similar projects , the requirement of a standard model seemed to be imperative  . The process of standardization has been proceeding more rapidly for the CODASYL network model than for any other architecture  . 
In the early 1980s there was just this model that fulfilled our requirements  , and this is basically true even today . 
Beginning with the early 1980'$ lexical symposia and conferences had a nample share of papers reporting on ongoin/~research which used the database concept in a variety of ways  . In 1981 Na ~ ao et al reported on " An Attempt to Computerize Dictionary Data Bases "  ( 198~ )  . At the same conference a University of Bonn group  ( Brustkern and Hess 1982 ) presented " The Bonn Iex Lexicon System " , which two years later evolved into a " Cumulated Word Data Base for the German Language "\[ Brustkern and Schulze  1983  )  . A list of similar projects could easily be extended  . 
One might have expected that the logical design of lexical databases would have built on structural ~ where we typically find entities and relationships  , and in general , set theoretic notions , which can directly be translated into conceptual data structures  . 
Surprisingly , in many designs , linguistic considerations did not seem to have played a major role  . Instead , the authors simulate conventional layout and type setting arrangements of printed dictionaries  . An example is the widespreadictionary usage to print one " Head word " in bold type and then use special symbols  , such as the tilde , to refer to the head word , or parts of it , thus saving space for the treatment of further lexical items with the same spelling  . Nagao et al ( 1 982 very faithfully transfered this and other layout details into their design  . But should a conventional " Head word " and its dependencies be a serious candidate for a databasentity ? Are the reasons that led dictionary publishers to accept certain layout techniques at all relevant for an electronic database ? These questions seem not to have been raised  . The design seems to have


System-to-Ailomorph__\[Morpheme-to-Aliomorph .   .   .   .   . IA\[,bOMORPHI . ~ I Allomorph-to-Segment

System-to-Lemmat \[ LB MMA

Figure 1 . Data-Structure for Morphological Families ( SHAD , database fragment become a paradigm case of an imitation design  , where a new technology replicates design features of an older technology  . 
The basic misunderstanding is the false identification of a mere presentation iaprinted dictionary with an underlying lexical information structure  . 
If the " Head word " is not a relevant database ntity  , which entity should be taken instead ? There is only one serious candidate : the lemma  . The lemma is a well defined linguistic notion . It is also we I\[known in computational work due to various automatic or semiautomatic lemmatization algorithms  . It is an abstract notion in the sense that printed dictionaries and database systems need a lemma-name to refer to it  . Language specific conventions usually govern the choice of a lemma-name  . Latin verbs , for example , are customarily lemmatized using the first person singular present form as lamina-name  . A\[emma is the set of all its inflected wordforms  . It thus comprises a complete inflectional paradigm  . Some lemmata have defective paradigms or suppletive paradigms  . Conventional dictionaries quite often include paradigmatic information in their front matter  . The user has to relate specific cases to these examples  . A database can relate these explicitly . A natural way to do this is by a one-to-many relationship between lemma and wordform  . In an author dictionary wordforms will be further related to the text  , and its internal structure . 
A machine-readable dictionary is just a starting point for a structured lexical database  . \[ n the Bonn " Word Data Base for the German Language "  ( Brustkern and Schulze 1983b there is but one databasentity , " LexicalEntry " , which seems to correspond to the lemma rather than to a " Head word "  . The authors speak about the " microstructure " and the " macrostructure " in respect to " Lexical Entries "  , but only the former is discussed in detail . 
The later is only mentioned once : " Special characteristics of the macro structure  ( other than alphabetical order are to be made explicit in the logical structure of the data base "  ( Brustkern and Schulze 1983b . "Macrostructure " is rarely visible in a conventional alphabetic dictionary  , although we are used to " synonyms " and " antonyms "  , dictionary " senses " , and labels that identify technical jargon , or special terminologies in individual dictionary entries  . In the design of a lexical database it is useful to make these various relations between lemmata explicit  . In this manner a user gets more information than by consulting a printed dictionary  . The information hegets is related and structured in unexpected ways  . 
3. A Sample Schema
There are various ways to approach the problem of schema design  . For the 5'habe~peare Diits ' an arj ~ Morphology Database , now an integrated part of the overall architecture  , both object-class methods and query-assertion methods lead to the current schema  ( cf . Figure 1) . There are four base object-classes ( entities : lemmata , segments , all amory h , ~ , and raary heme . ~ having cardinality values between 2 , 500 and 40 , 000 records . Queries were to allow for a direct retrieval on three levels : the conventional level of the lemma  , the level of allomorphs , and the morphemic level . This i : ~ achieved by a virtual record , defined as a subschema ( cf . Figure 2 . In this way the database design mirrors a structural morphological analysis directly  . The concept of a moryho/a~7#~a // amt/jf defined as a set of lemmata which has at least one morpheme in common is thus immediately accessible for database queries  . 
The ultimately Latin prefix IN-has , for example , database links to allomorph such as im-in the lemma impure  , il-in the lemma illegitimate , or it-in the lemma irregular . In Shakespeare's vocabulary there are almost 200 lemmata which belong to this IN'-family . A statistical survey of morphological families in Shakespeare  , reveals characteristic " family types " . Since morphological descriptions are directly accessible for a study of patterns such as nominal compounds  , conversions , or derivations , listings of morphologically similar lemmata supplement family / - ~  .  ~-/
VIRTUAL RECORDSECTION.
VIRTUAL RECORD MOR PHEME-TO-LEMMA;
BASERECORDISSEGMENT ;
MORPHEME OWNS ALLO MORPH
VIA MOR PHE ME-TO--ALLO MORPH;
ALLOMORPHOWNS SEGMENT
VIAAL LOMOR PH-TO-SES MENT ;
LEM MAO WNS SEGMENT
VIAL EMMA-TO-SEGMENT.
Figure 2 . Virtual Record for Morphological Families
SHAD database subschema
Morpheme SPEAK )
Allomorph speak
Frequency Dating vb . speak 111 Oldeng.
bespeak 13 Old eng.
mis--speak 11200 for speak 11800n . speaker 111303 vb . unspeak 41340 adj . unspeakable 51 400 pp . false--speaking 21598 SON vb . respeak 11600HAM outspeak 11603
Allomorph spok-pp . well--spoken 31400 fair-spoken 11460 n . spokesman 11540 pp . foul-spoken 11593 TIT
Allomorph speechn . speech 159 Old eng.
adj . speechless 15 Old eng.
Shakespeare Datings :
HAMH amlat jSONS an n ~ /6TITE ttu ~ Androm cu , ~ Figure 3 . A Morphological Family in Shakespeare's
Vocabulary listings in a study of the morphological articulation of Shakespeare's vocabulary  . The database has access to various additional and specialized kinds of morphological information such sound symbolism  , popular etymology , or contamination . Furthermore , morphological information is by design linked with etymological information  . Morphological families which are etymologically related can be grouped together under one etymon  . One example for such an etymological grouping is given in Figure  4  . The phenomenon of etymologically homogeneous or disparate word-formation  , which has traditionally been of some interest in Shakespeare an studies czn be analysed directly  . These materials are currently being prepared for the forthcoming first volume of SHAD  . 
Any lexical database design should account for externa links with other lexical databases  ( Neuhaus 1985 )  . 
Here again , a common standard is essential The/grama retard is a natural interface in these external relations  . 
Standardization of the lemma concept may therefore be a first step for systematic database connections  . 

Frequency Dating
Family Iro Rlvb . trow 17 Old eng.
n . troth 1111175 vb . betroth 121303 adj . troth-plight 21830 n . troth-plight 11513 pp . new-trothed 11598 pp . fair-betro the d11607
Familylrur Pn . truce 15 12 25
Family IFllt ~ adj . true 849 Old eng.
adv . truly 180 Old eng.
n . truth 361 Old eng.
adj . untrue 70 ldeng.
n . untruth 40 ldeng.
n . true-love 10800n . true 361 300 pp . true-hearted 31471 pp . truer-hearted 11471 n . truepenny 11519 pp . true-born 21589 pp . true-anointed 11590 pp . true-derived 11592 pp . true-disposing I 1592 pp . true-divining 11593 pp . true-telling 11593 pp . true-devoted 11594 adj . honest-true 11596 pp . true-begotten 11596 pp . true-bred 31596 pp . true-fixed 11599 pp . true-meant I 1604
Family trtt ln . trust 11225 vb . trust 221225 adj . trusty 211225 n . mistrust 91374 vb . mistrust 141374 vb . distrust 31430 n . distrust 31513 adj . mist rustful 21529 adj . trustless 11530 n . truster 21537 n . self-trust 11588 adj . distrustful 11589
Figure 4. Etymological Grouping of


Barnhart , Clarence L . "Planfor a Central Archive for Lexicography in English  . " In Annalso/the Hew York Academyo ~ , fct ' ~ ncea , No . 211 (1975), pp .  302-306 . 
Brustkern , J . and K . H . Hess . " The Bonnlex Lexicon System : " In iext cography tn the Electron tcA\]e  . Ed . J Goetschalckx and L . Rolling . Amsterdam : North-Holland , 1982, pp .  38-40 . 
Brustkern , J . and W . Schulze . " Towards a Cumulated Word Data Base for the German Language  . " Prec . Sixth International Conference on Computers and the Humanities  . 
68 June 1983. Raleigh , North Carolina.
" The Structure of the Word Data Base for the German Language  . " Prec . International Conference on Data Bases in the Humanities and Social Sciences  . 1012 June 1983 . New Brunswick , New Jersey . 
Chapman , Robert L . " On Collecting for the Central Archive . " In Annal selthet , rew York Academyo/~qcs~ncgs , No . 211 (1975, pp .  307-311 . 
todd , E . F . " A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks  , " ~ or nmunl cahbnsel the ACA ~ ,  13 . 6 (1970), 377-887 . 
D6ge , Michael . Problems clues EODAEYi-Datenbank-systems , dargestell tam B stap teldes DB MS- , ~ of lware-Pake lasder Ft?maPRIME . . Miinster , 1984 . 
Finkenstaedt , Thomas . A ~ hronolocteal Enghsh Dschbnary . Z : ahn ? @0~000 f?ordsmOr dero/their Earfiest Known Occurrence  . Heidelberg , 1970 ( with Ernst
Leisi , Dieter Wolff).
Lehmann W . P . " On the Design of a Central Archive for Lexicography in English  . " In Anna  #elthet Iew York Academyo / , re:knees , No . 211 (1975, pp .  312-317 . 
Nagao , M . et al " An Attempt to Computerize Dictionary Data Bases  . " In Ieztco . craphy tn the Electron lcAge . Ed . J Goetschalckx and L . Rolling . Amsterdam : North-Holland , 1982, pp .  51-78 . 
Neuhaus , H . Joachim . " Author Vocabularies compared with Chronological Dictionaries  . " Bullehnel the Assoc , ' a hb , /or Zderary and itn  #m~hc Computing ,  6 (1978) 1519 . 
"Design Options for a Lexical Database of Old English  . " Problemsel Old Enghahie . r ~ cofraphy . Ed . Alfred Bammesberger . Eichst~tter Beitfiige 115 . Regensburg , 1985, 197-210 . 
Spevack , Marvin . A Uom?1ele and ~ qyalemah cConcordance to the Worksel Shakeap #are  . 9 volumes . 
Hildesheim , 1968-1980.
"SHAD : A Shakespeare Dictionary , " #omlmter ~ , n thet Iumam h~s . Ed . J . L . Mitchell . Edinburgh , 1974, 111-123 . 
( with Th . Finkenstaedt , H . J . Neuhaus ) " SHAD\[AS hakespeare Dictionary) . Toward a Taxonomic Classification of the Shakespeare Corpus  . " ~ omyuhnytn the Arnm and tba . Proceeding sel/he Th/rd Internah on al O'on / erenee on O ' ompul : n ? tn the tfuman  , h'es . Ed . Serge Lusignan and John S . North . 
Waterloo , Ontario , 1977, 107-114.
