Designing and testing linguistic development phases in a 
machine translation project

Bente Maegaard,
Institute for applied
and mathematical linguistics
University of Copenhagen
N jalsgade 96
DK-2300 Copenhagen S

In the first sections of the paper the design of a scheme for building up linguistic coverage in a multilingual machine translation project  ( EUROTRA ) is discussed and a solution is proposed which also takes into account the extensibility of the system  , and in the last section the aspect of testing is brief Iy discussed  . 
i ~ The environment ?
This paper concerns a concrete project , EUROTRA , but the problems described are of a general nature  . 
Those basic characteristics of EUROTRA , which are relevant here , are the following . 
EUROTRA aims at producing a pre-industrial prototype for machine translation between the  9 languages of the European Community . The vocabulary to be covered is around 20 . 0 00 lexical items within specific text types a ~ within a specific subject field  . 
EUROTRA is divided into phases , each with their subgoal . The goal of the second phase is the development of a small-scale translation system  ( all languages )  , for a limited vocabulary (2500 items ) , based on a corpus text . The goal of the third ( and final ) phase is the development of a more general system  ( not corpus based , extenslhle ) with the coverage mentioned above . 
NOTE : In this description we have only ment ioned the goals of l in ~_ vistic development  , and deliberately left out all other aspects of the project  ( research , software etc . ) . 
It should be mentioned as well , that the treatment of the Spanish and the Portuguese languages is a little delayed  , because Spain and Portugal joined the Community after EUROTRA had started  . 
The project can thus be characterised by three important features : i  ) median-scale 2 ) extensible 3 ) imllti-iingual A fourth one is that it is corpus -based at one stage  , but has to develop into a more general system ? The fact that the project is medium-sized means that it is necessary to define various development phases for the linguistic coverage - it cannot be built in one single block  . 
Furthermore such an approach whereby the full task is broken down into smaller tasks  , supports the final goal that the system should be extensible  , because the extensibility is builtin and is being tested already during the development  . 
The fact that the project is a multi-linsual machine translation project implies that for each language the same or equivalent phenomena should be treated at the same time  , so that translation is possible . 
Below we will describe the development of the lin -guistic coverage in the second phase of the project  . 
In the second phase we are working with one single " corpus " text which exists in all the  9 languages ( Danish , Dutch , English , French , Gerlaan , Greek , Italian , Portuguese , Spanish ) . In fact the goal of the second phase is to create a machine translation system which is able to t ranslate this text  . The text is the Commission of the European Communities " proposal for the ESPRIT programme  , some sample texts are shown below , to give an idea of the similarities and the differences  . 
One cane . g . notice that participle constructions may correspond to relative clauses  ( in some languages , llke English , there is a choice between the two , in others , like Danish , only one is possible ) , one can also notice the complex use of future and modality in will need  , devront ( avoir ) , skal ( have ) , braucht . These are just typical and well-known examples of differences/slmilarities between the languages treated  . 

De , somer involve retiud viklingo ganven delse af programmel  , skal have adgang til progranm leludvik-lings verkt @ jerietgradvismereintegreretmilj ~  , og de , somharmed data matst@t ~ et konstruktion(CAD ) . . . .
Those involved with the development and use of software will need access to software development tools  , in a progressively more integrated environment , and those involved with computer aided design ( CAD )   . . . .

Les personness ' occupant du d6ve loppement et del ~ tilisation du logiciel devront avoirace  , saux out ils de d~veloppemeut deplus in t~r~et celles in t~ress~es parl a conception assist ~e parordinateur  ( CAO )   . . . .

We rander Entwick lungund demEins at zvon Software beteilig tist  , brauchtim Rahmeneiness chrittweise starker integrierten Umfeldes den Zugriff zu Soft-ware -Entwieklungswerkzeugen  . We rslchmit dem rechner gest ~ tztenEnt wurf ( CAD )   . . . be fass t . . . 
2. The definition of linguistic coverage.
=============================== Avery obvious way of ensuring correspondence between the phenomena treated in the various languages is of course to treat the first n  ( n = 5/10/25 ) pages in each language ( extensional definition of coverage )  , because it is given that the texts are equivalent  . But such a method would have nothing to do with designing  , as one would get a random collection of linguistic phenomena  . Furthermore the extension to a greater coverage ( e . g . next 20 pages ) can normally not be done in a systematic way ( because the point of departure was not syste -matle  )  . It is wellknown that this working method has several disadvantages : it gets easily out of control  , so that error correction become sim-system becomes unknown  . 
Therefore we have made a description of what the grammars of the various sub-perlods should cover  ( an intensional definition )  . It follows from the discussion above that such a definition of the coverage of gray  , mr and vocabulary has to meet the following conditions : I  ) it has to describe equivalent phenomena In the various languages  2  ) it should be possible to extend the linguistic coverage  , without throwing away ( too much of ) the grammars and dictionaries already produced . 
Point 2 ) above led to suggesting that in the first period one should concentrate on developing a system contaning the sceleton of a sentence and its main building blocks  . Therefore the first definition of linguistic coverage covers main clauses with no dependents  ( with one exception )  . Such sentences are of course quite simple , but it should be noted that the main clauses may contain adverbials in all possible positions  , and all arguments in all possible orders . The idea is that e . g . adverbial " slots " in a next version of the grammar is then expanded to be filled not only by adverbs  , but by adverbial clauses . 
An overview of the scheme made for the development of the linguistic coverage in the second phase of EUROTRA is given in the appendix  . In the following we will co~ent on the reasoning behind it  . 
Att ~ constituent level we have first a fail the noun phrases  . All types of noun phrases are treated in the first round  , i . e . all types of modification of the noun itself or any of its modifiers inclu-ding participles  . This inclusion of participles entails the inclusion of relative clauses in order to make translation possible  , ef . translation from French into Danish of the above examples s ' occupant  , int ~ ress~es . 
In the first round no control verbs are treated , as this would add the complication of empty elements and coindexing  . By the same rule no modal verbs are treated in the first period  . Auxiliary verbs however are accepted , as they together with the main verb form one unit at a later stage of analysis  . 
The fact that modal verbs are excluded has led to exclude also the future tense  , - as the future auxiliary is in many languages a modal verb  . As for other verb tenses the following are treated : only indicative  , both active and passive , present and past tense , and tenses made by combination of pre-~sent and past tense of auxiliaries with participles  ( ~ perfect , pluperfect ) . We do not include subjunctive , and not infinitives . 
In order to avoid coindexing , also some of the pronouns have been omitted : personal and demonstra-!tive  . The pronouns included are : possessive , rela-!rive , reflexive , indefinite , and all adjecival pronouns ( not because these do not involve co-indexing , but because missing coindexing is hoped to be less damaging in these cases  )  . 
In the second period the following complications are added : Subordinate clauses ~ adverbial as well as nominal  . These clauses may take the place of simple adverbials or noun phrases of the first period  . This means that the grammar rules specifying sentence patterns has to be slightly modified  . 

Furthermore participle constructions with sentential function are added  . As mentioned above participles modifying a noun were part of the first period  . Control verbs and infinitives are also added , and simple coordination ( coordination of noun phrases , adjective phrases , adverbs , prepositional phrases ) . 
Participles , control constructions and coordination all require empty eleraents and coindexing  . Correct treatment of relative and other pronouns also involve the use of a coindexing mechanism  . 
Furthermore , as a complication to noun phrases and adjective phrase @  , sentential arguments for nouns and adjectives are added  . 
The last type of grammatical construction , which is added in the second period , is verbless sentences ( headlines , titles etc . ) . As sentences they have a different grammar , but also as noun phrases they may have a slightly different syntax  . 
Finally , in the third period laodal verbs and other modal expressions are included  , as well as various types of movement phenomena . It has been foreseen also to include treatment of parehthetical insertions and appositions  , and a better treatment of pronominal reference , but this may have to be postponed to the third phase of EUROTRA  . 
2a . Comment : Levels of description
In the above short survey we have been using only syntactic and morphosyntactic criteria  . But as any other natural language project EUROTRA operates with deeper levels of description as well  . 
The definition of the linguistic coverage has to take phenomena at these levels into account as well  . I lere we may take the verbal tense/verbal time as an example  . 
In the first period only main clauses are treated and only some tenses and only at the morpho -syntac-ticlevel  ( a waiting a semantic legislation for the representation of time  )  . In the second period the time legislation , i . e . the deep representation of the tenses , is implemented , and in the third period it is extended to subordinate clauses at the surface as well as the deep levels  . 
This is of course one way of defining linguistic coverage  . It could be argued that a more reasonable approach would be to start from the interface structure definitien which is common for all languages and define the coverage in terms of this  . 
We find at least two arguments against this : first  . of all the practical one that a full definition of the interface structure was not ready when the first implementation started  . Secondly , the l % nguistic data which have to be treated are expressed as surface text  , and it seems more reasonable to define coverage systematically in terms of this surface representation  , than in terms of the abstract representation . 
2b . Lexical coverage
An aspect of linguistic coverage which has not been treated above is the lexical coverage  . The lexical items are of course taken from the corpus of the second phase of EUROTRA  . But a definition of lexical coverage consists in more than just defining the vocabulary : it also consists in defining the content of the dictionary  , the number of readings to be distinguished , the feature system to be used . 
The reason that the vocabulary and its number of readings cannot be seen as being defined by the corpus text itself is that this would be too spec i-fic and hence to oun systematic  , i . e . not easily extensible . Here the question of extensibility may be a little different than for the grammar  . Exten-sibility of a lexicon in terms of adding new items  , using the same features as in an earlier version of the dictionary  , presents no problem . But when the addition rather consists in adding new distinguishing features  , i . e . new readings , all the relevant iexica \] entries have to be checked for modification  . The only measures which can be taken to facilitate this type of extension of the dictionary is to use a reasonably well-structured set of : features  , so that extensions may concern only one feature or a few features at a time  . 
3. Concluding remarks on extensibility.

While not claiming that the above defined scheme of progressively growing linguistic coverage is tile only possible one  , we believe to have sllown that it is a reasonable one  , with respect to the languages involved , and with respect to extensibility . The modifications of the grammar whicb are necessary when going from one period to the next can in most cases be made very locally  . Take as an example the extension of a noun phrase to comprise sentential complement  ; this can be done almost solely by additions to the grammar  , but obviously a few modifications a ~ the existing grammar cannot be avoided  . 
Furthermore we want to add some comments on the possible definition of the linguistic coverage in the third phase of EUROTRA  ( and may be beyond )  . It may well be that , taking into account the complexity of I : he system ~ and the multitude of languages  , it will be more revealing to define the linguistic coveragt ~ in a negative way : by stating the phenomena which are not treated  . Internally however , in the project , and in particular in the language groups , the expll cit , intensional definition of coverage will always be needed  , and will be tile basis ol the linguistic design . 
Before we leave this section on definition of linguistic coverage we coul  . d add information on the actual status of implementation : the first period coverage was obtained for most imlguages during spring  1987  , second period will be obtained early 1988 , and third period mid 1988 , for all tile main modules : analysis , transfer and generation . 
4. Testing
This is a very brief sketch of the types of testing needed to cheektile linguistic coverage  . The type of testing which is adequate is of course dependent on the way in which the coverage has been defined : If tile extensional definition of a corpus has been adopted  , then tile testing is very simple : check if the corpus can be treated adequately  . 
If an inteusional definition is adopted like the one suggested above  , the question of testing becomes less simple , because the claims of the system are more general : all sentences described by tile grmn mar and the lexicon should be treated adequate-ly  , and such a set of sentences will normally be infinite  . 
\[ ereit seems reasonable to combine two approaches : first of all  , the conduction of a systematic test , whereby all types of constituents , and a reasonable amount of combinations of constituents are tested  . 
And secondly , also to test tlle grammars and dletio ~ naries developed against " real " text  . This last testing allows for random combinations that were not take a into account by those devising the systematic test  . All this testing should be done after the implementors " testing is performed  , and by a different group of people . 

The definition of the linguistic coverage of the second phase of EUROTRA was made by Charlotte Touhro  ( then : EUROTRA-DK , now : ALPS , Switzerland ) and the present author . 
We also want to thank the many collaborators in EUROTRA who consented on this definition  , thereby improving it . 

Alan Meibyp . 104-106.
(notitle ), Proceedings of COLING86,
Appendix : schematic overview of the elements of the sub-periods  . 
Periodi.
Sentences containing one main clause with a verb- in any tense except for morphologically expressed future-in active or passive-in indicative  . 
Constituents that are themselves not sentences , except for modifiers with verb algovernor in a noun phrase  ( participles )  . 
Constituents that do not contain sentences , except for strictly subordinated , modifying relative clauses and partieipai constructions  . 
Fully expanded noun phrases except for appositions  ( this includes all kinds of modification with adjectival phrases  , numerals ~ prepositional phrases etc . ) . 
All pronouns except for personal and demonstrative pronouns  . 
All adjectives , including prouominal adjectives.
All adverbs.
Coordination , only for simple noun phrases.
Period 2 ( extensions).
Subordinate clauses , adverbial and nominal.
Infinitives governed by control verbs , and " free " infinitives ( infinitives governed by modal verbs are excluded )  . 
Participles with sential function.
Sentential arguments for nouns and verbs.
Coordination of noun phrases , adjective phrases , adverbs , prepositional phrases , but excluding verb phrases and clauses . 
Verbless sentences.
Time in laain clauses
Period 3 ( extensions).

Tilae in subordinate clauses.

Apposition , parenthetical insertion.
Pronominal reference.

