Default Logic , Natural Language and
Generalized Quantifiers
Patrick Saint-Dizier
1 RISA-INRIA , CAMPUS de BEAULIEU , 3504 2 RENNES-Cedex FRANCE

Thause of default logic to represent various linguistic constru  , ' tions i explored in this paper . Default logic is then integrated into a theory of natural anguage seman-flee  , namely Generalized Quantifiers . Finally , proper tiee of haterest to the AI community such as the characterization of troth peraietence and come inferential patterns are emphasized  . 
1 Introduction
Default logic\[Reiter 80\] is now commonly used in artificial intelligence systems and turns out to be one of the major research fields in knowledge representation  . One of the first motivations of default logic wan to give a more accurate semantic represemtation to natural anguage statements of the form : 
Birdsfl ~:
Most birds fly.
or ~ arguably:
Typical l2o ; birdslty ~
The idea was to define a representation that permits ex~ceptions to be coherent togeLher with a general statement or law  . - Very so on this linguistic motivation be can m somewhat ne-gh  ; cted , yielding the way to theoretical investigations in non~monotonic reasoning and to the elaboration of automatic the ~ or emprover  ,  . For a good introduction see\[Besnard 89\] . The only works we are aware of in natural anguage processing are the use of default logic to solve anaphor as \[ Dunin-Keplitz  84\]  , to model dialogs\[Joshi et al 87\] and to derive presuppositions from sentences \ [ Mercer  88\]  . 
In this contribution , we come back to the very first moti~ration of default logic and explore its integration i to natural language semantics  , as introduced in \[ Saint-Dizier 87\] . More precisely , we propose an integration of default logic into Gent  . 
eralized Quontifiers framework \[ Barwise and Cooper  81\]  . This leads us to reformulate default logic within the framework of set theory defined on universes  . We first propose several types of linguistic expressions for which a representation by a default rule turns out to be relevant  . Next , we present some basic properties about truth persistence of statements represented by default logic and  , finally , we propose several inferential pat~terns which permit oderive new default rules on the one hand and new linguistic expressions on the other hand  . 
2Default logic for natural language semantlcs 2 . 1 In t roduct ion to de fau l t l og ic A default rule has the following general form : 
P : R

The meaning of this deduction rule is that given x such that  . 
P is true , if there are no contradiction to R being true in the current world  , then infer C . P is called the prerequisite and C is the conclusion  . R is a condition which has to be coherent with the current world  . 
Such a rule can be used to represent general laws or statement such as: 
Mostravens are black.

All ravens are black.
as well as contingent facts such as:
Most lights are on.
The first sentence above is represented as : raven ( X ) : black ( X ) black ( X )   ( variables are represented by capitaletters ) The difference between general awn and contingent state--ments is however fund an mntal but it cannot be captured straightforwardly within default logic  . Indeed , in the first example , blackness i taken as a property inherent to ravens  , not completely based on observation but also on induction  . Default logic permits this property to remain inherent or avens even if there are exceptions  . The second sentence is strictly based on observation and is valid only on a certain time intervalt at a given location  1  . The distinction between contingent facts and general laws can however be context-dependent  . Suppose the above sentence is stated in the context of a factory work ~ ing  24 hours every day then the fact that lights are on can be interpreted as a law imposed  , for instance , for security reasons , There is another difference : the first sentence may be true even if there are no ravens in the current world whereas the second sentence requires a nonempty denotation for the part of noun phrase following most  , in other terms , the presence in our example of at least two lights  . 
Default logic permits to assign a property ( C ) to a precise individual in a given world , modulo some coherence conditions ( R ) . This can be contrasted with filzzy and probabilistic  10g   . = ics where a set of individuals is characterized as a whole by a property  . Thus , no property can be deduced for a given in di . -vidu M in this set with a full degree of certainty  . Our choice of default logic is then motivated by the need of being able to make inferences about a precise individual and to provide precise responses  . This does not exclude fuzzy and probabilistie logics  , but it simply has different motivations and uses . 

Using default logical so permits to skip over some recalci-trant representational problems of fuzzy logic  , but , on the other hand , it cannot a keinto account slight differences between  , for example : Most birds fly Versus Almost all birdstty  . 
A majority of birds fly versus A high majority of birdsAy  . 
The question however is to know what is the real nature of the difference between those statements and if it is more than a connotative meaning  . 
At a formal level , it turns out that additional inferential patterns can be formulated when using default reasoning  . Furthermore , due to a certain stability , a default rule used in a semantic representation fa sentence confers to this representation useful properties ~ in a knowledge base context such as : conservativity  , extensibility and some forms of monotonicity . 
Because of their generality and stability , default rules can also play a prominent role to restore consistency in knowledge bases  . 
2  . 2 C lasses o f words and const ruc t ions represented by default logic In a sentence  , a wide diversity of types of words and linguistic constructions confer a certain degree of generality  ( either contingent or permanent ) to the statement in which they are included . In this classfall words like context-dependent determiners  , qnantifl cation ald verbs , propositional adjectives and adverbs and some very specific adjectives  ( worse , perfect , ideal ,  . . . ) . Constructions like superlatives and some agentless passive constructions also belong to this class  . It turns out that these words or constructions can be represented in a number of contexts with a greater precision and adequacy by default logic  . We now briefly examine some simple examples . 
2.2.1 Context-dependent determiners
Determiners like : most , many , several , few and probably determiners like : a majority when they have a universal meaning can be represented by default logic : 
Many workers have a car.
John knows few bird names.
The delegates of most workers have arrived.
Now , a majority o ? students have a car.
Notice the variety of syntactic positions in which those determiners can appear  . Such determiners can also be included into propositional statements : 
John believes that few birds can fly.
Determiners introducing some generic statements also fall in this category: 
A car has four wheels.
which is equivalent to:
Most cars have four wheels.
However , a generic statement like:
A car has at least one door.
should rather be universally quantified.
A context-dependent deer miner in a situation where it has a relative meaning cannot in general be represented by default logic  . By relative meaning , we mean , for example , sentences where the context-dependent determiner is in the scope of a quantification it roducing distributivity : The owners of several carspay an additional tax  . 
Relative meaning can also be introduced by an implicit restriction on the set of instances refered to  , as in:
Johnmet many people today.
~ her ~ the set of people that John can meet in a day is imp ~' ie it ~ yr~stricted to a  ( small ) subset of all the people in the curxent world . 
The latter example shows that default logic cannot be used to represent determiners where the set of elements refered to by the noun phrase following that determiner is restricted by a constituent outside that noun phrase  . Futhermore , th ~ tele-ment introducing the restriction can be explicit  ( e . g . t ~ lay ) or implicit as in:
Johnate many apples.
where the set of apples in which Johnatemany apples can be implicitly restricted by the context  ( e . g . in the basked , in the frig . . . ) or by the semantics of the verb to eat ( a human cannot eat more than a certain quantity of food per day  )  . An informal criterion to determine whether a determiner can be represented by default logic is to substitute all or no respectively for most  , many . . , and few and to check if it is possible to build a coherent world from the cnrent world with less exceptions  ( i . e . a more uniform world as in \[ Delgrande87\] ) so that the universally quantified statement is true  . If there is such a world then the original determiner can be represented by a default rule  . 
For example , consider the sentence :
Johnmet many people today.
uttered in a world where John is the manager of a company  , people refers to the staff of the company and John met every body in the company except n people  ( n being small )  . If we substitute all for many , we obtain the sentence :
John metal people today.
and if we can build a consistent world W ' from W where John met thosen people in addition to the others then many can be represented by a default rule  . 
If John is a politician and people refers to the people who want to vote for him  ( suppose this number is large )  , then it is not possible to consistently build a world in which John met every people in a single day  , in particular if those people are scattered throughout he whole country  . In this latter case , many cannot be represented by a default rule . 
2.2.2 Quantifl cation a \] adverbs
Adverbs introducing a form of universality or contributing to it can originate a default logic based representation : 
Johnsings rarely.
Mary is incidentally ( very rarely ) on time.
John meets Sue almost every day.
John often travels by bus rather than by subway in Paris  . 
For default logic to be used , the concept or the quality modified by the adverb has to be countable and quantifiable  . The first example can be paraphrased as : At most times t  ( or preferably , on most time intervalst ) , by default John does not sing . 
The representation f sentence 2 requires the use of events and is far more complex  . Roughly speaking , we can paraphrase this sentence by : In most eases when Mary has something to do  , she does it later than the scheduled time for this work  . 
This can be formulated in an equiwlent way in terms of default rule  . If el is the event associated with the scheduled time for the beginning of the activity and if  e2 is the event of Mary beginning to do this activity  , then if there is no contradiction with e2 > el then infer that e2 > el . 
Sentence 3 requires events to be associated with , for example , a date and a duration . It can be paraphrased by : If it is not inconsistent that John meets Sue today  ( e . g . 
John is in the same location as Sue , etc . . . ) , then infer that there is a time interwlt during which John meets Sue  . 
Various factors llke temporal factors can restrict he scope of a default : From  8 to 10 am , Mary is very rarely inheromce . 
5 56 but they still have a universal meaning over that restricted domain  . 
2.2.3 Adjectives
Adjectives in the superlative , in particular when the statement is not absolutely incompatible with a small number of exceptions can be represented by a default rule  . This permits to avoid a too strong and definitive formulation  . Consider : The Mon~-Blancis ( one of ) the highest mountains . 
Represe:fl ; ing this sentence by default logic permits : s to assume that a mountain whose elevation is unknown is lower than the Moat-Blanc  , s to accept without introducing inconsistencies that there are mountains with a nelevation explicitly known and greater than the MontBlanc elevation  . 
This approach is particularly relevant for superlatives : it turns out indeed that most superlatives are not completely universal  . 
They are often true in a coherent subset of the current world  . 
In the same range of ideas , adjectives such as ideal , worse of perfect turn out to be , in most contexts , implicit superlatives ranging over several properties  . In:
Jim is the ideal hiker.
idea \] couht mean that Jim has most of the qualities of a hiker in something close to the superlative  . Thus , such a sentence can be represented by a conjunction of properties in the superlative  , each of them being separately represented by a default rule  . 
The range of properties refered to by adjectives llke ideal or worse can be restricted  ( or a specific property can be emphasized ) as in : Mary is the worse person to work with : she is  ( almost ) never on time . 
where the quality refered to is to be never on time  . In this case , the representation becomes much simpler . 
2 . 2 . 4 Agent less pass ive const ruct ions Agentless passive constructions of verbs like to admire  , to hate , to neglector ~ olaug that , in some contexts lend very well themselves to a representation with defaults  . For example , a sentence like:
Mary is admired.
can be paraphrased by:
Most persons who know Mary admire her.
2 . 2 . 5 P ropos i t iona l adverbs and ad ject ives Adverbs and adjective such as probable  , likely , unlikely and certainly in some contexts modify the certainty of a statement  , as in the sentence : It is unlikely that computer science students know baroque music composers  . 
These adverbs and adjectives are basically interpreted with an intensional meaning  . However , representing them by default logic is also very relevant if we do not want to stress only on the likelihood of the statement but if we also want to have a more precise reading  , for example if we want to state that : If X is a computer science student and if it is not consistent to say that X does not know any baroque music composer then infer that X does not know any baroque music composer  . 
An interesting problem at this level would be to investigate the possibility of using default reasoning paired with intension-ality  . Using possible world semantics could be a mean to solve this problem  , but this is still unclear to us . 
3 Integrat ing default logic into General ized Quantiflers In the examples we have given above  , we have restricted our attention to the most straightforward uses of default logic  . In particular , the expressions or concepts used are : ? completely defined  ( no pronominal references ,   . . . ) , ? extensional , ? discrete ( no continuous uses as in " a lot of snow " )  . 
None of these restrictions are , however , essential . Another more important restriction is that universes are supposed to be finite at each time t  , in order to make our notations below computationally tractable  . 
3.1 Generalized quantifiers
To deal with semantic representations , we adopt the spirit of the Generalized Quantifiers framework\[Barwise and Cooper  81\]  . This approach is , in fact , of much interest because it is quite close to current research in knowledge bases  . A generalized quantifier Q denotes a relation among sets of entities in a world W  . It is noted as:
QAB where A and B are linguistic expressions or their set-theoretic equivalents  . For example:
All ravens are black is noted as:
AU ( ravens ) ( are black).
All establishes a relation between the set of ravens and the set of entities which are black  . Let us note the denotation of A in world W ( HA \] lw ) A ' and that of B ( I\[13\]\[w )  , B ' . Then , every generalized quantifier Q can be represented by a corresponding numerical relation RQ\[Van Benthem  86\]  , \ [ Vesterstahl 84 , 85\] with the following definition : QAB ~ R ~ ( IA'-B'I , IA'rlB'I ) . 
In Generalized Quantifiers , determiners are studied in a principled way by looking at their semantic properties  . This study appears to have enough logical foundations to motiw ~  . t c theoretical investigations . Generalized Quantifiers also turn out not to be limited to representing determiners but extends to the semantics of other structure such as conditionals \[ Van 
Benthem 86\].
We now turn to informally introduce default logic into the Generalized Quantifiers framework  . A default rule is basically used to conclude a formula C for a given entity e  , satisfying a prerequisite P , modulo R , However , it is also possible to characterize the set E of elements esatisfying P and for which C can be concluded modulo the coherence control on  1L If we view a default rule as a ternary relation : by-defPR  ( 7 . 
or , simply as a binary relation since , in our context , R an d
C are identical : by-defPC.
then\[\[P\]lw and I\[C\]\[w can be defined and the above relation is a relation among sets of individuals over world W in a way similar Vo the determiners accounted for within the Generalized Quantiflers framework  . In addition , a third set should be mentioned , which is the set of exceptions : , = lIP^- , C\]lw . 
which introduces another interesting type of relation  , out of the scope of the present contribution . 
557 3.2 Some examples
As an illustration , we now present possible representations for some of the examples given above in the previous ection  . 
Those representations have a know hdge-base orientation rather than a pure formal semantics one  . 
(a ) Many workers have a car.
is represented by : by-def ( worker(X ) , car(Y ) Ato-have(X , Y)) . 
(b ) John knows few bird names.
is represented by : by-def(bird(Y ) A name-of(X , Y ) , -1 to-know(john , name-of(X , Y)) . 
(c ) Johnsings rarely.
is represented by : by-clef ( time(T ) , ~ to-sing ( john , T)) . 
T is a precise time or , preferably , a time interval . 
(d ) John meets Sue almost everyday.
is represented as follows : by-def(day(D ) , (3H1 , H2 , H2 > H1 , to-meet(john , sue , time(D , H1 , H2)))) . 
( e ) John often travels by bus rather than by subway . 
is represented by : by-def ( (bus ( X ) Asubway ( Y ) Ato-travel ( john , Z )^(( Z = X)v(z = Y ))) , z = x ) . 
This logical representation means that if John travels by Z which can be either a busor a subway  ( X or Y )  , then , by default , John travels by bus ( i . e . by X ) . 
( f ) The Mont-Blane is one Of the highest mountains . 
is represented as follows : by-def ( (mountain ( X ) A - , ( X = mont-blanc ) Aeleva-tion(X , Y ) Aelevation ( mont-blanc , M )) , Y < M ) . 
( g ) Mary is admired.
is represented by : by-def(to-know(X , mary) , to-admire(X , mary)) . 
We could also add that X has the ability to admire . 
4 Stab i l i ty o f s ta tements represented by default rules Bystability of a statement  , we mean the characterization of conditions under which a statement remains true when the current world is updated  . In our framework , stability means the characterization f the conditions under which the set of elements x that satisfy by-def AB remains unchanged  , i . e . any deduction made from that default rule for any individual x before the updating remains true after the updating  . 
Representations with defaults appear to have slightly different properties than their more classical counterparts  . Among those properties , we now present some of those which are of much interestoknowledge representation systems  . The properties listed below are central to the field of Generalized Quan-tifiers  . 
4.1 Conservativity
For all A , B being linguistic expressions ( or their set-theoretlc equivalents ) : by-defAB~by-defA (  . 4 A B )   ( noted CONS ) The equivalence is straightforward in virtue of the very nature of the prerequisite A  . 
4.2 Extension
Let us first introduce the notion of irrelevance . The idea is that propositions irrelevant to a default statement should have  55B no consequence on any inference involving that statement  . This idea was developped by the philosophical community and  , more recently by \[ Delgrande87\] . In our framework , if we consider the statement : by-defAB , then , intuitively , Cisir relevant for this statement if knowing C does not alter the set of individuals for Which that statement holds  . We differenciate right and leftir relevance : Let W  , W ' and W " be worlds defined on universe U . 
Let A , B and C be linguistic expressions or their set -theoretic equivalents  . We consider the statement by-defAB . 
Then we have the following properties :- left -irrelevance : C is left-irrelevant iff : W '= W UC then 
I\[A\]lw = I\[A \] lw'.
-right-irrelevance :
Let W "= WUC' , then C'isright-irrelevant iff : ?~ wIco~si ~t~  , ~tw(B ( . .~ . .))) = ( y ~ w " I co~te , , tw . ( B ( .   . y .   .  ) )  . 
consistentw ( S ) is a predicate which is true if in world W the statement S is consistent  . 
If W contains disjunctions of formulae , then it is necessary to consider all maximal extensions E of W to define right-irrelevance  . The following condition has to be true : For all E  , maximal extension of W such that : ( 1 ) E ' = EUC . 
(2) E is consistent in W .
(3) xcElco~sia e~t ~( n ( . .~ . .))  =  y ~ E'I consistentw,BC . .tl . .))  . 
Then , we say that C is irrelevant oby-defAB if it is both left and right irrelevant  . Then the property of extension follows : For all A  , B , for all W , W'such that W'is an extension of W where only irrelevant statements to by-defAB have been added  , then : by-defwAB ~ by-defw , A B . (noted EXT ) . 
4.3 Monotonicity
For all A , B , W , W': ( a ) Let W ' be an extension of W such that WNW'is a set of left-irrelevant satements then : by- defw  , A B := ? . by-defwAB(downward left-monotonicity , noted ~ MON ) . 
( b ) Let W " be an extension of W such that WNW n is a set of right irrelevant statement shen : by- defw  , AB == ~ by-def wAB ( downward right-monotonicity , noted MON . L ) . 
Not surprisingly ( default logic is a nonmonotonic logic )  , upward monotonicity does not hold in general . 
5 Inferential patterns
Some inferential patterns within Generalized Quantifiers\[Vesterstahl  84  , 85\] , \[ Van Benthem 86\] also hold , with some restrictions , for default logic . Some additional patterns can be formulated , given the specificities of default logic . These patterns permit to derive new rules from previous ones and to generate new linguistic expressions  . Here are some simple , basic inferential patterns : 5 . 1 Restricted transitivity For all A , B , Clinguistic expressions : ? ( by-defA ( is B ) ) A ( ( all B ) C )  :=~  ( hy-def AC )  . 
( isB ), ( allB), . . . are recta-linguistic expressions corresponding to wellformed linguistic expressions explicitly containing the verb to be or the determiner all  . This inferential pattern can be used , for instance , to deduce ( 2 ) from ( 1 ) :  ( 1 ) Most animals are mammals and All mammals feed their babies  . 
(2) Most animals feed their babies.
via the following instanciation of the pattern : by-def  ( an~mal ( A )  , mammal(A )) A(ali(A') , nmmmal(A ') A(baby-of(B , A ') A to-fec d(A ' , B ))) == ~ by-def(an2mai(A) , baby-of(B , A ) A to-feed(A , B)) . 
Notice that A ' is bound to A in the consequent , because the two formulae are merged . 
The denotation of B need not be included in the denotation of A  . For example : Most workers are union members and All union members are on strike entail : Mast workers are on strike  . 
Here is a not he restricted transitivity pattern : ?   ( by-def X ( is B ) ) A ( ( no B ) C )  ~  ( by-clefA-IC )  . 
or , equivalently : by-def(A(isB )) A((allB ) , -C ) ~ by-defA-iC . 
Thus ,   ( 4 ) c and e deduced from ( 3 ) :  ( 3 ) Most animals are mammals and No mammal cant/y . 
(4) Most animals cannot fly.
Notice that in the patterns already stated , the determiner at the origin of the default remains unchanged in the conclusion  . 
Finally , here is the last restricted transitivity pattern : ?   ( ( all A )   ( are B ) ) A ( by-def BC )  ==~  ( by-def AC )  . 
Then , for example : ( 5 ) All raammals are animals and Most animals are vege-tarians entails  ( 6 ) Most mammals are vegetarians . 
This latter n is however weaker than the previous ones  . Nothing , indeed , excludes that there exist models M ~ in which no n~mnnals are vegetarians since in the premises nothing is said about the intersection of the set of mammals and the set of vegetarians  . If the intersection is empty , then the default rule will simply be never applied  . In the premises of the three tlrst inferential patterns  , there is a guarantee that the intersection of \[\ [ A\]lle and I\[C\]l w is not empty  , provided that I\[A\]Iv / , \[\[B\]lw and\[\[C\]lie are nonempty sets . As a consequence , this latter inferential pattern is valid but its corresponding paraphrase cannot be directly derived  . For example , for ( 6 we could have: ( 6a ) Most mammals are vegetarians . 
(6b ) Several mammals are vegetarians.
(6c ) Some mammals are vegetarians.
The determiner some is more neutral and will be prefered in this type of situation  . 
5.2 Distrlbutivity
If B and C are independent properties then : ( hy-def A ( BAC )  ==~  ( by-defAB ) A ( by-def AC )   ( by . -defAB ) == ~( by-clefAC ) . 
Thus , for example:
Most workers own a car and are married entails : Most workers own a car and Most workers are married  . 
The reverse pattern : ( by-defAB ) A ( by-def X'C ) ~ by-defA ( BAC ) where A ' is a copy of A with different variables  , also holds but it is somewhat weaker in the sense that the denotation of BA Cill W is included in the denotation of B in W and in that of C in W  . Thus , the same remark as for the previous pattern holds : the determiner at the origin of the default rule in the pre~rdses i not preserved and another context-dependent determiner can be more appropriate  , depending on how much the default has been weaken  , i . e . on how much the number of exceptions to the default rule has increased  . This number is characterized by the cardinal of the following set :  ( l\[A^B\]I wn I\[B\]lw ) u ( 1\[AAC\]lwn lie\]lie )  . 
In this case , we also adopt the determiner some as a neutral representation  . 
5.3 Contraposition
For all linguistic expressions A , B and C such that llAll wcIic\]l * , ll Bl lieclic llw , then : by-defAB == Y by-clef ( CA  ~ B )   ( CA--A )  . 
For example: ( 7 ) Most workers are union members entails : ( 8 ) Most people who are not union members are people who are not workers  . 
If ( 3 is the set of all entities of the current world W then contraposition permits to express that : by-def A B ~ by-def ~ B -~ A  . ( Extended contraposition ) . 
This property goes beyond a theorem given in \[ van Eijck  84\] which states that : A quantifier Q observes contrapasition iffQ is of the form :' at most k A are not B '  . 
in the sense that ( 1 ) k is not implicitly intended to be quite small ( with respect othesize of the world ) and ( 2 ) k can be null . In fact , the value of k turns out to be irrelevant since each time a default rule is used a test of coherence is made on a formula  . 
5.4 Cosymmetry
As shown in \[ van Eijck84\] , if C = B , then we have the property of cosymmetry : by-def A  ( AA-~B ) ==~ by-defB ( BA-~A )  . 
Furthermore , sincere flexivity holds for all A : by-def AA we have : by-defAB ? = e~by-defA  ( AAB )  . 
Suppose that : B = -1B' , then : by-defAB~by-defA(AA-~B ') and , finally , from this result and the definition of cosymme -try  , we have : by-defA-~B~by-defB-~A . 
Notice that , due to symmetry of formulae , there is an equivalence instead of an implication . 
For example: ( 8 ) Most teenagers are not married is logically equivalent to  ( 9 ) Most married people are not teenagers . .
This latter result can also be used to build passive forms from their affirmative counterparts  . 
5.5 Subalternacy
From complex relations holding between different classes of determiners  , the property of subalternaey has emerged and turns out to be relevant for statements represented by default logic  . 
This property states that :
For all A , B , by-defAB == ~~ by-defA(AA-1B ) . 
For the same reasons as above , this expression can be simplified and becomes : by-defAB~-~by-defA-~B  . 
(10 ) Most birds fly entails ( 11 ) It is false that most birds cannot fly . 
or , using e ontrapasition and iffew is the opposite of most :  ( 12 ) Few birds does not fly . 
5596 Epilogue
Default logic permits to represent with a greater accuracy and relevance several types of words and constructions  . We have proposed here to integrate it into the formal framework of Generalized Quantifiers  . Default logic also exhibits a number of particular properties at the level of the characterization of the truth persistence of a statement represented by default logic in a knowledge base being updated  . Next , new and revised inferential patterns are introduced and illustrated  . These patterns permit oderive new default rules and to construct new linguistic expressions from previous ones  . 
The forthcoming works include : ( 1 ) The extension and investigation f those linguistic expressions that can be represented by default logic  . 
(2 ) A formal characterization of contextual situations where default logic can  ( or must ) be used , permitting thus the specification of contextual semantic ompositional rules  , coherent with the representation defined in \[ saint-Dizier  86\]  . 
(3 ) The establishment of a link with the logic of presuppositions  . 
(4 ) The integration of default logic into other formal theories of natural language semantics  , in particular into the framework of Situations Semantics\[Barwise and Perry  83\]  . 
tics in Logic Programming , journal of Logic Programming , Vol 4 , Dec .  1986 . 
Saint-Dizier , P . , Default Logic for Natural Language , Logic and Linguistics Conference , Stanford ,  1987 . 
Vesterstahl , D . , Logical Constants in Quantifier Languages , Linguistics and Philosophy , Vol 8-4 ,  1985 . 
Vesterst Lhl , D . , Some Results on Quantifiers , Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic , Vol .  25-2, 1984 . 
Acknowledgements I am very grateful to Philippe Besnard  , Mario Borillo and Jim Delgrande for their useful comments on this work  . It hank also Dag Vesters tahl for providing me several of his publications mentioned below  . This work was supported by the French INRIA and the PRC CNRS Communication Homme-machine  , both civilian public institutions . 

Barwise , J . , Cooper , R . , Generalized Quantiflers and Natural Language , Linguistics and Philosophy ,  4 ,  159-219 ,  1981 . 
Barwise , J . , Perry , J . , Situations and Attitudes , MIT Press , 1983 . 
Besnard , P . , An introduction to Defanlt Logic , Symbolic computation series , Springer-Verlag ,  1989 . 
Van Benthem , J . , Essays in Logical Semantics , Essays in Linguistics and Philosophy , Vol 29 , D . Reidel , 1986 . 
Delgrande , J . , An Approach to Default Reasoning based on a First Order Conditional Logic  , prec . of AAAI-87, Seattle,
WA , 1987.
Dunin-Keplitz , B . , Default Reasoning in Anaphora Resolution , Proceedings o ? ECAI-84 , Pisa , North Holland ,  1984 . 
Van Eijck , J . , Generalized Quantifiers and Traditional Logic , in : Generalized Quantiliers and Natural Language  , J . 
Van Benthem and A . Ter Menlen Edts , GRASS series no . 4 pp 119, Forls , Dordrecht , 1984 . 
Joshi , A . , Webber , B . , Weischedel , R . , Some Aspects of Default Reasoning in Interactive Discourse  , in : Communication F ~ Jlure in Dialogue and Discourse  , R . G . Reilly Edt . , North Holland , 1987 . 
Mercer , R . , Using Default Logic to Derive Natural Language Presuppositions  , proceedings of C$0SI 88 , Edmonton ,  1988 . 
Reiter , R . , A Logic for Default Reasoning , ArtiIicial Intelligence , Vol 13 , pp81-132 ,  1980 . 
Saint-Dizier , P . , An Approach to Natural Language Seman-
