Semantic Interpretation of Pragmatic Clues :
Connectives , Modal Verbs , and Indirect Speech Acts
Michael GERLACH , Michael SPRENGER
University of Hamburg
Department of Computer Science , Project WISBER , P . O . Box 302762
Jungiusstrasse 6, I)-2000 Hamburg 36, West Germany

Much work in current research in the field of semantic-pragmatic analysis has been concerned with the interpretation of natural anguage utterances in the context of dialogs  . In this paper , however , we will present methods for a primary pragmatic analysis of single utterances  . Our investigations involve problems which are not currently well understood  , for example how to infer the speaker's intentions by using interpretation of connectives and modal verbs  . 
This work k , ; part of the joint project WlSBER which is supported by the German Federal Ministery for Research and Technology  . The partners in the project are : Nix dor f Computer AG  , SCSGmbH , Siemens AG , the University of Hamburg and the University of Saarbrticken  . 

Much work in current research in the field of semantic-pragmatic analysis has been concerned with the interpretation of ~ Latural language utterances in the context of dialogs  , e . g . , determining the speaker's goals \[ Allen 83\] , deriving beliefs of one agent about another\[ Wilks/Bien  83\]  , and planning speech acts \[ Appelt 85\] . In this paper , however , we will present methods for a primary pragmatic analysis of  , ~ Jingle utterances to construct user model entries which are the starting point for the higher level inference processes just mentioned  . Our investigations involve problems which are not currently well understood  , for example , how to infer the speaker's intentions by using interpretation f connectives and modal verbs  . 
Our work is a part of the natural anguage consultation system WISllER\[Bergmann/Gerlach  87\]  . Consultation dialogs require a much wider class of utterances to be understood than other applications  ( e . g . , for database interface) . In advisory dialogs wants and beliefs play a central role  . Although a consultation system must be capable of handling the linguistic means which are used for expressing those attitudes  , problems of how to treat modal verbs have received little attention in artificial intelligence and computational linguistics  . 
The interpretation processes described in this paper work with our aemantic representation ! anguage IRS\[Bergmannet  . al .   87\] and generatentries for the user model Representations of utterances in IRS still contain uninterpreted linguistic feature such as modal verbs  , modal hedges , connectives , and tense information . We are presenting methods for deriving the meaning of these features as they occur in utterances : transforming idiomatically-used indirect speech acts  , interpreting connectives in compound sentences , and resolving ambiguities in the meaning of modal verbs by using  , i . a . , temporal restrictions . The last chapter sketches the technical means used by these processes  , i . e . , the semantic representation language , the way rules are encoded , and the asscrtional knowledge base containing the user model  . 
Fig .   1 shows the different stages of the interpretation process  . First , if a connective is found , the analysis process breaks up the sentence into separate propositions  , in the next step idomatically-used indirect speech acts are transformed into a direct question  . The propositions are then interpreted independently during the modal verb analysis which creates one or more proposition alttitudes for each proposition  . These interpretations arc then related , depending on the natural anguage connective . 
Finally , after inferring the appropriate time intervals from verb tense  , the sentence type is used to derive the proposition alttitudes which are entered into the user model  . 
Transformation of Idiomatically-Used Ind irect 
Speech Acts
Speakers often use indirect speech acts because they want to express politeness or uncertainty  . Examples are : " Could you please tell me which bonds have the highest interest rate ?"  , " i'd like to know which . . . ", " I do not know which . . . ." We believe that for appropriately handling such an idiomatic use of indirect speech acts in a consultation system it is admissible to transform such utterances into a simplified form-the corresponding direct quest  ; ~n . 
Therefore the first step in our semantic-pragmatic interpretation is mapping the different ways of asking questions onto one standard form which is the formal representation f the equivalent direct question  . 
Fig .   2 shows the ru ~ e which applies to the idiom " I do not know whether X  . " and transforms it into the representation of the direct speech act " X ? " The rule formalism will be described in detailater  . 

S~actic/Semantic Repre ~\ [ Breaking up Connectives 
Transformation of Idiom slnter pretat ion2f Modal Verbsition
Assertional Knowledge Base
MUT UAL KNOWLED GE
UserWants\]UserBeliefs\]J'i \] FactsFig . !: The stages of the interpretation process Durin $" that transformation process we do not loose any information which might be relevant to the dialog control component of the system  ( not described in this paper )  . 
Before answering any question-direct or indirect -the system has to check whether it is able to answer that question  . If this is not the ease the user must be informed about the limitations of the system's competence  , anyway . 
This argumentation is similar to that of \[ Ellman  83\]  , who argues that it is not relevant whether an utterance is a request or an inform as long as the hearer can detecthespeaker's superordinate goals  . 
(AND ( ASSERTION ? A )   ( HAS-AGENT ? AUSER )   ( HAS-PROP ? A ? P )   ( PROP ? P ( NOT ( AND ( KNOW ? K )   ( HAS-EXPERIENCER ? KUSER )   ( HAS-OBJECT ? K?X ) ) ) ) )   ( AND ( QUESTION ? O )   ( HAS-AGENT?OUSER )   ( HAS-OBJECT ?0 ? X ) )

Fig .   2: A rule for transformlng tho ~ idic ~ m : '7 do not know X . "  102 ' The transformation of indirect speech acts works on the semantic level by applying rules which specify formal transformations of semantic representations of sentences  . 
In this our approach differs from that taken in UC \ [ Wilensky et  . al .   84 and Zernikf Dyer 85\] where a phrasal lexicon is used and the semantic interpretation fidioms is done during the parsing process  . 
Interpretation of Modal Verbs
An adequate treatment of modal verbs is necessary for determining the attitudes of the speaker concerning the state of affairs expressed by the proposition he is asserting  .  1 ) The main problem in interpreting modal verbs is their typical ambiguity  , e . g . , (1) Mein Sohnsodviel Geldhaben . 
In English the two readings are : ' My son is supposed to have a lot of money  . '

' I want my son to have a lot of money.'
Our rules for disambiguating the different readings are based on information which is stored in the semantic representation of the utterance : information about semantic ategories of the subject of the modal verb  ( e . g . , ANIMATE , GENERIC , DEFINIT\]O , the relation between the time expressed by the modal verb and the time of the proposition and whether the proposition denotes a state or an event  . 
(2 ) Ich habe 10000 Markgeerbtund m6chte das Geldir ~ Wierenan legem Sicsollen eine Laufzeity on vier Jahrenhaben  . 
'I have inherited 10000 Marks and would like to inves the money in securities  . '
Two readings of the second sentence : " they are supposed to have a term off buryea  , 's . '

Whey should have a term of four years.'
In the first reading of the second sentence the entry for the user model must contain the proposition embedded in a belief context  , while the second reading must lead to an entry underspeaker's wants  . In order to resolve this ambiguity , the rules compare the time of the proposition with the tense of the modal verb  . For example , if the tense of the modal verb is present and the time of the proposition is sometime in the future  , the system decides that the " want " reading is appropriate  . The problem in our example is to determine the time of the proposition : We have only the information of tense haben  ( to have ) which is a present infinitive and might also denote a future state  . Hence the system tries to final out whether the object of the proposition appears in a Want context of the speaker  . This is the case as is clear from the previous utterance  . . . and I wan$to invest the money in securities and therefore the ~ y ~ tem decides to put the propesition of the ~ c ~ nd sent ~ t ~ e into the user 's want ~ on text as well  .   ( Even if the second utterance is taken to be a belief of the ~ peaker  , the fact that it is cited in this context is sufficient to infer that it is also a want  , why else should the speaker cite this fact in connection with his decision to invest in securities ?  )  1 ) For the semantics of English modal verbs , which is quite different from the German , see\[Boyd/Thorne69\] . 
For German modal verbs see\[Brttnner/Redder83\] , \[ Rei~wvin 77\] , \[ Spr~nger88\] . 
Usually the user's questions are interpreted as user wants to know p  ( or more formally : ( WANTUSER ( KNOWUSERP ) ) )  , where ~ th ; notes the propositional content of the question . 
For example ,   ( 3 )   K0nnen Pf and brief emehrals 7% Rendite haben ? ' C~n bonds have an interest rate of more then  7%?' is interpreted as : the user wants to know whether the proposition is true  , which means in our example , taking into account hemodal verb k6nnen , whether it is possible for bonds to have an interest rate of more then  7  % . 
One problem arises when the modal verb sollen occurs in a question  . Normally it is interpreted as indicating a want , e . g . ,  ( 4 ) Soilichdas Fenster schliegen ?' l \] hould I close the window ?' Here the speaker wants to know  , whether there is some other pers~m ( probably the hearer )  , who wants the proposition to be true . But this interpretation doesn't make any sense in a consulting dialog  . In a consultation the speaker is not interested in the wants of the advisor  , e . g . ,  ( 5 ) Sollich Pf and brief emit 5% Rendite kaufen ?' l ~ hould I buy bonds which have an interest rate of  5 %?' Rather than inquiring about someone lse's wants  , as in (4) , the speaker is interested in a recommendation : ( WANTUSER ( KNOWUSER ( I ~ , ECOMMI , IND SYSTEMP ~ ) The interpretation of modal verbs is further infiue t ~ ood by e on nect i w ~  ; ; which may occur in complements . Consider the following sentence : ( 6 ) Meine Seh wester mugviel Geld habcn . 
' Mysisternms thave a lot of money.'
In this case one can only infer that the speaker bo ! ieves that the proposition is true  , namely that his sister has a lot of money . The interpretation completely changes when we have:  ( 7 ) Meine Schwester mugviel Geldhaben , umth ~ Hauszubauen . 
': My sister needs to have a lot of money in order to bnild her house  . ' It is possible that the speaker believes as in ( 6 ) that his sister has slot of money , but this cannot be inferred from the statement . Here we can only infer that the speaker believes that the second proposition  ( his sister's building her house ) implies the first one ( his sister's having a lot of money )  . 
Connectivos
Connective ~ are a means of expressing the argumentative and logical structure of the speaker's opinions by linking'propositions  . Such relations between propositions are classified into several categorie such as inferential  , temporal , causal linkages\[Cohen84 and Br6e/Smit86\] . 
The system interprets underlying beliefs and wants and enters them into the usernm delin accordance with the different classes of connectives  . 
As an example , take the class of connectives which express inferences of the speaker  , e . g . , (8) Ich will eine Anlage mit kurzer Laufzeit , damitic hschnellanme in Geldherankommenkann . 
' i want a short term investment so that I canget my money back quickly  . ' Because of the connectived amit the system concludes that the proposition of the second part of the sentence is the superordinate goal rather than the first proposition although this is the want which is expresse directly  . The user supposes that the first proposition is a necessary condition for the second  , which expresses his goal . When further processing this logical structure , the system can recognize the underlying misconception  , amely that it is not the term of an investment which is important forgetting them oney back quickly  , but the liquidity . 
The interpretation of connectives depends on the occur ~ rence of modal verbs  , as the following examples demonstrate : ( 9 ) Sollichmeine Wert papie rever kaufen , urn racine
Hypothekztt bezahlen ?' Should Isellmy securities to pay off my mort-gage ?'  ( 10 ) Muffich Gebtihrenbezahlen , umme in Sparbuchau fzulhsen ?' Do I have to pay a feeto de solve my savings account ? qIn  ( 9 ) the modal verb sollen inside the question indicates that the user wants a recommendation  . It indicates further that the connective um-zu has to be interpreted as a user's want  . The correct interpretation is that the user wants to know whether the system would recommend that the user attempts to attain a certain goal  ( paying off his mortgage ) by selling his securities . 
Such a want is not inferrable from (10) . It may be that the user wants to desotve his savings account at somctime in the future  , but the modal verbmt is sen ( must ) inside the question does not indicate a current want  . Therefore only the relation between the two propositions is the focus of attention  . Hence we can paraphrase the user's want as ' DoI have to pay a feeif I want to desolve my savings account ?'  , or , again more formally , ( WANTUSER ( KNOWUSER ( IMPLIESP2PLY)) , where P2 denotes the desolving event and P1 the feepaying . 
The Computational Model
The processes cribed in this paper work on a formal representation of utterances which reflects their semantic structure but also contains lexical and syntactic information  ( hedges , connectives , modal verbs , tense , and mood ) which has not yet been interpreted . Our formal represent a-tion language is called IRS  ( Interne Reprtisenta-tions Sprache , \ [ Bergmann et . al .  87\]) . It contains all the standard operators of predicate calculus  , formalisms for expressing propositional attitudes  , modalities , and speech acts , natural language connectives ( and . or , however , therefore , etc . ) , a rich collection of natura /! anguage quant -ifiers  ( e . g . , articles , wh-particles ) , and modal operators ( may be , necessarily ) . 
193  ( ( EXIST AI ( ASSERTIONAI ) )  ( ( EXIST PI ( PROPP1 ( ( EXIST $ I ( SOLLEN $ I ) )  ( ( EXIST P2 ( AND ( PROPP2 ( ( DPL Wl ( SECURITY W l ) )  ( ( EXISTTI ( AND ( DURAIIONTI )   ( HAS-UNITT 1YEAR )   ( HAS-AMOUNTT 14 ) ) )   ( HAS-TERM WlT1 ) ) ) )  ( HAS-TENSEP 2PRESENT-INFINITIV ) ) )   ( AND ( HAS-PROPS 1 P 2 )   ( HAS-TENSE$1 PRESENT ) ) ) ) ) ) )   ( AND ( HAS-AGENTA 1USER )   ( HAS-PROPAIP1 ) ) ) )
Die Wert papiere sollen eine Laufzeity on vier
Jahrenhaben.
' These curities should/are supposed to have a term of four years  . ' < formula > : := ( < quantification > < formula > ) I ( AND < formula >* ) I ( < concept name > < variable > ) I ( < role name > < variable > < variable > ) I ( PROP < variable > < formula > ) < quantification > : := ( < quantifier-operator > < variable > < formula > ) < quantifier-operator >: := EXISTIDPL\] . . . 
\[ DPL means definite plural \]
Fig .   3: An example of IRS and the corresponding part of the syntax of IRS Fig  .   3 shows a part of the syntax definition of IRS and the representation f the sentence  ( 6 ) Die Wert papiere sollen eine Laufzeity on vier
Jahrenhaben ' These curities hould/are supposed to have a term of four years  . ' This example contains some important features of IRS : Only one - and two-place predicates are allowed  . They correspond to the concepts and roles defined in our terminological knowledge base QUIRK\[ Bergmann/Gerlach  86\] except for SOLLEN and HAS-TENSE which still need to be semantically interpreted  . 
Quantifications are always restricted to a range which may be described by an arbitrary formula  . 
The operator PROP allows for associating a variable to a formula  . In subsequent terms the variable may be used as a denotation of the proposition expressed by that formula  . 
In the formula given in Fig .   3 the variable A1 denotes the assertion as an action with agent USER and propositional content  P1  .   $1 reflects the occurrence of the modal verb sollen which is represented like a predicate  , but has not yet been semantically interpreted . The " propositional content " of S1 is P2 which denotes the proposition these curities have a term of four years  . 
For characterizing sets of structures to which one specific interpretation may apply  , we use IRS patterns\[Gerlach87\] , i . e . , highly parameterized semantic structures which specify an arbitrary combination of features relevan to the interpretation process : The surface speech act  , tense information , modal hedges , and restrictions on the propositional content . 

A quite simple example for an IRS pattern is given in 
Fig .  4 . It selements are variables ( symbols starting with '?' )  , constants ( all other symbols ) , a concept pattern ( matching any one-place predication )  , role patterns ( matching two-place predications ) . 
(AND ( ? INFO-TRANS-TYPE ? INFO-TRANS )   ( HAT-SOURCE ? INFO-TRANSUSER )   ( HAT-GOAL ? INFO-TRANS SYS )   ( HAT-OBJECT ? INFO-TRANS ? OBJECT ) )
Fig . 4: An IRS pattern
This pattern is used for matching the toplevel of the representation f an utterance of the user  , directed to the system . When matching the variable ? OBJECT is bound to the whole propositional content of the utterance and is used by the subsequent steps of analysis  . 
As described above , we do not only infer new user model information directly  , but also perform transformations on IRS structures  , e . g . , to reduce idioms to more primitive speech acts . This kindo ? processing involves applying a set of transform at lonal rules to an IRS formula where a rule is a pair of IRS patterns as described above  ( for an example , see Fig .  2) . When instantiating the righthand side of the rule the interpreter will create new variables for unbound pattern variables and quantify them in the appropriate way  ( in Fig . 2 this is the case with the pattern variable ? Q ) . 
In WISBER the user model is a section of the central assertional knowledge base  ( A Box , \[ Poesio88\] ) which allows for storing and retrieving assertional knowledge in different contexts which denote the content of propositional tti-tudes of agents  . Hence a new entry is added to the user model by storing the propositional content in the ABox context which contains the user's wants  . 

We have implemented our interpretation module in an Interlisp programming environment  . I is a part of the natural lahguage consultation ' ~ ystem WISBER  . The module's coverage includes all German modal verbs occuring in assections and questions  , ome connectives ( e . g . , ? and , so that , because ) and the most common indirect questions . On the one hand our future work will concentrate on extending the performance of the system inside the framework which is described in this paper  . On the other hand we will integrate the concept of expectations  , i . e . expectations the system has according to the users next utterance depending on the actual state of the dialog  . Thi ~ will enable us to resolve more kinds of ambiguities in user utterances  . 

Allen 83:
J . F . Allen : Recognizing Intentions from Natural Language Utterances  , in : M . Brady and R . C . Berwick ( Ed . ): Computational Models of Discourse , MIT Press 1983 , pp .  107-166
Appelt 85:
D . E . Appelt : Planning English Sentences , Cambridge
University Press , 1985
Bergmannet . al . 87:
H . Bergmann/M . Fliegner/M . Gerlach/H . Marburger/M . Po~sio:IRS-The Internal Representation Language  , WISBER Berieht Nr .  15 , Universit ~ it Hamburg , Faehbereieh Informatik , November 1987
Bergman ~/ Gerlaeh 87:
H . Bergmann/M . Gerlach : Semantisch-pragmatische Verarbeitung y on J ~ u fler ungenim nati ~ r lichs prach li-ehen Beratungs system WISBER  , in : W . Brauer , W . 
Wahl~ter ( Eds . ): Wissensbasierte Systeme-GI-Kongress 1987 . Springer Verlag , Berlin 1987, pp . 318-H . Bergmann/M . Gerlach : QUIRK-Implementier ungeiner TBox zur Repri2sentation begriff lichen Wissens . 
WISBER Memo , Universittit Hamburg , Fachbereich
Informatik , Dezember 1986
Boyd/Thorne 69:
J . Boyd/J . P . Thorne : The Semantics of Modal Verbs , in : Journal of Linguistics 5 ,  1969 , pp .  57 - 74
Br ~ e / Smit 86:
D . S?Brae/R . A . Smit : Linking Propositions , in : Proceedings of COLING-86 , Bonn 1986 , pp .  177- 180
BrOnner/\[~edder 83:
G . Br ~ inner/A . Redder : Studien zur Verwendungder
Modal verben , Tiibingen 1983
Cohen 84:
R . Cohen : A Computational Theory of the Function of Clue Words in Argument Understanding  , in : Proceedings of COLING-84 , Stanford 1984 , pp .  251 - 258
Ellman 83:
J . Ellman : An Indirect Approach to Types of Speech Acts  , in : Proc . of the 8th IJCAI , Karlsruhe 1983, pp . 

Gerlach 87:
M . Gerlach : BNF-a Tool for Processing Formally Defined S~\]ntactic Structures  . Universit ~ tHamburg , Fachberelch Informatik , WISBI~R-Memo Nr .  17,
Dezember 1987
Naito et . al .85:
S . Naito/AShimazu/H . Nomura : Classification of Modality Function and its Application to Japanese Language Analysis  , in : Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the ACL , Chicago 1985 , pp .  2734
Poesio 88:
M . Poesio : Dialog-Oriented A-Boxing , Universit / ~ tHamburg , Fachbereich Informatik , WISBER Bericht , to appear . 
Reinwein 77:
J . Reinwein : Modal verb-Syntax , T ~ ibingen 1977
Sprenger 88:
M . Sprenger : Interpretationy on Modal verbenzu ; Konstruktiony on Partner modelle in tragen , Universitfit Hamburg , Fach be reichln formatik , WISBER Menlo
Nr . 18, Januar 1988
Wilensky et . al .84:
R . Wilensky , Y . Arens , D . Chin : Talking to UNIX in English : an Overview of UC  , in : Communications of the ACM 27(6) , pp . 574-593 ( June 1984)
Wilks/Bien 83:
Y . Wilks , J . Bien : Beliefs , Points of View , and Multiple Environments , in : Cognitive Science 7 , pp .  95-119 (1983)
Zernik/Dyer 85:
U . Zernik , M . G . Dyer : Towards a Self-Extending Lexicon . in : Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the ACL , Chicago 1985 , pp .  284-292
