
Language Engineering : The Real Bottle Neck
of Natural Language Processing
Panel Organizer , Makoto Nagao
Department of Electrical Engineering
Kyoto University , Sakyo , Kyoto , Japan
The bottleneck in building a practical natural language processing system is not those problems which have been often discussed in research papers  , but in il and ling much more dirty , exceptional ( for theoreticians , but we frequently encounter ) expressions . This panel will focus on the problem which has been rarely written but has been argued informally among researchers who have tried to build a practical natural language processing system at least once  . 
Theory is important and valuable for the explanation and understanding  , but is essentially the first order approximation of a target object  . As for language ~ current theories are Just for the basic part of the language structure  . Real language usage is quite different from the basic language structure and a supposed mechanism of interpretation  . Natural language processing system must cover real language usage as much as possible  . The system model must be designed in such a way that it is clearly understandable by the support of a powerful linguistic theory  , and still can accept varieties of exceptional linguistic phenomena which the theory is difficult to treat  . How we can design such a system is a major problem in natural language processing  , especially for machine translation between the languages of different linguistic families  . We have to be concerned with both linguistic and non-llngulst lc world  . While we have to study these difficult problems , we must not forget about the realizability of a useful system from the standpoint of engineering  . 
I received valuable comments from Dr . Karen Jensen who cannot participate in our panel , and kindly offered me to use her comments freely in our panel  . I want to cite her comments in the followings . 
Why Computational Grammarians Can Be
Skeptical About Existing Linguistic Theories
Karen . lensen
IBM TJ Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights , NY 10598, U . S . Ai . We need to deal with huge amounts of data ( number of 5 . We are not interested in using the most constrained/sentences  , paragraphs , etc . ) . Existing linguistic restricted formalism . LTs generally are , because of theories ( LTs ) play with small amounts of data . 
2 . The data involve many ( and messy ) details . LTs are prematurely fond of simplicity . For example : punctuation is very important for processing real text  , but LTs have nothing to say about it . ( This is actually strange , since punctuation represents -- to some extent-- intonational contours  , and these are certainly linguistically significant  . ) 3 . There is no accepted criterion for when to abandonan LT  ; one can always modify theory to fit counterexamples  . We have fairly clear criteria : if a computational system cannot do its Jobin real time  , then it fails . 
4 . We need to use complex attribute-value strnctures  , which cannot be manipulated on paper or on a black-board  . " Trees " are only superficially involved . 
This means we are absolutely committed to computation  . 
LTs have various degrees of commitment.
Existing linguistic theorie sate of limited usefulness to broadcoverage  , ral-world computational grammars , perhaps largely because xisting theorists focus on limited notions of " grammaticality  , " rather than on the goal of dealing , in some fashion , with any piece of input text . Therefore , existing theories play the game of ruling out many strings of a language  , rather than the game of trying to assign plausible structures to all strings  . We suggest that the proper goal of a working computational grammar is not to accept or reject strings  , but to assign the most reasonable structure to every input string  , and to comment on it , when necessary .   ( This goal does not seem to be psychologically implausible for human beings  , either . ) For years it has seemed theoretically sound to assume that the proper business of a grammar is to describe all of the grammatical structures of its language  , and only those stmc-trees that ategranlmatical : The grammar of L will thus be a device that generates all of the grammatical sequences of L and none of rheungrammatical ones  . ( Chomsky 1957, p .  13) 6 . We are interested in uniqueness as much as in generality  . ITs usually are not . 
7 . We are more interested in coverage of the gran ~ ar than in completeness l of the grammar  . LTs generally pursue completeness . 
8 . We aim for " all , " but not " only " the grammatical constructions of n natural language  . Defining ungrammatical structures is , by and large , a futile task ( Alexis Manaster-Ramer ~ Wlodzimierz Zadrozny )  . 
9 . Existing LTs give at best a high-level specification of the structure of natural language  . Writing a computational granmmrisllke writing a real program given very abstract specs  ( Nelson Uorrea )  . 
i0 . We are not skeptical of theory , Just of existing theories . 
At first blush , it seems unnecessary to conjure up any justification for titis claim  . Almost by definition , the proper business of a grammar should be grammaticality  . However , it has been notoriously difficult to draw a line between " gram  . 
maticai " sequences and " ungnmunalicai " sequences  , for any natural human language . It may even be provably impossible to define precisely rhenotion of grammaticality for any language  . Nalural language deals with vague predicatus , and might itself be called a vague predicator . 
This being tree , it still seems worthwhile to ~ at parsing ALL of the gr  , ' unmalical strings of a language , but parsing ONLY the grammatical strings becomes a dubious enteq ~ rise at best  . Arguments for doing so reduce it her to dogma , or to some general notion of proptiety . Argmnen is against , however , arc easy to come by . Leaving theoretical consideration saide for the moment  , consider these praguratic ones : ( a ) The diachronic argume ut . The creativity of human use of language is great , and language systems are always changing . A construction that was once unacceptable b comes acceptable over time  , and vice versa . Even if a grammar could d~:seribe at and only fileg ~ armnatical  . sequences today , the t ~ an emayuot be tree to mon ' ow . So there is , at best , only an ~ u : a demicute rest in only-g~nmuaticai stmctul'es  . 
( b ) The ptacrical argume ut . In tile area of alpplied com-p ~ ltational linguistics  , ill-formeti input is a partOf daily life , a ~ l du working gmlmu ar has to I landie it . By " handleit " we ~' Leau no ~ . grind to l * ilal t , but figu ~ out some kind of appropriate anaysls and then comment  , if possible ~ on whatever isd ~ fticn ltorm nmual , it ' real-lit'e natural language processing i ~ : gnl tigtoc ~ ist  , the ~ must be an me way to exla~t meaning e~ent ~ xa ' ~ sdngath at violate cns to mmy syntactic mien  , that a , e exc ,  . : ssive iy ~ oug and complex , and that are net sentences \[ J ~: , - ill . 
At ~ BMRe , arch , we are developing a broadcoverage l ~ . ar~,de . g granlmar for English , called tile PLNLP EnglLsh ~ raln-mar , og PEG . Its initial sylUactic component works only with limited infom ratiou-lexical feat m~es for pails of speech  , formo ~ phologic ~ dstmel me , and for some valeucy classes . This coln punetl tries to assil pl some n ~ as onable st~xtcture to any inputsiting of English  . 
Eveniuits Cnrk ~3 , nt be ~ iflntng8tale , PEG has proved to be ~ t ' considerable ~ sefolness for a lather wide valiety of realworld kWLP task z  . Its main uses of it r has been as the pin , lugC31kL polleut of CRITIQUE . a large scale natural anguage text pr~gx~s'ding systet n that identifies grammar and style errors in ~-  ; ll , tglisi text ( I qeido ~ uet at . i982, Richatdann and Bradeu-k\[md?~'1988) . Apt-ototype cx rrl QuE system is UOW fmLc-t ~mling hithr ~ major  , ' q t pli cat it m areas : business offices , a paldislliug center a Lrdu niveaal ries . 
Realworld natut M language processing nmst deal with huge amounts of data  , which involve many , and messy , details , lf ~ or example , ~mnctuallon is very impmlant in processing real t ! ~ X ~  , but cm~nt liuguistic theorios have nothing substantial to say about puuctuatinl L  . Nor have they anything substantial to ~ ay about \[ aialysl slructures for ellipsis  , or for strings that deviate ill various degrees frmntim canmiical order of the l  ; m guage ill which they OCCllr . Here is the kinti of natural an-guage ilqmt that CRITIQUI ?  ; has to deal wilh .   ( All of tile text excerpts below are wrilten EXAC ~ I'LY ~ Ls they were produced  . ) Fixzt , a memo that was sent via electronic matt to multipler  , sersill the of/ice envil ' on nLett : ( 1 ) Overtile comse of tile next couple of daystile accouoting  ( lepartment will cooducting inventory of labs and offices here at X~-L-~X  . I they are currently work iugon file tirst floor , ~ unlwoddngtire rewayniL . 
If you are il Othiyore " of lice and do not plan to be there with iutheuext few days  , please secme all con-lid cntial mail tuL ditems you may have of confidential ualu L'e  . Because if you . are LInttiLer eaccontlting is going to go iu and inventory our equipment  . 
Tile author of text ( 1 ) is aualive speaker of American Euglish , wile il as a collegeed n catimi and is employed in a  . position of some responsibility illalarge business firm  . Note 2ire following problems : ( a ) " will Collducting " shouldt ~" will conduct " ;   ( b ) " conducting inventory " should be " on uducting ani * wentory "  ; (c ) " l 6~ey " should he just ' " l~ey " ;   ( d ) " worl~ing the ~ ewayup " shmddbe " working their way up '  ; ( e ) " days , please " lacks a space hetweut im comma and " please "  ;   ( i ) " of confidential nature " wo~ld be better written ~'  ; " of a conridential nature " ; ( g ) The last text segme ut is a fragment , not a complete clause , although it is p ~ esented as if it were i ~ seutet lC ~  ,  . 
Noliieo ~ eticaliy pure grammar wm tide verbeable to ann ?  , dyz , e text like this . It may be objected that " granlmar " definestire competeuce thai makes it possible for us to identify mis-t~es  ( a-g )  , aml that any working system is a nembod lmeot of a kind of performauce  , not competence . Verywell ; note then that the role of " gra~nmar " becomes that of a COMME brYARY outile analysis strnctuce  , NOT the definition of tile structure itself . This is exactly the point . It may be timt we need a new defiuii ii ou of tile teri ~ l "  gra1~mar   . " Within the educational environment , the ch~dienge for a computation algmmmtn " is even stronger  . Follow hig are two excerpts from essays by nonnative English speakers  . Text (2) is an extreme exanLpte of tiler on , -on style of writing ; the interesting " grammatical " question is what cues might be used to divide this text into separate sentences :  ( 2 ) After the analysis of three graphs we can make conclusion  . From 1940 to 1980 the farm pop-station and farms decrease but the average farm siz~e increase  , this tendency shows American don't have strong intensie to work on the farms  , as a result it is impossible to increase the farms but when The people who would like to work ou farms expand their f  , ' umsize by themselves or the aid of government ; may be some other agents want to invest capital in tim " farming industry "  . 
Text ( 3 ) shows interesting problems with tile definite article  ( mass vs . count NPs ) and with auxiliaries in VPs : ( 3 ) So we know , now we can use tile fewer people to get the more food  . Is the decreasing farmer we deduce on tile graph7 Is the farms going to tie-creasing in luture7 Does the average of farm size will develope7 No . No . No . 
The problem of non -" grammaticality " is pervasive hireal language use  . The question ( 4 ) Who did you tell me that wo n ? supposedly poses ancxtraclinu problem-in terms of Government Bhtding Theory  , it violates tire Empty Case Principle . 
Yet it can be heard from the mouths of people who wo nkl  o111-etwlse qualify as speakers of Standard English . The sentence ( 5 ) He bought for tenshillings aring . 
supposedly violates an ordering constraint ill English because the prepositional phrase " for tenshillings " precedes the direct object " a ring  . ' ~ However , as the direct object NP becomes heavier and heavier  , the sentence sounds better and better : ( 5' ) He bought for tenshillings aring that de -righted the woman who had previously been proposed to by millionaires  . 
To move " for tenshillings " to a position following tim direct object in  ( 5' ) would be extremely awkward . Ill this case , it is better to interprettile " granrmalical " ordering role as a stylistic commem  . The consm~otion (6) Hlm self's father came . 
violates theoretical restrictions on a aaphora , or Binding ; but it is fine if mad with an Irish flavor . And the alternative of having a completely separate grammar for Irish English is not appealing  . The sentence (7) Site be happy . 
is censured because the main verb is not tensed ; but (7) is valid Nonstandard Black English . And so on . Many theoretically proscribed sequences exist and flourish as stylistic or social variants  . To ignore them , and to l ~ r sue the Holy Grail of a grammar that describes " all and only " the grammatical strings of a language  , would be to defeat the enterprise of broadcoverage computational parsing  . 
Furthermore , it is notuecessary to enforce all of the supposedly " grammatical " restrictions within a computational analysis grammar that actually deals with quantities of real text  , filreal flare . Our experience with PEG , in rile CRITIQUE application , proves this . PEG produces appropriate parses for (4)-(7) . Then a Style component can comment on the parses , calling attention to whatever problems or variations exist  . We do not cut ~ ntly handle all of the difficulties posed by  ( 1 )  - ( 3 )  , but we do handle some of them . For those grammatical restrictions that have to been forced within the syntactic gram-mat '  ( such as number agreement )  , we have a two-pass error detection and co f fecrion strategy  . For massive problems like the nm-ons in (2) , we use the technique of the " fitted parse , " which tries to identify sensible chunks of text and present hemill genre reasonable framework  . 
Since it is neither desirable nor necessary for a compuotational grammar to define " all and only " the " grammatical " sequences of a language  , and since working computational grammars are the most comprehensive descriptions that we can come up with  , right now , for natural anguages , we suggest that the goal of real world granlmatical nalys is be redefined : a grammar should try to describe " all  , " but not " only , " the grammatical strings of a language . 

