Unification Categorial Grammar:
A Concise , Extendable Gragamar for Natural Language Processing 
Jonathan CALI ) F.R , Ewan KI , E1N and + Henk ZEE VAT
I/niversity of Edinburgh
Centretot Cognitive Science
2 Buccleuch Place

EIt 89 LW
\] Institut fib ' Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung
Universit , qtStuttgm't
Keplerstrasse 17
D 7000 Stuttgart
Abst_~'act~hrlicationCategorialGtmmnar ( t/:G ) combines the syntacticiu . , ; ights of Categoria \ [ Grammar with the semantic insights of I  ) i ; course Representation Theory . The addition of uni/ication to these two frameworks allows a simple account of intexaction be  ,  . w cen different linguistic levels within a constraining  , monostraml theory . The resulting , computation a Uy efticient , system provides an explicit formal framework for linguistic description  , widf in which large fi'agments of grammms for French aud English have a h'eady been developed  . We present he for-maibasis of UCG , with i . dependent definitions of well- . 
toxmedness fol syntactic and semantic dimensions . We will also focus on the concept of  #nodifier within the theory  . 
Llntroduetl , on
Unii eation C~t cgo ~ q_alGrammm' ( UCG ) comlfines the syntactic insights of C~tegori ~ ll Grammar with the semantic insights of Discourse Rep  , : escntafion Theory ( DRT , Kamp 1981) . The addition of unilicalion ( Shiebcr et al 1983 ) to the set w of lame works allows a simple account of intcractiou between different linguistic levels  . The xesulting , computationally efficient , system provkles an explicit tbmmlfi'ameworkfbr linguistic description  , within which large grammar ti ' agnrents lbr French  ( Baschung et al 1987 ) and F . nglish ( Calder , Moens and Jmevat 1986 ) have already been developed . This paper will describe the design of the UCG formalism  , illustrated by exarn ples of grammatical categories and rules  , lUCG embodies eve . d recent trends in linguistics . First , being a categorial grar , a mar , it is strongly lexicalist , In other words relatively little Jr , formation is contained in grammar rules . Most information odginates in the lexicon . Second , it is strictly dechtrative . Unitication is the only operation allowed over grammatical objects  ;  . Third , there is a very close relationship between the syntax and semantics of linguistic expressions  . 
UCG lies with : ht the family of grammars described by Uszkoreit  1986 and Kmttunen 1986  . tJCG also has close affinities to the II ead -Driven Phrase Structure Grammar  ( I-IPSG ) proposed by Pollard 1985 . The main theoretical difference is that in IIPSG wel Mi~rmed rms si characterized algorithmically  , rather than declm'atively as in OC(/ . For this reason , wet , ave adopted l ' ollard's ten n ; no logy and refer to linguistic expressions as signs  . 
A signret m >; ents a complex of phonological , syntactic and semantic tale . nation , each of these linguistic levels having its own definitions of well--formedness  , In U ( . 'G , we employ three primitive categories : nomts ( tmun )  , sentences ( sent ) md noun phrases ( ltp ) These primitive categories i ' IIm work described here is SUl  ) portex l by the EECE SPRIT projec P393 ACORD : the Consruction and Interrogation f Knowledge Bases asia 
Natural L~mguag(~Text and Graphics.
admit further specification by features , so that we can distinguish tinite and nonfinite sentences  , nominative and accusative NPs , and so on . Categories are now defined as follows : (1) a . 
Any primitive category ( together with a syntactic feature specification ) is a category . 

If A is a category , and B is a sign , then A/B is a category . 
In a Category of the trmrA/B , we call B the active part of the category , and also of the sign as a whole in which A/B occurs as category  . It will be observed that this definition is just tire categorial analog of Pollard's  ( 1985 ) proposal for subcategorization , according to which phrasal heads at espccific d for a list of signs corresponding to their complements  . Likewise ,   ( 1 ) is closely related to the standar definition for the set of categories of a categorial grammar  , Within the grammar , we allow not just constant syln bols like sent and rip  , but also variables , at each level of representatiou . 
V ~ wiables allow us to capture tire notion of inconlplete infomaa-tion  , and a sign which contains variables can be further specitied by unilication  . The form of unification that we rely on is first -order term unification  , provided as a basic operation in program-ruing language such as PROLOG  . 
This , in essence , is the structure of UCG . We will complicate the picture by distinguishing two rules of fnnctional application  , and by giving more content othenotions of semantics and features  . 
2 . The Mechanisms of UCt ; 2 . 1 . Structuring Signs UCG signs have three basic components  , corresponding to their " phonology , category and semantics . We will write the most unspecified sign as follows:  ( 2 ) w : c : s by which we intend a sign with phonology W  , categow C and semantics S .   ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) give wellformedness conditions on possible instantiations for a sign's category  . For the present papm ' , we will assume that a sign's phonology may be simply its orthography intire case of proper names  , otherwise a sign's pho-nology may be composite , consistiug of variables and orthographic constant sep ~ ated by +  . The + operator is understood as denoting concatenation  . 22 This operation might apt ) ear to take us beyond tile bounds of first-o~ler unification  . However in the cases we will deal with , there are equivalent signs which express concatenation by means of PROI  . OG difference lists . 
83 2.2. Indexed Language
The semantic representation language that we use to encode the semantics of a sign is called In L  ( for Indexed Language )  , and is derived from Discourse Representation Theory  ( cf . Kamp 1981) , supplemented with a Davidsonian treatment of verb semantics  ( cf . Davidson 1967) . The main similarity with the Discourse Representation languages lies in tile algebraic structure of InL  . 
There are only two connectives for building complex formulas  ; an implication that at the same time introduces universal quantification  , and a conjunction . 
The language InL differs in one important respect from the DRT formalism  , and thus earns its name ; every formula introduce sade signated variable called its index  . This does not mean that ( sub ) formulas may not introduce other variables , only that the index has a special status . The postulation of indices is crucial for the treatment of modifying expressions  , but it is independently plausible on other grounds  . Every sign has an associated ontological type , represented by the sort of its index . Subsumption relations hold between certain sorts ; for instance , a index of sort singular will unify with an index of sort object to yield an index of sort singular  . For notational purposes , we use lowercase alphabetics to represent sorted variables in InL formulas  . 
Uppercase alphabetics are variables over form tt las  . The index of an expression appears within square brackets in prenex position  . 
(3) gives example translations of some expxessions . 
(3)\[Index \] Formula Expression Sorta . \[ elWALK(e,x ) walk event b . Ix\]STUDENT(x ) student singular object c . \[ x\]\[PARK(y ) , \[x\]\[IN(x , y) , MAN(x)\[Iman in a park singular object d . \[ m\]BUT lER(m ) butter mass object e . \[ s\]STAY(s,x ) stay state 3 . UCG Binary Rules We may write UCG rules as simple relations between signs  . We require two rules , our analogs of forwards and backwards application  ( FA and BA respectively )  . Here we follow the PROLOG convention that variables rart with an uppercase alphabetic  . 
(4 )   ( FA ) Phonology : Category/Active : Semantics Active
Phonology : Category : Semantics ( B A ) Active Phonology : Category/Active : Semantics $
Phonology : Category : Semantics
The Se rules state that in the case of function application  , the resulting category is simply that of the functor with its active sign removed  ; the semantics and phonology of the result are those of the functor  , thus effecting a very strict kind of Head Feature Convention  . Note in particular that we view the phonological , syntactic and semantic functor as always coinciding  . 
This has important consequences for the way we treat quantified NP's  , as we discuss in the next section . Any of the features of the resulting sign may have been further instantiated in the process of unification  . 
Importantly ,   ( 4 ) states that a functor may place restrictions on any of the dimensions of its argument  . Likewise it will determine the role that the information expressed by its argument plays in the resulting expression  . AUCG sign thus represents a complex of constraints along several dimensions  . 
4.1 JCG Signs
We now give some example UCG signs.
4 . 1 . Nouns and Adjectives ( 5 ) student:noun:\[x\]STUDENT ( x )   ( 6 ) cheerful + W : noun / ( W:noun:Ix\]P ) :\[ x\]\[CHEERFUL ( x )  , \[ ix\]P \] The reader is invited to work out for herself how the signs  ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) will combine using the rule of forwards application  . 
4.2. Determiners
Following Montague 1973 , we treat quantified NPs as type-raised terms . We can however take advantage of the polymorphic nature of UCG categories and have a single representation for NPs regardless of their syntactic on text  . In our analysis , the determiner introduces the typeraising . This is the sign that corresponds to a . 
(7 ) W ( C / ( W : C/a + Wl : np\[nomorobj\]:b ) :\[a\]S ) / ( Wl:noun:\[b\]R ) :\[ a\]\[\[blR , S\]Moreverbosely , this says that a combines first with a noun which has phonology  W1 and semantic index b . The semantics that results from such a combination is a conjunction  , the first conjunct of which is the semantics of the noun  . The second conjunct is the semantics of the resulting NP's argument  . As the NP is type-raised , it has a category of the schematic form : ( 8 ) C / ( C/np ) That is , a type-raised NP will take as its argument some constituent which was itself to combine with a  ( non-type-raised ) NP . 
When fleshed out with values for the other components of a sign  , it will have the form as shown in (9) . Note in particular that , as it is the verb that determines linear order , the phonology of the resulting expression depends on that of the argument othe NP  . 
(9 ) shows the result of combining ( 7 ) and ( 5 ) via forward application . 
(9) W
C/ ( W:C/a+student:rip\[nora or obj\]:b ) :\[ a\]S :\[ al\[\[blSTUDENT ( b )  , Sl The sign corresponding to every ( 10 ) is very similar to that for a , the major difference being that every introduces DRT implication  , notated here with ~ . 
(10 ) W ( C / ( W:C/every+Wl:np\[nomorobj\]:b ) :\[ a\]S ) /ONl:noun:\[blR ) :\[ sl\[\[b\]R~\[a\]S\]4 . 3 . Verbs
The following is the sign for walks : ( 11 ) W + walks : sent\[fin\]/ ( W : np\[noml:x ) :\[ e\]WALK ( e , x ) This will combine with file sign ( 9 ) a student to yield ( 12 ) of which the semantics may be read as : " There is a walking event  , of which b is the agent , and b is a student " . 
(12 ) a+student+walks:sent\[fin\]:\[e\]\[\[b\ ]STUDENT  ( b )  , WALKS ( e , b)\]5 . Modifiers in UCG We have already seen one category of modifiers  , namely adjectives , in section 4 . 1 . We are able to make more general statements about modifiers  ; they all contain instances of the category in ( 13 ) :  ( 13 ) C / ( W:C:S ) instance , the class of VP modifiers such as adverbials and auxi-liaries  ( Cf . Bouma 1988) . The close relationship between syntax and semantic  , , ; allow us to give concise formulations of the distinctions between intersective  , vague and intensional modifiers ( Kamp 1975) . In the first two cases , the semantics of the modified expression is conjoined with that of the modifying expression  . In the vague case , we have to relativize the meaning of the modifying expression to that of the modified  . In the third case , the semantics of the modified expression must be contained within the scope of an intensional predicate  . The following examples illustrate the three cases . 
(14 ) square + W : noun / ( W:noun:\[a\]A ) :\[ all SQUARE ( a )  , AI large + W : noun / ( W:noun:\[a\]A ) :\[ al ILARGE ( A , a ) , AIfake+W:nmm/(W:noun:\[a\]A):\[alFAKE(A ) 6 . Furtherltevelopment of the tlleory We have not attempted to give a fully representative list of UCG signs here  . Elsewhere ( Calder , Morns and Zeewtt 1986 , Zeevat , Klein and Calder 1987) , substantial nalyses of subcategorization , prepositional and adverbial modification , negation , relative clauses and sentential . connectives have been developed . We have also extended the theory to encompass noncanonical word order  , using ; t mechanism similm " to the GPSG SLASH ( Gazdar et al 1985 )  , and to handle quantificational constraints on anaphora following the analysis of Johnson and Klein  1986  . We have an eftie : ient implementation of the system which represents signs as PROIOG terms  , using a different reatment of phonological informalion  . The use of templates ( Shieber et al 1983 ) allows us to capture generaliztions about clases of lexical items  . 
The compilalion of UCG structures into PROLOG temas is pet-formed by a general processor driven by the definitions of wellformedness of the dimensions of a sign  , allowing compile-time type ocbecking of grammars ( Calder , Moens and Zeevat 1986) . 
The system u : ; es at a bular shift-reduce parser.
7. Further 6 evelopments of UCG
The system described above is deficient in some respects  . For example , requiring coincidence between the phonological , syntactic and semantic funetors may be too strict  . The problem of quantifier scoping is a case in point  . Zeevat 1987 suggests relaxing this requirement to allow linear ordering to become the dominant factor in determining semantic functor-argument relations  . 
It seems likely that such a step will also be necessary for certain phonological phenomena  . Current work is investigating the utility of associative and commutative unification in this respect  . 
in extending UCG to allow u ' eammnt of unbounded ependency constructions and partially fi'ee word order  , heavy use is made of uttary rules ( Wittenburg 1986 )  . Current work aims to recast the notion of unary rule within the framework of paramodular unification  ( Siekmann 1984 )  . 
8. Conclusion
An attractive feature of UCG is the manner in which different levels of representation - semantic  , syntactic and phonological-are built up simultaneously  , by them fi form device of unification . 
There axe , of course , different organizing principles at the different levels  ; conjunction and implication exist at the semantic level  , but not at the syntactic or phonological . Nevertheless , the composit : , on al construction of all three levels takes place in the same manner  , namely by the accretion of constraints on possible representations  . Although we have said nothing substantive about phonology here  , it seems plausible , in the light of Bach and Wheeler 1981 and Wheeler 1981  , that the methodological principles of compositiouality  , monotonicity and locality can also lead to illuminating analyses in the domain of soundstnm -ture  . 
UCG is distinctive in the particular theory of semantic representation which ites pouses  . Two iilcidental features of InL may obscure its relation to DRT  . The first is very minor : our formulas are linear  , rather than consisting of " box-ese " . The second difference is that we appear to make no distinction between the set of conditions in it DRS  , and the set of discourse markers . In fact , this is not the case . A simple recursive definition ( similar to that for " freew triable " in predicate logic  ) suffices to construct the cunmlative set of discourse markers associated with a complex condition from indices within a formula  . This definition also allows us to capture the constraints on anaphora proposed by DRT  . These departures from the standard DRT formalism do not adversely affect the insights of Kamp's theory  , but do offer a substantial advantage in allowing a rule-by-rule construction of the representations  , something which has evaded most other analyses in the literature  . 
UCG syntaxis heavily polymorphic in the sense that the category identity of a fim ~ tion application typically depends on the make up of the argmnent  . Thus , the result of applying a type-raised NP to a transitive verb phrase is an intransitive verb phrase  , while exactly the same functor applied to an intransitive verb phrase will yield a sentence  . Analogously , a prepositional moditier applied to a scntence will yield a sentence  , while exactly the same functor applied to a noun will yield a noun  . This approach allows us to dramatically simplify the set of categories employed by the grammar  , while also retaining the fundamental insight of standard categorial grammar  , namely that expressions combine as fnnctor and argument  . Such a mode of combination treats head-complement relations and hcad-moditier relations as special cases  , and provides an elegantypology of categories that can only beaw kwardly mimicked in Xbar syntax  . 
Finally , we note one important innovation . Standard ctt tegorial grammar postulates a functor -argument pair in semantic rcpresen-ration which parallels the syntactic constituents  ; typically , lambda-abstractions required to construct the appropriate flmctor expressions in semantics  . By contrast , the introduction of signs to the right of the categorial slash means that we subsume semantic ombinatioi * within a generalized fnnctional application  , and the necessity ~ ) consmtcting specialized flmctors in the semantics imply disaopears  . 

Bach , E . and Wheeler , D . (1981) Monmgue Phonology : A First Approximation . In Chao , W . and Wheeler , D . ( eds . ) University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers in Linguistics  , Volume 7 , pp 27-45 . 
Distribute xl by Gradtmte Linguistics Student Association  , University of Massachusetts . 
Baschung , K . , Bes , G . G . , Corluy , A . and Guillotin , T . (1987) Anxiliaries and Clitics in French UCG ( ; rammar . In Proceedings of the Third Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics , 1987.
Bouma , G .   ( 1988 ) Modiliers and specifiers in categorial unification grammar  . 
Linguistics , 26, 21-46.
Calder , J . , Morns , M . and Zeevat , H . (1986) AUCG Interpreter . ESPRIT
PROJECT 393 ACORD ; Deliverable I ' 2.6.
Davidson , D . (1967) Tile logical form of action sentences , in Rescher , N . 
( ed . ) Tile Logic of Decision and Action . Pittsburgh : University of
Pittsburgh Press.

Gazdar , G . , Klein , E . , Pullum , G . and Sag , I . (1985) Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar . London : Basil Blackwell . 
Johnson , M . and Klein , E . (1986) Discom'se , anaphora and parsing . In Proceedings of the llth International Conference on Computational Linguistics and the  24th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Institut fuer Kommunikations forschung und Phonetik  , Bonn University , Bonn , August ,  1986 , pp 669-675 . 
Kamp , J . A . W . (1975) Two Theories about . Adjectives . In Keenan , E . L . 
( ed . ) Formal Semantics of Natural Language : Papers from a colloquium sponsored by King's College Research Centre  , Cambridge , pp 123-155 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
Kamp , H . (1981 ) A theory of truth and semantic representation . In Groenendijk , J . A . G . , Janssen , T . M . V . and Stokhof , M . B . J . ( eds . ) Formal Methods in the Study of Language , Volume 136 , pp 277-322 . 
Amsterdam : Mathematical Centre Tracts.
Karttunen , L . (1986) Radical Lexicalism . Report No . CSLI-86-68 , Center for the Study of Language and Information , December ,  1986 . Paper presented at the Conference on Alternative Conceptions of Phrase 
Structure , July 1986, New York.
Montague , R .   ( 1973 ) The prot x ~ r treatment of quantification in ordinary English  . In Hintikka , J . , Moravcsik , J . M . E . and Suppes , P . ( eds . ) Approaches to Natural Language . Dordrecht:D . Reidel . Reprinted in RHThomason ( ed . ) (1974) , Formal Philosophy : Selected Papers of Richard Montague  , pp 247-270 . Yale University Press : New
Haven , Conn.
Pollard , C . J . (1985) Lectures on HPSG . Unpublished lecture notes , CSLI,
Stanford University.
Shieber , S . , Uszkoreit , H . , Pereira , F . C . N . , Robinson , J . J . and Tyson , M .   ( 1983 ) The Formalism and Implementation of PATR-II . In Grosz , 13 . and Stickel , M . E . ( eds . ) Research on Interactive Acquisition and Use of Knowledge  , SRI International , Menlo Park ,  1983 , pp 39-79 . 
Siekmann , J . H . (1984) Universal Unification . In Shostak , R . H . ( ed . ) Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Automated Deduction  , Napa , California , May ,  1984 , ppl-42 . Lecture Notes in
Computer Science ; Springer-Verlag.
Uszkoreit , H . (1986) Categorial Unification Grammars . In Proceedings of the llth International Conference on Computational Linguistics and the  24th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Institut fuer Kommanikations forschung und Phouetik  , Bonn University , Bonn , 2529 August ,  1986 , pp 187-194 . Also Center for the Study of Language and Information  . 
Wheeler , D .   ( 1981 ) Aspects of a Categorial Theory of Phonology . PhD Thesis , Linguistics , University of Massachusetts at Amherst . 
Distributed by Graduate Linguistics Student Association  , University of Massachusetts . 
Wittenburg , K . W .   ( 1986 ) Natural Language Parsing with Combinatory Categorial Grammar in a Graph-Unification-Based Formalism  . PhD Thesis , Department of Linguistics , University of Texas . 
Zeevat , H . , Klein , E . and Calder , J .   ( 1987 ) An Introduction to Unification Categorial Grammar  . In Haddock , N . J . , Klein , E . and Morrill , G . 
( eds . ) Edinburgh Working Papers in Cognitive Science , Volume 1: Categorial Grammar , Unification Grammar , and Parsing . 
Zeevat , H . (1987) Quantifier Scope in Monostratal Grammars . Unpublishedms . University of Stuttgart . 

