On the Generation and Interpretation of Demonstrative Expressions * 
Jeanette Gundel
Department of Linguistics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis , MN 55455 USA
Nancy Hedberg
Department of Linguistics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis , MN 55455 USA
Ron Zacharski
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis , MN 55455 USA
This paper presents necessary and sufficient conditions for the use of demonstrative expressions in English and discusses implications for current discourse processing algorithms  . We examine a broad range of texts to show how the distribution of demonstrative forms and functions is genre dependent  . This research is part of a larger study of anaphoric expressions  , the results of which will be incorporated into a natural anguage generation system  . 
1. INTRODUCTION
The primary purpose of this paper is to present a set of necessary and sufficient conditions for the use of demonstrative expressions in English  , based on a corpus of naturally occurring discourse from a variety of spoken and written genres  . We propose a comprehensives t of constraints on demonstrative use and suggest how they can be incorporated into a computational processing model which integrates the local centering and global focusing aspects of discourse structure  . Finally we show how our proposed algorithm for demonstratives can account for stressed pronouns as well  . 
Existing computational work on demonstratives has been based on examples from only three genres : experimentally-elicited apartment descriptions  ( Linde 1979 )  , technical dialogues ( Reichman-Adar 1984) , and scientific textbooks ( Sidner 1983) . 
Testing computation algorithms against multiple genres of natural discourse is important  , especially given the universal scope of current frameworks  ( cf . Grosz and Sidner 1986) . We have chosen to systematically examine texts from a broad range of genres  , which vary in spoken versus written medium , number of participants , degree of pre-planning , and formality of situation . These genres include informal conversation , partially-spontaneous televised discussion , newspaper articles , and planning and technical documents . 
2. REVIE WOF THE LIT ERATURE
Demonstratives have generally been considered to be one type of deictic expression  . Most of the linguistic literature on deixis has concentrated on classifying deictic expressions according to various parameters such as the linguistic or extralinguistic status of the referent  . For example , Buhler ( 1982 ) distinguishes between demonstratio a doculos , anaphora , and deix is at phan-tasma , whose intended referents are respectively found in the ex-tralinguistic on text  , the linguistic context , or in memory or imagination . Similarly , Fillmore (1975) distinguishes gestural , anaphorie and symbolic uses of deictic expressions  ; and Lakoff (1974) distinguishes spatiotemporal , discourse , and emotional deixis . Such distinctions have been useful as a basis for descriptive classification of various uses of demonstrative expressions  , but we do not feel that they are relevant for an explanatory account of demonstrative function and so shall not elaborate further on them here  . For the same reason we also will not discuss attempts to show that discourse deixis and/or anaphora is derived ? from or less prototypical than  spatio4emporal deixis ( of . , Lyons 1977; Fillmore 1982) . Our account is more compatible with the * The work presented here was partially supported under Control Data Corporation Grant  #86M102 and a grant from the University of Minnesota Graduate School  ( Jeanette Gundel , Larry Hutchinson and Michael Kac , Principal Investigators) . Support was also provided by a Doctoral Dissortation Fellowship from the University of Minnesota Graduate School to Nancy Hedberg  . We would like to thank Karen Fredericks on for kindly pri~vidlngus with transcripts of the casual conversations  , Walling Cyre for ~ oviding the CDC documents , and Suellen Rundquist for helping in thenitial stages of this research  . 
2 16 view that deictic expressions signal a change in focus of attention while anaphoric expressions ignal focus continuation  ( cf , Ehlich 1982; Bosch 1983) . It is this view which most closely reflects the assumptions underlying computation a Uy explicit models of focus-constrained discourse processing  ( e . g . , Linde 1979 ; Reichman 1985 ; Grosz and Sidner 1986) . 
We turn now to a presentation fspecific claims about demonstratives which have been made in the literature  . 
Focus shift.
a . That but not it may be used to refer to an item no longer in focus  ( Linde 1979 )  . That marks the end of a discourse section ( Reichman 1984 ,  1985) . This but not that signals focus movement , except when this occurs in the scope of a quantifier or when its head noun is not identical to the head noun of an existing immediate focus  ( Sidner 1983 )  . 
b . That but not it may be used . to refer to a preceding statement a kenasa statement  ( Linde 1979 )  . 
c . Stressed that must change focus ( Isard 1975).
Contras La . That may be used to indicate conwast , even for items currently in focus ( Linde 1979) . When this and that are used together contrastively  ( ' copresent ' use )  , this specifies the primary , continuing focus and that specifies a secondary , temporary focus ( Sidner 1983) . 
Proximity.
a . This is used to denote objects relatively close to the speaker and that for objects relatively far from the speaker or relatively close to the hearer  . ( Fillmore 1975 ; Halliday and Hasan 1976 ; Lakoff 1974) b . Both this and that may corefer with elements in the preceding linguistic on text  , but only th&mayeo refer with elements in the following linguistic on text  . ( Fillmore 1975 , 1982; Ha Uiday and Hasan 1976; Lakoff 1974) . 
c . Both this and that can be used to comment upon a speaker's own prior remarks  , with this often signalling greater speaker involvement or continue discussion  . 
Only that may be used to comment upon the remarks of another speaker  ( Halliday and Hasan 1976 ; Lakoff 1974 ; 
Sidner 1983).
d . The interval denoted by a determiner this used with a time expression includes the speech time  . ( Fillmore 1975) . 
That tends to be associated with a past time referent and this with one in the present or future  . ( Fillmore 1975;
Halliday and Hasan 1976).
Special effects.
a . Demonstratives often have subtle emotional effect such as solidarity  , distancing , sympath y , anger , irony , etc . 
( Lakoff 1974 , Fillmore 1982; Hallidaymad Hasan 1976) . 
b . Unstressed determiner this has an indefinite specific use in colloquial narrative speech  , ( Lakoff 1974) ; shared attention and experience ( Halliday and Hasan 1976 )  ; topicality ( Prince 1981a ) c . Unstressed determiner that phrases have a first -mention use for expected shared referents  . ( Wald 1983) . 
3. CONSTRAINTSON DEMONSTRATIVEUSE
The basic concepts which we take to be crUcial for any adequate description of demonstxatives are ones which are central to a theory of reference in general  . These are concept such as topic , focus and various types of givenness . Since these concepts concern the cognitive status of a referent  , definitions have often beeniough and iatuitive , bv . : d catiy con'ect but ~ to tsufflcie Litly precise for e o n l p u t ~  ; ikmaliupl cmctmttion . On the oilier hand , because of the conlpledty of these concepts , attempts to ihrnish n to reprecise opcrall on al definitions  , e . g . on the basis of surl hceline . 'n of dcrorgLm , Lmatical rclatiot ~ s ~ have failed to capture lhcircognitive basis  . ' lh (; ccsult hasheel , aicrminologicalnd conceptual cort-Nsionilltl ~ Cliterature which has led computational linguists to createnc  . wt:onsh ; ucts such as fc)cnsarid center , in some cases with outrcl : ttingtll c ; m to similar linguistic concepts ( Itajicov : t1987 is an , ltablc exception ) . Our aim h cr cist-L characterize as p ~ v cisely as possible what the relevant concepts for deruous lra-iives arc:  . hid how they relate to one a noih cr . In a later section wc will att cnlptl ~ show how they Lelate to more operational constructs prop  3sed in the , computational literature . 
Defiuit~ . ' ne ~ SoAs has often been pointed out , the basic notion which dctcrntines ~ q ) prol ) riateness of a given rcfi . : rential cxpres . 
sion is the ; status of the ref crc , to flhat expression v is . a-v is a cognitive . :; tale of the addressee ( cf . Chafe 19'/6) . hit he weakest c ~\:; t :, the SFeak crc:~\[Lt : ~ . is the itd dtcs seet ou ffd cr stand what type of eniily is be itt g described  , but not to uniquely identify the entity in q/ , cslion . Such c , ~ ities arc typically reiEl ' cn ccd with indefinite ito tnipbra !  ; cs Then lost basic distinction in demonstrative \[ tntciioni ~  ; between tile in definite use of lhedeterminer 1his   , as ~: x emplified in ( t ) and all other uses of hoth determiner and prouomiflal denlon stratives  , which arc definite . As has bccll pointed ot , ~ by a number of researchers , ind c finite this occurs only in cat ; ~ , al , n , @ a , ncd discouLs c . Tilts obscrvalion was con- . 
firmed hyour own study , which found instances of indefinite this ot , ly in the inhlrmal coaversalkms . 
(1) i couldn't sleep last night . My neighbors have this dog that kept meaw ake . 
We will be primarily concerned hete with definite noun phrases  , where the speaker expects the addressee to uniquely identify them lin'cntontile basis of the description in question  . 
Th , ercfe , e ~ lts of such expressions have often been characterized as ' given '  . t lowev cr , as pointed out by Gundcl (1978a , 1978b ) and l'rince (1981 h) , givcnness is not amfitary concept . The rearcd iil ' ereat senses of givenness each of which is relevant to the Rn'm of reicc  , ' ittg expr , -ssions , but in different ways . 
hletttiliabitity . In the weakest sense of givcnness , the slmaker expects the addressee to uniquely identify the referent  , but the basis forth : identification is ii Televant  . Not only can it be linguistic or extraling ttistic  , based on entities in immediate or longterm memory  , but it need no the based on any previous hared experience  ; : it all ( cf . lIawkins1978) . The basis /' or the identification may been c~led in lheform itselt  , as in (2) . 
(2) I couldn't sleep last night . The neiglt boes dog kept meaw ake . 
This type of givenness , which werct is r to as identitiability , is both necessary and Slffficient ot the use of deliniie articles  . 
Sharedt ' alailiarity . Most identifiablentities are identifiable because of some shared experience between speaker and aft  . 
dressec ; again this may be linguistic or exlralinguistic , based on local colRext or hmgterm menu Lly associated with shared cultural or personal expt : rienct :  . Itistiffs slattls which we claint is necessary for the use of demonstrative expressions  ( with the exception of ind c f in it , ~ this ) . Thus , (3) unlike (2) , is li : licitous only if the addressee has prior knowledge of the dog in question  . 
(3) I couldn't sleep last night . That dog next do or kept meaw a k e . 
Actilzatio Jii . Entities which are fantiliar on the basis of presence in the imnlcdiate discourse context  ( either linguistic or extralin-gnistic ) are not only shared but ' in awareness . ' This sense of pj vcmless , which w creler to as ' activated , '( of . Chafe 1976 , Gundel 1978b , Haji ~ fov ; i and Vrbov fi 1982 ) is necessary tor pronominal reference , including pronominal demonstratives . 
Thus , that ' in ( 4 ) could only r ~: li : r to the bmkiog of a dog if this \[ ladlrg  ; eu ac~ivaR ; db ) r the hnnu-diat c discourse context : ( 4 ) 1 couldn't sleep last night . That kept meaw ake . 
Activation is also a necessary condition for determiner this  . 
Demonst cative this , both pronominal and definite determiner , has the additional condition that it not only be activated but speaker-activated  , either linguistically or extralinguistically b virtue of its inclusion in the speakers context space  , as in ( 5 ) :  ( 5 ) A : Have you seen the neighbors new dog ? B : Yes  , and that dog kept meaw a keall night . 
B ': ?? Yes , and this dog kept meaw a keall night . 
\[ r ~ focus . Finally , the most highly activated entities are not only in the speaker's arid ltearer's awareness but are the center of attention at  ; t particular point in the discourse . We refer to this status as ' in focus . ' Entities in . focus 1always include at least the topic of the sentence as well as any higher level discourse topics which may not be overtly represented in the sentence itself  . Under certain conditions , they may also include other elements such as the reference of the linguistic focus  . Thus a shift in focus always entails a shift in topic but not vice versa  . The status ' into-otis ' is a necessary condition for unstressed pronomlnals and also for zero anaphora  ( cf . Gundel 1978b ) . 
The rehtlionship between tile various ( definite ) referential statuses and the forms that col Telate with them is shown in  ( 6 )  . 
These statuses are in a unidirectional implication rclation such that any status on lhe hierarchy implies all statuses higher on the hier-urchy but not vice-  . versa : ( 6 ) GIVENNESSIIIERARCIIY : in focus --> act ivated --> slmred --> identifiable it that  , this fllat N the N this N 40 CRITIQUE OF CLAIM SINTI lELITERATURE . 
Focus Shift . Observations regarding the focus shift functiou of demonstratives follow naturally from the theory outlined above given two additional  , but uncontroversials sumptions -- that pronominal it is necessarily unstressed and that the overwhelming majority of definite noun phrases are not only uniquely identifi-ahle  , but shared . As noted above , the prinlary distinction between demonstrative pronouns and unstressed personal pronouns is that the referents of the latter must not only be activated  , but in focus . 
A pronominal whose referent is not currently in focus is necessarily stressed  ( cf . Hirschbcrg and Pierrehumbert 1986) . 
Since it is necessarily nnstressed , the only third person singular neuter pronominals available for focus shift are the demonstratives that and this  . This accounts for the distribution of that versus it noted by Linde  ( 1979 ) as well as the uses of that noted by Reichman . Use of that in referring to previou statements ( also noted by both these authors ) is just a special case of focus shift , since the focus of attention at the point " after a statement is made is typically not the statement is elf  . However , our data does not support Sidner's ( 1983 ) claim that this but not that is used for focus movement  . Exatnplcs illustrating the focus shift function of pronominal this and that include the following  :   ( 7 ) Ki : And . .So what he DID was . . . came in , setup the free . . . 
2: and then henlade was sail , with rumin it ' ? 3: And . .made it in coffee cans and heated it on the stove in the graduate loung e  . 
A4: Oh , gee.
K5: And this was the solstice tree.
lu (7) , tile topic and hence the focus of attention in K5 is the tree , which is activated by its mention in K1 thus licensing tile l There is some confusion in tile literature resulting from the fact that tile term ' focus ' has been used in two distinct and at least partly opposite ways  ( cfIlaji ~ . bv ~1987) . We use ' in focus ' to refer to tile psychological notion of focus of attention  ( tlaji  ~ ovgsfoc USAl ) and ' linguistic focus ' to lefer to tile point of linguistic prominence in tim sentence  ( the comment )  . 
2117 use of a pronominal . However , since it is not in focus in K2 , K3 , and A4 , the reference to it in K5 constitutes a focus shift and thus requires as lxesse demonstrative form  . Note that since the tree was speaker activated , either this or that could be used . 
(8 ) N 1: I like the poor dog who was buried six times in one day ! K  2: Oh . That must , that must be a story that comes from the Second Minnesotahistory  , 3: because that didn't appear in the , in the ahdi-ary , 4: so it must have come from somewhere , In (8) , the topic and hence focus of K2 is the story . 
Since the story is activated but not in focus in N1   ( the focus of attention in N1 is stories that N likes )  , reference to the story in K2 constitutes a focus shift and thus requires a stressed demonstrative  . Note that the story continues to be topic ( in focus ) in K3 and K4 and that in K3 , an unstressed pronominal it could have been used instead of that  . 
(9) N1 : " Bobloves Mary " ,   2: and someonelse wrote " Mary loves Jim " 3: and I wrote " Jim loves Bob "! ( laughter ) 4: It was three different hand writings , three different people . 
K5: Yeah , that's good.
(9 ) illustrates the use of that to refer to a previou statement or utterance  . Since that refers to the topic of K5 , the story activated in N1-4 ( but not in focus ) , use of that constitutes a focus shift . 
The focus shift function of determiner that ( cf . Reichman 1984 ) can be explained as a consequence of Grice's maxim of quantity  , specifically don't be more informative than necessary  ( cf . Grice , 1975) . Since the overwhelming majority of definite noun phrases refer to entities that are shared  , use of a demonstrative determiner as opposed to the less restrictive definite article in most instances carries little additional information  . Thus a demonstratived terminer is generally used only when the signalling of shared familiarity has some additional communicative function  . This is the case when there is a shift in focus , as in (10) and (11) , since a focus shift always entails a shift in topic and topics are necessarily shared  ( cf . Gundel 1985) . 
In the particular case of (10) , there is not enough information encoded in the noun phrase itself to allow the addressee to uniquely identify the referent  . Thus a demonstrative ( as opposed to a definite article ) is required in order to link the referent up with entities hared as a result of immediate discourse context  . In (1 lb ) on the other hand , the demonstrative function simply to signal a focus shift and therefore a definite article would be equally appropriate  . 
(10) a . John , this speech was a magnific enttriumph for the President  . He showed he could stay a wake for twelve whole minutes  . He showed that he could speak every word off of his tele prompter  , even the long ones . But the speech doesn't have any chance of putting the scandal behind him  , because the scandal is not about mistakes , as he said , and it's not about mismanagement , as the Tower Commission said . It is about a betray alof principles , it's about lying , and it's about breaking the law . 
b . And those issues remain . \[ McLaughlin 3/6/87\] . 
(11) a . These incredibly small magnetic bubbles are the vanguard of a new generation of ultradense mem -ory-storage systems  . 
b . These systems are extremely rugged : c . they are resistant to radiation and are nonvolatile  . 
Contrast . The contrastive function of demonstratives , like the focus shift function , is related to the fact that contrast is marked by stress and pronominal it cannot carry stress  . Moreover , contrast may be just a special case of focus shift  , since a eontrastive noun phrase always brings into focus other entities with which it is being contrasted  , as illustrated in (12): (12) a . In both cyclesteal mode and DPC , the attachmeni feature . . . responds with a condition code . 
b . For commands that do not require interrupts ( that is , commands executed under DPC ) , the eonditi~m code provides current device status information  . 
c . For commands that requir executiou in cyclesteal mode followed by an inten'upt request  , this first condition code provides information concerning acceptance of the command by the attachment feature  . 
d . Upon interrupt servicing by the processor , the attachment feature provides a second condition code and an interrupt word  . 
Thus , the referent of this first condition code in ( 12c ) is already in focus since it is also the topic of  ( 12b )  . However ,   , dnce the use of this noun phrase brings into tb cus contrasting condition codes  ( cf . a second condition code in ( 12 d ) ) it is not only contrastive , but constitutes an implicit focus shift as well Proximity  . The speaker-activated condition on this predicts correctly that both this and that can comment upon a speaker's own prior remark as in examples  ( 7 ) and ( 10 ) respectively , but only that can be used to comment upon the remarks of another speaker  , as illustrated by example (9) . 
The same condition also explains why this is used for ex-tralinguistic objects relatively close to the speaker and that for those relatively further away as in  ( 13 )  , and why the intervalde ~ noted by determiner this include speech time  , while that tends to be associated with some time prior to speech time as in  ( 14 ) This is so because speaker-activated means not only linguistically activated but activated within the speaker's context space  . 
(13) N : This tastes like water . This tastes like THAT ! Waita minute -- the stuff that's  $1  . 9 9 for two quarts hastes a-the same as one that's $2  . 07 for a fifth . 
(14 ) K : There he was that hairy hound from Buodapest /Never leaving us alone  . /Never have Iever known/a ruder pest Special Effects  . As seen in the diagram in (6) , each of the referential statuses i also correlated as a necessary condition for a differentype of definite reference  . Since the statuses are implicationally related , reference with a particular form will generally imply appropriateness of reference with all forms associated with a status higher on the hierarchy  , but not vice versa . 
Thus , pronominal that in ( 13 ) may be replaced with that wine and these systems in  ( llb ) can be replaced with the systems . 
However , not all cases of the N are replaceable with that N  , as illustrated in (2) and (3) ; and not all cases of that N are replaceable with that  . , as illustrated in (3) and (4) . 
The maxim of quantity would dictate that speakers will use the strongest possible form  , i . e . will signal the most information as is relevant regarding the givenness status of the entity in question  . The same max impredicts that speakers would not use a stronger form than necessary in a given situation  , i . e . they will not signal more information than is appropriate  . Violation in either direction will often result in a special effect or implicature  , as in (15) , where the use of this as opposed to the equally appropriate he conveys an effect of solidarity :   ( 15 ) Gov . D ( from videotapel : I've got the energy to ran this marathon  , the slrength to run this country , the experience to manage our government , and the values to lead our people . \[ McLaughlin ,   3/20/871 We already noted that use of a demonstratived terminer often has a special effect  , such as signalling a topic shift , because virtually all definite NPs are also shared  , and thus demonstrative determiners do not normally convey much more infommtion than would be conveyed by the definite article  . Similarly , in cases where the referent is not activated , eterminer that acts as a nove ~ signal to the addressee to search longterm memoxy for the referent  , as in (16): i hat tell you when ~ ow a ter ~ t . They're only $10 or soumthing . 
5? ~., TENP . EDIIF kCERENC .'I ~; I
The distdUt ~ tion of demonstrative types difli . qsacco , ding to gem : e , as ~; cen in Table 1 ( Seelfedheyl , , flnthCOming , ibr more ( m the seg ? we ~ . ) Thus , ti > r example , the relative percentage of pronontinal that appears to begJ  , : at crill multi-pmticipant oral communication d~an in written comntuni ~ at km  . The casual co , l-versatiom ; * , rid electronic specification documents represent ther  , = sl~ctive c ~ . i reme sont iff ssca/e ~ ~ hatN this this N Total ~  ; POKEI~q G~C . NRE ~ Casual Co ~ rersations 49%   i5  %  17  %  19%   3t6 Televised l ; is cussio ~ t 30% 15% 12% 34% 1 i22
WRl'f'FElqGENI,~E,q
Ncwspap~ ; r Articles 14% 2l % 7% 58% 83 Plt vtmingl )( ~ ; ttruoiit ! 1% 9/)% 7% 53% ' ~3 Sty ; ~ , eificalioql ) ocu U , tmt1%:i % 4% 90% t02 fj ! 121 q . I : .   . l~q ),, W ; t ! . : ~! iv ~ di ~) yi but iiA ~2 hj_~?!v . eK ~, j r e ~_ . 
'' he distribution of demonstrative fl ) ~ ms and flmctlons for each genre will be individually presented and discussed below  . 
5 . 1C as ~ m ~ co ~ wersatio ~ , so The casual conve , sations were taped f brtm qose: ; unrelated to linguistic analysis ; participants are family members reunited lbr holiday gatherings : ~  . hatt tnatN this this N Total
Same speak . ~ r 6718 79101\[
Other Sl~:ak:r 58 35 . . . . 6 6 i ~, xh'alinguis tic 26 4 36 5 7 i
Reminder--17 . . . . . . 17
Indefinite . . . . . . . 3636
Tinte .   .   .   .   .   .   . 21012 " or wmd .   .   .   .   .   .   .  !  .   .   .   .  4
Other 44 1.. ..9
Totali\[~S 46 55 60 316' l'ab~e2 . Demonstrative sik ~ casualeo ~ versations Other Speaker's Remarks ? A large proportion of pronominal that in the casual conversations is due to its use for refer  . .
ence to an immediately preceding contribution of another conversational pard cipm~t  . For an example see 0) above . 
As noted above , pronominal and determiner this require that the referent bespeaker-activated  . Thus we would expect of ind that used extensively in any nmltiple-participant discourse  , such as casaal conversation . While , we do have five exceptions to this gene , : alization , where this is used to refer to an entity activated by tt  , : addressee , all of these are clarification questions re questing re :  , ' erent identification , perhaps conveying polite intention to notiaten ' upt  , as in ( 17 ) :  ( 17 ) iq : So yester day I finished up the day's work and put it in gear and nothing happened  . The cable for the trmls mission .   .   .   . 
MIs this your car ?
N : No . Truck . The old , beat up , lousy van I have to drive . 
E~g ~' aling ~ dstie ~' e fere neeo While tile linguistic or ex-tralinguist k status of the referent is irrelevant for predicting the form of a  1err  , ring expression , this status does differ across genres . For obvious reasons , extraiinguistic reference occurs primarily in face-to4ace interaction ,   ( 18 ) is an example showing the use of tha * ~ for shift hagtile focus onto an extralinguistic entity  , fblk ~ wed by subsequent reference using it ' . Note that activation is accomplish ~ . ,d here by a gesture : (18) 1( Wt , at is that , Beethoven wha Lonthatteeshir L
N1 thinkiUs the Ninth , isn't it.
K . Number Three . lafler reading it \]
N . Ohitis.
Renfinder that ? Since determiner that does not require actiw ~- tlon of the referent  , but only that it be shared , it can be used to rote , to entities that art : not present in the irrmmdiate discourse context  , as in (19) . 
(19 ) K : I realized something that seem significant to meahout George  . . that in the , in the fall , he .   .   . as everyonels e , he wears .   .   .   . 
N:\[Clothes.
A : \[!. eaters.
K : No . \ [ Those ldnd often n is shoes that are expensive , :
A : \[ Boots.
N : A didas.
A:\[Adidas.
K :\[ A did as , ok .
As not cd above , that N is sometimes used as an explicit signal to the hearer to search memory for the referent  . One would expect such signals to be most common in interactions between individuals with shm'ed personal experiences  , oit is not smprising that they would occur fi ' equently in cast ml conversations between family menlbers  . Typically such phrases include a relative clause specifying additional information to aid in the search and are often embedded in a request for confirmation that the referent g as indeed been located  . . Since the referent is shared but not activated , it frequently occurs in left-dislocated constructions which have tile lunction of introducing or reintroducing a topic into the discourse  . ( eLKeenan and Schieffelin .  1976) 5  . 2 Televised Discussions . The televised discussion was a videot a pedepisode of The McLaughlin Group  ( initial transcript obtained from the Federal News Service  )  . This genre is similar to the casual conversations in being spoken and multi  . 
pmticipant , but differs in degiee of fi ) rmality and spontaneity and mawareness of an audience  . Four journalists participate in asttucttned discussion about current affairs undertile control of a moderator As shown in Table  3  , most of demonstratives are pronominal that , as extxzct cd in interactive discourse . 
that that N this flds N Total
Same Speaker 216--431
Other Speaker 262 ... ..28
Discourse Topic I 167 2236
Extralinguisfic--1......
Remhader-o 2.....2
Indefinite . . . . . .33
T:\[me-Person-Place . . . . . . . 11I1
Forward ... ...5 -,.5
Other--1225
Total 4818 I442122
Table 3 . Demonstratives intelevised discussions Discourse topic this  . The televise discussions are distinguished from the casual conversations by the frequent use of this to refer to non-speaker activated entities  . Such uses contradict our claim that this " must bespeaker-activated  . To account for such examples , we suggest that a distinction be made between inclusive and exclusive speaker space  , in the case of local discourse segments , peaker space often excludes the addressee , but with higher-level discourse topics , which are often shm'ed , speaker space includes the addressee . In such cases , which are characteristic of highlys l ' uctured interactions  , this'may be used for something which was not initially activated by the speaker  . In (20) , reference is made to the explicit discourse topic of ' tlm segment  , Gorbachev's decision ot to cancel the smnnfit : 1The categories Same Speaker and Other Speaker include only referents which are locally activated in the immediately preceding utterance  . Thus , they aternutually exclusive with the category of discourse topic  . 
219  ( 20 ) G : The business of trying to play Kremlinologist on this decision  , I think it's simpler than that . I really think that Reagan looked very , very vulnerable at that time . It was the thing for Gorbacbev to do , and he just misread it . \[ McLaughlin , tO/30/87, 21\]5 . 3 Planned , non-interactive genres . Tables 46 show the distribution of demonstratives in newspaper stories  ( New York Times " Weekin Review " section ,  6-11/87) ; a University of Minnesot administrative planning document  ; and an electronic specification document supplied by Control Data Corporation  . 
A characteristic of these non-interactive , written genres is a relatively high percentage of determiner this  . This may be part-ly attributable to the fact that everything that is activated is speaker activated  . In addition , there are malay time expressions with this in the newspaper articles and metadiscourse references such as this document in the planning document  . Unlike the discourse-topic use in the televised is cussions  , referents of determiner this in the written genres are typically activated in tile immediately preceding sentence and constitute a focus shift  . 
that that N this this N Total n-0 t 3   1   1   3   8   n1   9   11   3   12   35   n2+  --  2   1   15   18 
Time-Person-Place - - 21 17 20
Forward . . . . . 11
Reminder--1....1
Total 12176 4883
Table 4 . Demonstratives in newspaper stories that that N this this N Total  n-0   9   9   .   .   .   . 18n1--1362039 n2+--2--911
Time . . . . . .44
Metadiscourse ... ...1111
Total 9246 4483
T_able 5 . Demonstratives in-planning d0c_ument that that N this this N Total n-0   1   5  --  3   9   n1   .   .   .   . 4788 2n2 + .   .   .   .   .   .  8 8
Metadiscourse ... ...33
Total 1549 2102' Fable 6 . Demonstratives in specification document Informative this  . A use of determiner this expressions which is found exclusively in the non-interactive gnres is to informa-tively redescribe a referent  . In the newspaper stories , these are typically redescriptions of topical referents  ( already in focus ) which would have been specifiable with an unstressed pronoun if the extra material had not been included  , as in (22) . Although speakers generally use the strongest possible form of referring expression  , here a weaker form is being used for a special reason  , namely to introduce new information i the noun part  . 
(22 ) Nearly lost in the polemic was Judge Kennedy himself  . That was ironic , because in many ways this former small-city lawyer with the stable marriage and three attractive children and the fine reputatiou appears to personify just those values that made the image of Ronald Reagan so attractive after the convulsions of the  1960's and 1970's   . \[ New York Times ,  11/15/87 ,   4:ll Informative this is used in the electronic specification document for obligatory demonstrative reference to the referent of a heading which is activated but not yet in focus  , as in (24) . 
Note that here an unstressed pronoun would not be possible  . 
1 The rows n -0 , n-I and n2+ refer to the distance between the demonstrative expression adits antecedent  . 
(24 ) Pg_!I  ~ The attachment leaturcs ends this in bound tag to the  Series/1 channel controls to indicate a poll capture for interrupts e~wicing or non-burst cyclesteal servicing  . It is not used to signal a burst transfer . 
6. IMPLICATION SFORAL GORITItMS
The previous sections Woposed constraints on demonstratives and discussed their use in different genres  . This section outlines components of a natural language system that would capture the relevant notions of shared familiarity  , activation and form ; and explores possibilities for incorporating these into current dis ~  . 
course-processing alorithms.1
Shared familiarity . At minimum , a computational rr to del of shared familiarity requires maintenance of a user discourse his-  . 
to ry in which a record is maintained of all entities referenced in conversations with a particular user  . Thus , for any entity in its knowledge base , the natural anguage system knows whether/bat entity has been discussed before  ( shared familiarity ) or not ( familiarity unknown )  . Only in the former case can a definite demonstrative expression be used  . The recognition of discourse units ( e . g . speech acts of Allen 1983 ) and the aelations between them , e . g . conversational moves ( Reichman 1985) , rhetorical predicates ( McKeown 1985 , Mann and Thompson 1986 ) are also important in demonstrativer solution . These require a sophisticated user model which keeps a record of beliefs and intentions of discourse participants  . While such a model could be incorporated into existing discourse structure frameworks  ( e . g . 
Grosz and Sidner 1986) , no specific proposals to account for shared familiarity have yet been advanced  ( but see SparckJones 1986 )  . 
Activation . An adequate model of activation must isolate that subset of shared entities which is activated at any given point in the discourse  . This subset includes entities referenced in the immediately preceding sentence  , ntities present in the immediate spatiotemporal context of the discourse  , and beliefs and intentions relevant othecm Tent discourse segment  . Many currem discourse algorithms which function at the local level of discourse structure can be used to model activation due to the immediately preceding sentence  . For example , Haji~ov ~ i ( 1987 ) point so at that elements in McKeown's ( 1985 ) potential focus list can be equated with activated elements  . Similarly , in the current centering paradigm ( Grosz , Joshi and Weinstein 1986 , Brennan , Friedman and Pollard 1987 ) elements in the set of forward looking centers can also be considered activated  . At the global level , Sidner and Grosz ( 1986 ) describe a model of discourse structure which indicates currently activated beliefs and intentions at any ? given point in a discourse  . 
In Focus . Elements in focus are those which are most highly activated  .   2 These always include at least the topic of the sentence  , any high-level topics ( including those not overtly represented in the sentence  )  , and under certain as yet poorly understood conditions  , the referent of the linguistic focus . In the cut '- . 
rent centering paradigm , the topic of the sentence is equated to the backward looking center  ( ef . Joshi and Weinstein 1981) . In this lKryk ( 1987 ) presents an algorithur for demo ~ lstrative int r pretation in Polish and English based on Sidner ' s  1983 algorithms . Kryk's algorithm , bowever , does not appear to be explicit enough to serve as a basis for implementation  . Moreover , some of the algorithm's predictions , for example that the demonstrative that is never used fbr non-co present extralinguistic reference whereas non-co present this is u  , ': ed only for exla ' a linguistic reference , are inaccurate . 
2Although our notion of activation is similar to Haji~ovlt  ( 1987 )  , it differs in that she considers the linguistic f ~ us to be more highly activated tha~t the topic  . We feel that our assumptions about iegrces of activation me more compatible w if lithe fact  , noted also by l laji ~" ov fi , that topic maintains iir ~ activation longer than does the referents of the linguistic focus  . 
' 2   2 Oparadigm nns~essed pronouns are viewed as preferring an existing bacl~wards-look hlg center as antecedent  . We have suggested that use of a demonstrative expression or stressed pronoun signals that the option to shift the backwards-looking center has been selected over the otherwise-preferred option of continuing an existing backwards-looking center  . Brennan , Friedman and Pollard (1987) , in fact , mention in passing that stressed pronouns in oral discourse could be used to unambiguously signal one such type of cer ~ ter shift  . ( cf . Sgall (1984) , who remarks that demonstratives c ~ Jn be used to unambiguously specify reference to the linguistic fi~cus of their mnediately preceding sentence  . ) Genre differences . A final application of our constraints i in the a tea of discourse genre variation  . We have shown that both the form and function of demonstrative expressions varies between diffi  ; rent spoken and written discourse genres . Our final suggestion is that these and other genre difference should be further explored  , so that it will eventually be possible to design maximally-efficient discourse-processing al or ithms which differentially e  , xploit such genre distinctions . 
7 oREFERENCES
Allen , James .  1983 . Recognizing intentions from natural langual ; e utterances . Computational models of discourse , ed . 
by M . \] Irady and R . C . Berwick , 267-330 . Cambridge , MA:
MITP ~ ess.
Bosch , Peter .  1983 . Agreement and anaphora . London :
Academic Press.
Brennan , ~ usan E . , Marilyn W . Friedman and Carl Pollard . 
1987 . A centering approach to pronouns . Proceedings of the 25th A , anual Meeting of file Association for Computational Lingui ~  , ~ tics , Stanford University ,  155-162 . 
Buhler , Karl .  1982 . The deictic field of language and deictic words . Speech , place , and action , ed . by R . J . Jarvella and W . Klein , 9- . 30 . Chichester , NY : John Wiley & Sons . 
Chafe , Wallace .  1976 . Givenness , contrastiveness , ubjects , topics , and point of view . Subject and topic , ed . by C . N . 
Li , 25-:; 5. New York : Academic Press.
Ehlich , Koarad .  1982 . Anaphor and deixis : same , similar or differei~t ? Speech , place , and action , ed . by R . J . Jarvella and W ~ Klein , 315-338 . Chichester , NY : John Wiley &

Fillmore , Charles J .  1975 . Santa Cruzlectures on deixis . Indi-aua Un~versity I , inguistics Club . Bloomington , IN : Indiana
University Linguistics Club.
.  .   .   .   .   .  19;~2 . Towards a descriptive framework for spatial deixis  . Speech , place , and action , ed . by R . J . Jarvella and W . Kh , ' ~ n , 3159 . Chiehester , NY : John Wiley & Sons . 
Grice , H . P .  1975 . l~gic and conversation . Speech Acts , Syntax and Semantics 3, ed . by P . Cole and J . Morgan , 4158 . New York : Academic Press . 
Grosz , Barbara J . , A . .K . Joshi and S . Weinstein .  1986 . Towards a computational theory of discourse interpretation  , ms . 
Grosz , Barbara J . antiCandace L . Sidner .  1986 . Attention , in-tendons , and the structure of discourse . Computational Linguistics 12 . 175-204 . 
Gundel , Jc~mette K . 1978a . Sa'ess , pronominalization ad the given - . n , ~ w distinction . University of Haw : tii working papers in linguistics  I0  .  113 . 
.  .   .   .   . 197 ~ b . A universal constraint on deletion . Proceedings of the 12th International Congress of Linguistics , ed . by W . 
Dressier and W . Meid , Innsbrucker Beitriige zur Sprachwis-senschaft ,  532~536 . 
. . . . . . . .  1985 . Shared knowledge and topicality . Journal of
Pragmad cs 9.83-107.
Haji~ov ~ i , Eva .  1987 . Focussing-A meeting point of linguistics and artificial intelligence  . Artificial Intelligence 1I : methodology , systems , applications , ed . by Ph , Jorrand and V . 
Sgux~ev , 311-321. Amsterdam : North-Holland.
Haji ~ ovtt , Eva and Jarka Vrbov ~ i .  1982 . On the role of the hierarchy of activation in the process of natural anguage understanding  . Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Pxague ,  107-113 . 
Halliday , M . A . K . and Ruquaiya Hasan .  1976 . Cohesion in
English . London : Longman.
Hawkins , John .  1978 . Definiteness and indefiniteness : a study in reference and grammaticality prediction  . Atlantic High-lands , NJ : Humanities Press . 
Hedberg , Nancy . Forthcoming . The discourse function of cleft sentences . University of Minnesotadissetaation . 
Hirschberg , Julia and Janet Pierrehumbert .  1986 . The intonational structuring of discourse . Proceedings of the 241h Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Columbia University ,  136-144 . 
Is , - u ' d , Stephen .  1975 . Changing the context . Formal semantics of natural anguage , ed . by E . L . Keenan , 287-296 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
Joshi , A . K . , and Weinstein , S .  1981 . Control of inference : role of some aspects of discourse structure-centering  . Proceedings of tile 1981 Meeting of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Vancouver ,  385-87 . 
Keenan , E . Ochs and B . Schieffelin .  1976 . Topic as a discourse notion : a study of topics in the conversations of children and adults  . Subject and Topic , ed . by C . Li , 337-385 . New
York : Academic th'ess.
Kryk , Barbara .  1987 . On deixis in Englishea ~ d Polish : the role of demonstrative pronouns  . Frankfurt am Main : Verlag Peter Lung GmbH . 
Lakoff , Robin .  1974 . Remarks on this and that . Papers from the Tenth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society  , ed . hyM . Le Galy , R . Fox , and A . Bruck , 345-356 . 
Chicago , 1L : Chicago Linguistics Society.
Linde , Charlotte .  1979 . Focus of attention and the choice of pronouns in discourse  . Discourse and syntax , ed . by T . 
Givon ( Syntax and semantics , 12), 337-354.
Lyons , John .  1977 . Semantics , Volume 2 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
Mann , William C . and Sandra A . Thompson .  1986 . Rhetorical structure theory : description and consla~uctionftext structures  . Reprint ISI/RS-86-174 . Information Sciences Institute . Marina del Rey , California . 
McKeown , Kathleen , R .  1985 . Text generation . New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Prince , Ellen . 1981a . On the inferencing of indefinite-this NPs . 
Elements of discourse understanding , ed . by A . Joshi , B . 
Webber , and I . Sag , 231-250 . Cambridge : Cambridge Uni ~ versity Press . 
.  .   .   .   . 1981b . Towards a taxonomy of given and new informao tion  . Radical pragmatics , ed . by P . Cole , 223-256 . New
York : Academic Press.
Reiehman , Rachel .  1985 . Getting computers to talk like you and me : discourse context  , focus and semantics ( art ATN model ) . 
Cambridge , MA : MIT Press.
Reichmau-Adar , Rachel .  1984 . Technical discourse : the present progressive t nse  , the deictic " that , " and pronominalization . 
Discourse Processes 7.337-369.
Sgall , Petr .  1984 . A note on text and reference . Contributions to functional syntax , semantics and language comprehension , ed . by P . Sgall , 139-144 . Amsterdam : John Benjrmfins . 
Sidner , Candace , L .  1983 . Focusing in the comprehension f definite anaphora  . Computational models of discourse , ed . 
by M . Brady and R . C . Berwick , 267-330 . Cambridge , MA:
MIT Press.
Sparek Jones , K .  1986 . Issues in user modelling for expert systems . Artificial intelligence and its applications . New
York : John Wiley & Sons.
Wald , Benji .  1983 . Referents and topic across discourse units : observations from current vernacular English  . Discourse perspectives on syntax , ed . by F . Klein-Andreu , 91-116 . 
New York : Acadenlie Press.

