Understanding of Stories for Animation
HideoSHIMAZU *
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
3531 Boelter Hall , University of Califomia,
Los Angeles , CA 90024, USA

This paper presents the story understanding mechanism for creating computer animation scenarios  . The story understanding mechanism reads a natural anguage story and creates its scenario for realistic graphic animations  . This paper presents three types of hidden actions and relations of actions that must be discovered for realistic animations of stories but which are not explicitly described in the stories  . They are : 1) causality check among actions ;  2 ) interpolation of a continuous action beyond a sentence  ;  3 ) interpolation of hidden actions between eighboring sentences  . This paper also describes the inference mechanism which recognizes the need for interpolation of these hidden actions  . Multiple TMS is introduced in the mechanism . The knowledge base is action-oriented , hence it is independent of individual stories' domains  . 
1. Introduction
Recently computer animations have been widely used in many fields like conventional CAD  , commercial films and movies . For these kinds of applications , high-level languages are now provided \[ Reynolds  82\]\[Zeltzer   82\]  . However , because these languages are programming languages and amhard to use for untrained personnel  , it is desirable to develop an easy-to-use computer animation system to encourage more widespread use of computer animation  . 
The authors have been developing Story Driven Animation  ( SDA ) \[ Takashima et al .   87\] which automatically generates the animation for a given story written in Japanese taken from a children's story book  . 
SDA consists of three modules : 1 ) story understanding ; 2) stage directing ; 3) action generating . The first module reads a story written in Japanese and makes an action-based scenario  . The second module receives the scenario and modifies it for stage setting  . The last module generates animations on a graphics display according to * The author is a member of NEC Corporation  , and is now staying at the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory  , UCLA during this academic year . 

Yosuke TAKASHIMA
Masahiro TO MONO
C&C Information Technology Research Laboratories
NEC Corporation 4-1-1 Miyazaki Miyamae-ku Kawasaki
Kanagawa 213 Japan the precisely specified scenario given by the stage directing module  . 
SDA differs from previous natural anguage processing systems  , such as summarizing\[Young & Hayes 85\]\[Lytinen & Gersh-man 86\]  , depth understanding of stories\[Dyer 83\]? question-answering \ [ Wilensky 82\]\[Harris   84\] and story gunerating \[ Schank & Riesbeck 81\]  , in that it interpolates hidden actions among sentences that must be discovered for realistic omputer animations but are not explicitly described in the story itself  . 
Since SDA can accept curtailed expressions in input stories  , story writers do not have to describe all the acts explicitly to get the desired graphic animation  . Consider the following sentences in " The Hare and The Tortoise " in Aesop's fables :  ( 1 )  , The hare ran . 
(2). The hare looked back.
(3) . The hare said , " the tor to ise can never catch up with me " . 
(4). The hare lay down on the grass.
(" The Hare and The Tor ~ ise " , Aesop's fable ) It is never thought that the hare would lie down while running with his face looking tn the reverse direction  . If he were to do so , he would do a dive and his neck would be broken l Any person can con-jure up an accurate image of the hate's actions  . Naturally lacking facts between sentences arc interpolated using the human reader's common sense  . We imagine that the hare stopped between ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  , and looked forward between (3) and (4) . However , if an animation producing program does not have this common sense  , it produce strange graph icanimations when these sentences are not more explicitly described  . The above scenario is merely one example of SDA's ability to interpolate curtailed expressions of action  . In order for a story understanding program to l accurately accept input sen-te nees  , it is imperative that such a common sense be built into the program  . 
SDA story understanding mechanism was constructed based on action-oriented knowledge  . Knowledge related to actors ' actions is independent of the content of individual stories  , and is common to everyone since actors ' movements are constrained by physical limitations of a human body  . Although this story understanding approach is superficial  , it allows for an extensive domain . 
This kind of research which strictly infers occurrences of actions among natural language sentences has not been done yet  . In this paper wo present various types of hidden actions among sentences and the inference mechanism to identify and interpolate them  . 
The whole SDA system is roughly described in \[ Takashima et al  87\]  . 
2 . Types of Hidden Actions to be Interpolated There a ~ e three types of hidden actions and relations of actions to be interpolated among sentences  . The above example shows a type of hidden actions to be interpolated  . It can be stated as follows: , Continuity of different actions between sentences : When an action in a sentence is not consecutive to any action in the previous ~ ntence  , bridging action ( s ) has/have to been found and added into the original text  . The action " stop " between " run " at ( 1 ) and " look hack " at ( 2 ) and the action " look forward " between " look back " at  ( 2 ) and " liedown " at ( 4 ) are examples . 
SDA interpolates discriminately ; if in the same context it must interpolate , if not in the same context , then it must not try to interpolate ( e . g . " The froglay down . The next morning , the frog went out . ") . 
The following example includes the other two types of interpolations in it  . The example is also from " The Hare and The To r to is e "  . 
(5). The tor to is eran.
(6) . The tor to iser an askicking up a cloud of dust . 
(7). The tort ( rises weat while running.
(8) . The tort(~isetopped at the top of the mountain . 
The proper interpretation f these sequences may be the followings : The tor to Lve starts running at  ( 5 )  . The tor to iser unswhile kicking up a cloud of dustat  ( 6 )  . Here , the action of " kick-up-a-cloud-of-dust " must be caused by the action of " run "  . The tor toises weats while running and kicking up a cloudo J dustat  ( 7 )  , even though " klck-up-a-cloud-of-dust " is not specOfed in  ( 7 )  . Here , the action of " sweat " must be caused by the action " run "  , for the tor to ise is not breaking into a coM sweat  . The tor toise stops running at (8) . At this time the tor to is e also stops " kick-up-a -cloud-of-dust "- ing and " sweat " - ing because these two actions were caused by " run "  . 
The other two types of hidden actions are : ? Causality among actions : When an action appears in a sentence  , it must be verified whether it is independent of any other action or caused by other actions  . If an action is caused by another action , it also ceases when its dependent action stops , ( e . g . the relationship between " kick-up-a-cloud-of -dust " to " ran " and " sweat " to " run "  )  . This verification is done between neighboring sentences whose agent is the same  . 
Continuity of an action beyond a sentence : An action is assumed to continue until it is explicitly ordered to stop if this action is a continuous type  . Inference of the continuity of the action " kick -up-a-eloud-of-dnst " from  ( 6 ) to ( 7 ) is an example . 
3. SDA Story Understanding Mechanism
In order to accurately understand an input story , SDA performs four distinct operations : \[1\] Extracting meanings of a sentence : Each sentence is parsed  , its meanings extracted , and the meanings put into an independent block called world  . Because our target story has a simple form , the sequence of its sentences becomes a chronological sequence  . 
Each sentence in a story include several assertions  . An assertion extracted from a sentence may not be true in context with time of its succeeding sentence  . Therefore , an individual worm is assigned to each sentence in order to store assertions which represent the situation inherent in a sentence  . When a new world is created , it is linked to the sequence of worlds which is linked with each individual actors  ; the hare , the tor to is etc . Each worm is compared with its previous world , and its assertions are added/deleted/modified in the following processes  , \[3\] and\[4\] . 
\ [2\] Causality check among actions : When an action assertion is put into a world  , its causal relationship to other actions is checked  . If it is dependent on another action , the causality link is connected between the action and its independent action  . 
\ [3\] Interpolation of hidden actions between neighboring sentences : Each action of the present sentence is also checked for its continuity to actions in the previous world  . If some action is hidden between the previous world and this sentence  , it is identified and added into the present world . 
\ [4\] Interpolation of a continuous action beyond a sentence : When there exist actions ~ vhich are not mentioned in the present sentence but should continue from the previou sentence to the present sentence  , they are added into the present world . 

Implementation ?.1 Implementing worm
Each world consists of two stages : present-state and post-state  . 
Present-state , the upper part of a world , holds assertions which represent the state of the moment when the sentence is uttered  . 
Post-state , the lower part of a world , holds assertions which represent the state just after the time when the sentence is uttered  . 
For example , the world of ( 5 ) has the assertion " the tor to ise runs " in its present-state  , the assertion " the-act-of the tor to ise is run " in its post-state  ( see Figure 1 )  . 
the tor to ise runs.
the-act-of the tor to is e is run .
present-state post-state
Figure 1World of (5)
This means that the tor to is e is running during the sentence  ( 5 ) and afterwards continues to run . Each post-state of each world is independently monitored by Truth Maintenance System  ( TMS ) \[Doyle 79\] . This structure is similar to Viewpoints in ART\[ Clayton  85\]  . TMS works well in accomplishing the continuity chock of an action beyond a sentence  . 
4.2 Causality Check Among Actions "
The dictionary contains action causalities of verbs  . When a verb or a verb phrase is processed , the SDA parser consults the dictionary . The following is a part of the dictionary for the verb phrase  , " kick-up-a-eloud-of-dust ": kick-up-a-clond-of dnst if the-act-of*actoristunthen  ; ; ; * actor is a variable , the agent of this action present-state : * actor kick-up-a  . eloud-of-dust . 
post-state : true ( the-act-of*act or is kick-up-a-cl ond-of-dus O supported-by  ( in ( the assertion-id of " true ( the-act-of*actor is run ) " ) out O ) else present-state : * actor kick . up-a-eloud-of-dust . 
post-state : true ( the-act-of ~ actor is kick-up-a-cloud-of-dus0 a-premise If the tor to ise kicks up a cloud of dust when it is running  , the action of " kick-up-a-cloud-of . dnst " i assumed to be caused by the " run " ~ ction  . Therefore , the corresponding assertion of t be action " kick- , i ~- a-cloud-of-dnst " is supported by tim " run " assertion  . If the tor-, oise is not running at the time . the assertion of " kick-up-a-cloud-of-dust " is justified as a premise  , which means that the tor to is e is kick-ing up a cloud of dust while standing at a point  , This causality between different actions is used as a dependency directed link for 

4 . 3 Interpolation of Hidden Actions Between Sentences Interpolation of bidden actions is accomplished by using goal directed search  . When a sentence is processed and its assertions arc extracted  , the system pick supeach assertion , and then makes an inspection to determine whether the action of each assertion is continuous from the state of the previous world or not  . The continuity is inspected by checking whether the precondition of the action is satisfied in the post-state of the previous world or not  . Each verb is specified its pre-cond it to n and postcondition in the dictionary  . 
Pre-condition is the constraint to be satisfied just before the act of a verb  . Post-conditlon is the state to be achieved just after the act of a verb  . For example , the dictionary indicates that in order to " stop  "  , the agent must be going on foot ( precondition ) , and after the agent " stop " s , it must be standing ( postcondition ) . 
If an action in the present sentence is continuous from the post-state of the previous world  , it is simply put into the present world . If it is not continuous , the system searches for a sequence of actions which bridge it  ( goal point ) and the post-state of the previous world ( starting points ) by referring the pre-condition/post-condition of verbs in the dictionary  . This search process is similar to the execution of STRIPS\[Nilsson  80\]  . If a bridging sequence of actions is found , the abridged actions in the sequence arc added into the original assertion  . Then , the modified assertion is put into the world . 
The sentence ( 2 ) " the hare looked back " is modified to " the hare stopped and looked hack " in order to satisfy the precondition of the verb phrase " looked back "  . The related pieces of the dictionary are shown below  . 
look back pre-eondition : ( the-state-of the agent is not in the reverse direction 
OR nothing is mentioned regarding the direction )
AND the-state-of the agent is standing.
postcondition : the-state-of the agent is in the reverse direction  . 
stop precondition : t be-act-of the agent is go-on -foot  . 
postcondition : the-state-of the agent is standing . 
622 4 . 4 Interpolation of a Continuous Action Beyond a Sentence Interpolation of a continuous action beyond a sentence is accomplist ~ d based on the assumption that actors ' actions are assumed to continue until they are explicitly ordered to stop  . This assumption is the same as the persistence problem in \[ Shoham  88\]  . 
After a sentence ts analyzed and its meanings are stored into both the present-state and the post -state of the present wor M  , all the assertions in the post-state of the previous world are copied into the post-state of the present world  . Then , the post-state of the present world is choked its consistency by TMS  . This ebeck prevents the over-copying of continuous actions from the previous wor M  . TMS works acemding to the following monitoring rules : Duplication Elimination Rule : If there exist two or more same assertions in the present world  , the copied one from the previous world is diminated  . 
? Exclusive Action Elimination Rule : If there exist exclusive assertions  , the one copied from the previous world is eliminated  . The exclusion relations of actions and states are also defined in the dictionary  . The exclusion relations are like the followings : exclusive  ( act-of ran , state-of standing ) exclusive ( act-of run , act-of walk ) . 
TMS compares each of the assertions in a world with each  ( 6 )  . The tor to iser an askicking upaelond of dust,
Vtl ~ tortoise ' runs .\[
It betor to ise kick-up-a-cloud-of-I1 . 0  . s - .   .   .   .   . If \] the-act-of the tor to is e is run . \[ i the act of the tor to is e's kick-up //
L . R-cloud -" . I-of-dnst .  $' / (7) . The tor to is es weat while running . 
the tor to is es weats . I copy~tl ~ wr to is e kick-up-a-cloud-of-I'~ the toise ts\I~te-aet-of the tor to is e is sweat  . I created I the-act-of the tor to is eisklck-up- I ~  , // Lg-cloud-of-du 7 .   .   .   .   .   . I/\[(8) . The tor to is estopped at the top of the mountain . 
copy I the tor to ise stops at the top of the It ~ ~0untatrL :----- It ~- state-of the tor to is eisstand-I\ ling  . l\,r/~-e- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  / - -~/  . o  ~ . . ~ =,  . ,-  .   .   .   . 2 ~ o .  ~ . L4~t , , , . I
Figure 2Worm of (6), (7) and ( g ) other . If two assertions cannot coexist , the one copied from the previous world is deleted . 
Figure 2 shows the worlds corresponding to sentence ( 6 )  , (7) and (8) . 
Here , the world of (6) is already troth-maintained . After the sentence ( 7 ) is analyzed and its meanings are stored into the world of  ( 7 )  , the two assertions In the post-state of ( 6 ) are copied into the post-state of ( 7 )  . TMS then deletes the duplicated assertion , "the-act-of the tor-toise is run " . The assertion " the-act-of the tor to is eis kick -up-a-cloud-of-dust " remains in the post-state of  ( 7 )  . 
Generally an assertion i a post-state corresponds to an assertion which presents the causal action in a present-state of the same world  . For example , "the-act-of the tor to is e is ran " is corresponding to " the tor to ise runs "  . When an assertion is added into the post-state of the present world by copied from the previous world and has no correspondence in the present -state of the present world  , its corresponding assertion is created and put into the present-state of the present world by the system  . Therefore , in this situation the corresponding assertion , " The tor to is ekick-up-a-cloud-of-dusts " is created and added into the present-state of  ( 7 )  . The present-state of world of ( 7 ) shows that the tor to is e is running while sweating and kicking up a cloud of dust  ( present-state )  , and afterwards continues to mn whiles weating and kicking up a cloud of dust  ( post-state )  . 
After the meanings of the sentence ( 8 ) are stored into the worm of ( 8 )  , three assertions are copied from the world of ( 7 ) to the world of ( 8 )  . Next , because " act-of run " and " state-of standing " are exclusive  , the assertion " the-act-of the tor to ise is run " is deleted by TMS according to the exclusive action elimination rule  . Then , two other assertions in the post-state of ( 8 ) which were supported by the deleted assertions are subsequently eliminated according to the dependency-directed backtracking mechanism of TMS  . Now , the world of (8) has only one assertion , " the-state-of the tor to is e is standing " , in the post-state of (8) , which means the tor to is e is standing and stopped kicking up a cloud of dust and sweating  . 
After all the story is processed and represented as chronologi-eal sequences of worlds  , assertions in thi~present-state of each worm are gathered and transformed into a scenario for the stage directing module  . 
5. System Configuration
Figure 3 indicates a high level view of the whole story understanding system  , Each sentence is processed individually and its assertions are extracted by SENTENCE-PARSER  . The sentence grammar in SENTENCE-PARSER is described using Definite are then put into the MORE-MEANING-EXTRACTOR which is based on forward -reasoning  . Here as many assertions as possible are extracted from the inputs  . For example , " If the weather is fine and it is night , then the background for the drama stage is colored in black with lots of stars "  , etc . The extracted assertions are put into a separate worm for each sentence  . Each world is monitored by TMS . 
Path #1 between eighboring worlds indicates the interpolation of a continuous action beyond a sentence  . Path #2 indicates goal directed search to discover the path of transition between different actions  . The whole story understanding system is implemented using 
Prologon vax 111780.
6. Conclusion
This paper presents the story understanding mechanism for creating computer animation scenarios  . The story understanding mechanism reads a natural language story and creates its scenario for realistic graphic animations  . This paper presents three types of hidden actions and relations of actions that must be discovered for realistic animations of stories but which are not explicitly described in the stories  , This paper also describes the inference mechanism which recognizes the need for interpolation of these hidden actions and relations  . The transition in a story is reflected by chronological sequences of multiple worlds  , each of which is monitored by TMS . 
A world holds extracted assertions representing the situation inherent in a sentence  . Each world is compared with its neighboring worms  , and assertions in the worm are added/deleted /modified in the following three processes : ? Causality check among actions  . 
? Interpolation of a continuous action beyond a sentence  . 
? Interpolation of hidden actions between eighboring sentences  . 
The knowledge base is a edon-oriented , hence it is independent of individual stories' domains  . Currently , the story understanding mechanism works well for several fables  . 
Acknowledgements : The authors would like to express their appreciation for continuous encouragement from Kunihiko Niwa and Takashi Arasekt  . This research could not have been started without the encouragement of Kazumotolinuma  . Stephen Berkov provided many useful comments . 
Chronological sequence sentence-I sentence-i+1
SENTENCEI
PARSER(DCG ) sentence-i+2
IMORE-MEANING-ICX TRkKTOR ( Porward-Reasoning)
WORLD-i,~WORLD-i+l.~WORiD-i+2
Figure 3 Whole Story Understanding System\[Clayton 851 B . D . Clayton , " ART Programming Tutorial , A First
Look at Viewpoints ", Inference , 1985.
\[ Doyle 79\] L Doyle , " A Glimpse of Troth Maintenance " , Artificial Intelligence : An MIT Perspective , The MIT Press . 
\[ Dyer83\]M . G . Dyer , " In-Depth Understanding " , The MIT press ; 1983 . 
\[\]\[lards84\]L . R . Harris , " Experience with INTELLECT : Artificial Intelligence Technology Transfer "  , THEAI Magazine summer 1984 . 
\[ Lytinen & Gershman 86\]S . Lytinen & A . Gershraan , " ATRANS : Automatic Processing of Money Transfer Messages "  , Proceedings
AAAI-86, 1986.
\[Nilsson80\]N . Nilsson , Principles of Artificial Intelligence " , Tioga . 
\ [ Percira & Warren80\]F . Pereira & D . Warren , "Definite Clause Grammar for Language Analysis - -A Survey of the Formalism and a Comparison with Augmented Transition Networks "  , Artificial Intelligence ,  13 ,  1980 . 
\[Reynolds82\]C . Reynolds , " Computer Animation with Scripts and Actors " , ACM Computer Graphics , vo 1 . 16, no . 13, July , 1982 . 
\[Schank & Riesbeck81\]R . Schank & C . K . Riesbeck , " Inside Computer Undelstanding " , Hillsdale , New Jersey : Lawrence Eflbaum

\[Shoham88\]Y . Shoham , " Reasoning About Change ", The MIT

\[ Takashima et al . 87\]Y . Takashima , H . Shimazu and M . Tomono , " Story Driven Animation ", Proc . ACM SIGC Ftl and Graphics Interface '87 Joint Conference ,  1987 . 
\[ Wilensky82\]R . Wilensky , " Talking to UNIX in English : An Overview of an Onqine Consultant "  , Report No . UCB/CSD 82/104 internal ~ poct of UCB , 1982 . 
\[ Young & Hayes 85\] S . R . Young & P . J . Hayes , " Automatic Classification and Summarization fBanking Telexes "  , the 2nd conf , on Artificial Intelligence Applications , Dec .  1985 . 
\[Zcltzer82\]D . Zcltzer , " Motor Control Techniques for Figure Animation " , IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , Vol . 2, No , 9,
November , 1982.

