The Success of Failure
The concept of failure in dialogue logics
and its relevance for NL-semantics
J . Ph.ttOEPEL MAN , A.J.M . van It OOF
lnstitut far Arbeitswirtschaft und Organisation

D-7000 Stuttgart1
E-Mail : vanho of @ iaoobel . UUCP

In this paper we present a new interpretation of failure  , a concept o which a lot of attention is being paid in the field of artificial intelligence research  , especially due to the rise of the programming language PROLOG that treats negation as procedural failure  . Our interpretation ffailure , however , does not originate from research in the foundations of PROLOG  . We present it here as an outcome of research on socalle dialogue logics  , a tradition in logic research that envisages a logical proof as a formaliz~ed discussion between conflicting parties  . Systems of formalize discussion that show the same logical behaviour as standard logical systems can be build  . We show how such a system with additional fall operator can be used for the treatment of phenomena that are also relevant for natural language discourse  . In the paper the following will be analyzed : negative questions  , the paradox of the small number , and conditionals . 
1. Introdue , tion *
Upuntil now research in knowledge representation concentrates mainly on the model ~ theoretic approach  , thus , in our opinion , neglecting somewhathe dynamic and procedural aspects of human cognition  . This traditional treatment of knowledge representation stems mainly from the view of logic as a monological enterprise  , involving the Logician-Mathematician proving more and more facts  ( " truths " ) from some set of " evidential " postulates . It is our contention that what we call knowledge about a topic is a series of " snapshots " from the process of human interaction  , showing sets of propositions and proof procedures that are agreed upon at that particular moments by the people working on that topic  , So knowledge is in a sense a product of discussion  , be it internal ( individual deliberation ) or ex\[ernal ( the community of experts )  . 1 Given this view on knowledge , another approach to logic as knowledge representation should be looked for  . 
Now , more of less the same arguments can be launched against the research on the semantics of natural language where logic features as representation laguage  . Moreover , we are convinced that the monological view on logic has led to the strong of " facts "  . Even where researchers start to show interest in " discourse " they concentrate most of tile time on texts which they can treat as a monological accumulation of assertions  . We feel that only a theory that also deals with the dynamic and procedural aspects of human linguistic interaction is able to provide a proper semantics for natural language  . 
Apart from the monological mainstream there is another tradition in logic  , taking its starting point in the work of the mathematical logician Paul Lorenzen  . Inspired by Belh's work on semantic table aux , Lorenzen developed what one could call a dialogical approach to the investigation of logics  . 2 In his theory , which in the following will be referred to as dialogue table aux theory  ( DTT )  , a logical proof is pictured as a discussion between two parties  . The formula to be proved , called initial thesis ( T ) , is defended by one party , which there with takes up the role of the so called proponent  ( P )  , agains the criticism of the other party , accordingly taking up the role of opponent ( O ) . A discussion about T represents a logical proof of T  , provided that P is able to defend T against all possible criticism  , i . e . that P has a winning strategy for T . Representations of logical discussions are structurally analogous to semantic table aux  . We shall call them dialogue table aux . At about the same time the philosophical logician Jaako Hintikka developed his so called game theoretical semantics which shows close connections with the work of Lorenzen  . . Game theoretical semantics i primarily occupied with the semantics of natm ' allanguage  .   3 Important consequence of the work of both : the view of logic as a theory of formalized interaction functions as a new heuristic paradigm : e  . g . it makes quite a difference when thinking about the semantics of conditionals  , whether one tries to construct models for them , or whether one imagines how people would go about discussing a conditional proposition  . 
2. Dialogue table aux for formal logic
This section is meant as a very rough introduction to dialogue systems for form a logic  . People who want to delve more deeply into the subject are refen'ed to/Barth&Krabbe  1982/  . 
Two kinds of rules determine formalized is cussions  . The socalled strip-rules determine how statement sate attacked and defended  . By means of these rules the meaning of the logical connective si determined by their use  ( " meaning in use " ) ~ figure i
S~ntence Attack Defense ( N )   ( N * )   ( N ) a --> b ( ? ) a\[bl ( implication )  -  , a (?) a\[1(negation ) aAb ? l . ( eft ) \[ a\] ( conjunction ) ? R ( ight ) \[ b \] avb ?\ [ a , b \]( disjunction ) ( At . I . ) ( parameter ) qxR(x ) , ?\[ R ( ml \] ( EXIST )   ( m parameter ) The strip-rule state the following : a sentence uttered by the speaker  , N , where N is O or P ( column 1) , can be criticised by the other party ( N * ) as defined in cohu-nn2 . The speaker then has ; he fight to defend his sentence wifl ran other statement  , as defined in column 13This , ight is called protective defense right . 
The second kind of rules , called the frame-rules regulate tile discussion as a whole  . They define rights and duties of both adversarie , ; during a discussion , and declare when tile discussion is considered over  , and still more important : heytell which party has won  . 
Changes and/or Extension of these frame-rules and strip-rules give rise to various systems ? with different logical strength  . It is this feature that makes Dialogue Table aux Theory of interest for the study of natural hm guage semantics  . 
3. Failure in dialogue table aux
Nowadays , because of the success of prolog , people are greatly interested in the logical properties of negation interpreted as procedural failure  . In tmpreted in this way , negation does not conform to i : he wellknown properties of classical  , intuitionistic , or minimal negation . Because of its procedurality , failure has been treated as a notion of ( non - ~ ) provability . In this way it can be thought of as a modality in provability logics  .   4 In this paper we want to present yet another interpretation of failure inte :  , ' ms of discussions , which to our opinion is a fairly natural one . We want to make it clear from the outset , that this new interpretation of failure is not an interpretation for negation  , as is the case in prolog . We will apply dialogical failure together with standal'd  ( classical , intuitionistic ) negation . This makes sense because of the fact that we do not have the Closed  , World-
Assumption in DTI'.
Dialogical faihn'e is handled by introducing a fail operator t  , ' into discussions . The operator , applied to a sentence A , could be interpreted as " There is no way to win a discussion on A relative to the present concessions "  , or " Nothing in the present discussion leads to the conclusion that A "  . Rules for this operator introduce the concept of role-changing : actual parties B  ( lack ) and W ( hite ) who play the roles of O and P will , under clearly defined conditions , change roles during a discussion . Winning and losing the discussion will be defined relative to B and W  . Figure 2a and 2b give an informal presentation f the way F functions  . 
figuro 2ao P
BW ?
W?(Bwins ) ( or the other way around )

B < ...
( Wloses)
An attackol\]a fail statement " FA " at the P -side of tile tableau  ( figure 2a ) will introduce a subdiscussion oil the winnability of " A " relative to the concessions made at the Ooside  , with the . 
parties ( B and W ) changing roles ( tile boxed-in part of filetable au )  . Concessions from the main discussion are taken ovcr completely  . The result of this subdiscussion ( who wins , wholoses ) is mmsferred back to the main discussion . 
An attack on a fail statement a the O-side of the tableau  ( figur c2b ) also leads to a subdiscussion , but there is no role change . 
There is also an extra constraint on the concessions to be taken over from the main discussion : only those concession suttered prior to the utterance of the fail statement are allowexl to be tanled over  . 
The fail operator enables us to deal with a broad range of nmch debated phenomena  . In what follows , we will treat the following topics , it being understood that their treatment cannot bedealt with here extensively :  1  . the lreatment of negative questions and their answers  ,  2 . the paradox of tim small number , 3 . conditionals 25\] . 
figure 2b
Cnii
FA (?) A
BW ( Bloses ); ~ , , ( B loses ) ( or the otherway arond ) . . . . . ( wwins ) ( wwins)4 . The treatment of negative questions It turns out that this fail operator can be nicely used to explain the behaviour of socalled negative questions  , a problem which has puzzled linguistics for some time  .   5 A simple example will show that negation in negative questions cannot be treated as negation proper : given the fact that John is ill  , the question " Is John not ill ? "/" isn't John ill ? " can only be answered correctly by saying " Yes  ( he is ill )  . " whereas treating not in the above questions as standard negation would give a negative answer  , which is incorrect . 
Provided negation in such questions i translated as dialogical failure  , we have a unified treatment of both positive and negative questions  . A ( positive or negative ) question " q ? " can be considered to be an invitation to carry through a discussion with " q " as thesis  , and the questioner as first proponent ( figure 3) . 
figure 3
W ~\ [ Sentence ? l
Who wins the following discussion on Sentence ?
OP13 W
Sentence ? positive answer means that the last party to play the role of proponent wins  , a negative answer that the last party to play the role of opponent wins  . In addition a change in roles can ( must ) be indicated in some languages . 6 An example in case is German ( figure 4) . 
figure 4 vv\]"The last proponents wins " " last proponent = first proponent " wIB " The last proponents wins " " bast proponent ? first proponent " " The last proponent loses "  5  . Tile paradox of the small number Using F there is an elegant solution to the paradox of the small number  , which runs as follows . 
1 is a small number , but there exists a number that is not small if n is a small number so is n + l there exists a number that is both small and not small  , which is absurd . 
Clearly the paradox is generated in the last premise which allows for the generation of small numbers which get bigger and bigger  , thereby reaching the number which is supposed not to be small and collapsing into inconsistency  . F allows us to do a pre-check on the consistency . If we build this pre-check in the last premise we can prevent the paradoxical inference :  7 
Small ( l ) 3 X ~ Small(X )
VX ( Small ( X ) ^ F ( Small ( X + I ) - - ~ Small ( X + l ) ) but not provable : 3X ( Small ( X ) ^~Small ( x ) ) This seems to be the normal way people intend the last premise to be understood  . This becomes even more clear , if one realizes that ( as in the case of the closely related paradox of the heap  ) the presentation of the paradox fits more closely in the garb of dialogue logics then in the garb of axiomatic systems  . The sophist ( Proponent of the absurd thesis ) lures the innocent debater ( Opponent ) into conceding sentences : . " Do you admit hat 1 is a small number ?"?" Yes , I grant you that . "?" Do you admit , then , that if some number is considered to be small , the direct successor of that number also is small  . "-" Yes , I suppose that that is correct . "  . o , Thus a set of seeming concession si established , from which the sop hist sets out to show absurdity  . The opponent is not given the opportunity to a mend his second concession by making a provision like " unless  , of course , this successor is not already agreed to be not small "- which every body tacitly understands  . 
It is even possible to give a range of vagueness in the definition of small number by widening the pre-check  , e . g . 
VX(Small(X )^ F ( ~ Smail(X+I ) v . . . v-~Small(X+k))
Small ( X+I)).
One can also extend the example by adding a definition of large number in an analogous way  . Starting from definitely small on the one end , and definitely large on the other end , there are several distinct results as to which numbers can be called small or large or " neither small nor large "  , this depends on the exact applications of the reeursive part of the definitions  , i . e . it depends on how a proponent would go about attacking these concessions  . 
6. Conditionals
Looking at it in a somewhat different way the solution to the paradox of the small number rests on a modification of the conditional in the premises  . Or to state it in dialogieal terms : it rests on a / no dification of the conditional in the concessions made by the opponent  . We propose to introduce a connective ">>" that will function as a new conditional with the above mentioned pre-check behaviour  . 
If isome very important respect this conditional " >>" will differ from the standard connectives of logic : its " meaning in use " cannot be stated in the same way as we already did for the other connectives in figure  1  . The strip-rules for the standard connectives are neutral as to the discussional role of the speaker  . 
The strip . .lule for ">>" that we will present in a moment is role-specific  , however . That means there is a version for the case of an opponent state tement and one for the case of a proponent statement  . We will try to argue for this asymmetry . 
figure 5 ntence (0) p >> q
Attack(P )(?) P
Defense(O)\[q ,
Role Change
I hesis :-~ q\]
Let us look first at the strip-rule for opponent state menL  , ( figure 5) . The opponent has two possibilities for protective defense  . One of them is stating the consequent of the conditional  . 
So farther e is no difference with the material implication  ( --~ )  . 
But whereas this move is the only protective defense with material implication  , with the new conditional , however , the opponent has an extra protective dense right : he can try to show that the negation of the consequent already follows from the concessions  . This is exactly the analogon of the pre-check condition as asked for in the paradox of the small number  . It is possible to give a simple translation for p >> q in terms of F and -~ where the formula on the opponent side is F~q--~  ( pq )   . 
We now turn to the rule for conditional statements made by the proponent  . Our job is to show why the same treatment as for opponent statements would not do  . Let us suppose that the conditional can be translated as above  , for a start . In which situations , then , can a proponent w in a discussion on such a statement relative to a proponent that has conceded the set E of concessions ? Basically there a three possibilities : i  ) -~ p is contained in orderivable from E , ii ) q is contained in orderivable from E together with the new concession p  , and iii ) ~ q is contained in orderivable from E . Cases i ) and ii ) present no surprise . Taken together they make up the possibilities the proponent would have if he had stated plainly p- ~ q  , instead of the complexer formula . But the more complex one provides him with the extra possibility iii  )  , which is utterly undesirable f in any conditional : the possibility to prove the conditonal because the consequent does not hold  , regardless whether the antecedent holds or not . 
The intennediate conclusion to be drawn from this is that on the proponent side > >- statements can and must be weakened to at least material implication  . But we do even want to go one step further . We want to rule out the possibility that the proponent can prove a conditional statement relative to a set of concessions E withouthe need to use the antecedent of the conditional  . Such a situation obtains if tile consequent is contained in orderivable from E  . The way to bar such a " proof " is to provide the opponent with an extra attack move : he can try to show that the consequent is derivable already  . The strip-rule for ">>" on the proponent side is then as shown in figure  6  . For people who like translation lore : using material implication  , conjunction and failure operator p >> q is translatable as F q ^  ( p ~ q )  , figure 6
Sentence ( P ) p >> q
Attack(O ) (?) P
Role Change thesis : q
Defense ( P ) \[ q\]\[\] natural language indicative conditional if it is treated informal dialogues in the manner indicated  . On the one hand it has default characteristics , giving rise to a nonmonotonic logic . The paradox of the small number is a case in point  , but it can even better be exemplified by the case of the famous Tweety  . Only knowing that Tweety is a bird and conceding that birds can fly  , an opponent has to agree under these circumstances that Tweety can fly  . But upon hearing that Tweety has nowings and it being understood that wings are an absolute necessity for flight  , this same opponent can safely withdrawhis consent to Tweety's flying capabilities without becoming inconsistent  . He can safely claim that the new information made it necessary for him to reconsider his prior agreement  . 
If one were to investigate he dialogue table au for the Tweety case with additional information  , one would see that the subdiscussion ensuing from the opponent's extra defense rightfor ">>" exactly contains the suecessfull arguments against Tweety flying  . This agrees with the actual way people use to argue: 
A : " Birds can fly."
B : " But tweety is a bird and cannot fly !" A : " Yes  , but Tweety has nowings and wingless birds cannot fly  . " Antecedent strengthening , transitivity and contraposition are not universally valid anymore with this conditional  , but they are assumed per default . In this way we can cover famous examples like :* ( 1 ) If I put sugar in my coffee it is drinkable ( tacit premise : putting oil in coffee makes it undrinkable  ) If I putsugar and oil in my coffee it is &- in kable *  ( 2 ) If I have an affection of the lungs I will stop smoking If I stop smoking I will feel healthier  ( tacit premise : affection of the lungs does not make feel healthier  ) If I have an affection of the lungs I will feel healthier *  ( 3 ) 
If I strike this match it will burn ( tacit premise : if the match is we tor has been used already  , or . . . then it will l not burn ) If it will not burn then I did not strike it Given the tacit premises our conditional will handle all these cases correctly  . 
It is realized that this conditionals it stands cannot do the job of socalled counteffactual conditionals  .   8 But we are convinced that these counterfactual conditionals can be build from ">>" together with formal dialogue rules that take care of blatant inconsistencies that arise fi'om the fact that the antecedent of the counterfactual may contradict explicit information i the premises  . 

Notes * . Parts of this paper will appear in the Journal of Semantics  . 
1. See Barth 1985 and Barth & Krabbe 1982.
2 . For a collection of his writing on dialogue logics see Lorenzen & Lorenz  1978  . 
3. See e.g . Hintikka & Kulas . 1983.
4. E.g . in Gabbay 1986.
5 . For a collection of articles on this topic see e , g . Kiefer 1983 . 
6 . This is discussed extensively in Hoepelman 1983 . In that article a four-valued logic is introduced m deal with negative question phenomena  . It turns out that the analysis with fail operator in the present paper achieves the same results as the four-valued approach  . The present version , however , has as addition almer it it's greater elegance and naturalness  . 
7 . Probably it was this kind of pre-check behaviour that McDermott & Doyle wanted to achieve with their operator M  ( McDermott & Doyle 1980 )  . They have run in some problems with that operator  , however , due to a certain circularity of their operator definition  . If we translate Mp as F~p , however , we achieve this pre-checking without getting their problems  . 
8 . For a collection of articles on conditionals , indicative and counteffactual , see Harper et al 1981 . 

Barth , E . M . ,"A New Field : Empirical Logic , Bioprograms , Logemes and Logics as Institutions " , in Synthese 63 , 1985 Barth , E . M . and Krabbe , E . C . W . , From Axiom to Dialogue . A Philosophical Study of Logics and Argumentation  , Berlin , Failure " , internal report T1 . 8 ESPR1T project 393,
ACORD , 1987
Harper , W . L . et at . ( Eds ), Ifs , Dordrecht , 1981 Hintikka , J . and Kulas , J . , The Game of Language , Dordrecht , and Answers , Dordrecht , 1983 Hoepelman , J . Ph . , and van Hoof , A . J . M . , " The Success of Failure . A dialogue logical interpretation ffailure with some applications  . ( Paper held at the Fourth Cleves Conference ) " , in Journal of Semantics ( forthcoming ) Kiefer , F . ( Ed ) , Questions and Answers , Dordrecht , 1983 Lorenzen , P . and Lorenz , K , Dialogische Logik , Darmstadt , 1978 McDermott , D . and Doyle , J . , " Non Monotonic Logic I ", in
Artificiallnt elligence 13,198 0
