Parsing French with Tree Adjoining Grammar :
some linguistic accounts
Anne ABEILLE *
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia PA 19104-6389 USA

We present he first sizable grammar written for TAG  . 
We present helinguistic coverage of our grammar , and explain the linguistic reasons which lead us to choose the particula representations  . We show that TAG formalism provides sufficient constraints for handling most of the linguistic phenomena  , with minimalinguistic stipula-tions . We first state the basic structures needed for parsing French  , with a particular emphasis on TAG's extended domain of locality that enables us to state complex sub-categoriza ei on phenomena in a natural way  . We then give a detailed analysis of sential complements  , because it has lead us to introduce substitution in the formalism  , and because TAG makes interesting predictions . We discuss the different linguistic phenomena corresponding to adjunction and to substitution respectively  . We then mov conto support verb constructions , which are represented in a TAG in a simpler way than the usual double analysis  . 
It is the first time support verb constructions are handled in a parser  . We lastly give an overview of the treatment of adverbs  , and suggest a treatment of idioms which make them fall into the same representations as ' free ' structures  . 

Tree Adjoining Grammar ( TAG ) was introduced by/Joshi et al 1975/ as a formalism for linguistic description . A TAG's basic component is a finite set of elementary trees  , each of which is a domain of locality , and can be viewed as a minimalinguistic structure  . 
A TAG comprises of two kinds of elementary trees : initial trees  ( a )  , which are complete structures , usually rooted in S , with preterminals on all their leaves , and auxiliary trees ( fl ) , which are constrained to have exactly one leaf node labeled with a nonterminal of the same category as their root node  . We have added lexical trees (6) , which are initial trees corresponding to arguments  . Their insertion in preterminal nodes of elementary trees  , which serves as psedicates , is obligatory . 
Sentences of the language of a TAG are derived from the composition of an initial tree and any number of auxiliary trees by an operation called ' adjunction '  . Adjunction in -* Visiting from University of Paris VII  . This work was partially supported by a J . W . Zellidja grant , and also by ARO grant DAA29-84-9-007 , DARPA grant N0014-85-K0018 , NSF grants MGS-82-191169 slid DCR-84-10413 to the University of Pennsylvania . 
Thanks are due to Aravind Joshl , Anthony Kroch , and Yves Schahes . 
serts an auxiliary tree at one of the corresponding odes of an elementary or a derived tree  . Recursion is provided by the structure of the auxiliary trees which can adjoin into themselves  . Adjunction allows the insertion of a complete structure at an interior node of another complete structure  . It appears to be a natural way of handling adverbs and modifiers in natural anguage  . Three constraints can be associated to any node of an elementary tree : null adjunction  ( NA )  , obligatory adjunction ( OA ) , and selective adjunction ( SA ) . Because of the formal properties of adjunction , the formalism is more powerful them Context-I~ee Gran~nar  ,   . but only mildly so/Joshi85/ . Most of its linguistic properties come from the fact that it factors recursion from local dependencies  . We are thus able to localize all dependencies such as subcategorization  , agreement , and filler-gap relations . Because trees , and not categories , are considered ms the units of the grammar , TAGs have a broader domain of locality than usual phrase structure rules  . 
We have added substitution to the formalism , essentially for descriptive purposes . Although adjunction is more powerful than substitution  , and could be used to simulate it , it seems more natural to have substitution itself for lexical insertion and for constructions in which the extra power of adjunction is not needed  ( section 2 )  . We define a restrictive use of substitution : it inserts an initial tree  ( or a tree derived from an initial tree )  , or a lex-ieal tree , into an elementary tree . Substitution is always obligatory and only one constraint  , selectional substitution , is defined . This improves the descriptive power of the formalism without changing its generative capacity  . 
Feature structures can be associated with each node of an elementary tree/Vijay-Shanker  87/  . They permit the dynamic assignment of constraints  . Features are also used for constraining the lexieal insertion of items such as prepositions in verbal complements  , coinplementizer of sentential complement or determiner in NP  . 
Our grammar currently covers the major basic and derived constructions  , such as wh-question , relativization or cleft-extraction . We are also able to handle neutral and reciprocal verbs  , middle and locative alternations , as well as argument reordering such as scrambling or heavy-NP shift  . We refer the reader to / A beill d 88b /for a more complete presentation of the grammar  . In this paper , we focus on some constructions which are of particular linguistic significance  . 
1 E lementary trees and min imal l inguist ic structures Our framework is that of a lexicon -grammar/Gross  75/ and/Gross 81/  . We view all basic structures as being produced by a lexical item in the lexicon  . We adopt the notation of/Gross75/ and/Boons , Guill et , Lecl ~ re 76/ . 
In this framework , as in a TAG , the linguistic unit is the sentence . We define 40 basic structures for French : 12 for verbs taking NP essential complements , and 28 for verbs taking sential complements . 
1 . 1 E lementary t rees fo r bas ic const ruc - t ions Each of the first  i2 structures are represented in the grammar by three initial trees corresponding to declarative sentences  , complement clauses , and infinitive clauses . Corresponding to NoVN1, we have 1 . 


NP o , LVP
NVSP l$
III Jeansims S
Merle * eLJ ?$
SOASOA
G8q.elflPo~VPNP ? IAVP\[//~PROVSPlJ.
.v.p , * II
II ! elmer N Jeanairesi I
M Jrle Merle
NP's are substituted at the proper nodes in the trees  . The structures a2 and a 3 , which would otherwise yield incomplete sentences , bear an obligatory adjunction constraint on their root-nodes  . We have to differentiate trees with infinitive from trees with tensed verb  , because lexical insertion is defined on already inflected items  , and because French does not allow lexical subject in infinitive clauses  . 
We thus state this constraint as a basic structure of the grammar : in  a3  , the subject has to be nonlexical ( PRO ) . 
A verb is thus defined by its syntactic argument structure  , and the corresponding set of trees are associated with it  . We refer to a given argument structure as a tree -family  . 
The optionality of a given argument and the lexical value of the preposition  ( for verbs taking prepositional complements ) are noted as part of the argument structure . 
A verb with more " than one possible argument structure will be duplicated  . /Gross 81/shows that French verbs have no more than three essential arguments  , including the subject .   2 II aving such trees associated with the lexical items  , instead of a standard argument structure in the form of a list  ( or of a feature ) and rules for sentence formation , provides us with an extende domain of locality that has interesting linguistic consequences  . We do not manipulate basic categories , but tree-structures corresponding to minimal sentences  ( for a verb , or a predicative noun ) or complete constituents ( NP , for a non-predicative noun , AP , for a modifying adjective ) . We are thus able to state cross-level 1For simplification , we do not put all the adjunction constraints these trees bear at their different nodss  . J , marks substituti ~ a . 
2Leaving apart such examples as Jean parle 1   O0 Fd Marie que Pier reviendra , which can undergo some kind of reanalysis . It is not \] always easy to distinguish essential complements from adjunct saltl ~ oughour formalism requires a clear cut distinction  . 
8 dependencies often overlooked in grammars , because they can only be defined on the sentence as a basic unit  . For example , the value of the determiner of the subject may depend on the verb  , as shown in 12 , but it also depends on the presence of a verbal complement in  3   ; the adjunction of the right adjective on the nominal complement depends on the lexical value of the verb in  45  :  1  ) * Cemotrime . 
~) Cesroots riment.
3) Cemotrime avec " banane'.
4) * Jean mange unfnturg ~ teau . /Gross 81/5) Jean pr @ are unfuturg dteau , sLexical insertion , or adjunction of adverbs or modifiers such as relative clauses  , depend on each element of the elementary tree , and not on just the immediately dominating node . They are difficult to capture by CFG rules such as S-+NP VP  , or VP-*VNP . 
1 . 2 E lementary T rees fo r Der ived Con-s t ruc t ionsInaTAG  , the standard derived constructions are represented as elementary trees of the grammar  . They are part of the tree family associated with a verb  . Their properties are those of elementary trees , which must be complete structures and have ; , their gaps bounded in the same tree they appear in  , plus the properties given by adjunction and substitution  , respectively . If one considers the principles that are used for designing such families  , these principles will correspond to syntactic rules  , or ' transformations ' , in derivation-based theories of grammar . Wh-question gives rise to the corresponding wh -elementary trees for each of the arguments of an elementary tree  . For the initial tree el , corresponding to the structure No VN 1 , we have for example :
KttSSA ~ : rSQ ~*., sI/~
Ipo~vq.~"povpquiNP.vII\]IJ """
Jeanalmael MI ! Ie
The different local constraints account for the asymetry between subject and object movement  , o ~5 can be an autonomou sentence , whereas 0~4 is only an indirect question , and must have an auxiliary tree such as Yes a is S adjoined to it  . Relative clauses are represented as auxiliary trees rooted in NP which can then adjo into the NP node they modify  . Each elementary tree , corresponding to a declarative sentence , has thus corresponding auxiliary trees rooted in NP  . Cleft-extraction is also represented by elementary trees  . To say that a tree with a wh-element , or a relative pronoun , must hean elementary tree , derived from another elementary tree , provides us with strong predictions : wh-movement is forced to apply only to elements present in an elementary tree  , that is to arguments of our basic linguistic structures  , and not to adjuncts . 
3* Thls word rhymes . These words rhyme . This word rhymes with ' bana na ' . * Jean is eating a future cake . Jean is making a future cake . 
Lexically dependent derivations comprise of middle  , ergative , passive , or locative alternation . They are represented as features associated with the proper verb  , and correspond to sets of trees to be added to the tree family of the verb  . One should notice that the verbal item to be marked is in fact a pair  ( lexical entry , argument structure ) . Foc example , regarder has , at least , four argument structure , % that is to say four entries : a ) NP or ~: gardeNPab ) NP or cgarde NP1 ( V-inf W ) c )   ( NPo4-So ) regarde NP , d)NP or ~: gardeque P ( subj)
Only regarder ( a ) has a passive.
For me resurface reordering , we have the possibility of defining linear -precedence rules associated either with a tree -family  , or with a specific tree , as described in/Joshis V . 
2 Tbe t reatment o f complement c lauses The representation of a verb taking a sentent iM argument can be viewed as the composition of two sentential structures  . The standard way of composing two structures in a TAG is to have one adjoined to the other  . Cc , mplement clauses can thus be represented as elementary trees  , with ' matrix ' sentences being auxiliary trees adjoined to them  , or vice versa . Following/Kroch and Joshi 85/ we prefer the former in order to account for wh -movement out of a complement clause  ) and to have unbounde dependencies falling out of the formalism  . No V $1 , for example , is represented by : qua!t
NP ~ NP VP
IAIA
NV81 APROVSii"I
Bobporise pen leperlserfl is adjoined to a3 to produce : 6"  ) Bobpease qn ? Jean aime Marie 4 . 
/?2 and /73 are cases of recursive adjunction ; 7 is derived from / 71 . . . . /?5 -~/72 --' ~3: 7 ) Bob peuse que Paul pease que M axpease que Jean aime 
Marie ~
The wh-element and the corresponding gap are always in the same basic structure  . Unbounde dependencies , which have always been a problem for generative grarrmaar  , are thus represented in a straightforward way/ Kroch  , Joshi 85/and /Kroch 86/ : adjunction is not limited and does not destroy the gap-filler relations stated in the initial trees  . For example : 8 ) Quilpenses-tuque Marieai meel ~ is derived t ' romQni ~ que Marieai mee ~?  , which is one of the Wh-trees corresponding to the initial tree : qneMarie aime Jean  ) and penses-tu is adjoined to it . The Wh-island 4Bob tlfi~tks that Jean loves Mary 5Bob thh tks that Paul thinks that Max thinks that John loves 
Mary 6Who do you think that Marie loves ? constraint is no longer a constraint on movement  , but becomes a constraint on the structure of the elementary trees of the grammar  . No elementary tree with two wh-elements is defined  , and there is no means to derive 9 because there is no elementary tree corresponding to  10:   9  ) * Qui~te deman des-tu comment Jean aren contrge  ~ ?   10  ) * Quii comment Jean aren contr de if TT his simple account fails short in the case of verb taking two sentential arguments  , uchas Jean pr ~ #reperdre Marieh perdred on ~ me  , because an auxiliary tree is constrained to have exactly one foot node  , and cannot adjoin to two initial trees at the same time  . We use for this purpose substitution as an alternative operation  . It replaces the leaf node of an elementary tree with an initial  , or a lexical , tree ( or a tree derived from an initial tree ) , provided it has a root node of the same category as that of the leaf node of the elementary tree  . 
Let us compare the linguistic properties derived from substitution and adjunction respectively  . Substitution represents embeddment as the insertion of a complement clause at a leaf node of the matrix clause  . Adjunction views it as the insertion of a matrix clause at any node of a complement clause  . Constraints on the derivation are put in the matrix clause  , when using substitution , and in the complement clause when using adjunction  . Complement clause which undergowh-movement must be composed with their matrix clause by adjunction  , because the matrix clause has to be inserted at an interior node  ( between the Wh-element and the complementizer )  . If one uses substitution , on the other hand , insertion at an interior node will be blocked , and wh-movement out of the complement clause will be ruled out  . Both operations are therefore complementary ; in order to know whether to use one or the other , one has to ask whether wh-movement out of the embedded clause is possible or not  . 
In the case of verbs taking both a sentential subject and a sentential object  , we use substitution to represent the subject clause  . This makes the wellknown sentential-subject island constraint fall out from the formalism  . We generate for example 11 and rule out 12:11 ) Qne Marieai ileen Gr & eennnie Jean 12 ) *Ofiiqne Marieai ileelennuie-t-ii Jean?s The verb ennnyer is associated with the argument structure SoV  NP1  , which is represented as an initial tree 9 . For verbs taking two sentential complements , wh-movement is normally allowed only out of one of the S-complements  , usually the direct one . 
13 ) Je and g duit que Marie a fail venir Bob dec u ' onen tend dn bruit  , to 14 ) Quil Je and ~ duit-ilque Marie a fail venire ide ceqn'onent end dubruit ?  15  ) * Quei Je and dduit-ii que Marie ~ fail venir Bob deceqn ' onentend ~  . qUsing adjunction for the clause subject o extraction and substitution for the other one rightly predicts the ungrammaticality of  15  )  . 
z * Who ido you wonder how Jean met ei ? 8That Mary is going to Grecebothers Jean . 
9To account for the constraint in its full generality we substitute sententlal complements even in structures with no other sentential argument  . 
l ? John deduces that Mary invited Bob from hearing noise  . 
on VNP1, L~~quo NP0$VP
II/\ . J . \[ / '%  . . . . . . " iT i , & i ' 3 The structure of NP : support verb construct ionsModifiers of NP are treated like adjuncts in respect to sentential structures  . Adjectives , for example , are represented as auxiliary trees rooted in N , and they adjoin to the node they modify , either before or after the noun : 16 ) Jeanvoltuncamionbleu . 
17) Jeanvoilune jolie femme 11
NN
AA
NAAN
IIbleu \] oll ~ 16 and 17 are derived respectivdy from dean voltuncamion , and Jeanvoilune femme . Adjectives produce then two types of structnres , one for their modifying nouns , and one for their being arguments of a sentence structure  , such as NP0 VNPtA:18) , lean lrouve Mariejo\[ie 1~ They are listed twice in the lexicon , except for socalled relational adjectives , which can Olfly be modifiers : 19 ) C'eslunedd cision minisl ~ rielle 20 ) * Celled & isiones lminist & ielle .   13 Prepositional phrases modifying NP receive the same treatment  , and Jeanvolt une femmes an slard TM is derived from the adjunction of sans fard to Jean volt une  fe~7$me  . 
Complements of nouns can be either prepositional phrases or sentential complements  . They can be viewed as a node in the lexieal tree yielded by the head noun  ( to be substituted at any NP-node in any elementary tree  )  . 
This is what we do for sentences such as : 21 ) Je and ds approu veune en qu ~ lesn r cel leaf faire 15 The PP can only be moved together with the head noun it modifies  , and extraction is ruled out for it . Because celteaf faire is an NP substituted in it , extraction is blocked in the correct way . 
IIIIII
Je and es approu veunee equete surcette aff Mre The derived constructions  , uchaswh-movement or cleft- . 
a 1 Jean sees a blue truck . Jean sees a pretty wom ~ m . 
12 Jean finds Mary pretty.
13 Thls is a department alderision . * This decision is department Mlg Jean sees a wo man without make up  1s Je and is approves of an inql firy into this affair . 
extraction , are defined on the nodes present in the elementary tree  . They are thus defined only for NP1 enquire , with or without its complement since the complement is optional  , hut not on the PP surcette affaire . We thus rule out : 22 ) * Earquoi Je and & approuve-t-iln ne enquire ? 23 ) * C'esl surcet leaf faireque Je and ds approuve une cn qu ~ le  . 
But sentences can be found which are of the same surface structure as  21  ) but in which the PP exhibit different syntactic properties : it seems to have properties of a nominal and of a verbal complement as well :  25  ) Jean failune en qu ~ te surcelie affaire .  16 25 ) C'estune en qu ~ te surcet leaf fair eque Jean fail . 
26), gurquoi Jean fail-ilune enquEle . ~ 27 ) C'est surcelle affaire que Jean failn ne enquire . 
These constructions have been called ' support verb ' sentences by/Gross  81/  , because the verb gives only person and tense marking to the sentence  ( with optionally some aspectual variat ; on ) . The noun is the predicative head of the sentence and subcategorizes the subject  . /Gross 76/proposed to have two basic structures associated with these constructions  , although they are not ambiguous , and they are problems for most formalisms/Abeil l6   88a/  . 
I to we ver , they can be represented in a TAG in a natural way with only one basic structure  . We consider the PP = node corresponding to sur cell eaffaire as belonging to the initial tree  , which makes it arJ argument of the sentence as any verbal complement  . But it is as the same time dominated by the noun enquire  , and this accounts for its properties as nominal complement  . 

NPO ~, VP\[
NV $ NP
DNP NP2 ~
IIII Iun . enquete surcettes ffalre The difference between  2223 and 2627 comes from the fact that wh-movement and cleft -extraction are defined only on the arguments  ( nodes ) of elementary structures rooted in S . In a2 both NP1 and the PP are available for movement . We are thus able to handle , in the gram . -mar , differences in syntactic properties concerning sen  . -tenees which are exactly of the same string : ( NP VP ( NP ( PP ) ) )  . The resulting trees are the same , but one is an initial tree , while the other one is derived . 
We also find support verb constructions with nouns taking sential complements of NP  , and we find pairs similar to 2124:28 ) Jeanale projeld ' aller h New York 29 ) Jean critiquele projetd ' aller h New York . r\[In 28 , the S-node corresponding to the sentential complement of NP is part of the elementary tree  ,   , and the string Jeanale projet de S'is represented as an auxiliary tree  . : In 29 , there is only one NP-node as direct complement of  16Jean makes aal inquiry into this affair . 
1 7Jean has a plan to go to New York/John opposes a plan tog ~ to New Ybrk the sentent lcd complenrent being substituted in it  , before insertion in the complete sentence . Thus , extraction is made possible for 28 and not in 29:   30  ) 04 deana-t-ilie projetd'aller ? 31 ) * Offa ~ ancrilique-t-ille projetd'atler?To represent support verb constructions with sentential complements as auxiliary trees accounts for unbounded dependencies :  3f  ? ) Oeq as & al'impression que Jean nous a donndl ' iddede \] hirela proposition  . . . d ' allerei ? ~ s We cone , taler all nouns taking complements aa having corresponding Support verbs that they subcategorize  . 
They thus yield a tree family , just as verbs , which comprises of the trees br the support verb construction  , and of the complex NPh'xical tree as well , which correspond to non-light verb constructions . So , a predicative noun will not be liste : l twice . Verbs , on the other hand , will be listed twice , as p := : edicate for their ' plain ' use , and as arguments for their support w ; rbuse , except for a few verbs which appear to be always support verbs : pratiquer  , pew 6trer or commet ! re . 
Such a representation can be extended to Verb ~ Adj -PP constructions  , uchas : 33) Jeane < ; t contenl des on nouve auchapeau . 
34) Jeane: ; t content que t outlem on delere ga'lde .   19 They are considered as S initial trees yielded by the predicative adjective  , and the node for complement , out of which extraction is possible , is present in it . Adjective staldng complements produce then three kinds of tree structure  ( sentential , attributive , modifying ) . 
We thus extend the set of elementary trees of our gram--mar to the support verb constructions  . They are projee-ii on a of tile noun , or tile adjective , in the lexicon , and add 40 basic ~3 trnctures in our grammar . 
4 The adjunct ; ion of adverbs
Adverbs can be : --' lexical ' ~ Ld verbs: souvent  , rarement ? PP:ah ' , ~ i theur es- . NP:eejo , ~ r . -la-subordinate clauses : pendant que Jean lit lejournal  . 2 ? Lexic ~ dadw : rbs , PP introduced by prepositions , and subordinate clause qiutrodnced by conjunctions  , are represented by / ; he proper auxiliary tree(s ) in the lexicon . The prepositional adverbs are listed under the value of their preposi ~  ; ion ; the bare-NP adverbs under that of their noun , and are considered cases of compound adverbs ( see section 5 )  . The subordinating conjunctions are represented > , " auxilimy trees rooted in S , in which sentential trees ( derive do linit ; a /) m'e substituted : 16 Wherelto you . have ~ he impression that Jean gave us the idea ~ , oma . kethesnggestion . . . .to g to ei ? \] g Jean it ; t . appy about his new hat . Jean is happy that every body ad ~ , ir ~: shin ~? ot'iacn , std dom/utrighto'clod ( /that day/while Jean is reading the paper f/ , o
Co . lS$/TVNPl$/NIIponaantquuleJournal The use of substitution  , which forces the insertion of a sentential structure to take place at its root node  , predicts that extraction is ruled out out of an adjunct :  35  ) Marie regardel at dl dpen dant que Jean litle journal  . 
36 ) : ~ Qui'est ceque Marie regardel at dl dpendant que Jeanlitei  721 Adverbials are represented as auxiliary trees usually rooted in S or in VP  . Leaving aside the case of negation , which is a discontinuous constituent , corresponding to a tree rooted in V ( because of the word-order )  , we consider most the adverbs to be rooted in S , in order to have a correspondence with such Wh -trees as  56   and/?7   , which have to be rooted in S : . &7
Wh IS Adv Wh ~ SA dv
JIII
OtJ 8nd EIObel
Although the formalism rules out extraction out of adjuncts/Kroch  86/  , it does not rule out wh-movement of the adverbial as a whole  . It further predicts that only S-rooted adverbials give rise to wh-question : ~ z  37  ) Jean add plorgla desh'uction de BeirouthEstle ~ Juin  . 
37 is analyzed as being ambiguous , between an S-and an NP-attachment of the adverbial  . But the fronted Qu and Jeana 4-ild@lor ( la destruction de Beiroutht ?: ; 1 ? is cor . .
rectly disambiguated , because qu and can only be adjoined to S . 
' l'he various positions of an adverb in a string , with the same attachment , is handled by linear precedence rules associated with the tree structure it adjoins into/aoshi  8r/  . 
For adverbs which are obligatory in a sentence , such as Jean vabien .  23 , there are two possibilities : either to put an obligatory adjunetion constraint in a structure such as Jeanva  , or to treat the adverb as an argument of the elementary tree  . We choose the latter , in order to maintain our claim that elementary trees correspond to semantic  , as well as syntactic units . 
5 The representation of idioms
Because in a TAG the linguistic unit is the sentence  , not the word , entries comprising of several words can easily be defined  . Compound phrases , which can be discontinuous constituents , are assigned a heat is usually either the item of the same category as the whole  , or the most significant item . The head produces the subtree corre-21Marie is watching TV while Jean is reading the paper . * What is Mary watching TV while Jean is reading ei ?  22Jea~l deplored the destruction of East Beirut on June , 4th 23 Jean is doing fine . 
11 sp0nding to the compound phrase , which will itself yield a tree-family in the case of a compound predicate  ( e . g . a compound verb ) . 
The internal structure of Sentential idioms is expanded more than that of ' free'sentences  . For example , the NP subject is usually noted as an NP-node , open for substitution ; if part of it is frozen , the corresponding node ( Dor N ) is directly in the basic tree , and its lexical value is subcategorized by the verb  . The heads for sentential idioms are the same as for ' free'sentences  . For example , Jeanvoit uncanard , which is a free sentence , is a tree of depth 1: ( NP ( VNP )) , whereas Jeanch as selecan ard , with the meaning of to hunt , has a frozen verb-determiner combination , and is represented by a tree of depth 2: ( NP ( V ( D N ) ) )  . The verb chasser produces a loatree of depth 1 , for its occurrence in free sentences , with the meaning of l0 chase . The parser will give two analyses , one corresponding to the idiomatic sense , the other to the literate interpretation . 
As for compound categories , we view basic categories as nodes which can be expanded if needed  . If it is a simple category , it will be treated as a preterminal , if it is a compound one , its internal structure will be specified . To have the precise internal structure is important in the case of idioms allowing some variations  , or insertion . We thus have a unified representation for the complex determiners la majorit ~ de and lagrande majo~t de : the adjective grande is adjoined to the noun major il das to any N  . 
.4/-,, 11 NPP
Araliorlte PNP , L
Ij grande de

Choosing the TAG formalism for parsing French has both computation alnd linguistic advantages  . The linguistic : stipulations are minimized and the general organization of the grammar is simplified : all structures are stated in terms of surface structures  , and there is a direct matching between the lexical information and the tree structures  . 
The implementation of such a grammar leads to a new parsing strategy developed in/Schabes  , Abefll 6 , Joshi 88/ . i We have shown that TAG formalism is suited for building a sizable grammar for a natural anguage  , and furthermore it allows one to state more local dependencies than other formalisms  . We show that constraints on extraction out of complement clauses and syntactic properties of support verb ' constructions are handled in a natural way  . We are using our current approach to build a TAG grammar for English along the same lines  . 
The overall size of the French grammar amounts to 80 basic structures ( tree-families )  , which correspond to simple verbs (12) , verbs with sentential complements ( 28 ) support verb-noun combinations ( 20 )  , and support verb adjective combinations (20) . An average tree-family comprises of 15 trees , and the whole size of the grammar is : roughly 1200 trees . One should notice that what crucially matters is the number of tree-families  , which is closed , , if we have been exhaustive . We have not incorporated yet pronominalization and coordination  , the two major remaining phenomena . We have added selectional restrict . 
tions features to each predicate . We know how to limit the future growth of the grammar : if the deriwtion we want to add amounts to word-reordering  , it is stated by adding a rule to the set of linear precedence rules associated either to the tree-family  , or to one of the trees/Joshi87/ . 
If it is a lexical rule , a feature will be added to the predicative entries  . In both cases , the size of the tree-database remains unchanged . If it is a syntactic rule , it adds the proper number of trees to at most each tree-family  , so the multiplying factor is 80 in the worst case . 
Our grammar has been implemented in an Earley-type parser as defined in/Schabes and Joshi  1988/  , and uses a dictionary which comprises of more than  4000 lexical items , that are the most common for French . 

A . Abeilld ( a ) , " Light Verb Constructions and Extraction out of NP in Tree-Adjoining Grammar "  , in Paper so \] the ~4th Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society  ,  1988 . 
A . Abeill 6(b ) , " A French Tree Adjoining Grammar " , Technical Report , Univ . of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , 1988 . 
J . P . Boons , A . Gnillet , C . Leel ~ re , La Structure des Phrases Simples en Fransa is: Constructions Intransitives  , Droz , 
Gen~ve , 1976.
J . P . Boons , A . Guillet , C . Lecl ~ re , La Structure des Phrases Simples en Fran ~ a is: Classes de Constructions Transitives  , Rapport de Recherche du LADL , Univ . Paris VII , 1976 . 
M . Gross , " Surquel ques groupes nominaux complexes ' , , in Mdthodes en Grammaire Fran#aise , J . C . Chevalier et M . Gross ( eds ), Klincksieck , 1976 . 
M . Gross , Mg tho desen Syntax e , Paxis , Hermann ,  1975 . 
M . Gross , "Les bases empirlqnes de la notion de pr6dicat   s6ma3atique  ' , Langages , n ? 63 , Laxonsse , Paris ,  1981 . 
M . Gross , "Les limite sent rephrases libres , phrases fig~eset phrases ~ verbe support , Langages , Laxousse , Paris ,  1988 . 
A . Joshi , " How much Context-Sensitivity is necessary for chaxacterizing Structural Descriptions : Tree Adjoining Gram-nlaxs "  , in D . Dow tyetaleds , Natural Language Processing : iPsye holinguistie , Computationalnd Theoretical Perspectives , New York , Cambridge University Press ,  1985 . 
A . Joshi , L . Levy , M . Takahashi , " Tree Adjunct Grammars " , Journal of the Computer and System Sciences ,  10:1 , pp . 136-163, 1975 . 
A . Joshi , " Word-order variation in Natural Language Generation "  , in AAAI87 , Sixth National Con \] erenee on Artificial Intelligence  , pp 550-555 , Seattle , July 1987 . 
A . Kroch , " Unbounded Dependencies and Subja~ency in a Tree Adjoining Grammar "  , in The Mathematic so ~ Language , 
New York , Benjaxnins . 1986
A . Kroch , A . Joshi , " Some Aspects of the Linguistic Rele ~ vance of Tree Adjoining Grammar "  , in Technical Report CI 585 . 18, University of Pennsylvania , 1985 . 
Y . Schabes , A . Abefll 6, A . Joshi , " Parsing Strategies with ' Lexic Mized ' Grammars : Application to Tree Adjoining Grammars "  , in Proceedings of the l~th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Budapest ,  1988 . 
Y . Sch~bes , A . Joshl , " An Earley-type Parsing Algorithm for Tree Adjoining Grammars "  , in Proceedings ACL'88 ,  1988 . 
K . Vij~y-Shanker , A Study of Tree-Adjoining-Grammars , PhD Thesis , University of Pennsylvaaaia , Philadelphia ,  1987 . 

