Functional Constraints in Knowledge-Based
Natural Language Understanding
Lars AHRENBER(g
Department of Computer and Information Science
LinkSping University
S-58183 Link Sping , Sweden
Telephone + 461 328 2422
Internet : LAH ~ IDA . LIU . SEUUCP : mcvax , mannari , annet ! enealliuida Ilah
Abstract
Many knowledge-based systems of semantic interpretation rely explicitly or implicitly on an assumption of structural isomorphy between syntaotic and semantic objects  , handling exceptions by ad hoc measures . In this paper I argue that constraint equations of the kind used in the LFG-  ( or PATR- ) formalisms provide a more general , and yet restricted formalism : in which not only isomorphic correspondences are expressible  , but also many cases of non-isomorphic or re -spondences  . I illustrate with treatments of idioms , speech act interpretation and discourse pragmatics  . 
1. Background and purpose
In knowledge-based natural language understanding systems the role of syntax is by no means self -evident  . In the Yalean tradition / , ~t chank & Riesbeck ,   1981/ syntax has only played a minor role and whatever little syntactic information there is has been expressed in simple terms  . Consequently , there is no grammar as such and syntactic onditions are freely intermixed with semantic onditions in the requests that drive the system  forward/13irnbaum & Selfridge ,  1981/ . Similarly , in frame-based systems such as/Hayes ,   1984/ the syntactic information is stated in ~: on junction with all other information relevant for instance sota frame  . A justification for this approach , apart from transparency , is that it makes sense to say that part of our knowledge of a concept is knowledge about how it is communicated  . 
A major disadvantage of this approach is of course its lack of generality  . To overcome this problem we may extract general syntactic knowledge ' and make use of it in a syntactic parser which works alongside with the semantic analyser  . Examples of such systems are PSI-KLONE/Bobrow & Webber  , 1980; Sondheimer et ah , 1984/ and MOP TRANS/Lytinen ,  1986; 1987/ . The promise of these systems is that you get both modularity and integration  , although there are many open questions about how the integration can best be achieved  . 
Moreover , one would I ! ketoput the integration of syntax and semantics  , not just syntax and semantics per se , on a principled basis , i . e . we need a theory of how syntactic and semantic objects correspond  . Linguistics and philosophy offer some guidelines here  , such as compoeition aiity , and a number of different theories , but a problem is that the semantic objects considered are usually not knowledge structures  . / Hirst ,  1987/ , though , is an attempt at a principled , modular and integrated knowledge-based system where compositionality and a principle of strong typing provide the theoretical underpinnings  . These principle steem to provide a tighter straight-jacket than one would really want  , however , as indicated by the many structures that Hirst shows are problematic for his system  . 
Another ~ more recent approach is to capture correspondences between syntactic and semantic objects through constraints/Halvorsen ~  1983  ;  1987 ; Fenstad et al . , 1985; Kaplan , 1987/ . An essential feature of constraints is that they simultaneously characterize properties of a structura level and account for a correspondence between those properties and properties of another level  , i . e . the level to which the constraint is attached . 
The correspondence may be between two different levels of syntactic structure  , as in LFG , or between a syntactic structure and a semantic structure or conceivably between any two structural aspects that constrain each other  . So far it seems that constraints have primarily been stated in the direction from form to meaning  , where meaning has been regarded as inherent in linguistic expressions and thus derivable from an expression  , given a grammar and a lexicon . 
In a working system , however , we are not merely interested in a decontextualised meaning of an expression  , but in the content communicated in an utterance of an expression  , which , as we know , depend on world knowledge and context in more or less subtle ways  . A rather trivial fact is that we need to have an understanding of the context in order to find a referent for a referring expression  . A more interesting fact is that we often need an understanding of context in order to get at the information which is relevant for determining the referent/Moore  , 1981; Ahrenberga 1987 a , b ; Pulman ,  1987/ . 
In a knowledge-based system , the knowledge base provides an encoding of general world knowledge as well as a basis for keeping track of focal information in discourse  . It seems a natural move to combine a knowledge -based semantics with the descriptive legance and power of constraints  , but as far as I know , not much work has been done in this area . / Tomita & Carbonell ,   1986/presents a knowledge-based machine translation system based on functional grammar and entity-oriented parsing  . 
In this paper I discuss the role of syntax in three general and related aspects of utterance interpretation : referent determination  , classification , and role identification . A joint solution to these problems will fall out if we assume  , as is often done , a simple , one-to-one structural ( or categorial ) correspondence btween syntactic and semantic objects  . This is done explicitly e . g . by/Danlelie tah , 1987/ and/Hirst , 1987/ and , so far as I can judge , implicitly in many other systems . 
However , the assumption is much too simplified and must be amended  . I will illustrate some cases where the correspondences are more involved and argue that local constraints of the kind used in the LFG -formaiism/Kaplan & Bresnan  ,   1982/ are able to handle them in a fairly straightforward way  . Thus , instead of adhoc-solutions the isomorphicases will in this framework fall out as particularly simple instances of the general principles  . 
2. A framework and a system
I regard the process of interpretation as a process in which a given object  , the utterance , is assigned a description , the analy Ms . The description has different aspects , primary among them being . a functional structure , ( f-structure ) , a semantic structure , ( d-structure ) and ? a content structure . 
I refer to these structural levels as aspects in order to emphasize the idea that they are all part of one and the same interpretation of the utterance  . The c-structure and the f-structure are roughly as in LFG/Kaplan & Bresnan  ,  1982/ , but with some important deviations . The functional structure is strictly syntactic . There are no semantic forms and hence no grammatical notions of coherence and completeness  . Instead of the PRED-attribute , there is an attribute LEX whose value is a " lexeme "  , an abstract grammatical unit which in turn is associated with semantic objects : object types  , semantic attributes , and so on . 
The semantic structure is a descriptor structure ( ' dag ' ) just as the functional structure , but with descriptors pertaining to the discourse referents accessed or made available by the utterance  . Thus , a constituent of the semantic structure consists of a description that potentially applies to an object in the universe of discourse  . The content structure differs from the semantic structure mainly in that referents for descriptions have been identified  ( where possible )  . 
If a c-structure , an f-structure and a d-structure apply to an expression under a given interpretation they are said to correspond  . If , similarly , a subexpression of the input is associated with constituents at all three levels  , these constituents are said to correspond . 
Correspondences between c-structure and f -structure are defined by an LFG-style grammar and a dictionary of stems and ~  . affixes . Correspondences between f-structure and d -structure are defined by the lexeme dictionary and information in the knowledge base  . Primary among the knowledge structures are types , attributes , and instances . Every type is associated with a prototype , a frame like structure whlch ' defines what attributes apply to instances of that type  , as well as restrictions on their values . 
Prototypes are also associated with functional constraints  , thus defining possible correspondences between d -structures and fstructures  . For example , the attribute AGENT , beside other restrictions on its occurrence and values  , may be assigned the canonical constraint ( ~SUBJ )  = ~ . The arrows in this schema have the same interpretation as in the gramma rules : i " points to the f-structure node corresponding to the description of which the attribute is part  , ~ points to the f-structure node corresponding to its value  . 
Semantic attributes may also be associated with contextual constraints  . The context is represented by a special object , the discourse state ( DS ) , the description of which encodes the contextual information that the system currently has available  . 
In particular , this will include information about who is speaker and who is addressee  . A simple contextual constraint can be stated as = ( DSSPEAKER )  , which when associated with an attribute asserts , the identity between its value and the current speaker  . 
The relations between different structural aspects and the knowledge sources that define and constrain them are illustrated in figure  1  . 
In the process of interpretation the analysis is ideally constructed incrementally  . When information is added to one structural aspect and there is a constraint associated with this information  , we are justified in adding the information stated in the constraint to the structural aspect o which it relates  . If this is not possible , e . g . due to the presence of contradicting information , the initial information can be rejected . 
1 4 string cstructure fstructured-structure content structure 




LEXEME \]
DICTIONARY g
PROTOTYPES )
DISCOURSEiSTATE
Figure 1: Structural aspects and their correspondenca L The ideas presented here have been partially implemented in a system called FALIN  , which is developed as a precursor to an understanding component of a dialog system  ( Ahrenberg , 1987a ) .   1 The world of FALIN is a drawing-pad and its knowledge cover simple geometrical objects that the user can draw and manipulate using natural anguage  . FALIN's parser ( a chart parser ) is constructing a c-~tructure and an f-structure in tandem  , huthands fstructures over to another module which attempts to construct corresponding d -structures and content structures  . The content structure is then evaluated against he knowledge base  . 
3. Structural Isomorphy
The semantic aspects that this paper considers are three very basic ones :  ( i ) referent determination ; to determine the set of discourse objects ( referents ) that a given utterance relates to ; ( ii ) classification ; for each of these referents to determine their type  , and ( iii ) role identification ; to determine the relations they contract with the other referents  . From the first task I then exclude the problem of actual identification of referents  , restricting myself to the task of deciding that there is a separate entity that some part of the utterance applies to  . 
Now , we can formulate a general and practical principle  , which is commonly used in semantic interpreters and which offers a solution to all three problems at once  , namely a principle of structural isomorphy between syntactic and semantic structure  . The basic tenet of this principle is that there exists a level of syntactic representation  ( which I will call fnnctional structure here , but which may be represented in various ways , e . g . as a dependency structure ) such that ( a ) every referent is expressed by some major constituent of the functional structure  ; ( b ) the type of a referent is given , directly or implicitly , by ( one sense of ) the head of that constituent ; and ( c ) two referents contract a role relationship iff their respective constituents contract a grammatical relation in the functional structure  . These one-to-one correspondences between syntactic and semantic objects yield isomorphic syntactic and semantic structures as long as we only consider the three mentioned aspects of semantic interpretation  , and hence the name " structural momorphmm . See figure 2 for a graphical illustration . 
1 FALIN can be read . ~' stAttempt at LINkfping Natural Language ~ nter face  . 
Thus , no claims are made for other aspects of semantic interpretation  , such as quantification or modification . 
SyN~fAXl-o . Tto-o , ; ~-\] ~ EIV ~ AN ' IICS Categore ~ natic Word 1 ~ .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . ~ Referent Type 1, . ) Corl ~, tituent1\] ~ .   .   .   .   .   .   . _ > Referent l %: . . . . . . . . J za~
Constituent2\].......-
Categorematic Word 2 Referent Type 2
Figure 2: Correspondences of syntactic and semantic objects yielding structural isomorphism  . 
It should t , e observed that the isomorphy principle allows for both lexical and structural ambiguity  , i . e . it does not require ~ hat a given word , or grammatical relation can be interpreted in only one way  . What it requires is a one-to-one correspondence of syntactic and semantic objects of the same interpretation  . 
Moreover , structural isomorphy is riot the same as composition ~  , lity . In one sense compositionality is more restrictive since it applies to all ~ mpects of semantic interpretation  . On the other hand compositionality is less restrictive since it requites derivation trees to bei ~ omorphic  , not constituent struct mea . Howe?er , compositional systems too , e . g . / Hirst 198'1/ , oi ? ~ en~ssume structural isomorphism for the aspects of q coltern here  . ~ As an ilh ~ a ~ tration , consider (1) . Here the speaker can be said to refer to hmr entities  , a sale , a car and two male humans . The last three r date to the first as , say , Goods , Provider and Receiver , re~pectively . Each of the referents corresponds to a major constituent  , he whole sentence for the case of the sale and subject  , direct object and indirect object for the others . Also , the head words as // , Jim , car and Englishman provide the type inibrmation ~ stipulated  . 
(t ) Jim sold the cartoan English man.
in the fi'a aaework used here we could have the following grammar rule  , defining constraints on the functional structure :
RI:S . . . NP : ( tSUBJ ) = $ VP : T = $
R2: VP-~FV:~'::~NP: ( ~ OBJ ) = : ~ PP*: ( tPOBJ ) 9
R3: Pl? , - ~ P:~':::$NP:i '==~/ I , 4: NP-+(DET:~:::~) N:~::~/PN:~=:J .    3 h : ~ tlirst's ~ lm~emprepositions and " pseudo . prepositions " ( name do ?() t~3 , OBJ , INDOB 3 ) are ther deva at syntactic objects hlstead of i ~ r ~mla?ical ~ uactions  . 
The morph dictionary associates functional constraints with stems and affixes as in the following illustrations  . Stems are also associated with lexemes ~ but affixes and function words are not  . 4LI : cat '; N , ( i " LEX ) = ! CAR , ( TNUMB ) = SING1 , 2: sold ; FV , ( j " LEX ) = ! SELL , ( TTENSE ) = PAST
L3: the ; DET , -~, (1" SPEC ) = DEF
L4: to ; P , --, (~" PCASE ) = TO
In the appropriate lexeme dictionary lexemes are associated with semantic objects  . This association may be one-to-many , but only one of the alternatives can be involved in an analysis  , thus making the correspondence btween head words and types one-t  ( r . one . It may also involve object descriptions rather than objects  . For instance , a proper name lexeme , such as ! JIM , can have associations with known instances as well as with a description that can be used in the construction of a new instance  . 
! SELL : & Selll/&Sell2/ . . . !CAR:&Carl/&Car2/ . . . !JIM : Person 67/Person 83/Name 18/ ( TYPE = & Person , SEX = Male , NAME = Namel S ) Finally , the association between grammatical functions and semantic roles is captured in the definition of the latter  . As attributes can be differentiated in very much the same way as object types  , these correspondences can be state datan appropriate level of generality  . For instance , Provider may be analysed as a differentiation of Agent and inherit its association with the Subject function from that attribute  , it is also possible to have these associations stated at the level of individual action types  . If we want to express the difference between sell and buy as a difference in the role & ruction associations of Provider and Receiver ~ we state the associations  ii1 the definition of the two action types . In any case the prototype of & Sell\]will turn out to bear the following inibrmation :  ( 2 ) _&Sell l




Price ;   ( TLEX ) =! SELL ( TSUBJ )  =  ( tOBJ )  =  ( TPOBJ ) ~  ( iPCASE ) = TO ( ~POBJ ) -B ( $ PCASE ) = FOR Here the associations are not just simply stated as a function label associated with the role attribute  , but corresponding functional descriptions are explicitly represented  . This is so because more than a mere function label may be involved and  , as will be shown below , the correspondences may be more complex than this . 
The correspondences in a prototype should be read as a set of canonical correspondences  . Alternative correspondences can be obtained from lexieal rules just as in LFG-theory/Bresnan  , 1982a ; cf . also Halvorsen , 1987/ . Applying the Passive lexical rule to ( 2 ) we obtain an alternative set of constraints , namely (2') . 
4 Lexemc labels are indicatied by an hLitial exclamation mark  . Object types are indicated by an initial '&' . 
15(2')__&Sell l
Type ; (1"LEX ) = tSELL(TACT/PASS ) = PASSIVE
Provider ;/ IPOBJ)~~"PCASE ) = BY
Goods ; ( TSUBJ ) =
Receiver ; IIPOBJ ) 3 ~
PCASE ) = TO
Price ; (1"POBJ)~J .
( IPCASE ) = FOR
There are some reasons for stating the role -function correspondences as functional constraints induced by the semantics rather than the other way round  . For one thing , definitions of types and attributes are needed for independent reasons and the introduction of the functional constraints is merely a way of encoding knowledge that pertains to them  , i . e . knowledge of how they are communicated . Moreover , subcategorization properties are semantically grounded  , even if not absolutely predictable . 
4. Cases of non-lsomorphtsm.
4 . 1 Non-isomorphic constructions . There are certain linguistic construction-types that  , at least on the surface ~ contradic the isomorphism principle  , such as Equi , Raising , Long distance dependencies and Gapping constructions  . However , in most cases it seems possible to eliminate the problems posed by these constructions already in the grammar and thus have appropriate functions assigned to constituents at functional structure  . 
4 . 2 Flexible idioms . For simplicity we may characterize a flexible idiom as a complex expression with a definte meaning whose parts may undergo variation and occur in nonadjacent positions  . Fixedidioms , such as at once , back and forth , first of all do not pose the same problems as they can be taken care of already at the c -structure level  . Most flexible idioms in English seem to involve a verb  , such as make fun of , break someone's heart , or make up one's mind . Consider (3) . 
(3) He broke their hearts completely.
At the c-structure and f-structure levels it is analysed in the same way as any other sentence  . In particular , each constituent will have its own LEX-d secriptor  :   ( 4 ) -LEXIBREAK
TENSE PAST
SUBJ\[LEX
OBJ ~ LEX NU MB


IHEART \] ~
PL\[LEXITHEY
Object types for both ordinary breaking and heart -breaking are associated with IBREAK in the lexeme dictionary  . The object type for heart-breaking also involve a reference to the lexemet HEART  , however . The object type & Break-someone's-heart carries the following information associated with the attributes of its prototype : 
Type ; IILEX ) ----' BREAK/-~\]
OBJLEX ) = ' HEARTI\[Cause ; ( TSUBJ)-----~L~patient ;   ( 1-OBJ POSS ) = ?_~ This means that while there is a simple one-to-one correspondence btween Subject and the role of Cause  , the other function-role correspondences involve structural distortions  . 
They are still expressible by local constraints , however , and this holds for any flexible verbal idiom where the fixed parts have a grammatical relation to the verb  , or to some complement of the verb , i . e . for the great majority of verbal idioms in the language  . 
In some cases a part of the idiom may play a double role  . On the one hand it is part of the expression of the idiom and on the other hand it brings with it a referent of its own  . Consider the following discourse : ( 6 ) A : He hasn't shown his face here for the last couple of weeks  , hashe ?
B : Who wants to see it anyway ?
To describe the fact that the phrase hieface can express a referent we may allow for this possibility in the statement of correspondences in the protytype for the action  . 
(7) __& Show-one's-face:




IiLEX ) = ISHOWoBJLEX ) = ~ FACE
OBJPOSSLEX ) = IREFL(TSUBJ ) = (~ OnJ ) =
I ~ ADV ) ~
PCASE ) = LOC 4 . 3 Constituted discourse objects . An utterance is itself a discourse object , i . e . it may be referred to in the discourse that follows  . When this happens the utterance will be classified one way or the other  , as in utterances of the following sort : 81 That is a difficult question to answer . 
I think your statement needs clarification.
Except for performative utterances there is no head word in the utterance that can be used to for its classification  , however . 
Instead the classification will have to rely on other information  , such as clause-structure and punctuation . 
Speech-act interpretation is often regarded as something entirely different from semantic interpretation proper  . This , I would argue , is a mistake . Illocutionary categorization is constrained by words and world knowledge in very much the same way as categorization of other referents ? The essential difference between the illocutionary act as a referent and other referents is that the illocutionary act come into being with the utterance of the words  , whereas the other referents exist independently . This means that we can postulate ( at least ) two ways in which an uttered expression relates to discourse referents  , first , it relates to referents described by the utterance  , and second , to referents constituted by the utterance , in particular the illocutionary act . The analysis of an utterance would be incomplete if it does not include a classification of the utterance  , as well as the discourse objects that fulfils the roles of 
Speaker and Addressee.
(10) Show me the files.
5 Similar problems arise with sentences each as The question is why he did it  , The fact is that he didi ~ where the subjects are not interchangeable :* The fact is why he did it  . 
Consider now how ( I0) may be analysed . Let us classify it by meaus of the object type & Directive which we assume to be supertype for commands  , orders , directions and similar ~ Jpee chacts . The prototype for this type may be assigned the following set of constraints  ( as one alternative ) :  ( 11 ) __&Directive


IAd dressee ; l Action ;   ( ~ MOOD ) = IMPERATIVE -= ( DSSPEAKER )  = ( DSADD RESSEE ) ~= ~ In order to distinguish objects being described from objects being constituted w ~ distinguish two modes of correspondence  . The ~- arrow in dic ~ . .tes " an f-structure node corresponding in constitutive mode  .   6 The schema associated with the Action attribute says that the f-structure node corresponding to the d-structure node for the directive in constitutive mode actually coincides with the f -str ~ mture node describing the action being directed  , thus encoding the one-to-two relation between the utterance and the discourse objects it relates to  . 
4 . 4 Implied referents a ~ d types . As is well known , in situated discol~rse we regularly do not give explicit expression of the referents being talked about as such information can be inferred from the context  . Obvious illustrations are given by short answers to questions as in  ( 12 )  . Similarly , we may suppress head words if t ~ hey are inferrable  , as in (13) . 
(12 ) -Who is the manager of the sales department ?- Jiml ~ mith  . 
(13) I'vego ~ many more at home.
There are ~ wo ways to react in the face of such " elliptic " utterances  . One way is to say that they require special pragmatic heuristics which are independent of the principle of structural isomorphism  ( and vice versa ) and thus simply regard them as irrelevant . However , this makes the principle limited in application . It would be better to have more general principles of utterance in telp retation that together covers both elliptical and nonelliptical utterances  . Again , contextual constraints in conjunction with ordinary functional constraints can do part of the jobibrus  . 
A phrase such as Jim Smith in itself does not give much information of course  . However , when it is uttered in reply to a question , as in (12) , it will have quite a well-defined meaning . In the definition of tiJe utterance type & Answer  , we may thus include , beside attributes for Speaker and Addressee , also an attribute in diq ' , ating what question is being answered . This question can be retrieved from the discourse state  , where it was put when it was raised and kept until it is answered or dropped  . 
(14)___& Answer
Type ; (~ MOOD ) = DECL~peaker ;= ( DSSPEAKER)
Addressee ; : ( DSADDRESSEE)
Question ; e(DSQUESTIONS )_Answer ;  ~ =  1   6 This use of the symbol '1~' should \] Lot be confused with its use in Bresnau  ( 1 982a ~ where it is part of the description of long -distance dependencies  . 
5 . Restrictiona on proper correspondence It would be premature to attempt an explicit characterization of the correspondence rlations between the structural aspects of an analysis  , especially as important aspects of semantic interpretation have not even been considered  . In this final section I therefore only summarize the general ideas  , pointing out how they differ from structural isomorphism and state a few necessary conditions on the correspondence btween f-structure and d -structure  . 
The referent descriptions conveyed by an utterance are constrained by linguistic form  ( functional structure ) as well as by conceptual knowledge ( prototypes ) and context-of-utterance ( discourse state )  . A referent need be given no overt expression in the utterance if it is inferable from a prototype and/or from the context  . 
The constraints themselves need not be one-to-one , contrary to the principle of structural isomorphy  , but they are local in the sense that they can only refer to  ( i ) structures corresponding to either ( a ) the object that induces them ,   ( b ) the object of which that object is an immediate part  , or ( c ) other dependents of that dominating object , or ( ii ) objects of the discourse state . 
To capture speech act interpretation we recognize two modes of correspondence  , one based on the relation descrip-tion-described object  , and the other on the relation utterance ~ constituted act  . 
The f-structure is a syntactic structure , which means that it must be a minimal structure satisfying the constraints induced by the c -structure  . However , it must also correspond properly with the d -structure  . To account for this correspondence we must first realize that not all functional attributes need be semantically relevant e  . g . those indicating rammatical gender . If ? is an f-structure , ?8 will indicate an f-structure obtained m .   . 
from ? by subtraction o ~ semantmally irrelevant paths  . 
Thus , we get the following conditions on proper correspondence between d-structures and fstructures :  ( 1 ) Ad-structure ,  6 , and an f-structure ,  ? , are corresponding properly in descriptive mode , only if ( a ) 6 ( Type ) ~ g(?(LEX )) , where g is the function defined by the lexeme dictionary  ; ( b ) There is a prototype ,  /'/ , for 6 ( Type ) such that ( i ) 6 satisfies the conditions '' of // , and ( ii ) Cesta is a minimal H fo structure satisfying all functional constraints reduced by r the role attributes at top level of  6  . 
( e ) For any substructure ~6' , of 6 , there is a substructure ,  ?' , of ~ , such that 6' and ?' correspond properly in descriptive mode . 
(2) Ad-structure ,  6 , and an f-structure ,  ? , are corresponding properly in constitutive mode , only if ( a ) There is an utterance-type , D , and a prototype , IID , for /2 , such that 6 satisfies the conditions of //_ . IJ ( b ) ~ b is a minimal structure satisfying all functional constr~nmts induced by // ~ for the role attributes at top level of ~  . 
( c ) as l(c).
6. Acknowledgements
This research as been supported by the Swedish National Board for Technical Development  . I am indebted to Magnus Merkel and the other members of the Natural Language Processing Laboratory at  Link6ping university , Mats Wirdn , Arne J6nsson and Nils Dahl bllck for valuable discussion of these topics  . 
177. \] ~ eferences
Ahrenberg , L .   ( 1987a ) : " Parsing into Discourse Object Descriptions . " Proceedings of the Third European Chapter ACL Conference  , Copenhagen , April 13 ,  1987 , pp .  140-147 . 
Ahrenberg , L .   ( 1987b ) : Interrogative Structures of Swedish : Aspects of the Relation between Grammar and Speech Acts  . 
Doctoral diss . Uppsala university , department of linguistics,
RUUL 15.
Bobrow , R . J . & Webber , B . L .   ( 1980 ) : " Knowledge Representation for Syntactic /Semantic Processing  . " Proceedings ,   1st Annual National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , pp . 

Bresnan , J . ( ed . )  ( 1982a ) : The Mental Representation of Graramatical Relations  . The MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass . 
Bresnan , J . (1982b ): " The Passive in Lexical Theory . " In
Bresnan (1982a ), pp . 3-86.
Danieli , M . , Ferrara , F . , Gemello , R . and Rullent , C .   ( 1987 ) : " Integrating Semantics and Flexible Syntaxby Exploiting Isomorphism between Grammatical and Semantical Relations  . " Proceedings of the Third European Chapter ACL Conference  , Copenhagen , April 13 ,  1987 , pp .  278-283 . 
Fenstad , J . E . , Halvorsen , P-K , Langhohn , T . and van Benthem , J . (1985): Equations , Schemat and Situations : A framework for linguistic semantics  . Manuscript , CSLI , Stanford University . 
ttal vorsen , P-K ( 1983 ) : " Semantics for Lexical-Functional Grammar . " Linguistic Inquiry , 14: 4, 567-615 . 
Halvorsen , P-K ( 1987 ) : Situation Semantics and Semantic Interpretation in Constraint-based Grammars  , Technichal Report

Hirst , G .   ( 1987 ) : Semantic Interpretation and the Resolution of Ambiguity  . Cambridge University Press . 
Kaplan , R .   ( 1987 ) : " Three Seductions of Computational Psycholinguistics  . " In Whitelock et al . ( eds . ) 1987: 149-188 . 
Kaplan , R . & Bresnan , J .   ( 1982 ) : " Lexical-Functional Grammar : A Formal System for Grammatical Representation  . IBresnan 1982a:173-281 . 
Lytinen , S . L .   ( 1986 ) : " Dynamically Combining Syntax and Semantics in Natural Language Processing  . " Proceedings of
AAAI'86, pp , 574-578.
Lytinen , S . L . (1987): " Integrating syntax and semantics . " In S . 
Nirenburg ( ed . ): Machine Translation , Cambridge University
Press 1987, pp . 302-316.
Moore , R . C : (1981): " Problems in Logical Form . " Proceedings , 19th Annual Meeting of the ACL , Stanford July 1981 , pp . 

Pulman , S . (1987): " The Syntax-Semantics Interface . " In
Whitelock et al(eds .) 1987:189-224.
Sondheimer , N . K . , Weischedel , R . M . and Bobrow , R . J . (1984): " Semantic Interpretation Using KL-ONE ' . Proceedings of Coling '84~ Stanford University ~ Cal . 26 July 1984 . pp .  101-107 . 
Tomita , M . and Carbonell , J . G .   ( 1986 ) : " Another Stride Towards Knowledge-Based Machine Translation  . " Proceedings of
COLING'86, pp . 633-638.
Whitelock , P . , Wood , M . M . , Somers , H . L . , Johnson , R . and Bennett P . (1987): Linguistic Theory & Computer Applications , 
Academic Press , 1987.

