Metonymy and Metaphor : What's the Difference ?
Dan FASS
Computing Research Laboratory,
Box30001/3 CRL,
New Mexico State University,
Las Cruces,
NM88003-0001,


A computational pproach to metonymy and metaphor is proposed that distinguishes between them  , literalness , and ano-maly . The approach supports Lakoff and Johnson's ( 1980 ) views that metonymy and metaphor are quite different phenomena  , that in metonymy an entity stands for another , whereas in metaphor an entity is viewed as another  . 
1 Introduction
This p ; ~ per describes a computational pproach to metonymy and  . metaphor that distinguishes betwecn them , literalness , and anomaly . Tile approach lends support othe views of Lakoff and Johnson  ( 1980 ) that metonymy and metaphor are quite different phenomena  , that metonymy is a means by which one entity stands for another  , whereas metaphor is a way in which one entity is viewed as another  . 
The tt , eemain features of tile computational pproach are that :  ( a ) literahtess , metaphor , and anomaly share common features and form a group distinct from metonymy which has characteristics that requires a quite different treatment  ; (b ) chains of metonymies occur , supporting an observation by Reddy (1979) ; and ( c ) metonymies can cooccur with instances of either literalness  , metaphor , or anomaly . An example is given of the computer analysis of a metonymy which illustrates the above three features  . The example is analysed by a natural language program callext  recta5 that uses Collative Semantics , hereafter CS . 
CS is a recently proposed domain-independent semantics for natural language processing which is  , in many respects , a developmenl of Preference Semantics ( Wilks 1973 , 1975a , 1975b ) . 
2 Overview : The Relationship between Metonymy and Metaphor This section outlines some of the main similarities and differences between metonymy and metaphor  , starting with their main similmities . One similarity is that both metonymy and metaphor are highly pervasive in language : there is linguistic evidence of tbo widespread use of metaphor  ( e . g . , Brooke-Rose 1958 ; Levin 1977 ; Reddy 1979 ; Lakoff and Johnson 1980) and metonymy ( e . g . , Stern 1931 ; Lakoff and Johnson 1980 ; Van Eynde 1982 ; Yamanashi 1987) . A second similarity is that both metonymy and metaphor are significant in language change  , notably in word sensex tension ( see Stem 1931 ; Wal & ' on 1967) . A third and perhaps most important similarity is that both meto-nymy and raetaphor are nonliteral  . We will not review the nature of metaphor here because that has been covered elsewhere  ( see Ortony 1979 a ; lloneck and Hoffman 1980 ; Johnson 1981 ) but will instead focus on the nature of metonymy . 
In a metonymy , the name of one thing is substituted for that of anothe related to it  . Several attempts have been made to organise instances of metonymy into categories  ( e . g . , Stern 1931 ; Lakoff and Johnson 1980 ; Yamanashi 1987) or " metonymic concepts , " as Lakoff and Johnson call them . One kind of metonymic concept is synech do cheor , in Lakoff and Johnson's terms , Part for Whole , Below are three examples of another metonymic concept  , Container for Contents . 
(1) " Denised rank tile bottle . "  ( = the liquid in the bottle )   ( 2 ) " Daved rank the glasses . "  ( = the liquid in the glasses )   ( 3 ) " Thckettle is boiling . "( = the liquid in the kettle ) ( Waldron 1967, p . 186; Yamanashi 1987, p . 78) None of the three sentences i literally true . The non-literalness in each sentence is indicated by a violation of a sclcc ~ tion reslriction of the verb  . In (1) and (2) , ' drink'expects a pot-able liquid but neither bottles nor glasses are potable liquids  ; in (3) ' boil'expects aliqnid , but a kettle is not aliqnid . I lowever , there is something regular about the nature of the selection res-triction violation in all three sentences  . Observe that in (1) and (2) , it is not bottles or glasses that are drunk , but the potable liquids in them , and in (3) , it is the liquid sinkettles that are boiled , not the kettles themselves . In each case , the selection res-triction is a liquid and the surface noun against which it is matched is a container of liquids  ; hence in each case , there is a regula relationship between a container  ( a bottle , glass , and ket-tle ) and its typical contents ( aliquid ) : this relationship is the metonymic concept Container for Contents  . 
(4 ) " You'll find better ideas than that in the library  . "( Reddy 1979, p . 309 ) It has also been observed that metonymies occur in chains  ( Rexldy , Ibid ) . Red dy suggests that ( 4 ) contains a chain of Part for Wholemctonymies between ' ideas ' and ' library ': the ideas are expressed in words  , words arc printed on pages , pages are in books , mad books are found in a library . 
Having discussed some areas of agreement about metonymy and metaphor  , we now turn to a much disputed subject : the nature of the relationship betw cen them  . One view is that metonymy is a type of metaphor , a view that has been traced by Genett c(1970) , according to Levin (1977 , p . 80) . Sem'le (1981, p . 280) claims to hold this view , though he claims not strongly . A second and antithetical view is that metaphor is a type of meto-nymy  . This view , also noted by Levin ( lbid ) , conjoins the views of Dubois et al (1970) , who reduce metaphor to synech do che , ;\[77 and Jakobson and Halle (1956) , who reduce synech do chetometonymy . Finally, . a third view is that metonymy and metaphor are quite different  , a view that has been advanced by Lakoff and Johnson  ( 1980 , pp . 36-37), among others . To them , metaphor is " principally a way of conceiving of one thing in terms of another  , and its primary function is understanding ; " metonymy " has primarily a referential function , that is , it allows us to use one entity to stand for another " though it has a role in understanding because it focusses on certain aspects of what is being referred to  . We subscribe to the third view . 
Metonymy has recently become a topic of interest in natural language processing  ( e . g . , Grosz , Appelt , Martin , Pereira , and Shinkle 1985 ; Martin 1986 ; Hobbs and Martin 1987 ;  . Stallard 1987; Wilensky 1987) though , to our knowledge , no one else has yet produced a theory embodied in a computer program that can process several different metonymic on cepts or that can distinguish metonymies from metaphors  . The next section outlines the treatment of metonymy in CS  . 
3 Collative Semantics : Description of Semantic Phenomena 

In CS , we investigate metaphors , metonymies , anomalies , etc . , by studying the " semantic relations " that underlie them  . 
Semantic relations are relationships that arise between the meanings of words  ( or larger linguistic Units )  . Seven types of semantic relations are distinguished in CS  . These are termed literal , meto-nymie , metaphorical , anomalous , redundant , inconsistent , and novel relations . The seven semantic relations divide into two classes which we refer to as " preference-based " and " assertion-based " relations  . Brief definitions of the preference-based semantic relations are now given  , together with example sentences ( ee Fass 1986b , 1987b , 1988 for more details) . These sentences assume a null context in which there are no complicating effects from prior sentences or the preexisting beliefs of producers or understanders  . 
The preference-based class of semantic relations tems from matching the semantic restrictions of senses of words against the immediate context of the meanings of other senses of words  . 
Such semantic restrictions have been called " selection restrictions "  ( Katz and Fodor 1964 )  , " preferences " ( Wilks 1973 ) and " expectations " ( Schank 1975 )  . We have adopted Wilks'term . 
Such preferences appear to be responsible for literal  , metonymic , metaphorical , and anomalou semantic relations . Literal relations are signified by a satisfied preference whereas the remaining three relations  , which are all nonliteral , are indicated by a violated preference . 
(5) " Them and rank beer."
There is a literal relation between ' man ' and ' drink ' in  ( 5 ) because ' drink'p refers an animal as its agent ( i . e . , it is animals that drink ) and a man is a type of anim also the preference is satisfied  . 
(1) " Denised rank the bottle."
In (1) , the semantic relation between ' drink ' and ' bottle ' is metonymic  . ' Drink'p refers a potable liquid as its object , A bottle is not a type of potable liquids other e is a preference violation  . Furthermore , there is a Container for Contents metonymy between ' bottle '  ( the container ) and ' potable liquid ' ( its contents )  . 
Metonymy is differentiated from metaphor in CS because we think that the core of a metonymy is a semantic relationship  , e . g . , Container for Contents , whereas the core of a metaphor is a relevant analogy  . Others have argued for the importance of relevance in recognising metaphors  ( e . g . , Tversky 1977 ; Hobbs 1983 ) and it has been frequently claimed that the critical match in a metaphorical relation is some correspondence or analogy between two properties  ( e . g . , Wilks 1978; Ortony 1979b , p . 167; Tourangean and Sternberg 1982, pp . 218-221; Gentner 1983) though , to our knowledge , no one has brough the two observations together and emphasised the role of relevance in the discove x ~? of an analogy critical to a metaphor  . 
(6) " The card rank gasoline . "( adapted from Wilks 1978) Thus , the semantic relation between ' cal " and ' drink ' in  ( 6 ) is metaphorical because between ' car ' and ' animal '  , the preferred agent of ' drink ' , there is a prefizrence violation and an underlying relevant analogy  . Aear is not a type of animal , hence the preference violation . However , in the context of a sentence about drinking such as  ( 6 )  , there is a relevant analogy that animals drink potable liquids as cars use gasoline  , hence the metaphorical relation between ' car ' and ' drink '  . 
A third kind of non-literalness , in addition to metonymy and metaphor , is anomaly . Metonymy and metaphor are distinguished from anomaly in CS because anomalous relations have neither the semantic relationships of a metonymic relation nor the relevant analogy of a metaphorical relation  . 
(7) " The idead rank the heart."
In (7) , the semantic relation between ' idea ' and ' drink ' is anomalous  . This is because ' idea ' is not a preferred agent of ' drink ' and no relevant analogy can be found between animals  ( the preferred agent ) and ideas . 
Next , we describe the four components that comprise CS , which can discriminate among the semantic relations just presented  . 
4 Coilative Semantics : Description of its Four Components The four components of CS are " sense -frames  , "" colla ~ tion , "" semantic vectors , " and " screening . ' ~ A fuller descrip . -tion of these components appears in Fass (1986 , 1987 c ,  1988) . 
Sense-frames are dictionary entries for individual word senses  . Sense-flames are composed of other word senses that have their own sense-flames  , much like Quillian's (1968) planes . 
Each sense-frame consists of two palls , an " arcs " section and a " node " section , that correspond to the genus and differentia commonly found in a real dictionary definition  . The arcs part of a sense-frame contains a labelled arc to its genus term  ( a word sense with its own sense-frame )  . Together , the arcs of all the sense-flames comprise a densely structured semantic network of word senses called the " sense-network  . " The node part of a sense-frame is the differentia that provides a " definition " of the word sense represented by the sense-frame that differentiates it from other word senses  . 
The second component of CS is the process of collation  . 
Collation matches the sense-frames of two word senses and finds a system of multiple mappings between those sense-flames  , thereby discriminating ~ the semantic relations between the word senses  . The two terms in a semantic relation are referred to as the " source " and the " target "  ( Martin 1985 )  . The source initiates and directs the mapping process  , the target has a complex system of mappings laid upon it  , and there is direction from the source towards tile target  . 
Figure 1 is a flow chart that shows how literal , metonymie , metaphorical and anomalous relations are distinguished  . The main features of the flow chart are : ( a ) metonymy is given a very different reatment from literal  , metaphorical , and anomalous relations ; (b ) chains of metonymies can be found , supporting Reddy's (1979) observation ;   ( c ) metonymies can cooccur with instances of either literal  , metaphorical , or anomalous relations . 
In the flow chart , a sense-network path denoting inclusion is sought first  . If such a path is found then the semantic relation is a literal one  . If the path is not inclusive then metonymic inferencing -- the application of metonymic inference rules -- is tried  . Metonymic inferencing is thus a special strategy tried after failure to discover an initial literal semantic relation  , hence meto-nymy is nonliteral . A successful metonymic inference rule establishes the relationship between the original source or target  ( " the name of one thing " ) and another entity ( '' another related to it " ) that substitutes for one of them . The substitute source or tar-\[inferencerues\]~ - - --\] --- i-Substitute\]_  , , Yes /~
I metonym for ~ ucceeds/\[source or target Ix /~ dmetaphorical ~  1 or anomalous\[semantic relation
Find sense-network path q be ! weea source and target  \]   ; __--\[ semantic relation \] ? t Figure 1 . Preference-based semantic relations . 
get is usext tO compute a semantic relation which can be literal  , metonymic again , metaphorical , or anomalous . Hence a discovered s~mantic relation can be a single relation  ( i . e . , literal , metaphorical , or a nonmlous ) or a combination of relations consisting of a single metonymy or a chain of metonymies plus a literal  , metaphorical , or anomalous relation . 
A further set of processing steps distinguish metaphorical from anomalou semantic relations  . The key step records the match of the : relevant cell from tile source sense-frmne with one of the cells from the target sense-frame  . For a metaphorical relation the match of cells is analogical whereas for an anomalous semantic rehttion the match of cells is not analogical  ( see Fass 1986 , 1987a , 1988); in other words , a metaphorical relation contains a relevant analogy  , as in (6) , while an anomalous relation does not , as : in (7) . 
Tile third component of CS is the semantic vector which is a form of representation  , along with sense-fi'ames ; but sense-frames represent knowledge , where a semantic vectors represent coherence . Semantic vectors are therefore a kind of " coherence representation  . " The fourth component of CS is the process of screening  . 
During analysis of a sentence constituent , a semantic vector is generated h weach possible pairwise combination of word senses  . 
These word sense combinations are called " semantic readings " or simply " readings  . " Each reading has an associated semantic vector . Screening chooses between two senmntic vectors and hence their attached semantic readings  , thereby resolving lexical ambiguity . 
5 Processing Metonymy : An Example
This section gives an example of a metonymy analysed by the  meta5 program , which contains an implementation of CS . 
Another example of processing a metonymy can be found in Fass  ( 1986b , to appear ) . The meta5program analyses sentences , discriminates the seven kinds of semantic relation between pairs of word senses in those sentences  ( i . e . , it actually recognises metaphors , metonymies , redundancies , etc ) , and resolves any lexical ambignity in those sentences  .   Meta5 is writter t in Quintus Prolog and consists of a lexicon containing the sanse-frames of  460 word senses , a small grammar , and semantic routines that embody collation and screening  , the two processes of CS . The process of collation currently contains metonymic inference rules for four types of metonymic oncept  , ordered from most to least common : Part for Whole  , Container fat " Contents , Co-Agent for Activity , and Artist for Artform . 
(8) " Tedplayed Bach . "( = the music of Bach ) In (8) , there is a chain of metonymies plus a literal relation  . 
The chain consists of Artist for ' Art form and Container fro  . 
Contents metonymic concepts . When expressed as inference rules , some metonymic on cepts appear to be drive " forward " from the source  , while others are driven " backward " from the target  . It is this direction of inferencing that determines whether the source or target is substituted in a successful metonym  . Both Artist for Artform and Container for Contents are target-cMven  , hence in Artist for Art form the inference is from the target  ( the Artist ) to the source ( the Art form )  , so the substitute metonym replaces the target ( tile Artist ) if the inference is successful . 
Figure 2 shows the sense-frames of the verb-sense playl2  , music l and jo hann_se bastian bach . Temetonymy results from nmtching the object preference of  playl2  , which is for music , against the surface object , which is ' Bach ' , short for ' Johann Sebastian Bach ' . In what follows , the preference ( music l ) is the source and the surface object ( johannse bastian_bach ) is the target . 
179 sf(play 12 , \[\[ arcs , \[\[ supertype , perform1\]\]\] , \[ node 2 , \[\[ agent , \[ preference , human__beingl\]\] , \[ oble c ~\ [ preference , music1\]\]\]\]\]) . 
sf(musicl , sf(johannsebastian_bach , \[\[ arcs , \[\[ arcs , \[\[ supertype , \[ sound 1 , a ~ form1\]\]\]\] , \[\[ supertype , composer l \]\]\] , \[ node O , \[ node O , \[\[ musician1 , play 12 , itl\]\]\]\]) . \[\[ animacyl , dead1\] , \[sex1 , male 1\] , \[ born1 ,  1685\] , \[ died 1 , 1750\]\]\]\]) . 
Figure 2 . Sense-frames of music l , playl2 , and johannse bastian bach . 
We shall use the flow chart of figure 1 to understand what happens . The rectangular boxes in the flow chart are called " statement boxes  , " the diamonds are " decision boxes . " We shall follow what happens using instructions given as sentences in brackets  . We now begin the example: ( Enter the flow chart . ) ( Enter the uppermost statement box . ) The sense-network path between the source ( music l ) and the target ( johann_sebastian bach ) is sought ,   ( Enter the uppermost decision box of the the flow chart  . ) The path is not inclusive so metonymic inference rules  , are applied . 
(Enter the middle decision box Of the the flow chart  . ) The rule for Artist for Artform succeeds . The discovered metonymic inference is that jo hann_se bastian bacti  ( the Artist ) composes musical pieces ( the Art form )  . The metonymic inference is driven from the target  ( the Artist )  , which is jo hann_sebastian bach . Te successful metonymic inference is as follows :   ( a ) johann_sebastian_bach ( the Artist ) is a composer l ,   ( b ) composers compose1 musical pieces ( the Art form )  . Two additional tests confirm ( a ) and ( b) , which are that ( c ) composing is a type of creating , and ( d ) a musical piecel is a type of art__forml . 
( Enter the leftmost statement box . ) The original target ( johannse bastian bach ) is replaced by the substitute metonym ( musical_piece1 )  . 
(Enter the uppermost statement box for a second time  .   ) The sense-network path between the source ( music l ) and the new target ( musical_piecel ) is sought . 
(Enter the uppermost decision box for a second time  . ) The path is not inclusive so metonymic inference rules are applied  . 
( Enter the middle decision box for a second time . ) The ride for Container for Contents succeeds . The successful inference is that a musical piecel  ( the Container ) contains music l ( the

(Entdr the leftmost statement box for a second time  . ) The direction of inference in the Container for Contents metonyrnic concept is from the target  ( the Container ) towards the source ( the Contents )  , so the target ( the Container ) is replaced by the substitute metonym if such an inference should be successful  . Hence in our example , the target ( musical piecel ) is again replaced by a substitute metonym ( music 1 )  . The source , which is music l , the object preference of playl 2 , remains unchanged ,   ( Enter the uppermost statement box for a third time  . ) The sense-network path between the source ( music l ) and the latest target ( music l ) is sought . 
( Re-enter the uppermost decision box a third time . ) The path is inclusive so a literal relation is found  , that music l is a type of music 1 . 
( Exit the the flow chart . ) The processing of the preference-based semantic relation  ( s ) between playl 2 , with its object preference for music l , and johann_sebastian bacl ~ is completed . After an initial preference violation ( Johann Sebastian Bach is not a kind of music )  , the semantic relation found was an Artist for Artform metonymic relation  ( that johanns ebastian_bach composes musical pieces  ) followed by a Container for Contents metonymic relation  ( that musical pieces contain music ) followed by a literal relation ( that music is music )  . 
6 Conclusions
The above analysis illustrates , we hope , why metonymy and metaphor are easily confused : both are nonliteral and are found through the discovery of some aspect  ( a property ) shared by the source , a preference , and the target , in the above case a surface noun . Our conclusion is that metonymy and metaphor are very different phenomena  , much as Lakoff and Johnson (1980) have said , excep that we add detailed suggestions as to why . We suggest that some key differences between metonymy and metaphor are :  ( a ) how the shared aspect is selected ,   ( b ) the operations that happen after the selection , and ( c ) the effect those operations produce . 
In the case of metonymy ,   ( a ) the selected aspect is a pro-perty that forms a regular semantic relationship with a property from the target  ; ( b ) there is substitution , i . e . , replacement of one conceptual entity with another  ; hence ( c ) the observed referential function of metonymy . 
In the case of metaphor , ( a ) the selected aspect is a relevant property ;   ( b ) forms an analogy with a property from the target ; and ( c ) the effect is of surprise discovery of similarity between the two concepts  . 
7 References
Brooke-Rose , Christine (1958) A Grammar of Metaphor London :
Secker Warburg.
Dubois , J . , et al (1970) Rhetorique Generale . Paris : Larousse . 
Van Eynde , Frank (1982) Ambiguity . In J . Erlandsen , F . Van Eynde , J . McNaught , H . Somers , and L . Destombes Diction ? ary and Semantics in Eurotra , Eurotra Contract Report ET-ig O10-SEM , European Communities , Luxembourg . 
Fass , Dan C .   ( 1986 ) Collative Semantics : An Approach to Coherence . Memorandum in Computer and Cognitive Science , MCCS-86-56 , Computing Research Laboratory , New Mexico State University , New Mexico . 
Fuss , Dan C . (1987a ) Semantic Relations , Metonymy , and Lexical Ambiguity Resolution : A Coherence -Based Account  . In Proceedings of the 9th Annual Cognitive Science Society Conference , University of Washington , Seattle , Washington , pp . 575-586 . 
Fass , Dan C .   ( 1987b ) Collative Semantics : Lexical Ambiguity Resolution and Semantic Relations  ( with Particular Reference to Metonymy )  . Memorandum in Computer and Cognitive Science , MCCS-86-59 , Computing Research Laboratory , New Mexico State University , New Mexico . 
Fass , Dan C .   ( 1987 e ) Collative Semantics : An Overview of the Current Meta5 Program . Memorandum in Computer and Cognitive Science , MCCS-87-112 , Computing Research Lalx ) ratory , New Mexico State University , New Mexico . 
Fass , Dan C .   ( 1988 ) Collative Semantics : A Semantics for Natural Language Processing  . Memorandum in Computer and Cognitive Science , MCCS-88-118 , Computing Research Lalx ~ ratory , New Mexico State University , New Mexico . 
Fass , Dan C . ( to appear ) An Account of Coherence , Semantic Relations , Metonymy , and Lexieal Ambiguity Resolution . 
In Steve L . Small , Gary W . Cottrell , and Michael K . 
Tanenhaus ( Eds . ) Lexical Ambiguity Resolution in the Comprehension of Human Language  , Morgan Kaufmann:
Los Allos , CA.
Fass , Dan C . and Wilks , Yorick A . (1983) Preference Semantics , Ill-Formedness and Metaphor . American Journal of Computational Linguistics ,  9 , pp . 178-187 . 
Genette , Gerard (1970) La Rhetorique Restreinte . Communications , 116, pp . 158-171 . 
Gentner , Dedre ( 1983 ) S~'ucture Mapping : A Theoretical Framework for Analogy  . Cognitive Science , 7, pp . 155-170 . 
Grice , H . Paul (1975) Logic and Conversation . IP . Cole and J . 
Morgan ( Eds . ), Syntaxamt Semantics 3: Speech Acts,
Academic Press , pp . 41-58.
Grosz , Barbara J . , Douglas E . Appelt , Paul Martin , Fernando C . N . 
Pereira , and Lorna Shinkle ( 1985 ) The TEAM Natural Language Interface System . Final Report , Project 48 65 , Artificial Intelligence Center , SRI International , Menlo Park , 

Hobbs , Jeny R .   ( 1983 ) Metaphor Interpretation as Selective Infercncing : Cognitive Processes in Understanding Metaphor  ( Part 1 )  . Empirical Studies of the Arts , 1, pp . 17-33 . 
Hobbs , Jerry R . , and Paul Martin (1987) Local Pragmatics . In Proceedings of the lOth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( 1JCAI-87 )  , Milan , Italy , pp . 520-523 . 
Honeck , Richard P . , and Robert R . Hoffman ( Eds . ) (1980) Cognition and Figurative Language , Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum Associates . 
Jakobson , Roman , and Halle , Morris (1956) Fundamentals of
Language , The Hague : Mouton.
Johnson , Mark ( Ed . ) (1981) Philosophical Perspectives on Metaphor , Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press Katz , Jerrold J .   ( 1964 ) Analyticity and Contradictioni Natural Language . In Jerry A . Fodor and Jerrold J . Katz ( Eds . ) The Structure of Language : Readings in the Philosophy of Language  , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice-Hall , pp . 519-543 . 
Katz , Jerrold1 . , and Jerry A . Fodor (1964) The Structure of A Semantic Theory . Iu Jerry A . Fodor and Jerrold J . Katz ( Eds . ) The Structure of Language : Readings in the Philosophy of Language  , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice-Hall , pp . 479-518 . 
Lakoff , George , told Mark Johnson (1980) Metaphors We Live
By , London : Chicago University Press.
Levin , Samuel R . (1977) The Semantics of Metaphor , Baltimore :
John Hopkins University Press.
Martin , James H .   ( 1985 ) Knowledge Acquisition though Natural Language Dialogue  . Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applications  , Miami , F1 . 
Martin , James H . (1986) Learning by Understanding Metaphors . 
Proceedings of the 8th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society  , Amherst , Massachusetts . 
Ortony , Andrew ( Ed . ) (1979a ) Metaphor and Thought , London:
Cambridge University Press.
Ortony , Andrew (1979b ) Beyond Literal Similarity . Psychological Review , 86, pp . 161-180 . 
Quillian , M . Ross (1968) Semantic Memopy . In Marvin Minsky ( Ed . ) Semantic Information Processing , Cambridge , Mass :
MIT Press , pp . 216-270.
Reddy , Michael J . (1979) The Conduit Metaphor- . -A Case of Frame Couflict in Our Language about Lml guage  . Iu Andrew Ortony ( Ed . ) Metaphor and Thought , London : Cambridge
University Press , pp . 284-324.
Schank , Roger C . (1975) The Structure of Episodes in Memory . 
In Daniel G . Bobrow and Allan Collins ( Eds . ) Representation and Understanding , New York : Academic Press , pp . 237-272 . 
Searle , John (1981) Metaphor . Iu Mm'k Johnson ( Ed . ) Philosophical Perspectives on Metaphor , Uuiversity of Minnesota
Press : Minneapolis , pp . 248-285.
Stallard , David ( 1987 ) The Logical Analysis of Lexical Ambiguity . Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the ACL , Stanford University , Stanford , CA , pp .  179-185 . 
Stem , Gustaf (1968 ; first published in Sweden 1931 ) Meaning and Changes of Meaning , Indiana University Press:
Bloomington , Indiana.
Tourangeau , Roger , and Robert J . Steinberg ( 1982 ) Understanding and Appreciating Metaphors . Cognition , 11, pp . 203-244 . 
Tversky , Amos (1977) Features of Similarity . l ' sychological
Review , 84, pp . 327-352.
Waldron , Ronald A . (1967) Sense and Sense Development , Andre
Deutsch : London.
Wilensky , Robert ( 1987 ) Knowledge Representation ad Natural Language Processing  . In Makoto Nagao ( Ed . ) Language and Artificial Intelligence ( Proceedings of an International Symposium on Language and Artificial Intelligence hemin Kyoto  , Japan , 16-21 March 1986) , Elsevier Science Publishers , B . V . , ( North Holland ), pp . 367-384 . 
Wilks , Yorick A .   ( 1973 ) An Artificial Intelligence Approach to Machine Translation  . In Roger C . Schank and Kenneth M . 
Colby ( Eds . ) Computer Models of Thought and language , San Francisco : W . H . Freeman , pp .  114-151 . 
Wilks , Yorick A .   ( 1975a ) A Preferential Pattern-Seeking Semantics for Natural Language Inference  . Artificial Intelligence , 6, pp . 53-74 . 
Wilks , Yorick A .   ( 1975b ) An Intelligent Analyser and Under-stander for English  . Communications of the ACM , 18, pp . 264-274 . 
Wilks , Yorick A . (1978) Making Preferences More Active . Artificial Intelligence , 11, pp . 197-223 . 
Yamanashi , Masa-aki ( 1987 ) Metonymic interpretation ad Associative Processes in Natural Language  . In Makoto Nagao ( Ed . ) Language and Artificial Intelligence ( Proceedings of an International Symposium on Language and Artificial Intelligence held in Kyoto  , Japan , 16-21 March 1986) , Elsevier Science Publishers , B . V . , ( North Holland ), pp . 77-86 . 

