Issues in Relating Syntax and Semantics
Daniel JURAFSKY
Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research
Computer Science Division
University of Californiat Berkeley
Berkeley , CA 94720
1. Introduction
The design of a natural language understanding system is dependent on a rich and structured knowledge representation  . Much recent work in computational and cognitive linguistics has focused on representations for syntactic and morphological knowledge  . Similarly , the knowledge representation paradigm has proposed many conceptual tools for the representation of semantic knowledge  . Combining the two in one system , a system for representing linguistic knowledge , is the essential next task for computational linguistics  . This paper will explore some issues which arise in the foundational design of such a representational system  . In using the fundamental building block of the grammatical construction  ( Fillmore 1987 )  , I will reanalyze traditional problems like the passive construction and dative " movement "  , showing how a " construction " solution avoids common problems in moi'e traditional grammatical theories  . In addition , I will suggest how use of an inheritance hierarchy can replace other linguistic tools for abstraction like lexieal rules  , while others can be captured by appealing to shared semantic structures  . I will also touch on the issues of lexicalization in theories of grammar-whether information is redundantly specified in the lexicon  . 
2 . Representation of Syntactic and Semantic Knowledge A complete and explicit description of a language  , a grammar , may be represented in many ways . Rulebase descriptions , for example , describe knowledge of language as knowledge of a set of rules  . In contrast , traditional descriptions in the pre-generative framework assume that knowledge of language can be expressed by a knowledge of structures  . Fillmore ( 1987 ) proposes a return to the traditional notion of the grammatical construction  . Construction grammar aims at describing the grammar of a language directly in terms of a collection of grammatical constructions each of which represents a pairing of a syntactic pattern with a meaning structure  . . . ( p .  3 ) Certainly this approach is standard for the representation f lexical knowledge  . But extending this approach to larger constructions  ( the passive construction , the subject-object construction ) means blur-ing the traditional boundaries between the lexicon and syntactic knowledge  , aview also called for in Beeker (1976) , and Wilensky and Arens (1980) . In the construction view , then , idioms , for example , are simply constructions with less variability than other  , more productive constructions . 
Given that a grammar is a large collection of these pairs  , how are they to be represented7 Here we turn to insights from the field of knowledge/epresentation  . The fundamental metaphor chosen as a foundation for a theory of grammar-meaning correspondences is that of the hierarchical stratified network  . The use of inheritance hierarchies for semantic knowledge is well-established  . Less common , however , is its use for syntactic knowledge ( Although see Flickenger , Pollard and Wasow ( 1985 ) for inheritence in the lexicon )  . Fewer still are systems which have used a structured inheritance network as a representational * Thanks to Nigel Ward and Robert Wilea~ky  . This research was sponsored in part by the Dofe ~ e Advance Research Projects Ageacy  ( DOD )  , Arpa Ordex No .  4871 , monitored by the Space end Naval Warfare Systems Commandlm der Contract No  . 

formalism for both syntactic and semantic knowledge  . Notable exceptions are PSI-KLONE ( Bobrow and Webber 1980 )  , as well Jacobs's (1985) ACE/KING system . 
The economy and elegance derived from having a grammar defined by a collection of structures defined with a single formalism is a strong argument for this type of unified representation  . But this approach , grammatical constructions represented in a unified knowledge-representation formalism  , has a number of additional advantages : Use of a single representation scheme allows the correspom dence between syntax and semantics to be represented in its own tight  . 
The two types of knowledge can be used together in natural language understanding or generation  , thus aiding the development of truly integrated understanding or generation mechanisms  . 
Using the same theoretical mechanisms to account for gen-eralizan'ons in beth syntactic and semantic phenomena encourages the development of unified treatments of linguistic abstraction  . Thus , for example , structured inheri?tance or other abstraction mechanisms can be used as a replacement for syntactic roles  , lexical redundancy roles , and other earlier linguistic tools to capture generalizations  . 
And finally , constructs that were originally motivated for the semantic domain  , construct such as prototypes and category theory can be applied to syntactic knowledge  , following Lakoff ( 1987 ) and his arguments for cognitive grammar . 
The explicit pairing of every syntactic form with a semantic one is extremely useful for such understanding techniques as " rule-by-rule " parsing  . 
It is interesting to note that the two main conceptual primitives of this approach  , the doubly articulated construction ad the semantic network  , both arise directly from some of the earliest work in modem linguistics  , indeed , both are clearly expressed in Saussure's Cours . A construction is precisely a sign in the sense of Saussure  . It consists of a syntactic and a semantic component  , the correlates of h is signifiant and sign if i'e . As for the semantic network , the idea that a theory of meaning could best be expressed by describing the relations among concepts is simply Sauasure's  ( 1966/1916 ) claim that " . . . each linguistic term derives its value from its opposition to all the other terms  . "( p .  88) 2 . 1 . Domains of Knowledge I will refer to the two domains in the network which describe syntactic and semantic knowledge simply as tl ~ Syntactic Domain and the Semantic Domain  . The semantic domain includes categorization of the lexical item ' semantics with respect to the prototypical ontological primitives  ( as an Action , Thing , ete ) . If the construction is headed by a valence-taking type  , such as most Actions , the choice of lexical entry will constrain the choice of case roles for each of the constituents  . Each valence-bearing type in the lexicon has a case frame-a set of case roles such as agent  , patient , or instrument , which it subcategorizes ( Fillmore 1968) . Also assueiated with each entry is an image -seheme  ( Lakoff 1987 ) such as the COrCI'AIN~RS chema , or the PART WHOLE Schema . In addition , alexieal entry is linked to a frame\[Thief\  ] 
Eo~er\]\[Goods\]l~?ame
Domain . . . . - L_____~ . L ~_3 ~- .   .   .   .   . ~_ Lexr ~ obJ
Semantic Syntactic
Domain Domain
Figure 1-Sketch of Syntax-Semantics Relation ( it t the sense of Fillmore 1982 )  . A frame describes the background constituents and concepts necessary for framing the lexical -semantic definition of a concept  . Thus a lexieal entry is linked to a frame which it evokes in the understanding process  , and which helps in associating and organizing concept in the generation process  . 
The representation f the subcategorized constituent elements of syntactic patterns at the Syntactic domain is done by grammatical relations such as Subject  , Objector Complement . 
Grammatical Mapping links relate the Semantic and Syntactic domains  , mapping the actual syntactic realization to each of the semantic constituents of the frame- specifying which constituent maps to the syntactic sul~ject  , object , and obliques . Following is a sketch of how some of these elements might be related  . The grammatical mapph ~ g between the semantic entry for " rob " and its syntactic realization have been simplilied for expository purposes-a fuller description will be suggested when the passive construction is discussed  . 
3 . Accounting for Some Traditional Problems Above : I sketched an outline of a representation for semantic and grammatiea ~ l knowledge  . In this section I give some suggestions toward a more explicit characterization f the representation  . I do this in the context of discussing some traditional linguistic problems which provide insight into and constraints on the design of a representational scheme  . 
3.1. Pass lvq ~
The passive construction in English has been analyzed as a transformational rue  , a lexieal rule , a change in grammatical relations . 
In each of these views , an active sentence like ( 1 ) and a passive like ( 2 )   ( 1 ) Marlo we mixed that perfectly loath some martini . 
(2 ) That perfectly loath some martini was mixed by Marlowe  . 
are related by some sort of rule . Even in the " lexie altheorie such as LFG , the passive and active lexical items are . related by lexical rules which makq , ~ ~ eference to grammatical relations and other syntactic notions  . Thas what these views have in common is an attempt to capture a generalization i language by appealing only to the syntactic component c~f the language  . 
In a construction-type theory , one can appeal to the semantic component ~ o capture the requisite generalization  . Thus the derived predicate adjective ( i e " p assivized " verb ) is related to the verb it mor-phologicaily resembles  , by sharing the same argument structure and ontological category at the Lexleal  . Semantie domain . 
But how exactly does the meaning differ ? And at what level do we express the productivity of the passive construction ? For example  , in a lexical theory like LFG , the passive is a redundancy rule that applies to transitive verbs in the lexicon to produce new lexical entries with passive subcategorization frames  . But as Rice (1987) points out , the criteria by which the passive can be used depend on much more information than can be stored in the lexicon  . For example , the difference between ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) is not present in the lexical entry for sleep . 
(3 ) This bed has been slept in again by that flea -bitten dog  . 
(4)* The living loom was slept in by Mary.
In other words , the criteria for what makes an acceptable passive include more lban just the subeategorization nformation of the verb  . 
Rice gives many such examples , and argues that that the passive con~stmetions makes use of a notion of transitivity which makes reference to the entire conceptualization that an utteranceralizes  . 
A definition of the passive construction would have to include some characterization f the following constraints : 
SEMANTICFUNCFION :- Focus on the most affected participant in the scene  . 
-Construe the verbal process as a property or modifier of this participant  . 
SYNTACTICFORM :- Realize this participant as the subject  . 
-Realize the verb ( in the past participle form ) as a predicate : adjective . 
Note that " most affected participant " must be defined with respect to the prototypical notion of transitivity  . Additionally , the realization of the passive participle as a predicate adjective motivates its use with the copula  ( or with got-note that adjectives can also use this verb with a change-of-state reading  )  . 
This description of the passive construction has been described in such a way that it can be combined with other constructions in a model of language use  . In other words , where redundancy rules in a lexical theory may describe an abstraction which has little to do with a pefforomance model  , here a construction is not present unless it is used  . 
Redundancy-type abstraction can be capture by use of the abstraction hierarchy  . 
Thus in generation , for example , the speaker might choose a frame of participants , a verbal predicate wl fie has signs thematic roles , and choose to focus ou a participant which happens to be assigned a non-agentive role  , or rather one which would prototypically be realized as a direct object  . Then the passive construction might be chosen as one construction to include in the utterance  . Such a model is used by McKeown (1985) . She note the use of the passive construction to focus on a semantic patient when answering question about missiles  , producing " Missiles are carried by water-going vehicles and aircraft  . . . "( p78) . 
Similarly , in a parsing system , the presence of the passive con-would enable reconstruction f the thematic roles assigned to the arguments  . 
3 . 2 . Redundant Information in the Lexicon-Passive Lexlcal 

Although this representation f the passive as a construction which can be combined with other constructions in a model of use is general and elegant  , should we still redundantly specify the passivized versions of verbs in the lexicon ? This relates to the difficult question of when rules are simply redundancy rules  , and when they are necessary for a theory . Two arguments for " compiling out " the lexicon , listing every entry redundantly , are given by Bresnan . The first is to avoid intricate feeding relations among rules  . As I show later when I discuss the relation of the Passive and Dative constructions  , this can be avoided by describing constructions with the understanding that they are to be embedded in a theory of use  . The second is the now classic evidence against the derivational theory of complexity  ( Fodor , Bever , and GaITeR 1974) . The evidence that the understanding process is no longer for passive sentences than for active ones was strong evidence against a traditional transformational model Of course  , this can also be evidence against a derivational lexical model  , if the passive lexical entry is derived from the active one by productive lexical rules  . But this argument does not apply to the construction grammar model  , for the passive sentence is not derived in any fashion from the active one  , but from an underlying semantic onceptualization , ii the same way as the active one . 
However , there are certainly cases where even the most stead fast proponent of syntactic predictability from semantics must agree that the lexicon must include information that might be redundant  . Indeed , as Lakoff ( 1987 ) points out " Our individual grammars may not be structured optimally  . . . That is , a speaker may learn certain constructions by rote rather than fitting them into his grammar as a whole  . " If such lexicalizing of knowledge is necessary in a theory of grammar  , we must have a way of representing it when it does occur  . If , for example , the English lexicon does represent the passive predicate " mixed "  ( as opposed to simply including the passive construction and the semar~tic argument structure for Mixing-Action  ) how would it be represented ? Roughly , using the inhetitence hierarchy to instantiate a new node in ? the lexical-semantic domain of the network  , and then having it multiply inherit from both Mixing-Action and Passive  . Of cours each of these concepts , Mixing-Action and Passive would have to be further fleshed out-Passive according to the construction specification sketched above  , and Mixing-Action with some sort of image -schematic notions  ( Lakoff 1987 and Langacker 1987 )  . But then the new concept Passive-Mixing-Actinn would inherithe conceptual structure of both of these  . 
For example , the ontological Event concerning Marlo we and that martini  , and its two syntactic realizations , can be represented as in Figure 2 . For clarity'sake I have represented the two different syntactic realizations on either side of the semantics  . 
Note that using structured inheritance networks allows the Subject-Agent mapping for Bivalent Verbs to be inherited from the more general Verb -Action mapping  . Future directions for the representation system include the ability to assign preferences to different mappings  , allowing as representation f the agency hierarchy  , and other nonbinary phenomena . 
Talmy ( 1985 ) notes that just as the passive is a productive way of forming adjectives from semantic Actions  , there are also many lexicalized adjectival forms of verbs  , forms not derived from such a productive construction  . Here there is no choice but to use the lexicalized version of the representation  , as a general productive mapping does not exist . Figure 3 shows an example of how such a lexiealized representation might be characterized  . In section 3 . 3 I will discuss the representation of similar such nonproductive derived forms  , nonproductive 3 . 3 . Dative The essential issue in the design of a grammatical representation is how the representation is to be used  . In other words , how construcptions are to be combined in generation  , or how they are to be used in understanding . These issues have not tended to receive a lot of attention  , but a few famous construction-combining puzzles exist  . One such wellknown example is the combination of the Passive with the Dative Shift  . ( or Dative Movement , or Dative Alternation ) . The dative shift , first noted in the early 60' s , involves verbs such as give which seem to allow two different structuring of its complement arguments :  ( 5 ) The bart ender gave a martinito B on d . 
(6) The bart ender gave Bond a martini.
A similar or related rule produces such sentences a  ( 7 )   ( 7 ) I baked my mother a cake . 
In a lexical grammar , such as LFG , these rules are lexical redundancy rules which apply to some verbs like " give " and produce new lexical entries  . In the new entries , the argument which fills the Goalthematic role is realized with the grammatical relation of direct object  , while the Theme role takes the Second Object grammatical reiation  . 
However , many recent semantic studies of these Dative and related example show that there are strong semantic riteria to the application of the Dative constmction ~  ( Greene 1974 , Oehrle 1975 , Baker 1979 , Langacker 1986) . These studies have shown that the feli-citous use of the construction ivolves the Goalor Benefacted argument ending up with some sort of possession of or control over the 
Theme . Langacker ( 1986 ) notes : ( 8 ) Isentawal rusto Antarctica . 
(9) ? Isent Antarctic awalrus.
(10) Isen the zooawal rus.
Here ( 9 ) is deviant because it is difficult oplace a continent in the role of a possessor  . 
(11) I clear the floor for Bill.
(12) ? I cleared Bill the floor.
(13) I cleared Bill a place to sleep on the floor.
Similarly ,   ( 13 ) makes it much easier to conceive of the area of the floorcoming under Bill's control than does  ( 12 )  . 
The point of these examples i similar to the one made by Rice  ( 1987 ) and noted above . The semantic on straints on when a Dative Direct Object can be used cannot be expressed in the lexicon-the difference between  ( 12 ) and ( 13 ) depends on a constmal of the entire utterance conceptualization  . Thus the Dative Direct Object construction is stated as a construction i the grammar whose combination with specific lexieal items comes up only in use  . A rough characterization of some aspects of this construction might be: 
SEMANTICFUNCTION :- Focus on the affectedness of the Goal  ( or Beneficiary )  . 
-Dosoby emphasizing the final control or possession the Goal has over the Theme  . 
SYNTACTICFORM :- Realize the Goal as the Direct Object-Realize the Theme as the Second Object  . 
Given the idea of this semantic on straint , and our representation of the passive constmet in n  , we are ready to explain a more complex problem , that of utterances with both Dative Alternation and Passive constructions  , uchas (14) or (15) . Of course , in the transformation paradigm such examples were handled by rule ordering-if the Dative Movement rule moving " B ond " to object position took place before the Passive role  , a structure like (15) resulted , otherwise one like (14) . 
(14) Bond was given a martiniby the barten der.

Figure 2-Passive and Active Actions
Figure 3-Passive and Deverbal Adjectives ( 15 ) Amartini was given to B on d by file barten der . 
tlowever in a construction-based fmmalism , the interaction between the constructions can be predicted by examining the semantics of the constructions  . Intile Dative rule , the Goal participant must be focused on as having some sort of control over the Theme  . The point is that what i ~ means for a Goal participant to be affected in a Goal-transfer scenalio is for the Goal to be transferred possession or control of tile Theme  . 
For differentypes of scenarios ( or I dealized Cognitive Model ( Lakoff 1987 ) ) , then , transitivity means different hings . Rice ( 1987 ) takes note of this when she proposes three cognitive domains with separate tra  , lsitivevent prototypes : the physical , mental , and social domains . 
For example , for Locative-transfer scenarios , what it means to be affected by the action is somewhat different  . As many writers have noted ( an long them Anderson 1971 and Foley and Van Valin 1984  )  , in the ( b ) sentences the locative arguments ( the truck and the wall ) can be understood as completely affected by the verbal action  . In other words , the truck completely filled with hay , the wall completely covered with paint . The ( a ) sentences do not have this reading . 
For example , (16a ) Bill loaded hay on the truck.
(16b ) Bill loaded file track with hay.
(17a ) Harry sprayed paint on the wall.
(17b ) Harry sprayed the wall with paint.
Thus " affected " here means something about completion  . Of course , this is not surprising . Both Rice ( 1987 ) and Hopper and Thompson ( 1980 ) do list telic actions as more prototypica Uy transitive than a telic ones  . But the important point is that what it means to be affected by an action is different for different action-scenarios  . 
Given some such theory of affectedness in transfer -scenarios  , we the Goal in this way . But an affected object is exactly the sot ~ of ' parti-cipan the the Passive is us ~ tor focusing on  . Thus sentences like ( 14 ) and ( 15 ) can be characterized simply by whether or not they use certain constructions  . Sentence ( 15 ) is not lormed by syntactic feeding rules , but by the combination i language use of these two constructions  . 
3.4. Nominalizations
The correspondence btween syntax and semantics i encoded by mapping relations which link groups of syntactic m~d semantic or tsti-tuents in the network  . To take a lexical example , the semantic primitive ' idog " might be related to the syntactic entity which instantiates the noun " dog " by one of these relations  . Likewise , more complex con--structions are mapped between the syntax and semantics  . So , for example , the syntactic onstruction \[ Adj Noun \] might be related to a numher of semantic onstructions  , pecifying the various prototypical ways of combining the semantic inforlnation associated with adjectives and nouns  . A complete t beory of this correspondence would involve showing however y syntactic onstruction was the realization of some sem  , ' mtic object . But clearly fire appropriate syntactic on struction to begin out investigations i the lexical category  . Note that a lexical category is a grammatical construction like any other  , differing only in the very frequency of its use . 
It has long been observed that a rough correspondence an be drawn between lcxical categories and an ontological partitioning of the workl  . Everyone is familiar with the traditional grammarians ' definition of a noun as a word representing a " person  , place or tiring " . 
Naturally , the exceptions to this simplistic analysis are abundant  . For example , nominalizations such as destruction secm to be more related to actions than to " things  . "But the many exceptions to this analysis caused the real semantic nature of lexical categories to receive less attention than it deserved  . As Miller and Johnson-Laird (1976) note , " perhaps\[traditional grammarians\]did not really mean that everything labeled by a noun is a concrete object  ; perhaps they me~mt that when you use a noun to label something  , you tend to conceptualize it as if it were a concrete object  ( p527 ) " . In the spirit of this Whorfian idea that lexical categories reflect a set of ontological categories  , the Lexical . .
Semantic Domain includes a set of such ontological primitives as Events  , Actions , and Things . Mapping relations in the network relate these primitives to syntactic onstructions  . In prototypical cases , like the noun " table " , what is semantically a Thing is mapped to a consti~tuent that is syntactically a noun  ( or more properly a noun phrase )  . 
Thus the lexical categories of language are the prototypical realizations of these underlying sernantic regularities  . These " prototypical realizations " are simply a version of what Lakoff  ( 1987 ) called " central principles " . Note that they amalso similar to Chomsky's ( 1986 ) " Canonical Structural Realizations " of semantic oncepts  . 
However , as each kind of ontological category can be mapped to different syntactic ategory  , it is also possible to have cases of non -prototypical mapping  . Thus what have traditionally been called productive nominaliza fions are non-prototypical mappings between Actions and different types of nouns  . A nominalization like John's destroying the city is related semantically to an an Action  , but is mapped inform to a noun phrase . The Action " destroy " maps into the noun " destroying "  . Similarly , remember that the passive construction involved the reanalysis of an Action as a a predicative adjective  . 
As for noun phrase mappings , as Ross (1973) showed , there are a number of noun phrase constructions which are bear different relations to the prototypical noun phrase  . He discusses eight differentypes of noun phrases which hear ranges along a Nouniness Squish  . These NP's are that-clauses , for NP to V , embedded questions , gerunds , possessive gerunds , action nominals , derived nominals , and Nouns . Ancxaminao tion of the syntactic ategory Noun Phrase is essential to any discussion of relations between Actions and Nouns  ( 1 use Action here only as an example - of course other ontological categories like States axelion for linguistic and conceptual knowledge is that such models as Lakoff's  ( 1987 ) eatego ~3 , theories for semantics are automatically applicable to syntactic knowledge  . 
But here I will only discuss a few of the lexical issues il wolved in nominalizations  , and in particular the difference between what Ross called " action " and " derived " nominals  , or the productive and non- . 
productive nominalizations.
For example , the verb " destroy " has two lexical nominalizations the productive orger undive " destroying "  , and the derived or nonproductive " destruction " . The nominal use of the gerundive " destroying " is productive in the sense that if a new verb entered the language  , say " to xerox " , the native speaker would automatically be able to speak about " xeroxing "  , Chomsky ( 1970 ) proposed that the relationship of these two types of nominals to their corresponding verb be captmed in two diflerent ways  . The relationship between productive noniinalizations and verl  ) s was captured by means of a transformational rule  . Non-productive nominalizations ( like " destruction " ) are related to the verb by sharing similar phrase struetu ~ es  . To accomplish this , Chomskypn ) posed the X-Bar Convention , the use of generalized cross-categorical phrase structure rules  . 
In the network fl'a mework , the generalization between verbs and productive nominalizations i handled by structure sharing- they shale descriptions of arguments ructure in the semantic domain  , just as with the passive examples . So a network expressing the relation among " destroy " and " destroying " and their thematic structure would be similar to the passive xample in Figure  2  . 
Indeed , the abstraction hierarchy allows a way to provide for the creativity of language without explicit rules  . Imagine the it wention of a new Action , xerox . Now the concept xerox is inserted under the mo~e general concept Action  , and inherits from it the mapping relation to the nominal total  . A possible representation is outline in Figure 4 . 
Note that this methodoes not involve a " rule " to capture its gen--eralizations  . This may call into question the classic Chomskyan argument from creativity to the need for rule systems  . 
In this way we can handle nonproductive nominalizations a well as productive ones  . A characteristic feature of these nonproductive nominalizations it hattbeir semantics is rarely predictable tom the semantics of the underlying verb-they tend to differ in idiosyncratic ways  . From a diachronic element , we would say that the nonproductive nominalizations have undergone ~ mantic drill The net  . 
-work representation f the synchronic results of semantic drift are simoply the creation of a new node which inherits fi'om Thi~Jgat the Semantic level  . But note that although this new node may differ in various elements of its semantics  , it will rarely drift far enough to change its thematic structure  . Thus the similarity in the argument structure between on-productive nominalizations and verbs is not a syntactic fact  , as predicted by Chomsky 1970 , but a semantic one . This would predict that nonproductive nominalizations which have drifted far enough to have changed their arguments ructure would also differ syntactically from the related verh  , This is indeed found to be the case . 
So , for example although we are perfectly comfm~able in saying  ( 18 ) or ( 19 )  , the meaning of " laughter " has drifted c ~ xought at it is uncon~brt ~ able to use it with an object in  ( 20 )  . 
(18 ) Who is stup id enough to laugh at Marlo we ? ( 19 ) Laughing at M'l r lowe is a dangerous proposition . 
(20)* Laughter at Marlo we israre.
A redundant lexicalized representation of the nOno productiw : nominalizatlons might look much like the one for adject i  ;  , cs in Figme 3 . 
Noun\]-7-T~- .   .   .   .   . h\I'"?"<L/---//IN\-\-Si;,
I _' .   .   .   . : %_-2: s1 xeroxe ~ xeroxed(~bject
Semantic Syntactic
Domain Domain
Figure 4-Inheriting 3 . 5 . Probgem and Fiature Directions Tim deriva ~ km of verbs from nouns citrates in a markedly dif -lerent way from dm derivation of nouns from verbs  . As Clark and Clark (19"/9) note , a speaker ill using a denominal verb denotes a situation where " the parfait noun denotes one role ill the situation  , midtile remaining surface arguments of file denominal verb denote othe roles in the situation  . " A sketcll of a solution would involve view -mappings which relate not  , ns to their derived verbs in the Semantic domain . In this domain , a heavily context-dependent process creates a new lexical entry through a metapt ! orical mapping fl ' om the underlying Thing  . 
Thus this phenomenon may be much more process -oriented than tile construction model currently allows for  . 
Another il ; l poltant issue is tile ability to model prototype ffects and other cogniiive issues ill categmy theory  . " file ISA links which I have sketched in file lexiealized n lodels are only an impoverished model of categorization  . A solution will probably involve some solution such as adding n mnerical weights to nodes and to links to express typicality weights  . 
4. Coll cluslon
This patx : r has suggested the barest skeleton of a representation system for linguistic knowledge  . I have discussed the semantics of two important constructions  , Passive and Dative , and have roughly them sketched out in ~ , m chawayas to give us an insight into how they can be combined in a model of language use  . In addition , I discussed how tile information and coustrainls in these constructions might be redundantly specified in the lexicon  . These problems have offered usaglimpse of what soli of constraints difficult linguistic problems will set for rclnesentational theories  . In explor hlg these constraints we gain important insights imp the requirements for a model of our use of natural language  . 
5. References
Andrews , Avery 1985 . " The major functions of file noun phrase " ill
Shopen 1985
Becket , Joseph 1976 . " The Phrasal Lexicon " . fil Proceedings of lnter-disciplinary Workshop on Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing  . R . Schank and B . L . Nash-Webber ( eds . ) . 
Cambridge , Ma~s . Jurte 1975.
Bobrow , D . G . and Allan Collins .  1975 . Representation ad Understanding . New York : Academic Press the Nominalization Relation Bobrow  , R . J . and Bonnie Webber , " Knowledge Representation for Syntactic/Semantic Processing  , " AAAI 1980 . 
Brachman , Ronald J . and James G . Sctmlolze .  1985 . An Overview of the KL-ONEK nowledge Representation System Cognitive Science  9 pp 171-216 Bresnau , Joan (1977) " The Passive in Lexical Theory " , in The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations Cambridge  , Mass . 
MIT Press.
Chomsky , Noam , 1970 " Remarks on Nominalizations . " In R . Jacobs and P . Rosenbaum , cds . , Readings in English Transformational
Grammar . Gitm , Walthan LMass.
Chomsky , Noam .  1986 . Knowledge of Language . New York , Praeger . 
Clark , Eve V . and Herbert J . (1979), " When Nouns Surface as Verbs , "
Language , Volume 55, 4.
Cole , Peter & Jerrold Sadock , eds . 1977 Grammatical Relations . ( Syntax and Semantics 8) . New York : Academic Press Comrie , Bernard 1976 . Aspect Cambridge , Cambridge Univ Press Fillmore , Charles , draft , On Grammatical Constructions . University of
California , Berkeley 1987.
Fillmore , Charles . 1982 " Frame Semantics , " in Linguistics in the Morning Calm , Linguistic Society of Korea , Korea . 
Fillmore , Charles .  1977 . The case for case reopened , in Cole &
Sadock , eds . pp . 59-81.
Fillmore , Charles . 1968 " Tim Case for Case " . In Universals in Linguistic Theory . Edited by Emmon Bach and Robert T . Harms , 1-90 . 
Chicago : Holt , Rinehart and Winston
Fedor , J . A . , T . G . Veber , and M . F . Garrett .   1974 The Psychology of Language : An Introduction to Psycholinguistics and Generative 
Grammar . New York : McGraw Hill.
Foley , William A . , and Robelt D . Van Valin , Jr , 1985 . " Information packaging in the clause " in Shopen  1985 Foley , William A . , and Robert D . Van Valin , Jr , 1984 . Functional Syntax and Universal Grammar Chicago , University of Chicago Press Gazdar , G . , E . Klein , G . K . Pullum and I . A . Sag .  1985 . Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar Oxford , Basil Blackwell . 
Green , G . M .  1974 . Semantics and Syntactic Regularity . Bloomington,
Ind . Indiana University Press.
Gruber , Jeffrey .  1965 . Studies in lexical relations . MIT . Dissertation mar . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press . 
Jacobs , Paul S .  1985 . A Knowledge-Based Approach to Language Generation  . UC Berkeley Dissertation , also Report 86/254 Computer Science Div . , University of California Kay , Martin 1979 . "Functional Grammar " Proc . 5th Ann . Meeting of the Berkeley Ling . Soc .  142-158 . 
Lamb , Sidney 1964 . "Stratificational Linguistics as a Basis for Machine Translation " in Makkai and Lockwood  1973 Langacker , Ronald .  1986 . An Introduction to Cognitive Grammar
Cognitive Science 10, 1
Langacker , Ronald .  1987 . Foundations of Cognitive Grammar Stanford University Press  . 
Makkai , Adam , and David Lockwood 1973 . Readings in Stratificational Linguistics . University of Alabama Press Marantz , Alec P .  1984 . On the Nature of Grammatical Relations
Cambridge , MIT Press
Miller , George A . and Philip N . Johnson-Laird .  1976 . Language and Perception . Cambridge , Mass . Harvard University Press Norvig , Peter .  1986 . A Unified Theory of Inference for Text Understanding  . UC Berkeley . Dissertation . 
Oehrle , R . T .  1976 . The grammatical status the English dative alternation  . Doctoral dissertation . MIT . 
Perlmutter , Davided .  1983 . Studies in Relational Grammar IChicago,
University of Chicago Press
Perlmutter , David and Paul Postal .  1983 . "Towarda Universal Characterization of Passivization " in Pedmutter  1983  . 
Pollard , Carl and Ivan A . Sag .  1987 . Information . Based Syntax and Semantics : Volume 1: Fundamentals , Stanford , CSLI . 
Rice , Sally Ann .  1987 . Toward a Cognitive Model of Transitivity . 
Doctoral Dissetl ~ ation . University of California at San Diego . 
Ross , John Robert .  1973 . " Nouniness " . in Osamu Fujimura , ed . , Three Dimensions of Linguistic Theory , pp .  137-258 . Tokyo : TEC Corporation Saussure , Ferdin and de 1915/1966 . Course in General Linguistics , transl . Wade Baskin . McGraw Hill New York , 1966 orig 1915 . 
Shopen , Timothyed .  1985 . Language Typology and syntactic description , Vol 1 . Cambridge Cambridge University Press Talmy , Leonard .  1985 . " Lexicalization Patterns : semantic structure in lexical forms " in Shopen  ( 1985 ) Vol . Il L Wilensky , R . , and Arens , Y .  1980 . PHRAN -- A Knowledgebased Approach to Natural Language Analysis  . University of California at Berkeley , Electronics Research Laboratory Memor and um #UCB /ERL  M80\]34  . 
Woods , William A .  1975 . What's in a link ? in Bobrnw and Collins 1975 . pp 35-82
