Stylistic Grammars in Language Translation
Chrysanne DiMARCO and Graeme HIRST
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto , Canada M5S 1A4
Abstract
We are developing stylistic grammars to provide the basis for a French and English stylistic parser  . 
Our stylistic grammar is a branching stratificational model  , built upon a foundation dealing with lexical , syntactic , and semantic stylistic realizations . Its central level uses a vocabulary of constituent stylistic elements common to both English and French  , while the top level correlates stylistic goals , such as clarity and concreteness , with patterns of these elements . 
Overall , we are implementing a computational schema of stylistics in French-to-English translation  . 
We believe that the incorporation of stylistic analysis into machine translation systems will significantly reduce the current reliance on human postediting and improve the quality of the systems ' output  . 
1 Introduction
Current machine translation ( MT ) systems deal only superficially , if at all , with the translation of style . At best , MT output is syntactically correct but strictly neutral into ne  . The expressive ffects contained in the source text  , together with the associated meaning , are lost . 
The translation of style involves two complementary and sometimes conflicting aims : ? Producing a style appropriate to the particular target language  , while ? Preserving the original author'sty listic intent  . 
The seaims require an understanding of the internal stylistics of both the source and target languages as well as the comparative stylistics of the language pair  . 
Our focus is the development of stylistic grammars that will provide the basis for an English and French stylistic parser  . The ultimate aim is the design and implementation of a computational schema of stylistics in French to English translation that will act as a posteditor to modify the output of a basic MT system to achieve the  above-menti6ned complementary aims . 
We believe that MT is an excellent vehicle for research into stylistics and that the incorporation of stylistic analysis into MT systems will significantly reduce the current reliance on human postediting and will improve the quality of the system output  . 
2 A Definition of Style for
Machine Translation
Our approach to a definition of style is non -literary  , group-based , and , most important , goal-directed . A " group-based " approach emphasizes the stylistic standard shared by a body of writers  , rather than the characteristics of an individual author  . Examples of group styles can be found in newspape reporting or scientific writing  . By " goal-directed ' , we mean that we seek to explicitly correlate specific goals of style such as clarity  , informality , or abstraction with particular syntactic structures and lexical choices  . 
Why focus on group . based style ? For MT , where we expect odeal with large amounts of similar types of text  , the analysis of group style is of more interest hantheidio syncratic style of anyone writer  . However , group style can be subdivided into two major types  , literary and functional ( or pragmatic ) . Analysing literary group style , as in a work of fiction , for example , is too ambitious a task for MT . Functional group styles , on the other hand , are correlated with particular types of situations and area more realistic objective  . 
To fulfill both of the complementary aims , we require a view of style that is goal-directed . A recent example with this view of stylistics is the PAULINE system described in Hovy  \[1987\]  . PAULINE generates text that conforms to given pragmatic and stylistic constraints  ; the system is goal-directed , able to correlate such stylistic goals as for -mallty  , simplicity , and respect with the characteristics of the text produced  . 
In French-to-English translation , as an example , we must account for the fact that French is generally more abstract  , static , and precise while English tends to be concrete , dynamic , and more lenien towards vagueness ( Vinay and Darbeln et\[1958\] )  . For the same text , therefore , the French source language may express an abstract style while the English target language must be more c~ncrete in its lexical and syntactic hoices  . If we are to properly translate from French style to English stylelthen we mus ~ understand how syntactic structures and ' lext cal choices correlate with particular stylistic goals or aspects  , such as abstraction , concreteness , statieness , and ' dynamism . 
1483 A Computational Schema of
Stylistics in Translation
We haw ; restricted our interest in style for MT purposes to concerns ~ hatare pragmatic  , group-based , and goal-directed . The next questioniq : how is this restricted ef i -nition to be reflected in a computation M schema of stylistics in machine translation ? The schema that we propose is outlined in Figure  1  . The process of stylistic translation is language- -independent but l ~' ench-to-English translation is the particular instantiation that we have studied in detail and from which we will give examples  . 
In the first stage of the process , French internal stylistics is considered . For each stylistic translation unit , i . e . , the current section o ? text within which the styler cmains constant  , in the French source text , we determine its stylistic contempt , i . e . , a correlation of lexicai choices and syntac . -tic structures with a particular stylistic goal and a particular styli  . '* tic intensity . 
In the second stage , we use knowledge of French-English comparative stylistics  . For each stylistic translation unit in the French source text  , given its stylistic con--text , we detor , nine the appropriate English stylistic goal correspohding to the possibly different French style  . Default rules of comparative stylistics are uscd but these can be broken if the situation warrants  . 
The third and final stage requires an understanding of English internal stylistics  . For each stylistic translation unit in the unedited English translation  , we edit lexicai choices mid syntactic structures to achieve an appropriate style that corresponds to the French source style  , but is good English style as well . 
The main feature of the schema is that the translation of style  , according to our definition , requires three distinct bodies ot ! stylistic knowledge : la Yench internal stylistics  , French-:E ; nglish comparative stylistics , and English inter-nat stylistics . The internal stylistics of a language tells us how to choose syntactic structures and lexical items to express a particular aspect of style  , such as clarity or economy . From comparative stylistics , we gain an understanding of when the target text should express a different style from the source text and when the styles should remain the same  . 
The need for three kinds of stylistic knowledge may not initially appear obvious  . Why not justed it the output of a MT system to remove awkward syntax and achieve a more natural flow of words ? The answer is that to preserve the author'sty listic intent  , while meeting the stylistic demands of the target l ~ a guage  , we must determine the author'specific stylistic goals and consider how these different aspects can be realized syntactically and lexically in the tin ' get language  . Thus , we must analyse the original source text to make certain we understand the source language style before trying to translate  . 
To implement the computational schema of stylistics in translation shown in Figure  1  , knowledge about stylistics must be ~ ,  . ccumulated , created , and organized into a formal representation . 
Our first task was the creation of a vocabulary of English stylistics  . The definition of concepts and the attempt to orgaa fize them into a recognizable structure were necessary to understanding the problem of translating style  . 
The development of the vocabulary proceeded in t and em with the collection and creation of stylistic rules  . 
A further complication in the codification of French  , English ~ and comparative stylistics is the need to build dif-ferentiNets of rules for lexieal choice  , syntactic structure , and semantic structure . This knowledge goes to make up stylistic grammars --formal representations of the stylistic rules  . These grammars provide a systematic description of the lexicai  , syntactic , and semmltic patterns that differentiate the various stylistic goals  . 
With these format bodies of rules to analyse the original source and uncdited target texts  , the strategy to be used by a French and English stylistic parser can be planned  . Ultimately ,   M1 components will be integrated in a posteditor that will accomplish the actual translation of style  . 
4 Stylistic Grammars
As a first step towards constructing a grammar of style  , we defined the basic vocabulm-y shown in Table 1 . 
The naive approach towards struct m'il ~ gan extended vocabulary of stylistics would be to organize terms by syntactic category  . For example , the concepts of detached ad-jccti'val clause , piled-up adj e . ctives , and adjectival phr ~, ~ e are all . significant in stylistics . However , not all terms ' ; associated with the same syntactic ategory necessarily shat'e the same stylistic significance  . 
We have therefore taken a more stylistically relevant approach by introducing stylistic elements  , which provide both are . cans of structuring the vocabulary and a link bc . -tween these vocal mlary terms and stylistic goals . Furthermore , a single vocabulary of stylistic elements will be used to describe lexical  , syntactic , and semantic realizations . 
Style , we believe , is achieved through the effects inherent in individual components  ( absolute shape )  , the effects created by the absolute position of components  ( whether , for example , the component is initial , medial , or final ) , and by relationships ( relative shape ) between the eomponent ~ of a stylistic constituent  . These relationships fall into at least two basic types : balance and harmony  , including the concordant and discordant elements in a constituent  , and dominance , the number of central shapes in a constituent . 
Each type of relationship is expressed by stylistic elements  . Table 2 shows samples . All the stylistic elements that we have defined , about twenty , have been recognized in our sample English data . Given these elements , we have a means of organizing the terms in our stylistic vocabulary : each term is associated with one or more stylistic elements of the w ~ rious types  . 


Original ~- Poor-quality
French source text English target translation
Fre~nch \], French ~ E . ng-~internal ~ comparative ~--- ~ internal \] stylistics\]\[stylistics\]\[stylist_ics  . , l
FIRSTSTAGE SECONDSTAGE THIRDSTAGE
Figure h A Computational Schema of Stylistics in Machine Translation Stylistic constituent : A passage of text  , associated with a particular stylistic goal , within which the style remains constant , e . g . , a sentence or paragraph . 
Stylistic component : A part of a stylistic constituent  , e . g . , a phrase or clause . 
Stylistic shape : A stylistic component usually regarded as stylistically expressive  ,   . 
i.e ., having a particular stylistic effect.
Stylistic texture : A stylistic constituent with an overall stylistic effect  , formed by particular types of relationships between its individual shapes  . 
Stylistic equivalence class : A set of stylistic constructions having the same type of stylistic shape  . 
Interval : The stylistic distance or difference between any two shapes in a stylistic constituent  . 
Modulation : A shift within a stylistic constituent from one type of stylistic effect  , e . g . , concord , to another , e . g . , discord . 
Tableh Basic Vocabulary of Style
Monopoise : A syntactically complete stylistic texture with no disturbance in canonical order  . 
Counterpoise : A stylistic texture containing an offset  , a shape which perturbs the stylistic balance by disturbing the canonical order  . 
Homopoise : A counterpoise in which the offset supports the overall stylistic balance  . 
Polypoise : A counterpoise in which the offset opposes the overall stylistic balance  . 
\[ Concord:









A stylistic shape expressing a unity of style , agreement , accord , stability , and not requiring resolution . 
A modulation with a narrow interva~t ween two shapes  , each expressing consonance __A stylistic shape expressing a disunity of style  , disagreement , contention , conflict , incongruity , and requiring resolution . 
A modulation with a wide interval.
A stylistic texture in which the initial and terminal shapes belong to the same stylistic equivalence class  . 
A stylistic texture in which two or more successive shapes belong to the same equivalence class  . 
A terminal modulation which moves from a stylistic discord to a relative concord  . 
A terminal modulation which moves from a stylistic concord to a relative discord  . 
A stylistic constituent having a stylistic shape but syntactically incomplete  . 
A stylistic constituent with a single dominant shape and no accompanying subordinate shapes  . 
A stylistic constituent in which the components are organized around a single dominant shape  . 
A stylistic constituent organized around two or more dominant shapes  . 
Table 2: Examples of Stylistic Elements pose a branching stratifieation M modeh As the foundation  , we have three branches : lexieal , syntactic , and semantic stylistic grammars , each with its own vocabulary of stylistic shapes and rules relating its type of shapes  . 
At the central level , we use a single vocabulary of constituent elements of style  , as in Table 2 , to build rules relating these elements to patterns of lexical  , syntactic , and semantic stylistic shapes . This level is the unifying core of the overM1 stylistic grammar for we believe that people also use the same principles  , the same constituent elements , to express tyle both in English and French . 
Finally , at the top level , we construct rules to correlate individual stylistic goals with patterns of stylistic elements  . 
Together , these levels form a language-independent goal -directed stylistic grammar for language translation  . 
4.1 A Syntactic Stylistic Grammar
For each of the branches in our goM-directed stylistic grammar  , we must define a vocabulary of stylistic shapes and rules for putting these shapes together  , t to w c v e r , a " stylistic shape " wil\[be defined differently for tile lexical  , syntactic , and semantic branches . 
For the , ; yntactic stylistic grammar , we have built a catalogue of sentence components ( syntactic stylistic shapes ) organized into equivalence classes by stylistic effect  , a quality inherent in a component which makes it a stylistic shape  . But what , in syntactic terms , gives each component a particular stylistic effect ? How should we define " stylistic shape " at the syntactic level ? We have adapted Quirk and Greenbamn's  \[1979\] use of syntactic integration as the basis for our definition of syntactic stylistic shape  . They catalogue most adverbials , some prepositional phrases , and some clauses as either adjunct , conjunct , or disjunct de I ) ending on tile degree of inherent integration . We have chosen to base the syntactic stylistic effect of all sentence components on their charac --teristic integration  . We have therefore xpanded the catalogue to define a syntactic stylistic vocabulary classifying components as either adjunct  ( strongly integrating )  , conjunct ( less integrating , but still having a connective ffect ) , disjunct ( neutral ) , or " antijunct " ( having a disconnective effect ) . 
We then adopted Crystal and Davy's \[1969\] " stylistic " grammar as the foundation for our syntactic stylistic grammar  . Their grammar is built upon a vocabulary of stylistically significant syntactic omponents  . It also recognizes the role of pre-and postmodificationisty listic effects  , a feature we have expanded in our grammar , apo > tion of which is shown in Table 3 . 
Now , having a base syntactic stylistic grammar which builds sentences out of syntactic stylistic shapes defined by their characteristic integrating effect  , , we can c . on struct , at the next level , a grammar which relates constituent ebements of style to patterns of syntactic stylistic shapes  . 
Syntactic exmnples for this level are given in Table  4  . 
Resolution -- ~ ( Initial Discord ) + , ( Medial Discord ) + , Final Concord
Dissolution - - - - 4
Initial q-Medial Concord , Final Discord
Initial q-Medial Concord --+
Diase hematic . . . ( i . e . , diaschcmatic for some initial portion )
Final Concord ---+... Diaschcmatic
Initial Discord--~
Discordant Major ,   ( Dependent clause ) * t ( Discordant dependent clause )  +  , Major , (Dependent clause )*
Medial Counterpoise ---~( VOC) , Co , mter poisal S , P , ( C ) ,   ( A ) + Medial Discord ISA Medial Counterpoise with Counterpoisal S = Discordant Counterpoisal S Final Discord--~  . . . Discordant Major Dia schematie - - - + Simple Concordant Sentence 
Cycle ---+ x + , Major , y + where x and y are instances of Dependent clauses and are in the same stylistic equivalence class  . 
Table 4: Sample Constituent Element Stylistic Grammar
Clarity - ~ Dia schematic I Resolution
Clarity not--*Initial Discord+Medial Discord Concreteness ---* Aschcmati  ( : I Medial Counterpoise I
Dissolution I Cycle
Table 5: Sample Grammar of Stylistic Goals And , finally , attile top level , we define rules which <: or relate stylistic goals with patterns of constituenteh'ments  . 
Syntactic clarity and syntactic ( mcreteness , for example , are correlated positively and negatively with tile stylistic element shown in Table  5  . 
Taken together , tables 3 ,   4 and 5 provide a portion of our goal-directed stylistic grammar for English internal stylistics  . 
The use of this grammar can be illustrated by the analysis of the following two samt  ) le sentences : they arc dia schematic and thus express clarity  . T iffs first examph , illustrates imitative dependent clauses : This painter did his beat to adjust to the tastes of the day  , softening his line and painting gracefully , converting to sfuma to and casting about for art -lover seven as far away as in Spanish America \ [ Manchester Guardian  , February 14 ,  1988 , p . 15\] . And , in this example , we see imitative postnmdification : Silvia , a commanding woman inher50's , a shrew falsely mel-lowed by religion , promptly organiaed prayer sessions on the lines of Tupper w are meetings\[adapted from Manch -Simple Concordant Sentence ISA Sentence with only Complete=Simple Concordant Complete Complete ~   ( Dependent clause ) * , Major ,   ( Dependent clause ) * I Minor Simple Concordant Complete ~ Simple Concordant Major  ,   ( Concordant dependent clause ) * Major ~ ( Conjunction ) * , ( A ) * , ( C ) , ( VOC ) , S , P , ( C ) , ( A ) +
Simple Concordant Major -- ~( Conjunction )* , Simple Concordant S , P , ( Simple Concordant C) , ( Concordant A)
Discordant Major ( Conjunction )* , ( Discordant A ) + , ( C ) , ( VOC ) , S , P , ( C ) , ( A ) + ( Conjunction )* , ( A ) * , ( C ) , ( VOC ) , ( AuxVerb ) + , ( C ) , S , P , ( C ) , ( A ) + ( Conjunction )* , ( A ) * , ( C ) , ( VOC ) , P , S , ( C ) ,   ( A ) + Discordant A~D is junctor Antijunct adverb I Disjunct or Antijunct adverbial construction I Disjunct or Antijunct dependent\[adverbial \] clause S ~ Nominal group IPro noun I Dependent \ [ noun \] clause Simple Concordant SISAS with only  ( ( Nominal group --- Simple Concordant Nominal group  ) IP ronoun ) Counterpoisal SISAS with only Nominal group = Counterpoisal Nominal group Discordant Counterpoisal SISA Counterpoisal Swith Nominal group = Discordant Counterpoisal Nominal group Nominal group ~  ( Premodification a ) Noun ( Postmodification ) * I Pronoun Simple Concordant Nominal group ISA Nominal group with  ( Premodification n - -= Simple Concordant Premodification n  ) and ( Postmodification = ( Simple Concordant Postmodification ) Counterpoisal Nominal group ISA Nominal group with Postmodification =  ( Counterpoisal Postmodification ) + Discordant Counterpoisal Nominal group ISA Counterpoisal Nominal group with Postmodification  =   ( Discordant Counterpoisal Postmodification ) + Simple Concordant Premodification ISA Premodification with only Adjunct or Conjunct Premodification 

Adjunct Postmodification n--~Dependent\[ relative \] clause \] Nominal relative clause I Adjunct dependent\[adverbial\]clauseConjunct Postmodification n  --4 Nonfinite construction IC on junct dependent \ [ adverbial \] clause INominal " that " clause I Preposition *+ Nominal group Disjunct Postmodification n----* Verbless clause\[ Disjunct dependent\[adverbial \] clause Antijunct Postmodification n ~ Adjective Simple Concordant Postmodification -- ~ Adjunctor Conjunct Postmodification  ( Imitative Postmodification ) \] Imitative Postmodification
Imitative Postmodification x , ( Conjunction ) , y , ( Conjunction ) , ( z ) where z , y , z are instances of Postmodification ad are not instances of Antijunct Postmodification adarc in the same stylistic equivalence class  . 
Counterpoisal Postmodification ISA Postmodification with all e~ccpt Conjunct Postmodification  #Preposition *+ Nominal group Discordant Counterpoisal Postmodification ISA Counterpoisal Postmodification with only 
Antijunct Postmodification
Concordant dependent clause ~ Adjunct or Conjunct dependent clause \] Imitative dependent clauses Discordant dependent clause ~ Disjunct dependent clause \] Antijunct dependent clause Adjunct dependent\[adverbial\]clause--~time -adverbial-clause ~ time-adverb  , Major place-adverbial-clause--~place-adverb , Major purpose-adverbial-clause ---* purpose -adverb  , Major time-adverb---* since , usually , before , after , until , when ,   .   .   . 
place-adverb ~ where , wherever , ...
? purpose-adverb ~ in order to , soas to , ...
Table 3: Sample Syntactic Stylistic Grammar with Modified Crystal and Davy Notation stylistic grammar also gives patterns of stylistic elements which tend to oppose a certain stylistic goal  . For example , an initial discord , a disjunct dependent\[nonfinite\]clause , followed by a medial discord , an antijunct postmodification , a postposed adjective , tends to suppress clarity in the following . ~ entence : To illustrate the benefits of assertive-ness  , politicians , eloquent , capture our interest . 
In these next two sentences , we see an effect of syntactic concreteness , an attempto express the immediacy of the world in the syntactic structure  . The first sentence contain same dial counterpoise : Now demons  , whatever else they may be \[ nominal relative clause \]  , are full of interest . The second example contains a dissolution : And the rain descended\[simple concordant major \] and the floods came  , and the winds blew , and beat upon the house ; and it fell :\[ concordant dependent clause due to the imitation \] and great was the fall of it \[ discordant major due to the inversion of the subject and predicate \]\[ Matthew  ,  7:27\] . 
We can now begin to see how our vocabulary of constituent elements ~ the centra level of our stylistic grammar  , will apply to the development of a semantic stylistic grammar  . In the following two sentences , for example , we see seman ~ , ie counterpoise , the main idea interrupted by a secondary one : The university attended by the Prime Minister  , one of the finest law schools in the country , is the alma mater of many prominent politicians . Compare this with : The university attended by the Prime Minister  , a set of buildings with the architectural charm of a prison  , is the alma mater of many prominent politicians . In the first case , the offset supports the main idea so that there is an overall effect of stylistic concord but  , in the second example , the intruding phrase is semantically and stylistically discordant  , In more subtle ways , we can correlate stylistic elements with patterns of semantic structure  . In the following sentences , note the difference in order of components between  11 are gardg dans lejard in parl a porteouverte and its English translation  , He gazed out of the open door into the garden . In French , the result comes first , then the means , while English follows the order of the images , like a film of the action \[ Vinay and Darbeln et 1958\]  . We would say that that are three types of semantic stylistic shapes composing the sentence : hegazed  , out of the open door , and into the garden . In the English sentence , the modulations between shapes seem small , so that there is a gradual unfolding of images , an effect of concreteness , while the French structure contains a pattern of modula-tions characteristic of abstraction  . 
So far , we have put forward stylistic grammars as the formal representation fEnglish and French internal stylistics  . This approach as led us to organize a stylistic vocabulary describing sentence components in terms of stylistic shapes and then to define rules relating stylistic elements to patterns of these shapes  . The next step , associating stylistic goMs with stylistic elements allows us  , in effect , to correlate syntactic structures with these goals  . 
With an explicit correlation between syntactic grammar rules  , stylistic gramma rules , and stylistic goals , we can now propose a strategy : for the English and French stylistic parser that we will construct  . The syntactic rules do the driving but partial stylistic decisions can affect the direction of the syntactic parse  . That is , once a stylistic rule has been partially recognized  , we can narrow the search space for constructs to complete the rule  . As the syntactic rules analyse sequences of syntactic structures  , these structures can then be recognized as sequences of stylistic elements  , the components of stylistic rules . In tandem , the stylistic rules will pick up a sequence of stylistic elements mid associate it with a stylistic goal  . The idea of tandem rules in language analysis is developed by Hirst  \[1987\]  . This approach to integrating syntax and semantics has been adapted to syntax and stylistics  . 
5 Summary
Our recent work has been the construction of a goal-directed stylistic grammar for English internal stylistics  . 
Our current focus is an extension of the grammar for French internal stylistics  . As well , we arc using a single vocabulary of constituent stylistic elements as the guiding principle in the development of a semantic stylistic grammar  , the second branch of our stratificational model . 
Our use of stylistic gramraars has allow cdusto propose a strategy for the French and English stylistic parser which will eventually form part of an editor to accomplish the actuM translation of style  . 

For discussion , helpful ideas , and comments on earlier drafts ~ we are grateful to Brian Fitch  , Diane Horton , and Eduard Itovy . 
This work was supported in part by a gran to the second author by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 

References\[1\]Crystal , David and Davy , Derek . Investigating English Style . Longmans , Green and Co . Limited , 1969 . 
\[2\] Hirst , Graeme . Semantic interpretation and the resolution of ambiguity  ( Studies in natural language processing )  . Cambridge University Press , 1987 . 
\[3\] Hovy , Eduard Hendrik . Gene'rating Natural Language Un~der Pragmatic Constraints  . PhD thesis , Department of Computer Science , Yale University , March 1987 . 
\[4\] Quirk , Randolph , and Greenbaum , Sidney . A University Grammar of English , Longman Group Limited ,  1979 . 
\[5\] Vinay , J . -P . and Darbelnet , J . Stylistique comparded ufran ~ aiset del ' angla is . Didier , Paris , 1958 . 

