A COOPERATIVEYES NOQUERY SYSTEM FEATURING DISCOURSEPARTICLES 
Kjell Johan S/E B ~
Seminar fiJrnatt J rllch-sprochllche Systeme
TiJblngen *

Norges allmenn vlten skop ellge for sknlngs r~d

Cooperative dialog systems will offer extended answers to questions  , that is , they will volunteer information not explicit ly asked for  . A complete response will be complex and the member sentences will evince an extensive parallel  , the indirect answer substituting an alternative for a focus in the question  . Research on discourse particles has shown that they are necessary to ensure coherence between adjacent sentences evin-cing an extensive parallel  , that is , that they reflect discourse relations as given in complex answers  , so that such answers emerge a score contexts . Thus the proper mode of representation for discourse particles in a system coincides with the framework of coopera-tive question -answering  . The PASSAT system centers on the r61e of particles in characterizing and reflec-ting relations such as underlie complex response  . 
Discourse Particle Semantics
Discourse particles are meta expressions in a natural language : They express discourse relations  , which are necessary properties of ( complex ) discourses , that is , they refer to things in the language and not to things in the world  . It follows that they do not influence truth conditions  . Instead , they affect coherence : When occurring in a complex discourse such that the discourse relation " contradicts " its meaning  , a discourse particle may cause incoherence . 
? Edison Invented the telegraph.
Marconi also invented the phonograph.
Conversely , discourse particles can cause coherence too : When one does not occur in a complex discourse such that the discourse relation " entails " its meaning  , an incoherence comes about which the occurrence would prevent  . What causes that incoherence is the occurrence of the empty  , or zero , particle . 
So nonempty particles are sometimes necessary to reflect discourse relations  , in other words , they substitute positive for negative presuppositions  . 
? Edison Invented the telegraph.
He invented the phonograph.
And , those presuppositions do not refer to the world but to the environment of discourse  . On a classical truth presupposition , enriched by a sensitivity to context , the empty particle in the example presupposes that Edison did not invent the telegraph  . But then , he in fact did not , so the incoherence is not explained . 
Similarly , on classical terms the particle in the former example presupposes that Marconi invented the telegraph  , but then , he in fact did . 
* The paper Is based on research done In the project L/LOG  , financed and supervised by IBM Germany . 
So discourse particles , empty or not , react not to what is or is not the case but to what is or is = lot supposed to be the case : To the context  . The proper context category for the discourse particle rategory is a complex sentence : A sentence pair  . Any two sentences in sequence occasion the empty or some nonempty discourse particle in front of or with irl the second sentence  . Thus a language in a model theory of discourse particles will consist in a pair : 
L = < SP , DP >
SP is a set of sentence pairs sp , the individual con~stants , and DP is a set of discourse particles dp includ ing the empty particled pO  , the predicates ; and for any dp and sp , dp(sp ) , the application of dponsp , is to represent the occurrence of dp in sp . An interpretation rule is to state a necessary condition for the coherence of any dp  ( sp ) in terms of tile meaning of sp and the meaning of dp  . Thus the model in the theory will consist in at r iple: 
M =< DR,S,h >
DR is a set of discourse relations ,  #is , ~ n assign m ~ n ?; mapping constants , i . e . sentence pair ~ , onto member ': , of DR , and I ~ is an interpretation mapping predicate ; : , i . e . discourse particles , onto subsets o ~ DR . The , d  ~ , -notation of any element of DP dp is defined as Lhes ~ of discourse relations b  ( dp )   . The interpre ' ~ tion rtd . ,: . 
states that for any sp , dp , dp ( sp ) is only coherent if S ( sp ) is not an element of b ( dp ' ) for any dr ' different from dp . 
It is assumed that the denotations of the discou ~' . , ; eparticles - the elements of the picture of DP under'h-are all disjunct  , i . e . that for any dpl , dp2 . in DP , the intersection of P ( dpl ) and P ( dp2 ) is empty . 
Thus for any sp and dp such that ~ e ( sp ) is in P ( dp )   , dp ' ( sp ) is incoherent for any dp ' different from dp ~ This means that a sentence pair instantia Ungadi ~ rcourse relation that belongs to the denotation of a particle is only coherent if occasioning the parUcle  , in other words , that a particle is necessary wi~h respect to every discourse relation in its denota-~ion  . 
As DP contains the empty particled pO , this principle corresponds to a negative presupposition  . 
So there are discourses necessitating this particle or other in virtue of the relations they instantiate  . 
A discourse relation is an abstraction on the v~ay the two members of the sentence pair compare to each other  . Any two sentences can be segmented into a COl~rt , a depart , and a report , meaning the portion common to both sentences , the distinct portion of ~ tt ~ first sentence , and the distinct portion of tile second sentence  . The common denominator of discourse relations in the denotation of any nonempty particle i ~ that the de-and the report a reminimal : That the two sentences differ in only one description  . Discourses necessitating nonempty particles are characterized by an extensive parallel  . Importantly , polarity serves as an extra parameter to dif ferentiate specific discourse relation classes  . 
Marconi Invented the telegraph , ?( but ) he didn't Invent the phonograph . 
Discourse relations encode information on two other parameters : Whether the de-and the repart are in a semantic relation  ( scalarity or hyponymy ) such that one sentence entails the other ( negation exempt )  , and , if so , whether entailment is left-to-right or reversely  , and if not , whether they are in a semantic relation ( exclusion ) such that one sentence entails the negation of the other  , or the two sentences are compatible . 
These four features-polarity distribution accounts for two-give rise to sixteen cases  , thirteen providing slots for German discourse particles : /< C  , D >/?\+ < C , R > sogor /> </ und zwar - < C , R > abet + < C , R > also-<C , R > contradiction /* < C , R > contradiction v ^ < v ~ <-< C , R > also * < C , R > auch^-<C , R > abet ~ . + < C,R > ober ~-< C,R > ouch
V ^+ < C , R > sondern - < C , R > ouch\>/+<C , R > contradiction > </~-< C , R > erstrecht\+<C , R > aber - < C , R > elnmol/

C = copart , D = depart , R = repart ; */- = positive/negative polarity ; > <= depart and repart a reordered :>= R>D ( * < C , R > entails * < C , D >) , <= R < D(?<C , D > entails + < C , R >) ; v ^= depart and repart are not ordered : v = D and R exclude each other  ( * < C , D > entails -< C , R >) , ^= D and R do not exclude each other (*< C , D > and * < C , R > are compatible) . 
Complex Response : The Basic DP Situation It is desirable to equip a computer system to execute the semantic theory sketched above  . There are several possible approaches to this , but one embodies decisive advantages . That is a particular generative approach . 
It is a cornerstone of the theory that discourse particles not only introduce requirements on contexts but also have a communicative necessity  ; that contexts require them in that the nonoccurrence can be as d amaging to coherence as can the occurrence  . In representing the model in an automatic process it is especially desirable to capture this aspect  . 
One way to go is to have a program test surface -language inputs and give notices of error whenever incoherence occurs  . On this course , every piece of information is produced by the user  , who must be acquainted with the theory in order to obtain an interesting reaction  . Or one can have a program generate particles in accordance with the syntax and semantics of the contexts it generates  . 
Again , there are more than one way to go : The input can be of a general nature  , e . g . a description of a discourse relation , or it can be specific , e . g . 
a pair of discourse representation structures . Either way , the user has to specify the context unit to be generated  , a complex discourse with a parallel , as long as she addresses it directly at some level  . 
However , once such contexts are embedded in a communicative setting to motivate them independently  , there is no need to prescribe anything . There is another , Indirect generative approach which promises spontaneous and systematic generation of proper contexts  , and an interesting application : Dialog systems capable of cooperative question answering  . 
This is an independently motivated field of research in Artificial Intelligence and in Computational Linguistics  , seeking to simulate that crucial feature of human dialog behavior that answers are far from always formed in strict accordance with the semantic structure of the question  . Frequently in actual conversation , answerers are expected to elaborate , in particular on a yes or a no . A realistic yesno query system will be prepared to offer additional information in the form of extended answers  , and several systems in this spirit have recently been devised  . 
As it happens , complex responses are key contexts for discourse particles  . A complete response consists in a sentence sequence  . This means that the proper context category for particles is given a priori in this framework  . Moreover , the context unit as such , a con~plex discourse with an extensive parallel , is given as well because a simple response is inadequate just in case corresponding information on a relevant alternative to a focus in the query is available to the responder  . As far as wh-questions are concerned , the focus coincides with the wh-position . As regards yesno questions , it may be any item suitable as a depart in a part icle scheme  . It is adequate , then , to supplement the simple response by the corresponding information  . The sentence frame of the question carries over from the direct to the indirect answer as the focus  ( and possibly polarity too ) is exchanged . 
( Occasionally , the focus ( depart ) is empty so that the alternative ( report ) adds a piece of information , typically an adjunct .   ) Thus complex response creates discourse relations such as necessitate discourse particles in a systematic way and on independent grounds  . It may be considered the basic situation of utterance for discourse particles  . 

There is consensus that an extension to a response is appropriate if and only if the information it conveys is relevant  . The challenge consists in defining what constitutes relevance in each single case  . It is a prime desideratum to develop general guidelines for selecting alternatives  . Relevant means relevant to the goal of the dialog  , and any sensible approch will take Grice's Maxim of Quantity as a point of departure : Make your contribution as informative as is required for the current purpose of the exchange  . There are various ways of exploiting this pr inciple  . One is to relate information to the assumed practical purpose of the query so as to suggest surrogate courses of action in case the direct answer is negative  . Such a strategy is pursued by KAPLAN (1983) . Alternatives will be identified on the basis of a functional synonymy : - Do you hovearnat chl- No  , but I hove a lighter . 
Another approach , adopted by JOSHI et al (1984) , is to focus on world knowledge so as to correct false default inferences licensed by the direct answer by stating exceptions to normal courses of events  . 
Alternatives will be identified by way of stereotypes : - Is Tweety ablrd ~- Yes  , but he cannot fly . 
In the theory of scalar conversational Impl l cature  , applied to question-answering by HIRSCHBERG ( 1985 )  , the Maxim of Quantity is revised to refer to the strength of an utterance : Make the strongest relevant claim justifiable by evidence  . The concept of relevance remains , but it is anchored to linguistic knowledge by a semantic relation : Strength as surfacing in scalarity  . 
~ ; uchastrategy embodies two clear advantages : A stronger version of a question  , whether positive or negative , cannot rationally be known to the questioner in advance  ; and , the search for a stronger version can be guided by rules which must be represented in a reasonably intelligent system any how  , namely , lexical relations and meaning postulates . 
Semantic scales are defined by tuples of lexical items linearly ordered by entailment  . Consider as an example the pair possible and probable and a query Is It possible or Is It probable for some proposition It  , and assume the adjective to be the focus . The answer no to the former question will answer the other one too  , as will the answer yes to the latter question . 
The answer yes to the former question will not , nor will the answer no to the latter , yet a responder is required to make the strongest relevant claim  , and provided the other item counts as relevant , there is a straightforward way to do so :- Yes , It Iseven probable . 
-No , It Is not even possible.
In fact , if the maxim is revised to require the responder to assess the strongest relevant proposition  , two more responses emerge as adequate , again on the condition that the other item counts as relevant : - Yes  , but It Is not probable . 
-No , but it Is possible.
In a wider sense , semantic scales are defined by tuples of lexical items arranged by entailment in a hierarchy of set inclusion and exclusion  . Consider as an example the quadruple Scandinavian  , Danish , Norwegian , and Swedish , and queries Is/tScand/nav/an etc . for some referent It , and assume the adjective to be the focus . The answer no to the first question will answer all the other questions too  , as will the answer yes to any subsequent question  . The converse is not the case , yet a responder is required to make the strongest relevant claim  , and provided the other items count as relevant , there is a straightforward way :- Yes , C and In fact ) . Danish ~ Norwegian ~ Swedish . 
-No , ( but ~ Norwegian ~ Swedish ~~
Danlsh/Swed/sh // Dan/sh / Norweg/on.
-No , not Se and lnov/an at all.
The proviso was made that the other items count as relevant  , as the responses were given on the maxim " Assert /assess the strongest proposition relevant "  . 
Note , however , that a certain measure of relevance is secured by the circumstance that that proposition is not the strongest proposition as such  , corresponding to a contradiction , or just any strong proposition , but one among a limited number stronger than another  , in fact , exactly one as polarities go , corresponding to a ( true ) sentence entailing the question supplied with a sign and obtained by exchanging one item  . 
So a link is established between the direct and the indirect answer prior to relevance considerations  . 
Relevant alternative candidates are selected on the basis of independently accessible linguist ic knowledge  . 
The relevance question is reduced from What is relevant ? to Isth/s relevant ?  ; the discovery procedure is transformed into a decision procedure  , and this process is low-level and domain- independent  . 
Items that are interconnected by a semantic relation such as scalarity and hyponymy seem to tend to be mutually relevant so that irrelevance cases can be considered exceptions to the rule  . It is not impossible that the assessment of a higher value is irrelevant once a value is confirmed or that the assessment of a lower value is uninteresting once a value is denied  , but it is as improbable as it is that items arr ived at on more pragmatic considerations are i r relevant  . 
Likewise , one cannot exclude that the confirmation of , say , a subkind once a super k in disconfirmed or the confirmation of a sister kind or the denial of a super-kind once a natural kind is denied is uninteresting  , but one can think it equally improbable . So regularly-by default-when there is a scale or a hierarchy around the item in question  , all items in that scale or hierarchy will enter into the set of propositions at issue  , the nonmeaning postulates , defining the interrelationships in terms of entailment  , one al-ternative can be identified as the informative independence on the distribution of polarities in that set  . 
With reference to the parametric discourse relations and particles paradigm presented above  , the sl < etched cases of complex response cover f ive relation classes  . 
Each of these is strongly motivated in tile framework of cooperative response in so far as any complex answer patterned on it is appropriate in principle  . Given a query < C , D > where D is the focus , any complex response +/- , */-< C , R > where R is an alternative such that the parameters are chosen accordingly - and truth fully-is basically adequate  . 
When moving upward on a scale , in case the stronger statement is verified , the particle sogar applies ; otherwise , if it is falsified , the particle aber . 
When moving downward on a scale , in case the weaker statement is verified , the particle a betapplies again ; otherwise , if it is falsified , the particle elnmel . 
When moving d6wnward in a hierarchy and the statement is verified , the specification particle und zwar applies . When moving upward and the statement is fals if ied  , the particle iJberhaupt applies . Finally , moving side ways to verify , sondern is the particle . 

The PASSAT System
The tiny database query system PASSAT , consisting in one PROLOGII program comprising approximately  100 clauses , is designed to demonstrate a register of rules regulating choices  , of alternatives to lexical items and of particles of discourse  , in accordance with semantic relations and in terms of polarity  . It is devised to imitate a natural performance in three respects : - Quality  , the search for the true response ; - Quantity , the quest for the exhaustive response- information on a relevant alternative  ; -Coherence , the search for the discourse particle ; and lexical entailments underlie all three aspects  . 
So while the system is primarily intended as an illustration of a facet of center piece functions of German discourse particles  , it is at the same time a small but systematic model of complex response principled on independently available knowledge  . 
PASSAT exploits a sortal hierarchy of natural kinds and a scalar structure of ranked items to arrive at relevant alternative data and to select appropriate discourse particles to bridge the gaps  , borrowing its terminology and database facts from shipping  . Such computations rely on a variety of modules : -Lexicon  . Here , semantic relations between and among lexical items  , such as sortal sameness , " antonymy " ( Disjunctivity : Difference and sortal sameness  )  , hyponymy , intersectivity ( cross concepts , uniting different-sort items ) , " synonymy " ( comparability in a strict sense )  , and scalarity , are designated and defined in their own terms . 
-Meaning postulates , where semantic relations introduced in the lexicon are defined and interpreted by entailment  , that is , in terms of ( necessary ) polarity in view of the sentence context . 
-Alternative relations , stating conditions on which one item constitutes an alternative to another in terms of lexical relations and  ( simple ) polarity in view of the sentence context . 
-Particle relations , stating sufficient conditions for the output of a certain particle in terms of alternative relations and  ( simple ) polarity in view of the sentence context . 
-Response rules , evaluating original queries and perceived and received substitute queries  ( alternatives in the sentence context ) in terms of database facts or meaning postulates . 
-Knowledgebose , containing the minimal amount of primitive fact  ( no facts that are deducible from other facts on meaning postulates  )  , representing ( predominantly positive ) polarity . 
damp fschlff , motors chlff , segels chlffschraubenda mpfer , ra~damp ~ bark , brlgg , schoner , vollschlff This is one of the two sortal hierarchies PASSAT is acquainted with  . Questions to be understood by
PASSAT are of the form-Ist xP ? where x is an individual name  ( that of a ship ) and P is a predicate , e . g . a common noun , so throughout it is a question of a constant's membership in a set  . 
First answers ( jaorneln ) are by a large measure calculated by way of meaning postulates defined on lexical relations like hyponymy or antonymy  , and these same relations go in turn to compute second answers  . 
Once a first response is found , PASSAT goes on to seek alternatives : Provided that answer was yes  , it seeks to enhance the specificity of the predicate  , e . g . to restrict the set denoted by the noun by moving downward in the sortal hierarchy : - Ist for tunase gelschlffl-Jo  , undzworbark . 
In case polarity is negative in the first run  , the system seeks to increase informativity by e . g . 
searching for the set to which the individual does belong  ( moving side ways in the sortal hierarchy ) :- Ist preclos a bark?-nein , sondern brlgg . 
These two basic principles are enriched and extended by a recursl vemechanism : As soon as an alternative to the subject of interrogation has been determined  , the search goes on for an alternative to that alternative  , entering into the rble of the subject of interrogation  , and so on :- Ist concordlada mpfschlffl- neln  , sonderns egels chiff , und zwarschoner . 
IIII-Ist prudent lasch oner?-neln,

I ~ berhauptnl chtsegels chlff , ~ Jrs on dern damp fschlff , 
I und zw arr add a mpfer.
On the other hand , PASSAT is acquainted with another hierarchy too . The concepts hip is subdivided on two equivalent points of view  , the locomotion and the function : frachtschlf f  , possaglers chlff , spezlals chlff\[tankschlff , schiJttgutschlff , stt Jck gutschlff two hierarchies : For a constant to be a member of such a set  , it must belong to both sets denoted by the two components : fracht do mpfer  , I~s sogler do mpfer , motor tonker IA nd here , a context sensitivity inside the complex answer has been installed  ( by means of an extra variable position in the al ternative relations  ) to permit a second and a third alternative to the first answer to be stalled until the sequences of " lower-level " alternatives to the second and third answers  ( first and second alternatives ) are exhausted , to be readdressed with bocktrocklng : -/ stp rudentiomotorton ker?-neln  , so neer , ch , rr . /und z worrod do mpfer , \ tund ouchnlcht to nkschlff , 
I iJ be r h o u p t n l c h t f r o c h t s c h l f f ,
Is on dern possoglers chlff , also possogler do mpfer . 
-/ stpose id on possogler dompferl-neln , z word a mpfsc ~ iff , Iundz worschroubendo mpfer , \ obernlcht possoglers chlff , 
Is on dern frochtschlff,
Iundz worsti Jckgut frachter , elso frocht dompfer . 
The conditions under which a cross-concept like f rocht dompfer is an  ( ultimate ) alternative to another are rather complex insofar as it requires numerous steps to come to a conclusion as to whether to draw a conclusion by use of Mso  ( approximating English so )  . It depends on the arrangement of both of the two intersected kinds  , in casu , dompfschlff and frochtschlff , in relation to the other pair , say , motors chlff and to nkschlffuniting to motor tonker  . 
-/stpose/donmotorton ker?-neln , nlchtmotorschlff , sondern dompfsch/ff , und zwm's chroubendo mpfer , undouchnlcht to nkschlff , sonderns tiJ ckgut frachter . 
Thus frocht damp fer is no alternative to motor tanker because the two corresponding component kinds to nkschlff and frochtschlf f are downward specific  ( the former is more specific than the latter )   , whereas the converse is not the case- motor tonker does form an alternative to f rocht do mpfer as frochtschlff and to nkschlff are upward specific  ; the latter is more specific than the former . 
\ [ gestron det , gescheltert\]
This is one of two scales known to PASSAT . Again , comprehehsible queries are of the form Is ? xP ? where x is an individual name and Pa predicate  , but this time the predicate is not a common noun but a  ( perfect participle ) intransitive verb . Once a primary answer is given to a query , a search starts for " an alternative answer once over  , and given a positive primary response , the system seeks , again , to enhance the specificity of P , only now not by seeking to restrict the set by downward movement with respect to a hierarchy but by upward movement on the scale  , to assess the next value irrespectively of whether it is valid or not : -/ st precloso gestron det l-/o  , so gorgescheiter t . 
-/ st for tune gestron de t?-Jo , obernlcht gescheiter t . 
Given a primary answer with polarity negative , however , as before , PASSAT tries to increase the information value nevertheless through strengthening the statement  , but not by searching for confirmation side ways or a more comprehensive denial upward in a hierarchy  , -/ stprudent/oschoner?-neln , fJ berhouptn/chtsege/sch/ff , sondern domp fschlff .   .   . 
but by assessing the next value in the downward direction on the scale induced by the verb :- Ist for tune geschelter t?-neln  , a betgestrond et . 
-Istfell clogeschelter t?-neln , nlchteln molgestron det . 
Now there is another scale known to the system : \ [gekentert  , gesunken \] And the two scales are associated with one another in a structure which presents a pragmatic case of alter-nativity  ( the only one in the system )  . More precisely , the items gekenter t and gestrandet are in a symmetric  . 
relation termed syn as a pseudo-synonymy case , with the consequence ( and purpose ) that in case the-primary or secondary-answer to either one of the lower values-as a query or alternative-is negative-in the first or the second instance  , and the answer to the other lower value is posit ive  , then that other lower value is treated as an alternative  , on the consideration that in view of the higher goal of the query  , i . t will be of interest : - Ist concordlage strond et ?- neln  , wohlobergekentert , so gorgesunken . 
-Istconcordlogescheltert?-nein , nlchteln molgestron det , wohlobergekentert , so gorgesunken . 


The test of any natural-language system , whether generative or interpretative , is in its measure of generality or flexibil ity  , in its aptness for expansion and extension in various dimensions  . As far as the present program is concerned , these dimensions can be identified with a range of linguistic modules : Morphology  ( 1 )  , lexicon (2) , syntax (3) , semantics (4) , and pragmatics (5) . 
(I ) Deliberately , no morphology has been built into the system . Relevant items would have been ( a ) the indefinite article ( e/n )  ,   ( b ) gender variants ( eln/-e ) and ( c ) coherent forms ( keln/-e )   . These refinements are omitted in order not to pay undue complexity to such in essentials  , though the implementation would be feasible . 
(2 ) The lexical items and relations are not casuistic in the sense that they are unrepresentative of hierarchies and scales in German  . Parallel structures can be added or substituted without difficulty  . Only , real hierarchies and scales do not exist in isolation but in integration in a taxonomic superstructure  . One problem is that a concept ( e . g . sch/ff ) may be open to specification in sequence ( e . g . Ja , und z worse gel'-schlff , und zwarvo/Ischiff ) , another is that a concept ( e . g . schiff ) may be open to specification in two directions ( e . g . \] o , undzwer possaglers chlffund motors chlff ) . Before the concepts ch/f fenters into PASSAT in the obvious way  , a method must be developed to determine how far and which way relevance is to reach in each case in view of the user's interest  . 
(3) Deliberately , only a minimal syntax has been built into the system  . This is , again , to accentuate the central principles , but more to not create the impression that interesting syntax problems have been solved  . Thus the rules of ellipsis have not been explored  . PASSAT uses to talellips is throughout = though not on deliberation  , but by necessity . It could instead use partial ellipsis discriminately to put out answers like neln  , zwer/sts/eelnx , und z were lny , a bets/e/stke/nz , s/e/stiJber hauptkeinu , sonderne/nv = yet it would still do so not by f irst generating and then reducing complete structures but by producing those strings bl indly  . 
4 ) The system suffers a serious shortcoming in not assessing the lexical relations in meaning postulates and alternative relations in terms of the sentence context semantic structure  . By accident , predicates ( common nouns or verbs ) occur in predicative position with the copula throughout  , so the semantic relation invariably comes to the surface  . As soon as contexts are introduced where the noun e  . g . serves to restrict quantification over ab in ary relation  , or , as a simplification , it is an argument of a binary relation , as in hat for tu not use/nebrigg ( compatible with fortune tushot elne bark )   , the relation ceases to carry semantic relevance , and the system must consider some semantic representation to judge whether meaning postulates and alternative relations apply  . 
(5 ) The pragmatic open problem lies in where the focus lies  , more exactly , to which component of the question any alternative can be considered relevant in particle terms  , what part is the plausible depart in the first instance  . At the current state of the system , the focus is located once and for all in the one -place predicate P  , yet it is a common place that yesno questions are systematically ambiguous insofar as their topic -focus structure has consequences for what constitutes a proper substitute  , namely , a sentence where the topic stays the same and the focus changes  . Thus it could be that a question like Ist concordlael nebark is intended to  , in the event of a negative response , elicit not a continuation likes on dernel n schoner but an extension like ober for tuno Ist elne-for example  , in case the higher goal of the query is to ascertain that there is a bark available for a higher purpose still  . In principle there are means in a language to posit focus  , and those means may be syntactical , like word order or clefting . Such are not , however , available to PASSAT , being a German-interfaced system , so without the phonology Germans use it is necessary to exploit a memory of past exchange  , so as to address the higher goal of the query directly  . 

HIRSCHBERG , J . (1985) A Theory of Scaler Impll coture . Univ . of Pennsylvania diss . 
JOSHI , A . /B . WEBBER/R . WEISCHEDEL . (1984) " Preventing False Inferences " , in Proceedings of COLING 18 tI . 
KAPLAN , J .   ( 1983 ) " Cooperative Responses from a Portable Natural Language Database Query System "  . 
in Brady/Berwick ( eds . ): Computational Models of Discourse , Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press , 167-208 . 
SP ~ B  ~ , K . J . (1988) A Model for Discourse Particles . 
LILOG Report n , Stuttgart : IBM.

