Co~npiexity ~ Two-Leveli ~/ il ~ phology and Finnish
Kimmo Koskemliemi
Kemieth Ward Ctmrch
Coling 88

Although , Two-Level Morphology has been tbup , dinp ~ actice to be an extremely efficient method for processing Finnish words onvely smffil machines  ,  \[  Barton86\] has recently shown tt ~ entethod to be NP-haxd . This paper will discuss Bak-ton's theoretical argument  , and explain why it has not been a problem for us in practice  . 
1 .   77re Two-Level Model ' ll~et woolevel model provides a language independent framework for describing phonological mid morphological phenomena associated with word inflection  , derivation and compounding . The model can be expressed illtenos of finite o state machines  , and it is easy to impliement . \] he model has , in fact , two aspects : ( 1 ) it is a linguistic formalism for describing phonological phenomena  , and ( 2 ) it is a computational apparatus wtfich implements descriptions of particular languages as operalional systems capable of recog ~ fizing and generating word-fonns  . 
The model consists of three representions ( nmq , hological , lexical and surface forms ) and two systems ( the lexicon and phonological rides ) rela ~ hlgthem : molphemes in word-fonn




I ~ exk:Jmp ~' esentafion of word ..fom ~


TWO~LEVEI , RULES
I ) surface representation f word4om ~" f h c surface representation is typically a phonemic representation of wind-form  , but sometimes graphic or wriRen forms are used instead  . The lexical representation is an underlying ( postulated ) morphophonemic representation of the word stem and affixes  . 
These two representation seed not be identical , and in case there are phonological alternations in tl-e language  , these representations are more or less different . The task of the two-level rule component is to account for any discrepancies between these representations  . 
The task of the lexicon component is twofold.
First , it specifies what kinds of lexical representations are possible according to the inventory of known words and their possible inflectional tb~ms  , plus derivations aud compounds according to productive rules  . The second task of the lexicon is to associate proper morphemes to lexical representations  . The task of the lexicon component is considered to be universal  . 
Many languages can be quite well described with rather simple lexiconstmct mes  . The lexicon needed for Finnish is basically a set of sublexicons  ( for stems , case endings , possessive suffixes , clitic particles , tense of verbs , person , etc . ) . Each entry specifies all continuation lexicons which are possible after that morpheme  . 
This scheme is equivalent to a(pat , ly nondetenninistic ) finite state transition et work . 
Two ? level rules compare lexic , -d and surface representations . The pmtitive plural of the Finnish wold lasi ' glass ' is lase ja  , Tiffs form might be represented as a stem lasi plus a plural ending I plus a partitive ending A  . The correspondence would be then be : 1 as iIA lexical 1 as ej a surface The ~ e are three discrepancies here : the stem final i is realized as e  ( and not asilike in singuler for ths )  , the plural I is realized as j instead of i , and the partitive A is realized as the back vowel discrepancy is described with a two-level rule : i : e <=> I : This states that lexical i is realized as surface if and only if it is followed by a lexical I  ( the plural affix )  . The plural I itself is a bit different from other i's because it is realized as j if and only if it occurs between two surface vowels  ( let
V denote the set of vowels):
I : j <=> : V_:V
The realization of partitive A is an instance of Finnish vowel harmony  , which causes endings to agree e in frontness or backness with stem vowels  . Thus A has two possible realizations : it must be a back vowel iff there are back vowels in the stem:\[A:aIO:o\]U:u \] => : V back: V nonfront *_ The set V back contains the back vowels a  , o , and u whereas V nonfront contains anything that does not have one of/i  6 i J on surface . 
Phonological two-level descriptions have been made for about twenty different languages up to now  . Only about a third of them can be considered to he comprehensive  . Typically a description co : ": , ots of 7-40 rules ( English and Classical Greek being the low and high extemes  )  . 
A special compiler is used for converting these rules into finite state transducers  ( Karttunen , Koskenniemi , and Kaplan ,  1987) . The resulting machines are similar to the ones that were hand compiled  , eg . in ( Koskenniemi , 1983) . 
2 . Barton's Challenge \ [ Barton86\] poses a challenge to find the constraint that makes words of a natural language asy to process : " The Kimmo algorithms contain the seeds of complexity  , for local evidence does not always show how to construct a lexical-surface correspondence that will satisfy the constraints expressed in a set of two-level automata  . These seeds can be exploited in mathematical , 3 36 reductions to show that two-level automata can describe computationally difficult problems in a very natural way  . It follows that the finite-state two-level framework itself cannot guarantee computational efficiency  . If the words of natural languages are easy to analyze  , the efficiency of processing must result from some additional property that natural languages have  , beyond those that are captured in the two-level model  . 
Otherwise , computationally difficult problems might turn up in the two-level automata for some natural language  , just as they do in the artificially constructed languages here  . In fact , the reductions are abstractly modeled on the Kimmo treatment of harmony processes and other long-distance dependencies in natural languages  . "\[ Barton 86 ,   p56\] We suggest hat words of natural anguages are easy to analyze because morphological grammars are small  . As Barton shows , two-level complexity grows rapidly with the number of harmony processes  . But , fortunately , natural languages don't have very many harmony processes  . 
Any single language seems to have at most two harmony processes : ? zero  ( most , i e . some 88% of languages ) , ? one ( Uralic , Tungusic , Sahaptian ) or ? two ( most Altaic languages ) Even in principle , a three dimensional vowel harmon y is rather improbable  , because it would lead to a total ( or almost total ) collapse of distinctions between vowels . In most languages there are not enough distinctive features in vowels to make a four-way harmony even possible  . We have not found any reliable accounts for more than two harmony-like processes in a single language  . 
Normally , most complexity results describe space/time costs as a function of the size of the  . 
input . Claims in support of the two-level model are generally of this form  ; speed is generally measured in terms of numbers of letters processed per second  . Barton's result is somewhat nonstandard ; it describes costs as a function of the size of the grammar  ( or more precisely , the number of harmony processes ) . 
Complexity results generally don't discuss the " grammar constant " because any particular grammar has just a fixed  ( and very small number ) of rules ( such as harmony processes )  , arid tirositisn't very helpful to know how the algorittm a would pert brm if there were more  , because there aren't . 
If phonological grammars were laxge and complex , there could be efficiency problems because processing time does depend on the size and structure of the grammar  . However , since phonolo ~ pcalgrammars tend to be relatively small  ( when compared with file size of the input )  , it is fairly safe to adopt the grammar co , a slant Lssump fior L3 . Barton's Reduction Lettm consider the satisfaction reduct on in \[  Barton86\]  . Barton used a grammar like the one below to reduce two-  . level generation to the satisfaction problem . 
In tiffsmtificial grammar , it is assumed that there are an arbitrary number of harmony processes over the letters : a  , b , c , d , e ,  1 ,   . . . .  ; each letter must coir espond to either T ( truth ) or F ( falsehood )  , consistently throughout he word . 
~l ~ is reduction is a generalization of harmony processes which are common in certain families of natur '  , d languages . In these languages , stem ( madaffix ) vowels must agree illone or more of the following distinctive features : oFront/back vowels  ( palatal , velar harmony ) , eg . in Uralic and Turcic languages .   ( Replaced by consonantal palatalization in Karaite  , a
Turcic language . ) o Rounded/tmrounded vowels ( labial harmony ) , eg . in Tttrcic languages . Tongueheight , eg . Tungusic languages ? Nasalization , and oPhatyngealization eg . emphatic consonants and vowels in semitic languages Some processes are classified a sumlaut rather than vowel harmonies  , but behave similarly . 
One , still different but relevant process , has been reported in Takelma ( Sapir 1922) . There , a suffix al/a/isle placed with anfi/ , if the following suffix contains / i\[ . This rule derives\[ikuminininink\]from underlying / ikuman an anink /  . 
It may be a mistake to classify all of these processes as vowel harmonies  , and if so , it only strengthens the claim that languages don 't have very many vowel harmony processes  . 
Barton's Satisfaction Grammar
TF,-abcdef

ANY =
END"a-consistency(ora-harrnony)"aa =
TF = 1:2312:2023:03333"b-consistency ( or b-harmony ) " bb =
TF = 1:2312:2023:033 33"c-consistency ( or c-harmony ) " cc =
TF = 1:2312:2023:03333 d , e , f-consistency all follow the same pattem " satisfaction "  3   4 
TF-,1.21 302:222 13.1200
Empirically , we observe that generation time is linear with the length of the word and exponential with the number of harmony processes  . That is , given Barton's Satisfaction grammar , words of the form a a a . . . * are processed in time linear with the number of as  , but words for the form a be . . , are processed in time exponential with the number of different characters  . 

Linear with
Input Length
Input Steps in Generatio-na 2 aa 4 aaa 6 aaaa 8 aaaaa 10 
Exponential with
Number of Harmony Processes
Input Steps in Generation a 2 ab 6 abc 14 abed 30 abc de 62 abc def 126 Bart on showed that generating words in the two -level model with nharmony processes can be reduced to a satisfaction problem with n variables  . Thus , it is not surprising to find that the two-level model takes time exponential with the number of harmony processes  . I 1 . Most harmonies are progressive , ie . the harmony propagates from left ~ oright . A few exceptions to this are mentioned in literature : Sahaptian  ( in chlding NezPerce )  , Luorawetlan ( including Chuckchee) , Dlola Foguy , and Kalenjin languges . These are said to have so called dominant and recessive vowels where an occtarrence of a dominant vowel in the stem or even in affixes causes the whole word to contain only dominant variants of vowels  . We have found no references to languages with more than one harmony process combined with  ( potentially ) regressive , or right-t0-1eft direction . 
Left-to-right harmony seems to have a virtually unlimited scope because  , in addition to inflectional affixes , also derivational suffixes that can be recursively attached to the stem  . 
Neither progressive nor regressive harnmny-Ilke processes catt seany nondeterml nlsmin recognition i the Two-Level Model  . Even generation of word-forms with progressive harmonies is always quite deterministic  . The only truly nondeterminlstic behavior with vowel harmonies occurs in the generation with regees sive harmonies where there is no way to choose among possible realizations of prefix vowels until the word root is seen  . 
An artlfical ( and almost maximal ) example of the unbounded character of Finnish vowel harmony is the following where back harmony propagates from the verbal root  ( havai-'observe ' ) all the way to the last However , if there are only a fixed ( and small ) number of harmony processes , as there are in any natural language , then processing time is found to be linear with input length  . This has been our experience as verified by the following experiment  . We collected a word list and measured recognition time as a function of word length in character  . The word list is a combination of two samples from a Finnish newspaper corpus  ( seven issues of Helsing in Sanomat consisting of some  400  , 000 running words ) : ? all Finnish words with 17 or more lette ~ in the whole corpus , plus ? some 700 words of running text from the same corpus . 
(This construction produces very few words with 16 characters . ) Figure 1 plots recognition time ( in steps ) as a function of word length . Note that the relationship is well modeled by the linear regression line with a slope of  2  . 43 steps/letter . 
The data show no hint of an exponential relationship between processing time and word length  . 
One of the two outlets is " lakia into imis to a , " an 18 letter word that takes 206 steps (11 . 4 steps/letter) . Part of the trouble can be attributed to ambiguity  ; this word happens to be two ways ambiguous . In addition , there is a false path " laki + asia + into + im is . . . " that consumes even more resources . The fit of the regression line can be improved considerably by removing these ambiguous words as illustrated in figure  2  . 
5. Conclusion
A disclaimer is in order . The two-level clitic particle ( overseven derivatlonal , one case ending and a possessive suffix ) : havai-nTO-Ilis . tU-ttA-mAottOm . UL~t'e-ll Aons A . k A An hava in no Ills to ttamat to muudeilans a kaaofomt : dism does not guarantee efficient imp k ' mentations a such  ; the formalism may be inappropriate for some problems  ( such as processing a nurmatural language with hundreds or thousands of phonological processes  )  . 
Moreover , the choice of two-level rules and lexk'al replesentations may ak ' fect performance  . 
" lheib an alism peim its several styles of description  ( corresponding rougt fly to abstract , COI loete oF natural phonology , etc ) . Some may bentore suitable than others for a particular problem  . More generally , finite state automata a ~ er , ot the so hl fion to all problems ; they are inadequate for some , and non-optimal for others . 
~ iowe , ver , the two-level model has made a sigt filicant contribution  . It has enabled the const:cuction of a comprehensive  , fficient and compact morphological recognizer of Finnish with broadcoverage  , an important practical achievement that had not been accomplished befon  , ' the introduction of the two-level model . 
Totx : lter understand why the two-level model is able to achieve broad coverage of Finnish with modest computing resources  , and where the two olcvel model might break down , it is important o an , ' dyzetime and space pedormance very carefully . In so doing , certain idealizations will need to be introduced . For instance , we have fomadit helpful to consider recognition time as a function of word length  . Other idealizatiotts are possible . Bart on has discussed generation time as a function of the number of harmony processes  , and by implication , the number of phonological processes in general . 
This ~ dealization , in our opinion , is not helpful ; it confuses the picture by considering a host of aatific ~ allanguages that bear little resemblence to reality  . Natural languages do not have very many phonological processes  , but they do have a comparatively argenumber of words  . 

Barton , E . , 1986 , " Computational Complexity in Two-I , evel Morphology , in 24th Annual Meeting of : he Association for Computational 
Linguistics . ~'
Barton , E . , 1987, Berwick , R , and Ristaxl , E . , '" i'he Complexity of Two-Level Morphology , " chapter 5 , in Computational Complexity and Natmal Language , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 
Karttunen , L . , Koskenniemi , K . , and Kaplan , R . , 1987, " A Compiler for Two-level Phonological
Rules , " in Dalrymple , M ., Kaplan , R.,
Karttunen , L . , Koskenniemi , K . , Shaio , S . , and
Wescoat , M ., " Tools for Morphological
Analysis , " Report No . CSLI-87-108 , Center for the Study of Language and Information , Stanford

Koskenniemi , K ., 1983, " Two-Level
Morphology : A General Computational Model for Word Form Recognition and Production  , " Publications No .  11 , University of Helsinki , Dept of General Linguistics , Hallituskatu 1133 , SF-00100 Helsinki 10 , Finland . 
Sapir , E . , 1922 , " The Takelmal anguage of southwestern Oregon , " in F . Boas ( ed . ) , " Handbook of American Indian Languages II , " pp . 1-296, BAEBullet in 40 ( II ), Washington . 
Ultan , R . , 1973, " Some Reflections on Vowel Harmony . " In " Working Papers in Language Universals , " Number 12 , November 1973 , pp . 
37-67 . ( Language Universals Project , Committee on Linguistics , Stanford University , Stanford , 

Vago , R . , ( ed . ), 1980, Issues in Vowel Harmony . 
( Jolm Benjamins , Amsterdam.)
AllWords **
I ..I051015
Word Length
Figure Ii * i * .., . : ~ i , , ,
I 2025 303 ~40
Recognitl .. I ..4.
, I 2 "** , i **" // I **05 1015 , I ? itl , i * " 1 ~ ?
St 202530
Word Length
Figure 2
