Reasons why I do not care grammar formalism
Junichi Tsujii
Dept . of Electrical Engineering,
Kyoto University,
Yoshida-honmaehi , Sakyo , Kyoto , 606, JAPAN
General Comments
Computational linguistics ( CL ) has borrowed a lot of ideas from Theoretical Linguistics  ( TZ )  . We could not have developed even a simple parser without the research results in TL  . It is obviously nonsense to claim that we , computational linguists , do not care research results in TL . 
l lowever , the researchers in TL , it seems to me , are very fond of fighlinq ~ especially , those who are called Synlaclicians . They always fight with e ~ h other by asserting that their grammar formalisms are superior to the others '  . They are over sensitive and tend to distinguish people into two groups  , the ally and the enemy . 
A computational linguist using LFG ( or pseudo LFG ) as a small part in his total system is taken as the ally of LFG  , and is certainly accused by the other groups . They promptly demonstrate that LFG is wrong , by showing a lot of peculiar sentences which rarely appear in real texts  . 
We are tired of listening to such discussions.
The Reasons Why
Formalisms are prepared for accomplishing specific purposes  . The formalisms in TL have been proposed , roughly speaking , for describing the rules of distinguishing rammatical word sequences from arbitrary ung ~ ummatical sequences  , and of relating the grammatical sequences with the other representational levels  . 
On the other hand , a formalism we need in CL is for differ-e at purposes  . That is , we need a formalism for describing the rules of distinguishing the most feasible grammatical structures from other less feasible but still grammatic alones of the same sentences \ [ Disambiguation \]  . We also lined a formalism in which we can manage systematically a large amount of knowledge of various sorts necessary for NLP  . 
Formalisms for different purposes , of course , should be evaluated based on different standards . The current discussions of diffhreut formalisms in TL are irrelevant to our standards  , though they may be important for their fights . The following is a list of the reasons why I think so  . 
(1 ) \[Small and Peculiar Examples \]: Linguists Mways argue that their formalisms are better than others by using almost the same set of peculiar sentences  . This implies that the differences of the formalisms are revealed only in these types of sentences which rarely appear in real texts  . 
F ~ l r t h e r m o r e , it often happens that all of the proposed formalisms can capture the same regularity  . They only claim that their for . -malisms capture it more elegantly than others , elegantly accord--ing to their standards . 
(2 ) \[ Meaning and Knowledge \]: The elegance of their formalisms is obtained partly by ignoring uninteresting phenomena  , again uninteresling according to their standards . Especially , they ignore largely phenomena related to meaning , extra-ling~tistic knowledge , contexts , etc . Or they ignore them by claiming that they are related to these factors  . 
(3 ) \[ Disambiguation \]: Linguists can ignore the uninteresting phenomena  , but CL researchers developing actual systems can . .
not . The systems have to cover wide ranges of phenomena which really appear in texts  . Furthermore , disambiguation , which is the hardest problem in CL but not at all in TL  , certainly requires considerations in the factors which syntacticians ignore  . 
If eart hat lheelegance of their \] or malisms becomes a serious obstacle ~ o the introduction of such extra factors and processing a on them  . 
(4 ) \[ Management of Grammar Descriptions \]: lalso fear that their elegance becomes an obstacle to the systematic develop  . 
meat and management of grammar descriptions . Grammar descriptions here include the descriptions of both rules and dictionaries  . Some formalisms are claime deleganl in the sense that they require only very few rules  . But this elegance is obtained by very complicated ictionary descriptions  . The standard sibrbeing elegant seem different in TL and CL  .  ?  ( 5 ) \ [ Processing Issues \]: The grammar formalisms ignorer nostly the processing issues  . Linguists do not care processing issues in their formalisms just as we do not care grammar formalism  . 

I have to repeat here that I do not claim that TL research is irrelevant oCL  . I only claim that grammar formalisms are not important  . What is important is in their discoveries which are described by their formalisms  . And what we have to do is to describe their discoveries in our own formalisms  . 

