ONTHESEMANTICS OFFOCUS PHENOMEN AINEUR OTRA
Erich H . STEINERJ uttaWINTER-THIELEN
IAI Eurotra-D1A1 Eurotra-D
Martin Luther Str . 14 Martin Luther Str .14
D-6600 Saarbriicken D-6600 Saarbrtieken
FRG FRG

In this paper , we discuss issues connected to the phenomenon of linguistic FOCUS or INFOR MATION DISTRIBUTION in the sentence in the context of the multilingual machine translation project EUROTRA  . We shall present some of the arguments why a consideration of FOCUS phenomena is important for the determination of linear order and for semantic interpretation  . 
We shall proceed , in sections 2 and 3 of the paper , to mention the main lines of development in the dicussion of FOCUS phenomena in Computational Linguistics and in Linguistics respectively  . Section 4 contains an illustration of a pilot implementation covering some aspects of FOCUS phenomena in 

1 . Problem description 1 . 1 . The determination flinear order in the clause An initial  , but faulty assumption , underlying a possible theory of language is that linear order of syntactic on stituents in the clause is fully determined by a combination of the following types of information :- basic type of language  ( SVO , SOV , etc)-clause modus(indicative , interrogative , etc . ) - information on verbs in the lexicon ( lexical forms )  . 
This paper will present some of the arguments why this assumption is wrong for the clause  , in how farth is fact is relevant for EUROTRA , and initial suggestions towards a treatment within our framework  . We shall not be able here , for reasons of time , to deal with linear order within NPs , ADJPs , or ADVPs ( cf . for English on these questions Halliday . 1985:158 ff , and many others) . 
At least the following hierarchy of factors can be said to contribute to linear sequence  ( cf . Allen . 1987 : 51 ) :  ( 1 ) The familiarity hierarchy ( 2 ) The topic < comment , given < new hierarchies ( 3 ) The universal sequencing conventions ( 4 ) The definitieity and referentiality hierarchies ( 5 ) The personal , social status , and role hierarchies ( 6 ) The dominant descriptor hierarchies ( 7 ) The formal hierarchies Of these , this paper will deal with focus phenomena , covered in (2) above . Different aspects of this area are covered in the linguistic literature under the headings of " topic comment "  , " focus-presupposition " , " theme-rheme " , and " given new " . The difficulty with these pairs of terms is - that they reflect a difference in orientation  ( rhetorical vs . 
logical vs . psychological ); - that they cover the related , though different aspects of linear order and intonation  . 

Rather than go into an extended theoretical discussion at this point  , we shall in 1 . 2 . discuss a range of examples to show where exactly these phenomena would seem to be relevant for a multilingual MT system like EUROTRA  . The system within which the implementation of the ideas suggested here implemented is the Eurotra-D system as described in Steiner  , 1 986 and Steiner et al forthcoming and in other places . 
1 . 2 . The relevance of linear order for semantic interpretation  1  . 2 . 1 . The scope of negation Cf . the following pair of sentences ( capital standing for stress ) :  ( 1 ) Theee is not controversial , because it is a multi-natlonal

(2 ) Because it is a multinational organization the eec is not 
CONTROVERSAL(1) and (2) are identical , except for the position of the Adverbial Clause , and the assignment of primary information focus realized by main stress and symbolized here by capitals  . 
However , their semantic interpretation differs with respecto the scope of negation :  ( 1 ) is ambiguous with respect to the quest on of whether or not the propostion expressed in the matrix clause is true  , cf . (3): ? (3) Theee is not controversial , because it is a multinational ORGANISATION . It is controversial because it is EXPENSIVE . 
The second sentence in ( 3 ) is not possible with ( 1 )  , whereas it is with (2) . In (1) , the scope of negation includes the Adverbial Clause  , whereas in (2) , it does not . In general , it seems to be the case that the scope of negation may include everything in the clause to the right of the negation particle and including the constituent which has a lexical item carrying focus  . Therefore , the truth values of (1) and (2) are different , which implies that they are not acceptable translations of each other in a truth value oriented semantics  , uchas we are having it at the moment in EUROTRA . Yet , in the present framework ,   ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) would receive one representation at ERS , which means that ECS-ERS translations are not translationally equivalent  . The implications for other pairs of levels of representation are obvious  . 
We shall not go into the question here of how marked intonation in such cases would influence truth values - as we  ar0 dealing with written texts exclusively , we shall assume unmarked intonation for each syntactic structure  , which implies that in the case of thematizing constructions  , we shall assume main stress in the constituent functioning as a marked theme  , and stress within the rightmost clause constituent carrying a fully lexical item otherwise  . All this , for the time being , applies to English . 
1.2.2, The scope of quantification
Cf .   ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) : i4 ) Everyone in this room speaks two languages . 
(5 ) Two languages are spoken by everyone in this room . 
This is a classical example which has been discussed in the literature again and again  , so we shall merely restate the problem : In (4) , it is not implied that everyone speaks the same two languages  , whereas this does seem to be the implication in ( 5 )  . 
The difficulty seems to be that type and scope of underlying quantifiers may change depending on linear order  . 
This problem may be even more important in languages with a somewhat freer word order like German  , cf . (21)-(24):(21) Einit ~ eyonunshabeneine Serge . 
Some of us have a worry.
(22) Eine Sergeh a beneinige vonuns.
A worry some of us have.
(23) Wital learbeiten a neiner L~sung.
All of usa working towards a solution.
(24 ) A neiner L6sungwird vonalien vonuns gearbeit et . 
A solution is worked on by all of us.
In (21) and (23) , the indefinite article in the object NP does not necessarily imply " one and the same for all of  ( Subject ) " , whereas the implication may be given in ( 22 ) and ( 24 )   ( changes of syntactic constituents considered )  . Note that (24) includes passiviz ~ ttion , whereas ( 22 ) includes the matization without passivizalion . This shows that what is at issue here is not VOICE  , but , as we have been emphasizing all the time , FOCUS . 
Howevel , it seems to be type , rather than scope of quantification which is at issue here  . Furthermore , the judgements of native speakers here arc influenced by intonation and ethelf actors  . 
1,2.3. Acceptable question-answer pairs
For an illustration of this problem , cf ,   ( 6 ) to ( 11 ) :  ( 6 ) When did Parliament decide on tile budget ? ( 7 ) Parliament decided oil the budget last WEEK . 
(8 ) It was last WEEK that Parliament decided on the budget  , (9) ? Lasl week Parliament decided on the BUDGET . 
(10 ) ? It was on the BUDGET that Parliament decided last week  . 
( l1 ) ? What Parliament DID last week was decide on the budget  . 
As it is wellknown from discussions in tile literature  , (7) and (8) a refine as answers to (6) , yet (9)-(11) are at least questionable . Observe that thematizing devices like in ( 8 ) - ( 11 ) do not tlanslate in simple syntactic transfer between different European languages  . German , for example , can simply change linear order where English needs clefting  , pseudo-clefring , extraposition , or similar devices . Observe furthermore that , as a first rule , focus goes with tile thematized constituent in cases of marked theme assignment  , wbereas the remainder of the clause would seem to function as presupposition  , which is important to observe ia the case of written language  , wbere we do not have any encoding of intonation directly  . In the case of wh-questions , focus usually goes with tile wh-elemeut . In cases of unmarked the mea ~; signment , focus , in English , falls on the last fully lexical item in the clause  . 
Backnow to the question of the translation of sentences with certain types of marked themes  , cf . (12 ) to ( 15 ) :  ( 12 ) Zuelnem groBen UNGL ~ CK wurde die Entscheidung erst dutch die weiter e  ENTW1CKLUNG   ( D )   ( 13 ) ? A big DES ASTER the decision only because of further DEVEI  , OPMENTS ( 14 ) It was only through further DEVELOPMENTS that the decison became a DESASTER  . 
(15) ? Eswarnut dureh die we itere Entwickluug , dass die Entscheidung zu einem Ungliiek wurde . 
(13) is a questionable translation of (12) , yet the present framework would either dictate so  , or else produce the " canonical " form underlying  ( 16 ) as a translation of ( 12 ) :  ( 16 ) The decision becameades aster because of further

(16) , however , misses the double focus of ( 12 ) and is thus problematic , also in view of what we have said in 2 . 2 . 1 . 
On the other hand , (15) is a questionable translation of (14) , because the syntactic device of " clefring " does not carry over from English into German in a non-complex way  . 
We shall not go into other areas where FOCUS is important at this point  , such as , for example , the scope of certain classes of Adverbials like " only  , just ,  . . . " in English ( we would like to express our gratit ut de to Au and Syea  , Manchester , for alerting us to this area . )
It should be obvious that : a : These problems occur not just in isolated examples  , but with thematizing devices in general . 
b : The problems are magnified greatly between languages wbic bareless closely related than English and German  , such as , for example , Germanic and Romance languages etc . 
As we hope to have indicated in this section , a disregard for questions of focus may lead to translations which are not truth value equivalent  , or else to translations which are grammatically wrong or at least hardly acceptable  . One could , of course , choose tile approach of introducing complex syntactic transfer to handle such problems  . It should be obvious that the complexities involved would be considerable  . Even in a syntaxbased transfer , though , one would need a systematic account of focus phenomena  . 
The alternative would seem to be to include into EUROTRA Interface Structure semantic information about focus phenomena and let the rest be handled in target language generation  . This seems to be a solution which is theoretically more desirable and practically far superior in view of the fact that with the number of languages involved in EUROTRA  , introducing a major source of complex syntactic transfer is always extremely costly and should be avoided as far as possible  . 
The following two sections will give references to places in the literature where focus phenomenare discussed more extensively  . 
2. Issues in the discussion of focus phenomena :
Computational Linguistics
The relevance of focus phenomena and topicalization for free word order languages i discussed in Karttunen/Kay  . 1985 . 
A criticism of the general neglect of focus phenomen and topicalization can be found in Kay  . 1985:252, as well as in
Winograd . 1983:280ff.
McDonald . 1 985 discusses the relevance of such phenomena for the production of coherent text in MT  . 
Mann/Matthiessen . 1 985 emphasize the need for having a theory and implementation of topicalization in text generation  , illustrating the particular strength of implementations of Systemic Functional Grammar in this area  , just as do Winograd . 1983:280ff , Patten . 1984, and

Recent contributions of Prague School representatives on the issues connected with our topic can be found in Hajicova/Sgall  . 1986 and in Sgall/Hajicova/Panevova . in press . 

Within the field of Machine Translation , it would seem to be clearly the Prague School approach which has the strongest tradition with respect to our topic  . Functional Unification Grammar and Systemic Functional Grammar both have a known history in this respect in Computational Linguistics  , even if not in MT directly . 
3. Issues in the discussion of focus phenomena :

We shall only be able to give an indication of the main lines of thought  , because the literature on issues of focus /presupposition  , theme/rheme and topic/comment has become very extensive  . 
Within the paradigm of Generative Grammar and Government & Binding  , we find , roughly from the early seventies on wards , a discussion of focus phenomena in so far as they contribute to a semantic structure of focus and presupposition  ( cf . Chomsky . 
1970, Jackendoff . 1972, Jackendoff . 1983, Rochemont . 1986) . 
The emphasis is on the implications for scope of negation  , Adverbials , and quantification , as well as on rules for generating acceptable sequences of sentences  ( cf .  1 . 2 . of this paper ) . 
The Prague School has perhaps ' the longest tradition of investigating focus phenomena under the heading of " Functional Sentence Perspective " organization of the clause  ( of . 
Danes . F . ed . 1974 . ) . The notions of " Theme " and " Rheme " are refined in order to overcome a purely binary division of the clause  , using the notion of " Communicative Dynamism " . Also , the notions of " Theme and Rheme " are extended to cover aspects of text-structure  , rather than only sentence-structure . 
Lexical Functional Grammar , to my knowledge , has not given a centrabe to consideration of focus phenomena  , while not denying their importance ( cf . Kaolan/Bresnan .  1982 : 255) . 
However , in the area of LFG , my knowledge of the literature is far from comprehensive  . 
Systemic Functional Grammar has a long tradition of giving a central place in their theory for considerations of the " textual organization " of sentences into " Theme-Rheme " and " Given-New "  . These two aspects are conceived of as related , though distinct . The " Given-New " dimension expresses the assignment of " old vs new " information in the clause  , whereas the " Theme-Rheme " dimension is assumed to account for " Point of departure "- assignment to constituents of syntactic structure  ( el . 
Halliday , 1967-68 . /Halliday . 1985:38 ff/Fawcett . 1980:157ff/
Steiner . 1983:228ff).
Outside of certain " Schools " of Linguistics , it is certainly worth mentioning Chafe . 1970:210ff , Prince . 1 981 for an interesting treatment of focus phenomena within the perspective of Pragmatics  , Sperber/Wilson . 1 986 for a definition of " focus " with respect o hierarchies of ordered entailments between different syntactic and semantic constituents of sentences  , and Jones . 
1977 . for a very useful treatment of the notion of " Theme " as it extends from the sentence to the text  . 
4 . Towards a treatment of the semantics of focus phenomena in 
EUROTRA : some preliminary suggestions
In this section , we shall outline an implementation of a treatment which will at least begin to cover some of the translationally relevant phenomena which we have outlined in ? the previou sections  . This implementation is entirely within the EUROTRA framework as described in Arnold et  a1  . 1986 . 
For the time being , we shall assume that each clause constituent is assigned to either the focus or the presupposition fa clause  . 
Later on , it may become important to distinguish more precisely between " clause " and " sentence "  , and between primary and secondary focus . Also , there are reasons to assume that focus is assigned to lexical categories in the first instance  , and that upwards percolation to the phrase is not unrestricted  . However , at present , we shall only try to account for movement of phrasal constituents aw holes  , and therefore , we shall assume that focus is automatically percolated upwards from lexical categories to their phrasal mothers  . Note that in the future this might create special problems as it is not necessarily the head element of a phrase which is marked for focus  . 
For work in the immediate future , it seems important to investigate a somewhat more constrained interpretation of the percolation of the feature \[+ FOCUS\]  . We shall in the following use ~ ome of the insights to be found in Roehemont  . 1986:84 ff:a . If some constituent A is \[+ focus \] and A is X  ?  , then X n is \[+ focus\] . 
b . If A is \[+ focus \] and A is an argument of X ? contained in Xn  , then X ? is\[+focus\] . 
e . If X ? is\[+focus\]andA is an Adjunct of X ? , then A is \[+ focus\] . 
From a . - c . above it follows that focus percolation operates differently on arguments and on modifiers :\[ focus \] percolates upwards from arguments to heads  ( b . ) and reverse ( a . ), . 
However , \[ focus\]percolates downwards from heads to modifiers  ( c . ), yet not in the reverse direction . Now , while this is certainly an interesting hypothesis  , it should be investigated before webase any implementations on it  . 
From a linguistic point of view , the semantics of focus and presupposition determines linear sequence at ECS in interaction with intonation  ( stress assignment )  . For an illustration of this fact , ef . (17) to (20) ( Jaekendoff . 1972:321 ) :  ( 17 ) Did Maxwellkill the judge with a HAMMER ? ( 18 ) Was it with a HAMMER that Maxwell killed the judge ?  ( 19 ) No , he killed him with a ZAPGUN . 
(20) No , it was SAM who killed the judge.
Jaekendoff's point here is that in a polar interrogative it is the focus rather than the presupposition which is questioned ~ and that therefore  ( 20 ) is odd as a response to ( 17 ) or ( 18 )  , both of which presuppose that Max well did the killing  . 
Our point here is that ( 171 to ( 20 ) exhibit unmarked stress assignment relativ to their syntactic structures  , and that marked assignments are possible , even if they are unlikely . As we shall argue shortly , the knowledge of unmarked stress assignments for the major syntactic patterns of a language is important in our context  , because when dealing with written texts , stress itself is not accessible to us . Observe that " focus " and " stress assignment " are not the same phenomenon : in the case of wh -questions in English and German  , for example , focus goes with the wh-element rather than with the element carrying primary stress  . 
For each of the EUROTRA languages , there would seem to be an unmarked stress assignment to ECS  ( Eurotra Constituent Structure ) translations of one ERS ( Eurotra Relational Structure ) representation , e . g . in cases of fronting , " dislocation , cleft sentences , pseudo-claft sentences , extraposition , actives vs . 
passives etc . Assuming unmarked stress assignment , we could then predict he elements of sentences which carry focus  . In the case of wh-questions , focus will always be assigned to the wh-element . 
Within our framework , we can introduce an attribute-value pair " FOCUS = yes/no " which is included into the feature description ERS  . Thus , we translate the information which we have available at ECS  ( linear sequence , whether we have a wh-question etc , ) to ERS . The linguistic basis of this knowledge is the knowledge about unmarked stress assignments on ECS for each ofthn EUROTRA languages plustim assumption of unmarked intonation throughout  , which is an assumption that we could modify in a controlled way at a later stage  . 
From ERS to IS , our FOCUS feature and its value would simply be carried over  , which is a natural consequence of the fact that information about focus and presupposition is semantic information based on information from the constituents ructure level  . Our sentence ( 1 )   ( 1 ) Theee c is not controversial , because it is a multinational organization . 
thus receives two representations both at ERS and at IS  , whereas sentence number ( 2 )   ( 2 ) Because it is a multinational organization the eec is not controversial  . 
receives only one represemation . I such cases , the difference is not only in the area of FOCUS assignment  , but is also due to differences in scope assignment in t be case of  ( 1 )  , which is dependent on the ECS position of the element carrying FOCUS  . 
So far , we have sketched an approach to the problems of FOCUS  , yet not automatically to problems of scope of negation and quantification  . The reason is that in our representations at ERS and at IS  , each sister constituent of one level has to be either a predicate or an argument/modifier  . A negative particle like English " not " , however , does not seem to be one or the other at clause level  . Semantically speaking , " not " correspondes to a logical operator ather than to a predicate or an argument  . In other words , our IS or ERS representations do not correspond to a " logical form "  , which would represent problems of scope in the usual way  , e . g . ( roughly ): ( NOT a(X )) AND b(Y ) vs . NOT (( a(X )) AND(b(Y ))) . 
Within our present framework , a possible approach would seem to be the following : We define a feature SCOPEN = yes/no  ( Scope of negation ) which is assigned to clause constituents in the translation ECS->ERS  . 
As we assume that t be scope of negation may include all the constituents right of the negative particle at ECS up to the constituent dominating the element carrying FOCUS  , we could assign a SCOPEN value to constituents in the course of translation ECS->ERS and then simply carry it over to IS  . The isssue we have to decide on in this context is whether we want to introduce this additional source of creating ambiguities into the framework  . Note that scope is said to extend " up to " the FOCUS constituents  , yet this may or may not be the case , which exactly is the problem in (1) above . (2) is not ambiguous , because the adverbial clause is definitely out of the scope of negation  . Ambiguities are created in all those cases where we have constituents between the negative particle and the FOCUS  , and in the case of longer clauses , this my cause a high number of readings which only differ in the scope of negation  . lt is not obvious at the moment whether the magnitude of the problem created by questions of scope is sufficient to warrant such a step  . Our treatment of FOCUS , it should be said , does not create additional ambiguities at this stage  , it merely adds to the feature descriptions in representations which we are generating anyway  . 
Our Appendix contains representations showing the operation of the FOCUS feature in ECS and ERS structures  . 

Allan . K . 19g7 . Hierarchies and the choice of left conjuncts ( with particular attention to English )  . in : Journal of Linguistics . 

Arnold . D . J . /Krauwer . S . /Rosuer . M . /Des Tombe . L . /Varile . 
G . B .  1986 . The < C , A> , TFramework in Eurotra : A theoretically committed notation for MT  . in : Proceedings of
COLING .1986 .297-304
Chafe . W . 1970 . Meaning and the structure of language . Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press
Chomsky . N . 1970 . Deep structure , surface structure , and semantic interpretation , in : Jakobson . R . / Kawamoto . S . eds . 
1970 . Studies in general and orient a linguistics . Tokyo:
T . E . C . C . Corporation
Danes . F . ed . 1974 . Papers on functional sentence perspective . The
Hague : Mouton
Fawcett . R . P . 1980 . Cognitive linguistics and social interaction . 
Heidelberg : Groos
Halliday . M . A . K . 1967-68 . Notes on transitivity and theme in English . in : Journal of Linguistics .  3 . 1 . ,3 . 2 . , and 4 . 2 . 
Halliday . M . A . K . 1985 . An introduction to functional grammar . 
London : Edward Arnoldllajicova . E . /Sgall . P . 1986 . Degrees of understanding , in : COLING proceedings .  1986 . 184-186 Houghton G/Isard . S . forthcoming . " Why to speak , what to say and how to say it : modelling language pr~luctiou in discourse  , in : Morris . P . ed . forthcoming . Models of Cognition . 
New York : Wiley
Jackendoff . R . S . 1972 . Semantic interpretationi generative grammar . Cambridge/Mass . : The MIT Press Jackendoff . R . S . 1983 . Semantics and cognition . Cambridge/Mass . :
The MIT Press
Jones . L . K . 1977 . Theme in English expository discourse . Lake
Bluff/Ill.:Jupiter Press
Kaplan . R . M . /Bresnan . J . 1982 . Lexical Functional Grammar : a formal system for grammatical representation  , in : Bresnan . J . ed . 1982 . ~ I'hemental representation of ~ mmatical relations  . Cambridge/Mass . : MIT Press . 173-Karttunen . L . /Kay . M . 1985 . Parsing in a free word order language , iu : Dowty . D . R . / Karttunen . L . / Zwicky . A . M . eds . 
1985 . -Natural language parsing . Cambridge : Cambridge
University Press . 279-306
Kay . M . 1985 . Parsing in functional unification grammar , in : Dowty/Karttunen/Zwicky . eds .  1985 . Natural language parsing . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 251-278 Mann . W . C . ~Matthiessen . C . M . I . M . 1985 . Demonstration of the NIGEL text generation computer program  , in : Benson/Greaves . eds .  1985 . Systemic perspectives on discourse . Vol . l . Norwood , N . J . : Ablex McDonald . D . 1985 . Recovering the speaker's decisions daring mechanical translation  , in : Colgate Universty . Proceedings of the conference on theoretical and metmdologic assues in Machine Translation  . 183-199 Patten . T . 1984 . Planning and Systemic text generation : a , conflatlon . Edinburgh : Department of Artificial
Intelligenee Working Papers . no . 166
Prince . E . 1981 . A taxonomy of givennew information , in : Cole . P . ed . 1981 . Radical pragmatics . New York : Academic

Sgall . P . / Hajieova E . /Panevova . J . in press . The meaning of the sentence in its semantic and pragmatic aspects  . Dordrecht :

Sperber/Wilson .  1986 . Relevance : Communication and cognition . 
Oxford : Basil Blackwell.
Steiner . E . 19g3 . Die Entwicklung des Britisch Kontextualismus . 
Heidelberg : Gyoos.
Steiner . E . 1986 . Generating semantic structures in Eurotra-l ) . in:
COLING-proceedings 1986
Steiner . E . /Schmidt . P . / Zelinsky-Wibbelt . C . eds . forthcoming : From syntax to semantics : insights from machine translation  . London : Frances Pinter Winograd . T . 1983 . Language as a cognitive process . VoI . I : Syntax . Reading , Mass . : Addison Wesley

ECS-representaii one 1 . Letzie Wocheenischied die Kommissionueber den Haushalt  ( Last week the Commiemt on decided on the budset .   ) eced/lssbarcompmatznpp:nppnp:detpnp app:  .   .   .   .   .   .   .  :  .   .   .   .   .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . : a paadjletztnv rb de ( n wo cheents cheid end kommission ppP-:npp ;   .   .   .   .   . :___:detpnp:::prep delnueber dhaushal t t ~ e e  , cat = eep I focu ~: yes )) I . \[( ppp , \[ cat=pppasr=case=acc prep=ueber )   )   . \[ prep , lex : ueberlu = uebercal=prepagr:case = acc  )   )   ( npp ,   ( cat = nppper=3 asr: ( case:accs end:mas nb = s9
Jnflec = defn-iy p = sub)) . \[( detp ,   ( cat=detpaSr=case=aces end=m as nb=sg inflec = def  )   )   . \[( det , \[ le ? = denlu = d de ~- typ = arl cal=de ( nf \] ec = def a9r = case = a ? ? 9end = ma$nb = *9  )   )   )  \ ]  ( np , ( cat = np(nfle ? = defaSr=case=ace
Send = mas nb = mS ) n-typ = lubper=3 )   )  ? \ [  ( n ,   ( lex=haushaltlu=haushaltn-typ = oub cat = naSr :  ( tale:ace
Send = mal nb = 89 ) per:31 )  \ ] \ ] \ ] \ ] \ ] \ ] \ ]  . 

B . ER$-repreeenta(tonnermd / ! under .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
: compO::mod 9ov   9or   9ov entlcheiden komm?mond comp4 : comp::mod:!: 9or ~ ovSoY:: ; ueber haum hal(dmod:mod9 or 9 ov wo cheletz (
History : erudl ! <= ec ? dll(??def . ( c a (= ? voice = & cilve(enme = pa ?()) . \[(9ov,(sf = 9 or
C4 ( = v r bl u = en ( scheiden frame = ( CompO = ( cat : np ca~e = nom ) 
Ico'mp 4= ( cat = PPI focus = yes prep = ueber ) -prep='ueber " compl = no
Comp2 = no comp3 = no
Comps = no
Comp 6= no comp 7= no
Comps = no
Comp9 = nov rb-(yD = mlin per=3 nb = ?9) .   .   .   .   . 
( compO,(ca ~ = hpc&se = flom sf = co . pO )) . \[(9ov , (? f=9 or
Ce (= nlu = kommissionn . typ = lubper=-209 frame = ( ComP2=-2\]1comp4=-212\] )   )   ( mode\[cat=detpinflec = def det-typ = ar tlu = dsf = rood  ) )  . ((9ov , ( mf = 9 ov cat : de ( lu = d det .   . typ = artinflec = def ))\]\]
