Generating Multimodal Output-
Conditions , Advantages and Problems
Dagmar SCHMAUKS , Norbert REITHINGER
SFB 314: K Qnstliche Intelligenz-Wissensbasierte Systeme
Universit & tdes Saarlandes , FB 10-Informatik IV
D-6600 Saarbr(Jcken11
Federal Republic of Germany
Net:schmauks@sbsvax.uucp , bert@sbsvax.uucp

In natural communication situations , multimodal referent specification is frequent and efficient  . The linguistic component a redeictic expressions , e . g . ' this ' and ' here ' . Extralinguistic devices in dialogs are different body movements  , mainly pointing gestures . Their functional equivalent in texts are means like arrows and indices  . 
This paper has two intentions . First , it discusses the advantages of multimodal reference in interhuman communication which motivate the integration of extralinguistic " pointing " devices into NL dialog systems  . 
The generation of multimodal output poses specific problems  , which have no counterpart in the analysis of multimodal input  . The second part presents the strategy for generating multimodal output which has been developed within the framework of the XTRA system  ( a NL access system to expert systems )  . XTRA allows the combination of verbal descriptions and pointing gestures in order to specify elements of the given visual context  , i . e . a form displayed on the screen . The component POPEL generates referential expressions which may be accompanied by a pointing gesture  . The appearance of these gestures depends on several factors  , e . g . the type of referent ( whether it is a region or an entry of the form ) and its complexity . 

The work presented here is being supported by the German Science Foundation  ( DFG ) in its Special Collaborative Program on AI and Knowledge-Based Systems  ( SFB 314 )  , project N1(XTRA ) . We would like to thank our colleagues of the XTRA project for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper  . 
1. Introduction
In face-to-face communication , speech and communicative body movements are performed simultaneously  . A prime example ot this mu/lirnoda // ly are detctic actions which specify elements of a shared visual world by the combination of deictic expressions  ( ' this ' , ' there'etc . ) and extralinguistic devices like pointing gestures  . The advantages of this mu  #imoda/de/xismotivate the integration of extralinguistic means for referent specification into natural language  ( NL ) dialog systems . Starting point of the following considerations is the system XTRA  , an NL access system for expert systems , which is under development at the University of Saarbr Licken  . In its current application domain , it assists the user in filling out a tax form which is visible on the screen  . Elements of this form can be specified not only by  ( typed ) verbal descriptions , but also by combining descriptions and simulated pointing gestures  . Some problems of rnu  #imoda/input and solutions in XTRA have already been treated in detail  ( cf . /AII gayer , Reddig86/ , /AII gayer et al 88/ , /Schmauks 86 a ,  87/) . 
Mu #/ moda/ou/put is no simple mirror image of multimodal input  . 
Rather , it has to deal with different problems the investigation of which has been missing till now  ( for a first impression see/Reithinger87a / )  . 
Because of the novelty of the task , one cannot claim to offer ultimate solutions . Instead , we wish to outline several approaches for the realization of multimodality  , present our strategy and give reasons for the choice  . 
In section 2 , we present the means , conditions and advantages of multimodal deixis within natural communication situations  . Topics of section 3 are the different strategies for realizing multimodality in NL dialog systems and some of the problems arising  . Section 4 sketches the framework of the XTRA system and the types of gestures occuring in this domain  . Section 5 presents the generation component POPEU , focussing on its global strategy for generating multimodal output  . 
Subtopics are POPEL's architecture and its methods for simulating different types of pointing gestures  . In section 6 , some alternative strategies for generating multimodal output are briefly discussed  . 
1 ) POPEL is the acronym for Product ~ on Of\[ Perhaps  , Possible ,   . .
Eloquent Langu , ~ Te.
584 2 . Deixis in natural communi-cation situations Deictic reference occurs in dialogs as well as in texts  . In both situations , the objects referred to can be linguistic entities  ( sentences , chapters e to . ) or nonlinguistic objects ( cats , tables etc . ) , For the following considerations , only those types of deixis are relevant which specify nonlinguistic entities  . They can be performed by combining linguistic expressions with extralinguistic devices  . 
D/e/ogs are characterized by the possibility of turntaking  . If both participants are present , they can specify elements of their common visual world by combining deictic expressions and body movements  , mainly peinting gestures , If a speaker can point to objects , s/he can use shorter , ~ impler and even referentially insufficient descriptions  . In particular , pointing facilitates reference if the speaker doesn't know how to describe the object in question  , One example is the utterance
THIS\[~'\] is broken.
while pointing at some part of the engine of one's car  2  . 
Successful reference by pointing has some preconditions  , for instance the receiver's visual attention . S/he hast of ace the speaker in order to notice his/her gesture and then has to follow this gesture with his/her gaze  . The first step can fail by visual in attentiveness  , the latter by wrong direction of gaze . Feedback is received by speakers via two channels  . On the one hand , a speaker controls the nonverbal react/on of the receiver and can therefore immediately request attentiveness or correct a wrong direction of gaze  . On the other hand , s/hegets delayed feedback by the verb a/reaction . 
Communication by text normally implies a spatial and temporal dissocation of sender  ( -writer ) and receiver ( = reader )  . Therefore , the sender can deictice l/ . y refer only to non-!inguistic entities which are visible also for the receiver  . This condition is fulfilled if the text is combined with nonlinguistic representations  ( pictures , diagrams , maps etc . ) . In these cases , the sender can refer to elements of this ' visual context ' by combining linguistic expressions and extralinguistic means  ( arrows , indices etc . ) . The latter represent a functional equivalent to pointing gestures within dialogs and have the same advantages  . But , like the text itself , they don't require attentiveness on the reader's side during the period of their production  . 
3. Deixis in NL dialog systems
The type of dialog considered here is a consu#at / ono ~  ; ~/ o  #: ' the system ( = expert ) assists the user ( -non-specialist ) in filling out his/her tax form . The system has not only more expert knowledge about the domain  , but also more knowledge concerning content and structure of the graphics displayed on the screen  . 
Due to these differences in knowledge , the an a O/s is component has to deal with shortcomings in the user's input  . His/ber pointing gestures may be imprecise becauses/he doesn't know the structure of the presented graphics  . Ignorance of technical terms results in inadequate descriptions  . In theses cases , additional knowledge sources are needed for referent identification  , e . g . case frame analysis and dialog memory ( /AII gayer , Reddig86/ , /AII gayer et al88/) . In contrast , the genera/ion component can always produce precise pointing gestures as well as exact descriptions  . But the latter capability may be in conflict with the task of generating system reactions which are communicati-vely adequate  . If the user doesn't know certain technical terms , then the combination of underspecitie description and precise gesture is more comprehensible than a totally specified description  . 
2 ) Pointing gestures are represented by the sign' \[1~>'1 Capital ~ etters I hlghllgh the correlated phrese . 
Another problem is the different perceptual capabilities of user and system  . Humans are ' multichannet systems ' which receive information about objects through a great variety of channels  . In contrast , the perceptible world of all systems developed to date is only a small subset of the user's world  . Normally , systems with more general application domains are only able to process textual and graphical input  . In particular , these systems cannot " see " the user's nonverbal behavior and therefore cannot request attention if necessary  . Also , wrong user reactions cannot serve as an indication of his/her visual in attentiveness  , because they can be caused by several other factors  . 
For example , It might be the case that the user has correctly identified the field In question but enters a wrong amount becauses/he has confused some technical terms  . During natural pointing , the sound which occurs when the speaker touches the form may cause the hearer to pay attention to his/her gestures  . But in the case of simulated pointing , the generation of a specific audible signal in parallel to each pointing gesture implies a rather " unnatural " situation  . 
The design of multimodal interfaces is one central topic of recent research  . It has to be emphasized that the term ' multimodal input/output ' covers a great variety of heterogeneous phenomena from the manipulation of simulated objects within an " artificial reality "  ( e . g . the D#taG/ove , see/Zimmerman et al 87/ ) to the use of different pointing devices . 
The goal ' multimodal referent specification ' can be achieved by various strategies  . If one wants to s/~nu/atenstuf#/po/'f/t/\[Ig , the pointing device should correspond to natural gestures  . A touch-sensitive screen allows highly natural gestures  , but pointing by means of a socalled'mouse cursor ' can also simulate some aspects of natural pointing  . The latter strategy is chosen in the XTRA system . If , in contrast , one wants to offer function #/ equ/v#/ents , here exists a great variety of devices . It is possible to adapt the extralinguistic deictic means which occur in texts  , e . g . arrows and indices . Furthermore , the computer offers several specific devices , which have no model in natural pointing , such as Iraming , highlighting or inverting the referent . The choice depends on several factors , for example which types of objects are to be referred to  . 
4. Form deixis in XTRA
The given visual context of the XTRA system is the form displayed on the screen  . In order to specify its elements , several types of pointing actions occur ( cf . /AII gayer 86/ , /Schmauks 86 a , 86 b ,  87/ ) : ? Punctua/po/nt/ng indicates one singular point on the form and can be produced in order to specify primitive objects  , i . e . 
individual regions and individual entries . Another possibility is the reference to a complex region by pointing to a part of it 
Coam-pro-to to de/x/s).
? During non-punctua/po/nt/n# , the pointing device performs a complex motion , e . g . underlines an entry or gives the borders of a larger region  . 
? Mu  #/ plepoin // ng means , that one utterance is accompanied by more than one pointing gesture  . These complex pointing actions specify elements of sets  , for example several instances of one concept . 
One aim of XTRA is the use of multimodal referent specification techniques in input as well as in output  . Mu  #imoda/input is performed by combining typed NL descriptions and simulated pointing gestures  . 
The latter are currently realized by means of a mouse cursor  . They simulate natural pointing with regard to two aspects : the user can select the accuracy of gesture  , and the relation between the gesture and the object referred to depends on context / AII gayer  86/  . For example , if the user points at a region which is already filled out  , descriptor analysis is necessary in order to decide whether s/he refers to the region itself or to its actual entry  . 
The generation component has to reckon with different problems concerning pointing actions  . If it also realizes gestures by movements of a mouse cursor  , their perception may be hampered by the user's visual in attentiveness  . In the case of multiple pointing , for example , s/he might fail to notice one of the pointing gestures and consequently may not identify the referent  . This causes the whole utterance ( e . g . 
' THISAMOUNT\[i \]~-\] , you could also enter HERE\[o '>'\]' ) to be comn incomprehensible . 
5B 55 . Generation of pointing actions with POPEL 5 . 1 Architecture of POPEL The task of POPEL , the natural language generation component Of XTRA  , is to select and verbalize those parts of the conceptual knowledge base that are to be uttered  . The structure of the component follows the wellknown division into a " what-to-say " and a " how-to-say " part/McKeown  85/: POPEL-WHAT , which selects the content , and POPEL-HOW , which verb a // ~ esit ( cf . /Reithinger 87b /) . Contrary to most other systems , the information flow between these two submodules is not unidirectional from the selection part to the verbalisation part  . Rather , both parts communicate while processing the output of the system  ( cf . / How 87/) . 
A second essential feature of POPEL's architecture is the parallel processing approach to generation : the different stages of selecting end realizing the output proceed in a parallel cascade  . In this way , it is possible to go a head with the selection processes inside POPEL-WHAT  , while a previously selected part of the utterance is already verbalized in POPEL-HOW  . As one consequence , restrictions to the selection arising out of the verbalization process can be taken into account  . 
Currently , a first prototype of POPEL is under development . The processor for the parallel cascade has already been implemented  . The emphasis was placed on information propagation both upwards and downwards and on the definition of the syntax and semantics of the transition rules  . The next step will be the encoding of knowledge within this framework  . POPEL is implemented on a Symbolics 3640 Lisp machine running Z et al is p . 
5 . 2 Pointing gestures as special cases of descriptions  5  . 2 . 1 Selection of descriptions Selection of descriptions is one essential interaction point between the two components  . Decisions which concern POPEL-WHAT are : ?" Givenness " of an object : the description of an object depends on whether that object is known in the  ( implicitot explicit ) context of the user , In general , POPEL-HOW selects definite phrases for known objects and indefinite phrases for unknown objects  , but the required knowledge as to " givenness " is stored in the user model which is accessed by 

?" Pointability " of an object : the socalled ' form hierarchy ' represents the structure of the form  . It links the regions of the form to the respective representations in the conceptual knowledge  . 
If an object is selected for verbalization , the link from the concept of the object to the form hierarchy provides the information that a pointing gesture can be generated  . 
? Situation-dependency of a description : the contextual knowledge bases contain structure and content of the previous dialog  . They allow the determination of differently detailed descriptions  , depending on the current context , If necessary , meta-communicative or text-deictic attributes can be added  . 
POPEL-HOW makes the following decisions : ? Generation of a description : whether an object in the conceptual knowledge base is to be realized as a description depends on the language -related structure that has already been determined  . 
? Language-dependent constraints : the possible surface structures remaining for a description depend on the extent to which the sentence has already been verbalized  . In German , for instance , it is hardly possible to generate a pronominal NP if there is already a lexical NP or PP after the finite verb and the pronominal NP is to follow this phrase  ( cf . /Enge182/) . 

The sequence of these decisions is intertwined . For example , the inquiry of POPEL-WHAT , as to whether an object is available in the context makes sense only after POPEL-HOW has decided to generate a description at all  ( for an outline see/Reithinger87a / )  . 
5.2.2 When to point
From the viewpoint of an NL dialog system , pointing actions are descriptions which are accompanied by a pointing gesture  . They focus the user's visual attention and can therefore localize visible objects  . In the XTRA domain , pointing actions can refer to three types of objects : ? A form region  , e . g . ' You can entery our donations HEREI on \] . ' ? Anentr2;,e . g . ' THESE 350 DM\[~\] are travel expenses : ' ? A correlated concept  , e . g . ' Can I deduct SUCHDONATIONS\[~\]?'All elements of the form are in the shared visual context  ; therefore , they can be referred to by definite descriptions . No serious problems arise if an utterance is accompanied only by one pointing gesture  . In contrast , the simulation of multiple pointing requires further considerations  ( cf . section 4 ) and has therefore not been treated in this paper . 
If the system's reaction contains more than one description which allows pointing  , only one possibility will be realized . The others are reduced to purely verbal descriptions  . The sentence ( 1 ) for example allows the reductions ( la ) and ( tb ) :  ( 1 ) THISAMOUNT\[~'> . \], you have to enter HERE\[\[~','\] . 
(la ) The donations of ISDM , you have to enter HERE\[~ . '\] . 
( lb ) THISAMOUNT\[Q : ~'\] , you have to enter / // the // he " donations ' , Because sentence generation is performed incrementally  , POPEL-WHAT doesn't know the whole content of the utterance at the moment it has to decide whether to use a pointing gesture or not  . Therefore , the decisions have to be based on heuristics and may be " suboptimal "  . 
One of these heuristics is : do not use a pointing gesture if the object in question can also be specified by a short referential expression  , for example a pro-word . Then the pointing gesture remains available to reduce a complex description if it follows in the same utterance  . 
5.2.3 How topoint
Following the simulation-oriented strategy of XTRA  , pointing gestures are realized by positioning a mouse cursor on the screen  . This is a close approximation of the type of movements a human performs when pointing with his /her finger  . Furthermore , different degrees of accuracy are simulated by different shapes of the cursor  . POPEL performs the pointing gesture parallel with verbalizing the correlated phrase and presenting it on the screen  . 
5.2.3.1 Punctual pointing gestures
During a punctual point in gesture , the cursor doesn't move on the form . This type of gesture is used both for the localization of primitive objects as well as for pars-pro-to to deixis  . Because a gesture can refer either to a field of the form or to its content  ( i . e . a string in our domain ) , the linguistic information ( e , g . ' this field'vs . ' this amount of money ' ) has to disambiguate between these possibilities . A h and which holds a pencil is used as the symbol for this type of gesture  ( see figure 1/symbol A )  . The exact position depends on the type of the object  . The default strategy is as follows : if the pointing action refers to a field  , the pencil is in the middle of the fie/d , if it refers to an entry , the pencil is below the entf ~ , so that the symbol doesn't cover it . Additionally , the user model takes effect : if the user requested another position of the gesture repeatedly  ( e . g . ' Take away the finger , I cannot read that l') , the pointing strategy has to be changed . 
Each time the speaker-heare roles are reversed , the current pointing symbol changes to a neutral symbol  ( i . e , the standard mouse cursor ) . 
In this way , the user's visual attention doesn't remain fixed to  . the location of the last pointing gesture . If the system generates a new pointing gesture , it first changes the neutral symbol into the choosen pointing symbol  . Then it moves the symbol to the new pointing location  . This method mimics the functionality of the movements of the hand during natural pointing  , which already direct the heater's visual attention to the target location  . 

F ~ hrten = wlxchert ~ oh nu ~ u : ~ d/~:t'l ~ e\[tx ~ % aette Auf ~/ an ~ ungenfuer Fahrtenraila ~ ena ~ ~  k4otorrad /L ~ U : taa ; amt ~ , Ke~n~e~chen ~ IM oped / ~ i ) t ~ = ? h l X Y l . khlilll = lvg haihdlltl~l "~"" V , ~ ni~4l\[~lll = ~@ V . H . 
TI~',I ~, , UrldI ~ lhblh ' J ~ dlyuh Gi . ~' b,t)I clli~f?hl3tll~dlc~lCkSllhd
A B
Figure 1: Differentypes of pointing gestures Furthermore , punctual pointing gestures are used to realize pars-pro-to to deixis  , which refers to greater parts of the form . In this case too , the ambiguity of the gesture has to be compensated by linguistic information  . In our domain , unambiguous descriptions are ' row ' and ' column  '  . Ambiguous expressions like ' region ' can be disambiguated by additionally = taming the referent  , e . g . ' the region of DEDUCTIBLES ' . 
Delayed pe=ception of a punctual pointing gesture doesn't hamper referent identification  . The pointing symbol changes only when the user takes initiative in the dialog again  . Until then , the information of the gesture remains visually available  . There exists an equivalent in natural pointing : it might happen that a speaker leaves his/her forefinger extended  , until the dialog partner recognizes the gesture . 
5.2.3.2 Non-punctual pointing gestures
Non-punctual pointing , for example the encircling of a whole area , poses much greater problems . After the movement of the cursorce as ed , the actual cursor position indicates only the final point of the gesture  . If the user was in attentive , s/he cannot reconstruc the course of movement . This loss of information can be partially avoided by providing exact descriptions  . 
Standard candidates for non-punctual pointing actions are composite objects  , for example rows , columns or larger regions . However , a non-punctual pointing gesture that has not been noticed does not deliver any more information than the combination of punctual pam-pro-to to de /N/s and an exact linguistic description  . 
Non-punctual pointing gestures can be realized by various means  . In a first release of POPEL , the gesture is performed with another symbol ( hand with stretched-out forefinger , see figure 1/symbol B ) . The movement should be both " natural " as well as relatively precise  . 
Further research has to evaluate POPEL's current strategy with respect to various features  , for example the efficiency of the pointing strategy and its acceptance by the user  . 
6 . Alternative concepts for multimodal input/output and future requirements In the case of non -punctual and multiple pointing actions  , the possible in attentiveness of the user and the current " blindness " of the system may lead to a loss of infermation  . This danger increases with the temporal complexity of the gestures  . The usage of " lasting " pointing techniques would be one possibility of dealing with this problem  . 
One strategy is to " freeze " the track of non -punctual pointing gestures  . This is similiar to underlining or encircling with a pencil  . The track remains visible on the form until the next change in dialog control  . 
One can imagine two variants of this strategy : the first is the successive drawing of the line  , which is simi Uarto a human-made gesture . Also the drawing speed could be adopted from natural drawing  . The second variant is to produce the whole lines /multaneous ~ But this keez/ng method has the essential shortcoming that the additionalines muddle the screen  . Therefore , the functionally similar but " unnatural " means of referent specification  ( framing , underlaying , blinking , inverting etc . ) seem to be more advantageous . They preserve the form's structure since it is not blurred by additional lines  . 
Furthermore , these methods specify form regions , i . e . rectangular objects , more exactly than circular lines . On the other hand , however , this framing approach cannot simulate the context -dependency of natural pointing  . 
One unsolved problem remains to be emphazised : all the aforementioned methods a/one cannot solve the problems of multiple pointing  . If the sequence of the gestures must be known in order to understand the utterance  , the frames etc . have to be combined with additional means . One solution could be the adaptation of methods used in texts in order to refer to elements of graphics  ( e . g . indices , cf . section 2) . 
A highly user-adapted generation of pointing actions would require the storage of information about pointing in the user model  . On the one hand , these are facts about the user's pointing behavior  , including frequency and accuracy of gestures and possible systematic deviations  ( e . g . pointing consistently beside or below the intended referent  )  . On the other hand , the generation component has to take into account the user's reaction to the system's point/n# actions  . If s/he repeatedly misunderstand such an action , the system has to modify its pointing strategy and switch to the fixation method or to the framing approach  , for example . 


AIIgayer , J .   ( 1986 ) : Eine Graphikkomponente zur Integration von Zeige handlungeninat Orlichs prachllche KI -Systeme  . Proceedings der 16 . GI-Jahrestagung . Bedin : Springer . 
AIIgayer , J . and C . Reddig ( 1906 ) : Processing Descriptions containing Words and Gestures-A System Architecture  . In : C,-R . 
Rollinger ( Hrsg . ): GWAI/C ) GA 11986 . Berlin : Springer , AIIgayer , J . , K . Harbusch , A . Kobs =, C . Reddig , N . Reithinger , D . Schmauks ( 1988 ) : XTRA-A Natural Language Access System to Expert Systems  . Technical Report , SFB 314 , FBInformaUk , Universit ~ lt des Saarlandes , Saarbr Ocken . 
Engel , U . (1982): Syntax der deuts chan Gegenwartss prache . Berlin :
Erich Schmidt.
How , ` E . H .   ( 1987 ) : Generating Natural Language Under Pragmatic Constraints  . Ph . D . Dissertation , Yale University . 
McKeown , K . R . (1985): Text generation . Cambridge : Cambridge
University Press,
Reithinger , N .   ( 1987a ) : Generating Referring Expressions and Pointing Gestures  , In : G , Kempen ( ed , ): Natural Language Generation , 
Dordrecht : Kluwer.
Reithinger , N .   ( 1987b ) : Einerster Blick auf POPEL -- Wiewird was gesagt ? In : K  , Morik ( ed . ): GWA1 87 . Berlin : Springer . 
Schmauks , D .   ( 19868 ) : Formular deixls und ih reSimulation auf dem Bildschirm  . Ein Oberblickaus linguistischer Sicht . Memo Nr . 4 , SFB 314 , FB Informatik , Universit ~ tdes Saarlandes , Saarbr Ocken , Schmauks , D . (1986b ): Form und Funktion von Zeigegesten . E in interdisziplin ~ irer Oberblick . Report Nr .  10 , SFB 314 , FB Informatik , Universit ~ it des Saarlandes , Saarbr Ockan , Schmauks , D . (1987): Natural and Simulated Pointing . Proceedings of the 3rd European ACL Conference , Kopenhagen , Denmark . Also : Report Nr .  16 , SFB 314 , FB Informatik , Universit ~ tt des Saaflandes , 

Zimmerman , T . G . et el . (1987): AH and Gesture Interface Device . 
Prec . CHr87 Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York . 

