IMPL~\[CI(TNESS~A~:;AG(.lt ~) I\[NGPRINC~itLE
iN tV~AC~/li~NETRANS LATION
Klaus SC ~ IIJBI !; RT
lgSO/Research , Postbus 834 LNI, . 3503 RHU hecht , The Netherlands
schubert@dill.uucp
Multiling~ , alcxt cnsibility requires an MT system t ( ~" have at au / , uagc-iud cpend cnt pivot . It is mgtmd that au ideal , purely so . 
mastic pivot is impossil ) le . A translafiou method is desc fihc diu which scmantic relations m~kept implicit in synlax  , while files c-manlic trails and distine tiousam implicit in the words of a flll-ftcdged language i is ell aspivot  . 
Ll ~ iul fiiinguaie ~ tensibility
There is a next cnlal fitctor with v cry substantial conscquene c  , , ; lot the internal design o1" machine translation systems : extenoaibility . When a machine mmslation system has to allow lbr adding m ' bitrary soum cm~d target languages without each time adapt in t  ; the at mady existing pa~ts of the system , tim Reedar-ises for at careft flly defiv . ed interface ~; tr , ctm ' e to which modules R ) raddithmal lauguag cs may bclinked . The design that be sllneets these requirements is the pivot or interlingual appmac  , h , since it ~ such a system them is only a single interface whi  , :b gives access it ) all tim languages already included in it c system . 
In mode is of this type the only link hat ween a source and a iarget lm~guagcis file in \ [ ermedialerl cwesentation  , it has a doublelh netion : 1 . The intcrmediNe representation should render the tel content of theie xt being translated  , with NI its details audmtances . 
2 The intermcdiae representation stmuld contain lhe resnlts of Ihe grammatical nalysis cmTied out on the som~:c text  , wbem these chala ( ' telistics are translation-relevant . 
( t is desirable that the intermediate m presc , ntation express both the cnatem and the glammatical dlaracteristics of the text tmambit  ; aonsly , and since it is the interface to arbitrary languages  , it should express them in a language o independent way  . 
2o Lan !!: m ~, , e . indepet ~ de ~ Nt semantics ?' t ' or ( a ~( . ertx ) th the content aud the \[/ Hl Ction a features of a text is vsually taken to mean Nmlling them out in ~mappropri  . .
ateway . Tim in temm diatem present Nion provides a formalism t  ; or this puq ) osc . ' Spelling out means maldng explicit . My main concern here , is investigating to what extent here quiIe de ~ q ~lf  , ~: ~ L'm~s can bc achieved in almlguage-independent rt : p  , esv , tation . Am the relanguage-independently valid categories and values \ [ or the characterisics of wordstrod wold groups needed in an int cimediate ~ epresentation ?  ( When speaking of grammatical analysis , I take grammar to denulc the study of the entire in lema system of language  , so that i ; uth sy~t taxaml semantics on all levels between mmpheme aud text amstfl  ) liclds of grammar , l ' ragmatics , by contrast , describes the inlluenee of extralinguistic factors on lauguage and is ~ mtpa  , ' to f grammar ; el . Schubelt 1987b:14 f . ) The form of the linguistic sign is l~mguage -spccifi  , = , wt~m casits content ix nm'mally thought to be language  , hldellcndenl . 
The content side of Ihelinguistic sign is the rclor collel  ) assumed to heagood tart\[urn comparation i slot tra~mlation grammar  . In oilier words , the lralls fer slapfn ) masy tnactic fmY ninlh c source language to a conesponding lbrmth the target language is perlonned onlilt : hasis of iht  ; common meaning the two forms are supposed to have . 
As a consequence , an intermediate reprcsenlation is usually devised as a structure in which this common meaning is made explicit  . The intermediater presentation is scan as a semantic equival cnl of the source text  . For obtaining such as l rucmre , a syntactic analysis of the source text is by no mean :  , superfluous . An inlennediate representatim ~ consists , like any system , of elements and their relations . In a semantic system elcmenls and relations in e semantic  . But illorder to detect the elements and their relations in a given text  , a syniactic maalysis is needed . (" Syntax-fi'ee semantic parsers " a , pply syntactic knowledge lacitly , and as anile they work especially well for languages where the sequential m det of " purely st : mantle " elements carries symactic thl brmation  . ) There are two major clusters of reasons why an ideal ~  ; cmantic intermediate representation of the language  . independent ld sketched above is impossible , however desirable it may be i >_ theory . 
Filet of ' all , tramarerm languaged n depende utsernanlicale . 
man N . Whatever symbol sam chosen -- words , moiplmmes , numbers , letter codes . . . -- they are , always inherently I . mgtm ge-bnund . The elements of an artificial synthol system are either directly taken from an exist thg language  , or have a a explicit mimplicit definition in a rcli  . ', rcncehm guage . Itisira . 
possible to make a tufty language-independent sys em of sym  . 
bols , if it is to possess the fill expressiveness of a hm nan language  ( ef . Schnbell 1986) . Symbols cannot be giveu a meaning independenlly of a reference hmguage  ; I\[leir meaning can only become autonomous by being used thalanguage community during along period  . This is why a plamle ( t language like Esperanto could not rank as al hll . -fledged hn . 
nmnlanguage fimn the very day the first textbook was pub  . 
lished but had to develop slowly from ml artificial  , refer cncelanguage-dependent symbol system into m ~ autotiomoushmguage by being used in a community  ( cf . Sehnbe it fot thc . ) . 
Perhaps this is ant musu N argument in a e omtm talkmal con  . 
text , where people are u~d to defining symbol systems which they call " languages "  . It shoukl be borne in mind , however , that such defined syml x ) l system sam subsets of an existing human language  ( or o1' several )  . Machine translation , by contrast , is concerned with translat in G texts between thunaulanguages  , which hemasem , ' mticpoint of view--even if dielmlguage may be simplified or the text pre-edited--are in -herm Ny more complicated than artificial symbol systems  . 
Not only are deft ) ted semantic units in such systems reference hm guage-dependent  , but them adto the basic semantic units needed is via semantic deeom positim ~- with all its  we11-find universally valid semantic atoms ( or primitives )  , but none of the many system suggested has met with acknowledgement or proved applicable on any wider scale  . Individual languages cut up and label reality in different ways  ; noun derlying " smallest semantic units " have been found as yet and possibly they will never be found  . In my opinion the conclusion is that meaning is not portioned  , so that no smallest portions can be found . 
Semantic atoms would be needed for totally spelling out the content of a text in a language -independent way  , that is , in such a way that it would be suited for translation into any arbitrary target language  . In many machine translation systems , ambitions are not that high . Most often , intermediater presentations use words or other language-bound symbols  , decorated with semantic features which are held to be cross linguistically valid  . Yet , what is true for semantic atoms applies to semantic features as well  , albeit in a less obvious way : They contain portions of meaning which do not function in all languages in the same way  . That semantic atoms and features are not as crosslinguistic as they seem to be  , is also suggested by the experience that they are very hard to define and delimit in a way that fulfils exactly the required function  , or denotes precisely the intended distinction for a large number of languages simultaneously  . It is because of this that intermediater presentations often have to be adapted  , attuned or even redesigned when a new source or target language is added to the system  . Such representations fail to provide for multilingual extensibility  . 
3. Case frames
The second cluster of reasons for the impossibility of an ideal  , purely semantic , intermediate representation concern seman-tic relations  . One of the best-known approaches to making semantic relations explicit is Fillmore's ease grammar  ( 1968 )  . Deep cases are often believed to be crosslinguistically valid  . Although there are many substantial difficulties in del-imiting and labelling deep cases  ( cf . Fillmore 1987) , many machine translation systems perform transfer with case frames  . This works quite well to a certain degree , but slowly the insight is gaining ground that deep cases nevertheless are language-specific  . If case frames really were an autonomoustertium comparation is  , translating on the basis of case frames would mean just filling in target language forms in a language-independent case frame obtained from the source language analysis  . But in reality case frame-based translation often entails a transfer from a source language -specific case frame to a target language one  . Evidence for this need comes first from general inguistics  ( e . g . Pleines 1978:372; Engel 1980:11) , but recently alms up in computational linguistics as well  ( Tsujii 1986: . 656; cf . Schubert 1987a ) . This is in concord with Harold Somers ' ( 1987: viii ) observation about the popularity of case grammar , already declining in theoretical linguistics , but still invogue in computational pplications . 
Returning to the argument about a purely semantic system  , it can be concluded that neither the elements nor the relations  , which together should constitute the theoretically desirable language-independent intermediater presentation  , actually exist . This insight , among others , is the origin of the idea of implicitness in machine translation  . 
4. Implicitness
Since there are no crosslinguistically valid semantic relations  , and since case frames arc therefore language -specific  , the transfer step actually lacks a language -independent intermediate stage  . This means that , where semantic relations are concerned , there is no tree pivot . There are only source structures and target structures with a transfer step somewhere between them  . Given the notorious difficulties of defining deep cases  , translation to make semantic relations explicit . As they are language-specific anyway , it is much easier to perform transfer at another level  , which is language-specific as well , but about which there is much more certainty : syntax  . If transfer is carded out at the syntactic level , semantic deep cases can remain implicit . 
Before describing this in somewhat more detail , a few words about the semantic elements . If there are no language-independent semantic relations  , looking for language-independent semantic elements does not seem worthwhile either  . Yet , the above discussion of the function of an intermediate representation et ails another unexpected implication : Since an intermediater presentation is the only link between source and target languages  , it must be as expressive as any of them . If high-quality machine translation is the goal , this condition is inevitable , since the intermediate representation has to render and to convey the full and unsimplified content of the text  , to make further translation possible . It must be feasible to translate into such an intermediate representation from all other languages  . Interestingly enough , this translata-bility criterion is the property by which human language is distinguished from artificial symbol systems by one of the classics of linguistics  , Louis Hjelmslev (1963:101) . According to him , a human language ( hister misdagligs prog ) is a language into which all other communication systems  ( human languages and artificial symbol systems ) can be translated . As a consequence of H jelms lev's theory , an intermediate representation with the expressiveness indispensable for multilingual high-quality machine translation should indeed be itself a human language  . 
Now the elements and relations in the semantic system of the intermediate representation can be considered together  . The discussion so far has yielded two results : There are no language-independent semantic elements and there are no crosslinguistically valid semantic relations  . Moreover , the required expressiveness entails the consequence that the intermediate representation should be a fullfledged language  . 
If the pivot of a machine translation system is a language  ( rather than an artificial symbol system )  , this removes the problems of spelling out semantic dements and relations  . Semantics can then be kept implicit , that is , it can be expressed in tile intermediate language by purely linguistics means  , in the way illustrated below . 
If the intermediate language is a full language , the syntactic side of the translation process comes down to performing two direct translations : first from a source language into the intermediate language  , and then from the intermediate into a target language  . Moreover , if one opts for a human intermediate language , this brings about a substantial change in the design of a pivot-based mnltilingual machine translation system  . Artificial intermediate representations are designed to achieve multilingual extensthill tyat the level of transfer  . The conditions that provide for extensibility are thus directly intertwined with the mechanisms that translate from one particular language into another  . But when the intermediater presentation is a language  , multilingual extensibility shifts to another level : it is now catered for by the combination of language pair modules in which the intermediate language is always one of the two counterparts  . This considerably facilitates the design , since mullllingual extensibility with all its needs of crosslinguistically valid grammatical elements and relations no longer interferes with the translation steps proper  . For this type of direct translation within a language pair  , a translation method that performs the syntactic transfer on the basis of syntactic functions is both suitable and sufficient  . 
A possible implementation of this idea is found in the meta-taxis translation method  ( Schubert 1987b : 222ff . ) . It works on the basis of language-specific syntactic functions and contrastive transformationntles that cater for the transfer step  . Meta-taxismle , ~ ; can be seen as contrastive lexical redundancy rules  ore1' a bilingual dictionary . Tee hulcally speaking , they are treett~msduction rules which presuppose the dictionary to consist of tree-structured entries  . Metataxis is contrastive dependency syntax for translation  . Of course it is not the only possible way of performing the syntactic part of a machine translation procedure  . A dependency-based approach , however , is esprit\[ally well suited for a multilinguul system  , since dependency syntax takes syntactic functions as its primary units  , using syntactic form as a secondary means . This is an essential enhancement , since syntactic functions - i . e . dependency retation . such as subject , object etc . -are translation-relevant , where a syntactic form characteristics-uch as a word's Position vis-~t-vis other words  , it sendings for case , number , lerson , tense , mood , aspect etc . -are needed for monolingual nalysis and synthesis steps in an overall translation proo '  . ss , but are not themselves directly translation -relevant  )  . 
As forth ? ~ semantic side of the translation process  , an intermediate representation tempts its designers to make explicit all the semantic distinctions needed for specific source and target languages  , which ultimately leads as tray if mnltilingual extensibility is aimed at  . This is the danger of an " exploding " pivot . 
If the pivot is a language , the degree of semantic detail it provides can be taken as a natural limitation to this explosive tern dency : An implementation is possible in which the entire semantic pn~cessing needed for a machine translation procedure is carried out with linguistic means in the intermediate language only  . This means that whatever semantic elements or relations are used  , they are always expressed by means of words aria morphemes from the intermediate language  . No semanticll ; atures , no selection rules and no metalinguistic labels or togs are used  . This is in good agreement with the metataxis approach to the syntactic side of the process : Meta-taxis provides all syntactically possible translations of a source sentence  ( clause , paragraph . _ ) and the semantic processing performs a choice among these Alternatives  .   ( It normally needs a substanlial pragmatic augmentation witlik now ledge of the world etc  ; ef . Papegaaij / Sehubert for thc . : chapter 3 . 5 . ) . This semantic process can be carried out entirely in the intermediate language and is titus suitable for metataxis altemative translations generated from whatever source language  . 
The second half of the translation , from the intermediate into a target lauguage , could in theory work in the same way , but this would presuppose semantic processing in all the different target lanl  , ,uages . The requirement of extensibility is much better met  , if all the semantic processing for the second half as well is carried out by means of the intermediate language  . 
This is indeed possible . The semantic-pragmatic processing in the second half is-to put it in plain words-conceroed with fitting in the alternative translations offered in the bilingual dictionary  ( intermediate language ---> target language ) into the context of the sentence and the entire text  . What is needed for assessing the probability of different contexts is information about he typical contexts of the words in question : word expert knowledge  . It is possible to describe the typical contexts of target language words by means of words and phrases in the intermediate language  . Thus all semantic-pragmatic comparisons and probability computations are carried out exclusively in the intermediate language  , and as a consequence only a single semantic system is needed for tratts lating between arbitrary languages : a system in the intermediate language  , ffrids central system is built up within the limitations of fl~e intermediate language without reference to any peculiarities of p  . a . r tieular source and target languages , the requirement of complet extensibility is fulfilled  . 
5. Conch ~ slon
An inte . uediate language for high-quality machine translation needs to hea fullfledged human language  , due to the inherent lack of expressiveness that is an inevitable characteristic of artificial symbol systems  .   1 argue that one can make a virtue of this necessity : A human language as intermediater presentation allows for rendering the full content of the text without making semantic elements and relations more explicit than what is expressed by appropriately interrelated words of the intermediate language  . 
Of course the question arises whether , in that ease , any arbitrary language would be suited for this function  . It should be pointed out , however , that the full range of tradeoffs related to the choice of an intermediate language cannot be dealt within this three-page contribution  . My ideas about implicitness are closely related to one of at least three fundamental criteria for an intermediate language : expressiveness  . The other two are regularity and semantic autonomy  . Only when all criteria are considered together , can a choice be made . 

Engel , Ulrich ( 1980 ) : Fiigungs potenz and Sprachvergleich . VomNutzeneines semantischer weiter ten Valenz begriff siir diek on trastive Linguisfik  . In : WirkendesWort30, pp . 122 Fillmore , Charles J . (1968): The ease for case . In : Universals in linguistic theory . E . Bach/R . T . Harms ( eds . ) . New York:
Holt , Rinehart & Winston , pp . 1-88
Fillmore , Charles J .   ( 1987 ) : A private history of the concept " frame " . In : Concepts of case . Ren6 Dirven/Gi inter Radden ( eds . ) . Tiibingen : Narr , pp . 2836 Hjelmslev , Louis (1963): Sproget . Kcbenhavn : Berling skef or lag\[2nded . \] Papegaaij , B . C . /KlansSchubert(forthc . ): Text coherence in translation . Dordrecht/providence : For is Pleines , Jochen ( 1978 ) : Istder Universali ~ tsans pruchder Kasus -grammatik bereehtigt ? In : Valence  , semantic case , and grammatical relations . Wemer Abraham ( ed . ) . Amsterdam : Benjamins , pp . 335-376 Schubert , Klans ( 1986 ) : Linguistic and extralinguistic knowledge . 
In : Computers and Translation 1, pp . 125-152 Schubert , Klaus ( 1987a ) : Warmbedeutenzwei W6rter dasselbe ? 0bet Tiefenkas usals Tertium comparation is . In : Linguistik in Deutschland . We mer Abraham/Ritva Arhammar ( eds . ) . 
Tiibingen : Niemeyer , pp . 109-117
Schubert , Klans (1987b ): Metataxis . Contrastive dependency sntax for machine translation  . Durdrecht/Providence : For is Schubert , Klaus ( for the . ): Ausdmckskraft und Regelm ~ l\]igkeit . 
In : Language Problems and Language Planning 12   \[1988\] Somers , H . L .   ( 1987 ) : Valency and case in computational linguistics . Edinburgh : Edinburgh University Press Tsujii , Junichi ( 1986 ) : Future directions of machine translation . 
In: 11th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Proceedings of Coling'86 . Bonn : Institut fii range w and te Kommunikations - and $ prach forschung  , pp 655-
