A Computer Readability Formula of Japanese Texts for Machine 

TATEISIYuka , ONO Yoshihiko , YAMAD Altisao
Department of Information Science , Faculty of Science , University of Tokyo , 
7-3-1, Hongo , Bunkyoku , Tokyo , 113, Japan

A readability formula is obtained that can be used by computer programs for style checking of Japanese texts and need not syntactic or semantic information  . The formula is derived as a linear combination of tile surface characteristics of the text that are related to its readability :  ( 1 ) the average number of characters per sentence ,   ( 2 ) for each type of characters ( Roman alphabets , kanzis , hiraganas , katakanas ) , relative frequencies of rims ( maximal swings ) that , : on sists only of that type of characters ,   ( 3 ) the average number of characters per each type of runs  , and ( 4 ) tooten ( comma ) tokuten ( period ) ratio . 
To find the proper weighting , principal component analysis ( PCA ) was applied to these characteristics taken from 77 sample texts . 
We have found a component which is related to the readability  . Its scores match to the empirical knowledges of reading ease  . 
We have also obtained experimental confirmation that the component is an adequate measure for stylistic ease of reading  , by the cloze procedure and by the examination on the average lime taken to fill out one blank of the cloze texts  . 
1 o Introduction
This study aims to obtain a readability formula that can be used by computer programs for style checking of Japanese texts  . A readability formula predicts the difficulty of a document that may result from its writing style  , but not from its content , organization , or format . A readability index is calculated from the measures of surface characteristics of the document that are thought to indicate the stylistic difficulty without an attempt to parse sentences or to consult a large dictionary  . 
Many of the readability formulae for English , ( for example , Flesch's Reading Ease Score/Flese h 1949/and Automated Readability Index/Smith 1970/  )  , use the average length ( number of syll-ables or lettors ) of words and the average number of words in sentences in a document for calculating the readability index  . Word length is a measure of the lexical difficulty  , i . e . , difficulty of the vocabulary used in the document  . Sentence lng this a measure of the Syntactic difficulty or complexity of the sentence  . While reaodability indices are derived from simple formulae  , they predict reasonably well the difficulty of a document  . This is because the sentence length and the word length are highly correlated with feature such as the complexity of the sentence and the difficulty of the word  , respectively . 
Existing scoring methods for Japanese , such as the one proposed by/Morioka 1958/or/Yasumoto   1983/  , use the sentencolength measured in letters instead of words and the percentage of kanz is  ( Chinese characters )  , the latter used for estimating the difficulty of the vocabulary  . Both rate the average number of letters per sentence and the percentage of kanz is in the text independenly and do not combine the two factors into a single index  . Ate~t with longer sentences i estimated as difficult  , and a text with more kanzis is also estimated as difficult  . Morioka , who surveyed on school text books , showed that the upper grade text books contain longer sentences on the average and more kanzi  . 
Yasumoto states that documents with more kanzi are less readable even for adults  , for the following reason . Kanziarelograms , one roughly corresponding to a word . Documents using more kanzis , therefore , apt to include more different words and should demand more reading skill  . 
A problem of rating the sentence lngth and the percentage of kanzi independently is that these two may yield an inconsistent rating  . Generally , a sentence becomes longer if its kanz is are rewritten in kanas  . Thus sentence lengths depend on representations . 
There seems to have been no attempt on combining the factors of sentence lngth and the proportion of kanzi  . On the other hand , no rationale is given for the separate measurements  . It is possible to derive a single index that can assess readability of Japanese text  . 
/Sakamoto 1967/proposed a method of scoring the relative difficulty of children's books to match the reading skill of the intended readers  . His method consists of three independent ratings ;   ( 1 ) the proportion of fundamental words based on /Sakamoto  1958/  ,   ( 2 ) the proportion of sentences that are made of more than  10 words , and (3) the proportion of kanzi . However , Sakamoto's method introduce the problem of measuring sentence length in words in place of tile conflict between sentence length and representation  . 
Using word count o1' word length as an estimator of readability is not practical in the case of Japanese  . Since Japanese does not use word segmentation si nomaal writing  , dividing sentences into words needs parsing and consulting dictionary  . Thus , a scoring method based on words , such as Sakamoto's , is costly . This is especially so when scoring is done by a computer  , because x tradevice such as parsers , a large dictionary , and , sometimes , eman-tic analyzers are required for word segmentation alone  . 
Another problem with the traditional scoring methods is that they have ignored katakana  , which are used to represent foreign words . Recent documents , especially scientific and technical ones , use a lot of foreign words . /Watanabe 1983/reports that , in a year's issues of the Jonrual of lnfonnation Processing Society of Japan  , Vol .  17 , about a neighth among the characters used is katakana  . /Satake 1982/surveyed the article of magazines published today and found that the ratio of katakana ranged from  4  . 44 to 13 . 75 percent . Thus percentage of katakana is not negligible in scoring today's documents  . Katakana words mean imported foreign words , old and new , which are often unfamiliar to readers . 
Yet existing measures take into account only kanzi and are insufficient to score the today's technically oriente documents  . 
2. Factors of Readability
We have chosen the following four surface characteristics a factors of readability :  ( 1 ) relative frequency of characters for each type of characters  ,   ( 2 ) the length of a run ( maximal string that consists of one type of characters  )  ,  . 
(3) the length of a sentence , and ( 4 ) the number of too tens ( commas ) per sentence . 
The former two are related to the difficulty of vocabulary in a document  ; he latter two are related to the complexity of sentences in a document  . 

Character Frequencies
The most common Japanese writing system is based on the mixture of kanzis  , kanas ( hiraganas and katakanas ) , the Roman alphabets , Arabic numerals , and some other alphabets and symbols . Almostal ! normal writing is a mixture of kanzis  , hiraganas , and katakanas ( and others ) . Frequencies of types of characters in a Japanese text are known to affect its readability at least in the following manner : Kanzi  , as mentioned before , are considered to make texts difficult . Since katakan and alphabets are used for foreign words  , high frequencies of these characters indicate that the text contain many unfamiliar words  . Hiragana are used to represent the rest of the text and more of them are considered to make texts easier  . There is no rigid orthography for Japanese . 
Nevertheless , the way an adult Japanese spells out a sentence in usual writing is roughly fixed  . Kanz is are used for nouns and for the root parts of verbs  , adjectives , adverbs , and the like . Hiraganas are used to write inflections and other grammatical parts of sentences  , and katakanas are used mainly for the transcription of foreign words  . So in passages written in the common way , the use of types of characters , i . e . , kanzi , hiragana , katakana , etc . , reflects the use of vocabulary and can be an ' indicator of the difficulty of the passage  . 
It is possible to write the words usually written in kanzi in hiragana  . However , psychological experiments such as the ones conducted by/Kitao  1960/ or / Hirose 1983/ a reader finds it difficult to read the texts represented in the way unfamiliar to the reader  . In Kitao's experiment , subjects took less time to read and recognize the word or the sentence written in a common way than written solely in hiragana  . In Hirose's experiment , the words usually written in kanzi are harder to recognize than the words usually written in kana when both type of words are written in kana  . Both results show that words or sentences in the representation more-familiar to a reader are more readable than those in less familiar representation  . 

In the ordinary representation , a boundary of the types of characters corresponds to the boundary of words or smaller grammatical parts thereof  . That is , a series of letters of the same type in the text , bounded by other character types corresponds to a word or a smaller grammatical part  . We will call such a series a run , i . e . , a run is a maximal string that consists of only one type of characters  . 
It is not a grammatical unit . Usually , a run corresponds to one or more words . A verb or an adjective is often found across two runs  . 
Such a word no rulally has its root part written in kanzi and its inflection part in hiragana  . 
As the boundary of runs roughly correspond to the boundary of words  , the different grappe a rance of kanzi and k an a letter shelps a reader to parse a sentence  . Hence , long runs , when they happen , hide the word boundaries and makes a sentence l ssreadable  . 
Longkanzi runs give another problem to the readability  . 
Kango . can be formed into a compound word simply by concatenating two or more of them successively  . The meaning of the new word is formed by the meanings of its elements  . However , how each element is related to each other in the compound word is not clear from mere concatenation  . A reader must pragmatically see the relation . Therefore , it is often the case that the meaning of a compound kango is ambiguous  . For example , siken-ki can be read assiken-suru-kikai ( testing machine ) or assiken-sareru-kikai ( machine to be tested )  ; rinzi-kyouiku-singi-kai meaning rinzi-ni-kyouiku -ni-tuite-singi-suru-kai  ( an adhoe council to deliberate on education ) can be read as rinzi-no-kyouiku-ni-tuite-singi -suru-kai  ( a council to deliberate on an adhoeeducation )  . 

It is unlikely that there may be any good theory possible about the relationship between run frequencies and readability  . 
Nevertheless , the run frequencies may be used in a similar manner as character fequencies  . In a study preceding this/Tate is i 1987/ we found that the run frequencies are correlated with the frequencies of the character of corresponding types  ( 0 . 6 < r < 0 . 9 , depending on character types ) and a unit of run is sufficien to obtain the information otherwise supplied by both characters and runs  . 
Sentence Length
The length of sentences ia known factor of readability as/Morioka  1958/and other survey show . In Japanese , as in other languages , long sentences tend to have complicated structures  . 
Sentence length can be measured in the number of characters it contains  . Though Sakamoto ' survey of children's textbook / Sakamoto  1963/shows that the number of words per sentences ia more accurate indicator of the grade level than the number of characters  , it also shows that the two are in good proportion  , the correlation coefficient being 1 . 00 . 

Too tens , like commas , are put at the end of a phrase . The number of too tens per sentence corresponds to the number of phrases per sentence  . / Hayasi 1959/found that junior high schools U : dents and senior high students understood the text more precisely if modifying phrases are separated and made into independent sentences  . Following this result , a sentence with smaller number of phrase is easier to understand  . /Kozuru 1987/ found that the average number of too tens in a sentence increases with student's grade level  . These findings indicate that the number of too tens in a sentence is greater in more difficult-to-read texts  . 
Thus , the number of too tens is a factor of readability . 
3. The Method of Analysis
We shall first extract several numerical characteristics of style from texts and then derive a readability formula as a linear combination of the values of those characteristics  . A nurflerical index is only a rough scale of readability  . It should be calculated with simple devices and methods  . We use character as the unit of measuring length for the sake of simple calculation  . 
Several surface characteristics are extracted from the materials  . Difference of the characteristics among materials consists of several factors  . It may be factored into variation of the topic area of the texts  , and the variation of style . Style may differ by the writer or by the intentions of the text  . Introductory textbooks should be written easier than technical papers intended for experts and the authors will be careful not to make it difficult to read  . 
Thus they will be written in a style easier to read than the style of technical papers  . Translations tend to have a particular style , highly dependent on the syntax of the original anguage  . The particular style of translations is often found awkward as Japanese and less readable  . The distinctive feature of the texts with different intentions can be used as a criteria of assessing readability  . 
To find the distinctive feature of texts from the surface characteristics  , the principal component analysis ( PCA ) extracts factors of variance of the characteristics  . We will then examine tile components , by comparing component scores for the materials with the empirical knowledges of readability  . In this way we shall choose a component relevant to the stylistic readability  . A principal component is a linear combination of the variables  . The formula which computes the component can be used as a readability formula  . 

We have chosen the ten variables that represent the four fac ~ tots of readal ~ ility :  ( 1 ) for each type of characters ( (Roman ) lphabets , kanzis , hira-ganas , katakanas ) , relative frequency of runs ( maximal strings ) that consists only of that type of characters ,   ( 2 ) the avelage number of letters per each type of runs  , (3) the avelage number of letters per sentence , and (4) tooten lokuten ratio . 
Sentence lengfl ~ is measured in the number of characters between two adjacent sentence-ending marks  ( kuten , exclamation marks , and question marks ) . Kuten , unlike period , is placed only at the end of a sentence , not as an indicator of abbreviations . 
Therefore , the end of a sentence is a hnost always detected by detecting kuten  , although the endquotation embedded in a sentence is also counted as the end of a sentence  . 

We must compare the readability anaong the texts written in tile common way  , that is , the texts written by authors as they are . 
For exampl ~ , the textbooks for elementary school children are inadequate  . This is because those textbooks are written in an unusual way  . They use hiragana where most adults use kanzi , transcribing the kanzi the readers are not expected to learn yet  . 
We will therefore take the documents written by adults for adults as materials of the analysis  . 
Seventy-seven ( 77 ) documents were selected as sample texts to extracthe data from  . Seventy of the samples are machine-readable document shat were stored in our laboratory  . They are technical papers , textbooks for collage students , and translations of computer science materials , written by 13 authors . Seven of the samples are included as indicators for reading ease  . Five of these indicators a ~ e text judged as easy . Three of the rft are taken from the books on technical writing  ; two are taken from essays for general readers . They are considered to be easier than the papers or textbooks for scientists  . The remaining two are the text judged as difficult  . One of them is a decision on the case of an infringement of copyright of a computer program  ; the other is a juridical paper about copyright and new media such as magnetic tapes  . Juridical texts are empirically known as hard to read  . 
Tables ~ figures , references , and expressions which are displayed i it dependently from the passage are deleted from tile samples  . 
4 . Result of the Principal Component Analysis ( PCA ) The plincipal component analysis is done by S routines/Becker  1984/on Vax 8600 at the Computer Center of the University of Tokyo  . The components and the loadings of each variables are shown in table  4--1  . 
The first three components ( eigenvalue > 1 ) are examined . 
Total variance x plained by these components is 70% . Figure 41 shows thes , : atter plot of sample texts . The letteride signate introductory textbooks , mmagazine articles other than technical papers , ptt ~ chnical papers , t and T designate translations from English papers  , and D and E designate the difficult and easy indicators  , respectively . 
The following are observed for the first component . 
(11 ) This component reflects the occurrences of alphabets  ; separates the texts with little alphabetic content and the text a burtdant with alphabetic content  . 
(12 ) The texts with many equations and abbreviations have high scor  , ~s on this component . 
The sc . 0 reont his component shows the area of topic . 
The following are observed for the second component  . 
(21 ) This component separates the texts with long sentences and long kanzi runs from the other texts  . 
(22 ) The component score agrees with human judgement about easy/difficult texts  . It is high ontile texts judged easy and low on the texts judged difficult  . The second component score shows the distinction more clearly than the first or the third  . 
(23 ) Introductory textbooks have generally higher scores than papers  . Again , the second component score shows the distinction more clearly than tile first or file third  . 
Since long sentences and long kanzi runs make texts less readable as stated before  ,   ( 21 ) indicates that the second component can be an indicator of readability  .   ( 22 ) and ( 23 ) also indicates that he second component is related to readability  . 
The third component shows a difference of proportions of katakan and kanzi  . From table 41 we can find that the variables on kanzi have positive loadings and the variables on hiragana nd katakana have negative loadings on the component  . Thus , the component shows the proportion of kanzi , in the way that it increases with texts with more kanzi  . 
5. Principal Component Scores and Style
We have observed tile following phenomena on the second component  . 
Improvement and Principal Component Scores Five of the sample texts are chapters  ( indicated T in the figure 41 ) of the final versions of the translation of an English paper by different translators  . Their component scores were compared with those of tile respective draft versions  . ( The drafts are not among the samples . ) The first three component scores of the final manuscripts were uniformly higher than those of drafts  , i . e . , tile scores became higher with the improvement of their style  . The differences between the final versions and the respective draft versions are shown in table  51  . The mean difference of the second eomponent is found greater than that of the first at the  5 percent significance ( 17 = 0 . 044 ) and greater than that of the third at the 10 percent significance but not at the 5 percent significance ( 19 = 0 . 098) . Thus , the difference of the second component is greater than the other two  . This agrees with the observations on the distribution of texts  , that is , easier-to-read texts have higher second component score than difficult ones  , since a text becomes easier to read after improvementi general  . 
Frequencies of Passive Forms
Table 52 below show stile correlation between the component scores and the frequencies of passive  . Passive forms are counted using the pattern matching method proposed by/Ushijima  1987/  . The count is divided by the number of the kutens in a sample  , yielding the ratio to passives per sentences , o1' sentence-endings . 
Japanese passive forms are also used for potentials  . For example , mirarer u may mean either be seen ( passive ) o1' can see ( potential ) and taberare ru may have one of three meanings : be eaten  , caneat , and can be eaten . Thus , frequent use of passives tend to make a doc~ment vague and less readable  . 
The second component scores have a higher correlation than other component scores  . Note that the correlation coefficient is negative  . This agrees with the observation that the second component score is lower on difficult-to-read texts and that the frequency of passives i higher on such texts  . 
Figure 51 shows the plot of the second component scores and the frequencies of passives per  1000 sentences . The line in the figure is the regression line . 
6516. The Derived Formula
The results above support head equacy of the second component as a scale of readability  . To summarize , the second component score may be used as a readability index because of the following facts  . 
(1 ) The component score agrees with human judgement about easy/difficult texts  . Easier-to-read texts yield higher valued scores . 
(2 ) Introductory materials give higher scores than technical papers  ,   ( 3 ) The score increases as the result of improvement by editing of texts  ,   ( 4 ) The frequencies of passive forms have a negative correlation  ( -0 . 53) with the component score . 
The first component and the third component do not possess all of these properties  . Thus the second is a better measure of readability than the first or the third  . 
The second component score is transformed so that the mean on those  77 samples equals 50  , the standardeviation equals 10 , and let the value be higher on easy texts . This yields formula , RS = 0 . 06x pa + 0 . 25 xph -0 . 19 xpc -0 . 61 xpk-1 . 34 xIs-1 . 35 xla +7 . 52 xlh-2 2 . 1 ? lc -5 . 3 xlk-3 . 87 xcp-10 9 . 1 where pa , ph , pc , p k are the percentages of alphabet runs , hiragana runs , kanzi runs , and katakanamns , respectively ; Is is the average numbers of letters per sentence  ; la , lh , lc , Ik are the average numbers of letters per alphabet run  , hiragana run , kanzirun , and katakana run , respectively ; and cp is the tooten tokuten ratio . 
7. Validation of the Derived Formula
We have also obtained experimental conformation on the idea that the RS is an adequate measure for stylistic ease of reading  , by the cloze procedure/Taylor 1953/ , /Shiba 1957/ . 
Cloze procedure judges the relative reading difficulty of texts to a particular population  . This difficulty mostly related to the content of the text  . Suppose readers have no background knowledge of the content  . They are not likely to be able to fill a blanked -out word where a technical term or some other word that requires the knowledge of the area the content belongs to be filled in  . In such cases , the cloze score or the doze percentage becomes low for the text even if an experts finds it very easy to read  . 
Stylistic difficulty may be also measured by this procedure  , according to the experiment of \] Kitao 1960/ . In the experiment subsequent to the one mentioned in the previous section  , he required the subjects to perform the cloze procedure on two materials  ; the same text represented in two different ways . One is in the usual representation , mixing kanzi and kana ; the other is written entirely in hiragana . The cloze score of the usual form was higher than the one entirely in kana  . This result was consistent with the result hat the subjects required longer time in reading the text entirely in kana  , as mentioned in section 2 . 
As the cloze procedure scores both the difficulty of style and the difficulty of the content  , another measure is needed to confirm that our formula is a measure of the stylistic readability  . For this purpose , we recorded the total time each subjectook to complete a cloze text  . The recorded time was divided by the number of blanks  , thus converted into the average time taken to fill out one blank  . 
The process a subject a kest of illoutablank is composed of four phases  , i . e . , content of the passage ,   ( 2 ) the phase of surmising what is missing ( as a notion )  ,   ( 3 ) the phase of choosing the proper word to supplement  , and (4) the phase of writing down that word . 
The time for writing down a word is fairly constant  , unless the word contains extremely complicated kanzi  . Therefore , the variation of time from text to text is the variation of time for the phase  ( 1 )  ,  (2) , and (3) , i . e . , understanding the passage , surmising the missing notion , and choosing the proper word . The text which is stylistically difficult takes more time in the phase  ( 1 )  . Thus the difficult-to-read texts must require more time filling out blanks than easy-to-read ones  . 

The materials of the experiment , denoted by p1 through p6 , were taken from the six sample papers among the 77 used for the PCA . Each was about 500 characters in size . Three of them ( p1 , p2 , p3) had high RSs ( RS>50) and the three ( p4 , p5 , a 6) had low RSs ( RS<50) . 
Every eighth word of each text was blanked out , i . e . , the proportion of blanked out words to the whole words was  12  . 5% . Ten under score ( '_' ) characters were put where a word was blanked out . Among several different definitions of Japanese words used  , the one which gives the smallest unit was taken . The materials were printed out on a sheet of A4-sized paper , one material per paper . 
Twenty-eight subjects ( 2 5 undergraduate students and 3 gra-duate students ) participated in the experiment . Each subject was assigned three materials fi~mp 1 - p 6 selected randomly , so that the half of the subjects were assigned each material  . The subjects were required to fill blanks ( underscored parts ) with words they thoughtmost appropriate to the context  , taking as much time they need . The subjects were told that each word-unit was smallest possible  , and therefore the deleted part might not match what they think is a word  . The subjects were also told that the materials that they had were independent from each other  . 
At the same time , the subjects were required to record the time when he/she start to fill out each paper  , i . e . , one material , and when he/she completed , for each paper , to the unit of seconds . 

Completed sheets , expect for one by a subject who gave up the procedure in the middle are analyzed  . Whether the word filled in matched the original or not was judged according to / Shiba  1957/  . Some sheets are without the record of the time . Such sheets are included for calculation of doze pereen\[ages but excluded from the analysis of time  . The eloze percentages and the medians of the time taken to fill a blank are shown in table  71  . 
The cloze percentages were higher on texts with higher RS  , although the correlation was not statistically significant  ( the correlation coefficient between cloze percentages and RSs is  0  . 295) . 
For the analysis of time taken , the texts were divided into two categories ; the ones with RS>50 and the ones with RS < 50 . The average time for filling a blank was compared between the two categories of the texts using the median test  . The result is shown in table 7-2 . The difference of the time for filling a blank is shorter on texts with high RSs  . 
In addition , we compared a document and its rewritten version by the same procedure  . The material r 1 was taken from the final report of rinzi-kyouiku -singikai  ( National Council of Educational Reform ) of Japanese Government . The document r1 had an extremely low score ( RS=27 )  . The material r2 was rewritten from r 1 by di?iding long sentences into shorter sentences and substituting Japanese words for words of Chinese origin  . The inte . u-tion of the rewriting is to increase RS . The RS of the rewritten text is 47 , nearly the average of the sample texts of PCA ( = 5 ( I )  . 
The cloze percentage and the average time for fll ing a blank is compm'ed con  ( pared as above . The cloze percentage of rite rewritten version r2 was 59  . 6%, higher than that of the original r1 (56 . 6 %) . The average time for billing a blank is shorter for the rewritten version than for the original  ( the mexlian was 9 . 6 sec . for r2 and 10 . 9 see . for r1) . The median test of time e ompadug the two materials showed that the difference was not statistically significant  ( )~:~ :- 0 )  . 
These ret ; ult show that ( 1 ) the subjects take shorter time with the texts of higher RS in understanding and guessing the n fissing words of the text  , than wilh the text of lower RS , though the result is not statist-ieally significant  , and that ( 2 ) the subjt : cts guess the missing words in the high RS texts more co~cectly than those in the low RS texts  . 
The difi'ereneeil ~ time a subjecl spent to fill one blank in the two types of texts is significant  , by the median test . 
The sercudts did not show that RS is related to the difficulty of the content or the vocabulary of the texts  , t to wever , RS is related to the stylistic difiiculty , that is , RS show the ~ vlative difficulty of : mnsfb , mation from the text itself to the content . 
Therefore , RS is judged useful to measure the readability of texts in general  . 
We judged that the clozc score is more relate xl to the difficulty of the content hanto the difficulty of the style  . The re--foreweint roduced another measure tbr stylistic difficulty  . Acom . 
rnentfi ' om the experimental subject who gave up the procedure coufit'ms on  , judgement to be reasonable . Ilegave uphe task because he has not enough knowledge of them ' ea of these texts  , especially , of technical papers . 
g . Concluding Remarks
We have : derived a readability formulati ' or h the multivariate analysis on w triance of surface characteristics of Japanese technical documents intended for adult readers  . 
The mean , file minimum , and the maximum v'alue of RS over the several types of texts are shown in table  8-  . 1 . 
As with all indices , RS can be increased by revision which dues not necessarily enhance readability  . For example , if a text is written entirely in hiragana and the sentences are cut into short shorter ones  , lh and ph increases and Is decreases . This revision yields greater value of RS but does not produce the text easier to read  . The formula shmdd be applied to the texts written in the common way To construct an index that is sensitive to the unrea-dability caused by unusually many  ldraganas0 we may nee Aaqua ? dratic formula on hiragana rim length or hiragana run frequencies  . 
References/Recker 1984/Becker , R . A . and Chambers , J . M , " S : An Iuteroactive Environment for Data Analysis and Graphics "  , 
Wadsworth , Behnont , C~di Ibrnia , 1984/Flesch 1949/Flesch , R , " The Art of Readable Writing " , 1 Iarper , 1949 Blayasi 1959/II ayasi , S . , " Yomi no Nooryoku to Yomiyasusa no ? ooin to Yomareta Kekkato " Mathematial Linguistics  , Vol . 11, pp . 20-33 , 1959 ( In Japanese)/\[firose 1983/ltirose , T . , " The Effect of Script Freqnency on Semantic Processing of Kanji and Kana Words "  , Jail J . of Psychol . , Vol . 55, No . 3, pp .  173-176 , 1984 ( In Japanese )/ Kitao 1960/Kitao , N . , " Comparative Study on Readability of'lliragan ; t-bun ' and ' Kanji-majiri-bun '" , Jap . J . of Educ . 
Psychol . , Vol . 7, No . 4, pp .  15 , 1960 ( In Japanese )/ Kozuru 1987/Kozuru , Y . , " Basic Study for Readability listima-tion of Japanese Documents "  , Proc . of the 34th Convenlion of IPSJ , pp .  1295-1296 , 1987 ( In Japanese )/ Morioka 1958/Morioka , K . , " Readability " . In : Endo M . ted ) , " Kotobano Kagaku " , Nakayama Shoten , Tokyo , t958 ( In
Japanese )/ Sakamoto 1958/Sakamoto , I . , . " Kyooiku Kihon Goi" , Gakugei--Tosyo , Tokyo , 1958 ( In Japanese)/Sakanroto 1963/Sakamoto ,  1 . , " Assessing the Weight of Senten-ce Length . . . . An attempt o Approach the Readability " Science of Reading  ,  7 , pp .  16 , 1963 ( hi Japanese)/Sakamoto 1967/Sakamoto , I . , " A Yard stick lor Readability ", Sci . .
ence of Reading , 14, pp .  16 , 1967 ( In Japanese)/Satake 1982/Satake , H . , " On the Frequency Ratio of Kinds of Lctters in All Sorts of Sentence "  , Report of The Natiorutl I , anguage Research Institute No . 71, p . p . 32' l . -346,1982 ( in
Japaues ) / Shiba 1957/Shiba , S . , " A study of Readability Measurement . . . .
Application of Cloze Procedure to Japanese Language " Jap  . J . of Psychol . , Vol . 28 No . 2, pp . 67- 73 , 1957 ( In Japanese)/Smith 1970/Smith , E . A . and Kinkaid , P . , " Derivation and Validation of the Automated Readability Index for Use with Technical Materials "  , Human Factors , Vol . 12, pp . 457-464,1970/Tateisi1987/Taleisi,Y . , Ono , Y . , and Yamada , II . , " Statistical Analysis of Japanese Texts as a Basic Stuby for Readability "  , Proc . of the 3rd Symposium on Fluman lntert ' aee , pp .  1522,
Osaka , 1987 ( In Japanese)/Taylor 1953/Taylor , W . L . , " Cloze Procedure : A New Tool fgr Measuring readability "  , Journalism Quarterly , Fall 1953/Ushijima 1987/Ushijima , K . , Ishida , M . , Yoon J . , and Takagi T . , " A Simple Method to Extract Passive Voices in the Writing ' Fools for Japanese Documents "  , Trans . of IPSJ , Vol . 28, No . 8,1987 ( In
Japanese)/Watmmbe 1983/Watanabe S . and Ogisit L , " Zyoho Syorino fozito Yogo " , Preprint of Working Group WGJI 10 . .2 , lnt ) rmation Processing Society of Japan , 1983 ( In Japanese )/ gasumoto 1983/Yasumoto B . , " Set tokuno Bunsyo Gizyutu ",
Kodan-sya , Tokyo , 1983 ( In Japanese) .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . " -- rabie 4--l_Co-ti ~ onent Loadin ~ s .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . Ng VV gd21 q-f~o ; -#" fqOL-~--i--~OgY--NO . -d------F0 . -: I - - - - ~ O ~ -- g - - CNO - - ~--" ~ qo ? l--0--
Alpha . r.f.
Hira . r.f.
Kanzir.f.
? Kata.r . L
Sent . length
Alpha . r . L
Hh ' a.r . 1.
Kanzir.l.
Kata . r.1.
" l ' ooten_~r .. Kl ) en
Eigenvalu ~ th'o portion (%) f\]t ? ym!ative . (%)_0, R710 . 03 1 0 . 03-n . \[14 I0 . 17 -0 . 39 0 . I0-0 . 93 I 0 . 19 1 -0 . 13 0 . 03 1 -0 . 03 0,04 0 . 11 ~0 . 92 1 -0 . 14 1 0 . 24 0 . 0 ~0 . 18 0 . 10 0 . 09 n . m \]-0 . 25 1 -0,85 ~0 . 26 -0  . II ~0 . 02 -0 . 33 4) . 72 I -0 . 34I -0 . 10 -0 . 05 ,0 . 04 -0 . 55 0 . 16 0 . 34I -0 . 3'1 I0 . 04 0 . 75 0 . 39 00 . 07 -0 . 12-(I . 63 I 0 . 54 I . 0 . 22 0 . 25 0 . 02 o 0 . 14 -0 . 19 U . OI-0 . '18 I0 . 25 -0 . 39 -0 . 30 0 . 112 -0 . 0A . .0 . tI4I -0 . 63I -0 . 53 0 . 28 0 . 29 0 . :20 0 . 32__-t ) . 4_:3 ~!_ . -Q . 54 _!_ 0 . 36 .  __0 . 13 .   .   .   .   .   .   .  0  . 50 _-0 . 03_ -0  . 35 3 . ~c , t1 . 9 . ~ I1 . 34 0 . 95 0 . 65 0 . 53 0 . 45 36 . 60I 19 . 50I 13 . 40 9 . 50 6 . 50 5 . 30 4 . 50 _36 . 60 ! _56 . _\] o_\[_6')::~0 . . . . .  79 . ~L_~Ls . 6e,_99 . ? o_9_5:4o ~0 . 04 I . -0 . 22 -0 . 05 0 . 10I ?0 . 22 0 . 11 0 . 08 I -0 . 08 -0 . 15 o . 121-o . o4-oo 30 . 071 ( I . 13 0 . 02 o . o61-0 . 03 0 . ( . 
-0 . 38 , -0 . 0 l -0 . 02-o . 28 i -0 . 06 o .  (~ -0 . 14 I 0 . 0 -0 . 02 0_ . 9 J_0 . 291 0 . 13 0 . 04 2 . 90I 1 . 30 0 . 40 28=39 !_29 . 69  .   .   .   . 10 o : oo_r . f . = run frexluency , r . t . = rnlt length ip

PP ppp~)~~:)~"mi
EEEPP ~ pE
D-6-4-202
Se ~: ond 3 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . D . . . . . ~ lJ .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
2fl . 1-2-3-4-6'p\]~) p'fiePPpp~l~j ~ ~ , lu
Pp~lnli Iii ~ EEmini
EE
Pm .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . L .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . I .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . P .   .   .   .  ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 

Second ~ xiT-/---o . W--F--1 . , ~--~:~-7te , xt 20 . 11 IO . 6 Ol 0 . 87/text3\[0 . 41 10  . 38 I0'23 ttcxt4\[0 . 0 I 0 . 42 l 0 . 20\[~o ~51 . 0 . 50__~_ ~33 4_ 0 . 43, ~ T-b . % -7--658-7--?~- I~dovIO . lO__L_ . O . 2 O_l_o . 12  . I 1
S/6 (10$40 0 een 200 ees
Fig .  5--1 . Frequencies Of Passive ~"- . s12)1) p
EE .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . i .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . L .   .   .   .   .   .   .  1  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 

Second Component Score
LZ/_:Y-_-L-T-:-22L-:\]/RS\[61 . 44/54 . 54 \[ 51 . 86 \] 43 . 72 / 37  . 87 35 . 64/cloze %\[66 . 58163 . 81 \[ 56 . 28 \[ 56 . 25 \[ 64 . 69 / 60 . 46/I time folank I 6 . 89 \ [ 6 . 19\[8218I8 . 75 / 9  . 06 Ig . 05/L_(~_ . .)_ . _k . . . . . . . _L . .  .   .  ~_  . . . . . . _ l . . . . . . . . _1  .   .   .   . I .   . . . . . . . . \]
I Table 7--2 . median test on time 1 long 12\[24/
Isho~tl 24/12/-Xz=672 p < 005 J\[~ .   .   .   .   .   .   . o-~, .   . 
Difficut * 1 ~ di ~ ato~s 136 . 7 I 27 . 5 /18 . N r ~ hnic ~_D ~ ~ . __~_ 49 . 4L !!_~- Y ~ xt ~ kTT ? ~ T~h S--~T ~9 . 9 IT 55-148'51 Senior High School 58 . 0 49 2 39 . 5  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . A_\[__~ . __~9 . 51 Intable 81 , indicators are the five and the two texts in the PCA samples included as indicators judged as easy and as difficult  . Technical Do  #tanents are the other 70 samples . Textbooks are the passages taken from the school textbooks on natural science and from the ones on social science  , five fro ' each . 
They are included in lable 81 for comparison.
Table 52 . Correlations to the Frequen Cy . of P~sive Forras .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
6 ~ a
