LANGUAGEL EARNING A SPROBLEM SOLVING
Modelling logical aspects of Inductive learning
to generate sentences in French by man and machine 
Michael ZOCK
GilFRANCOPOULO
Abdellat if LAROUI
LIMSI , BP 30, 91406 Orsay-France

We present here a system under development , the present goals of which are to assist ( a ) students in inductively learning a set of rules to generate sentences in French  , and ( b ) psychologists in gathering data on natural language learning  . 
Instead of claim in ~ an all-encompassing model or theory  , we prefer to elaborate a tool , which is general and flexible enough to permithe testing of various theories  . By controlling parameters such as in it ml knowledge  , the nature and order of the data , we can empirically determine how each parameter affects the efficiency of learning  . Our ultimate goal is the modelling of human learning by machine  . 
Learning is viewed as problem-solving , i . e . as the creation and reduction of a search-space , t ~ y integrating the student into the process , that is , by encouraging him to ask an expert ( the system ) certain kinds of questions like : can one say x ? how does one sayx ? why does one say x ? we can ennance not only the efficiency of the learning  , but also our understanding of the underlying processes  . By having at ra . ~e of the whole dialogue ( what questions have been asked at , what time ) , Ave should be able to infer the student's learning strategies  . 
ITHE PROBLE MOFLE ARNING ALANG UAGE :
Language learning can be viewed as a special case of problem solving in which tlae learner tries to build and intelligently explore a hypothetical search space  . If this view is correct , then two sets of questions arise immediately . On one hand one may want to know : a ) what the nature of this search space is ( what are the variables 9 ) b ) how it is built ( incremental learning : local vgglobal view )  , '' c ) how it is explored ( strategies : intelligent opportunistics v systematic search  )  . 
On the other hand , one may want to investigate how ( i ) the knowledge at the outset and ( ii ) the ordering of the data will affect the building and the searching of the space  . Typically one does not learn from scratch , nor is it likely that one encounters either well -ordered at a  , or a Complete set of examples : natural learning is incremental  . 
Obviously , these . facts imply that : * initial knowledge , in particular , knowledge of other languages may bias the kind of variables  ( attributes or hypotheses ) constdered , i . e . , included in the search space ; * the order of the data ( the exampes encountered by the student ) may determine what rules are likely to be inferred at what moment  , and finally rues are referred from m complete data  ( incremental learning )  . 
Furthermore , the same data may be characterized in different ways  . 
That is , several equivalent descriptions may be inferred from the same dataset  . Whieli of these descriptions turns out to be the most adequate generally cannot be established until one knows the complete dataset  . Thus , rules may have to be revised in the light of new evidence  . Consequently , errors are not only unavoidable parts of the learning process  , but also an indispensable source of information for the learner  . 
2 THE PROBLEM OF TEACHING HOW TOLEARN t
As we have shown , learning can be seen as searching . Actually , teaching , as well as learning , can be conceived of as problem solving or reasoning in an informatio  . n-exchange environment . There is a sender , a goal , a message and are cewer . The SENDER may be a native speaker , at eacher , a parent , a book or a computer . The GOAL is the task or performance ( output ) . In our case it is knowledge of how to produce sentences in French  . The MESSAGE is the input to the learning component : examples from which the rules have to be inferred  ( 1 )  . The RECEIVER or learner can be any system , naturm or artlttcial , capable of perceiving , memorizing and analyzing a set of data and drawing the necessary conclusions : a child  , a student , or a computer program (2) . 
Learning occurs in various settings . Depending on the order of the examples and the control of the information flow we seak of nator I  .   .   .   .   .   . pa experimental , or ms muttonal settings . Natura learning is characterized by the absence of a clearly defined learning objective  ( 3 )  , by noisy and heterogeneous material ~ and by unordered examples  . The underlying regumr : ties are thus multiple , diffuse , and hard to perceive . Experiment ffl learning and teaching , on the other hand , have a \] earning objective , the material is error-free , homogeneous and coherently ordered according to some point of view  ( learner or teacher )  . Whereas experimental learning can be characterized by the following sequence :  ( i ) encountering the data ( ii ) analysis , ( iii ) building and testing of h ~ , pothesis ,   ( iv ) feedback and ( v ) proof or a emonstration of the the o ~ , traditional teaching goes throug fithe following stages :  ( i ) exposition , 0 i ) practice , ( iii ) testing and ( iv ) evaluation . 
This can be schematized as follows:
Teacher : sets the task and presents the learning material 
Student : analyzes the data;
Teacher : provt des a set of examples;
Student : practices;
Teacher : asks questions to test the gained knowledge  ; 
Student : answers the questions;
Teacher : evaluates the answers , provides feedback ( explanations ) and organizes future data as a function of actual performance Student : integrates the feedback into the knowledge base and corrects misconceptions  ; As one can see , the information flow here is entirely teacher -controlled  . He is the one who sets the task , and provides the examples and the feedback . 
Consequently , the teacher decides the nature and the order of the material to be learned  . 
There are two major shortcomings in this approach . Not knowiug what information is needed by the learner  , the teacher may present he wrong data . More importantly , the student is only loosely integrated in the learning process  . Instead of being active , generating and testing plausible hypotheses ( discovery learning )  , here acts to questions , Thus , it may happen that the student perceives his task as the learning of the material rather than the learning of the underlying principles  . 
I~norance of what or how to learn may result in ( i ) learning the unintended 0: ) poor problem-solving skills or ( iii ) little transfer . As long as the learne ~" does not go beyond the inform a Bongiven  ( the concrete word level )  , he cannot transfer the gained knowledge to similar situations  , because the perception of similarity presupposes abstraction  . 
Given these criticisms , it would be useful to have a system which has the qualities mentioned above without having the drawbacks  . A good learning environment should be both flexible and constraining enough : * to allow for simulation of real Communication  , that is to say , to provide a setting where both participants can take the initiative and control the information -flow  , * O "" tensure the learmng of the appropriate material  ( i . e . , what to learn ) as well as the necessary problem-solving skills ( the methods , i . e , how to learn ) . 
A computer program could provide such an environment  . It would offer different k!ndsoi'!nformation ( see below : trace-function )  , while answering mestuuent's questions as negoes a Jong generating and testing different sorts of hypotheses  . 
3 THE COGNITIVE ENGENEER'S TASK : to provide the user a friendly interface We will describe here a system under development  , whose major goals are : * O ' "" t provide an environment whtch allows communication between a learner  ( student ) and an expert ( in our case the system )  ; * O "'"' ts~mulate them formatton-processmg aspect of natural learning  , i . e . , the inductive learning of grammatical rules to generate sentences in French  . 
* to allow teachers and psychologists to test various theories  . 

The system we have in mind is designed to help the student build the search space  ( the set of all attribute-value pairs )  . The learner has to discover how to explore it , By applying a given set of operators and by watching the outcome  , het~ntest ( i ) which information is relevant and ( it ) to what it is relevant ( to . ,~ yntax or morphology ) , l to wever , in this kind of dialogue ( controlled trial and error ) the system not only answers the questions as Eed by the learner  , but also assists him in determining what questions are meaningful in this context  . 
Learning , be it by manor by machine , implies exchange of information between two s ~ , stems , for example , a native speaker ( expert ) and a foreigner ( learner )  . We will start by describing someort be features ours ' c stem needs to have in order to allow for such an information exchange  . We will then give a detailed example , showing what such a dialogue between a human learner and the machine might look like  . Finally we will discuss whether machines can acquire linguistm competency in a humanlike way  . 
Before showing how the system is designed to work , let us specify more clearly what the learning ol Jjective is  . 
4' I~IESTUDENT'SLEARNING OBJECTIVE :
Tile learner's task consists of incrementally earning the morphosyntactic rules of personal pronouns in French  . More precisely , the student is expected to acquire the necessary knowledge norder to generate sentences composed of several pronouns  ( -see examples ( a )  -  ( i ) ) . l " n order to achieve this goal , he has to learn :- how to express a given concept  ( morphemes )  , -how to to linemize these concepts ( sentence patterns ) and-under what conditions ( rules ) to use each of these words or sentence forms . 
MORPHOLOGY Example of rules to determine MORPHOLOGYSPEAKER : je  , me , mot-nous if SYNT . FUNCTION : direct object LISTENER : tn , te , to t , -vous PERSON : third ELSE : il , ella , ils , elias REFLEXIVE : no It , la , les , lui , leur QUANTITY : definite on , an , s t , sol , eux NUMBER : singular
GENDER : female then DIRECTOBJECT-->la
SYNTAX : a ) S--I ) O-'IO'-V ~ el alulprdnente I Introduce her to himb  ) S-IO-DO-V Jet el aprd nento ~ tlltroduce liar to youc  ) ~DO-V-pp-~O \] et a pr6sente ~ell at lltroduce youto herd ) S-iO-V-pp'-~: O~ol Utpari et aldo tel Iwi ll tollher about you a  ) V-DO-IOpr * sente-lamol Introduce her tome f  ) neg-DO-IO . -V-negnol alulprdson tapa a Donttintroduce her to himg  ) neg-IO-DO'-V-llog nomelapr deentepan Dealt Introduce her tomeh  ) Ileq-DO-V-nl~g . ' pp--ro 1o In eprdflent opail bell a Doltlth ~ tro duce me tOherit n~g-Io~v-lmg-pp-Ioli elut par lepa~demolDon't tell her about meS : subject  , DO : direct object , IO : indirect object , pp : preposition , nag : negation , V : verb As one can see from tile data , pronoun < onstructions in French can be fairly complex  ( 4 )  . This complexity is due to : * the number of features necessary to determine word order or morphology : 
PARTOFSPEECH : ( noun , pronoun ) ie parle ~( noun ) jekl J , parle ( pronoun ) SYNTACTICFUNt . 7" ION ( subject , direct object , indirect object ) il 6 erith Pierre ~ subject )
Paulll lider it ( redirect object )
SENTENCE-TYPE : ( declarative , interrogative , command ) tum~le donnes ? ( interrogative ) donne-It ~! ( command ) 
NEGATION : ( , yes , no ) oonnes-leal fi ! ( positive ) ne~le donnesp as I (  . negative )
COMMUNICATIVE-ROLES : ( I , you , tie ) jete LE donne ( IO = je LE llli donne ( IO = ~ o ~ ) NUMBER : ( singular , plural , indefinite ) jet e1~garde ( singular ) jete Its garde ( plural ) jet'gngarde ( indefinite ) 
GENDER : ( male , female ) jelgvo is ( male ) jelavois ( female ) VERBCONSTRUCTION : type of complement ( DO vs IO )  , pJ peat preposition , reflexivity ) jevo is_Mane-->jelavois ( direct object ) je parle ~ tMarie --> j e1~parle ( indirect object ) SEMANTIC FEATURES : ( animate , inanimate ) i l m'emm6ne ~~--> ilm ' ~ emm6ne ilme pr6sente ~ tsa ~--> ilme pr6sente ~ t * the structure of these features : if one compares  ( a ) and ( e )  , one will notice that the form of the indirect object  ( luivsella ) depends on the value of the direct object ( horizontal dependancy )  ; * the inte ~ ependance of syntax and morphology : practically all variables  , except NUMBER and GENDER are relevant both for ~ ntax and morphology  . Furthermore , the position of the direct object pronoun may depend on the value of the indirect object  ( compare ( a ) and ( b ) here above )  . In other words , changes in morphology often imply changes in syntactic structure  . 
* the various knowledge sources : the determination of morphology and syntax requires information about the Le  . fgLe . ~( number , gender , animacy ) . text fimctions ( syntactic status of noun phrase : noun vs pronoun , topicalisation , person ) , ~( positive/negative ) , & tLe~:c_hh = aC . t , ( statement/question/cornmand ) , verb-construclio ~ ( type of complement : direct\]indirect , type of preposition : il , de ) , etc . 
Given these intricacies it is easy to understand why students so often fail to learn these rules  . Modelling their learning is thus a challenging task  . 
5 HOW CANTHELE ARNERBE INTEGRATEDIN TO THE
PROCESS ?
If one accepts this view of learning , then the problem of the student is to find out how to build and how to intelligently reduce the search space  . The system will help the student in various ways . 
First of all , it will answer certain kinds of questions :/ ~ How does one say x ? 
What would hapl ~ en if . . . ?,
Canone say x ?,
How should one say x ?
Why does one say x ?
All these questions occur in some form or another in natural settings  . The following examples may illustrate these strategies or testing modes :  ( a ) Question : ~ ~ : " jeluipense "
Answer : ie pensei ~ ellae pease , ~luiele pense (5) ( b ) Question : ~~12tled ~ , if in the following sentence :
Paul parlegl Made ( Paul talks to Ma ~ the object-noun was pronominalized  . 
Answer : Paullui parle(c ) Question : . ~:" jehepense "?
Answer : no(d ) Question: . ling " jeluipense ", ~?
Answer : jepense hell a lepense ? aluijele pense  ( 5 )   ( e ) Question : Why does one ~ SKy : " Jelepense " Answer : explanation given by the system These strategies are complementary in that they correspond to different learning needs  . They provide different kinds of feedback . The first two methods ( the induct we approach ) seem useful if one does not have much knowledge yet  . Tile third one allows to test the degree of generality or the extension of a given rule  ( deductive reasoning )  , the fourth method provides additional information in case of incorrect performance  , while the last question may either confirm a hypothesis  , or correct a misconception . 
Second , the system should show how to reach the solution ( the demonstrative mode )  . This might be helpful if the student gets stranded  , not knowing what to do . In this case the system takes over , showing how information may be processed . By watching the system , the student may learn how to explore , pc . , how to generate and test a set of hypotheses . 
Third , the system keeps a record of the whole dialogue . Such a trace has many advantages : it allows the student to verify to explaiu and to remember  . He may thus ( i ) check the consisten ~ of the rules ,   ( it ) justify a given conclusion in the light of evidence and  ( iii ) reorganize his knowledge base . This last possibility should enhance f is perception of underlying regularities  . 
Psychologists could use this trace to infer the student's learning strategies  . 
The rules a student Ires been testing at a given moment may be inferred on the basis of the nature and order of the questions being asked  . 

Finally , teachers could use the trace-function to gain feedback concerning the order of presentation of the data  . By varying the nature and order ot information , they can determ in experimentally t~e complexity of the data  ( examples , rules ) , - and thereby the relative efficiency of various teaching-strategLes  . 
6 THEFUNCTION INGOFTHESYSTEM :
The program works interactively . The user is given a set of options fi'om which he has to choose  . The system converts this input into the adequate output  , i . e . , linguistic form . Input are meanings ( what to say ) , output are sentences ( how to say it ) . 
The process is started with a list of nouns and verbs  . This list is a kind of knowledge base " i . e . , a set of facts a potential user may want to talk about  . 
This base is limited in scale , and arbitrary , in that it is given by the s , stem . 
However , this limitation is easily overcome . The base can be extenued by tile user at any moment  . The important point is that , by feeding nouns and verbs into the knowledge base and by choosing among these entities  , the student signals what he wants to say . In doing so , he builds propositions of various complexity ( one- , two- , or three place predicates ) . 
The system will operate on these structures and build simple declarative sentences  . In other words at this stage of interaction it is assumed that the student wants to know how the intended meaning translates into this canonical form  . For example , the input ( a ) would yield the output ( b ) . 
STUDENTSYSTEM input: ( a ) output : ( b ) regarder ( Manuel , Christine ) ==> Manuel regarde Christine watch ( Manuel , Christine ) ==> Manuel watches Christine The student is queried a ~ a into determine what he wants to say  . Basically he has two poss L bitities . Either hetries a complete new idea ( proposition )  , or he modifies part of the preceding one . In this latter case , tile system provides a list of options ( -attribute-value pairs )  , inviting the studen to discover what happens , i . e . how morphology and/or syntax are affected , a she changes the value of any of the attributes such as PARTOFSPEECH  , SENTENCE MODE , NEGATION , and so forth . Let us assume that the student had chosen to replace respectively Manuel and Christine by a pronoun  . In this case the system would produce the following sentences : 
I1 regarde Christine
Manuela regarde
How shouklone say ? Why does (: no say ?\]/ , -6 ~ explanation ~ ilmeled on ne
XPERTUSER
FIGURE1
By comparing these sentences with the baseform , the student should notice certain differences and draw the necessary conclusions  . For example , given the data he may conclude that : RI : if the direct object is pronominalized  ,   . 
then it moves in front of the verb ( syntax).
R2: case ( syntactic function ) is morphologically relevant : if the subject is pronominalized then its surface form is " ir '  ,   113: if the direct object is pronominalized then its surface form is " la "  . 
Control is returned to the user . Actually , from now on we are in a loop , wth the dialogue having basically the same form . However , in each cycle the hypothesis to be tested is likely to be different and it is interesting to watch how a student proceeds in acquiring competency  . What does he want to know 9 I she systematic ? What kind of strategy does he use  ( breadth first , depth first etc . )? Under what conditions does he change his m~thod ? etc  . 
The learner's problem is threefold , he must find out :* which parameters ( attributes ) are relevant , * to what linguistic omponent they are relevant ( syntax and/or morphology )  , and * to what extent hey are relevant (6) . 
A student may thus want to know :: whether the variable GENDER is morphologica ! ly relevant !  , whether this is the only relevant varmme , or I totlaer varmmes come into play '* whether it is relevant for all cases  , irrespective of , for example , communicative role , negation or sentence mode ( compare ( e ) and ( g ) ) ; It should be noted , that every time the student is given control , he can choose two things : ( i ) the kind of information he wants to convey ( what to say )  , and ( ii ) the dialogue-mode , i . e . , HOW DOES ONE SAY ? , CANONESA ~9ete ) The following diagram illustrates the information flow  . 
insert figure 1 here
This kind of environment has three basic functions : b to answer different kinds of questions  , to convert meaning into form and to help the student to discover how changes in meaning are reflected in changes in form  . 
It should be noted that the student has most of the control  . The following examples should give an idea of the dialogue  . These hypothetical dialogues serve illustrative purposes  . However , we believe that they are reasonably close to what might be encountered in an experimental session  . 
6.1 EXAMPLED IALOGUE NUMBER 1:
Tile student's question ( dialogue mode ) is : HOWDOESONESAY ? The figure below contains three columns which express respectively the student's intentions  , i . e . what he wants to say , his observations , and his conclusions with respect to syntax and morphology  . 
insert figure 2 here
Having generated the following proposition :
Max , voir/ax ' Paul )   ( see Paul ) ) he wants to know what would happen , if both arguments ( Max , Paul ) were pronominalized . The system generates the following answer : ( 1 ) illevolt The student analyze stills sentence and draws as conclusions Rule  1 and Rule 2  , mentionned here above . He goes the nonto ask 2dl ~ IJY ~ l~\] . ~% ~ if PAUL was replaced by MARY . The system answers : ( 2 ) illavoit The student concludes that GENDER is not relevant with regard to word order  , but is a necessary condition to determine morphology  ( Rule 3 )  . This latter kind of knowledge could be expressed as: 
R 3: if PARTOFSPEECH : pronoun & SYNTACTICFUNGI'ION : direct object & GENDER : female then PRONOUN : la else if GENDER : male then PRONOUN : leIn the next question he is concerned with the relevancy of NUMBER  . He asks : what would happen if the direct object were CHILDREN  ( lesenfants ) ? The system's answer ( 3 ) illes volt allows him to conclude that NUMBER is relevant for morphology but not for syntax  , as there are no changes in word order , but there is a change in form . This fact is encoded in the following rule : HOW DOESONES AYOBSER VATION CO~CLUSmN 
I ) volr(Hox , Paur)
Ha ~ ~ l ~ ronuu.
Paul = preheat ~> llJ~voit
DO precedou Vpl'o:lou:l~I0
Ha ~ i ~= pronoun ~> il ~ Ovolt poslt lol ) of 00 cnnalat . ~It bR1 changei . fot ~ ~) voirIll , x . e ~\] Fonts ) eat ' ant s = pronoun ~ dNBER = plural -> iilos veil rioeh or ~ tJoin posifinn change in form 
A ) ~( Hax , Mari ~)
Hox : pro\[iotp ~
Herin : pronoua -> II hllparle
I0 preoedes V see R1
SYNTACTIC CATEGORY o.d the SYNTACTIC
FUNCTION of the roror on t are ay ntoc-.
fleetly relevant
RIIIf SYNTACTIC CATEGIJIIVI pronoun tfSYNT ACTIC FUNCTION : dlr  . obj . 
th ~ n pronoun Infrer ~ k of the verb
Subject ~ DirectO ~ oct-Verb
SYNTACTICF ~ CTtONiol ~ r phologl cally ~ BI~vB~tl R2: If SYNTACTICFUNCTION : all PJ~t then PRONOUN ~ ll 
If SYNTACTICFUNCIIGN : ( U roobj.
then PRONOUNIle

GENDERIs syntactically not rel , lva , ,t ogmmholo!gS~
GENDE8 is morphologically relevant
R ) :' f'SYNTACTIC CATEGORY : pro . sunt fSYN'IACIIGFUNCTION : dlr . obj . 
If GENDER 1 femal ~ then PRONOUN tlaifGENDER : mole than PRONOUN : le  5y~t nx:N~NBERIs ~ yntoct leally not relevant
H_9. zor ~ L ~ a.~
OAfif5YNTAUTCFUNCTION : dlr.obj.
if NUHUER : plural if GENDER : male ( ~ ) then PRONOUN : lab

Syntactle Tuner?o ) ( cane ) lareleva , tr sl if SYNTACTICCAIEGORY : pronoun
If SYNTACTICFUNCTION : Ind . obj.
then : Subject-Indlr . Ohj ~ et-Verb
General taation of RE&R5=116:
R 61 if ~ nobject is pronoainalized then : Subject -Object "- Verbo hange in form ~ lnr~rl~hnl  . ~SYNTACTICFUNCTION of 10 morphological,-
Iv relevant ( sea R2)
R71 If SYNTACTICFUNCTION I ind il '. obj.
if GENDER : f , ~ lale (**)
Ellen PRONOUN : lui5) parlor(Max,\[au !)
Paul = pronoun -> ll ~ parle cona latent with 5_yntax : preceding rules GENDER is synt~ctically not relevant nn change in Mo ~ morphology The gender af the  I0 ~s morphologically no L relevant , consequently minxtile
GENDER conatralnt of 117
Correction of flY :
Rill if SYNtACtiCFUNOIIDNI lndlr.obj.
th = mPRONOUN * iul ( * ) since GENDER wan relevant for the singular th  ~  8tudont a ~ SL ~ m ~ that It it laole or . J . vant for , the plural (~*) ' Jlnc*~GENDER wanral , vant for tim DO ( R3) Lhoatud .   , taa ~ lum~l \] that it to a ! tlo relevant far the IO 
FIGURE2
R 4: if SYNTACTICFUNCTION : direct object & GENDER : male & NUMBER : plural then PRONOUN : tesit is in tm'esting to notice  , that this rule is too specific , because GENDER is not a necessary condition , However , this conclusion is perfectly reasmmble given the data encountered so far  . GENDER was a necessary condition for singular ( see rule 3 )  , and since then there has been no evidence to the contrary  . Consequently , the student has no way to conclude from the data , that for direct objects GENDER is generally relevant only for the singular  . 
(The onl ~? reason we could think o f that a student might consider this last hypothesis  , would come from his knowledge of another language which has the very same property  . ) It is also noteworthy that for objects , GENDER is only relevant for the SINGUIAR . This has procedural implications ; namely that NUMBER should be processed prior to GENDER  . The former being n To reinformative than the latter  . 
In the following cycle ( sentence 4 ) the student changestile proposition altogether , asking the system how one would say : parler ( Max , Patti ) when both arguments are pronominalized . This would yield the following senteoce : ( 4 ) IIluiparle From that he may conclude that the indirect object precedes the verb  ( Rule 5 )  . Reco~aizing the similarity with rule 1, Le . , rccognizi , lg the fact that the syntactic status of the object  ( direct vs indirect ) does not affect word order , he may generalize these two rules and replace them by rnle  6:   R6: if an object is pronominalized , it precedes the verb This rule is more general titan the former ones  , in that the distinction between direct and indirect object has beeu dropped  . It should be noted , however , that this rule , even though correct in the light of evidence , i . e . , data encountered so far , is too general . For example , it does not apply to seutences composed of two objects  ( three place predicates )  , hi other wo ' rds this rule needs refinement ,   . e . , add it on al constraints . 
With respect to morphology , the student concludes that the attribute CASE ( syntactic function ) ts relevant , which yields the following rule : R7: if SYNTACI'ICFUNCTION : indirect object & GENDER : female then PRONOUN : luiAgain  , the morpheme is overspecified , because GENDER is not a necessary condition . Having noticed that GENDER was relevant for directobiects  ( - rule 3 ) the student has overgeneralized , assuming that it was also relevant for the indirect object  . It is noteworthy , however , that this particular overgeneralization does not produce incorrect results  . 
Finally , the student asks the system to replace MARY b ~ /PAUL  . Getting the same answer as in 4 he concludes that for indirect objects the GENDER is irrelevant for syntax as well as for morphology  . Consequently , he relaxes the gender-constraint of rnlc7 . Once again , this conclusion is valid only with respect to the set of example she saw  . 
6.2 EXAMPLED IALOGUE 2:
This time the dialogue-mode is CANONESAY . The three colmnns correspond to the student's questions  , his hypotheses , and his conclusions . 
The controlled variable ( a change of attribute or a change of its value ) is underlined . 
insert figure 3 here
The figure being rather self explauatory , We will make only some short comments . At stage 3 the student wants to know whether the comnmnicative role of the indirect object  , the attribute PERSON , is syntactically relevant . From the data he has seen , he conch , dest hat this was not the case . However , this conclnsion , even though correct with respect to the data , has to be revised in the light of new evidence ( next sentence , i . e . , sentence 4) . 
It is interesting to note , that the student would probably never have drawn tb is conclusion if sentence  4 had preceded sentence 3  . hT other words , he would have noticed the relevancy of the attribute PERSON right away  , and never have drawn conclusion 5 . 
lle LUI donnel TE le donne
This shows how the order of the data is a critical variable determining the efficiency of rule -inference  , i . e . , what conclusions are drawn at what moment . 
7 CAN MACHINES ACQUIRE LINGUISTIC COMPETENCY IN A ' HUMAN " WAY ? 
Actually there are three questions : - Can machines learn ?- Can they learn in an intelligent or " humaW'way?-What kind of knowledge would a computer program need to have in order to learn the rules I have been talking about ? The answer to the first question is clearly yes  ( see Michalski , Carbonell & Mitche U1983) . The , latter two questions are more controversial . Let us begin with the last one . 
Inductive learning basically consists of drawing conclusions li'om the similarities and differences of abstract data descriptions  ( contrastive analysis )  . The crucial points are thus data description and analysis  ; -in what terms should we characterize the data ? -what additional kiud of knowledge is needed to infer the rules ?  13  \[ ) 9
CANONESAY ? HYPOTHE51S : CONCLUSION : 1 ilmale donne . ql : Do both objects yes precede the verb ? q2: Which one precedes the other ? Is II meLA donne Q \]: is the GENDER of the yeadirect object syntactically relevant ?  2a ~Ime ~ r ~_ donne Q~: lathe NUMBER of the yesd irect object syntacti-cally relevant ?  3 IIT\[ledonne QS la PERSON of the yes indirect object syntactically relevant ?  4 il LUL le donneno : ille luid on ne 5 ille SEgar deno = ilae legarde 6 il S ' ~ mOdUS yes 7 ilen LUI donne Q6t if the DO:en & no : illuiendonne if the IO = lui  , 
Wbich one of them precedes the other ? 8 ilm ~' and onne yea
Answer to Oftyeet both objects precede the verb
Annwerto Q2: the indirect object precedes th ~ directoriels -Ig-OO-V 
Answer to Q ) : the GENDER is syntnctical-ly not relevant
Answer to Q4: the variable NUMOERianot relevant for syntax
Answer to Q 5: no , PERSON is not relevant for syntax
Correctian and refinement of Conclusions 2 and 5: the variable PERSON i a syn-tact l cally relevant =
Concluoion 6: if PERSON-IO : 3d than=S-DO-IO-V
Conclusion 7: if PERSON-IO : fator 2nd them S-\[O-DO-V refinement of conclusion 6 
Canclusion 8: if PERSON-IO:3d if V-CONSTRUCT . = reflex . 
then = S-\[O-OO-V confirms conclusion 8 conclusion 9= if NUHBER~DO : in definite then = S-IO-DO-V
Answer to q 6: the indirect object , consequently conclusion 6 has to be Pefined . 
Conclusion lO = if PERSON-IO : 3d if NUHBER-DO : indefinite then: 5-IO-DO-V confirms conclusions 7  &  9 with regard to the examples given in 7 and 9 we may relax the , PERSON-can straint of conclusion 10
FIGURE 3
Obviously , a system capable of performing the kind of learning we have been talking about would have to be able to parse the sentences  ; that is , it would have to produce as output an adequate description of the input sentences described above  . 
This raises a terminological problem . Data can be described in various ways . 
Different descriptions can be functionally equivalent  ( 7 )  . Clearly , the chorea of metalinguistm terminology differs depending on whether the goal is machine learning or modelling " human'r learn mg  . In the first case , the problem is descriptive adequacy , whereas in the second case we deal with an additional constraint  , hatot the universal status of the terminology . Doall humans , irrespective of culture and education , use the kind of terms linguists use to analyze sentences ? Is there a universally shared subset of metalinguistic vocabulary ? In the absence of answers to these empirical ~ tuestions we will stick with the terminology currently used in computation alhnguistics  . 
? A differeut , but related problem is the guestion of how a system may be enabled to draw conclusions from a set of data  ( infer in general rules )  . 
As we have said above , generalizations are made on the basis of contrastive analysis  . In order to allow for such generalizations , the learning component needs a hierarchically structured metalanguage  , that is , a vocabulary whose low level concepts ( primitives ) are subsumed by more highly ordered , abstract forms of knowledge . For example : masculine & feminine ==> GENDER ; singular & plural ==> NUMBER ; subject , direct object ==> CASE We will now turn to the question of whether computers can learn in an intelligent or " human " way ? Obviously this question raises the problem of what intelligence is  . Instead of answering this question , we will focus on two aspects of intelligent learning  , namely economy and flexibility of methods . 
Exhaustive search is neither natural nor economical  . Since memory is associative , we find it hard to be consistently sstematic . Like gamblers , we tend to use search methods which are more or less risky  . 
People ( learners ) generally have a set of methods and a separate component  ( critique ) for evaluating these strategies with respect o their relative efficiency  . As different proSlems require different problem -solving methods  , it is very unlikely that there is aum que , universal problem-solving method . People tend to be opportunistic in their approach rather than systematic or scientific  . Both tile nature of strategies and the depth of processing will vary with the needs of the learner  . Corrolarily , it is equally unlikely that one fmds the optimal method immediately  , since one operates on incomplete data . Inductive learning is typically incremental . Hence methods have to be adapted or gradually refined in the light of new evidence  . 
Intelligent learning is thus intimately linked to strategic knowledge  ( 8 ) and to ( more or less ) general information-processing principles . These principles may be expressed in terms of simplidty  , informativeness , generality , and so forth . 
For example , the notion of simplicity may be used to choose among different options  . In fact , a learner could hypothesize that two-place predicates  ( to see ) are simpler to process than three-place predicates  ( to give )  . 
The notion of information is related to efficiency  . It can be used to reduce the search space . This claim is substantiated by the fact that rules governing morphology of first and second persons  ( I , you ) are generally learned faster than those which determine the form of the third person  ( he )  . 
In conclusion , we believe that , in principle , certain aspects of intelligent learning could be modelled by a computer  . However , before trying to model human learning , it may be worthwhile to start gathering data on ~ aow humans learn  . This is precisely one of our goals . By watching people as they use this tool , i . e . by keeping a trace of the dialogue , one should be able to infer the strategies they use  . 
8 CONCLUSION :
We have described a system under development that is mean to be a tool for theory builders  ( cognitive psychologists )  , application designers ( language teachers ) and end users ( students )  . The system is mean to assist psychologists teachers and students in their respective tasks : model learning  , optimize teaching and learning strategies . 
The emphasis in this paper has been on learning rather than teaching  . For the time being the task of learning is to be performed by a human  , however , in principle it is possible to extend the system so as to allow for automatic learning  , the ultimate goal being to model humanlike behavior  . 
Computers , with their large , indelible memories , are powerful tools . They allow us to control virtually any number of parameters  . Consequently , one ?' an trace a reasoning processor test a given theory  , i . e . , determine " , ~mpirically how different variables affect the efficiency of learning  , and so forth . 
This has an interesting consequence with respect to theoretical commitments  . Instead of claiming an all-encompassing model or theory  , one can write a program general and flexible enough to permithe testing of various theories  . That is what we are trying to do . 
Watching how people use the tool , we may gain insights about the way humans learn ( strategies )  , and thus eventually move from artificial to natural intelligence  . 
NOTES : (1) This message has to be interpreted . Thus the learning task is not the surface form of the message  , i . e . , words and sentences , but the underlying principles ( abstractions : rules and sentence patterns ) allowing tqae tr generation . While some forms ( e . g . , words ) have to be learneR , they generally serve for illustrative purposes . Rote learning of the entire set of surface forms ( words and word combinations ) is not only inefficient , but in fact impossible , because of time constraints : there are more possible combinations than we have time to learn  . 
Learning is thus more than a quantitative change of performance  ( speed , number of errors ) . It generally implies a restructuring of the knowledge base  . 
(2) It should be noted , however , that we are not dealing here with children learning a first language  . Instead we would like to model some aspects of the sctentific-minded foreign language learner  . 
(3) One may object that there is a global goal , namely learning the language . However , it seems tome that the primary goal is communication rather than attaining a local objective like  , let us say , learning the pronoun system in French . 
(4) For a more detailed discussion , in particular with respect o the procedural implications  , see Zock , et al (1986) . 
810 5 ) In art ambiguous situation the system will either produce all cases see here above  )  , or ask for clarification . For example : Student : How does one say : ilte me  pr6sente System : This depends on what you want to say . 
Doyoumean ( a ) or ( bl ? ( a ) iltepr 6 sente ~ moi " " ( b ) ilmepr6sente . ~ to i (6) This last problem , which consists in finding the right degree of generality  ( underspecification vs over generalization )  , is part teularly delicate in that conclusions have to be reached on the basis of incomplete data  ( incremental learning )  . 
(7 ) This fact is illustrated by the variety of parsers  . Parsers analyze sentences and assign them descriptions on various levels such as : part of speech  , syntacti ~ function , case-roles and so forth . For a review of the state of the art See King ( 1983 ) or Winograd ( 1983 )  . For a French parser see Francopoulo (1986) . 
(8 ) These strategies could either be part of the system  , in which case they must be explicit ( one needs a model )  , or they could be part of the learning process , in which case the system learns not only domain specific knowledge but also methods of how to learn  ( metaknowiedge )  . 
REFERENCF,S :

1 986 Machine Learning as a Tool for building a Deterministic Parser in : Rollinger C  . & Horn , W , Second Austrian Congress on Artificial Intelligence  , GWAI 86 , Springer Verlag

1983 Parsing Natural Languages , Academic Press , New York , 1983 Michalski , R . , Carbonell , J . & Mitchel I , T . 
1 983 Machine Learning : An Artificial Intelligence Approach Tioga Pubishing Company  , Palo Alto , Calfornia

1983 Language as a Cognitive Process , Addison-Wesley , Reading , 

Zock , M . , G . Sabah , C . Alviset 1986 From Structure to Process : Computer Assisted Teaching of various Strategies for Generating Pronoun-Constructions in French  , in : Proceedings of the llth COLING , Bonn
