TRADITION ALMEANS IN MACHINE TRANS LATION
Zden~k KIRS CHHER
Matematicko-fyzik ~ ln~fakulta UK
11800 Praha1,Malostransk@n~m~st ~25


The chronic problems of machine trans-
lation cannot be solved in a fully automatic way . Human intervention is inevitable . 
The development of " traditional " means in connexion with advances of computer techno-logy represent most substantial contribution to further progress in the field of machine translation  . Some of the problems are illustrated using the example of the  APAC32 pro-

I . The hopes for a successful solution of the chronic problems of machine translation  ( MT ) have long been set on two fruitful and mutually dependent prospects : research in artificial intelligence  ( AI ) and advances in the computing technology . The importance of the latter contribution is beyond dispute  . As regards the former domain , some reservations must be voiced . 
1 . 1~ It can be stated with some tolerance that the missing information required for automatic understanding  ( or desam-biguation ) of natural language ( NL ) is supposed to be supplied by a computer model of the knowledge correspomding to the universe of discourse  . The context of the analysed message constitutes an important part of this universe  . Therefore , an essential component of such a model must draw on the texts processed  . 
Thus , irrespective of the contingent form , organisation , etc . , of the whole , the model would at least partially depend on the results of the analysis for which it is supposed to provide necessary information  . This means that circularity is imminent . Even if the almost inevitable occurrence of elements not covered by any device in the system is disregarded  , it is obvious that the model can be neither complete nor consistent  . 
Since there will always remain threats of failure caused not by accidental factors but by the intrinsic  inadequa-1  . 2 . 


cy of any system of MT , human intervention is inevitable , and the ideal of " fully automatic high quality trans~lation "  ( FAHQT )   ( which , we suspect , is no longer believed to be able to ever come true  , anyway ) is impossible ? While not denying potential merits of the contribution of AI  , the above discussion should suggest that the develop ~ ment of means called " traditional " is equally important for MT  . An example of an approach based on such means is our experimental system  APAC32  . 
If we refer to our system here , it is not to boast that we have achieved any extraordinary successor that we have long du-ly appraised the above conclusions and reacted on them in an original way  , etc . 
It is only to illustrate our conviction that there is still a fairly wide and long path open a head of us within the confines of the traditional means  . To say the truth , it has been our material situation that forced us to rely exclusively on them and to dispense with anything more sophisticated  . This had to be said to clear us of a suspicion that we are making a virtue of necessity  . 
APAC32 is a descendant of the Montreal
TAUM series . It has been implemented on computers of the type of IBM  370 to translate into Czech English abstracts in microelectronics and  , later , pumping machinery . Using Colmerauer~s Q-systems the main part of the program builds linearized rooted-tree-llke structures  , which stepwise identify and interpret elements or groups of elements of the input units stating their character and function  , dependency relations and position in the sentential context  . 
Strings with multiple interpretations which had not been eliminated arers ~ presented by parallel structures giving multiple parses in the final stage of the analysis  , but not necessarily mul~tiple translations at the final output  . 
Bas ~ oorfully accomplished structures ~ which resemble predicate calculus pat-?te ~ Ds  , have a finite verb at their root and individual participants indepen~dent pesitions ~ The sense  ( direction to the left or right ) of an oriented edge ( a narrow ) representing a dependency relation ~ an information per-raining to the mutual projective position of the incident nodes - as well as the function of a dependent participant are ~ Lndicated in a way that simulates the marking of edges in a graph  . The synthesis starts by disintegrating the stru ~ tures that result from the analy~s is ~ At the output of this stage  , re~latlvely simple trees representing in -divl dual words appear  , with all the in-fer ~ atlon necessary for generating form ~ of the target language  . This pro-eeed ~ fin steps in which occasionally additional target-language-specific information has to be derived to render the synthesized structures complete and acceptable  . Such adjustments are usually connected with the operations of transfer : while the action of its general rules mostly coincides with the opening phases of the synthesis ~ the ~ nformation concerning the parti~cular changes is contained in the dic ~ tionariss to be exploited in the concluding parts of the program  . 
The absence of any accomplished model of the universe of discourse and the temporary abandonment  ( for technical reasons ) of any device alowing the involvement of hypersentential context in the analysis have  , of course , endowed the system with a typical probabilistic character  . In this connexion , especially the tactics occasionally referred to as " preferential " must be mentioned : some rules are applied repeatedly in subsequent stages  , each time with conditions less rigid . The combinatorial power of the Q-systems had to be reduced by introducing seve-ral stages - partial grammars-operat~ing before the syntactic analysis pro-pete Thus  , e . g . , a ( partial ) analysis of nor , linal complexes precedes that of verbal structures  . Therefore , a special device registers schematically the context  (  , feach element in the sentence . 
2 ~3~ In simulatiz ~ ne functions sf a model of the universeOfd~scou~se  , the sys~tom of dictionaries represents themo ~ important tool  . 
2 o3 ~ o The basic dictionary information in
A PAC32 is a complex which consist ~ of two main parts = information  conce1~ ing the source language and that p e ~ = ~ raining to the target language ? These structures can be separated ~~ hey have been put together whenever pos ~ sible with respect to the efficiency of the system ? The internal structure of both these parts is almost the same and can be briefly described as follows : ca ~ egorial information ~ le ~  , xical value ~ , pa~a digmatic information ~ pointers to parallel meanings  , valen ~ oy frame , combinatory frame ( preposi ~ tional , phrasal 9 special ~ liaison , etc . , patterns ) , terminological spe~cifications , special syntactic inforo ~ mation , semantic features ~ Extensive though this apparatus may be  , it should be stated that the zeare still possibilities ~ and a need ~ of course to add further data ? For lack of space  , let us confine ourselves to three poi~ts only ? 2~3  . 1 ~ I . The apparatus of semantic featu ~' e ~ consists of four & lasses of feao-tures : a  ) features concerning the text vs . metate xt structure ~ b ) general semantic features ~ c ) domain specific features , and d ) features concerni ~ terminologi ~- calstatus ? The number of features is limited for reasons of which the most important is that excessive detailedness leads to unwanted ~ i ~ gidity  . However , a number of poten . 
tially very useful candidate featu ~ res can be added  . Assigning weights to features might be a solution to this dilemma  , especially in the framework of the " preferential " tactics  . 
2 o3 oi . 2 . Some classes of words have been further classified to highlight their intrinsic properties in thG translation environment ? E~g  . , a special classification of verbs makes it possible to solve  , at least in part , the problems of as . ~ pest in Czech in relation to Eng ~2 . 3 . 2 . 

330 ! fish verbal adjectives (- ED ,- ING forms) . Much more can be done in this direction . Unfortunately , this will imply extensive empirical work including excerption and  , if possible , organization of a usage-panel-like inquiry . 
As concerns combinatory frames , also more information will be added on the possibilities of adverbial modification of nouns  . Some changes and additions to the present orga -nisation and contents of the dic-tionary entries are considered with a view to structures suggested in the Mel % huk-A presyan's model " meaning-text "  . 
A specific dictionary device has been introduced in the terminological section of the dictionary system  . 
Special rules control , or rather , guide the analysis of terminological complexes , making it possible to decide frequent ambiguous structures  ( e . g . , INTEGRATED CIRCUIT SYSTEM as ( ( INTEGRATED CIRCUIT ) SYSTEM ) rather than ( INTEGRATED ( CIRCUIT SYSTEM ) ) )  . 
In this way partial quasi-model of the specific domain can be formed whose elements are capable o ~ recursive application to new combinations  . 
Another dictionary device deals wlth unrecognized elements - the socalled transducing dictionary  ( TD )  . TD relies on derivational morphology , assigning categorial information , and , in some cases , semantic status and other information to words hither to " unknown " to the system  , on the basis of their endings ( e . g . , - ING , -ED , -ESS , -ITY , -ION , -LY , -WISE , -PY , etc . ) ; for some of them even successful adaptation to the target language is possible  . The remaining unrecognl-zed . elements are regarded as nouns : first as proper , then , if this fails to be confirmed , common . A more versatile practice is planned , which will take into consideration other possible interpretations as well  . 
TD , as well as some other devlces and rules can be also regarded as special fail-soft measures  , though another component called " emergency rules " is  2  . 4 . 

included which performs this f~Lucti0~ as a specialized set of rules design ~ ed to reconstruct  , complete or integ ~ rate into a ( would ~ be_ . )_ . me_animgf . u ! whole those structures that failed %0 reach the stage of an accomplished parse . In some respects , the role o ? such measures is problematic in zela ~ tionto h ~ an intervention  . Our sys~tem offers possibilities to introduce a special diagnostic device to recog ~ nize and classify the s~mp toms of a failure  , so that more than the present simple marking of " suspicious " or " under done " outputs can be presen=ted to aid the postedition  . 
Ambiguities are treated in the usual way . It should be pointed out that in the translation between the languages in question  , the principles of agreements o widely applied in Czechunmer ~ cifully reduce the chances to get over some types of unsolved ambiguities in an " unperceptible " ~ i  . e . , accidental , way . These principles , as a rule , ob-stinately insist upon rendering impli ~ cit information explicit  . That is why in some cases structures with ambiguous reference are translated by equivalents equally ambiguous or vague  . E . g . , with some classes of verbs ,   ( clausal ) parti ~ cipial modification with ambiguous de ~ pendence is replaced by prepositional or other constructions without any di ~ rect dependence : e  . g . , USING-,WITH
USING , CAUSING-~WHICH ( referring to the whole of the preceding or pertinent clause  ) CAUSES , etc . 
This concerns also contrastive ambigui ~ ties and other asymmetrical relations between the two languages  . In this con . 
nexion , it should be pointed out that one of the criteria for the classifica ~ tion of English verbs is the classific ~ tion of their Czech counterparts  . Th,~s ~ e . g . , the verb SUPPOSE must be assigned information that the construction SOME~ONEIS SUPPOSED TO  . . . must be transfor-med to ITISS UPPOSED ( ABOUTSOMEONE ) 
THATSOMEONE . . . to make it correspond to the structure acceptable in Czech  . 
Similarly , constructions like SEATSAT
ONBY , . . must be transformed with the aid of correspondi ~ relative clauses ~ Much remains to be done for the domain of conversion  . Its productive aspects po ~ eserious problems . 
3o To come back to the opening paragraphs : the ~ dvances of computer technology  , while not offering ultimate solution of problems detrimental to the efforts to achieve the ideals of PAHQT  , will un-doubtably liberate the MT from the curse entailed by its usually more or less immediate subservience to various practical applications - the strict limitations of computer time and storage-which so of t-en represented the only obstacles in in-trodu  , ~ing many a useful and , sometimes , even very necessary device , processor approach . Most of the prospective extensions , innovations and other changes require profound empirical examination and more linguistic fleld -work than  , up to now , we were able to expends Kirschner , Z .   ( 1982 ) A Dependency-Based Analysis of English for the Purpose of Machine Translation  . Praha , Matematicko ~ fyzik ~ ln~fakulta UK . 
--(1987) APAC3-2: An En~lish-tc ~
Czech Machine Translation System . Praha,
Matematicko-fyzik ~ In ~ fmkulta UK.

