A Novel Analysis of
Temporal Frame-Adverbials
Magnus MERKEL
Department of Computer and Information Science
Link 6 ping University
S-58183 LINK OPING

Telephone : + 461 328 2423
Internet : MME@IDA . LIU . SE
Abstract
In this paper interpretation principles for simple and complex frame-adverbial expressions are presented  . Central to these principles is a distinction between phases and periods together with the temporal hierarchy  , where multiple scales of time and relations can be expressed  . A system , CLOCK WISE , has been implemented which interprets Swedish temporal expressions according to the principles outlined in the paper  . 
Introduction
Temporal information is expressed and conveyed in a number of ways in natural anguage including tense  , aspect and lexical items that carry temporal information  , eg . temporal adverbs . 
Most researchers in this field approach temporal entities in language from the perspective of tense and aspect  . But there is very little in the literature on other expressions that hold temporal information  , such as temporal adverbs , certain prepositional phrases and noun phrases . In most papers the meaning of a temporal adverbial such as ' next year ' is merely explained as the predicate ' next year ' which specifies a point or interval of time from a reference time  . In objective time-modelling systems such as/Kahn & Gorry  1977/and/Bruce   1973/ temporal expressions were never analyzed in their linguistic form  ; instead they had to be typed in asstereotyped lists  . The internal structure of temporal expressions must be investigated in order to construct grammars that can capture general features and be of use in computational pplications  . In the paper I will focus on temporal frame -adverbial phrases  , that is , expressions that refer to a temporal period in which events are located  ( Cf/Bennet & Partee 1978/ , /Hinrichs 1986/) . I will not discuss the complex question of how tense  , aspect and temporal adverbials interact ( for an outline of the problem see/Ejerhed 1987 D . 
TemPoral frame . adverbial phrases
A large group of temporal expressions can be classified as frame-adverbial phrases  . /Smith 1981/ categorizes temporal frame-adverbial phrases in the following  way1: 
Deictic Clock-Calendar 2Dependent-last week , yesterday-at midnight = now , this moment+next week , tomorrow + at midnight-previously , before = the same time + later , afterwards 1 My use of + and - is the same as Smith's forward and backward arrows  . 
2In an earlier paper ( Smith 1980 ) Smith calls this class flexible anchoring adverbials  . 
This classification is based on the concept of anchoring  , i e . a deictic is generally anchored to the time of speech  ( ST )  , a dependent is anchored to another given time in the context  , and a clock calendar adverbial can anchor to either ST or to some other context-dependent time  . Smith attributes a relational value to these expressions  ,  - , = and + . These symbols stand in turn for the relational value anteriority  ( past )  , simultaneity ( present ) and posteriority ( future )  . 
Frame-adverbials can syntactically occur as adverbs  , noun phrases and prepositional phrases . They can be complex expression such as ( 1 ) On Monday next week at 6 pro . 
where temporal information is specified on several evels and we have a combination of deictic and clock calendar expresosions  , Complex expressions have a relatively loose syntax in that the time denoted in  ( 1 ) can be expressed as ( 2 ) and ( 3 )   ( 2 ) Next week on Monday at 6 pm . 
(3) At 6 pm next week on Monday.
The issues that need considering are the following : How is the semantic wellformedness of frame -adverbial phrases determined and  , if possible , what is needed to establish their temporal reference in terms of locations on the time axis  . 
Periods and phases
To account for the semantic wellformedness of flame-adver-bial phrases the ' time'denoted by the phrase can be thought of as an ordered set of specifications for conventional temporal concepts  , such as YEAR , MONTH , DAY , HOUR , MINUTE , SECOND . The ordering of these temporal concepts may seem to fit well into a ' Chinese box metaphor ' where each concept is ~ included in a concept on a higher level and in turn includes a concept on a lower level  . A semantically wellformed temporal frame -adverbial would then be described as a phrase which forms a description of an unbroken chain of temporal concepts  . 
This is put forward by/Hinriehs 1986/in hisScoreboard of reference points and cooccurence restriction in which the construction of a reference time from a flame -adverbial phrase is possible if there is a chain of specified temporal concepts in accordance with an ordered set of concepts  . However , if we included WEEK in the above set of concepts we would get into trouble  . Weeks are not included in months in the same way as months are included in years and a problem of where to fit in WEEK in the Chinese box order would occur  . This is due to the fact that the western calendar system is based on three sepaorate descriptive traditions : the week  , the Gregorian calendar and the clock/Levy 1980/ . The Gregorian calendar holds year , month and day ( of month ) as its basic concepts , the week is a sequence of named days , and the clock system divides the day into hours and hours into seconds  , etc . The week and Gregorian calendarsh are the concept of day and the clock can express a time by specifying different concepts of separate systems is that the system share one or more concepts with each other  , tlt is also reflected in the way we refer to the day period  ( in S~vedish and English )  . A day can be referred to in two different ways , either by specifying the day of a certain week ( DW ) or by picking out a day of a certain month ( DATE )  . 
In English the expression on Monday next week will describe the same day on the time axis as an expression describing the same day by specifying a year  , a month and a day of month . In Swedish it is possible to specify amfique day by the year-week-day path as the Swedish calendar has numbered weeks  , giving usa year divided into 53 weeks 3 . 
In our model we want to distinguish between periods and phases and ~  ; how the relations between them . 
A period P is a segment of time with a certain length  , such as
YEAR , MONTH , DAY , WEEK , HOUR , MINUTE,

Al ) eri ~? lP i is a subperiod of a pecind P iff 1" can be seen as consisting of a number of periods Pi that to geflmr exhaust I '  . 
A phase p is a specific instance of as nb period having a eelt a in orderiatire sequence of subperiods cxh au still ga given period 

For example , a period such as YEAR can be seen as consisting of twelw+subperiods  ( MONTH )  . January is the first phase of those twelve subperiods  . 
The graph below illustrates the relation between year as a period and the monthly phases  . 
' ~........ YEAR .....
Fig . 1 The YEAR period
This graph shows the year period from one point of view  . We could split the year into other phases , for ' instance , into periods of seasons , where summer , autumn , winter and spring would be the corresponding phases  . Note that a sequence of phases is cyclically lecurring  . 
Apart fi'c , m differentiating periods and phases we must be able to show the  , ' elations between them , The following table shows some period : ; with corresponding phases :
YEP , R:CALENDAR ...0 ...
MONTD .: YEAR Janmtry , ... December
WEEK:YEAR 1,2, . . .53
DA ' ~(: MONTH(DATE ) l , 2, ..31
WEEK(I)W ) Monday , ... Sunday /
HOUR:DAY 0,1, . . .23
MINUTE : HOUR0, l , ...59
SECONI : ): MINUTE0,1, . _ 59    3 One could say that the system of number exlweeks is similar to file  , use of named months or named days . The analogy does no tho : Ld Idt the way of course as the week system is historically indel~mdent from the Gregoriau calendar  , but we have'tried'to force the week concept onto the concept of year by naming the weeks with numbers  . In Sweden aumubered week always slarls on a Monday  . The first week that holds at least four days of a new year forms week  1  . Tire first of January 1987 was a qhursday and pintofweek 1  , whereas the first of January 1988 is a Friday which : esults in the first three days of  1988 being part of week 53   19811 This is standardized by Swedish authorities . 
Fox each period there are one or two possibilities to view it as a subpefiod of a higher-level period  . The difference between the two different ways of referring to a DAY period is shown by the fact that there are two subperiod-of relations  , one to
MONTH , and one to WEEK.
The subperiod-of relations can be displayed in a temporal hierarchy of lhefollowing kind  . 
YEAR .................

Fig . 2The temporal hierarchy
The lines connecting temporal periods to each other show subperiod -  . of relations . The hierarchy shows the two diflerent paths fi'om YEAR to DAY  . 
: The periods and phases described above share one property and that is that they all have fixed lengths and as a consequence clear boundaries  . We can easily locate the point on the time axis where January becomes February  , but we cannot with accuracy specify the location on the time axis where spring is succeeded by summer  . So we must distinguish be--tween bounded and fuzzy periods  . There are other phasal divi--sions one can make . For example , we could split the week into weekdays and non -weekdays  ( weekends ? )  , and timyear : into feasts , such as Christmas and Easter , and non-feasts , etc . It is just a matter of fact that we divide time into different emporal scales  , and some contain periods of fixed length and some do not  . This is why it is problematic to try and map a phase of no fixed length  , such as summer , onto another temporal scale where we are dealing with fixed boundaries ueb as the one depicted in the temporal hierarchy above  . 
Durative expressions are mostly expressed in terans of quanti--fied periods : one week  , two months , three years , etc . It is more seldom that p has a lexpressions are used in a durative sense  . 
Quantified phasal expression such as two mornings  , six Thursdays , three winters , etc are primarily used to express habituality and iteration  . It is however possible to infer duration fl'om these as we know the length of a phase or can infer it from its corresponding period  . 
Phasal and deictic expressions
In accordance with the previous section we can now distinguish between p has a l and deictic expressions  . 
In our terminology a phasal expression is a temporal expression that primarily describes a phase by using a corresponding word for the phase in question  . Aphasal expression may be , a single word (1988 , January , midnight ) or be more complex , such as a prepositional phrase ( in 1988 , in January , at midnigh O . 

The difference between Smith's clock calendar adverbials/Smith  1981/ and phasal expressions is that p has a lexpressions are just " providers of phases " and they are not primarily anchored to any other time as clock calendar adverbials are  . 
Phasal expressions may describe absolute times if they refer to a unique phase on the time axis  . So if the phasal expression 1987 denotes a unique phase of the calendar then it is possible to map it into an absolute time  . Following/Hinrichs 1986/we call these phasal expressions complete or independent dates  . 
Also included in this class we find complex phasal expressions which  , if mapped onto the temporal hierarchy , would form a chain of temporal information . By chain of temporal information we mean a chain of temporal phases according to the temporal hierarchy  . 
Deictic expressions function basically in the following way : Starting from a reference time  ( eg . ST ) a deictic will establish a new reference time with a different phasal value for the relevant period by moving a number of steps in either a forward  ( + ) or a backward ( - ) direction depending on the deictic , and keeping phasal values for higher-level periods consistent with this change  . 
Certain deictics do not change the reference time . For example . 
idr(this year ) , denh ? irveckan ( this week ) , idag ( today ) , etc , do not move the reference time in a forward or backwardirec-tion  . The new RT will be a partial copy of the old RT ; today will describe a time equal to ST and specified to the DAY period level  . 
The deictic expression u ( now ) is ambiguous in respect of period level . In one context nu would map onto the year level and in another context it would refer to the hour level of RT  . 
In our system the function that maps a deictic expression is of the form F  ( x , index , step ) where x is either a phase or a period . Applying F results in a description of the time in terms of a set of phases which forms a chain in the temporal hierarchy with x as its most specific phase or period  . Posterior deictics will have positive numbers as step  , anterior will have negative numbers and simultaneous will have  0  . For example , a deictic such a simorgan ( tomorrow ) will be mapped to a set of corresponding phases from the YEAR period down to the DAY period  , leaving more specific phases unspecified . This means that while constructing a description of a time unnecessary work is avoided as we are dealing with partial descriptions and not the temporal objects as such  . Compare the following two phrases : ( 1 ) tomorrow ( 2 ) tomorro wat3o'clock . 
In both expressions tomorrow will contribute with exactly the same information  , i e . a description of a certain day of a certain month in a certain year  , etc . 
Deictics in Swedish can be categorically characterized in the following way : "  . Lexical deicties ( such a sigdr ( yesterday ) , fjol(last year ) idag ( today ) . 
? Pre/post positional phrases with a temporal NP where the pre/post position signals the type of temporal expression  . For example , amt vdveck or ( in two weeks ) , f ~ rfemdrsedan ( five years ago ) . 
-Noun phrases with a temporal phase or period word as head and a modifier or ordinal that signals a deictic function  , such as ( n ? is tave cka ( next week ) , f ~ rradret ( last year ) , etc . 
In many contexts prepositions are omitted in Swedish deictic expressions if the remaining NP signals a deictic function on its own  . 

Note also that a phasal expression such as in October may  , apart from specifying a phase October , also function deictically , that is , it may provide phasal values for the periods above its explicit level  . However , this is regarded as a secondary use of a phasal expression  . 
Determining the initial reference time ( or index ) for deictic expressions i another important consideration  . Some deictic expressions are necessarily anchored to ST and others may be anchored to ST but they may also be anchored to another reference time depending on context  . In Swedish expressions such a sigdr ( yesterday ) , imorgan ( tomorrow ) , am2 dagar ( in two days ) and fSrradret ( last year ) are examples of expressions that must anchor to ST  . Some expressions involving ndsta ( next ) are examples of the second group . The expressions n distave c k a ( next week ) and nd~stators dag ( next Thursday ) can have either ST or another context-dependent time as their initial reference time  . Expression such as n distadag(next day . ) and tvd veckor senate ( two weeks later ) must necessarily anchor to a reference time other than ST  ( see/Merkel 1987/ . 

Expression such as nd stators dag ( next Thursday ) , n dist a sommar ( next summer ) and n ~ is tajul ( next Christmas ) may be ambiguous to certain speakers . These expressions seem to be ambiguous in the sense that they either take you  1 or 2 steps from your reference time . Sontistators dag may refer to the first or second Thursday from the initial reference time  . If we changed the argument of ndstain the above examples to words denoting periods instead of phases the corresponding reference times would not be ambiguous  . Ntt's tave cka ( next week ) and n ? is ta dag ( next day ) will be interpreted as having only one temporal location and not two as the first examples  . How is this possible ? If somebody says ntista torsdag  ( next Thursday ) when the initial reference time is a Thursday , then there is no ambiguity ; the step value will be +1 which will pick out the first phase that has the value tors dag after the initial RT  . However , if ntistators dag was uttered on a Sunday , we would have to adjust the initial RT by either starting at the Thursday preceding the initial RT or at the Thursday succeeding it  , and from the ' new ' initial RT move +1 to reach a temporal reference . The expression nastajul ( next Christmas ) is analogoust on a stators dag . 
Instead of saying that next-expressions have two possible step values  , +1 or +2 , we claim that there is only one value , namely +1 , but that when the argument is a phasal expression  , such a stors dag , the initial RT may be chosen in two ways depending on individual strategies  . Some may for example choose the nearest phase as their new RT  . 
There is a class of expressions that behavest l ~ e same way as next-expressions  , for example , expressions involving modifiers such as fSrra ( ~ last )  , nast nasta ( the next but one ) . 
Interpretation principle
By looking at the properties of the different parts of a complex temporal expression interpretation principles for frame-adver-bial expressions can now be set up  . Making use of the distinction between the deietic and phasal expressions together with the temporal hierarchy we can outline a Frame-adverbial interpretation principle which will explain when a frame-adver-bial expression is interpretable : It is possible to interpret a temporal frmne -adverbial phrase au-tanom cusly iff  1  . a ) \] hephrase consist8 of olinor several phasal expressions and b ) ' t ' heeom bimt tion fp has al values wilt constitut ~ a chain of  1  , 3 mpot-alinfonnafi ( m according to theic mpmal hierarchy . 
and c )  ' ) ' hetopmost phase of the chain specifies a unique phase  . 
or 2 . a ) ' Y hephrase con ~ ; is ts of a combhlation of one or several deieties and an arbitrtay numbes of p has a lexpressions and b  ) hMex islmown for each deictic ~ mt ~ e ) ' the deietics and the phasal expressions each specify consistent phase-of relations  . The phasal values provided will constitn teach ~ , in oftemlm ~ alinfommtion according to rimt cmlmmI hierarchy  . 
IRt (   ( d ) Add ctic provideston poral information for the highest level of the chain  . 
The abow : principle will permit in tc~pretation of expressions such as 
O )   ( 2 )   1987 imaj den 24 maj 1987 imo/gonklkvartOver'fyrangtsh~reekspd torsdagkl  . ~ vart 6vet fyra for 20 drsed an idagrid denhtirtide nimorgon 1987 in May
May 24th ,   1987 tomorro wat a quartet ' past four ~ extweek onl " hursday at a quarter past four  20 years ago today at this time tomorrow fSr 39 dr " ochfyrat * ~ m~dersdaza 39 years and four ~ umths a goom t , Mveckoroeh fyradagar in two weeks and four days The following expressions will be rule A out by the principle :  ( 3 ) klkvarti ~ ver 5   1987 at a q~tarter past Jive 1987 pdkvdl lenijnnua ~ i in the evening in Januacy ( 4 ) fOr rad ret p defter middage n last year in the afternoonnastarecks  k112 next week at nvelveo ' clock The fact that an expression i  . , ; ruled out by the principle does not mean that into ' pretation is blocked completely  . The expressions in ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) are only incomplete in the sense that some per k , dslack a phasal value and it may turn out that contextual knowledge will provide this  . Inteq ~ retation is stack if the expression yields inconsistent phasal values  . For example , the expression pdmdndagenden23 november idr ( on Momqay Novem be ~23rd this year ) provides inconsistent phasal values for the I ) AY period , i e . November 23rdi , ~ a Wednesday in 1988 . 
However , there are some borderline cases that the above principle would permit such a  , q(5) for . 3 9 drsedanig & n ~' ~ are eksn&~tadr for 2 arsed an fOr 2 nu ~ uulersedan ( 6 ) for 39& sedani ~ u ~ rgonoms ,  . xdrfOr2mdnaderse&m39) , ears ago yesterday next week next year two years ago two months ago  39 year's ago tomorrow in six years 2 months ago\[n ( 5 ) two deictics with the same direction are combined  , either ++ , or . . . .  . And in ( 6 ) there is a combination of deictics with different relational values  , that is an anterior is joined with a posterior deictic  . In principle it seems possible to combine de- -ictics in this way  , although some Swedish speakers do con- . 
sider the examples in (5) and (6) as being odd.
The examples in ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) are all complex frame-adverllial expression holding more than one deictic phrase  , but the im--portant hing is that the different deictics together specify the same t in re  . In other words , if we interpret a phrase such as ( 7 ) f i O r t v d d r s e d a n i g d r ( two years ago yesterday ) where the two involved deictics both have ST as obligatory index the first deietic will pick out a description of a reference time two years before ST and the second will modify that description by adding phases for DAY and MONTH based on the partial description of a phase one day before ST  . This view makes it possible to claim that certain deictics such as igdr  ( yesterday )  , imorgon ( tomorrow ) , ete , always have ST as their index . /Smith 1978/ has proposed that interpretation of expressions such as  ( 7 ) is done in two steps , that is , that the first deictic forms the RT fortile second  . Smith's strategy would mean that igd r ( yesterday ) in ( 7 ) cannot have ST as its obli-gatory index ; with our strategy this is indeed possible . 
hnplementations
The principles outlined for the interpretation of temporal I~'amc-adverbials have been implemented in a system  , CLOCK WISE , which interprets frame-adverbial expressions into a temporal description in terms of p has alw dues  . Tht : first version of CI , OCK WISE consists of a parser , based on finite ~'; tatcmachinery , and a ' temporal expert ' that will make use of its knowledge about temporal phases and periods and infer temporal information that is missing explicitly in the expressicms  . 
A temporal representation is constructed in a notep addm'ing the parsing process  . The note pad contains information about the periods and phases denoted by the expression and ~ if the expression is deictic  , also index , step value and direction . Th cn otep a d is structured according to the temporal hierarchy and will therefore support the interpreter according to the l  , lter pretation principle . The first version can , however , only deal with one type of index , namely speech time . CI_ , OCK WISI -! ,   1 has been use x l as a module in a natural anguage and graphi--cal interface to a booking  system/J6nsson   1987/  . 
The second version of CLOCKWISE is under construction  . The temporal representation is built by an LFG -type gimmnar together with a frame-based knowledge representation whmv temporal periods and phases amtreated as semantic objects  ( of / Ahrenberg 1988/ . The grammm " is written in a way to syntactically filter out file temporal expressions  , i e . temporal prepositional phrases are functionally distinct front other prepositional phrases in the functional structures  ( fstructures )  . The result of a successful interpretation of a temporal frame-adverbial is a directed acyclic graph  ( DAG ) where a set of phasal values forms a description of the time denoted by the expression  . For example , a frame-adverbial such as ni is tave ckapdfredag kl  12  . 30 ( next week on Friday at 12 . 30 ) has a functional structure of the following kind  : 
I io LEX $ WEEK\]\]
RDIN . ~ STA\][
ASEUNM 31
FOR MUN M\]J\[-PCASE ., A\]
ELEXSFREDA ~
EGENDUTR 3
EcAsE~EX $ HOUR12$ MINUTE 303
Fig . 3 Functional structure
The above DAG is mapped to an intermediate DAG by the Frame system  . The intermediate DAG has separate deictic phrases from p has alones  , and also provided a frame for the deictic mapping function F  . 
rEaPicT , c\]/r \]/
EVHASAL * " OUR 122
EPHASALS MINUTE 30 ~
Fig . 4Intermediate structure
By using a more general and powerful framework we are able to incorporate other types of temporal expressions and develop the above principles in relation to tense and aspect  . Durative expressions have recently been incorporated in the system  . 
The development of CLOCKWISE is part of the grammar development project in the LINLIN project at LinkSping 
University (/ Ahrenberg 1987/).
CLOCKWISE is at the moment unable to handle expressions such as  ( 1 ) The first week of January CLOCKWISE will get stuck on this expression due to the fact that weeks cannot be mapped onto months  , whereas the first day of January would result in a description  . One solution would be to force a mapping of weeks onto months  ( in the same way a sweeks are mapped onto years in the Swedish calendar  ) giving us five subperiods of MONTH each of week length  , with corresponding phases where the first and the fifth week phase sometimes would be partial  . 

This research has been supported by the Nation a V Swedish 
Board for Technical Development.
I would like to thank Lars Ahrenberg , Ntis Dahlbltck , Arne Jtnsson , Mats Wirtnoch Ivan Rankin for helpful comments on drafts of this paper  . I am also indebted to Jim Goodwin who has provided me with the knowledge representation tool used in 
CLOCK WISE 2.

Ahrenberg , L ,  1987 , Parsing into Discourse Object Descriptions , in Proceedings of the Third Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics , Copenhagen.
Ahrenberg , L ,  1988 , Functional Constraints in Knowledge-Based Natural Language Understanding  , in Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , 

Bennett , M&Partee B ,  1978 , Toward the Logic of Tense and Aspect , Indiana University Linguistic Club , Bloomington . 
Bruce , B , The processing of time phrases in CHRONOS , Report CBM-TM-29 , Department of Computer Science , 
Rutgers University , New Brunswick.
Ejerhed , E , 1987, Event structures in text . . Paper presented at the Workshop on Text and courses of events  , held at the Department of Computer & Information Science  , Linktping
University , March 1213, 1987.
Hinrichs , E ,  1986 , Temporal anaphora in discourses of English , in Lingustics and Philosophy 9 , pp 63-82 . 
J 6nsson , A ,  1987 , Naturligts prdkfi ~ ranviindar dialog och databasftr frdgningar  . Report LiTH-IDA-R-87-25 , Department of Computer & Information Science , Linktping University . 
Kahn , K&G or r ~ GA , Mechanizing Temporal Knowledge , in Artificial Intelligence 9(1977) , pp87-108 . 
Levy , DM , 1980, The architecture of text , Ph . D . dissertation,
Stanford University.
Merkel , M ,  1987 , The Interpretation of Swedish Temporal Frame -Adverbial Phrases  , in Papers from the Tenth Scandinavian Conference of Linguistics  , Bergen . 
Smith , C . S .  1978 , The syntax and interpretation f temporal expression i English  . Linguistics & Philosophy , 2, pp 43-100 . 
Smith , C . S . , 1980 Temporal Structures in Discourse , in 77 me , Tense and Quantifiers , ( edCRohrer ) , Niemeyer , Tubingen , pp . 

Smith , C . S ,  1981 , Semantic and Syntactic Constraints on Temporal Interpretation  , in Tedeshi , PJ&Zaenen , A ( eds ) , Syntax and Semantics , Volume 14 , pp 213-238 . 

