Directing the Generation of Living Space Descriptions 
Penelope SIBUN
Department of Computer & Information Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst , MA 01003 USA
Alison K . HUETTNER
Department of Comparative Literature & Languages
Hofstra University
Hempstead , NY 11550 USA
David D . MCDONALD
Brattle Research Corporation
55 Wheeler Street
Boston , MA 02138 USA

We have developed a computational model of the process of describing the layout of an apartment or house  , a much-studie discourse task first characterized linguistically by Linde  ( 1974 )  . The model is embodied in a program , APT , that can reproduce segments of actual tape -recorded descriptions  , using organizational and discourse strategies derived through analysis of our corpus  . 
1. Introduction
At this point in research on natural language generation  , it is important to select problems that will clarify what is at issue in the larger phenomena under study  , while at the same time being small enough to yield principled results in a reasonable amount of time  . To build on what the field has already accomplished  , the problem must involve the generation of motivated discourses -- rather than isolated test sentences -- and should be based on a corpus of real text  . Furthermore , since a computational treatment of a generation problem should include a fully programmed underlying conceptual model to facilitate xperiments  , and since the representation used in that model will invariably play a crucial role in any theory  , part of the research is building the model and designing the representation  . 
This means that to be tractable the problem should not require expert knowledge or be overly large  . 
Support for this work was provided in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under contract number  N00014-87-K0238  , and by Rome Air Development Center under contract number  AF30602-81-C-0169  , task number 174398 , both at the University of Massachusetts . 

Living space descriptions fit these demands neatly ? They are single-speaker monologues  , allowing us to ignore issues of turntaking strategies or interpreting an interlocutor's intentions  . The task is something everyone seems to be able to do  , but it is not such an everyday occurrence that it has become formulaic : it is likely that people are actively constructing what they are saying  . Affective and abstract information is minimal and  , to a first approximation , can be safely factored out of a corpus , reducing the potential complexity of the conceptual model in living space descriptions  . This simplicity has allowed us to concentrate on our primary concerns :  ( a ) understanding the relationship between the organization of a conceptual model and descriptive strategies  ,   ( b ) determining the influence of these strategies on the discourse structure of a text  , and ( e ) taking an initialook at issues in lexical choice in a familiar domain  . 
At the time this paper is written , we have finished the first phase of our research . We have collected and carefully transcribed a corpus of seven different people's descriptions of the same  , single-story house ( the residence of one of the authors )  . A program model of this house , as these people appear to view it , has been developed , along with a set of strategies and meta -strategies for generating some of the living space descriptions that emerged from our analysis of the corpus  . This paper presents our representation , some of the strategies we have identified and their application imimicking I a segment from our corpus  , and our ? treatment of some linguistic issues in choosing words and constructions  . 
2. Background and approach
The s ~ ; minal work in living space descriptions is Charlotte Linde's  1974 dissertation . Linde's data consisted of 72 descriptions of apartments elicited in inte ~ ciews on the quality of life in New York City  . She found that the great majority of speakers organize their descriptions as an imaginary " tour " of the apartment  . 
The spatial relationships among the rooms can be expressed by describing how one might make one's way from each room to the next  . Such at our is of course constrained by the position of the actual routes through the apartment ? Lin de proposed a model in terms of a phrases t ~ ' ucture network in which the terminal nodes were rooms and vectors of various categories  . 
Veronika Ullmer-Ehrich ,   ( 1982 ) extended the discussion to descriptions of individual dormitory rooms  , again embedded in longer interviews . The description she collected focused on the spatial relationships among the rooms ' furnishings  . She found , as one might expect , that imaginary movement was less usual here , since the speaker can typically " see " everything to be mentioned from a single point of view  . 
As in Li~de's apartment descriptions , physical proximity has a strong influence on the order in which objects are introduced  ; Ullmer-Ehrich refers to the result as an imaginm ' y " gaze tour " around the walls  .   ( Our own informants tended to give the contents of the rooms as well as their spatial relations to each other  , letting us see both kinds of strategies in action  . ) Linde's and Ullmer-Ehrich's treatments were descriptive  . Ours attempts to model the motivations behind the texts  . Our aim is to conslxuct a computer program that can reproduce our data and  , further , produce variations on it . If simple variations on the parameters of our model still produce realistic texts  , then we will have a basis for claiming that it could be a candidate explanatory model of the processing that underlies human behavior in this task  . 
Our implementation , APT , is composed of a knowledge base consisting of interconnected first-class objects that reconstruct the living space  , strategies which traverse the knowledge base constructing descriptions  , meta-strategies which choose among the strategies each time a new strategy is needed  , and mapping rules between APT's knowledge structures and there  ; dization component's knowledge structures . 
tLiving space descriptions are a small enough subject area that it is worth trying to develop a treat rnent with enough articulations in its mechanisms to potentially account for every detail of what people actually say---hence " mimic "  . There may well be a vast amount of arbitrariness in the decisions people make  ; but the pressure to explain the fine structure of their utterances  , not just to gloss over it by producing something " comparable " but more regular  , should lead to stronger , more interesting theories . 
3. The representation
Practically any familia representation language that one might " take off the shelf  . ' to use in modeling the information eeded for the description of a house will be technically deficient in several ways when one comes to use it as a source for generation : it may not supply first-class objects for the information units a natural language can reference  ; its taxonomic hierarchy may provide the wrong generalizations  , and so on . To avoid these problems , we developed our own representation system , essentially a system for building a classic semantic net  . 2 Every minimal fact and item to which a text can refer is its own first-class object  , as are the relationships among them . We refer to these objects as noumen a , 3 and presently break them down into three basic types  , reflecting differences in how they are mapped to the realization component  . 
objects , such as kitchen-window and sink relations , such as has-property and next--to propenies , such as large and picture-window-like Noumena have links to selected other noumen a  . 
i These are the basis of the connectivity that ( tacitly ) makes a given knowledge base into a coherent whole  , and allows the descriptive strategies to navigate it  . 
Connections are introduced on an empirical basis wherever noumen are related in such a way that they can be combined by a strategy in some description as determined by our analysis of the corpus  , The knowledge base for a given living space consists of all the noumen a that might reasonably be mentioned  , given our analysis . 
While deliberate connections between oum en a may seem to be begging the question  , they account for a phenomenon that cannot be neglected  , namely why it is that it never occurs to anyone to say  , e . g . , the toilet is next to the stove . If all aspects of describing a living space are data-directed  , i . e . following or choosing among already established connections  , then a speaker will never even think about infeasible possibilities  . One can easily imagine other architectures , uch as simply lumping all objects into a common heap organized by their salience  , where one would have to actively search for interesting relations by methods like generate and  4est   . Such a design would make different predictions i . 
2 At this point we clo not include any sort of part-whole hierarchy such as house dominating room dominating furniture  . If such a structure eventually emerges as a generalization that  , say , simplifies the statement of our strategies , then this will suggest that it is inherent in the conceptualization of the task  . On the other hand if we build in a hierarchy a priori  , we will never know whether the slrueture is them only because we put it there  . 
3 Singular : noumen on ; a Greek word used by Kant to mean a thing-in -itself  , independent of sensuous or intellectual perception fit  . 
, 627 about resource demands and processing effort than ours would  .  4 4 . Strategies and meta-strategies A description is a controlled traversal of the knowledge base  . 5 No component of this traversal is precomputed ; that is , there are no " plans " which dictate a priori the structure of the description  . Instead , control is handled by strategies , which are dynamically selected and linked together by meta-strategies  . A strategy , when chosen , operates in a context which determines how it will traverse  ( its part of ) the knowledge base . 
This context is composed of the most recently visited noumen on  , all of the untraversed link semanating from it , and the most recently used strategy . There are other factors which feed into the context  , many of which can be conceptualized as parameters which " bias the choices of strategies within a particular house description  . One such parameter is level of detail : a description may or may not include the more detaile descriptions of objects within it  . 
We believe that this implementation f the context is sufficient o account for most of the choices of strategies that could be made  . However there are clearly cases in which a richer context is required  , for example , And the door , again , is in the same relationship to the windows as it is in Penni's room  . Here we need to model ! some awareness of previous patterns and the ability to refer to them in constructing new descriptions  . 
We have so far identified approximately 15strategies in our corpus , each grouping noumen a together and ordering their presentation  . Typical strategies include moves such as circular sweep  , in which the speaker picks an anchor point in a room  , and describes the room's features or contents in an order determined by their placement along the circumference of the room : look right-look left  , in which the speaker describes features to either side of a mental reference point  , or follow a hallway , one of the strategies by which a speaker shifts to a new vantage point  . 
To understand this better , let us look at how the strategies and recta -strategies come into play in \[  4 An arguably equivalent and perhaps preferable representation might be a non-propositional geometrical model after the fashion of an architect's drawing  . However , we have never seen any evidence of the precision that such a representation would bring with it  ( quite the contrary )  , and have found many conventional spects to the descriptions in our corpus that would be quite at odds with a model that captured the actual visual appearance of the house  . 
5 Our observations agree with Linde's that a minimal description mentions all of the rooms  ( except possibly the bathroom ) and their spatial relation to each other . Apt keeps track of rooms ( and other noumena ) mentioned , and simply stops when all the rooms have been mentioned  . 
6 28 generating this excerpt from a description by a subject named L is a  .   ( This is an implemented example that APT has actually produced  . ) Then , in the kitchen , (1 ) there's a large window which faces the backyard , with two flanking windows . (2) And , if we're facing the backyard , (3) on the right hand side is a sliding glass door , and then a small window . If we're again facing the backyard , (4) on the lefthand side is the stove , then are frigerator . And , beneath that large window is the sink , (5) and on the right hand side is the dish washer , This segment starts with a preposed adverbial to mark a shift of vantage point  . (1 ) Upon entering a major room a meta-strategy preferring any especially salient objects over object sequences applies  , giving us the matrix clause of the first sentence . (2 ) That window is connected to three sets of objects  , each of which is organized by a sweep strategy . This pattern ( i . e . a salient object hat is then exus of several sweeps  ) triggers a room-sweep meta-strategy that anchors them all to the same object  ( the window )  , expressing the sweeps as displacements from this anchor using deietic terms  ( right hand side , and then ) and reorienting to the salient focal point between sweeps  . (3 , 4 , 5) A recta-strategy , probably specific to L is a , prefer starting with " righthand " alternatives , thus giving the sweeps their order . 
5. Linguistic choices
Thus far we have been talking about issues of what we would call " or chestration ": planning the text structure that provides the order of presentation  , segmentation into sentences , and the textual function and salience of a body of information that has been selected for inclusion in an utterance  . We must also look at issues in " mapping ": selecting the specific wording and choice of construction that will realize a given noumen on  . 6 Lexical selection is in most respects a non -issue in living space descriptions  . Nearly every physical object has an obvious and very over-learned name  ( e . g . kitchen , bathroom , sink , refrigerator ) , making the process one of simple retrieval rather than judgment and planning  . The exceptions are , as one would predict , the objects whose associated common ouns do not pick them out uniquely  , such as " hallway " , " closet " , or " window " . For these APT will have to explicitly construct descriptions by folding in restrictive modifiers as they are needed  . In the corpus , such descriptions were most often constructed 6 The other principal activities of generation ( as we see it ) are " selection " , which is in most respects rivial in this domain since we stipulate that all of the noumena in the knowledge base are to be mentioned  , and " realization " , which is carded out by the program Mumhlo-86 in the fashion described in Meteer et al 1987  . 
from the same sort of spatial information used in clauses  . 
Thus we have references to a large hallway that leads into the kitchen  , or the smaller hall way that leads , to the bedrooms . After it has been mentioned a few times , a description will be abbreviated and e a nonicalized : that wide hallway  , that smaller hallway , with or without further ( nonrestrictive ) modification . 
Choosing syntactic onstruction sia constrained problem in this task  , since our corpus contains surprisingly few construction types  . For example , once affective comments and digressions have been removed  , more than half of all clauses fall within the class locative relation : there is < object > < at location > < at location > there is < object >   , < at location >/ s < object > < object > is < at location > < object l > has <  object2> at < location > Which construction is selected is determined by a set of discourse-level heuristics  . For example within a sweep the " < at location > is < object > " choice is natural because it facilitates chaining  . Breaks between discourse segments can be flagged with a marked construction like The re-Insertion  ( Then there's Sabine's room on the right , as opposed to Sabine's room is on the right ) . 
6. Future Work
A major goal of this work is to construct a library of meta-strategies  , strategies , and mapping rules that is comprehensive enough to allow APT to produce a variety of new descriptions  ( in addition to mimicking the ones factually in the corpus  ) from the same knowledge base by varying library selections in what appear to be natural ways  . Towards the end of establishing and strengthening ~ our theory  , we are also planning to collect and model a larger set of descriptions of another living space  . In a parallel effort , we are working on a computationally feasible model of spatial deixis  . We would ultimately like to use the architecture we develop to reanalyze prior work in related domains  , such as the scene analysis done by Conklin's GENARO  ( 1983 )  . 
7. References
E . Conklin . Data-Driven Indelible planning of Discourse Generation Using Salience  . COINS
Technical Report 83-13, University of
Massachusetts , 1983.
C . Linde . The Linguistic Encoding of Spatial Information . Doctoral Dissertation , Columbia
University , 1974.
M . Meteer , D . McDonald , S . Anderson , D . Forster , L . 
Gay , A . Huettuer & P . Sibun , Mumble-86: Design and Implementation . COINS Technical Report 87-87 , University of Massachusetts , September 1987 . 
P . Sibun . APT : A System to Direct and Control Natural Language Generation  . COINS Technical Report 87-42 , University of Massachusetts ,  1987 . 
V . Ullmer-Ehrieh . The Structure of Living Space Descriptions . In Speech , Place , and Action , R . 
Jarvella and W . Klein , ed . , John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 


