Discontinuities in Narratives
Alexander Nakhimovsky
Department of Computer Science
Colgate University
Hamilton , NY 13346
saaha % colgate.csnet@rlay.cs.net

This paper is concenled with heuristics for segmenting narratives into units that form the basic elements of discourse representations and that constrain the application of focusing algorithms  . The following classes of di ~ ontinuities are identified : figure-ground  , space , time , perspective , and topic . It is suggested that rhetorical relations between narrative units are mac~o labels that stand for frequently occurring clusters of discontinuities  . Heuristics for identifying discontinuities are presented and illustrated in an extended example  . 
1. The Segmentation Problem.
1.1. Introduction
Thi ~ ; paper is concerned with heuristics for segmenting narratives into units that tb~t the basic elements of discourse representations and that constrain the application of focusing algorithm r  ,  . The importance of proper segmentation is frequently mentioned  ; as one text says , " the need for segmentation is a hnost universally agreed upon  .   .   .   . A good model of segmentation is essential to simplify the problem of understanding discourse  . In particular , it divides the problem into two major subproblems : what techniques are needed to analyze the sentence  . ' ; within a segment and how segments can be related to each other "  ( Allen 1987:398-399 )  . However , " there is little consensus on what the segments of a particular discourse should be or how segmentation could be accomplished  . One reason for this lack of consensus i that there is no precise definition of what a segmen ! is beyond the intuition that certain sentences naturally group together "  ( ibid . ) . A brief discussion of our position is therefore in order  , addressing the following questions : What is it that is being segmented ? What is the dominant feature of a segment ? What is the purpose of the segmentation process ? We adopt the position that reading a narrative  , like taking part in a eo~wersation , is a form of so ci ' , d interaction . However , the nature of the interaction is quite different in narratives and conversations  , and so are the principles of segmentation ad the nature of the resulting segments  . The time of a conversation coincides with the time of its content  . Sinmlt a neity in time is typically accompanied by a tight integration between linguistie and nonlinguistic behavior : the verbalization of how -to-get-the redirections is the action of giving directions  , task-oriented conversations between an expert and apprentice are an integral part of p~r forming the task at hand  , and the unfolding text of a a
William J . Rapaport
Graduate Group in Cognitive Science and
Department of Computer Science
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo , NY 14260 rapapon@cs . buffalo . edu argumentative dialogue is precisely the activity of arguing  . 
Conversation can thus properly be called performative discourse  . 
By contrast , the content of a narrative is decoupled from the linear progression of its text and unfolds in its own  , separate timeline . 
It follows that in place of the situation of discourse  , a narrative is processed with respect o a constantly maintaine deictic center  , which is " the locus in conceptual space-time of the objects and events depicted or described by the sentences currently being perceived  . At any point in the narrative , the cognitive agent's attention is focused on particular characters  ( and other objects ) standing in particular temporal and spatial relations to each other  . Moreover , file agent ' looks ' at the narrative from the perspective of a particular character  , spatial location and temporal location . Thus the deictic center consists of a WHERE -point  , a WHEN-point and a WHO-point . " ( Bruder et at .  1986: 1) . In this paper , the WHEN-point of the deictic center is referred to as the Temporal Focus  ( cf . Webber 1987a , b ; Nakhi-movsky 1987b) . 
We conceive of discourse segments ( DSs ) as continuous stretches of text corresponding to relatively monolithic pieces of internal representation  . What " relatively monolithic " means is the subject of much of the rest of the paper  ; at this point , we simply say that the DS remains the same as long as the deictic center does not undergo drastic changes in space  , time , perspective or composition , while the beginning of a new DS is accompanied /signaled by a discontinuity in one or several of these parameters  . Within each segment , reference and anaphoraate processed by local algorithms mostly relying on recency lists as in Sidner  ( 1983 )  . At the beginning of a new DS , a more global search through the accumulated representation is required  . 
We thus have three kinds of entities organized into three kinds of structures : linearly ordered stretches of text forming the Linear Text Structure  ( LTS )  ; the Event-Situation Structure ( ESS , ef . Webber 1987b ) , representing the narrative's unfolding contents ; and the Current Focus Space , which is a collection of focusing mechanisms ( including the deictic center ) that together represent the " attentional state "   ( Grosz & Sidner 1986 ) of the system . The components of the LTS are frequently linked by r be to d cal relation g such as el aboration  , resumption or flashback ( see , e . g . , Hobbs 1982) . We believe that these rhetorical relations are simply macro labels that stand for certain of t -repeated clusters of discontinuities in the ESS  . It is the discontinuities that are essential for constructing the ESS  ; the rhetorical labels need not be recognized by the reader at all  , just as , on the sentence the intention of the speaker ( Cohen & Levesque 1987 )  . 
The foregoing hassewed to motivate the need for reliable segmentation heuristics  . Most such heuristics found in the iitera~ture are syntactical in nature  , relying , in almost Eliza-like fashion , on clue words and phrases ( see references in Grosz & Sidner 1986:177 )  . Wept~pose that heuristic should be based on semantical considerations such as discontinuities in the representation  . This paper investigates four kinds of discontin ui -ties : discontinuities of topic  , discontinuities of space and time , discontinuities of figure and ground , and discontinuities of the narrative perspective . Section 2 explains what these are ; the remainder of this section gives a preliminary and paltial illustration and reviews related work  . 
1.2 An example
Consider the following example : ( 1 )   ( a ) Hartley and Phoebe had been sent by their mother to fix the tail vane of the wind mill  .   ( b ) In the great expanse of the prairie where they live  ( I , the high tower of the wind mill was the only teal landmark  . ( Worline 1956:1) Rhetorically speaking , sentence ( b ) interrupts a sequence of events described in ( a )   ( = DS1 ) to start DS2 , a description , fit order to recognize this rhetorical relation between the two DSs  , it is necessary to recognize that : ( 1 ) there is a shift of topic ;   ( 2 ) there is a shift in perceptual modality to visuai perception  ; (3) there is a shift in time scale , from the events of the cun'ent day to years or decades  , associated with the lifetime of a wind mill and the ' where they lived ' clause  ;   ( 4 ) there is shift in Sl ~ tial scale from a house hold to the entire prairie  ;   ( 5 ) there is a shift from a foregrounded sequence of events to the " mopping-up " operation of filling in the background  ; the shift is signaled by aspectual changes ( Hopper 1978 ; 
Nakhimovsky 1987b ,  1988) ; and ( 6 ) the foregrounded sequence of events includes two telic processes  ( walking fi'om rite house to the wind mill ; fixing the broken part ) whose beginnings or preconditions are explicitly mentioned but whose terminal points are still in the future relative to the Temporal Focus  ; this sets up expectations for the reader . 
The following empirical investigation is suggested by this and similar ' examples : classify the discontinuities and clusters of discontinuities that typically accompany DS breaks in narratives  ; identify rite linguistic and extralinguistic knowledge involved  ; develop heuristics for using this knowledge ; and test the heuristics in a computer program . Section 2 below discusses nma-ative representations mid the data structures that ale needed for con  . -structing and updating them . A classification of discontinuities falls out of this discussion  . Section 3 present several kinds of knowledge that we consider elevant for identifying discontinui-tics with an extended example Whose point is that our heuristics explain the use of deietic devices attd con'ecfly predict paragraph breaks observed in existing narratives  . ' i1 . 3 . Related work Centt ~ alto our investigation is the idea that text underst~md-ing involves " building a good structure "  ( Bruce 1981:283 ) by the process of snccessivembedding of the cut ~ent sentence representation into the stEa ~ cture created by the preceding text  . 
This idea emerged almost simultmleously in Computational Linguistics/Al  ( Bruce 1981 ; Weber 1979 , 1983) and linguistics ( Kamp 1981 , Heim 1982) . ( There has al~been interaction , moreo1'less conscious , with the Re , " , der -- Response chool of literary criticism as represented in  , e . g . , Thompkins 1981 . ) The main difference between these two developments concerns the role of inference and monotonicity : to what extent doe  , s the structure being built incorporate defea . sible inferences that may have to be undone ? We do not pursue this issue hele but assume non ~ -monotonic embeddability and an active role fbr expectations setup by the text  . ( Cf . N~himovsky 1988 for some discussion . ) Grosz & Sidner ( 1986 ) is the first unified approach in which the problem of segmentation is fled up with the notion of atten  . .
tional state . As argued in Nakhimovsky (1987b ) , some features of their model ( a stack mechanism for attentional state , the prom ~ inenee of pragmatic notions such as the speaker's intentions  ) make it more appropriate for conversation rather than na ~ cative ~ Webber  ( 1988 ) and Naidlimovsky ( 1988 ) suggest a model in which the distinction between the top and the rest of diest ack is replaced by the distinction between as h~nt~tel'm memory and the 

Ottr work has been developing in close contact with the SUNY Buffalo Graduate Group in Cognitive Science's p~'oj ccton cognitive and computer systems for understanding arrative text  . 
This research program consists of a group of projects whose goals are to develop a psychologically real model of ' a cognitive agent 's comprehension fdeictic infbn nation in nan ' ative text  . 
The hypothesis of this project is that the e on strtiction and modification of the deictic center is important fox ~ comprehension  . 
To test tiffs hypothesis , a computer system implemented in SN ePS ( Shapiro 1979 , Shapiro & Rapaport 1987 ) is being developed that wilt " read " a narrative and answer questions con-renting the reader's beliefs about the objects  , relations , and events in ito " l~e system will be psychologically real  , because the details of the algorithms and the efficacy of the linguistic devices will be validated by psychological experiments on nolmal ar  , dabnormal comprehenders .  ((~ . Bruder et al1986, Daniels 1986,
Ahneida 1987, Wiebe & Rapapolt 1988.)
Thence is surprisingly little psychological work on discourse seganentation  . To rem . edy this situation , a series of expel Jments I " This is not to suggest timt yl ~ ogmphical pcag ~ aph breaks are the only discontinuities weate a far  . First , ~ttile minimal level of segmentation , DSs are ust'tally smaller than typographical p ragraphs  . 
Second , a typographical pragraph does not simply sigJlat or suggest a discontinuity : it creates one by its reD'pJ'esenc  . ~; . 
is being de , , ; igned and condncted at Colgate ( Reynolds & Nakhi-movsky ( in preparation ) ) . The gubjects are being asked to segment narratives of varions gemes and stpactural characteristics and later recall them  , under conditions of both cued and uncued ~ ee at l . We proceed from the hypothesis that narrative structures as they arc remembered are different from such strnc-tures as they are built " online " in the process of comprehension  . 
2o Narrative ~ and Theirlltepr ~ ntatlon ~.
For the purposes of this paper , we adop the simplest narra ~ five model . There is only one , objective , narrator , who gives an observer account of the story . The story consists of descriptions of situation , ; evolving or persisting in time . Loosely following Hayes (1995) , we call these descriptions history-~okens , or h ~ token , stbrslto ~ . ( l , exie al meanings are history-types ( h-types ) related to iheh " h-tokens by the relation of " nonmonotonicemtnMdability "  . ) The time of a narrated h-token is determined with respecl to a specific point within the previously muratexl h-tokens ~ and usually without reference to the time of discourse  . \] ~ Using Reiehenbach's notion of refel ~ ence time  , we can say that a sentence in a narrative never has the time of discourse as its reference tiaie  . Put differently , a sentence in a presentense necessarily ~ ntennpts a nan'ative  , unless it is int ~ preted as historical ( narrative ) present . 
Tl~emeaning of a non-generic sentence in a narrative is a collection of h-tokens together with the position of the deictic center  ( to lhe extent hat it is uniquely specified by the sentence  )  . 
After the first sentence of an m ' rative establishes the initial setup  , each subsequent sentence is processed ill the context consisting of the ESS and ttte Current Focus Space  . Depending on the meaning of the sentence , one of two thing shappens : either the representation of the sentence is incorporated in the Current Focus Space  , with the focusing mechanisms appropriately modified  , or , in the case of a focus shift , the contents of the Current Foeus Space are incorporated into the Event-Situation Slxucture  ( ESS ) ~md Linear Text Stmctore ( LTS )  , and the Current Focus Space is completely reset . The nature of the processing at the DSj uncOtre is thus quite different fiom the " routine " tasks m be performed as long as the text remains in the same DS : the start of all e't  , vDS prompts , and is prompted by , a shift of attention . The ( ircularity here is deliberate . The start of a new DS brings al~t~t several c ~ , anges , ome of them more immediately noticeable thorn others  ; file mole obvious ones serve to signal that a new DS is  , indeed , started . Wep ~ oceed to catalog the changes . 
Th ~ lost obset vali ~ n to make is that a nan'ative must have a plot  , i . e . , p~e~ent ~ sequ~mce of events that forms an in slamce of a recognizable pattern  . ( The patto-n . , ; are part universal , part culture - . specific ; the work of Lehnert ( 1982 ) and Alker et ali In spoke narratives about eve ~ L  , ; that ( axe presented its having ) ac . .
ta~ll yoecun'ed , ritenamatornmy occ ~ L ` ionally make ~ eference to the time of discom'se  ( by b , - . ginnh ~ ganew discotlrse segment with , e . g . , " Then , yesterday , 1 ran into 8 mid ~ midhetold me . . . "); however , oven in his case , hltegration with t tie previously narrated events is obligatory  . 
(1985 ) can be seen as a search for the principles on which such patterns are built  . ) Using Gestalt terminology ( brought into linguistics by Tahny ( 1983 ) ) , we can say that a narrative's plot must present are cognizable tmporal/ean salfigure shown against some ground that minimally consists of spatial/visual settings  ( descriptions of characters are also frequent )  . The distinction is not always clearcut , because lements of the figure can be hidden among the details of the ground  , but the temporal nature of the plot does stand in clear contrast to the spatial nature of the ground  . 
Secondly , a narrative must have characters with whom we empathize  . These characters don't have to be human : one Can easily imagine a story about an adventure some plant seed that falls off its parent  , gets swallowed and excreted by a horse , and nearly drowns in a tropical rain before being miraculously saved by the sun and producing a flower  . Even so , the narrative is likely to alternate between die objective narrator's point of view and that of one of the characters  .   ( " The belly of the horse was dark and noisy inside  . " ) Suppose for a moment that the ESS is implemented as a partitioned network of nodes  , each node representing a narrated h-token and partitions corresponding to the belief spaces of the characters  . An unfolding narrative then creates a path through the network such that it  , and the inferences it generates , covers the network in its entirety . Some discontinuities of narratives very simply reflect the inlrinsic spatial or temporal discontinui-ties of the plot  , e . g . , when the story is composed of a sequence of events taking place during an afternoon  , followed by two years ' hiatus , followed by another action-packed afternoon .   ( A similar example of a spatial discontinuity can be easily imagined  . ) One measure of the " simplicity " of a narrative is how faithfully the order and stntcturing of its text reflects the order and structuring of its component events  . Even in the simplest narrative , how ~ ever , there are bound to be discontinuities resulting from the tension between the linear nature of the text and the multidimensional structure that it is mean to evoke  . These are discontinuities of figure and ground , when the narrative shifts between the main story line and the surrounding circumstance  , and discontinuities of perspective , when the narrative crosses into a different " empathy partition " or creates a new one  . 
Given this classification of discontinuities , one can proceed to catalog the clues that signal them  . This is a subject for a large empirical study , of which the next section is but a preliminary sketch  . It is important okee p in mind that it is clusters of discontinuities that signal the beginning of a new DS  . 
3. Discontinuities in Narratives.
3.1. Topic discon\[inuities.
Discontinuities of topic faLl into two groups . In the first , there is no anaphoric relation or immediate inference path from the new topic to a node in the Current Focus Space  . Whatan " immediate inference path " is depends , of course , on the system's knowledge base and inferential capabilities  , but this is a interest to us is the second kind of discontinuity  , when an anaphoric relation exists and calls for a pronominal anaphor  , but the WHO-point is instead reintroduced by a full noun phrase  , e . g . 
( unless otherwise indicated , the examples below are from Joyce 1969\[1914\] ) :  ( 2 ) \[ The barm bracks \] had been cut into long thick slices and were ready to be handed round attea  . Mafia had cut them herself . 
Maria was a very , very small person indeed ...
3.2. Temporal discontinuities.
The most important temporal discontinuities are : a  . A shift from perfective to imperfective sentence perspective accompanied by a shift to a much greater time scale  . The corresponding rhetorical move is frequently characterized as " introducing background or descriptive material "  . The move is frequently accompanied by a topic reintroduction  . 
b . The reverse shift from descriptive material to the main line of the narrative  . This move is signaled by the TF and the entire deictie center  , returning to an established node in the ESS , with an appropriate contraction of the timescale . 
c . A backwards move of the TF to an earler point in time  , with or without a change in time scale . Rhetorically , this is known as flashback . This move is frequently signaled by a verb in past perfect or by the used to + Infinitive construction  , although a shift may occur without such a verb form  , and the presence of such a verb form does not necessarily signal a shift : the reference time of the sentence may remain the same as  , rather than precede , the current TF .   ( See Almeida ( 1987 ) and Nakhimovsky ( 1988 ) for a more detaile discussion . ) 3 . 3 . Spatial discontinuities . 
The most obvious spatial discontinuities are discontinuities of scale  . It is argued at some length in Nakhimovsky (1986 , 1987a ) that h-types have time scales associated with them  , characterized in terms of " received " cyclical event such as day or year  . It seems equally necessary to establish a gradation of spatial scales  , based on similar considerations from human biology and habit at  . The spatial scales we currently employ are : one ' s body  ( which may need to be further specialized )  ; within arm's reach ; room area , such as deskorbed ; room ; floor ; house ; household ; village/neighborhood ; larger area within a between-meals roundtrip ; within a day's roundtrip ; staying over night . 
( The larger the scale , the more domain - and culture-specific vail-ation there is  . ) A change in spatial scale is frequently accompanied by related phenomena such as a change in temperature or lighting :  ( 3 ) She changed herblouse too and , as she stood before them irror , she thought of hows he used to dress for mass on Sunday morning when she was a young girl  ; and she looked with quaint affection at the diminutive body which she had so often adorned  . In spite of its years she found it a nicetidy little body  . 

When shegot outside the streets were shining with rain and she was glad of her old brown rain cloak  . 
3.4. Perspective discontinuities.
The following signals frequently indicate a shift to a character's subjective perspective away from the objective perspective of the implied narrator  :   ( a ) attitude reports , which can be further subeategorized into beliefs , desires , emotions , and so on ; communication verbs ; and perceptions ; and ( b ) deictics . 
Attitude reports , by their very nature , introduce private semantic objects into the ESS and thus create  , or move into , a partition . 
Deictics , such as the verbs bring or come , indicate the position of the WHO-point of the deictie center  ; a shift of this position to one of the characters signals a discontinuity  . ( Cf . Banfield 1982,
Wiebe & Rapaport 1988.) 4. An Example.
This section of the paper applies the above heuristics to the initial fragment of Joyce's " Clay ''  . The fragment falls into three DSs : sentence 1 ( DS1 )  , sentences 26 ( DS2) , and sentences 612 ( DS3) . tEmbedded in DS3 is DS3 . 1, consisting of sentences 9 . .
10 . Sentence 13 starts a fourth DS by returning to the first one . 
1 . The matron had given her leave to go out as so on as the women's tea was over and Mafia looked forward to herevening out  .  2 . The kitchen was spick and span : the cook said you could see your self in the big copper boilers  .  3 . The fire was nice and bright and on one of the side-tables were four very big bann-bracks  .  4 . These barm brack seemed uncut ; but if you went closer you would see that they had been cut into long thick even slices and were ready to be handed round attea  .  5 . Mafia had cut them herself . 
6 . Maria was a very , very small person indeed but she had a very long nose and a very long chin  ,  7 . She talked a little througher nose , always soothingly : Yes , my dear , and No , my dear .  8 . She was always sent for when the women quarrelled over their tubs and always succeeded in making peace  .  9 . One day the matron had said to her:--Maria , you are averitable peace-maker ! 10 . 
And the sub-matron and two of the Boardladies had heard the compliment  .  11 . And Ginger Mooney was always saying whatshe wouldn't do to the dummy who had charge of the irons if it wasn't for Maria  .  12 . Everyone was so fond of Maria . 
13 . The women would have their tea at sixo'clock and she would be able to get away before seven  . 
The transition from sentence 1 to 2 is very similar to the transition from ( a ) to ( b ) in example ( 1 ) : it is a shift from figure to ground marked primarily by tense and aspect changes and a shift from temporal to spatial/visual material  . The change in time and space scales is not as dramatic here  , but there is the t'II~escintuitive divisions , two of which correspond to Joyce's paragraph breaks  , have been Confirmed by one of the experiments reported in Reynolds and Nakhirnovsky  ( in preparation )  . 
sa near rangement of nanated events that are prior to the Temporal Focus  ( " The matron had given her leave .   .   .  "  ) and anticipated events that are in the future with respecto the Temporal Focus  ( the women's tea , Maria ' sevening out ) . This sets upexpectations suspended by the visual mated M and stative verbs  . 
Sentence 5 , by using an action verb and the past-perfect tense  , return to the time scale and the temporal a ~rangernent of sentence  1  . 
The transition from 5 to 6 ( paragraph break ) is characterized by a shift i a time scale and a topic reintroduction  . The material is a ( back ) ground character description : ' Maria is such that  .   .   . ' The hegira , Aug of " DS 3 . 1 is signaled by a wellknown clue phrase One day and by the past-perfect tense  . Note that the material is still gronnd ( 'Mmia is such that .   .   .  ' )  . " the precise relationship between I ) S3 and DS3 . 1 is at this p~fint ambiguous : they cmt be siblings  , alt d they wou M be if sentences 11 and 12 were dropped fi ' om the nmxa five . Howev cr ~ sentence 11 clearly signals a returu to the material of sentences  68: the tense changes back from past perfect opast ( past progressive , presumably for a sharper contrast with the perfect  )  , and the adverb always , used in sen?tences 7 and 8 , reappears again . ' Ibisestablishes that DS3 . 1 is , indeed , embedded in DS3 ; note that it bears no relation to DS1 , and , inpmticular , the past q ~ erfect events of sentences 910 are much fm'ther in the past ( on a different imescale ) than the past perfect events of sentence 1 . 
The tJansition from 12 to 13 ( the next paragraph break ) is a retina to the event sequence of senteuce 1 . The position of the TF , amt the entire deictic center is indicated by the future-in-the ~ past tense  . Note that it is essential to retrieve the entire deictic center  , and not just the ' I'I , ' , because the WHO-point is also restored : the she in  13 does not evoke Maria of sentence 12 or any other sentence in DS 2 and 3 presented from the perspective of the implied narrator  . Rather , this pronoun is a quasi-indexical ( Rapaport 1986 ) that replaces the first-person singular I of Maria ' sfit  , mghts and expectations , signaled by Marialooked forward in sentence 1 . t5 . Future research . 
There : are several directions in which we are proceeding  . 
Wiebe & Rapaport ( 1988 ) and Wiebe ( in progress ) present an outline of a detailed computational investigation of narrative per-spec five and reference  . Reynolds & Nakhimovsky ( in preparation ) will report on several psychological experiments designed to obtain empirical data on how people segment narratives in the process of reacting  , and how they are segmented when recalled . 
The deicti?center project ( Bruder et at . (1986)) contains both a linguistic t ; tudy of the role of indexicals in narrative segmentation  1In contrast to the naive children's story of Example  1  , it is difficult to make definite starements about he narrative perspective in Joyce  . 
Even his early stories , anticipating the incoming medenfism , deli . -berately and skillfully blend the character's perspective with the implied ruartator's  , so that even a descriptiouf Maria uses colloquial vocabulary and syntax that suggest a hum  , 'm voice that could l ~ e ouly

and a computational project hat will test all the diverse segmentation he ~ wisties within the unifoma system of belief represent a-  . 


This research was supported in part by NSF Grant No  . IR1-8610517 . We are grateful to Mary Galbraith and Janyce M . 
Wiebe for comments on an earlier version , and to Bonnie Webber and Rebecca Passonneau for discussions of related work  . 

Alker et at .  1985 . Two reinterpretations of Toynbee's Jesus : Explorations in computational helmeneutics  . In G . Tonfoni ( ed . ), Artificial Intelligence and Text Understanding . 
Quaderni di Ricerca Linguistica 6:49-94.
Allen , James .  1984 . Towards a general theory of action and thne , ArtiJicial Intelligence 23: 123-154 . 
Allen , James .  1987 . Natural Language Understanding . Menlo Park , CA : Benjamin Cummings Publishing Co . 
Almeida , Michael J .  1987 . Reasoning about the temporal structure of narratives  . Technical Report 87-10 . Buffalo : SUNY Buffalo Department of Computer Science  . 
Banfield , Ann .  1982 . Unspeakable Sentences : Narration and Representation in the Language of Fiction  . Boston :
Roufledge & Kegan Paul.
Bruce , Bertram .  1981 . A social interaction model of reading,
Discourse Processes 4: 273-311.
Bruder , G . A . , et al 1986 . Deictic centers in narrative : Anliner -disciplinary cognitive-science project  . Technical Report 86-20 . Buffalo , NY:SUNY Buffalo Department of Computer Science . 
Cohen , Philip R . , & Levesque , Hector J .  1987 . Persistence , intention and commitment . CSLI-87-88 . Stanford , CA:

Daniels , Joyce H .  1986 . A psychological investigation i to the deictie center  . Proc .   8th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Soc . ( Univ . of Mass . at Amherst ) . Hi Usdale,
NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum : 621-626.
Grosz , Barbara , & Sidner , Candace .  1986 . Attention , intentions , and the structure of discourse . Computational Linguistics 12:175-204 . 
Hayes , P .  1985 . The second naive physics manifes to . In J . 
Hobbs & R . Moore ( eds . ), Formal Theories of the Cottmum-sense World . Norwood , NJ : Ablex : 136 . 
Helm , I .  1982 . The semantics of definite mad indefinite noun phrases  . Ph . D . Dissertation , Department of Linguistics,
University of Massachusetts , Amherst.
Hinrichs , Erhard .  1986 . Temporal anaphora in discourses of English . Linguistics and Philosophy , 9, 1:63-82 . 

Hobbs , Jerry R .  1982 . Towards an nnderstanding of coherence in discourse  . In Lehnert & Ringle ( eds . ), Natural Language Processing . tliltsdale , NJ : Lawrence Edbanm . 
liot ) per ~ Paul .  1978 . Aspect and fox , grounding in discourse . In T ? Givon(cA . ), Disco , awea ~ d5)/ntax . Syntax and Seman . 
ties , vol . 12. New York : Academic Press.
?ioyce , James .  1969 11914\] . Clay . In Dubgners . New ' York:
Modern Library.
Kamp , llans . 1981 oA theory of tr , th and semmltic representation . In J . A . G . Groenendijk et al(eds . ), Formal Methods in the SnMy of Language . Amsterdam . 
Lehnert , Wendy .  1982 . Plotnnits : A narrative summ . ~ rizatk ) ~ . , strategy . In W . Lehnert & M . Ringle ( cxts . ), Strategies Jbr Natural Language Processing . llills dale , NJ : Lava'ence

Nakhimovsky , A .  1986 . The lexicon and common senser as on--ing : A case study ? In Proceedings of ' the Conference on Advances in Lexieology  , University of Waterl~m . 
Nakhimovsky , A . 1987a . The lexicon , grammatical categories , and temporal reasoning . In Arti~cial Intelligence and Simulation of Betu ~ vior  , Chichester : John Wiley . 
Nakhimovsky , A . 1987b . Temporal reasoning in natural language understandifig : The temporal structure of the narrative  . EACI,- . 87, Copenhagen . 
Nakhimovsky , A .  1988 . Tense , aspect , and the temporal structure of narratives . Computational Linguistics , forthcoming . 
Puttee , Barbara .  1973 . Some structural analogies between tenses and pronouns in English  . Journal of Philosophy 70:601-609 . 
Rapaport , William . L 1986 . Logical foundations for belief ~ e presentation . Cognitive Science 10:371-422 . 
Reynolds , James and Alexander Nakhimovsky . In preparation . 
Segmentation ad recall of narrative texts.
Shapiro , Stuart C .  1979 . The SNePS semantic network processing system . In N . V . Findler ( ed . ), Associative Networks . 
New York : Academic.
Shapiro , Stuart C . , & Rapaport , William J .   1987~ SN ePS con-side ~ ed as a flll y intensi0nal prot ~ ositional semantic ~ let , work . In N . Cercone & G . McCalla ( eas . ) , The Kno; , vledge , Frontier , New York : Springer , Verlag : 262-315 . 
Sidner , Candace .  1983 . Fnensing in the comprehensio ~ l of d clinite anaphora  . In M . Brady & R . Berwick ( eds . ), Com . .
putational Models of Discourse ? Cambr Mge , MA:M:T

Talmy , \[ x ~ onard .  1983 . How languages t~nct messpume . \[~ c ~ k ~ ley Cognitive Science Re4Jort No .  4 . Beri:dey : U , ive ~ r ~: ity of California . 
Thompkins , Jane .  1981 . Reader Response Criticism . Balfi ~, ta ~':
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Webber , Bomfie .  1979 . A Formal Appt'oach ~' o Discour , '; eAsia phora . New York : C , ad and . 
Webber , Bonnie .  1983 . So what can we talk ab~-mtk ~ ow?t ~ iMBrady & R  . Berwick ( eds . ), Computatio ~ ml Models oj
Discourse . Cambridge : MFt " Press.
Webber , Bonnie . 1987a . Two steps closer to event reference ? 77?   MS-CL~-86  . .74 . Department of Computer and Intb:mation
Science , Univensity of Pennsylvania.
Webber , Bonnie . 1987b . The interpretation of tense in discourse . 
In Proceedings of ACL-87 ( Stanford , CA).
Webbed , Bonnie .  1988 . Tense as discourse an N ~ hor ? in ( ; ompu-tational Linguistics , forthcoming . 
Wiebe , Janyce . In progress . Belief representation , dise our . , ; eanalysis , and reference in narrative . 
Wiebe , Janyce M . , & Rapaport , William J .  1988 . A computational theory of perspective and reference in n ~ rative  . 
Proc .   261h Annual Meeting of " the Association for Compum tional Linguistics  ( SUNY Bul~'alo )  . Monistown , NJ : Association tor Computational Linguistics . 
Worline , Bonnie Bess .  1956 . The Children WhoStayed Alo , w,
New York : Scholastic Book Services.

