CROSSING COREFERENCE IN DISCOURSEREPRESENTATION THEORY 
Michael HESS
University of Zurich
Dept . of Colnputer Science , Winter thurer str .  190
Ctt-g057 Zurich , Switzerhnld
Abstract
Sentences a , ith crossing coreference ( Bach-Peters-sentences ) are notoriously difficult to eq/lainilla natural nmnner  . An intriguing parallel with certain properties of t'm log suggests a modific atiml to Discour ~ Represenlation Thexn'y which allows a simple and coherent explanation of these  , and related , sentences . 
The Probteln
In English there is due type of sentence that has caused major problems for practically all linguistic theories that have tried to explain it  , and none of Ihe explanations put forward is very convincing  . The sentences in question are those with cross ' lag corcferenee  , the socalled Bach-Peters-sentences . The standard exam-pies arc : l ) " The tutter who shotal: , it hJl ; the \] ion that chased him and , with cxpiicit quarld fier expressions : 2 ) Every man who wants it will get the prize he deserves What is the difficulty wilh this type of sentence ?' Illey contaiu twououn phrases each of which contains a pronoun that refers to the other not nl phrase  , and tile first pronoun is filrthermore a case of " backwards anaphora "  , or " cataphonl " . 
These sentences are admittedly t are , bet sentences with simple ( noncrossing ) camphor are quite frequent ill realworld English  ( Carden 1982 )  . And Bach-Peters-sentences are nevertheless perlectly reguhu '  , and so they should find a natural exph/nation . Moreover , they are key exanlplcs of sentences where Gala . 
pllor a cannot , in principle , bemphlced by anaphora ( cf . also Mittwoch 1983) . 
This is imporlant because one of tile standard approaches to cataphora has been to define it away as stylistic variant of an aphm ' a  , which can be " rectified " by a simple transposition  . Ill other words : Since we have to find a way to explain cata-phora for Bach-F'eters-sentences anyway  , we carls aveus thel fouble to devise such tricks for the siutpler cases  . 
Are Bach-Peters-Pronouns Description all ' ronouns ? The non-reAucibility of cataphofic to anaphoric pronouns in Bach-Peters-sentences becomes clear if we try to explain them in tile traditional manaer  . It seems that both of/tie two traditional interpretations of prononns  , tile " de ~: rip-tional " as well as the " denota fionar ' one  , fail to explain the intuitive truth condi-lions of Baeh-l'ete ~  . -sentences . In Transformational Grammar the deseriptional approach is taken  , trod pronouns are always expanded to the sl , r face syntax form of the norm p baase they anaphoric ~ dly refer to  ( in other words , pronominalization is an obligal xlry cyclic rule ) . But then we get , for tile example above , a double in finite embedding of relative clauses :
The hunter who shot at ( the lion that chased ( the hunter who shot at ( tilelion that chased .   .   .   )   )   ) hit the lion that chased ( the hunter who shot at ( the lion that o hased ( the hunter who shot at . . . ))) This analysis is patently use lc , ss . K , ' u't tuuen shows ( Karttunen 1971 ) that dropping the requirement that pronominalization is acyclic rule alleviates the problem somewhat  , but at a cost : II would make sentence 1derivable from ( at least ) two different deep structures , viz . fi'om file deep structures corresponding to the sentences  3  ) Tilehunt ; ~r who shot at the ll . on that chased him hit it : d ) The lJ . on thai : chased the hlnlter who shot at it was hit by him This would mean that  1 has to hemnbiguous between the meanings of 3 and 4  . 
This is what Karttuncn assumes , but it is a highly duhious claim as Karttunen himselfs c culst of cel  ( Karttunen 1971:167 it . Moreover , the strnctum of I co , ld also be derived from a deep stract m'e corresponding to  5  ) The hunter who shot at the l ~ on hit the lion that chased tile hunter But Oils sentence is considered by nuuly informants to l~esimply ungramnmtical  ( Karttunen 1971:178 )  , audill is not acceptable at all under the coref blvn ce relations that should obtain between tile noun phrases  . Finally , the asson lp tion that l is three ways ambiguo , sbct wceu 3 , 4 and 5 is unaccellml ~ le , too , Illurder to show this , and in order to underslanll better what these three sentences really nlean  , we Call USe a set of data hascs ( after Karttnaen 1971 ) whicheitller contain , or do not contain , well-define xl referents for the varimm defiaite uoun phrases occtnriagiu/lie example sentences  . We will see that I is not aln higuous hcl wccn 3 anti 4  , \[ lilt that the three sentences have three distinct n/eanings which C all lie derived directly fl ' onl their syniactics tractllre  . This proves , attile same time , lha ! cataphoric prououns are irreducible ill Bach-Peters-sentences  . Let us first consider tiled c fiuite nonuphrase " the hunlor who shot attile liondmt chased him "   ( fiont3 ) consisting of an embedding of two definite noun phrases  . Since each singular definite noun phrase presupposes that there is annique retereut for it  , this phrase cau refer to a pah "" hnnter H- lion I /' in the case whomlion L is the only lion chasing huuter tl  , and this hanter H shot at this very lion L . Ill the following dambase ( Karttunen 1971:166 ) there is one such pair . 
hunt or ( hl ) . chased ( L1~h3) . \]ion(~t ) . 
hunter(h2) . chased (12, h\]) . \] Jon(\]2) . 
hunter(h3). chased (13, 112). lion13).
shot ;_ at ( hl , ill . shot_at(h2,\]1) . shot at ( h2,\]3) . 
shot at ( hl , 13) . shot ; at ( h3r\]3) . shot at ( h3,12) . 
\]?; or each hnnter , there is a single lion c has in j ~ him but only elm hunter ~ d so shoots at this lion  , viz . hnnter 2 who shoots at lion 3 . I unter 2SIOOIS at Oilierlions , as well ( e . g . atlion 1 ) but lieu I doesn't chase hunter 2 ( although it does chase other hunters , e . g . hnnlm "3) . Hence it can be said ( Dik 1973:320 ) that tile deliniteu on n phrase " the hnnter who shot attile lion that chased hiuf'has a well -defined referent in ally data hase which contaius fl~stone contigll ration of the types hoots ? ' ~" -"   7-~'?" ~ t ,   .   . hunter 4 .   .   .   .   . ~lion ~6) chases ~ . ~ This rules out that other lions chase the hunter  , bat it leaves open tile possibility that the hunter shoots at other lions  , that the lienchases other hunter saml , in particular , that other hunter shoot at the lion . On the other hand , example 4 , " The lion/lint chasexltile bunter who shot at it was hit by him "  , is not intelllretnble in the database given above  , lts subject , " the lion that chased the hnnter who shot at it  "  , Nils to refer properly : There is only one lkm for which/llere is a huater we can call " the hunter who shot at it "  , viz . lion 2 ( the other two lions are both being shot at by nlm 'et hanone hunter  )  , but lion 2 does not chase " diehmlter who shot at it " ( viz . hunter 3) , and so tile en file no an phrase fails to refer . A database where there is a referent for this noun phrase couhllook like that : hunter  ( hl )   . chased Ill . , hl ) . llonlilt . 
hunter(h2). chased (13., h3).\]ion(12).
hunter(h3). chased (12, hl ). lion(13).
shot_at(hl,\] . 2)  . chased (\], 2, h3) . chased (\] . 3, h2) . 
shot_at(h2, ii ) . shot . at(h3,13) . chased (13, hl ) . 
The definite nouu phrase " triolion that chased the hanter who shot at it " has a well-defined refer eatill troy database which contains just one configuration of tile type  7:   , , o .   . ~  .   . .~ ? ,, ? 7) hunter ~ lion ? .   .  ~- - "~"  , A Exmnple 1 cannot be inter0reted in eitherttle first or/lm second database . It is interpretable only in a dambase which contains at most one confign ratkmlike  8 which combines restrictions 6 and 7:   hunter"4" - - - - - ~ lion ~ ~"" ~ .   .   . @,2 Are Bach . Peters-Pronouns " Bound Variable " Pronouns ? Since the unmodified as well as the modified escriptional interpretations of pronouns in Bach -Peters-sentences do not allow us to represent these distinctions they cannot be accepted  . But how do the " deep " approaches to pronouns , the socalled " denotational " interpretations , fare ? The prototypical denotational interpretation f pronoans is the one suggested by Fh'st Order\[x  ) gic , where bound variable sate seen as the logical counterpart of pronouns in Natural Language  . If we use iota-operators , we could try to translate
I into 9 ) hit ( iota Z : \[ hunter ( Z ) ^ shot_at ( Z , W )\] , iotaW:\[lion(W)^chased lW , Z ) \] ) The trouble is that iota-operators bind their variables  , making them in accessible for reference from the outside  . Hence we cannot refer forward from the term " shot at  ( Z , W ) " to the " W " in the secondiota-expression , nor can we refer backward from " chased ( W , Z ) " to the " Z " in the first iota-expression . If we add equality to First Order Logic there is awayout  . We could rephrase 9 as 10) Hx : HY : ( hit(x , Y ) A
X = iotaZ :
Y = iotaW:\[hunter(Z ) Ashotat(Z , Y )\] A\[lion(W)^chased(W , X )\]) The other examples , 3 and 4 , would then become 11) 3x : ~ Y : ( hit(X , Y ) ^
X = iotaZ:\[hunter(Zl^shotat(Z , iotaW:\[lion(W ) A chased lW , Z )\])\]^Y=iotaV:\[lion(Vl^chased(V , X )\] l12) 3X:-qY:(hit(X , Y ) AX = iotaZ:\[hnnter(Z ) ^ shot_at(Z , Y )\] A
Y = iotaW:\[lion(W)A chased(W , iotaV:\[hunter(V ) ^ shot_at(V , W ) \ ]  )  \ ]  ) But in cases 11 and 12 part of the expression must be repeated , namely the one stating the uniqueness of the hnnter-chasing lion  , and of the lion-shooting bunter , respectively . This is a very unattractive way to express this sort of thing  , and Karttauenagrees : " One is tempted to think that one of \[ these repeate definite descriptions \] could be eliminated by a more clever use of variables  , especially when variables in predicate calculus are genera Uy used very much the same way as pronouns in natural language  .  \[_ . \]\[ But \] the second appearance of the same description cannot be avoided  , because , in predicate calculus , there is no way to refer back to the first . " ( Karttunen 1971:176) . 
McCawley's suggestion : Referential indices But this is the point where other people disagree  . McCawley ( McCawley 19"10) , for instance , argues ( for othereasons ) , that the semantic representation f sentences hould not be east in terms of First Order Logic  , but rather in terms of the overall proposition of a sentence plus referential indices  . The proposition would define the relationship that exists between the different objects talked about in the sentence  , but these objects would be represented independently breferential indices that correspond to the " intended reference " of the noun phrase  . These indices are " identified " by the noun phrases in the sentence  , i . e . their values are determined by the nonn phrases . A sentence such as " The mankilled the woman " , would be translated as 13 ) s ( proposition ( killed ( Xl , X2) , np ( Xl : the man ) nplX2: the woman ) ) A surface sentence would be generated from this structure by replacing die referential indices in the proposition by the noun phrases identifying them  . As for Bach-Peters-sentences , example 1 would be represented as 14 ) sI proposition ( hit ( Xl , X2)) , np ( Xl : the hunter who shot at X2 ) np ( XZ : the lion that chased Xl ) ) Here the referential indices are identified by noun phrases which themselves con-rain referential indices  . \] f we want Ix\]generate a surfaces enteue e from this structure we will have to ~' eplaee the referential indices by their identifying nmm phrases  , but we will not be able to replace systematically all referential indices this way  , because flt is would lead tit the same kind of in finite embedding that we encountered above  . We will rather , at some point in the derivation , have to tncn some of the refereoti~d indices into pronouns  ( talOns into account case , gender and number ) . The point at which we stop replacing referential indices by full noun phrases and start turning them into pronouns will determine which of several possible paraphrases of a sentence we will obtain  . The distinction between " proposition " on the one hand and " referential index " with the accompanying " identifying noun phrase " on the other hand allows McCawley to overcome the problem with repeated components : The " identifying noun phrase " of a referential index is memioned only once  , independently of how many times the referential index itself is used elsewhere in the representation  . 
Dik's Modificatio ~ of McCawle/s Theory This approach as been criticized on different coums  . First , it is not clear at which point referential indices may begin to hetarued into l  ) m nouns rather than being replaee x l by identifying expressions  . Second , and more importantly , McCawley'suggestion allows all three sentences ( 1 ,  3 , and 4 ) to be derived from the same semantic representation  , which would require that they are all synonymous . Hence all the problems we encountere A with the descriptional interpretation f pronouns are hack with a vengeance  . Does that meau that we have to return to the standmd First Order Logic representation with all its unattractive features  ( repetition of components ) ? Dik 1973 suggests a moth fication of McCawley's approach that takes care of the empirical fact that file three sentences mentioned above are not synonynrous  . 
The main syntactic diffel ~ nce between the three example sentence  , ; is the way in which tfie different full noun pllrases are embedded in each other  . In particular , in the Bach-Peters-sentence there are no embedded full noun phrases  ; tile only embedded noun phrases are pronouns ( " who shot at it " , " that chased him ") . This kind of distinction is lost in McCawley's original notation  , which is the reason why he has to ch'fim that the examples sentences axe all synonymous  . Dik's first ( and main ) modification of McCawley's notation makes sm'e that this  , cnlcial , distioction is not lost . The way to achieve this goal is by iuiroduciug what might be called  ( not Dik's expression ) " annotated variables " to take the place of McCawley's referential indices  , which are constants . The annotation of a variable indicates howtile value of the variable is to be computed  . Thus " X2(X2 = iotaZ : ( lion(Z)^chased(Z , Y ))) " is an annotated vari ~ thle . This would give as , for 3, 15) hit(XI , X2)
Xl = iotaY : ( hunter(Y ) A ~ hotat(Y , X2(XZ = iotaZ:(\] . ion(Z ) A chased ( Z , Y ))))) As in McCawley's system , refereotial indice sumst be replaced by the corresponding identifying expressions  , and any variables remaining after this step are tnmed into pronouns  . In addition , we have the usual convention that functional expressions are to be evaluated from the inside out  . But what is gained by faithfu Uy copying a certain syntactic structure  ( viz . embedding ) into the deep representation ? Are the interpretation rules given by Dikreally sufficient to interpret the resulting expressions correctly ? If we perform the replacement  , lbrinstance , in 15 we get 16 ) hit ( iotaY : ( hunter ( Y ) As hot at ( Y , X2lX2 = iotaZ : ( lion(Z ) A chased(Z , Y )))) l , X2) Now , if we wanted to generate a surface sentence from tiffs representation we would turn the remaining unbound varinble  , i . e . " X2" , into a pronoun , and everything would be in order . But what if we wmtted In evaluate this statement over one of the databases ? The  X2 on the level of the proposition , i . e . " hit ( . . . ,X2 ) " is clearly outside the scope of the " almotntion " defining its value  , and so we would expect it to remain unbound alter the annotation itself has been evaluated  . This is , after ' all , precisely the reason why Karttunen thought it necessary to reintroduce the duplication of logical expressions that McCawley had tried to gelrid of : To provide the second  , outer , occurrence of this variable with a value . We need an interpretation rule which specifies how variables of this kind can be bound  , and this rule is not provided by Dik . 

An Unexpectedly Simple Solution Suggested by Second- 
Order Prolog Constructs
As it turns out , the additional interpretation rule that makes the correct interpretation of Bach-Peters-sentences virtually " f all out " is the definition of second-order operators  , and the general interpretation rules of Horn Clause Logic  , as implemented in starutard Prolog : Instead of " Z = iotaX:  ( Y ) " we use " set of ( X , Y , \[ Z\])" , where then niqueness reqltirement is built into the definition of " set of '  , and singularity is enforced by requiring the result list to consist of exactly one element  . Annotated variables on the other hand are " multiplied out " in the relational spirit of Prolog  , i . e . instead of " predicate(X , Y(Y = Z )) " we write " ( predieate(X , Y ) , Y = Z ) " . Combining these two steps we get , for the expression above , 17) hit(Xl , X2) , set of ( Y , ( hunter(Y ) , set of ( Z , (lion(Z ) , chased ( Z , Y )) , \[ X2\]) , shot at ( Y , X2)) , \[Xl \]) or , with a more suggestive choice of variable names and a more efficient ordering of the goals Ig  ) set of ( H , ( hunter(It ) , shotat(H , TL ) , set of ( L , (lion(L ) , chased ( L , TH )) , \[ TL\])) , \[TH\]) , hit(TH , TL ) . 
Now the desire altruth conditions come out corrccdy  . We can see this if we treat 18 as a Prolog query : Welind , first , almnter CH ") who shoots at something CTL ") . Then we check whether this entity is identical with the set of exactly one lion C\['IL\]"  ) ttmt chase someone CTH " ) who mast then tamout to be identical with the hunter who is the only such hunter C\[TH\]"  )  . Finally we check whether this hunter also hits this lion  . The other sentences are represented the same way :   4 and 1   ( the Bach-Peters-sentence ) give 19 ) set of ( L , (lion(L ) , uhased ( L , Tn ) , set of ( H , ( hunter ( H ) , shotat(H , TL )) , \[TH\])) , \[ TL\]) , hit(TH , TL ) . 
20) set of ( n , ( hunter ( H ) , shotat(H , TL )) , \[TH\]) , set of ( L , (lion(L ) , chased ( L , TH )) , \[ TL\]) , hit(TH , T 6) . 
Now we get , without any additional stipulations , the three different interpretations for the tlnee example sentences  . The sentences are neither collapsed into one single meaning repre ~ ntation  ( with three synonymous surface sentences )  , as with McCawley's approach , nor into two different ones ( with two distinct and unambiguous , : rodone ambiguous , surface sentence ) , as with IG arttanen's approach . The simple fact that in Bach-Peters-sentences th full definite descriptions are not embedded  , forces them to evaluate to two distinct , independently unique , values , and this ensures that these sentences are true only over databases meeting condit it m  8  . 
But how can this unexpectedly straightforward solution be explained ? The main problem that McCawley's representation  , and Dik's modification of it , tried to overcome was : How can variable values be communicated into iota-expressions from the outside  , despite the fact that , in First Order Logic , variables within the scope of an operator or quantifier ares hielded from the outside ? Now  , in Horn Clause Logic nil variables of a clause are  , implicitly , universally quantified ( which means that variables in a query , i . e . in a negated clause , are existentially quantified ) , and the scope of the implicit quantifiers is the entire clause  . The bindings of variables " spread " tl voughout the clause  , irrespective of how deep a variable may be . embedded . This also applies to the set of-operator : All its variables are accessible from the outside  , within the given clause . The variables can , of course , still be unbound when the evaluation of the set of -expression begins  , and then it is the evaluation of the set of -expression that will establish bindings for these variables  . But they can also get bound elsewhere , before the operator is used , and " spr~tdforward " . And then a proof of timset of-expression treats these pre-established I~indings as constraints to be satisfied  . This is the Prolog way to implement the cataphoric pronoun in Bach-Peters-sentences  , In this , last , respect the set of operator in Prolog is treated as just another predicate  , and its being second order is irrelevant . The difference is that the interpretation of the set of-operator uses Prolog's meta-call facility  . Or , to put it differently : A piece of code ( the entries in the second argument of these mf -operator  ) is first treated as " data " ( variable bindings are communicated with the outside world  )  , and then it is treated as a piece of " program " that is executed  ( using the variable bindings that are established at this point in time  )  . And in this the Prolog set of-operator differs fundamentally form theiota-operator as used in First Order Logic  . Theiota-operator has , a ~ fro " as variable binding is concerned , the same force as a quantifier : A variable in its scope is immune from any outside interference  . 
Now it is clear why we need not repeat any expressions in the representation f the example sentences  , and yet the variables all get properly bound : In the example above  , the two terms of 18 ( i . e . rite set of-expression ad the expression " hit(TH , TL )") are part of the same clause , and values for variables created in either of them will spread to the other  . In particular , the value which the variable " TL " takes during the evaluation of " shot_at  ( H , TL ) " is still available during the evaluation of the embedded " set of  ( L , (lion(L) , chased(L , TH)) , \[ TL\])" , and later during the evaluation of " hit(TH , TL)" . 
Mapping Variables onto Pronouns
If we want to generate surface sentences from these stmctares  , we must distinguish between two uses of variables : First there are those uses which are merely an artefact of the relational way of representing functional application  , and , second , there are those that correspond to true anaphoric relations in language  . 
The first use is simple : If we wantore present functional applications such as plus  ( times ( 3 , 2) , 4) in a relational language , we must " multiply out " the embedded expression and create auxiliary variables for the intermediater sults  , e . g . " X " and " Y " in times (3 , 2 , X ) , plus(X , 4 , Y ) Thus we had to use 20 , with auxiliary variables " TH " and " TL " , instead of a functional representation such as , for instance , 21) hit(set(H , ( hunter ( H ) , shot . at(H , L ))) , set ( L , (lion(L ) , chasod ( L , H )   )   )   ) These " auxiliary " variables are situated on the same level of embedding  ( by definition : their purpose is to flatten embeddings  )  . Cooccurrence of such variables on the same level of embedding maps  , in simple cases , onto concatenation ( "^" ) in surface structure : Thus the fonuwing occurrences of variables " TI  . " and " TH " in 2020a ) set of ( L , ( .   .   . );\[TL\]), set of(H , ( . . . ),\[TH )), hit(TH,TL ) . 
become " (( rite hunter ) ^ hit ^ ( the lion )) " . Cooccurrence of variables across different levels of embedding  , however , cannot be encoded as simple concatenation . 
These cross-references map onto pronouns .   ( The conver ~ does not hold : There are pronouns that do not correspond to this kind of cross -reference  ; e . g . descriptional pronouns . ) Thus the level-crossing cooccurrence of the variable " TL " in  20b   ) set of ( H ,  (  . . . shot at ( H , TL )) .   .   .   . ) set of ( L , ( . . . ),\[TL\]), hit( .   .   .   ) must map onto a pronoun ( " The hunter who shot at it " )  . A problem arises when we trytO translate 19 back into English . If we begin the translation process wiri ~" hit ( TH , TL ) " and map the level-crossing variable " TH " onto a pronoun we get " He hit the lion that chased the hunter who shot at it "  , which is not acceptable under the intended interpretation  ( i . e . coreferentiality of " he " and " the hunter . . . ") . This corresponds to a wellknown syntactic restriction on the use of cataphoric pronouns  . Here we need a rule that works for syntax generation rather than for analysis  . The following rule is a bit ad hoc , but it is sufficient for the present purpose : We require that the translation of the entire set of expressions must begin with the expression defining the top relationship between the individual set expressions  ( i . e . with the expression corresponding , in most cases , to the main verb of the surface sentence ) , and that level-crossing occurrences of variables in this term are la'anslated last  . If this restriction makes it impossible to translate these variables from  , say , left to right ( as in the case of example 19 , where the first variable " TH " is a level -crossing occurrence  )  , it is done right to left . This requires that the surface verb form is passivized but it gives the gram-matieally correct ordering of full noun phrases and pronouns  ( i . e . we get rite original passive sentence4 for 19) . In Bach-Peters-sentences such as 20 both the active and passive versions are admissible under this restriction  , in keeping with the linguistic facts . 

Second-Order Prolog Constructs and Discourse Represen-tation Theory The painless way in which the correct ruth conditions of Bach-Peters -sentences and the related sentences virtually fall out of the standard Prolog interpretation rules and the definition of the second-order set of-operatorism  ) t just a lucky coincidence . It is rather another case of the intriguing parallel between Natural Language and Horn Clause Logic which has become particularly clear in Discourse Representation Theory  ( DR'I )  . The main hypothesis of DRT is that noun phrases ( and articles ) have no quantificational force on their own but are implicitly quantified by the context  . This allows DRT to explain , with remarkable ease , so called on key-sentences , a type of sentence that does not yield to the traditional interpretation of noun phrases as quantified statements  . The correspondence between the logic underlying DRT  , and Horn Clause Logicis , in this respect , almost one-to-one : In DRT ,   ( indefinite ) noun phrases introduce discourse refcreuts which are quantified by the  ( discourse ) context in the same way as variables in Horn Clause Logic are implicitly quantified by the  ( chnlse ) context . 
How do Bach-Peters-sentences fit into DRT ? First , we notice the parallel between McCawley's ideas and DRT : His " referential indices " correspond  , in their intended fllnction , totile discourse referents in DRT , and " propositions " correspoud to the DRT " conditions " on discourse referents  . In the Prolog version of Dik's modification of McCawley's ideas  , discourse referents correspond ~ the value of the third argument in a set of-operator  , and the " conditions " of a Discourse Representation Structure  ( DRS ) to the expression ( s ) in its second argument . All this applies , for the time being , only to definite noun phrases and their representation  . If we want to incorporate this into DRT , we must first provide for the possiblity to explicitly represent he embedding of noun phrases  . 
This kind of explicit embedding was the main reason why we got the right truth conditions in the Prolog representation f the example sentences  . We must , in other words , be allowed to use embedded " conditions " in a DRS  . Traditional DRT allows for the embedding of entire DRSs  , hut not of individual conditions . 
While a sentence like " If John owns a donkey that dislikes him  , he beats it " is traditionally represented as a flat DRS like  22  ) \[ UI:\[U2: john ( ul , donkey ( u2) , owns ( ul , u2) , dislikes ( u2 , ul )\]\[ beats(ul , u2)\]\] ( cf . Kamp 1981 , Kanrp 1983 , Frey 1983 , Guenthner 1983 , Guenthner 1985 , Kolb \]985 , Guenthner 1986 , Pinkal 1986 , Root 1986 ) this will not do-for the sentences with embedded e finite noun phrases considered above  . We must somehow represent this embedding . And we must , obviously , provide for the interpretation rules to use them . These rules will crucially rely on Prolog's meta -call facility to implement the double use of embedded set-expressions  , a data structures on the one hand and as " executable procedures "  ( i . e . as provable assertions ) on the other . 
In traditional DRT mostly indefinite and universal noun phrases  ( and proper names ) are used while the Bach-Peters-sentences considered above all contained definite noun phrases  . But for some of them there are versions with indefinite noun phrases  , too , and all of them have corresponding plural versions  . In order to cover all these cases we must introduce  , instead of the " conditions " of DRT , generalised set expressions without the totality implication of Prolog's " set of "  ( cf . also Webber 1983) . We use " set ( Def , Card , Gdr , Var , Int , Ext ) " , where " Def " can take the values " def ' ( inite ) or " indef " ( inite )  , and " Card " either an explicit dumber , " plur " , or a quantifying expression Call " , " some " etc . ) . " Gdr " gives the gender of the main noun . " Var " ( iable) , "Int" ( ension ) and " Ext " ( ension ) correspond to the three arguments of the set of -operator  . The variable " Ext " can imw stand for sets as well as for individuals  . 
Mapping Pronouns onto Variables
So far we have mentioned how pronouns correspond , statically , to certain semantic objects of oar modified DRSs ( i . e . to the level-crossing occurrences of variables ) . But it is one of the main goals of DRT to give a unified account of what the procedures that actually perform the resolution of pronouns should look like  . 
This problem is much harder than the converse one , i . e . the mapping of level-crossing variables onto pronouns  . The central idea used hel~by DRT is simple ( it goes back to Karttunen , together with the term " discoarserferent " ) : Indefinite noun phrases in " assertive " contexts create discourse referents which " live on "  , and which can he accessed by anaphoric expressions from points later in the sentence or discourse  . Discourse referents , however , that are created by indefiuites in universal , conditional , and negative contexts , " die oft " when the sentence in which they occur is processed  . This idea corresponds closely to Prolog's concept of variables and Skolem constants  ( the latter standing for existentially quantified variables  ) : During the interpretation faprogram variables remain accessible by name within the clause where they occur  . This corresponds to the limited fife-span of discourse referents created in universal  , condifional , and negative contexts . For Skolem constants in Prolog , however , the scope is the entire program ; they " live for ever " , in the szune way as discourse referents created by iarle finites in assertive contexts  . And whenever a ( definite ) pronoun or definite noun phrase is encountered , a suitable antecedent must be located among the discourse referent still " alive "  . Its value is then replaced by the value of the discourse referent found  . If several pronouns access the same discourse referent  , heyget , of course , the same value . This is the DRT counterpart of unificatiou . 
If we want to have , in our modified notation , discourse referents " float on the surface " of the corresponding DRSs  , accessible lot later anaphoric reference , we could write , for the indefinite version of 3 , viz . "A hunter who shot at alion that chased him hit it "  19a   ) \[ TL , TH : set(indef ,  1 , masc , H , ( hunter ( H ) , shot_at(H , TL ) , set ( in def ,  1 , neutr , L , (lion(L ) , chased ( L , TH )) , TL )) , TH ) , hit(TH , TL ) But there are fimdamenml differences between the treatment of variables in Prolog and DRT : During the interpretation faPro log program  , bindings of a given variables pread throughout a clause to all occurrences of the same name  , forwards and backwards . DRT , however , allows mdytorwards , " anaphoric " , spreading of values . Since a pronoun is processed as soon as it is encountered  , it can " look for " antecedents exclusively in the DRSs built up by the preceding discourse  . The interpretation procedures of DRT thus implement  , implicitly , the syntactic rule that a pronoun can refer auaphorically to a preceding noun phrase that c -commands it  . Becausct his is , at the same time , the only case where anaphora is allowed , the ~ interpretation rules block , correctly , cataphor a from tile pronoun to the indefinite noun phrase in  23  ) He said that a boy had taken the book But legitimate cases of cataphora  , such as those in Bach-Peters-sentences , are blocked by these interpretation rules of DRT , as well . Hence we must weaken the accessibility restrictions for anaphoric l ~ ronominal references somewhat  , but not too much : If we modelled them on Prolog 's unrestricted variable sharing  , 23 would go through in its coreferential reading . 
Accessibility rules of DRT not only block certain correct interpretations  , they also allow certain blatantly incorrect ones . They would allow , for instance , the sentence above with a definite noun phrase , i . e . 
24 ) He said that the boy had taken the book to get an interpretation where pronoun and definite noun phrases are coreferential  . Why ? The correct interpretation f this santence ( no coref crence between " he " and " the boy " ) requires that the definite noun phrase will be able to find an antecedent among the preexisting discourse referents  . But then the sentence-initial " he " would be equally capable of accessing them  , and this would allow the prohibited coreferential  , cataphoric , reading of the " he " ( i . e . " pseudo-cataphora " via a common antecedent ) . The same thing holds for " He hit the lion that chased the hunter who shot at it "  . 
The prohibited reading of this type of sentence can be ruled out on the basis of purely syntactic information  . The standard rule about pronoun says that a pro- ~aoun cannot be coreferential with an noun phrase if it both precedes and c-commands it  . This rules out the cataphoric use of a pronoun if it c-commands its target noun phrase but it allows cases of eataphora such as  25  ) ~ lenhegotup , Johnfelt hungry ( which are reducible to anaphora ) as well as Bach-Peters-sentences ( which are not )  , but it blocks the prohibited coreferences in " He hit the llon that chased the hunter who shot at it " and " He said that he boy had taken the book "  . 
Mittwoch ( 1983 ) has shown that lhese purely syntactic criteria are not sufficiently general to cover all relevant occurrences of cataphora  . In many cases , discourse considerations are needed to explain why eataphora is allowed  . The pronoun can occur , for instance , in a sentential constituent which is demoted , by explicit discourse subordlnation markers , to a lower position than warranted by syntax . Thus , in 26 ) I haven't seenhim yet but John is back ( from Mittwoch 1983 ) the " but " functions as an overt marker of topicality for the second sentence  , demoting the first sentence , and in 27 ) He may not represent the US at the United Nat ions any more  , but that does not mean that Andrew Young hass lowed hiapace  2/48   ( fi'um Macleod 1984 , quoting li'om " Tium , ") I he " but " , together with the modal " may " , even lnallages to laak ecalaphor acceptable fronl a sent cnee  . iuifials ab . 
ject position ( at l ~ a still journales e ) . The common element of all lhese examples of catapltoric proaouus is that they occur in discourse conditions  , ht simple , cases this coiacides wilh senteulial conditions ( " if ' etc . ) , and rely often with sub-seate otial condilious ( ill particular with postmodifie ~ s 0f norm phrases , such as reslrictive relative elanses , prepositioual phrases , or nonlinite cla , scs ) . IlutIhepict are is complicated by tile lhct flint the " antecedent " of cataphotamns tbc definite if ~ hesea ~  . ence is specific . Conlll are 28) ? ? A hu , lh ~- r l . lhoshot at : . 1 . th~ta\]loni . hatch~s,ed h:im29)A\]lll rlher, . / heshoto . /; J thitth ? ~\] iont h&t~:ha;~:dhi . hi30) ? ? When h , ? 1 ; as poor a farm e ~: t ez~le<1 toove ~ wo J : k his do ~- koy\[I ) Whonliew~s poortile fa ~7111 or tendod toov ~< wo , Tkhis < lollkey In general ( and illmauy generic ) scutences this restriction does not hold . The following sentence sale fine although the " all cl:edcnt " normill n ' ases are in detinile :  32  ) Ahun ~: e ~- who . ~; ho . t ~ al : it wSlll ~ talion ch ~ Lch . ~:;,-, . ' ~ hllfl 33 ) Z fhe is ~ oo ~: ~ tf/l ~: mer will t : ~ nd Lo ovez work hSs  donk0y What seems to Im\[llmn here it that . in tntiv ? lyspe~tking , the calallhoric I ) rononn sets npan " expectation " for at ~ lllowing nonni  ) lnase which is specilic or no a-specific , depend in ! ~ , on the st ~ cilicity of the coudill n na I context in which the pro  . 
norm fiilds itself . The specilicity of the pronoul hnll context is deteralino : l  ( mainly ) by tilem ~ pect of the velb there:"who shoots " vs  . " whoshul ", " if hc islloer '' vs . " when he waxpoor ", etc . A spc citie expeclalion requires a delinite not al phl~dS Cora properuauleIllits " auteceAlent  "  . while a non . .specilic one accepts either an indefinite or a delinite nonn phrase  . 
Required M of lilications to Discourse Representatio . 
Theoryllow conld I ) RT incoi0oratc I his kind of iuionuation in order to determine more  , reliably tile range of permissible an all hor a aud cataphora  , while rnling out the illegal coreferential reading in sentences like " lie said that the boy had taken the book "? The R  ) llowing it " l list of requirements fl ) ran implementation I hat wo nld take tllese additional condilions lute account  ; A till traditional \]) P , T , tile iu conl-ing sentence ot x ; ns a new DRS , which define stile space where all newly created discourse  , referenls Call survive . Nouu phrase scremeso text lressic , ns ( tile " condi-tides " of standard dleory ) : hl definite and detinite noun lltnases give rise to nor-ulal set expressions  , while pro\]floons create set expressions Of a special type  . 
In definite no on plnases give rise , in additioa , to discern's or eferenls , which are , deposited in tim DRS nn der coustraction . Traditional DRT has properuame , s create discourse reli : rents , toll . Whether this is the best possible decision is open to  d0bale   . It would , iuln any respects , t ) ( 3 more consistent to lreat prot x : rnailles Oila parwidl detiui \ [ eu ouu phrases  . Discoarse referents hoald contain all the illform '  . ttiou that can become relevant brtim resolntion of prenuminal nnallhora  , i . e . at least nt nn be raud gender . Definite set eXll ressions delived from full nonu phrases without co * ~ ditional modtihers  , as well as those del Jvedfl ' onl definite pronouns  , are evalualed as soon as Ih cy are created , i . e . they try to find tlleir ' , mtee , edenls among tile pre . .exisling ( liscourse reforeuts . \[x pressions for pronouns whose autecedents have been fotuld tireren loved  , once they have done I heirduty as values hariug ch  ; mnels . S of I lr nothing really new . 
But nowtile first modificatiou of standard theory is ueeded : Delinite full noun phrases are uot aiR  , wed to look l br their antec ( xlenls inside file 1 ) RS still under CouslxnctiOll , wheu ; aspr(lll OUn Sntay do so . Sdcond , wllen any definite UOHU phrase ( fnl\[noah phrase or pronoun ) Ilasiomld tiltton ' oct discourse rcfercllt , it drags it into the DR Sumler cousl ruclion . These two chauges make sure that two full noun phrases within I he same clause at e  , never interpreted as corefemntial . 
The ytd so blocke alaphora in " lie said that a boy had token the book "  ( tile " he " has dragged file aptwopriate discotms e referent in lo the DRS  , where it is " iuvisi-ble " to the subseqnent " tile boy "  )  . And , liually , it brings a discourse refereut accessed by a definite uoun phrase lute focus and makes it the prime caudiate for sllbs equcntaaaphoric reference by ploaouns  . The lhird modiiication to standard I ) R Tistills : Bc cat ~: proaolln Silluon-gene , ricontext scequire deliniteiloan phrases at ante  , ced cnts ( see examples 28 to 311 , di ~ ; ouls erefer euls ulnsta/so calry information m ~ out ile definiteness of ~ he noun phrase from which they were derived  . Set expressions derived from prl ) nOUllS will use this infornlaliout Odetennio e whed mragive u discourse referent is a possible ~ mtece  , dent . The fou * th modification , linally , takes case of cataphora : Wheoever all expression denoling a contrition  ( ontile disconrse , sentence , or sab-sentential level ) is encountere , d , uo embedded DRSs are created ( as it is done in standard DRT for " if "- and " every "- seuteuces  ) and the production of discourse referents goes on  , but evaluation of all newsete X flressions is suspendex l  . In particular , no filr the rattempts at , ' maphor are solul Joualen lade , aud allllronuuns encountered from now on are store dill the DRS ouder coust tllctiou as unevahlated set expressions  . It is only when die end of file chaise , is reacll0xl tllat unevahlated set expressious are processext . Aluoug the set expressions and disconrse refereuls " in SUSl mnded animation " within a DRS  , any reference , ( backwards and lorwards ) is permitted , as/one as the coedi-lions oullincd above ale fullilled  . This allow scalaphura to be modelled , while the classical syutact i ( reslriclious ( calaphora only fi'om a non?-eom nlauding COll Slittlent  ) are Stlll Slllll OAI . Lastly , dlose discourse refer e , nlsthai are allowed In live ( I hose from assertive , i . e . non-conditional , contexts , and those that were . 
dragged illl ? om I he out . side ) are released into the universe of discoarse re , ferents . 
ACI . 1983.
tlrady 1983.
Cardeni 982.
Dik 1973.
Frey 1983.
Grocneu dijk 1981.
Gueadmcr 1983.
Guenthner 1985.
Guelathner 1986.
Jacobs I970.
Camp 1981.
Kamp 1983.
Karttuneu 1971.
Kolb 1985.
Macleod 1984.
McCawley 1970.
Mittwoch 1983.
Piukal 1986.
Root 1986.
Stoyan 1986.
We , bber 1983.
ACI , , 1983 , t ' roceedings of the 21st Annual Meeting of the

Irady , M . and , R . C . Berwick , e , d . , Computational Models of Discourre ,   ( ' File MIT Press Scrics in Artilicial Intelligence  )  , MIT Press , Canlbridge , Mass . \] Loudon (19113) . 
Cardcn , G . , " Backwards auaphora in disconrse contcnl . "Journal of Linguistics 18 pp .  361-387 (1982) . 
f ) ik , S , C . , " Crossing Corefe , rence Agaiu , " l:oundutiom of
Lunguage 9 lip . 306-326 (1973).
Frey , W . au ( Ile . eyle , U . , " lmxical Fnncfional Granunar und lkiskurs reprlise utatious theorieals Grtmdlagen cluess pr\[lchverarbeitenden Systems  , " Lingu Lvtische Berichte , (88) pp . 

Groenendijk , \] . A . G . , Jansseli , T . M , V . , and SR ) k , M . B . J .   , Formal Methods iuthe Study of Natural Language ; Partl , Mathenlatisch COlllrtlnl Tract 135 , Anlsterdam (198I) . 
Gllelllhaer , F . ~tll(\]Lehnlaun,It . , " Ru les I()l l)r(nl(ln2inaliza - lion , " ill : Proceedings of tile 1st Confere , uce of tile Enro--lmaU Chapter of the ACI , , Association lilt Compntational \[ Juguistics , l ' is a ( September 1983) . 
Gnenthuer , 1; . , " Linguistic Meaumg ill Discourse Represeu -ration Theory  , " FNS-Bericllt 85 -5 , l " or sclun/gsstell cfirnati Mich-s prach liche Systcme  , Universit fit Tiibing cn 0985) . 
( iuenthuer , F . , i . chlnann , it , and Sch Cufcld , W . , " A Ihcoty for the representation ( ff knowledge , " IBM . 1 Re . vl ) eveto \]) 3011) pp .  39-56 11986) . 
Jacobs , R . A . and , Roscnbaum P . S . , eds . , Readings in English tran . sformation af grammar .  1971/ . 
Kamp , 11 . , " A Theory of Truth and Semantic Representation , " pp . 27% 322 ill Groenen dijk 1981, 11981) . 
Kamp , H . , SID without Time or Questions , Llnlnd ) llshed ; slrongly rnnlonred to appear as CSI , IR ctx-/rt 1983 . 
Karttuncn , L . , " Definite Descriptions with Crossing Corefemncc  , " Foundations of Language 7 pp .  157- . 182 00711 . 
Kolb , 1?-i' . , " Aspekte der hnplemenmtiol ~ der Diskursmlm ~ isentations fimorie  , " FNS-Script 85-1 , Uuiversit ~ it Tlibiuge , n , Forschungsste , llcfih ' natiir lichs prach liche Systeme ( May 1985 )  . 
Macleod , N . , " Morn on backward anal ) hem and discourses lruct nfe , " J of Pragmatics 8 p p .  321-327 (1984) . 
McCawley , J . D . , " Where dm norm phrases come from ?, " p p . 
166-183 in Jacobs 1970, (1970).
Mittwoch , A . , " Backwards Anaphora aud Discomse St , m-turk , " J of Pragmatics 7 p p .  12%139 (1983) . 
Pinkal , M . , " Situationssemautik und Diskarsrepr' , isen-talions flmorie ; Einordnnngund Anwe , n dungsasl~kte , " pp . 
397-407m Stoyan 19, 5'6, (1986).
Root , P, . , " The Semantics of Anaphora ill Discourse , " l ' li . D . 
Thesis , Universit \[ it Tiibingen , t : or schuags stelt c fiirnati Michs prach liche Systeme  , University of Te , x as at A as-f in ( May 1986) . 
Stoyan , lI . ed . , GWAI 1986 , "9th Germun Workshop on Ar@cial Intelligence , 0 uformatik-Fachberichte) , Springer , 
Berlin etc . (19861.
Wcbber , B . L . , " So What Call We Talk AN . mrNow ?, " pp . 
331-371 in Brady 1983, (19831.

