Presuppositions as Beliefs
Diane HORTON and Graeme HII:tST
Department of Computer Science
University of " ibronto
Toronto , Canada M5S 1A4
dianeh@ai.toronto.edu(CSNET )
Abstract
Most theori~s of presupposition implicitly assume that presupposition  , ; are facts , and that all agents involved in a discourse share belief in the presuppositions that it generates  . These unrealistic assumptions can be eliminated if each presupposition is treated as the belief of an agent  . 
However , it ~ s not enough to consider only the beliefs of the speaker  ; we show that the beliefs of other agents are often involved  . We describe a new model , including an improved definition of presupposition  , that treats presuppositions a beliefs and considers the beliefs of all agents involved in the discourse  . We show that treating presuppositions a beliefs makes it possible to explain phenomena that cannot be cx plaine cl otherwise  . 
1 Introduction
In addition ' I ; o its liter M meaning , a sentence or utterance conveys a host of indirect information that can be pragmatically in ~ rred  . Presuppositions , whidl we mark ">>" , are one pa ~' t of that information . Table 1 gives several examples of presupposition with their traditional analyses  1  . 
Roughly , a presupposition is a proposition that is conveyed by a sentence or utterance  2 but is not part of the main point , and must be consistent with the established context in order for that sentence or utterance to be fe-licitous  . For example , the following is in felicitous because the second . ,~ entence presupposes that Angle quit , which contradicts the first sentence : ( 1 ) * Angle didn't quit . It's surprising that she quit . 
Other types of pragmatic inference include entailment  , conversational implicature , and conventional implicature ( see Levinson ( 1983 ) for detailed descriptions )  . Presuppo-sitions can be distinguist md from other sorts of pragmatic inference by their unique behavior when the sentence from which they originate is negated  . These basic ideas are generally agreed upon ; however , their formalization into a theory of presupposition has been difficult  . We will now introduce two problems and our approach to solving them  . 
1 Throughout this paper , we use the sentence itself a . q short form for its semantic representation , i order to avoid addressing the orthogonal issu * . , of semantic representation . 
2The sentence/utterance distinction will be made clear in the presentation of ouc approach  . 
Horton (1987) reviews several theories , including those of Karttunen (1973 ,  1974) , Karttunen and Peters (1979) , Wcischedcl (1975 ,  1979) , Gazdar (1979a , 1979b ) , Wilson and Sperber (1979) , and Atlas and Levinson (1981) . One problem is that many theories of presupposition i i aplicitly make the ' following unrealistic assumptions s : ? Truth Assumption : If sentence S  ( or its utterance ) presupposes proposition P , then P is true . 
? Shared Belief Assumption : If sentence S ( or its utterance ) presupposes proposition P , then all agents involved share the prior belief that P is true  . 
Weischedel and Gazdarare exceptions ; e~tch of them attributes presuppositions to the speaker as either knowl-  . 
edge or belief . However , we will show th~t the beliefs of agents other than the speaker must be considered in order to correctly express many presuppositions  . Ourai ) proach is to treat presuppositions a beliefs , but a . lso to consider the beliefs of all agents involved in discourse  . 
A second difl ~ culty has been in finding an adequate definition of presupposition  . Many definition state that the presuppositions of a sentence must be known prior to the utterance of that sentence to avoid in felicity  . Some have the stronger constraint that the presuppositions must be mutually known by all participants  . The following definition ( Levinson 1983 ,  205 ) has these properties : DEFINITION 1: An utterance A pragmatically presup-poses a proposition B iff A is appropriate only if B is mutually known by participants  . 
These requirements , which reflect the Shared Belief Assumption , are too strict--presuppositions are often used to introduce new information  . Conversely , many definitions accept inferences from the other inference classes as presuppositions  . Our definition , to be presented in section 3 . 2 , weakens the overly strict prior knowledge condition so that it does not reject valid presuppositions  , and avoids accepting inferences from other classes by checking whether each candidate xhibits the distinctive behavior under negation that signifies a presupposition  . Hence , the new definition captures presupposition more precisely  . 
The next section describes the unique behavior of presuppositions under negation  . In section 3 the details of our 3Here both sentences and utterances are mentioned because the assumptions are generally made when either is analyzed  . 

II '..... ~! gger
Faetive verb

Change-of-state v r b
Non-restrictive rlative clause
Implicative verb
Definite description
Verb of judging

Ritaisup set that Jennylied.
>> Jennylied.
It was ~ Pauline who told Arthurabout Miehelle.
>> Someone told Arthurabout Miehelle.
Tom finished making dinner.
>> Tom had been making dinner.
Kerry , who is Jay's son , was married last month.
>> Kerry is Jay's son.
Morn forgot to call.
>> Morn intended to call.
Ti reperson whostole Dr . Legg's file used a key.
>> There is a person whostole Dr . Legg's file.
I congratulated Lois when she finished her thesis.
>> For Loistofinish her thesis was a goodthing.
Table 1: Some common triggers of presupposition , with examples . 
approach are presented . We then compare our analysis with that of Gazdar , and conclude with a summary . 
2 Behavior under Negation
It is often stated that presuppositions are constant under negation  , as in example 2 , but are also defensible . By this view , the presupposition i example 3 remains constant under the negation in the first sentence  , but is later defeated by the second sentence . 
(2) Calvin did I didn't stop going to college.
>> Calvin had been going to college.
(3 ) Idon't wish I hada Porse he -- I already have one  . 
~I don't have a Porsche.
Our explanation of this behavior is different . Before presenting it , some terminology must be introduced . 
We will make the following semantic distinction between two kinds of negation  . Internal negation has a particular element of its scope as its focus  , in the sense of the terms defined by Quirk and Greenbaum  ( 1973 ,  187-188) . External negation focuses on an unspecified component of its scope and therefore has several possible interpretations  . The following sentence contains external negation  . It has at least three interpretations : ( 4 ) The boogiem and idn't blow the doors hut . 
( a ) It's stiff open.
\[ negating the main proposition \] ( b ) There is no boogie man . 
\[ negating a presupposition \] ( c ) It was already shut . 
\[ negating a felicity condition \]
The focus of internal negation is unambiguous . If that focus is on a presupposition , the presupposition , of course , does not survive the negation , as in the following : (5) Mark , who has a Ph . D . , is the president . 
>> Markhasa Ph.D.
(6) Mark , who doesn't have a Ph . D . , is the president . 
~ Markhasa Ph.D.
Internal negation that focuses on anything other than a presupposition does not affect that presupposition  , because presuppositions do not depend on tile truth of any other thing expressed by the sentence  . For example , the presupposition of sentence 7 still holds when the main proposition is negated . 
(7) Debbie , who has a dog , does I doesn't have cats . 
>> Debbie has a dog.
External negation is inherently vague . We argue that it is handled as follows . One first checks to see if there is any evidence favoring one of the possible interpretations  . 
If a presupposition contradicts any established information  , one assumes the intended reading negates that presupposition  ; hence the presupposition is never believed to hold  . We will call this the blocking of a presupposition  . 
In the absence of any evidence to guide one in choosing an interpretation  , one assumes that negation of the main proposition was intended  , and hence that the presupposition stands . This assumption might be either supported or refuted by information to follow  . If it is refuted , then the incorrect presupposition must be retracted  . 
Our analysis of example 3 then , is as follows . The negation in the first sentence is ambiguous and  , on hearing that sentence alone , the hearer assumes a reading where the focus of negation is on wish and the presupposition is left intact  . That is , the hearer assumes the intended reading was I don ' ~ have a Porsehe  , and I don't want one . 
On hearing the second sentence , the hearer learns that this assumption was incorrect  , and the presupposition that I don'~have a Porsche is retracted  . 
In summary , a presupposition survives semantically internal negation exactly when the negation does not focus on the presupposition itself  . It is assumed to survive semantically external negation unless there is evidence to the contrary  , in which case it is blocked . If not blocked , it correct by evidence that follows . We use the term defeat to subsmne both blocking and retraction  . Horton (1987, sec .  1 . 2 ) shows that this behavior distinguishes presuppositions from entaihnents and implicatures  . 
3 Presuppositions as Beliefs
The at ) proach proposed here is to treat each presupposition as the belief of some particular agent in order to avoid ~ heassumptions of truth and shared belief and there by arts  . in a more reatistie account of presupposition . In addition , we propose considering all agents when deciding to whomt imbelief should be attributed  . 
Before continuing , we will point out our assumptions . 
Following Griee (1975) , we assmnet lrst that no speaker will deliberately try to deceive the listener  , and second that no speaker will use irony or sarcasm  . Deceit , irony , and sarca , ; m cart affect presuppositions , and the possibility of handling them is discussed by tIort on  ( 1987 )  . 
3.1 A Logic for Modeling Context
In ( Hortoi , 1987) a formal logic of belief is defined . 
Its syntax allows the expression of propositioils uchas  . l ~ John BM ary -' P ( that is , dohn believes that Mary believes P is not true ) . Its semanticsibased on belief structures , aw ~ riant of Fagin , Halpern , and Vardi's knowledge structures (1984) . A belief structure n codes what Will be called as tate--the truthw due of each proposition  , as well as the beliefs of each agent regarding these propositions  , their beliefs about the other agents ' beliefs , and so on . If a proposition P is true for a belief structures  , we write s~P ; if not , we write s ~ P . We also infornmlly describe operations Add Proposition  , which updates a belief structure to encode a new belief for some agent  , and Retract Proposition , which retracts a proposition from an agent's beliefs  . These operations can bcused to model the acquisition and retraction of presuppositiom fl information by agents  . Formal definitions of these operations raise difficult problems that w c have not solved  . See ( Horton 1987, 37--42) . However , the logic does provide a notation a , ll , : l formal semantics for the expression of beliefs . 
3.2 The Definition of Presupposition
We now present a definition of presupposition that embodies the idea of attributing presuppositions to specific agents  , and incorporates our view of the behavior of pre -supposltion  . , ~ under negation . 
The presuppositions of an utterance depend not only on the sentence uttered  , but also on the speaker , the listener , and the listener's beliefs , since only the listener's beliefs affect the cancdlation of presuppositions for him  . 
One sometimes wishes to speak of presuppositions when not all of this contextual information is known  . In particular , it is desirable to be able to discuss presuppositions of a sentence independent of any context of utterance  . In such cases , it is not possible to perform a consistency check to determine whether or not a candidate will actually turn out to be a presupposition  ; but one can say that if the necessary information were available and if the proposition were consistent with established information  , then the proposition would be a presupposition . We will define potential presupposition to capture this notion of a candidate presupposition that may turn out to hold when the sentence is completely situated  , and actual presupposi-tion to denote a potential presupposition that does turn out to hold  4  . 
In the definitions below , S ~ is used to rel ) resent tile affirmative form of sentence S , and S-to represent the externally negated form of the sentence  . We will use the term state to refer to a state of affairs  , as represented by a belief structure . 
Potential Presupposition
The definition of potential presupl ) osition for when only the sentence is known is as follows : DEHNI'rlON  2: Sentence Spotentially presui ) posest ) roposition P iff for any speaker Sp , listener L , and state a ,   ( a ) The utterance of S+by Sp to L in states would allow L to infer Bs ' vP  . 
( b ) The utterance of S-by Sp to L in states would allow L to infer BspP unless L already believed 
Bsp ~ P , i.e ., unless s ~ BLB sp'-P.
Clause ( a ) says that if the a~rmative form of the sentence were spoken  , any listener could infer that the speaker believed P  . Clause ( b ) says that even if the negative ibrm of the sentence were spoken  , any listener could still infer that the speaker believed P  , unlc'ss the listener already believed otherwise . A definition with clause ( a ) alone woukl capture other pragmatic inferences as well as presupposition  . Since clause ( b ) requires that the candidate x hibit the behavior under negation that is unique to presupposition  , it excludes the others . See ( Herren 1987, sec .  4 . 5) for exmnples . 
Actual Presupposition
An acttml presupposition of a sentence completely situated in context must be a potential presupposition f that sentence and consistent with the context  . 
DEFINITION 3: The utterance of sentence S by speaker Sp in states actually presupposes proposition 
BspP for listener L iff ( a ) P is a potential presupposition fS . 
(b ) If S = S-, s ~ BLBS p ~ P .
In keeping with our philosophy of treating presuppositions as beliefs  , clause ( b ) checks whether the spe~rker believes the potential t  ) resupposition according to the listener . Since blocking can only occur in negative sentences  ,   4See section 4 for a comparison of our concepts of " potential and actual presupposition with Gazdt~r's " pre -supl  ) osition " and " act , ual presupposition . " tion 3 . 4 for a qualification ) . 

Consider the utterance of S = I'm not glad that Chrisis leaving by Tom  . Let P be Chrisis leaving , and the state beswheres ~ B Diane B : romP , s ~ B Dia , ~ eBTom ~ P , and s ~ B coth ie BT or n ~ P . The sentence is Mready externally negated , so oe -= S , and S+=It isndt true that l'm not glad that Chrisis leaving  , which is equivalent to I'm glad that Chrisis leaving  . 
For any speaker Sp , listener L , and states , the utterance of S+by Sp would allow L to conclude B sp P  . We can confirm this by noting that the utterance of I'm glad that Chris is leaving  , but he isn't would be in felicitous . In addition , the utterance of S-by any speaker Sp would also allow any listener L to conclude B spP  , unless it were inconsistent with L's beliefs . Therefore , P is a potential presupposition of sentence S . 
P may or may not be an actual presupposition of the utterance of S by Tom in this state  , depending on who is the listener . Diane has no particular belief about whether or not Tom thinks Chrisis leaving  . In particular , s ~ B Di ~ n ~ B : ro , ~ P . Therefore , B~'omP is an actual presupposition to Diane of the utterance of sentence S by Tom  , in this state . However , Cathie has the previous belief that Tom thinks Chris is not leaving  , i . e . , s ~ B cathle B Tom ' ~ P . Therefore , BTomP is not an actual presupposition to Cathie of the utterance of sentence 
S by Tom , in this state.
3.3 Applying the Definitions
Horton (1987, ch . 5) applies the definitions , in the manner shown above , to a representative stofs inlple sentences , and shows that the presuppositions of many sentences must be treated as beliefs  . For example , sentence 8 does not potentially presuppose Brian's leaving was bad  , as shown by the felicity of 9 . However , under our assumption that all speakers are sincere  , it does potentially presuppose
Bpe ~( Brian's leaving was bad).
(8) Percycriticized Brian for leaving.
(9) Percycriticized Brian for leaving , but there was nothing wrong with him leaving . 
In the case of utterances , all presuppositions must be treated as the beliefs of the speaker  , but many can be correctiy expressed only if the beliefs of agents other than the speaker can also be mentioned  . For example , consider the following utterance of 8: ( 10 ) Mavis : Percycriticized Brian for leaving . 
~ Brian's leaving was bad.
~ BM~i ~ ( Brian's leaving was bad ) > > BM ~ , i , Bpercy ( Brian's leaving was bad ) Because our approach models the beliefs of all agents  , it is capable of correctly handling these cases . 
For complex sentences ~ one can either again apply the definitions directly or attemp to find rules for determining  25~1 the potential presuppositions of the sentence from those of its constituents  . Horton (1987 , chapter 6 ) examines this projeetion problem and shows that beliefs are again important  . For example , when sentence 11 is embedded in the context of the verb hopes , another level of belief is necessary to expres's the potential presupposition correctly  . 
(11) L of ty is sorry that he upset Willie.
>> BL of , u ( L of tyup set Willie).
(12 ) Ethelhopes L of ty is sorry that heup set Willie . 
>> BE the ZBLol ~( L of tyup set Willie).
The felicity of sentene e 13 below shows that 12 does not simply carry the potential presupposition  , BLoltu ( L@yupset Willie ) , of its constituent 11 . 
( la ) Ethelhopes L of ty is sorry that heup set Willie . She doesn'tre Mize that L ofty doesn't even know he did  . 
Any account hat does not treat presuppositions a beliefs cannot capture the presupposition i  12 and must incorrectly consider verbs of proposition alttitude such as hopes  ( as well as verbs of saying ) to block this projection , Even an account hat treats presuppositions a beliefs  , but considers only the beliefs of the speaker , cannot capture this presupposition . 
The initial motivation for treating presuppositions a beliefs was to avoid two unrealistic assumptions  . We have now seen that some cases of projection cannot be handled otherwise  , and that many presuppositions do involve beliefs of agents other than just the speaker  . 
3 . 4 Defeat in A f f i rmat ive Sentences The presuppositions of an affirmative sentence usually cannot be defeated without an infclicity  . For example , It's a good thing that Tom didn't . fall presupposes that Tom didn't fall . There is no context for this sentence in which the presupposition does not hold and hence no context in which it can be contradicted  . However , there is a small class of affirmative sentences in which defeat is possible  . 
For example , sentence 14 potentially presupposes 15 because of the definite reference Barney's loud music  . 
(14) If Fred's in his office , Barney's loud music will both er him . 
(15) Barney is playing loud music.
However , in the context of 16 , the presupposition does not hold . 
(16 ) Barney plays loud music when Fred's in his office  , just to bother him . 
In this case , the contextual information combines with the/\]- clause of  14 to establish that the potential presupposition of the then-clause  ,  15 , is merely a possibility , thereby blocking it as an actual presupposition of the sentence  . 
We argue that a presupposition of an affirmative sentence can be defeated only in this manner  , i . e . , only if it is established as hypothetical by a clause of the sentence in combination with contextual information  . Horton ( 1987 ) enumerates these relatively infrequent cases . 
Definitions 2 and 3 , given above , correctly handle the cases in which attempted e feat of a presupposition arising from an affirmative sentence leads to an infelicity  ; however , they do not handle those cases where such defeat is possible  . In this section we discuss two ways to do so . Both are compatible with our approach . 
We define an anti-e on dltlonto be any background information that helps to establish as hypothetical  , and therefore to de that , a potential presupposition of an affirmative sentence  . Clauses involving anti-conditions are added to ~\ [le definitions as follows : DEFINITION  4: Sentence Spotentially presupposes proposit i on P with anti-condition Q iff for any speaker 
Sp , listener L , and states ,   ( a ) Tt ~ e utterance of S + by Sp to L in states would allow L to infer BSpP unless L already believed 
B svO , i . e . , unless s I = BLBsp @ ( b ) The utterance of S-by Sp to L in states would allow L to infer BSvP unless L already believed Bsp ~  . PorB svQ , i . e . , unless . s ~ = BLI3&,~Pors ~ BLBSvQ . 
DEFINITION 5: The utterance of sentence S by speaker Sp in states actually presupposes proposition 
B&I -' for listener L iff ( a )  1  ) is a potential presupposition of S , with anti-condition Q . 
(b ) If S = S-, s~kBLBs ,, -~ P .
(e ), ~ baB ~ B ~ , Q .
For examt , le , sentence 14 potentially presupposes 15 with 16 as an anti-condition . As long~s the anti-condition is not believed , the presupposition is actual . 
As mentioned above , defeat can only occur in a few types of positive sentence  , so the anti-condition is usually nil ; in such cases the simpler definitions , 2 and 3 , suffice . 
An alternative method of handling the phenomena regarding defeat in affirmative sentences i to treat affirmative and negative sentences uniformly  , that is , to perform the consistency check on both types of sentence  . This approach , adopted by Gazdar (1979a , 1979b ) , requires no special mechanism to account for felicitous defeat in affirmative sentences  . To explain the infelicity that arises in moat . cases when defeat of a presupposition of an affi >mative sen /  ; enee is attempted , the help of entaihnent sienlisted . For exmnpie , Gazdar's theory says that 1 didn't see Lea Mia drableaisa " pre-supposit ion  ''5 of 18  , but not an actual presupposition i the context of  17  , because this would be inconsistent . So far no infelicity is detected . 
(17) I saw LeaM is & ables.
(18) I'm sorry that I didn't see it.
However , I didn't ace Les Mia drables is also an entaihnent of  18   ( bec~msef active verbs entail their complements )  . 
5Gazdar's " presuppositions " correspond roughly to onr porch-tim presuppo:dtions  ( see section 4 )  . We will use quotation marks to distinguish is hyphem~ted term from the generic one  . 
This entailment introduces an inconsistency into tile cumulative context and sentence  18 is therefore predicted to be in felicitous in the context of  17  . 
Unfortunately , Gazdar does not say exactly where such ent ai lments occur  . We argue that the entaihnents exist exactly where anti-conditions do not  , and thus that the distinction between M firmative sentences that allow defeat and those that do not can be drawn either by anti~conditions or by tile existence of entaihnents  . 
Casting the " uniform " approach in our terms , w c get the following definitions : DEFINITION 6: Sentence Spotentially presupposes proposit ion Pill " for any speaker Sp  , listener L , and states , the utterance of , 5' by Sp to L in state s would allow L to infer BspP unless s ~: BLBsp~P  . 
DEHNITION 7: The utterance of sentence S by speaker oep in state a actually presupposes proposition 
BspP for listener L iff ( a ) P is a potential presupposition of S . 
(b ) s\[/=BLB sv ~ P .
We are at present undecided as to which of these two methods to prefer  . Both explain the t ) he nomena . Treating a f\[irmative and negative sentences uniformly leads to simpler definitions  ; in addition , the use of entaihnents to explain defeat phenomena in positive sentences is more gmmral than relying on anti--conditions  , which are specific to the type of sentence under question  , t to wev cr , this approach does not capture the intuition that defeat differs in negative and at firmative sentences  . In addition , uniform definitions do not capture only presupposition  , because they do not mention the unique he havior of presui  ) posi-tion under negation . In contrast , the earlier definitions 4 and 5 can distinguish presupposition from other kinds of implication  . 
It is inlportant onote that the choice between these two methods is orthogonal to our goal of developing a model that treats presuppositions a beliefs  . 
4 Comparison with Gazdar's

Gazdar's (1979 a , 1979b ) is perhaps the most influential theory of presupposition  . It attempts to explain diverse phenomena regarding the behavior of presuppositions in context ~ with a single rule  , based on consistcucy . Consistency is also central to our analysis . In addition , the structure of our account is similar to Gazdar ' s  . In particular , both accounts first compute preliminary propositions in our case potential presupposit ions and in Gazdar's  , " presuppositions " - - and then perform a consistency-based context check to find the presuppositions of the  sen-6Gazdar refers to this a stile projection problem . We use the term differently , as Levinson does , to mean the problem of finding the presuppositions of a complex sentence from the presuppositions of its constituents  . 
259 tence or utterance in context . Despite the structural similarities , there are important differences between the two approaches  . We will now describe some of these . 
First , for Gazdara sentence may " presuppose " a proposition that it can never  , on any occasion of use , presuppose . His " presuppositions " are simply convcnient intermediate results  . In our theory , on the contrary , to say that a sentence S potentially presupposes proposition P is to make a general statement about sentence S : it tends to imply P  . Second , Gazdar computes his " presuppositions " using a set of unconnected and unmotivated rules  , whereas our definition of potential presupposition lends coherence to the diverse class of potential presuppositions  . The key difference between the present work and Gazdar's is that our emphasis is not on the behavior of presuppositions in context  , but on the relevance of agents ' beliefs to all aspects of presupposition  . Gazdar does not address this issue .   7 We consider our integration of beliefs into an account of presupposition to be our main contribution  . 
5 Summary
We have found that agents ' beliefs are relevant o an account of presupposition  , and that it is necessary to consider all agents involved in discourse when deciding to whom belief in a presupposition should be attributed  . We have described an account of presupposition that therefore makes beliefs central  . This account includes a new definition of presupposition that captures it more precisely than earlier ones  . 
Treating presuppositions as beliefs--with full consideration given to all agents ' beliefs -- not only allows a more correct analysis by avoiding the Truth Assumption and the Shared Belief Assumption  ; it also makes it possible to account for presupposition M phenomena that could not be explained otherwise  . 

This paper is based on thesis work by the first author  , under the supervision of the second . The authors wish to thank Brenda Fawcett , Gerhard Lakemeyer , Hector Levesque , and Bart Selman for helpful discussions , and Chrysanne DiMarco and Susan McRoy for help in preparing this paper  . Financial support was received from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 

7 As mentioned above , Gazdar does treat all presuppositions a knowledge of the speaker  ; however , he does not consider the knowledge or beliefs of other agents  , or examine the relevance of beliefs or knowledge to a theory of presupposition  . 


Atlas , J . D . ; and Levinson , S . C .  1981 . It-Clefts , Informativeness , and Logical Form : Radical Pragm ~ tics ( Revised Standard Version )  . In Cole , P . Ed . , t2adiea I
Pragmatics . Academic Press : 1-61.
Fagin , Ronald ; Halpern , Joseph Y . ; and Vardi , Moshe Y .  1984 . A Model ~ Theoretic Analysis of Knowledge : Preliminary Report  . Proceedings of the 25th IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science  . West Palm Beach , Florida : 268-278 . 
Gazdar , G . 1979a . Pragmatics : Implieature , Presupposition and Logical Form . Academic Press . 
Gazdar , G . 1979b . A Solution to the Projection Problem . 
In Oh and Dinneen 1979:57-89.
Grice , H . Paul .  1975 . Logic and Conversation . In Cole , Peter J . ; and Morgan , Jerry L . , Eds . Syntax and Semantics , Volume 3: Speech Acts . Academic Press : 4158 . 
Horton , Diane Lynn .  1987 .   , Incorporating Agents ' Beliefs in a Model of Presupposition  . M . Se . thesis , published as Technical Report CSRI-201 , Computer Systems Research Institute , University of Toronto , Toronto , 

Karttunen , Lauri .  1973 . Presuppositions of compound sentences . Linguistic Inquiry 4: 169-193 . 
Karttunen , Lauri .  1974 . Presupposition and linguistic context . Theoretical Linguistics 1:181-194 . 
Karttunen , Lauri ; and Peters , Stanley .  1979 . Conversational Inlplicature . In Oh and Dinneen 1979:1-56 . 
Levinson , S . C .  1983 . Pragmatics . Cambridge University

Oh , C . -K . ; and Dinneen , D . A . , Eds .  1979 . Syntax and Semantics , Volume 11: Presupposition . Academic

Quirk , Randolph ; and Greenbanm , Sidney .  1973 . A University Grammar of English . Longman Group Limited . 
Weischedel , Ralph Mark .  1975 . Computation of a Unique Subclass of Inferences : Presupposition and Entailment  . Unpublishe doctoral dissertation , University of Pennsylvania . 
Weischedel , Ralph Mark .  1979 . A New Semantic Computation While Parsing : Presupposition and Entailme ~ L 
In Oh and Dinneen 1979:155-183.
Wilson , Dierdre ; and Sperber , Dan .  1979 . Ordered En-taihnents : An Alternative to Presuppositional Theories  . In Oh and Dinneen 1979:299-323 . 
