On the R ble of Old Information in Generating Readable Text : 
APsychologicalnd Computational Definition
Of " Old " and " New " Information in the NOS VO System 
Mark Vincent La Polla
Linguistics Dept,
University of Texas , at Austin
Austin , Tx 78712

NOS VO is a Natural Language Generation postproeessor which is sensitive toold hi~w information contrasts  . We believe that generating old information first establishes cohesion in text promoting readability  . This paper describes the NOSVO system in detail and the motivations for building it  . We also provide a phychological nd computational definition of " old " and " new " information  . 
Tbere . are situations where the speaker is constrained by a grammatical rule  , and there are situations where he chooses according to Iris meaning  . . .   ; but there are fie situations in the system where " it makes no difference " which way yougo  . This is just another way of saying that every contrast a language permits to survive is relevant  , some time or other . ( Bolinger 1972:71) . 
1.0 Introduction
There are at least two stages of text generation . One is generating the content of the text . The other is generating the language that represents and communicates the content  ( Thompson 1977 )  . These two stages , though interrelated , have their owtasets of interesting problems and principles  . 
The first stage , generating the semantic ontent of the text , involves motivating , planning and creating the conceptual and semantic ontent of a piece of text  . Once the semantic representation for a text has been constructed the language of that text can be generated  . The second stage , language generation , involves communicating the intent and content of the text Without confusing or misleading the reader  . " ~ his paper will address the second stage only . 
It is not enough to merely generate text . It is also necessary to generate cohesive text . However a shopping list is cohesive , though not " flowing " text by any means . A set of sentences that are prepositionally related are cohesive though are not necessarily beautiful prose  . 
It is not enough to attend to ellipsis and prouominalization to generate radable prose  . We believe that there are other factors which must be attended to to generate prose  . The NOSVO system is an attempt to take into account old/new information contrasts  ( Chafe 1974 ,  1976 ) which we believe will help natural language generation systems produce more readable text  . 
' assumable ' as being there " ( Prince 19'/8:819 ) i This is quite important and expands upon Ch ~' e : . ; ir , cefbrhim the important hing is that the antecede ~ tmu~t be in the hearer's consciousness  , i . e . i - ~ thel ~ earer , stbcus of attention , while for Prince and LaPolla it need only be appropriate to the situation or in some other way coCperatively assumable  , to ho in the fiearer's consciousness . 
Hajicov ~ and V brov ~ t ( 19811 also takes exception with the terms " given ( or old ) " or " new " information and suggests that " contextual l !? bound " and " contextually non -bound " bexical item would be more appropriate  . 
"contextually bound " and " contextually non-bound " is even more appropriate han " already activated " ~ md " newly activated " because it seems to also convey situational appropriateness  . However , it seems that Hajicov ~ t restricts her terminology  , as well as her theory of discourse ( focus ) strueture ~ to linguistic antecedents . That is , her " shared stock of knowledge " appears to be closer to  , if not completely , linguistic in representation . The t~f0 re , neither her theory or terminology has the power to deal with m t antecedent that is merely inferable or appropriate to a situation  . We will use the familiar terms " new/old infolmation " but will define them a little more precisely later in the paper  . 
3.0 The System 2?0 " Old " and " New "
It is important at this point to clarify the use of the terms " old information " and " new information "  . The term " old information " is a misnomer , though it expresges the J intuition needed for this paper  . The term suggests " it is what the listener is expected to know already "  ( Haviland and Clark 1974 )  . The term " new information " is also a incorrect . It suggests that what the speaker has uttered is completely new to the hearer and is being introduced into the speaker's consciousness for the very first time  . But as Ch~ife ( 1976 ) points out a person uttering the sentence " I saw you father yesterday " is " unlikely to assume that the addressee had no previous knowledge of his father  , even though ~ by the usual criteria " your father " would be considered new information "  , ( Chafe 1976 . - 30) . Chafe " y " etivated " and " newly suggests that the terms aheada activated " would be more anvronriate  . 
Certainly " alreaay actlvatect " and " newly activated "  ( information ) are by far better than the terms " ~ iven " and " new "  . Even so , they are still somewhat m precise . 
" already activated " and " newly activated " imply  , as does Chafe , that the concept that is activated , whether extralinguistic or linguistic , is directly activated by a ( linguistico1"extralinguistic ) referent . As Prince ( 1978 ) shows for clefts and as LaPolla ( 1 9861 shows for inversion and prepositional phrase fronting this need not be the case  . Rather the antecedent " simply has to be appropriate to the situation  , and hence co 6Peratively N ( ISVO ( Not Only Subject Verb Object ) is a preprocessor that , aids in the genei:ation of English text . It is not in and of itself " a text generator . Rut does contain a very simple predicate to EngliSh translator  ( simih trinsphit , though not in complexity , to Simmons 19841 . NOSVO is sensitive to the old/flew ( i . e . given/new ) contrasts in a discourse ( Chafe 1974 ,  1976 ; t tajicov ~ and V brov ~ 19811 and file syntactic structures that allow a writer  , ors I~aker , to begin a sentence with old information , NOSVO organizes the semantic ontent of pirxlicates to produce an old information first ordering  .   ( Appendix A contains a short example of test with and without he application of the old information first principle  . ) The rest of this section describes NOSVO and its motivation i detail  .   ( See Appendi ? Bt brahigll level data flow diagram of rite system  . ) ~ . 1/Motivation One of the . goals of communication is to modify and extend the store of information imemory  ( Hajicov ~ i ~ mdv browt 19811 and language facilitate seormnunicatlon . If the above statement is accepted then one might ehma eterize a discourse as a session where particular slices of memory are accessed and ehauged ~ Since this actz~nulated storeOf information imemory is presumably very large and has a complicated Structure  , it i~nsefill ff the commmricator can first identify tile locations in metuory that are to be modified or added to before in u ' odncing rite modifications Begbming a sentence with old information allows a speake J to direct he hear cr 's focus of attention to exactly those elements which he wishes to modify before he utters the  . rest of the sentence , presamatfly new information ( Chaff ; 1974) . If a speaker began a sentence with new information  , the listener wouklnot know where to connect it in the discourse  . The listener wonk l have to waituhtil the old inlbrmation is uttered to locate where the new information is to be used  ( LaPolla 1986 )  . The former process , takes less concentration by the list et , er ( Green 1980) , If we model human mcm(ny , specifically lexical access , as as p: , :cading- . actiwttion network ( Ouillian 1962 ,  1967 ; Collins and Loftus 1975 ) we can describe the effects of uttering old information before new as p !' imiag  , for at least the class of linguistic an Wcedents . Old inflmnation primes an already active node in memory raising its level of activation ' and making it more accessible than surrounding nodes  . The priming may then spread to related concepts . 
This causes only the relevant and related portions of memory to be available for modification or replacement  , and restricts the amount of memory brought into tire processing of discourse  . ( Our model can bc extended to cover nc , Minguistic and infer ablemt tecedeuts by using a laybrill representation  ( Vihdn 1985 ) \[ cf . Havil and Clai'k~?974) or Prince (1978) fbr . a definition of inferable anteced ~ . nts\] . ) If new infommtkm were nttered first then the level of activation achieved would be equal  ,  . , r close to previously primed concepts and the speaker's attention would not be properly focused  . 
We can now define old ( linguistic ) information as already activated memory . New ( linguistic ) information , then , is either information ot in memory or information that ha : ~ not yet been act N at cd  . Using Quilliau's model , all concepts that haw ; bern , primed by the discourse , either directly or by spreading-activation , arcold . Everything else is uew . 
Structures like inversion and PIM?-onting , to a name a few , extend the syntactic amt logical possibilities of inflmnation presentationia language  . They allow adj nnct ~, e . g . in PP-fronting ~ or objects , e . g . in passives , or other arguments , e . g . in inversion , to be presented before other syntactic on stituents  . 
To complete the above definitions we will adopt and expand Quillian's definidon of " concept "  . For Qui Uian , and Collins and Loftus , a concept correspond : ; " to particulm " senses of words or phra ~ , ' , es"(Collins and l~xfftus1975:408) . We will expand this to include extralinguistic phrases c  , r groups of actions and objects . A concept then is not onl 7 senses or words or phrases such as NPs , " machine " , VPs , " to machine " , and phrases " the pro-titularold car Iown " ( page 408 ) but also extralinguistic objects : at ficture of a fire engine  , and actions , the picture of a fire engine racing down the slreet  . This also include situations such as eating in a restaurant and paying the check  . In sum , concepts arc linguistic words and phrases as well as more difficulthing stop in down like situational scripts  . 
We have adopted a well proven model of truman memory to describe the elf~-ets of linguistic in fbtmation on memory  . 
We have used this the x~ry to wodel discourse processing as a type o:i ! memo ~ yl  ) rocessing . We tuwe also advanced the idea that langnage in its role as a communications facilitator allows ~ a speaker to direct which concepts will be primed and therefore what the hearer will loons his att cnlion on  . 
We have defined old and new inibmmtion within this flamework and have b  , icfly described the contribution inversion , PP-fronting amt passivization make to the preseutafio  , finformation iuh mguage . In the rest of this paper we will show how we have integrated these ideas and theories into NOS VO  . 
3.2 Syste~l Overview
NOSVO takes as input a syntacfico-semantic predicater c prescmatRm of each sentence in the text to be produced  ( following Simmons 1984 )  . ( Sec Figure 1lor an example . 
The asterisks indicates a backward pointing arc ( Simmons 1984 ) 0 It determines which of ~ ltc predicates constituents are " old " inlbnnafion  . It th tu~updates its lexical memory to reflect the predicates ntte can  ,  . : e on the listener's own memory . The lexicon is a semantic network following Quillian  . Currently it supports the relations ISA , HAS , HAS-PART , LOC , IS-CAI , LED , EXAMPLE , SUPER - and SUBCLASS . 
NOSVO assumes that each of the underlying predicates maps to a sentence  . This assumption has allowed us to focus on the old h~ew information distinction that is the core of the NOSVO system with on two rrying about the mapping from " deep " semantic structure to surface structure  . In other words , NOSVO is not a robust English generator and has all of its intelligence devoted to the manipulation of information  . We feel that language generation is a difficult research issue and is beyond the scope of this paper mtd the current system  . 
(spend tns past ae ( ( father number sing ) agt * ( accompanyms presinflint ) ae ( menumbersing ) ) before * ( ( be ms past nmnber sing ) atr ( tall ) atr ( enongl0agt ( ( I nmnber sing ) agt * ( ( ride ins pres iufl inf ) on * ( ( coaster number sing ) alr ( bi ~ 9 ) ae ( menmn bersing ) ) ) ) agt ( ( hour number pl ) atr ( pleasant ) atr ( many ) ) ) 
Figure 13 o2, 1 NOS VO
First , NOSVO determines which parts of the input predicate are " old information "  . It checks the nodes with the tive ( 5 ) highest levels of activation in its knowledge base  ( KB )  , e . g . levels 610 where 0 is not activated and 10 is fully activated . If any of the heads of any of the arguments from the input predicate is among the activated nodes then that argument is marked as " old "  .   ( NB : We do not address in this paper intenml ordering of constituents other than sentences  . We only check the heads of consfitnents directly below the sentence lvel  . ) After NOSVO has marked the old information in the input predicate  , it updates the stalus of its KB to reflec the hypothesized change the generated sentence will have on the listener  . To do this , NOSVO first parses each input predicate into its constituents  . For each argument in the input predicate NOS VO primes  , or reprimes , a corresponding ( concept ) node in its KBs .   ( Note : Though we do not check each part of each constituent when determining what is old  , every part of every constitue ut does affect he state of the lexical rnemory of NOSVO  . ) When a node in the knowledge base is primed , it is tagged with a level of activation The initially primed concept is tagged with the highest level of activation  , call it level 10 . The initially primed concept is also tagged as the initially primed node  , i . e . the no detMmed by the discourse and not by spreading-activation  . Activation then spreads outward raising the level of activation of sun-ounding nodes  . As the spreading-activation gets timber away from the initially primed node its effect is reduced proportionally to the distance mtvclcd  ( following Collins and Loftus 1975 )  . For example , at the initially primed node the level of activation is  10  , at the next node it is 9 , at the next 8 and so on . NOSVO also tags the surrounding nodes with the umnc of the initially primed node  . We realize that we do not know by what exact proportion the activation effect is diminished  . Nor do we know how long actiwt tion lasts or at what rate is deteriorates These are questions for future research  . 
3.2?2 Generating Sentences
After NOS ? O has marked the arguments in the predicate  , the result is passed to a simple English generator  . The role of the generator is complex but the way it executes its role is simple  . The generator looks at the nuu'ked predicate and chooses the correct English syntax to map the predicate to English  . We realize that this task is very complex and our treatment of it is superficial  . We realize that entire systems have been created to address the problem  , e . g . MUMBLE ( McDonald 1980; see also McDonald , Meteer and Pustejovsky 1987) . We " also realize that we do not address pragmatic onsiderations in the our goal was not to create a robust language generator  . Our ? goal was to create a system that could recognize old ! ll  . fo ~ r nation in a phrase being generated . After this is done it is the responsibility of the rest of the system to act on that infolmation  . 
We assumed fl ' om the beginning that the underlying semantic ~ epresentations NOSVO processes are already organized into sentences  . This was not to aid NOSVO in its task ~ though it does by explicitly defining the relationship between the verb and its arguments  , but rather to aid the simple predicate to English generator  . 
The English generator coupled with NOSVO takes NOSVO's output and analyzes it  . If a prepositional phrase ( PP ) adjunct has been marked as " old " then the generator fronts it  , e . g . "In the park , Johnkissed Mary " . If an object has been marked as " old " the generator generates a passive  , e . g . " The apples were eaten by Vincent " . If appargument or adjunct of an intransitive is marked as " old " the generator generates an inverted sentence  ,   . g . "Aroundtile bendlives John " . If no old information is found other than in the subject hen a simple Subject Object Verb sentence is generated  , e . g . " Vinnieloves Mark " . If a predicate contains no old information , either explicitly or implicitly , it is a nonseque turmid should not be geuerated . 
At-this stage in the generators development only simple syntaxes are generated  . Extraposition out of clauses is not addressed . This was no tour intent . Also it was not our intent o argue here that he presentation fold information first is the sole discourse function of structures like inversion  , pp- . fronting and passives but only one of their discourse functions  , perhaps the main one . It was our intent obuild a system that could determine which parts of a sentence tinder generation were old information  . It was also our intent oelm ' if y the terms old and new in folxnation and to put their definitions in perspective both linguistically and psychologically  . These issues we have addressed . 
4.0 The System In Detail
In this section , we will present the NOSVO system in detail . 
4 ot Detailed Overview
NOS VO's grammar is segmented into two parts : i ) plain vanilla SVO rules , e . g . S -> NP verb PP , " A little angels tood outside " ( Green 1980 , page 582) , " Uncle Jack lives around the bend " ( LaPolla forthcoming )  , and it ) so called old information first syntax , e . g . S -> PP verb NP , " Outsides tood a little angel " ( Green 1980 , page 582) , "Around the bend lives UncleJack " ( LaPolla 1986 and 1988 )  . ( CfGreen1980 and LaPollai986 for details) . 
When NOSVO encounters old information in any constituent in a predicate  , x cept for the logical subject , it uses the old information first syntax grammar to generate the seutence  . Otherwise it uses the plain vanilla granunar . 
NOSVO does not do any extraposition from within embedded clauses nor does it handle the differences between internal arguments and adjuncts  . It only produces the three variations on standard  , plain vanilla syntax discussed above . These issues will be addressed in future versions of NOSVO  . 
NOSVO has two Idnds of knowledge bases from which to Work : linguistic and conceptual  . There are two linguistic knowledge bases : the lexicon and the discourse base  . The lexicon maps into either a domain specific or . a non-domain specific KB . Both the domain specific and non-domain specific KBs are hierarchical networks which supporthe relations ISA  , HAS , HAS-PART , LOC , IS-CALLED , EXAMPLE , SUPER - and SUBCLASS . The domain specific and non-domain specific knowledge bases are the Quillian  . style semantic networks . In NOSVO's current avatar , there is a one to one mapping of lexical items to concepts in  . the knowledge bases . That is , there is no lexical or conceptual ambiguity . A more robust system would allow for multiple mappings in both direction because of the power and depth it gives  . A more robust mapping wo nld produce two problems though  . The first would be the extra computation and heuristics required to resolve the ambiguities  . The second problem would be determining when to prime a node  . It might not be correct might have to wait for a completed parse before priming the concept bases  . 
The discourse base is a tree . As NOSVO generates text , it builds the discourse tree connecting old in t\ ~ rmation to new while retaining the autonamy of each predicate  . The discourse base contains the structure of the discourse and is a way to record prinr in l ~ o The discourse base maps directly into the KBs as well  . One could assume that the discourse is just a a section of prirn exlmemoly  , l to wever , it was felt that a more linguistic representation would be usefld in helping to resolve anaphora  . Tile discourse base was modeled after the discourse mechanism in LaPolla  ( 1986 )  . 
NOSVO's first step in determining whether a predicate or an argument is " old information " i ~? whether or not it has been introduced into the discourse  , that is whether or not it is definite ( tleim 1982 , 1983) . If a referent has already been introduced into the discourse then it is necessarily oM information  . However , the converse is not necessarily true . That is , just because a referent has not been introduced into the discourse does not mean it is ' new intbrmation '  ( Von Stechow 1981 )  . All it means is that the referent has not been introduced  . The information may have been . 
The nonliuguistic KBs contain met Ninguistic knowledge about articles  , stories or other appropriate formats and tile expectations speakers have a bouthem  , knowledge about the topic of the text and specific and gener N knowlexlge about he lexicon ? NOSVO tlies to establish a link from the sentence under generation to one of the KBs  . If a link can be found from an argument or an adjunct in the input predicate to the knowledge base  , the link is recorded and the old in formatkm first grammar is used to generate the argument or adjnnct first  , if possible .   ( This is a over simplification and will be expanded tq  ~ on  . ) If NOSVO can not establish a link to the knowledge base  , it searches the meta-knowledge base , i . e . the knowledge base containing information about author motivation for writing an article or story  , the techniques authors use to write articles or sto~ies  , and iuf on nation about art Mes and stories , the h'parts and subcategories . 
The recta--knowledge base is primarily used to establish bridges  ( Clark and Havil and 1974 ) discourse initially from the old information in the predicate to an infeITable metalinguistic antecedem  . For example , a college professor may begin a leet m-e ( or course ) with the discourse initial utterance " What we're going to look at today  ( this term ) iso . ." but not "* , What one of my colleague said this morning was . . . " ( Prince 1978 , page 889 ) or "* What I told my wife this morning was . . . "  ( The asterix means semantically nnace eptable ) The first sentence is allowable because the context  , i . e . the class room setting , allows a direct inference to studying ( for the terns )  . 
The recta--knowledge base has two pa~s:a taxonomy similar to the Domain Specific KB and scripts that have knowledge about objects and the actions that they perform  , e . g . writers write stories , writers set scenes , stories have scenes . 
The algorithm which NOSVO uses to detem~ine which old information first syntaxis appropriate is straightforward  . The complicated partishow NOSVO decides what is old information  . Currently NOSVO searches through all comcepts with activation greater than  5  . The value 5 is arbit xary , however , it is still an open research question when an antecedent can be considered no longer in the speaker's/listener's common ground  ( Chafe 1974 ,  1976) , or no longer cooperatively assumable ( Prince 1978 )  . 
4.2' l'he Components of the System
This subsection will outline in detail the various components of NOSVO and their function  . This subsection is organized in parallel with the data flow diagram in Appendix B  , starting with NOSVOs first component subsystem . 
4.2.1 The Predicate Parser
The Predicate Parser identifies and parses the inputs eutential predicate into its component parts  . This is the first :; tay , c in identifying old information ia predicate . 
4.2?2e'rcdicateArgn~aentTranslator
The Predicate Argmnent Translator translates the ling nist tc representation f the input predicate consituents into tokens  , from the lexicon , which map into the discourse base and the other KBs  . Notice that the represe ~ ttation of discourse referents and concepts need not be the same  , only that each referent or concept be indexed , and indexable , by a token . The tokens are only used to qnery the knowledge bases  . When we speak of finding a link belween the input predicate and the knowledge base that li ~  . : is established through the conceptual translation  . 
4, 2?3 The Discom?se Ba~e Searcher
The Oiseourse Base Searcher searches the discourse to determine whether any of the input predicate arguments in the predicate have been previously introduced into the discour  . ; e . If an antecedent ( s ) i found the link is recorded and the whole predicate  , with highlighted old infonaaation , is sent to the LiHguistic Converter and Category Analyzer  ( l , C~CA) . 
4 ? 2? 4 The Domain Specific KB Searcher
If no antecedents are found in the discourse base the Domail  , Specific KBSearcher searches the domain specific
KB for a possible link.
First maximally primed nodes are investgated , i . e . , nodes with priming 10 . Then other less palmed nodes are investigated and so on up to priming level  5  . Note : that the amount of search necessary increases as the priming decreases  . If a link is found to a node , that node is primed and the input predicate is sent to the Linguistic Converter and Category Analyzer with the old information highlighted  . If not , control and the input predicate is passed to the Non-Domain Specific KB Searcher  . 
4 . 2 . 5 The Non-Donmin Specific KB Searcher The Non- . Domain Specific KB Searcher searches for an antecedent in the Non-Domain Specific KB  . In NOSVOs case non-domain specific knowledge is general and prototypical knowledge  . So , for example , if the domain specific KB is Navy ships , then the non-domain specific KB might contain information aboutships in general  , water , vehicles , transportation , orguns and fighting in general . The exact same mechanism is used to search the Non-Domain Specific KB as the Domain Specific KB  . If no antecedent is found in this knowledge base the predicate is passed to the Bridge Building Inference Engine  . 
4 . 2 06 ' ~' he Bridge Bttilding Inference Engine If all the other processes have failed to find a link from predicate to cornmon grom ld  , i . e . the context , both linguistic and nonlinguistic , of a discourse , NOSVO tries to build a bridge , an inference , which connects information in the predicate to a metalinguistically inferable antecedent  . 
Tints component of NOSVO is not very robust . NOSVO will eventually be reimplemented using a Valain  ( 1985 ) type hybred approach . Then the Bridge Building Inference
Engine will be expanded.
At this point , the careful reader may think that given the nature of NOSVO's search mechanisms that it must always succeed in establishing a connection from input to knowledge base  . That is the case . Indeed it must be the case . Consider lhat everything that peoples ay to each other must in some way link to '  . lhe common ground in order to be nnderstood . Or else the utterance would be a nonsequitur . Even the selfinl roductions perfomaed by two people who do not kiroWeach other  , and have just met , are expecled and reasonable ? The formula has a metalinguistic antecedenticulture  . 
The question to tNOSVO is not whether an antecedent exists but rather what it is  . If NOSVO cannot find an antecedent it assumes that one exists and generates a sentence with plan vanilla  , SVO structure , leaving it to the reader to establish the connection  . If NOSVO did not assume an antecedent it would have to discard the sentence as a nonsequitur and potentially confusing and/or misleading  . This is an important issue and will be dealt with in a later and expanded version of NOSVO  . 
4.2.7 The LC-CA
The Linguistic Converter and Category Analyzer analyzes the old information to determine its syntactico-semantic category  . It checks whether it is a prepositional phrase , agent , theme or instrument , in that order . It then decides if the old infomaation is an internal or external argument or a prepositional phrase adjunct  . With this informatii on it picks the type of grammar that will place the particular argument or adjunct first and sends the choice along with the predicate to the English generator  . 
4.2.8 The English generator
The English generator is a prolog grammar segmented into the various old information first syntaxes  , e . g . 
prepositional phrase first , object first rules , and a plain vanilla syntax . At this point all , or most , of the intelligent work has been done and the generator is nothing more than a syntactic manipulator under the direction of the Linguistic 
Co , wetter and Category Analyzer.
5.0 Future Research and Directions
Future research and development topics for NOSVO include :  1  . determining when information cannot be assumed to be in the listener's common ground  , i . e . , at what level of priming is a concept not in the listeners common ground ?  ;  2 . expanding NOSVO's capability to handle ellipsis , definiteness , and pronominalization and investigate how the generation of ellipsis an  . d definiteness affects the generation of old information fin:st  ;  3 . extending NOSVO to do more of the linguistic generation from either a more " conceptual " representation r to take as input another source langauge such as another natural language or a computer program and generate English from that underlying representation  , i . e . expand NOS VO's back end ; 4 . extending NOSVO's capabilities to handle the subtle distinction between arguments and adjuncts  ;  5 . determining how much the nonapplication or miss application f the old in folx nation first principle  , discussed above , makes a difference in reading and understanding text  ;  6 . finally , investigating other old information first syntactic structures and phenomena to determine how they affect a discourse and how they might be integrated into NOSVO  . 
The next generation of NOSVO will be written in CLOS and Lisp  . The application will be " generating descriptions of Lisp programs "  . CLOS objects will be used to organize the knowledge structures and CLOS methods will be used to dotile actual parsing  . Eventually NOS VO will be expanded and refined along the directions stated above  . 

I would like to thank Kent Bimson , Mirjam Fried , Randy La Polla , Marie Meteor and Varda Shaked for all their help and criticism on this abstract  . Any mistakes arc my own . 


Bolinger , D . That's that . The Hague : Mouton , 1972 . 
Chafe , Wallace . Language and Consciousness . Language , 1974, 50(1), 111-133 . 
Chafe , Wallace . " Givenness , Contrastiveness , Definiteness , Subjects , Topics and Point of View " . In Charles Li ( Ed . ), Subject and Topic . ( edLi , C . N . ),
New York : Academic Press , 1976.
Collins , Alan M . and Elizabeth F . Loftus ( 1975 ) " A Spreading-Activation Theory of Semantic Processing "  . 
Psychological Review , 87, 407-428.
Davison , Alice . " Peculiar Passives " . Language , March 1980, 56(1), 42-66 . 
Green , Georgia M . " Some Wherefores of English Inversions " . Language , 1980,56(3), 582-602 . 
t tajicov~t , Eva and Jarka VrbovL " On the Salience of the Elements of the Stock of Shared Knowledge "  . Folia
Linguistica , 1981, 15, 291-303.
Haviland , Susan E , and Herbert Clark . " What's New ? Acquiring New Information as a Process in Comprehension "  . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior , 1974, 13, 512-538.
Heim , Irene R . The Semantics of Definite and Indefinite Noun Phrases  , Doctoral dissertation , University of Massachusetts at Amherst , September 1982 . 
Helm , Irene R . " File Change Semantics and the Familiarity Theory of Definiteness "  . In Rainer Bauerle , Christoph Schwarze and Arnimvon Stechow ( eds . ) Meaning , Use , and Interpretation of Language . Walterde Gmyter , Berlin , 1983, 164-189 . 
Hovy , E . H . Generating Natural Language Under Pragmatic Constraints  . Unpublished Yale Dissertation,
YALEU/CSD/RR#521, 1987.
LaPolla , Mark Vincent . " The Role of Inversion , Clefting and PP-Fronting in Relating Discourse Elements : Some Implications for Cognitive and Computational Models of Natural Language Processing "  . In Proceedings from the XI International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics , 1986, 168-173.
McDonald , David D . Natural Language Production as a process of Decision-mdtking under Constraints  , unpublished Ph . D . Dissertation , MIT , Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory , 1980.
McDonald , David D . , Made W . Meteer ( V , aughan ) and James D . Pustejovsky . " Factors Contributing to Efficiency in Natural Language Generation "  . In G . 
Kempen ( ed . ) Natural Language Generation : Recent Advqnces in Artificial Intelligence  , Psychology and Linguistics , Kluwer Academic Publishers , 
Boston/Dordrecht 1987.
Prince , Ellen F . " A Comparison of Wh-Cl~fts and It-Clefts in Discourse "  . Language , 1978, 54(4), 883-905 . 
Quillian , M . R .   ( 1962 ) " A Revised Design for an Understanding Machine " , Mechanical Translation ,  7 ,  17-29 , Quillian , M . R .   ( 1967 ) " The Teachable Language Comprehender : A simulation program and theory of language "  , Commut ~ ications f the ACM ,  12 ,  459-476 . 
Simmons , Robertg . Computations from the English . 
Prentice-Hall , 1984.
y on Stechow , Arnim , " Topic , Focus and Local Relevance " . In W . Klein and W . Levelt ( eds . ) , Crossing the Boundaries in Linguistics , '1981 ,  95-130 . 
Thompson , H . " Strategy and tactics : a model for language production "  . In Papers from the 13th Regional Meeting , Valain , M . " The Restricted Language Architecture of a Hybrid System "  , In the Proceedings of the Ninth International Joint Conferet ~ ce on Artificial Intelligence  , 
L.A ,, 1985, 547-55I.
APPENDIXA
In this Appendix we have given two examples of text that NOSVO can generate  . The text was based upon naturally occurring text ( Lawrence 1985 )  . The old information first principle has been applied to the first text  . 
It has not been applied to the second text . We believe that the second text is stilted , less cohesive and harder to read , though this has yet to be proven experimentally . We also believe that the miss application f the old information first principle would be worse than its nonapplication  . These are topics left for future research . 

Long before I wast all enough to ride on the big coaster myself  , I spent many pleasant hours per suading my reluctant father to accompany me  . 
As an aficion adofam usement parks I was over joyed when our whole family finally flew to California to tackle 
Walt Disney's extrava ganza.
.More than two decades later , I'm still journeying to parks . ( page 4)
TEXTII
I spent many pleasant hours per suading my reluctant father to accompany melong before I wast all enough to ride on the big coaster myself  . I was over joyed , as an aficion a do famusement parks , when our . whole family finally flew to California to tackle Walt Disney's extrava ganza  . 
I'm still journeying to parks more than two decades later  . 
APPENDIXB ~ J \] ~ . .^\[ l:,oraa:tn I ~ . _I . on-Domain I . ^In ridg . ID is ~ ou ~ so I ~,/ . ,, . ., . ," . , . " ~ l speciz ? c I/~ so spaol z ~ c ~ . v ~ ui : tdingABase ~? unQ ~ Knowledge ~ . Found ? ~-- ~ I Knowled ~ eI ~ I . . . . . ~- I Inferenoe I / ~ Searcher I ~/ I Base Searche . l ~/ I ~_~_~-~ ounQY ~-~_~-~-/ Found ?@@@ // ~ i -\ [ Lingulisti $ Converter__  , ~ And Catego Sy-IAnalyzer Ii ! English

