INTERPRETATIONOFNOUNPHRASESININTENSIONAL CONTEXTS 
Leonardo LES MO and Paolo TERENZIANI
Dipartimento di In for , natica
Universita ' di Torino
C.soSvizzera 185-10149 TORINO-ITALY

This paper presents a network formalism for representing the meaning of noun phrases occurring in the context of intensional verbs such as seek and want  . The basic assumption is that an intermediate representation is useful to carry out the interpretation process perspi-cuously  . The proposed representation keeps apart dere ( transparent ) and de-dicto readings , stating , by means of suitable arcs and nodes , that in the first case there is a real counterpart of the described entity  , whereas in the second case no such counterpart exists  . Moreover , t be concept of relevance of the description is emphasized and the relationships between intensional contexts and the dicotomy existing between value-free and value-loaded readings of definite descriptions is discussed  . Finally , t ! ae impact of the intermediate representation the discourse history is considered  , in order to explain how such a representation accounts for the contextual data and updates them according to the informational conte  , tts of the sentence being analyzed . 
1. INTRODUCTION
Formally , an intension is a mapping that associates with eve  , y possible world ( actually , with indices that identify possible worlds ) a denotation , where a denotation is a set of entities ( individuals , relations , functions ) . If we take a term , say " animal " , it denotes , in the present world , a set of individuals ; but the meaning of the term cannot be characterized by that set  . For instance , the terms " human " and the term " feather less biped " denote the same set  , but their meaning is different , since the fact that there are ~ feather less bipeds except human beings  , in this world , e . ' m be regarded as a mere accident . It is not difficult to conceive of a different world where another species shares the same property with humans  . 
The characterization of possible worlds has been subject to deep philosophical debates  , which were mainly concerned with the relationships existing between " conceivable worlds " and " possible worlds "  , as well as with the connections existing between alternative worlds  , but , for t impresent purpose , we only need to note that : - The concept of " possible world " is rather easy to render formally  , expanding the usual concept of interpretation i logics by introducing " indices " on worlds  . Thus , for instance , the mapping which assigns to each predicate symbol a relation  ( of the same arity ) on the universe , must be viewed as a set of mappings ( one for each world )  , since the denotation of the predicate can vat 3 , fiom world to world . Equivalently , the intension of anary predicate can be delined as a function from world indices to n-sty relations  . 
-The concept of " possible world " is rather common in the everyday practice  . For instance , in saying ( 1 ) John seeks a unicorn no relation between John and a realworld entity referred to by % unicorn " can be assumed  , since no such entity exists . Nonetheless ( 2 ) John seeks a centaur is different fi'om ( 1 )  . Intuitively , the expression " centaur " has a meaning different fiom " unicorn "  , because in some ( fictitious ) world they are used to refer to different entities  . The same cannot be said for expression such ' . , s " centaur " and % being hall ' human and half horse "  , since the second can be used to define the first  ~  . 
On the other hand , the fact that possible worlds are common to logics and intuition does not mean that there is an exact match in the way the concept is used  . 
Let's consider , for instance , the best known treatment of natural language in logics  , i . e , the work of M on lague's . In order to maintain the strict compositionality of his approach  , Montagucllad to make the interpretation of linguistic entities considerably complex a  . 
For instance , the interpretation of a NP is given as a set of properties  , where a property is a function from indices to set of individuals  . For instance the property " redness " is that function that  , for each index , says what is ted at that index . Of course , this is intuitively acceptable , but why should " John " be interpreted as a set of properties ? It is true that with any person we know we associate a bundle of proper  . .
ties that that person has ( i . eproperties such that the individual denoted by " John " happens to be in their denotation evaluated at this index  )  , but it seems also true that when I say " John " I refer to an individual and not to his properties  ~  . Even more complexistim treatment of NP's in object position  ; for instance the phrase " aunicorn " in ( 1 ) is interpreted as a property of properties , in order to accont for the fact that , loosely speaking , sets have to be evaluated " here and now " and so the set of properties that t  , unicorn has is the same as the set of properties that a cell taurh as  . 
We cannot go in further details here ( more detailed information can be found in \[ Dowry et al  81l   )  , but a couple of questions naturally arises : Is it possible to maintain the basic principles of a possible worlds analysis without introducing the complexities of Montague's in mnsionalogic?Is it possible to introduce an inter-nlediate level in the semantic interpretation process  , which preserves the idea of compositionality ? Recently  , two interesting proposals concerning the semantics of NL have been put forward  . It seems that they can give some suggestions about how to answer the questions above  . We will briefly outline them here , but we must first notice that we do not aim at presenting the philosophical position of those authors  , since the discussion that follows is strongly biased to the views we hold about the  1 This can simply be due to my scarce knowledge about mythology  . If there is a more precise characterization f centaurs  , uch that it is possible to conceive of a world where a being half human and halfhorse is not in the denotation of " centaur "  , then the same situation as " feather less biped " arises  . 
2 We cannot discuss here our disagreement with a conception of syntax that assigns to a sentence as  ( 1 ) two different syntactic stnmtures in order to cope with the socalled spec ~ c and nonspecific readings  ( the one where a particular unicorn is wanted vs . the one where any unicorn could serve John's purpose  )  . We can only note that , in our view , syntax is mainly concerned with surface phenomena  . Note also that in\[Cooper 83\] a Montague-based proposal is presented , that overcomes this difficulty . 
3 Formally , the two alternatives are equivalent if weassura e that no two individuals share the same " total " set of properties  . For this reason , the solution proposed by Montague is perfect , if we assume , a she did , that no intermediate representation of the meaning of linguistic entities is ever built  . In fact , the formulae of intension alloeics are only tools to renresent constraints on oossible worMs  , so tha ~ their complexities was not a matter at hand  . As we will see , our position is different . 
37 B topic a that uL
The first proposal is " Situation semantics " by Barwise and Perry  1183\]  . They view the meaning of a sentence as a relation between the discourse situation  ( who are the speaker , the addressee , etc . ), the connections of the speaker ( i . e . its relationships with the environmenl ) , and a described situation ( the event , or " type of event " , which is being described ) . What is flm damental , in our view , is the rejection o1' truth values as " senses " of sentences . This move accounts for the non- . equivalence of attitude reperts involving logically eqtdvalent embedded sentences  . For instance ,   ( 3 ) John knows that two plus two is fonr is not the same as  ( 4 )   . io hn knows that the square of 37 is 1369 although bt , th facts are necessary lruths ( with respects to the difference Imtween meaning and intension  , see also \[ Lewis 72\]) . 
Also important is the exploitatio of what is called  , ' esource situation in the interpretation of constituent of sentences  . In the present concern ~ we . can fix our attention on NP's . Let ItS consider , for example , the meaning of defufite noun phrases : " We can also think of  . d , c\[then\] 4 as giving a partial function fi'um situations e to individuals a ~  , : d , c\[t beu\]re ) is defined and = ae iff d , c\[tileu\]a , ,e " IBarwise & Perry 8L pp . 1 49-150\] where the latter means that in the context where tile expression is evaluated tb ~" rehttionar ' meaning of uumst single out exactly one individual  . If we have available a particula resource situation  , then we get an individual ( a , ,) , but if such at context is not awdlable , then the interpretation of the NP is just the non -evaluated function fi'om situations to individuals  . In the lirst case , we get the referential ( or value-loaded ) use , since any predicate the sentence x pressesiabout the referred individual  ( a  ~ , ) ; in the second case we get the attributive ( or value-free ) use ; what is the predicate about in this case ? It will be about the eventual  ( possible , future , fictional ) fillet " of rite description . 
The simples l way to obtain such are su his to incorporate the description of the individual into tile inler pretalion of the sentence  , so that , wheneverth . ~ actual fillet " will be avaiht ble , the predicate will be true of it . This approach does not seem to us in contrast with a possible worlds analysis : in each such a world there will be all individual denoted by the definite CX l  ) ression ( possibly different individuals at different indices  )  ; thus , the property of satisfying rite description will imply the property expressed by the predicate  . In any case , theiuterpretatior , of sentences on the basis of some specific contextual situation suggests that the context is made explicit  , in particular the connections of the speaker ; of course , in an " nnderstanding " system ( be it a human or a computer ) such counectious are , at best , presumed , that is the hearer must " imagine " the connections ontire basis of a " shared " environment or whatever she/he knows about tile speaker  . More important , in case the hearer is a machine , no real sharing of environment can be assumed , so that it must use an " internal " representation of the outer context  ; In the present work , this representation is available in terms of general world knowledge  ( represented in a KL . .ONE like format ) , plus the history of the user-machine dialogue carried on so far  . 
Another piece of research that must be taken into flc coant con-corns mental apaces \[ Fauconnier  8511  . This framework provides us with a tool for representing the relationships between the individuals mentioned in a sentence and their particular view of reality  . We believe that this is one of tire most common nses of the pro-theoretical notion of possible world  . Of course , tile knowledge , the beliefs , the opinions , the desires of different persons are not the same  , and when we want to understand natural language we must try to model these differences  . Althoughmental spaces are not claimed to be such a modelling techniques  , nonetheless they seem useful in modelling the process that leads to the construction of rite correct interpretation  6  . 
4" d " stmtds for the discourse situation , c for the " connections " , "\[ the 1?\]" for file meaning of ' the ' g' , " e " for the described situation . 
This paper does not present an implementation f the mental spaces approach  , but uses one of the basic ideas of that work : some linguistic on texts " setup " local spaces that constrain the meaning of the entities occurring in them  . So , a mental space represents a local view of linguistic entities  , that may be used to isolate the ( referred ) beliefs , desires , etc . , of the mentioned individuals . 
It should be clear from the above discussion that we are not adopting in full any of the positions of the reviewed works  . It seems , however , that each of them can have a strong impact on the overall framework  . Thus , an adaptation of mental spaces can help in modelling the process of building the meaning of sentences  ; a " situational " analysis can help in unde , ' standing how such a meaning must merge wifll the environment  ; a possible world approach can provide the basic insights about the tinal result of the interpretation  . This paper is mainly concerned whh the first of these three aspects  . 
2 . OVERVIEW ( IF THEPt lENOMEN A TO MODEL This paper is concerned with the interpretation of noun phrases and in particular with NP's occurring in intensional  ( or opaque ) contexts and to the dichotomy existing between value-loaded and value-flee interl  ) retations . The final goal is to show bow the formalism of lri-e on cepts  ( introduced in \[ Di Euge , tio & I . esmo87\]) , extended in a suitable wily , accounts for tile phenomena under study . 
Particularly r clov autiil the present context seem tile works by Fawcett and Hirst  \[19861 and Kronfeld \[1986\]  . The theoryoulined in \[ Fawcett & Ilirst 1986\] implies the existence of seven different readings of the sentence  ( 5 ) Nadia wanls at loglike Ross's Those readings depend on three different parameters : I  ) Transparent ( dere ) vs . opaque ( de dicto ) II ) Source of description ( the agent , i . e . Nadia , vs . the speaker ) Ill ) Time of application ( present vs . future vs . repeated ) We believe that only three readings are directly related to the informational conleut of the sentence  , since neither the source of the description , n ( ~ r the time of applicatious cent to be among the con-corns of the sentence itself  . For instance , leawcett and Hirst distinguish betweeu a ) Transparent reading , agent's description ( Nadia says " I want that dog , which is just like Ross's " . The speake reports this as ( 5 ) perhaps without being familiar wilh
Ross's dog ) b ) Transparent reading , speaker's description ( Nadia says " I want that dog " , and t be speaker , who knows
Ross's dog , reports this as in (5)).
The problem is that ( 5 ) does not seem to be concerned with what Nadiror the spe  . ' tkerknow about Ross's dog ; it only assumes that " a dog like Ross's " is a description wtlid for the bearer of  ( 5 ) so that it can enable him to huild an internal representation of what Nadir wants  . On the other hand ( 5 ) ceaainly involves a description of Nadia's desires  ; taking this into account , a perspicuous representation should be able to characterize those desires more precisely : Does Nadia wants a dog of a kind that casually happens I o be the same kind of Ross's dog ? Or the dog she wants must be oftl nlt kind just because it is the same kind of Ross's dog ? In other words how relevant is the description ? The relevance of description seems to be one of the central concerns of the work described in \[ Kronfeld  86\]  . In that paper , a computational model of reference is provided , and definite descriptions outside intensional contexts are considered  . Some examples are : s " The conslruction of space should not be over-interpreted  . They are not representations freal it !? or of partial ' possible worlds '  . Ill particular , a belief space ( ' Maxbelieves ' ) is not a belie for state of belief ; at most , it is a way of talking about belief~7\[~conuier   85  , p . 1 521   6 " The space lements are not referred to by expressions of language  ; they are setup , identified , etc . , and may then be used for purposes of reference ( or possibly purported reference )  , tIowever , this distinction has an obvious and yet nontrivial consequence : theories of refarence based on the use of language cannot by passmen -halspaces  ; they will have to for sake I heidea of a direct link between linguistics trec-tares and referents aod take into account the important intennediate process of space construction "  . \[ Fauconnier 85, p . 158\]  ( 7 ) The winner of the race will get $10000 Let's consider ex . (6): traditionally , "Smith's murderer " can be used referentially in ease the speaker " knows " who is the murderer  ; otherwise , it must be used attributively ( i . e . when " who everhe is " is appropriate ) 7 . Note that , even in case the speaker does not have any clue about the identity of the culprit  , still the expression refers to a single , well defined individual . In fact , one of the accomplices of the murderer , after hearing a police man say ( 6 ) on a TV interview , could report that as " Hey , Bob , he told that you are in sane " . Analogously , the fact that no winner of the race exists yet does not mean that the reference in  ( 7 ) is not definite or precise , since the " role " of winner is uniquely defined even when the race has not been run  . Again , if Fredwins , it is possible to report ( 7 ) telling him " You will get $10000" . 
Notice , however , that in both examples the reports are correct but not precise  , since they fail to convey the " reason why " the thing reported is true  , So it seem stous that : in " attributive " readings there is a component of meaning concerning some kind of dependency  ( Causality ? )  8 . It is worth noting that this proposal is completely compatible with Barwise and Perry's  . In \[ Barwise & Perry 83\] , in case of attri-butive reading , the description must be evaltmted in all the situations which contain an individual who matches such a description  . That means that the assertion made about tiffs description must be relevant in all these situations  . This implicitly states that there is a sort of dependency connection between the description and the assertion  , and that this connection is valid in all possible situations which contain an individual satisfying the description  . What we aim to show is that the distinction between attributive and referential readings provides us with an important criteriun a that also affects intensional readings  . 
We believe that the two " opaque " readings we envisioned earlier are distinguished by means of the same " relevance " crite fium used above  . In classical exaln ples as ( 8 ) Mary wants a dog no relevance criterium can be applied because of the simplicity of the description  . In fitct , if Mary said " I want a nice and faith fol animal  "  , either we assume that , for Mmy , the intension of " nice and f ; tilbful animal " coincide with the intension of " dog "  ( i . e . in all possible worlds the two expressions denote the same set of individuals  ) or the report is not accurate . On the contrary , we could assume that " a dog like Ross's"is right only in this world  ( in any world she wants the same kind of dog , which is the same as the kind of dog that Ross owns in this world  ) or in every world ( whichever is the kind of dogRoss owns , in any world , Nadilt wants to have one of the same kind ) . 
Let's consider one more example to make the point clearer  ( see\[Fau-connier 85 , pp . 45-46\]):-George says : " The winne , ' will go to Hong Kong "- The speaker assumes that " the winner " and " the best dancer " are equivalent descriptions  ( or " equal roles in the speaker's mental space " in Fauconnier ' ste  , ' ms ) -The speaker says " George thinks the best dancer will go to Hong 

We claim that the speaker's report is incorrect ( although sincere )  , contrarily to what Fauconnier assumes , because in an " attitude " context ( as " thinks " in the present example and " wants " in the previous case  ) what must be correctly modelled is the attitude of the agent  . 
The speaker's description always has a subsidiary role : the one of describing correctly the mental state of the agent  . 
3. LAY OUT OF THE SYSTEM
TNs short section provide some information about the overall organization of the system which the semantic interpreter is a part of  . 
The GULL ( General Understander of Likely Languages ) system works on the Italian language and is based on production fles  . The syntactic structures are represented as dependency trees  , where all nodes , and not only the leaves are associated with surface words  . For 7 What " knowing " means in the present context is not very clear  . If the speaker determined the identity of tlSe murderer by finding his driving license near the corpse and this is the only thing he knows about him  , then it can safely be stated that be " knows " who is the murderer  , but still the only possible reading is the attri -butive one  . 
s " Conversationally relevant use " in Kronfeld's terms  . 
380 each subtree- , the root represents the " head " of the constituent and its immediate subtrees are the " modifiers "  . The syntactic production rules say how the tree must be extended when a word of a given syntactic category is analyzed  ( for more details see\[Lesmo&Torasso83 , 85 a , 85 b \]) . 
As soon as the syntactic rules extend the tree , the control is passed over to the semantic rules : they update the semantic representation according to the meaning of the new piece of tree  ( in other words , syntax and semantics operate synchronously and the knowledge sources are separate  )  . Backtracking is not used : whenever the analysis is blocked  , the current situation is inspected by another set of rules  ( " restructuring rules " ) that modify the dependency tree in order to provide a new interpretation  ; then , the analysis is restarted on the new tree . Semantically ambiguous words that belong to the same syntactic ategory ated is anthiguated on the basis of the local context where they appear : no possibility of undoing the choice on the basis of a larger context is currently provided  . The antecedents of the semantic rules pick up any newly entered word  ( the " current node of the tree " ) and match it , together with its surrounding context ( i . e . its mother node and its dependants ) , against the domain knowledge , represented in terms of a KL-ONE-Iike semantic net  , which fulfills the role of the terminological component in an hybrid knowledge representation system  . The access to the net binds stone variables appearing in the antecedent of the rules to nodes of the net  ( concepts )  , which are then used in the consequent o build up the representation that is going to be described  . Of course , the import of noncontent words ( as articles and quantifiers ) is different from the one of content words . In a previous paper \[ Di Eugenio & Lesmo 87\] we described how the introduction of non-atomic nodes called tri-concepts enabled us to deal deterministically with definite and indefinite determiners  . Now , we will see how the problems about intensional contexts described before can be solved  . In parallel , we worked on quantifiers : some results have been presented in \[ Lesmo et al  .  88\] . 
Tim semantic representation built by the interpreter consists in two planes  ( CP : Content Plane ; RP:Reference Plane) . A third plane is used in the drawings to refer to filestabled mnain knowledge  ( the terminological component mentioned above , called SP-Semantic Plane ) . The CP includes a set of nodes and arcs that represent the main assertion and the description of the entities involved in that assertion  ( i . e . the restrictions imposed on them by prepositional phrases  , relative clauses , etc . ) . The RP contains a set of non-atomic structures called RASs  ( Reference Ambiguity Spaces ) composed of a Concept node , an Extension ode , and a Class node ( three aspects of a " concepf ' that are needed to establish the possible referent of a linguistic expression  )  . These structures will not be used often in the present paper  , since they are mote concerned with the representation of articles  . A fourth node can be present in a RAS : it represents a subset of the extension and is used when a specific reading is chosen for definite noun phrases  . On the contrary , since in definite determiners are not used in class assertions  , the Class node does not appear in RAS's associated with indefinite descriptions  . Each RAS is linked to the defining concept of the SP via a SEMREF  ( SEManticRE Ference ) arc . Also in the CP there may appear complex structures  ( DAS : Distributivity Ambiguity Spaces ) : They contain two nodes ( Set and Individuals ) and are used to distinguish between distributive and collective readings  . The arc which connects a node in the CP to its associated RAS in the RP is labelled SAME for definite NPs  ( it simply states that the given node of the CP coincides with the reference node in the RP  )  , I-OF ( Instance-OF ) for indefinite ones . 
In order to simplify the figures , we will use the conventions shown in fig . 1 . Note that the initial representation ( as shown in fig . l ) will be augmented during the processing of the sentence if the NP has specifications  ( e . g . adjectives , relative clauses etc . ) . These specifications are not directly linked to the CP node that refers to the entity but to another node connected to the RAS by a DEF-AS  ( or NAME , if the specification is a proper noun ) arc 9 . 
9 The introduction of a pair of nodes for a unique referent is justified by the need of keeping a partheentity that partecipates in the main predication and the way it is defined  . 
4 . REPRESENTATIONOFINTENSIONAI , CON'FEXTS The main extension to the work reported in\[Di Eugenio & LesnroII'/l consists in the introduction of CONTEXTSPACES  ( CS )  , which enable us to treat the intensional contexts along the lines pro  . .
posed in \[ Fauconnier 85\].
A ContextSpace is a subplane of the CP , which contains a set of nodes and of arc connecting them  . CS are created when particular conditimm occur illtile input sentence  , in our case the presence of an intensional verb . In this case the CS is created and connected to the node which represents the verb in the CP by a SP-BU tLD  ( SPace-BUIL Der ) arc . The fact that the arc leaves a node representing an attitnd in  ; d verb specifies ( it nplicitly ) the type of the CS lO and its generator . The nodes appearing in a CS refer to entities that do not  necessaril7 exist in the enter context ( the CP itself is assumed to correspond to the ott ten nost context  , i . e . it contains terms that have to be interptl ; ted according to the speaker's view of reality , as expressed in the SP ) . A node of a certain CS may refer to a local entity ill that CS or to a counterpart in that CS of an entity of tile outer context  . 
The COUNP ( COUNmrPart ) arc specifies the seeping of nodes in the semantic representation : an mvCOUNP that connects a node NI in a CS  ( say CS1 ) manother node ( say N2 ) external to CS1 states that N2 is a count t . ' tlxtrt of N1 ( or , better , of the entity which NI refers to ) in the outer t ; pace ; on the contrary , a COUNP arc staldng from N1 and entering N1 itself specilies that NI has no counterparts h outer contexts  , i . e . it refers to a local entity of space CS1 . The absence of a COUN Pace leaving from NI represents art ambiguous case in which tile scope of  N1 has not been determined yet . Such ambiguous representation eable us , as we will later see in the paper , to develop a determit fistic attalys is of sentences also in case of dere or de-dicto ambiguity  , Let's show how theses truclnres arensed by means of some of tile previotts examples  . During the interpretalion of sentence ( 5 ) the analysis of the fl'agntent " Nadia wtttt ls " leads to the creation of a new CS  ( CS1 in fig . 2) .   CS1 represent stbe " world of Nadia's desires as mentioned iu the sentence " and is linked to node  N2   ( instance of " to want " ) tlmm ghaSP-BUII . , Darc . Node N3 represents what Nadia wanls as an instantiation of the " dog " concept and is introduced in  CS1 when " adog " is analyzed . Up to this point , lhere presentation must be considered as at n biguous  , sitlce it does not specify which is fire status of  N3 wilh respect Io the speaker's world . In case no further processing is possible , then tile sentence remains ambiguous ( fig . 2 shows the basic ambiguous representation f sentence  ( 5 ) )  ; in other cases , perhaps depending on the context where tile sentence is uttered  , it could be possible to decide whether tile intended reading is  10 Ill I bisp all or we will only deal with " attialdinar ' CS's  . Actually many oth-Er types of C ~ ; ' S may be used to cope with other kinds of linguistic pite ttort t clta  , For example a " temporal " CS may be used to deal with tile ant biguity of " In  1970  , tile president metmy sister " , where " the preside ~ lt " could refer eitherte tile current president or to file person who was president in  1970  . 
" de-m " or " de-dicto " ( also preference criteria could be adopted ; for instance , it seems that , outside any specific context , the preferred reading of ( 5 ) is the intension alone )  ; when such a disambiguation is possible , then the representation is expanded by including a suitable COUNP arc : it will leave fi'om node  N3 and will enter node the same node N3 iu case the reading is intensional , otherwise it will enter a newly-created node outside CSI  ( tile latter alternative is reported in fig . 3) . It is clear that it is the presence of node N8 that relates tlae representation to tire existence  ( in the speaker's world ) of a specific entity wanted by Nadia , contrarily to what happens in the intensional reading  , where no node ( referring to a dog ) existing outside CS1 is linked to N3 . 
As stated above , two different " intension ar'readings can be obtained for sentence  ( 5 ) depending on the relevance of tile description . The representation we obtained till now corresponds to the purely referential l'eading of  ( 5 )   ( actually , this use of " l~eferential " is slighhy inappropriate  , but the previous discussion should enable tile reader to in tm pretit correctly  )  . If we want to represent the " attrihit-rive " reading wetnust add something to the Stl 't Jcture  ; what we need is a specification of the " dependency " of the statement made through the utterance on the description used  . To this aim we include the WIllS ( WH-ever IS ) arc , as shown in fig . 4 . At this point , the import of this arc shot fld be clear . 
The proposed formalism enables the system to operate deterministically  , i . e . to build the liual representation without destroying strttctures built previously  ( this was one of the goals of the introduction of tri-concepts  , as explained in \[ Di Eugenio & Lesmo87\]) . In fact the system builds a basic ambiguous representation  ( as shown in lig . 2 for sentence ( 5 ) ) which is possibly expanded with the introduction of new arcs when sotned is ant biguation is possible  . Of course , the insertion of suitable arcs does not modify the set of nodes initially stored in the CS's  , which remain stable ( perhaps expanded ) throughout he analysis . As regards the disant biguation criteria , it does not seem that there are general roles for choosing one interpretation or tile o/her  . Of course , if the verb does not open an intensional context , then no problem arises ( the CS is not created ) Jr ; On the con-traly , if we consider a verb as " seek " , it sectns that only the object NP can provide the clues to select one particular reading  ; in " Mary is seeking a street " , the preferred reading certainly is non -intensional  ; in " Mar5' is seeking a fl'i end " still seems to be preferable to assume the existence of apt u ' ticular fliend  ; on the contraly , in " Mary is seeking aftmding " there seem 1o be few doubts thai the funding does not exist yet  . We are currently trying to build heuristic roles , based on nominal hierarchies appearing in the terminological component of an hybrid knowledge representatiott formalisnt  , able to suggest a particular reading . Moreover , subsequent sentences may provide further disant bi -guation criteria  . Consider the example in \[ Fauconnier 851, peg . 57: (9) Ursula wants to marry antillion aire . 
Wennty obtain different readings depending on the subsequent sentences :  ( t0 ) lie is really a eon-nlan leads to a dere ( referential ) interpretation , while ( 11 ) But she won't thl done indicates a de-dit to reading t br sentence  ( 9 )  . 
Concep ~ T@P ' ~
RAS ? ode
Exte\[lslon ~"

Possible ~

DAS ~ ~ ~' ~' ~, Individuals
C~'~ . ,'4 . . * Atomic Node Node . . . . . . ( l lotl-nnlbiguous)

Fig , 1 - Basic structures used in the representation A linal point concerns the use of the proposed representation in the subseqt tent phase of irtter pretation  . Generally , the search fortile correct referent in the discourse history is led by the presence of a RAS in the RP and by its incoming  ( I-OF or SAME ) and outcoming ( a DEF-AS arc which connects it with the representation of the referent's description  ) arcs . An indefinite specific reference ( for exatnple " adog " in " a dog is eating meat  "  ) causes the creation of a new entity , since the assumption is that indefiuites are used when the referent is not identitiable by the reader  . On the contrary definite specilic reference ( for example " the dog " in " the dogiseating meat "  ) leads to the search . for the entity referred to into the discourse history l : ~ nActually  , the verb of the sentence is exatnined in all cases  , since tile presence of some auxiliaries folx ; es the creation of an intensional context ; consider , for iastaoce : " Y outllusl reserve a seat " , " I will build a lable " . Of course , these verbs , when used in the past tense do not have any intensional characterization  . 
l : ~ Obviously , many other types of references are possible ? For a complete analysis of referential problem connected with tile semantic of determiner see\[ Di 
Eagenio & l~esmo87\], onto this environment . When a RAS is referred to by a node Nk through an  1-OF arc ( in definite specific reference ) the possible presence of Nk in a CS ( say CS1 ) may be detected . If this is the case , node Nk must be inspected : if it has a COUNP arc  , pointing to a node of the external context , then the usual creation process is executed ; otherwise Nk refers to an entity which is local to CS  1 and has no counterparts in the external worid . So we need an interpretation which blocks any infet ~ ence on the entity associated to the node in the external world  . This result can be obtained by copying the whole CS in the Iinal network representing the discourse history  , and so biding its internal node to the external context  . 
Let us specify now the interpretation of the WHIS arc  . As stated above , when a RAS is refet Ted to by a node Nk through a SAME arc  ( definite specific reference )  , an entity satisfying the description ( represented by a Nj node of the CP connected to the RAS through a DEF+AS arc  ) is searched for in the discourse history network . In fact , in this case , we only have to cope with " the functional relevancy of the description "\[ Kronfeld  86\]   ( i . e . its ability to convey in folx nation leading to the identification of the correct referent  )  . But what does it happen if we also have to account for conversational relevancy  , i . e . , what is the interpretation if a WHIS arc connecting the description odeNj to the node Nk exists ? In this case the usual searching for the referent is delayed  . Both node Nk and its description ( represented by the WHI Sate and by the subnet of CP whose head is Nj  ) are entered in the discourse history network . 
In this way the description itself becomes part of the final representation of the sentence  ( as stated in \[ Barwise & Perry 83\] )  . Moreover the presence of an arcWHIS in the final network states that the node entered must not be considered as the referent of the sentence hut rather as a " role "  ( see\[Fauconnier85\] ) which may assume different values in different worlds  ( i . e . in different CS's ) . In fact , different referents for the descriptiort may be detected by the usual searching process in the CS 's and this leads to different inferences  ( different assignments of referents to the " role " )  . 
NAME 8~r
ROSS-'qEJ
Fig . 2 - Basic ambiguous representation of the sentence " Nadia wants a dog like Ross's "  . 
SP-BUII_D ~ X ~ N~j ~ .   .   .   . L , KEj ( . bFig . 3 - Representation in the CP of the transparent reading of the sentence " N a dir wants a dog like Ross's " ~ lPN~T  8p  - . _k .   .   .   . - - - - , , , ? m
WHISN4@
Fig . 4 - Representation in the CP of the opaque attributive reading of the sentence " Nadia wants a doglike Ross's  . 

A final remark is needed : for the sake of simplicity we stated that the relevancy of tile description must be detecte during the analysis of the input sentence  , independently from the subsequent interpretation process  . Actually the strategy of the system is quite more flexible  , because also the interpretation process , merging tile semantic representation f the sentence and the discourse history network  , supplies further information about the relevancy of a given description  . For example , when the sentence does not include sufficient information to choose between referential and attributive reading  )  , the absence in the discourse history of a referent litting the description  ( detecte during tile final process of interpretation  ) forces an attributive reading . 
5. CONCLUSIONS
We have described a semantic network formalism that is able to cope w if ll the problems arising when NP's occur as objects of verbs inducing an intensional context  . Themp , esentation preserves in an easily a , -cessible format all information needed to distinguish among the lU  ) ssible readings , and the construction of tilenet can be carried on  ( eterministically ( see the discussion of paragraph 3 and note that di : ~ ambiguating among different readings only consists in adding arcs to existing subnets  )  , l lowever , some problem still have to be solved concerning the final representation btained by the process of mew  , ing the meaning of the sentence under analysis with the discourse hi ~ tory  . Actually , the " assertional " cmnponent of hybrid lortnalisms  ( see , for-instance , \[Brachman et al83\] ) does r to tlend itself to handling intensional objects created uting  . ~ heanalysis . As stated above , we have structured the assel , ional component providing facilities for copying the subnetworks containing the description of intensional entities into it  . Ontire other hand , some work still has to be made in , rd cr to provide such a component with a clear semantics  . 
We believe that basic insights can be found in the SNePS system\[Maida & Shapiro  821  , \[Shapiro & Rapaport 86\] , where the proposed organization meet , smore clearly the requirements set forth by the existence  o1' intension alolrjects . 
The version of the interpreter described in this paper is implemented in FRANZLISP and runs on a SUN workstation under the UNIX operating system  . The maintenance of tim discourse history and the merging process is currently under implementation  . 

This work has partially been fimded by tile Ministem dellal'nbblicaIstmzione of Italy  , within the project " Software Architectures for lnt dligentSystems "  . We must thank Kaivon Luck and his colleagues of the Technische Universita et Berlin  , for having put at our disposal BACK , a hybrid Knowledge representation system whose terminological component has been used to implement the Semantic Plane  . The second author ( Paolo Terenziani ) acknowledges Regione Piemonte , Proget to Finalizza to Sanita' , that provided the funds for his Research Assistantship  . 
REFERENCES\[Barwise & Peny83\]l . Barwise , J . Perry : Situations and Attitudes . 
MIT Press (1983).
\[Brachman et al83\]R . J . Brachman , R . E . Fikes , H . J . Levesque : KRYP-TON : Integrating Terminology and Assertion  . Proc . AAAI-83,
Washington , D.C . (1983) 3135.
\[Cooper83\]R . Cooper : Quantification and Syntactic Theory . 
D . Reidel Publ . Co . (1983).
\[ Di Eugenio & Lesmo87\] B . DiEngenio , L . Lesmo : Representation and Interpretation of Determiners in Natural Language  . Proc . 
lOth IJCAI , Milano (1987) 648-654.
\ [ Dowty et al81\]D . R . Dowty , R . E . Wal I , S . Peters : Introduction to Montague Semantics . D . Reidel Publ . Co .  (1981) . 
\[Fauconnier85\]G . Faueonnier : Mental Spaees . MIT Press (1985) . 
\[Fawcett&Hirst86\]B . Fawcett , G . Hirst : The Detection and Representation of Ambiguities in kntension and l  ) escription . 
Proc . 24th Annual Meeting of the AcL ; New York (1986) 192-199 . 
\[Kro , ffeld86\]A . Kronfeld : Donnellan's Distinction and a Colnpnta -tional Model of Reference  . Proc . 24th Annual Meeting of the
ACL , New York (1986) 186-191.
\[Lesmo & Torasso83\]L . Lesmo , P . Torasso : A Flexible Natural Language Parser Based on a Two-level Representation f Syntax :  . Proe . 1st Meeting of European Chapter of ACL , Pisa (1983) 114-121 . 
\[ Lesmo & Torasso85a \] L . Lesmo , P , To rasso : Amdysis of Conjunctions in a Rulebased Parser  . Proe . 23rd Annual Meeting of
ACL , Chicago (1985) 180-187.
\[Lesmo & Torasso85b \] L . Lesmo , P . To rasso : Weighted Interaction of Syntax and Semantics in Natural Language Analysis  . Proe . 9th
IJCAI , Los Angeles (1985) 772-778.
\[Lesmo et al88\]L . Lesmo , M . Berfi , P . Terenziani : ANetwm'k For-realism for Representing Natural Language Quantifiers  . 1' roe . 
ECAI88, Muenchen ( August 1988).
\[Lewis72\]D . Lewis : General Semantics . In D . Davidsnn , G Harman : Setnantics of Natural Language . D . Reidel Publ . Co .  (1972) 169-218 . 
\[ Maida & Shapiro82\]A . S . Maida , S . C . Shapiro:\[ntensional Concepts in Propositional Semantic Networks  . Cognitive Science 6 (1982) 291-330 . 
\[Shapiro & Rapaport86\]S . C . Shapiro , W . J . Rapaport : SNePS Considered as a Fully Intensional Propositional Semantic Network  . 
Proc . AAAI-86, Philadelphia (1986) 278-283.

