GENERATING CONNECTIVES
Michael Elhadad
Kathleen R . McKeown
Department of Computer Science
450 Computer Science Building
Columbia University
New York , N.Y . 10027



We present an implemented procedure to select an appropriate connective to link two propositions  , which is part of a large text generation system . Each connective is defined as a set of constraints between features of flxe propositions it connects  . Ore ' focus has been to identify pragmatic features flint can be produced by a deep generator to provide a simple representation f connectives  . Using these features , we can account for a variety of connective usages  , and we can distinguish between similar connectives  . We describe how a sur-fi ~ ee generator can produce complex sentences when given these features in input  . The selection procedure isirn plemented as part of a large functional unification gralm nar  . 
1. INTROI ) UCTION : MOTIVATION
A language % ~: . eration system that produces complex sentences must be able to determine which connective  ( e . g . , " but , "" although /'" since , "" because , "" and , " etc . ) best links its embedded sentences . Previous text generation systems ( McKeown ,  1985 , Mann ,  1984 , Davey ,  1979 , Hovy ,  1987 )   1 have generally used a notion similar to rhetorical relations to describe the connection between propositions  . They make a one-to-one mapping from these relations to connectives for generation  ( for example , the relation " opposition " would be realized by the connective " but "  )  . In this approach it is difficult to distinguish between similar comlectives  ( e . g . , because vs . since or but vs . although ) . These connectives cannot be used interchangeably  , however , and a generation system must be able to make the correct choice  . 
In this paper , we describe a model for connective choice which distinguishes between similar connectives  . 
It is based on a representation futterances - called " interpretative fommt "  ( IF )   ( Elhadad & McKeown ,  1988 ) -which captures several dimensions of their usage  . We present an implemented procedure to select an appropriate connective given IFs for two propositions  . We demonstrate how our surface generator uses I\] :s to choose between the four connectives but  , although , since and because . 
1 From published reports , we assume these are the primary genera-fi on systems that make any attempts at connective g neration  . 
Each connective is described as a set of constraints between the features of the propositions it connects  . 
This allows for a simple representation f the connective but one that captures a wide variety of different uses  . An IF contains four pragmatic features in addition to the propositional content and speech act of the proposition : argumentative orientation  ( Duerot ,  1983) , the set of conclusions that the proposition supports  ; functional status ( Sinclair & Coulthard ,  1975 , Roulet et al ,  1985) , its structural relationship to the remaining discourse segment  ; polyphonic features ( Ducrot ,  1983) , indicating whether the speaker attributes the utterance to himsel for to others  ; and a the matization procedure , which describes the connection between discourse n-tities in the propositions  . Connective selection is implemented through constraint satisfaction using a functional unification grammar  . 
2. PREVIOUSWORKONCONNECTIVE
DESCRIPTION
The most basic constraint on connection is often referred to as homogeneousness condition : two propositions can be conjoined if " they have something in common  . " Which features of the conjuncts must be homogeneous is a difficult question :  ( Chomsky ,  1957 , p . 36 ) stated a constraint on syntactic homogeneousness ( conjuncts must be " of the same type " )  ; a purely syntactic constraint is , however , largely insufficiento satisfy the needs of a text generation system  , since file decision to conjoin must be made before the syntactic structure of the conjuucts is determined  . ( Lakoff ,  1971 ) proposed a semantic approach to the problem of homogeneousness:conjuncts must have a " common topic " for conjunction to be possible  ( p .  118) . Based on this definition of homogeneousness , she distinguished between a " semantic " meaning of " but "  ( to express a semantic opposition ) and a pragmatic usage of " but " ( to deny expectations )  , for eases which would not satisfy the homogeneousness constraint  ( e . g . , " John is rich but dumb ") . Such a distinction between a semantic and a pragmatic analysis of connector sicriticized in  ( Abraham ,  1979 , p . 104) ( Lang ,  1984 , pp 172ff ) and ( Ducrot et al 1980) . Lang ( 1984 ) presents a general semantics for conjunction that does not distinguish between pragmatic  ( or contextual ) and semantic levels . 
Lang attributes to conjunctions an operative semantics : conjunctions ' meanings are sets of " instructions " fbr " carrying out certain mental operations "  ( p .  96) 2 . The ~ A similar operative approach is advocated in Ducrot  ,  1983 )   1   97 meaning of connectors is a " program " that controls how a " common integrator " can be constructed from the meaning of each conjunct  . In our work , we use a similar approach for the definition of connectives  , but , since we work on generation ( as opposed to interpretation )  , we describe the meaning of connectives assets of constraints hat must be satisfied between the conjuncts as opposed to " instructions  . " We use the notion of the matization procedure to account for the homogeneousness condition  ( of . Section 5) . In this paper , we concentrate on the distinctions between similar connectives rather than on the general properties of the class of connectives  . 
Work on the structure of discourse ( Cohen ,  1984 , Reichman ,  1985 , Grosz & Sidner ,  1986 ) has identified the role of connectives in marking structural shifts  . This work generally relies on the notion that hearers maintain a discourse model  ( which is often represented using stacks )  . Connectives give instructions to the hearer on how to update the discourse model  . For example , " now " ( Hirschberg & Litman ,  1987 ) can indicate that the hearer needs to push or pop the current stack of the model  . When used in this manner , connectives are called " cue ( or clue ) words . " This work indicates that the role of connectives i not only to indicate a logical or conceptual relation  , but also to indicate the structural organization of discourse  . The distinction between cue and non-cue usages is an important one  , and we also attempt to capture cue usages , but the structural indication ( which often has the form of just push or pop ) under-constrains the choice of a cue word - . it does not control how to choose among the many markers indicating a pop  . 
Halliday ( Halliday ,  1985 ) proposes that the connection between clauses can be described on three dimensions : taxis  , expansion and projection . This model is implemented in the Nigel system ( Mann & Matthiessen ,  1983) . It provides a finegrained classification of a broad set of connectives  . However , labels used to describe the type of relation between two propositions within the expansion system are similar to rhetorical relations and precise definitions of these relations  , to date , have tended to be subjective . 
Like Halliday , we also attempto provide a finegrained characterization f connectives and our model has features that are similar to Halliday's tccds and projection systems  . However , the use of argumentative features and a the matization procedure allows us to avoid reliance on rhetorical relations  . 
Our work is influenced by work in pragmatics on implicature  ( Levinson ,  1983 , Karttunen & Peters ,  1979 ) which proposed a two-level representation f utterances  ( propositional content and implicatures )  . It is also based on a " multidimensional " description of utterances and describes connectives as devices acting on each pragmatic dimension  . 
" But " and " although " can be distinguished by their influence on the discom~estructure in which they are embedded  . We draw upon a theory of conversation organization common in conversation analysis  ( Sinclair & Coulthard ,  1975 , Taylor and Cameron , 1987 ~ Roulet et al 1985 , Moeschler , 1986) to explain this distinction . 
The model describes conversation as a hierarchical structure and defines three levels of constituents : speech acts  , move and exchange . A move corresponds to a turn of a speaker in a conversational exchange between two or more speakers  . It is made up of several speech acts . 
In the structure of a move , one speech act is dh'ective ; all others are subordinate-they modify or elaborate the directive act  ( Roulet et al 1985 )  . Intuitively , the directive act is the reason why the speaker started speaking  . It constrains what can follow the move in the discourse  . While a move may consist of several sub ~ ordinate speech acts in addition to the directive act  , the directive controls the possibilities for successive utterances  . Thus , it detemfines what is accessible in the structure of the preceding discourse  . 
To see how this characterization f discourse can explain the distinction between " but " and " although  , " consider the following examples : ( 1 ) * He failed the exam , althoughe is smart . Let's hire him . 
(2) He failed the exam , but he is smart . Let's hire him . 
In both (1) and (2) , the first sentence x presses a contrastive r lation between two propositions  . But , the fill sequence (2) is coherent , whereas the sequence ( 1 ) sound speculiar in most situations . This can be ex~plained by the fact that in " P but Q " Q has directive status while in " P although Q  , " Q has subordinate status . In (2) then , " he is smart " has directive status , whereas in (1) it is subordinate . Therefore , the argumentative o6entation of the complex sentence as a whole in ( l ) is the argument a tive orientation of " he failed the exam " and it is the argumentative orientation of " he iss mart " in  ( 2 )  . The conclusion ( let'shire him ) is only compatible with " heiss in ai ,  . " This distinction is similar to Halliday's taxis system  ( the classic subordinate/coordinate distinction ) but operates at a different level . Although " but " is a conjunction , meaning that P and Q have the same syntactic status  , P and Q have a different influence on the following discourse  . We therefore require the input to the surface generator to indicate the " point " of a move  , but to leave the syntactic status of each proposition unspecified  . This more delicate decision is made by the surface generator  . 
4. DISTINCTION BECAUSE/SINCE :
POLY PHONICFEATURES " Because " and " since ''3 have the same argumen-3? DISTINCTION BUTVS . ALTHOUGH :
FUNCTION ALSTATUS 3we consider only the causal meaning of " since " here 98   2 tative behavior and give the same fnnctional status to the propositions they connect  . Their different usages can be explained using Ducrot's theory of polyphony  ( Duerot ,  1983) . Duerot distinguishes between the speaker and the utterers : in an utterance  , some segments present beliefs held by the speaker  , and others present beliefs reported by the speaker  , but attributed to others-then tterers . 
Using this theory , the difference between " because " and " since " is as follows : in the complex " P since Q  , " the segments P and Q can be attributed to different utterers  ( " since " is polyphonic )  , whereas in " P because Q , " they must be attributed to the same utterer ( " because " is monophonic )  . 
Others have described " because " and " since " by noting distributional differences such as :  1  . To answer a " why " question , only " beocause " works:
Ai Why did Peter leave ?
B : Because he had to catch a train.
B :* Since he had to catch a train.
2 . " Because " has a tendency to follow the main clause while " since " has a tendency to precede it  ( Quiak et al 1972 ,  11 . 37) . 
3 . " because "- elauses can be the focus of cleft sentences  ( Quirk et al 1972 ) :
It is because he helped you that I'm prepared to help him  . 
* It is since he helped you that I'm prepared to help him  . 
The given/new distinction gives one interpretation f these differences : " because " introduces new information  , whereas " since " introduces given inibrmation ( where given is defined as information that the listener already know sor has accessible to him  ( Halliday ,  1985)) . Halliday also indicates that , in the umnarked ease , new information is placed towards the end of the clause  . And indeed " because " appears towards the end , then n marked position of new intbn nation , and " since " towards the beginning . " Because " can be the focus of an It-cleft sentence which is also characteristic of new information  ( of ( Prince , 1978) for example ) . 
'' Because " can answer a why-question , thus providing new information to the asker . Present in given information in response could not serve as a direct answer  . 
There are many different types of given information  , however ( Prince ,  1981) . Polyphony is one type of given information but it adds an additional parameter : each piece of given information is attributed to a particular utterer  . That utterer can be one of the speakers ( this is similar to indirect speech )  , or it can be a mutually known previous discourse . The ability to distinguish how the " since " clause is given  ( i . e . , which utterer contributed iit ) is crucial to correct use of sentences like ( 3 )  . 
From a father to his child: ( 3 ) Since you are sotired , you must sleep . 
in (3) , the speaker presents the hearer as the source of " you are tired  , " and uses the fact that the hearer has previously uttered this sentence as the argument for " you must sleep  . " If the hearer is not the source of the sentence , this strategy cannot convince him to go to sleep . Given/new in this ease is therefore a polyphonic distinction  , and polyphony provides an addedimension to the distinction  . 
In summary , " because " and " since " have the same argumentative and functional status definitions  , but they have different polyphonic definitions . " Because " requires P and Q to have the same utterers  , while " since " does not . 
5; . THEMATIZATION PROCEDURE :
CUEVS . NON-CUEUSAGE
As mentioned in Section 2 , the most basic constraint on the use of all connectives  , is that the two related proposition say something about the same " thing "  ( Lakoff ,  1971 , p . l18) . It must be possible to find a discourse entity that is mentioned in both P and Q for a connection PcQ to be acceptable  . We call the set of discom~entities mentioned in an utterance the theme of a proposition  . The constraint is that the themes of P and Q intersect  . For example , in (2) " he failed the exam but he is smart , " the entity in common is the person refel Ted to by " he " in both P and Q  . In simple cases , this common entity can be found among the participants in the process described by the proposition  . In many cases , however , the common entity cannot be found in the propositional contents of P and Q  , and yet the connection is coherent as shown in ( 4 )  ,  (5) , and (6) . 
(4 ) Are yougoing to the post office ?- because I have some letters to send\[i  . e . , I ask this because . . . \] ( Quirk et al 1972, p . 752) (5) He paid for the book , because I saw him\[i . e . , I claim that because . . . \] ( Quirk et al 1972, p . 559) (6) A : where is she ?
B : Sheissick , since you want to know everything . 
\[i . e . , I talk because you insist . . . \]  ( Roulet et al 1985 ) We explain these connections by introducing the notion of the matization procedure  . The elements of the theme are not limited to the entities mentioned in the propositional content of a proposition  . They can also be derived from other aspects of an utterance  . In (4) and (5) , the theme contains the speech act realized in P : " because " justifies the fact that the locut or asked a question or asserted knowing something  , and not the fact asserted or questioned . We say that " because " links on the speech act rather than on the propositional content  . The SA thematization procedure adds the feature Speech-Act : to the theme of the proposition Q  . In (6) , " since " links on the Utterance Act : the fact that Butters " sheissick " is justified by A's insistence on knowing everything  ( note that " since " does not justify the assertion but the fact that B is speaking at all  )  . 
It is characteristic of cei ~ ain connectives to allow  3   99   ; ; Polyphonic mention of a known principle : use since Since turning the switch to the left causes the power to decrease  , the transmission capacity decreases . 
; ; Explanation by a new fact : use because The transmission capacity decreases because you turn the switch to the left  . 
; ; Subordinate act is an imperative-use but Replace the battery  , but keep the old battery . 
; ; Subordinate act can be syntactically subordinate -use although Although you replaced the battery  , keep the old battery . 
F igure6-1: System generated complex clauses linking on certain features or not-that is  , to allow the use of a certain the matization procedure  .   ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) show that " because " allows the use of the Speech Act thematization procedure and  ( 6 ) shows that " since " allows the use of the utterance act procedure  . We currently use the following the matization procedures in our implementation : Propositional Content  , Argumentative Derivation , Functional Status , Speech Act and Utterance

In a complete text generation system , the " deep component ''4 given certain information to convey , decides when it is possible to make some of it implicit by using a certain the matization procedure  . The effect is to remove certain discoups entities from the propositional content to be generated  . Using a non-PC thematization procedure therefore allows to implicitly discuss certain features of an utterance that may be difficult to address explicitly  . The deep module we are currently developing ( Elhadad , 1990a ) will use politeness constraints ( Brown & Levinson ,  1987 ) to decide which thematization is most appropriate . 
CUEVS . NON-CUEUSAGE : The matization procedures allow us to distinguish cue and non-cue usages of connectives  . When a connective links on a feature that is not the propositional content  , it does not affect he truth conditions of the propositions  , at least in the traditional view . This suggests that noncontent linking is in some ways similar to the cue/non-cue distinction discussed in section  2  . Our approach does therefore capture this distinction  , but with several differences . It describes the structural move performed by the connective  ( whedler it is a push or a pop , for example ) using features of the " nonnal " ( i . e . , non-cue ) interpretation : if C introduces a directive act , it would work as a " pop , " if it introduces a subordinate act , it would be a " push . " Thus , a cue interpretation faconnective differs from non-cue by the thematization procedure  ; cue usage would be indicated by linking on the functional status  , and possibly speech actor utterance act . 
It remains open whether cue connectives retain all  4Generation systems are generally divided into two modules : a deep module decides what to say and a surface module decides how to say it  . 
other features of non-cue usage : does a connective loose its normal meaning when used as a cue ? Some resear-chers  ( Grosz & Sidner ,  1986 , Hirschberg & Litman ,  1987 ) seem to argue that it does : the cue and non-cue usages are actually two distinct words  . If that is the case , it would be difficult for a generator to choose among the different cue words that can perform the same structural task  . On the other hand , we have no evidence at this point that cue words are not interchangeable  (   . g . , that " but " is used for one kind of pop and " now " another  )  . 
6. IMPLEMENTATION
The procedure for selecting connectives ipart of FUF  , a larger surface generator using the functional unification formalism  ( Elhadad ,  1988 , Elhadad , 1990b , McKeown & Elhadad ,  1990) . Each connective is represented as a functional description capturing the relations between the features of the segments it connects  . Functional unification is well suited for our model because constraints on each pragqnatic dimension can be described separately and the formalism handles interaction between these dimensions  . The generated sentences in Figure 61 typify the kind of sentences our system currently produces  . 
7. CONCLUSIONS
We have presented a model that distinguishes between similar connectives  . This work synthesizes theoretical work in argumentation  ( Anscombre & Ducrot ,  1983) , conversation analysis ( Sinclair & Coul-thard ,  1975 , Roulet et al 1985 , Moeschler ,  1985) , polyphony and given/new studies ( Duerot ,  1983 , Halliday ,  1985 , Prince , 1981) into a coherent computational framework . Connective choice is implemented using functional unification  . 

This work was supported by DARPA under contract # N00039-84-C-0165 and NSF grant IRT-84-51438  . 


Abrahmn , Weruer .  (1979) . BUT . Studia Linguistica,
X X X\[II ( II ), 89-119.
Anseombre , J . C . & Ducrot , O .  (1983) . Philosophie et langage . L ' argumentation clans la langue . 
Bruxelles : Pierre Mardaga.
Brown , P . & Levinson , S . C .  (1987) . Studies in Interactional Sociolinguistics 4 . Politeness : Some universals in language usage . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Chomsky , N .  (1957) . Syntactic Structures . The Hague:

Cohen , R . ( July 1984) . A computational theory of the function of clue words in argument understanding  . Coling 84 . Stanford , California : COLING , 251-258 . 
Davey , A .  (1979) . Discourse Production . Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Ducrot , O .  (1983) . Lesens commun . Le dire et led it . 
Paris : Leseditions de Minuit.
Duerot , O . et al (1980) . Lesens commun . Les roots du discour ~ . Paris : Leseditions de Minuit . 
Elhadad , M .  (1988) . The FUF Functional Unifier : User's manual . Technical Report CUCS-408-88,
Columbia University.
Michael Elhadad .  (1990) . Constraint-based Text Generation : Using local constraints and argumentation to generate a turn in conversation  . Technical Report CUCS-003-90, Columbia University . 
Elhadad , M .  (1990) . Types in Functional Unification Grammars . Proceedings of ACL'90 . Pittsburgh . 
Elhadad , M and McKeown , K . R .  (1988) . What do you need to produce a ' but ' . Technical Report
CUCS-334-88, Columbia University.
Grosz , B . and Sidner , C .  (1986) . Attentions , intentions , and the structure of discourse . Computational
Linguistics , 12(3), 175-204.
Halliday , M . A . K .  (1985) . An Introduction to Functional Grammar . London : Edward Arnold . 
Hirschberg , J . and Litman , D .  (1987) . Now let's talk about Now : identifying clue phrases intonationally  . Proceedings of the 25th Conference oJ " the ACL . Association for Computational Linguistics ,  163-1'71 . 
Eduard Hovy .  (1987) . Generating natural anguage under pragmatic on straints  . Doctoral dissertation,
Yale University.
Karttunen , L . & S . Peters .  (1979) . Convention al hn-plieature . In Oh & Dinneen ( Ed . ), Syntax and Semantics . Vol . 11: Presupposition . New York:
Academic Press.
Lakoff , R .  (1971) . IFs , ANDs and BUTs : about conjunction . In Fillmore & Laugendoen ( Ed . ), Studiesht Linguistic Semantics . New York:
Holt , Rinehart & Winston.
Lang , Ewald .  (1984) . SLCS . Vol . 9: The Semantics of Coordination . Amsterdam : John Benjamins B . V . 
Original edition : Semantic der koordinativen
Verknupfung , Berlin , 1977.
Levinson , S.C . (1983). Pragmatics . Cambridge,
England : Cambridge University Press.
Mann , W . C .  (1984) . Discourse Structure for Text Generation . Teelmical Report ISI/RR-84-127 , h-formation Sciences Institute . 
Mann , W . C . and Matthiessen , C .  (1983) . Nigel : a Systemic Grammar for Text Generation . Technical
Report ISI/RR-83-105, USC/ISI.
MeKeown , K . R .  (1985) . Text Generation : Using Discourse Strategies " and Focus Constraints to Generate Natural Language Text  . Cambridge,
England : Cambridge University Press.
McKeown , K . and M . Elhadad .  (1990) . A Contrastive Evaluation of Functional Unification Grammar for Surface Language Generators : A Case Study in Choice of Connectives  . In Cecile L . Paris , William R . Swartout and William C . Mann ( Eds . ) , Natural Language Generation in Artificial Intelligence and Computational Linguistics  . 
Kluwer Academic Publishers . ( to appear).
Moeschler , J .  (1985) . LAL . Argumentation et Conver-sation : Elements pour une analyse pragmatique du discours  . Paris : Hatier ~ Credif . 
Moeschler , J .  (1986) . Connecteurs pragmatiques , loisded is courset strategies interpretatives : parce queet la justification enonciative  . Cahiers de Linguistique Francaise , (7), pp . pages 149-168 . 
Prince , E . F . ( December 1978) . A Comparison of Wh-Clefts and It-clefts in Discourse  . Language , 54(4), 883-906 . 
Prince , E . F .  (1981) . Toward a Taxonomy of Given-New Infonnation . In Cole , P . ( Ed . ), Radical
Pragmatics . New York : Academic Press.
Quirk , R . et al (1972) . A Grammar of Contemporary
English . Longman.
Reiclmmn , R .  (1985) . Getting computers to talk like you and me : discourse context  , focus and semantics ( an ATN model ) . Cambridge , Ma : MIT press . 
Roulet , E . et al (1985) . L ' articulation du discoursenfi'ancais contempora in  . Lang : Berne . 
Sinclair and Coulthard .  (1975) . Towards an Analysis of Dbcourse . Oxford , England : Oxford University

Taylor , T . J . and Cameron , D .  (1987) . Language & Communication Libraly . Vol .   9: Analysing Conversation : Rules and Units in the Structure of 
Talk . Oxford : Pergamon Press.

