Reading Distinction in MT *
Plusten Hacken
Eurotra
Onderzoeks in stituut voor TaMenSpraak
University of Utrecht
Trans 10,351 2 JKU trecht
email : ten hacken C~hutruu 59. bitnet
Abstract
In any system for Natural Language Processing having a dictionary  , the question arises as to whicl hentries are included in it  . In this paper , I address the subquestion as to whether a lexical unit having two senses should be considered ambiguous or vague with respect to them  . The inadequacy of some common strategies to answer this question in Machine Translation  ( MT ) systems is shown . From a semantic conjecture , tests are developed that are argued to give more consistent and theoretically well-founded results  . 
1 Introduction
In any system for Natural Language Processing having a dictionary  , the question arises which entries are included in it  . In this paper , I will assume the environment of a mnltilingual MT system based on a linguistic analysis and transfer architecture  , from which I will derive some argumentation . 
The question which entries are included in the dictionary should be answered in two parts  . 
First there is a mapping from graphic words to lexical units  ( lu's )  , then a mapping from lu's to readings , each of which is represented in an entry . The former mapping represents a certain level of analysis of the graphic word  . It abstracts away from inflection and spelling variation  , and , depending on the system's analysis component , may do so as well for productive * I would like to thank my colleagues at the university and in Eurotra  , especially Louisdes Tombe and Henk
Verkuyl , for their helpful comments.
derivation and compounding , and multiword units . In this paper I will concentrate on the latter mapping  , reading distinction , in a way that does not appeal to a particular choice on the relation between lu and graphic word  . 
A consistent approach to reading distinction is necessary  , because inconsistencies in reading distinction in an MT system will compli-ca  . te transfer components between a pair of languages  , and jeopardiz extensibility of the system . A correct solution will save time in development and improve performance  . The central question in this area can be formulated as in  ( 1 )  . 
(1 ) Given an luX and two of its senses ocl and 5'2 , is X ambiguous or vague with respect o S1 and $2 ? In ( 1 ) a sense of anlu is the meaning the 1ll has in a certain set of contexts . If the lu is vague , both senses are covered by the same reading . 
If it is ambiguous ,   S1 and $2 are examples of different readings of the lu , each reading being represented in a single entry . 
2 Some common methods
Since every reading distinction creates lexical ambiguity that has to be solved  , it seems attractive to use the features expressing the relevant information as criterion for answering  ( 1 ) : Anluis ambiguous between $1 and $2 iff there is a feature describing the dilference . 
If we only take morphological and sylltactic features  , many intuitively clear cases of ambiguity ( e . g . bank as financial institution vs . as to problems in transfer or in generation . On the other hand , these features will cause unwanted distinctions as well  , e . g . Prench fonc-tionnair'e ( civil servant ) with gender masculine or feminine , and kneel with past tensel ~ neeg dor knelt . It makes no sense to try to disambiguate these . 
The use of semantic features to define aln-biguity should be rejected for similar reasons  . 
First , we have to determine a fixed set of features a priori  , since otherwise no answers to questions of reading distinction evolve  . This imposes an artificial upper bound on reading distinction  . Moreover , the availability of a certain feature does not mean that it has to be assigned in all cases  . We will certainly have a feature expressing the male/fema  . le contra . s t , but it is not desirable to create two readings of parent accordingly  , leading to a translation of pa~r . nts into something meaning mother ( s ) a ~ zd/or J hther ~ , :) . 
Alternatively , we couh largue thal , since translation is the goal , its houh \] be the criterium \[ brreading distinction as well  , answering ( 1 ) : Anlu having two senses is ambiguous iff there are diffe  . rentranslations for the two senses . Leaving aside the non . -trivial problem of determining whether there are different translations  , we have to admit that there are cases of exceptional distinctions in one language  , e . g . fle ' uve vs . r'ivi & cin French , mean-ing river ending in a , sea or in another river respectively . " l " hese distinctions will influence all other dictionaries in the system  , in the sense that e . g . English 7+ iver and Dutch r'i vier be- . 
come an abiguous , and there are two transla-t ; ion rules between them . If we restrict our attention to a limited grou I ) of languages , e . g . 
the languages in the system , the system becomes difficult to extend , siace adding a new language from outside this group will affect all existing dictionaries  . Otherwise there is a conceptual problem , since it will , rover be possible to decide that an luis vague , unless we know al \] languages of the world . Instead , cases of exceptional distinctions , bilinqual ambiguities , are best i handled in transfer between the two languages  , because they really are translation problems . .
Summarizing , taking the means ( features ) or the goal ( translation ) as a criterium for read- . 
ing distinction results in decisions that cause various practical problems and are intuitively incorrect  . Furthermore these strategies detach the notion of reading from meaning  , which is theoretically undesirable . 
Taking only intuitions as our guide will link reading to meaning  , but if even trained intuitions or lexicographers do not prevent inconsistencies  , as can be seen in many published dictionaries , there is not much hope of reaching consistency , unless we manage to find some support for the intuitions  . 
3 A semantic method
The tests I will propose here to decide on reading distinction are based on monolingual meaning  , and yield a substantially greater degree of consistency than direct  , ui ~ . aided intuitions . It is based on the following conjecture . 
(2) There is a set of processes P , that , given a single occurrence of a nlu , can stretch the actual meaning of the 1 , l in the context to the boundaries of the reading the lu has  , but not beyond . 
In order to be able to check the results , we will first consider some tests where specific processes in P are used  , as a . pplied to some intuitive h , clear cases of ambiguity ( e . g . 
ba~dv " as financial institution vs . river verge ) and vagueness ( e . g . elephant as Indian elephant vs . 
African elephant ) . Then the scope of these tests will be expanded to other cases  . 
A wellknown test evolving from ( 2 ) is based on conjunction . Lakoff (1970) proposed a . test where anaphoric so in the second clause of a conjunction refers back to an antecedent containing the lu : for which the question of reading distinction arises  , ms in (3) . 
(3) a . John went to a bank this morning , and so did Mary . 
b . Johnsawanelephant , and so did

The question to be asked in this cast is whether tile sentence is semantically normal when tile anaphor is interpreted in the other sense than its antecedent  . Clearly ,   ( 3a ) is strange in this firming that bank but not elephant is ambiguous in the relevant way  ( cf . Cruse ( 1986 ) on the use of semantic normality judgements )  . Other anaphors , e . g . one , there can be used as well . 
The answers are more reliable in case of an antecedent contmning less lexical material outside the luin question  . In (3a ) , the antecedent of so is go to a bank , and ambiguity might be claimed to arise from the verb  . Using one instead of so takes a way this possibility  , which is especially relevant in less clear cases . 
Other processes use quantifiers . One , based on Wiggins (1971) , uses universal quantification . It is exemplified in (4) . 
(4) a . Allbanks in this town are safe.
b . Allelephants in th.iszoo are old.
The question to be asked here is whether all X can be interpreted as all  $1 or all , % . , or only as all $1 and all $2 . Whereas ( 4a ) can mean either that there is no danger of flooding or that bank-robbers are effectively discouraged  , and it is odd when used to mean both ,   ( 4b ) can only be used to predicate over both African and Indian elephants in the zoot hat they are old  . 
A variant using negation in the same way is discussed by Kemps on & Cormack  ( 1981 )  . 
A slightly different test can be pertbrmed with a universal quantifier somewhat remote from the relevant lu  , as in (5) . 
(5) a . Every town has a bank .
b . Everyzooha ~ sanelephant.
The question to be asked here is whether the X ( bank/elephant ) has to be interpreted in the same sense for every Y  ( to wn/zoo )  . In a similar way numerals can be used as in (6) , and coordination as in (7) , requiring the same question . 
(6) a . This town has two banks.
b . This zoo has two elephants.
(7) a .

John and Mary went to a bank this morning.
John and Mary saw an elephant his morning.
Summarizing , there are three main classes of processes in P behaving as in  ( 2 )  . The first one refers to two elements from the extension of the lu  , one of them by an anaphor , as in (3) . The second one refers to the flfll extension of a reading at once  , as in (4) . The third one refers to a group of elements in the extension  , exploiting distributivity , as in (5)-(7) . Each class is associated with a difl'erent question the answer of which determines whether an analysis as ambiguity or as vagueness is correct  . 
There are various realizations of test sentences for each class  , some of which are subject to independently motivated constraints  . In a natural way an intuitively appealing definition of reading evolves as in  ( 8 )  . 
(8 ) A reading of anluisa coherent group of senses , the boundaries of which ( ' aunot be crossed by a single occurrence of the lu without losing semantic normality  . 
4 The tests in actual use
In the previous section , semantic tests were shown to give correct answers in cases where we can check them  . This proves that we should not immediately reject the tests  . The reason we need them however , is that there are many cases wtm reunaided intuition is not sufficiently determinate  , so that conflicts on the correct an , ~ tysls might arise . 
A wellknown problem area is the al~alysis of privative oppositions  , where one of the senses is more general and includes the other one  . 
Both dog and lion have senses animal belonging to a particular species of mammals and male specimen of that species  . According to Kemps on ( 1980 ) they are both vague with respect to these senses , but Zwicky ~: Sadock ( 1975 ) claim that dog but not lion is ambiguous . Applying various tests to them we get the following sentences  . 
(9) a . John has a dog , and Maryi has one too.
b . The zoo hasalion , and the circus has one too . 
(lo ) a.

All dogs of this breed are short-sighted.
Alllions in this wild reserve have been killed by poachers  . 
164 (11) a . This family has two dogs.
b . This zoo has two lions.
The sentences (9) and (1.1) cannot lead to a.
conclusion for independent reasons . Since an individual or a group in the more specific sense of the luisal so an individual or a group in the general sense  , the general sense is always available to cover up the opposition  . This is not the case when the flfll extensions are compared  , however . Therefore from ( 10 ) we can in--deed conclude that do gisambiguous and lion is not  . Both ( 10 a ) and ( 10b ) have the general interpretation , but only ( 10 a ) also has the more specific one ( cf .   .   .   . , b , tt not the bitches vs .  *  .   .   . , but not the lionesses ) . 
Another problem that comes up is the construction of test sentences for other syntactic categories than nouns  . Although the various processes are most easily demonstrated with nouns  , nothing in the theory refers to nouns directly . VP-anaphors , e . g . so , can also be used for w ~ rbs . 
(12) a . John has been running ' all day , and so hash is washing machine . 
b . John has been running all day , and so hash is dog . 
(13) John followed Mary , and Bill ( lidso too.
The sentences in ( 12 ) show the ambiguity of run between tile senses with a human and a machine subject  , and the vagueness between senses with a biped and a quadruped subject  . 
For transitive verbs , such as follow , having the sense understand and go after , the result of the test is more disputable , since (13) shows the ambiguity of follow Mary , and one could argue that it is due to ambiguity of Mary  , e . g . 
between the senses thinking person and spatial object  . Therefore , the use of a nonlexical anaphor , indicated by  #in the examples , is to be preferred . 
(14) John followed Mary , and Bill #Kate.
It is rather difficult to construct a sentence with a quantifier over the verb comparable to  ( 4 ) for nouns . Rather , a sentence such as ( 15 ) below displays the same distributivity effect as ( 5 )  , that can also be achieved by coordination as in ( 16 )  . 
(15) All boys followed Mary.
(16) John and Bill followed Mary.
Tile test sentences for verbs can also be used for adjectives  , if they are used predicatively . 
An example is (17) , where black is shown to have different readings when used with a concrete object and with humour  . 
(17) Herdress is black , and so is her hu-n~lour . 
For gradable adjectives , a comparison is a basis for constructing a test sentence  . Although (17) can be used humoristica . lly , (118) below , illustrating the ambiguity of fair , ca:n hardly be interpreted . 
(18 ) Herhair is as fair as the salary shep a ~ ysher employees  . 
In general it seems that for gradable adjectives comparison provoke stronger judgements than anaphoric reference by so  . In some cases , how-ew , , r , one of the senses cannot be used predica-tively , and neither of the two processes can be used . An empty anaphor sometimes provides a solution , as in (19) , where economic is shown to be ambiguous between the senses relati~g to the economy and not wasteful  . 
(19) For In any years , he produced economic theories ~ nd#cars . 
Insorne languages , there is a lexical anaphor that requires an adjective as its antecedent  , e . g . 
dito in Dutch , as illustrated in (20).
(20 ) Bijhungouden bruil of tkregenze e endito horloge  . 
( Litt . ) ' At their golden wedding got they a # watch ' Among the remaining problems is the comparison of two senses with big syntactic differences  . All test sentences have to be syntactically correct  , and syntax does not allowe . g . coordination of a noun and a verb in corresponding positions  , tn such cases , tile semantic part of testing the senses is never a  . rrived at . 
165 5 Conclusion
In this paper , I developed tests to answer the question whether anluwith two senses is to be analyzed as ambiguous or vague with respect to them from the semantic conjecture  ( 2 )  . The tests allow for theoretically well-founded and consistent decisions in many cases  . 
In MT , they determine a proper balance on the cline between what can easily be disambiguated monolingually  , and what is useful as a distinction in translation  . As such they define the target for monolingual disambiguation  , and the class of bilingual ambiguities , that should be treated in transfer . Since the MT environment has only been used in the argumentation  , not in the solution proposed , theoretical well-foundedness and consistency evolving from the tests presented here are equally valid in other environments where a monolingual dictionary is used  . 
References (; ruse , D . A .  (1986) . Lexical Semantics , Cambridge University Press . 
Kempson , Ruth (1980) . ~ Ambiguity and Word Meaning ' , in : Greenbaum , Sidney , Geoffrey Leech & Jan Svartvik , St'udics in English Linguistics , Longman , London/New York , p .  7-16 . 
Kempson , Ruth & Annabel Cormack (1981).
' Ambiguity and Quantification ' , Linguistics and Philosophy ~ , p .  259-309 . 
Lakoff , George (1970) . ' A Note on Vagueness and Ambiguity ' , Linguistic lnquiryi , p .  357-359 . 
Wiggins , David (1971) . ' On sentence-sense , word sense and difference of word sense . Towards a philosophical theory of dictionaries . 'In : Steinberg , Danny , ~ Leon Jakobovits ( ed . ) . 
Semantics , Cambridge University Press , p .  14-34 . 
Zwicky , Arnold & Jerrold Sadock (1975) . ~ Ambiguity tests and how to fail them ' , in : Kimball , John ( ed . ) . Syntax and semantics 1, Academic Press , p .  136 . 

