Is the recontent in empty heads ?*
Louise Guthrie , Brian M . Slator , ** Yorick Wilks , and Rebecca Bruce
Computing Research Laboratory
Box 30001
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces , NM 88003-0001

We describe a technique for automatically constructing a taxonomy of word senses from a machine readable dictionary  . Previous taxonomies developed from dictionaries have two properties in common  . First , they are based on a somewhat loosely defined notion of the ISA relation  . Second , they require human intervention to identify the sense of the genus term being used  . We believe that for taxonomies of this type to serve a useful role in subsequent atural language proce  , sing tasks , the taxonomy must be based on a consistent use of the ISA relation which allows inheritance and transitivity  . We show that hierarchies of this type can be automatical ! y constructed  , by using the semantic ategory codes and the subject codes of the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English  ( LDOCE ) to disambiguate the genus terms in noun definitkms  . In addition , we discuss how certain genus terms give rise to other semantic relations between definitions  . 
1. Introduction
In order to extract meaning from text , we must at least disambiguate he words used in the text  . The normal sceaario is to locate the disambiguated words in some knowledge base  , which gives additional in fc , m  ~ , ation about the words and their properties , so that some of the higher-minded tasks of naturali  ; mgt . ,age processing ( NLP ) can be accomplished : task siike determining speech acts  , identifying topic a ~_d focus shifts for discourse analysis  , and drawing inferences . The work described here is a step reward developing an initiN knowledge base for NLP by automatmally transforming information found in machine readable dictionaries into a database suitable for a variety of NLP applications  . 
The overall scheme of the work at CRL on Inachine readable dictionaries i described in Wilkset al  .  (1988, 1989, 1990) . As part of that work , Slator (1988 a , 1988b ; Slator and Wilks ,  1987 ,  1990 ) developed a program called Lexicon Provider which creates frames from the dictionary definitions of word senses provided by the Longman's Dictionary of Contemporary English  ( LDOCE )  . Each frame is con -** Prc~cnt address : Department of Computer Science  , North Dakota State University , Fargo , ND 58105 nected via an ISA link to some other word ( spelling form ) in the dictionary . Our goal in this paper is to refine that works o as to connect each frame to another word sense in the dictionary  . This insures that properties can be consistently inherited in this graph structure  ( since AISAB allows A to inherit properties of B  )  . We can think of this task as building a taxonomy of the word senses in LDOCE  . 
This paper presents our techniques for automating this task for noun definitions  , using the special c~?led information found in the machine readable version of LDOCE  . We also present ways to extract other semantic relations automatically as part of the process  . 
2. Background
Dictionary definitions of nouns are normally written in such a way that one can identify a " genusterm " for the head word  ( the word being defined ) via an ISA relation . The information following the genus term , the differentia , serves to differentiate he*~Pn is research was supported by the New Mexico State University Computing Research Laboratory through NSF Grant No  .   1RI-8811108 --Grateful acknowledgement is ac-corded to all the members of file CRL Natural Language Group for their comments and suggestions  . 
1 38   -1o head word from other head words with the same genus  . For example ,   ( from LDOCE ) : knife-ablade fixed in a handle , used for cutting as a tool or weap on . 
Here " blade " is the genus term of the head word " knife " and " fixed in a handle  , used for cutting as a tool or weap on " yields differentia  . In other words , a " knife " ISA " blade " ( genus ) distinguished from other blades by the features of its differentia  . In order to create a taxonomy of word senses , this genus term must be identified and also sense -tagged  ( in this case , by ruling out blade of grass , propeller blade , and an amusing tcllow ) . 
Previous research on constructing taxonomies from machine readable dictionaries  , i . e . Amsler & White (1979) and , to some extent , Chodorow et . al . 
(1985) , has relied on a good deal of human intervention whenever the taxonomy is composed of word senses rather than spelling forms  . Nakamura 8: Nagao ( 1988 ) automatically constructed autxonomy , but did not distinguish the senses of nouns and hence cannot allow inheritance of properties along the links of the implied network created by the taxonomy  . 
Because of the semantic category markings in LDOCE  , we have been able to develop heuristic procedures  ( described in section 4 )  , that , to a great extent , automate the task of developing a hierarchy of word senses  . 
Constructing t , % xonomies from tt , egen us terms of definitions forces one to take a stand on how to treat a large class of noun definitions which are not as " standard " as the definition given above for knife  . 
The characteristic property of these definitions is that the head of the first noun phrase  ( the usual place to find a genus term ) seems vacuous , and another easily identifiable noun in the definition gives information about the head word  . Nakamura & Nagao (1988) , identify these non-sumdar definitions syntactically as : det  . adj . * < Function Noun > of < Key Noun > adj . phrasc * For example , the following definitions have the pro-perty that the head of the noun phrase following the " of " is more semantically relevant othe head word than the head of the first noun phrase  . 
arum(LDOCE ) - at all , white type of Lily cyclamate ( LDOCE ) -any of various manmades weeteners . . . 
deuterium ( Meniam-Webster Pocket Diction- , ' try ) - a form of hydrogen that is twice the mass of ordinary hydrogen academic  ( LDOCE ) -a member of a college or university The form of this type of definition is predictable whenever certain words  , are used as the head of the tirst noun phrase . Amsler and White ( 1979 ) kept a list of these words , referring to them as partives and collectives . Nakamura & Nagao (1988) call them Function Nouns . Chodorow et al ,   ( 1985 ) refer to a subset of these as " empty heads " . Since we diS-Agree with certain elements of these characterizations  , we will use the terminology " disturbed heads " . 
The question at issue is : what to do with these cases ? In the original work of Amsler and White  ( 1979 ) with the Merriam Webster Pocket Dictionary ( MPD ,  1964) , file disturbed head cases were handled by asking paid human " disambiguators " to sense-tag the head of the first noun phrase in the definition and also to sense-tag any other noun in the definition which " made a significant semantic ontribution to an ISA link "  ( Amsler and White , 1979: p . 55) with the head word being defined ( i . e . for the deuterium definition above , " hydrogen " was sense tagged as well as " form " )  . The taxonomy actually contain exl both a link from deuterium to " form " and a link from deuterium to " hydrogen "  , although the hydrogen sense was marked in a special way to indicate it is not the syntactic head of the definition  . In cases like the " hydrogen " example just given  , the marked " semantic ontributors " were never given ancestors  , since the link often represented a more loosely defined relation than the strictly transitive " is a subset of ' definition of ISA  , which ideally relates the head word and its genus sense  . This degenerate fo , zn of ISA precludes inheritance in the network . It is included in the taxonomy in order to form links to words which may not be related in a strict ISA sense  , but which convey useful information about the word being defined  . 
There have been various proposals over the years suggesting different specialized link types to be added to the taxonomy  ( besides the degenerate ISA )  . 
Markowi ~ et al ,   ( 1986 ) suggest HAS_MEMBER links be created in definitions which use the phrase " member of "  ( i . e . " college " HAS_MEMBER " academic " in the definition of academic above  )  . 
Nakamura & Nagao ( 1988 ) identify 41 different function nouns and replace the ISA link in their taxonomy with various other links in these cases  ( except in the " kind of " , " type of " , etc . , definitions ) . Amster ( 1980 ) suggests the incorporation of an IS_PART_OF link in addition to the ISA links in the earlier taxonomy of Amsler & White  ( 1979 )  . 
Chodorowet ~ d . ,  ( 1985 ) automate the genus finding process for nouns and verbs in Web ster's Seventh  ( W7 ,  1967) . However , in their work , only the spelling form of the genus is identified automatically  ; the sense selections are made by humans . The disambiguation here is not to attach a sense number  , but rather to perform a function termed " sprouting "  -2-   139 which interactively selects among all words which have a given word sense as a genus  . Their taxonomy contains only ISA links , but they partially attack the " disturbed head " problem by identifying a small class of what they call " empty heads "  . The effect of their method is to skip over seemingly vacuous terms  ( located where agenus is usually expected )  , and treat the more semantically relevant term as the actual genus  . 
3 . Description of LDOCE and its limitations The Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English  ( LDOCE ; Procter et at .  1978) , is a full-sized dictionary designed for learners of English as a second language that contains  41  , 122 head word entries , defined in terms of 72 , 177 word senses , in machine-readable form ( a type setting tape ) . The book and tape versions of LDOCE both use a system of grammatical codes of about  110 syntactic categories which vary in generality from  , for example , nountonoun/count to noun/count/J bllowed-by -infinitive-with-TO  . The machine readable version of LDOCE also contains " box " and " subject " codes that are not found in the book  . The box codes use a set of primitive such as abstract  , concrete , and animate , organized into a type hierarchy . This hierarchy of primitive types conforms to the classical notion of the ISA relation as describing proper subsets  . These primitives are used to assign type restrictions on nouns and adjectives  , and type restrictions on the arguments of verbs . The subject codes are another set of terms organized into a hierarchy  . This hierarchy consists of main heading such as engineering with subheadings like electrical  . These terms are used to classify words by subject  . For example , one sense of current is classified as geology-and -geography while another sense is marked eragineering/electrical  , This paper's overall goal is to make implicit semantic information in the dictionary explicit  . However , we are not doing " psychology of lexicography ": the test of our derived structures i not whether they match any conscious or unconscious inferences of lexicographers  , but whether they improve subsequent natural language processing  ( e . g . machine translation ) . Nor are we in anyway concerned here with low -level issues of the syntax of dictionary entries  , its expression on tapes or pages , or by what device the information enters the computer  . It is of course a strong assumption that a fallible dictionary designed for human learners of a second language also implicitly contains the information eeded for successful naturalanguage processing  . We make this assumption consciously as an empirical hypothesis  . Even though LDOCE has beneficial features , such as its restricted vocabulary for sense definition  , we seen or eason to believe at this stage that the taxonomic relations we derive are in any way nonstandard  . 
4. Automatically finding genus senses
A heuristic procedure that automatically finds disambiguated genus terms for nouns has been developed  . The initial stage of this procedure is to automatically identify the genus term in the definition  . The Lexicon Provider ( Slator 1988 a , 1988b ; Slator and Wilks ,  1987 ,  1990 ) mentioned above has a parser which does this . The parser accepts LDOCE definitions as Lisp lists and produces phrase-structure tes  . LDOCE sense definitions are typically one or more independent clauses composed of zero or more prepositional phrases  , noun phrases , and/or relative clauses . The syntax of sense definitions is relatively uniform  , and developing a grammar for the bulk of LDOCE has not proven to be an intractable problem  . Chart parsing was selected for this system because of its utility as a grammar testing and development tool  . The chart parser is driven by a contextfrec grammar of  100-plus rules and has a lexicon derived from the 2  , 219 words in the LDOCE core vocabulary . The parser is left-comer , and bottom-up , with topdown filtering . 
The contextfree grammar driving the chart parser is virtually unaugmented and  , with certain minor exceptions , no procedure associates constituents with what they modify  . Hence , there is little or no motivation for assigning elaborate or competing syntactic structures  , since the choice of one over the other has no semantic on sequence  . Therefore , the trees are constructed to be as " flat " as possible  . The parser also has a " longest string " ( fewest constituents ) yntactic preference . The grammar is still being tuned , but the chart parser is already quite successful and works extremely well over a fairly wide range of examples from the language of content word definitions in LDOCE  . Ninety-Five percent result in a parse tree for the entire definition text  . Five percent of the analyses fail at some point . In those cases where it fails the parser still returns a partial parse  ( of the leading constituents in the definition texO  , and this is the most imporUmt part of a definition anyway  . 
The second phase of this procedure is to find the correct sense of the genus term that has been identified by the parser  . To do this , we have constructed a program called the Genus Disambiguator  , which takes as input the subject codes ( pragmatic codes ) and box codes ( semantic ategory codes ) of the head word , taken from the machine readable version of LDOCE , and the spelling form of the genus word which has been identified by the parser described above  . The output is the correct sense of the genus word . 
The codes in LDOCE seem to support the thesis that the genus for a noun must be a noun  , and that the semantic ategory of the genus word must be  140   -3-the same as , or an ancestor of , the semantic ategory of the head word . The word ancestor refers to superordinate terms in the hierarchy of semantic codes defined by the Longman lexicographers  . The strategy of the algorithm is : 1 . choose the genus sense whose semantic codes identically match with the head word  , if possible ; 2 . if not , choose the sense whose semantic category is the closest ancestor to the semantic ategory of the head word  ;  3 . in the case of a tie , the subject codes are used to determine the winner  ;  4 . if subject codes cannot be used to break the tie , the first one of the tied senses which appears in the dictionary is chosen  ( since more frequently used senses are listed first in LDOCE  )  , The lollowing examples illustrate the algorithm . The ordered pair following the head word consists of the box code and subject code as found in dictionary  ( the notation following that is the English gloss for these particular codes  )  . Many definitions are not given a subject code in LDOCE midadash  ( -- ) is used here to indicate that . Consider the following LDOCE definition . 
ambulance-(J : movable-solid , AUZV : Automotive/Vehicle-Types) . -motor vehicle for carrying sick or wounded people esp  . 
to hospital
The genus of ambulance is the word " vehicle " , which is fl ) und by the Lexicon Provider's parser ; therefore the input to the Genus Disambiguator is  :   ( ambulance JAUZ V vehicle ) The following are the LDOCE definitions for the noun senses of vehicle ? vehl cN !? l-  ( J : movable-solid , TNVH : Transpor-tation/Vehicles ) -something in or on which people or goods c , ' m be carried from one place to another . . . 
vehicle-2(T : abstract , -- ) something by means of which something else can be passed on or spread : Television has become an important vehicle for spreading politic alide as  vehicle-3  -  ( T : abstract , -- ) a means for showing of fapers on's abilities : The writer wrote this big part in his play simply as a vehicle for the famous actress In this case the Genus Disambiguator chooses the tirst sense of vehicle  , because of the match between the " movable-solid " semantic codes  , therefore the output is " vehicle-l " . There are many cases , however , where a direct match is not found . Consider the following LDOCE definition . 
dart ? ( J : movable-solid , GA : Games ) oa small sharp w pointed object to be thrown , shot , etc . . . .
The word " object " is the genus of dart , making the input to the Genus Disambigalator ( dart JGA object ) The following are the LDOCE noun definitions for " object "  object-1  -  ( S : movable-solid , --) athing object-2 o(l:human-and ~ solid , -- ) -something or someone that produces interest or other effect  . . . 
object-3~(l:human-and-solid , -- ) something or someone unusual or that causes laughter  object-4  -  ( T : abstract , -~)- purpose ; aim object-5(T : abstract , LN:Linguistics-and-
Grammar ) -word ( s ) saying with whom or with what , a PREPOSITION . . . 
In this example there is no direct match between the semantic odes of the head word  , dart , and any of the senses of the genus , " object " ; therefore the Genus Disambiguator must traverse up the type hierarchy  , described in section 3 , to find the closest ancestor of box code " J " ( movable-solid ) that is present in the definitions of the genus word  . In this case , box code " S " ( solid ) is found one level above " J " and the output is " object-l "  . There are still other cases , however , when more than one sense definition has semantic codes matching the codes of the head word  . Consider the following LDOCE definition . 
flute-(J:movable-solid , MU:Music ) -a pipelike wooden or metal musical instrument with finger holes  , played by blowing across a hole in the side . . . 
The genus of flute is the word " instrument " ; therefore , the input to the Genus Disambiguator is ( flute JMU instrument ) The following , are the LDOCE definitions for instrument ? instrumentol  ( J : movable-solid , HWZT : Hardware/Fools ) -an object used to help in work : medical instruments  instrument-2  -  0:movable-solid  , MU : Music ) - . . . an object which is played to give musical sounds ( such as a piano , a horn , etc . )  . . . 
instrument-3-(Z : unmarked , -- ) someone or something which seems to be used by an outside force to cause something to happen : an instrument of fate  -4o   141 In this case both the first and second senses of instrument are marked as " J "  , ( movable-solid ) , which matches perfectly with the selection restriction for flute  . However , the tie is broken by appeal to the subject code , Music , which selects the second sense of instrument as the genus of flute  , and the output is " instrument-2" . 
There are occasional failures , many of which appear to be due to unusual markings in LDOCE  . 
For exmnple , the LDOCE definition for banana is : banana- ( P : plant , PMZ5: Plant-Names ) -any of several types of long curved tropical fruit  , shaped like a thick finger , with a yellows k in and a soft , usu . sweet , inside .   .   . 
The genus of banana is the word " fruit " , and the input to the Genus Disambiguator is ( banana PPM fruit ) The following are the LDOCE definitions for fruit . 
fruit-1-(J:movable-solid , FO : Food ) -an object that grows on a tree or bush , contains seeds , is used for food , but is not usu . 
eaten with meator with salt fruit-2-(S : solid , FO : Food ) - these objects in general , esp . considered as food . . . 
fruit-3-(J:movable-solid , FO : Food ) -a type of this object fruit-4- ( J : movable-solid , BO:Botany ) a seed-containing part of any plant fruit-5- ( T : abstract , --) a result , good or bad:
H is failure is the fruit of laziness fruit-6- ( M:male/human , --) fellow ( in the phr . old fruit ) In this case , banana is marked as a " plant " but , for some reason , the likely candidates defined under fruit are all marked " solid " or " movable-solid "  . Since neither solid normovable-solid , are ancestor to plant in the LDOCE type hierarchy they are all equally bad  , from the point of view of the Genus Disambiguator  , and the default is invoked , which is to choose the lowest numbered sense from among the competitors  . 
Therefore the first sense is selected and the output is " fruit-l "  . This happens to be correct , but it is an unsatisfying resolution . 
In a piece of related work , Slator ( 1988a ) has implemented a scheme in the Lexicon Provider which imposes deeper structure onto the LDOCE subject hierarchy  ( e . g . terms like Food , Botany , and Plant-Names in the " fruit " definitions above  ) relating these categories in a natural way , in order to discover important relationships between concepts within text  . 
This manual restructuring simply observes that words classified under Bot any have pragmatic on nections to words classified as Plant-Names  , as well as connections with other words classified under Science  ( connections not made by the LDOCE hierarchy as given  )  , and that these connections are useful to exploit . 
The Lexicon Provider system relates these codes through a specially restructured hierarchy created for that purpose  , making Communication , Economics , Entertainment , Household , Politics , Science , and Transportation the fundamental categories . Every word sense defined with a subject code therefore has a position in the new hierarchy  , attached below the node for its subject code . Once this feature is implemented in the Genus Disambigua-tor  , the subject code hierarchy can be used to resolve the " bana-fruit " case above in a somewhat more satisfactory way  , by choosing sense 4 of fruit . 
5 . Identifying other relationships automatically The identification of a satisfactory genusterm and the construction of a taxonomy is not straightforward in all cases  . It is clear that the problems in this area are difficult  , numerous , and can be seen to encompass a great variety of relationships  . We believe that a thorough study of this shadowy are a is necessary in order to make optimal use of the semantic information available in machine readable dictionaries  . Although we do not have complete solutions , we have additional insights into the problem of extracting supplementary information from the " dis-turbed head " definitions  . 
Chodorow et al ( 1985 ) examined a phenomenon that they described as follows : " If the word found belongs to a small class of " empty heads "  ( words like one , any , kind , class , manner , family , race , group , complex , etc . ) and is followed by of , then the string following of is repro-cessed in an effort to locate additional heads  . "( pg .  301) . 
Although the empty head rule seems to be a reasonable one in certain situations  , we have reservations about its use . The empty head rule produces undesirabl effects in an ISA hierarchy for some of the collective words  ( that Chodorow et al treat as empty ) : set , group , class etc . Our response to the empty head phenomenon is to process them in the same way  , but limiting this processing to a much smaller set  ; that is , to those heads that are truly empty--the set containing one  , any , kind , type . 
Consider the LDOCE definition : canteen- ( British English ) a set of knives , for ks and spoons , usu . for 6 or 12 people Since " set " is one of the empty heads for Chodorow et al  , their procedure would create ISA links to " knives "  , " for ks " and " spoons " , and this again would violate the inheritance properties that should be preserved via ISA links  . Our response to the collective heads , set , group , collection , class of , family of ( which we maintain are not truly empty , simply disturbed ) , is to form a taxonomic link to the correct sense of " set  , "" group , " or " class " etc . and to form a HAS MEMBER link to the noun or nouns which describe the elements of the collective  ( as found in the differentia of the head word efinition  )  . Further , we propose that definitions in which the genus term is plural be treated in the stone way as those which begin with " a set of ''  . 
In general , our view is that the disturbe A heads should be grouped in the sense of Nakamura & Nagao  ( 1988 )  , and that additional links ( like HAS MEMBER , ISPARTOF , etc . ) should be created whenever they are appropriate . However , it is our position that ISA links should also be created for every word sense given in the dictionary  . Moreover , in order to maintain inheritance and transitivity in the ISA network  , a strict " subset of " definition of ISA should be maintained  . 
Unlike Nakamura & Nagao (1988) , we propose that " member of '' definition should not be grouped with the " set of "  , " group of " definitions . All but one " member of " definition in LDOCE uses ~' member of " to mean " person who is a member of "  . We recommend that in this case , a link be created from the head word to " person " , and that the appropriate MEMBER-OF link is constructed  . The exceptional case , where " member of `' does not refer to a person , is in the definition of feline : " a meml ~ er of the cat family  . " This case must be treated separately , since it is impossible to identify the correct sense of the word " member " here  , given that all these senses , in LDOCE , are marked as referring to a human or a part of the human body  . 
The difficulty of these many varieties of special cases  ( ~ td they are not so special , since there are hundreds of them in the dictionary  )  , is that they call into question certain of the long held assumptions about the taxonomic structure of dictionaries  . The conventional wisdom has always been that dictionary definitions contained a genus term  ( a term more general than the one being defined )  , and that this term could almost invariably be found in the first phrase of the definition text  . Further , the exceptions to this convention , the " empty heads " like " one of " any of " , have been viewed as being similarly well-behaved . Our investigations lead us to conch\]de that things are not so simple as they once appeared  ; and the question of what to do with these trouble some cases is far from resolved  . 
6. References
Amsler , Robert A . and John S . White (1979) . l ) evclopment of a Computational Methodology for Deriving Natural Language Semantic Structures via Analysis of Machine-readable Dictionaries  . NSF Technical Report . ( MCS77-01315) . 
Amsler , Robert A .  (1980) . The Structure of the Merriam-Webster Pocket Dictionary  , Tech : fical Report . ( TR-164) . University of Texas at Austin . Ph . D . Thesis . 
Chodorow , Martin S . , Roy I . Byrd , and George E . Heidom (1985) . 
Extracting Semantic llierare hies from a Large On Line Dictionary  . Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the
ACL , pp . 299-304. Chicago , IL
Markowitz , Judith , Thomas Ahlswede , and Martha Evens (1986) . 
Semantically Significant Patterns in Dictiona : y Definitions  , Proceedings of the 24th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 112-i19 . New York . 
MPD (1964) . The New Merriam . Webster Pocket Dictionary . 
Pocket Books , New York.
Nakamura , Junichi , and Makoto Nagao (1988) . F ~ xtraction of Semantic Information from an Ordinary English Dictionary amlits Evaluation  . Proceedings of COLING-88, Budapest,
IIungary . pp . 459-464.
Procter , Paul et al (1978) . Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English ( LDOCE )  . lladow , Essex , UK : Longman Group

Slator , Brian M . (1988a ) . Constructing Contextually Organized Lexical Semantic Knowledge-bases  . Proceedings of the Third Annual Rocky Mountain Conference on Artifcial Intelligence  ( RMCAI . 88) . Denver , CO , June 1315, pp . 

Slator , Brian M . (1988b ) . Lexicai Semantics and a Preference Semantics Analysis  . Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Science . ( MCCS-88 . 143) . lats Cruces , NM : Computing Research Laboratory , New Mexico State University . 
( Doctoral Dissertation).
Slator , Brian M . and Yorick A . Wilks .  (1987) . Towards Semantic Structures from Dictionary Entries  . Proceedings of the Second Annual Rocky Mountain Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( RMC A1-87 ) Boulder , CO , June 1719 , pp . 

Slator , Brian M . and Yorick A . Wilks ( Forthcoming-1990) . 
Towards Semantic Structures from Dictionary Entries  . 
Linguistic Approaches to Artificial Intelligence . Edited by Andre , as Kunz and Ulrich Schmitz ~ Frankfurt : Peter L . ang Publishing House . ( Revision of RMCAI . 87) . 
W7(1967) . Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary . C . & C . 
Merriam Company , Springfield , MA.
Wilks , Yorick A . , Dan C . Fass , Cheng-Ming Guo , lames E . 
McDonald , Tony Plate , and Brian M . Slator (1988) . 
Machine Tractable Dictionaries as Tools and Resources for Natural Language Processing  . Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COUNG . 88), pp .  750-755 . Budapest , Hungary . Aug . 

Wilks , Yorick A . , Dan C . Fass , Cheng-Ming Guo , James E . 
McDonald , Tony Plate , and Brian M . Slator (1989) . A Tractable Machine Dictionary as a Resource for Computational Semantics  . Computational Lex & ography for Natural Language Processing  . F Aired by Bran Boguraev and Ted Briscoe . Harlow , Essex , UK : Longman and New York:
Wiley and Sons . pp . 193-228.
Wilks , Yorick A . , Dan C . Fass , Clheng-Ming Guo , James E . 
McDonald , Tony Plate , and Brian M . Slator ( Forthcoming-1990) . Providing Machine Tractable Dictionary Tools . Computers and Tratt?lation . Also to appear in Theoretical nd Computational Issues in Lexical Semantics  ( I'CILS )  . Edited by James Pustejovsky . Cambridge , MA:
MIT Press.

