Extending the Lexicon by Exploiting Subregularities * 
Robert Wilensky
Computer Science Division
Department of EECS
University of California , Berkeley
Berkeley , CA 94720

Llntrmiucfion
This paper is concerned with the acquisition of the lexicon  . In particular , we propose a method that uses annolo ~ , ical reasoning to hypothesize new polysemous word s e  , ses . This method is one of a number of knowledge acquisition devices to be included in DIRC  ( Domain Independent Retarge table Consultant )  . DIRC is a kindol intelligent , natm ' a language-capable consultant k it that can be retargeted at different domains  . DIRC is essentially " empty oUC " ( UNIX Consultant , Wilensky et al ,  1988) . DIRC is to include the language and reasoning mechanisms of UC  , plus a large grammar and age , neral lexicon . The user must then add domain kr ~ owledge , user knowledge and lexiealk qlowledge forth , ~ area of interest . 
2 . Previous Workha Acq ~ fisifio ~ n of the Le . ~fico~ . 
Th ~' rehave been ~ mmerous attempts to build systems that automatic  ; ally acquir ~ word ~ ~ anings . Mostly , th ~ se have f ~: neither dietion ~ , ~y ~' e ~ q der so attempts ~ o hypothesiz emcanings of cor~plctely unfamiliai ~ words from context  ( e . g . , Selfridge (1982), (; rangcr (1977)) . 
h ~ contrast , w c have focussed on the px ' obleln of acquiroinl ; word senses that are related to ones already known  . 
gle meaning may be involved in any number of senses  , each of which has grammatical or other differences  . 
Typically , a word has at least one core meaning from which the meanings involved in other senses are in some sense synchronically based  . 
For example , the word " open " has adjectival and verbal senses  ; the verbal senses include some whose meaning is , roughly , making physical access available to an enclosed region by moving some object  ( e . g . , " open a jar " , " open a draw " , " open the door ") . This is probably a core meaning of the word . There are several senses involvin ~ g this meaning , just among the verbal senses . These senses are differentiated from one another by how the components of the meaning relate to the verb's valence  . For example , one sense has the object moved as the patient , and hence as the direct object of tile transitive verb  ( as in " open the door " )  ; another uses the container itself as the direct object  ( e . g . , " open the jea "') ; pedlaps another involves some sort of a perture that widens  ( e . g . , " open your throat " or " open the pupil of your eyC'  )  . Additionally , each of these components of the meaning can be realized as patients by a pi ~ aring as the subject of the intransitive version of the verb  . We consider each differentiable valence structure for both the Wansitive amt intransitive verb forms as constituting different senses  , although we presume that the same conceptual structure is in all of these xamples  . 
22. oA Note on W~d~er~ses
F c ~ , ' the pml x ): ~ es at hand , we ~' conly concerned with w ( nd senses that a ~ c ~ ; ynchronicaily r clatcd . These may be polysemou . ,; senses of bldividl~als words , ~ u well related senses of different words , in addition , we distin- . 
gu~sh meanings or conception structures of a word from senses  .   ( We will use fileterm " meaning " and " conceptual structure " interehangely in this context  . ) A sin-*'lae research reported here is the product of the Berkeley Artilicial Inteiligt~ce and Natural Language Processing seminar  ; contribmers include Michael Bravennan , Narciseo Jaramillo , DalJ Jurafsky , Eric Kadson , Marc Lufia , Peter Norris , Michael Schiff , Nigel Ward , and Dekai Wu . This research was sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  ( DoD )  , mo ~ fitored by Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command under Contract  N00039-88-C~  ( )292 andby the Office of Naval Research , under contract N00014-89-J-3205 . 
Yet other senses of " open " have the meaning of causing an information-containing item to come into existence  ( e . g . , " open a bank account " or " open a file oll someone "  )  . This second meaning is probably ba . ~' lon the first one . Also , the various adjective uses ( e . g . , " the open door " ) are separate senses in this view having some as yet unspecified relation to the senses described above  . Finally , other words , e . g . , " close " , have senses that we presume to be related to the various senses of " open " just discussed  . 
2.2. MIDAS
Previously , we have succeeded in doing some automatic lexical acquisition by exploiting conventional metaphors as motivations for linguistic forms  . In particular , Martin ( 1988 ) implemented the MIDAS system which both uses metaphoric word senses to help with language under ? phoricuse of a word is encountered  . For example , the sentence " John have Mary a cold . " is presumed to make recourse to a " a cold is a possession " metaphor  . 
We call such a conventionalized metaphora core metaphor  , since it seems to serve as the basis for related metaphoric uses  . Thus , the sentence " John gave Mary a cold " is presumed to involve the " infecting with a cold is giving the cold " metaphor  , which entails the previous " cold is possession " metaphor  . 
Suppose the system encounters an utterance like " John got the flu from Mary "  , but is not familiar with this use of the verb " get "  , nor with the notion of a flubeing treated as a possession  . Then both the available non?metaphoric sense of " get "  , along with the metaphors involving diseases and possession  , are brough to bear to hypothesize the word sense that might be in playo Hypotheses are generated by two kinds of lexical extents ion processes : core extension and similarity extension  . 
Understanding " et a cold " given an understanding of " give a cold " involve score extension  , as the core meta~phor " cold is possession " is extende ~ to the " ge~i~g " concept  ; understanding " et the flu ~ given a ~ a under . ? standing of " getacold " involves imfiharity extension ~ as the generalization about a role in the metaphoric structure must be extended from colds to diseases in general Understanding " get the flu " given an under ~ standing of " give a cold " involves both kinds of extension  . 
The MIDAS system has been used in conjunction witt ~ UC to extend metaphoric word senses in the computer domain  . The following is an example of MIDAS le ~ i ~ inga new sense of the word " kilF ~ given that it knows some metaphoric extension ~ ofth~s~nseo ~ s ~ de the computer do ~ nM n  . 
 #How can Ikilla proces ~?
No valid interpretations . Attempting to extend existing metaphor . 
Searching for related known metaphors.
Metaphors found : Kill-Conversation
Kill-Delete-Line Kill-Sports-Defeat
Selecting metaphor Kill-Conversation to extend from  . 
Attempting a similarity extension inference.
Extending similar metaphor
Conversation with target


Abstracting Terminate-Conversation to ancestor concept 
Creating new metaphor:
Mapping main source concept Killing to main target concept 

Mapping source role killer to target role c-proc -termer  . 
Mapping source role kill-victim to target role c-proc-termed  . 
Calling UC:
You can kill a computer p~ocess by typing " c to the shell ? Here MIDA ~ tirst ret deves amm ~ ber of metaphors related to the input  ; of these , , " KilbConversafion " ~ s chosen as most applicable  . A simple similarity exten ~ , sion is attempted , resulting in a proposed " Temfina ~ e . .
Compnterq ~ ocess " metaphor for interpretation of ~ eill pUt ? Th ~ intei pretation ~ hus provided is passed ale~gto UC  , which can answer ~ his question . Meanwhi~e~demetaphor is incorporated into OC ' sk ~ towledge ba ~  ( ~ ,  . 
which a hows UC~s language generator to use the , ~eterminology in encoding the answer ? MIDAS is discussed in detain in Marti ~  ( 1988 ) o 30 Why M~DA~W~rkn We believe that MIDAS works because it is exploiting metaphoric subregula fity by a form of analogical rea~soning  . That is , it finds a metaphorical usage that is closes to the given case according to some conceptual metric  ; it then exploits the structure of the prior metaphor usage to construct an analogous one for the case at hand  , and proposes this new structure as a hypothetical word sense  . Note that according to this explanation , metaphor does not play a crucial role in the extension process  . Rather , it is the fact that the metaphor is a subregularity rather than the fact that it is a metaphor that makes it amenable to analogical exploitation  . 
Analogy , of course , has played a prominent role in traditional inguistics  . Indeed , rather influential linguists ( for example , Paul ( 1891 ) and Bloomfield ( 1933 ) seemed to attribute all novel language use to analogy  . However , today , analogy seems almost entirely relegated to diachronic processses  . A notablexception to this trend 408   2 is the wo~k of Sk on~n ( in press )  , who appears to advo . ~ cate avk ~ w quite similar to our own , although the primary focl L ~ of his work is morphological  . 
Analogy has also been widely studied in artificial intelligence and cognitive psychology  . The work of C~bonell ( 1982 ) and Burstein ( 1983 ) is most relevant to our enterprise , as it explores the role of analogy in knowledge acquisition  . Similarly , Alterman's (1985 ,  1988 ) approach to planning share some of the stone concerns  . 
However , many of the details of Carbonell's and Alterman's proposals are specific to problem solving  , and Burstem ' zwo~k is focused on fommlating cou -straints on rite relations to be considet v  . d for analogical mapping . "! bus , their work does not appear to have an obvious application to our problem  . Many of the difter ~ ences between analogical reasoning for problem solving and language knowledge acquisition are discussed at length in Martin  ( 1988 )  . 
Anotherihte of related work is the connectionist approach i initiated by Rumelhart and McClell and  ( 1987 )  , and explicitly considered as an alterative to acquisition by analogy by MacWhinney et al  ( 1989 )  . However , there are numerous reasons we believe an explicitly an a ~ logical framework to be superior  . The Rumelhart-McClell and model maintains no memory of specific cases  , but only a statistical summary of them . Also , the analogy-b~L~d model can use its knowledge more tlexi ~ bly  , for example , to infer that a word encountered is file past tense of a known word  , a task that an associationist networks could not easily be made to perform  . In add le ~ Jon , we interpret as evidence supportive of a position ? li_keours psycholinguistic result such as those of Cutler  ( 1983 ) and Butterworth ( 1983 )  , which suggest that words are represented in the h ~lull " nn decomposed ' ~ ~' on n  , along with some sorts of relations between ie late ~ i words  . 
3 . LOther K~nds of Lexical Subregularities ffMIDAS works by applying analogic M reasoning to ~ x ploit metaphoric subregularities  , then the question ~ is es as what other kinds of lexic M subregularities there might be  . One set of candidates i approached in the ~ vork of Brugman  ( 1981 , 1984) and Norvig and Lakoff (1987) . In particular , Norvig and Lakoff ( 1987 ) offer six types of links between word senses in what they call ~ exical network theory  . However , their theory is con ? ( : erned only with senses of one word . Also , there appear ~ obe many more links than these . Indeed , we have no J ~ eason to believe that the number of such subregularitics ~ s bounded in principle  . 
We present a partialist of some of the subregularities ~ vehave encountered  . The list below uses a rather in for oreal rule fi ~ rmat  , and gives a couple of examples of words to which the rule is applicable  . It is hoped that explicating a few examples below will let the reader infer the meanings of some of the others :  ( 1 ) function-object-noun->primary-activity- " detemfinerless "- noun  ( " the bed "--->" hibed , go to be d " ; " a school ~> at school " ; " any lunch ~-> at lunch " ; " the conference -> in conference " )   ( 2 ) noun ~-> lesembling-in-appearance-noun ( " tree " ~>" ( rose ) tree " ; " nee "~->" ( shoe ) tree ") ; " tiger " --> " ( stuffed ) tiger " , " pencil "-> " pencil ( of ligb0" )   ( 3 ) noun -> having-the-same-function on oun ( " bed "-> " bed ( of leaves ) " )   ( 4 ) noun -> " involve-concretion " - verb ( " a tree "->" to tree ( aea0" ; " aknife " --> " to knife ( someone ) " )   ( 5 ) verb->verb-w ~ role-splitting ( " take a book "-> " take a book to Mary " , " Johnshaved "-> " Johnshaved Bill " )   ( 6 ) verb -> profiled-component over b ( " take a book "-> " t ~ ea book to the Cape " )   ( 7 ) verb-->framedm posifion . .verb ( " take a book " -> " t~c someone to dinner ' , " go ' ~ L_>"godancing " )   ( 8 ) acfivity-verb ~ t -> concrefion ~ . activity-verb oi ( " eat an apple "-> " eat\[ameal \]" , " drinkacoke " --> " drink\[alcohol\]" , " feed the dog "-> " file dog feeds " )   ( 9 ) acfivity-verb-t->dobj-subj-middle-voice-verb q ( " driveacar "--> " the cardrives well " )   ( 10 ) activity-verb qo->activity-verb + primary o category  ( " John dreamed " -> " John dreamed adream " ; " John slept "-> " John slept the sleep of the innocent "  )   ( 11 ) activity ~ verboi->do-cause-activity-verb-t ( patient as subject )   ( " John slept "-> " The bed sleeps five " )   ( 12 ) activity ~ verb->activity-of-noun ( " to cry "->" acry ( in the wilderness ) " ; " to punch "->" a punch ( in the mouth ) " )   ( 13 ) activity-verb <-> product-of-activity-noun ( " copy the paper "<->" a copy of the paper " ; xerox , telegram , telegraph )   ( 14 ) functional-noun-> use-function-verb ( " the telephone "->" telephone John " ; machine , motorcycle , telegraph )   ( 15 ) object-noun->central-component-of-object ( " abed "-> " boughtabed\[=frame with not mattress\]  ; " an apple "-> " eat an apple \[= without the core\]"  ) ) Consider the first rule . This rule states that , for some noun whose core meaning is a functional object  , there is another sense , also a noun , that occurs without determination , and means the primary activity associated with the first sense  . For example , the word " bed " has as a core meaning a functional object used for sleeping  . 
However , the Word can also be used in utterances like " go to be d " and " before bed "  ( but not , say , "* during bed ") . In these cases , the noun is determiner less , and means something akin to sleeping . Other examples include " jail " , " conference " , school " and virtually all the meal terms , e . g . , " lunch ", " tea ", " dinner " . 
British English allows " in hospital " , while American
English & ~ esnot.
The dialect difference underscores the point that this is truly a subregularity : concepts that might be expressed this way  , are not necessarily expressed this way . Also , we chose this example not because it in itself is a particularly important generalization about English  , but precisely because it is not . That is , there appear to be many such facts of limited scope  , and each of them may be useful for learning analogous cases  . 
Consider also rule 4 , which relates function nouns to verbs . Examples of this are " tree " as in " The dog treed the cat " and " knife " as in " The murderer knife dhisvictim "  . The applicable rule states that the verb means ome specific activity involving the core meaning of the noun  . I . e . , the verbs are treated as a sort of conventionalized denominalization  . Note that he activity is presumed to be specific , and that the way in which it must be " concreted " is assumed to be pragmatically determined  . Thus , the rule can only tell us that " tree-ing " involves a tree  , but only our world knowledge might suggest to us that it involves cornering  ; similarly , the rule can tell us that " knifing " involves the use of a knife  , but cannot ellus that it means tabbing a person , and not say , just cutting . 
As a final illustration , conside rule 5 , so called " role splitting " ( this is the same as Norvig and Lakoffs semantic role differentiation link  )  . This rule suggests that , given a verb in which two thematic roles are realized by a single complement may have another sense in which these two complements are realized separately  . 
For example , in " John took a book from Mary " , John is both the recipient and the agent . However , in " John took a book to Mary " , John is only the agent , and Mary is the recipient . Thus , the sense of " take " involved in core meaning , is the basis for the sense used in the second , in which the roles coinciding in the first are realized separately  . A similar prediction might be made from an intransitive verb like " shave "  , in which agent and patient coincide , to the existence of a transitive verb " shave " in which the patient is realized separately as the direct object  . ( Of course , the tendency of patients to get realized as direct objects in English should also help motivate this fact  , and can presumably also be exploited analogically  . ) 4 . An Analogy-based Model of Lexical Acquisition We have been attempting to extend MIDAS  . -style word hypothesizing to be able to propose new word senses by using analogy to exploit these other kinds of lexical subregularities  . At this point , our work has been rather preliminary , but we can at least sketch out the basic architecture of our proposal and comment on the problems we have yet to resolve  . 
( A ) Detect unknown word sense . For example , suppose the system encountered the following phrase : " at breakfast " Suppose further that the function noun " breakfast " were known to the system  , but the determiner lessuage were not . In this case , the system would hypothesize that it is lacking a word sense because of a failure to parse the sentence  . 
( B ) Find relevant cases/subregularities . Cues from the input would be used to suggest prior relevant lexieal knowledge  . In our example , the retrieved cases might include the following :   bed-I/bed-3  ,   class-I/class-4 Here we have numbered word sense so that the first element of each pair designates a sense involving a core meaning  , and the latter a determineless-activity type of sense  . We may have also already computed and stored relevant subregularities  . If so , then these would be retrieved as well . 
Relevant issues here are the indexing and retrieval of cases and subregularities  . Our assumption is that we can retrieve relevant cases by a conjunction of simple cues  , like " noun " , " functional meaning " , " extende detex-miner less noun sense " , etc . , and then rely on the next phase to discriminate further among these  . 
( C ) Chose the most pertinent case or subregularity . 
Again , by analogy to MIDAS , some distance metric is used to pick the best datum to analogize from  . In this 410b ca~e , perhaps the correct choice would be the following : class-  1/cl~t~s-4 One motivation for this selection is that " class " is compatible with " at "  , as is the case in point . 
Finding the right metric is the primary issue here  . The MIDAS metric is a simple sum of two factors :   ( i ) the length of the core-relationship from the input source to the source of the candidate metaphor  , and ( ii ) hierarchical distance between the two concepts . Both factors are measured by the number of links in the representation that must be traversed to get from one concept othe other  . The hierarchical distance factor of the MIDAS metric seems directly relevant to other cases  . However , there is no obvious counterpart to the core -relationship component  . One possible reason for this is that met & phoric extensions are more complex than most other kinds  ; if so , then the MIDAS metric may still be applicable to the other subregularities  , which are just simpler special cases . 
( D ) Analogize to a new meaning . Given the best case or subregularity , the system will attempt to hypothesize a new word sense  . For example , in the case at hand , we wo~dd like a representation for the meaning in quotes to be produced  . 
class- 1/class-4  ::  breakfast-1/"period of eating breakfast " In I he case of MIDAS , the metaphoric structure of pre-vio ~ ls examples was assumed to be available  . Then , once a best match was established , it is relatively straightforward to generalize or extend this structure to apply to the new input  . The same would be true in the general case , provided that the relation between stored polysemous word senses is readily available  . 
( E ) Determine the extent of generalization . Supposing that a single new word sense can be successfully pro-pos ~  , the que . , ; tion arises as to whether just this particular word sense is all the system can hypothesize  , or whether some " local productivity " is possible  . For example , if this is the first mealtema the system has seen as having a determiner less activity sense  , we suspect that only the single sense should be generated  . However , if it is the second such mealter m , then the first one would have been the likely basis for the analogy  , and a generalization to meal terms in general may be attempted  . 
09 Record a new entry . The new sense needs to be storcA in the lexicon , and indexed for further eference . 
Thi , ; task may interact closely with ( E ) , although generalizing to unattested cases and computing explicit subregularities are logically independent  . 
There are many additional problems to be addressed beyond the ones alluded to above  . In particular , there is the issue of the role of world knowledge in the proposed process  . In the example above , the system must know that the activity of caring is the primary one associated with breakfast  . A more dramatic example is the role of world knowledge in hypothesizing the meaning of " treed " in expressions like " the dog treed the cat "  , assuming that the system is acquainted with the noun " tree "  . All an analogical reasoning mechanism can do is suggest hat some specific activity associated with trees is involved  ; the application of world knowledge would have to do the rest  . 
5. Other Directions of Investigation
We have also been investigating exploiting subregalari-ties in " intelligent dictionary reading "  . This project involves an additional idea , namely , that one could best use a dictionary to gain lexical knowledge by bringing to bear on it a fall natural anguage processing capability  . 
One problem we have encountered is that dictionaries are full of inaccuracies about he meaning of words  . For example , even relatively good dictionaries have poor entries for the likes of determiner less nouns like " bed "  . 
E . g . , Webster's New World ( Second Edition ) simply lists " bedtime " as a sense of " bed " ; Longman's Die-tionary of Contemporary English ( New Edition ) uses " in bed " as an example of the ordinary noun " bed "  , then explicitly lists the phrase " time for bed " as meaning " time to go to sleep "  , and gives a few other determiner less usages , leaving it to the reader to infer a generalization  . * However , a dictionary reader with knowledge of the subregularity mentioned above might be able to correct such deficiencies  , and come up with a better meaning that the one the dictionary supplies  . 
Thus , we plan to explore augmenting our intelligent dictionary reader with the ability to use subregularities to compensate for inadequate dictionary entries  . 
We are also attempting to apply the same approach to acquiring the semantics of constructions  . In particular , we are investigating verb-particular combinations and conventionalized noun phrases  ( e . g . , nominal compounds ) . We are also looking at constructions like the ditransitive  ( i . e . , dative alternation ) , which seem also to display a kind of polysemy . Specifically , Goldberg (1989 ,  1990 ) has argued that much of the data on this construction can be accounted for in terms of subclasses that are conventionally associated with the construction itself  , rather than with lexical rules and transformations as proposed  , for example , by Gropen et al (1989) . If so , then the techniques for the acquisition of polysemous * Longman's also defines " make the bed " as " make it ready for sleeping in "  . We have no idea how too ope with such errors , but they do underscore the problem . 
4 11 lexical items should prove equally applicable to the acquisition of knowledge about such constructions  . We are attempting to determine whether this is the case  . 
6. References
Alterman , Richard . Adaptive Planning : Refitting Old Plans To New Situations  . In the Proceedings of The Seventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science 
Society , 1985.
Alterman , Richard . Adaptive Planning . In Cognitive
Science , vol . 12, pp . 393-421, 1988.
Bloomfield , L . Language . New York : Holt , Rinehart &
Winston , 1933.
Brugman , Claudia . The Story of Over . University of California , Berkeley M . A . thesis , unpublished . Distributed by the Indiana University Linguistics Club  .  1981 . 
Brugman , Claudia . The Very Idea : A Case-Study in Polysemy and Cross-Lexical Generalization  . In Papers from the Twentieth Regional Meeting of the Chicago 
Linguistics Society . pp . 21-38.1984.
Burstein , Mark H . Concept Formation by Incremental Analogical Reasoning and Debugging  . In R . S . Michal-ski , J . GoCarbone U , & T . M . Mitchell ( eds . ) , Machine Learning : An Artificial Intelligence Approach  , vol . II . 
Tioga Press , Palo Alto , California , 1982.
Butterworth , B . Lexical representation . In B . Butterworth ( ed . ), Language Production , vol .  2 . Academic
Press , New York , 1983.
Carbonell , Jaime . Learning by analogy : Formulating and Generalizing Plans from Past Experience  . In R . S . 
Michalski , J . G . Carbonell , & T . M . Mitehe U(eds . ) Machine Learning : An Artificial Intelligence Approach  . 
Tioga Press , Palo Alto , California , 1982.
Cutler , A . Lexical complexity and sentence processing . 
In G . B . Floresd ' Areais & and R . J . Jarvella ( eds . ), The Process of Language Understanding , pp .  43-79 . Wiley,
New York , 1983.
Goldberg , Adele . A Unified Account of the Semantics of the Ditransitive Construction  . BLS 15,1989 . 
Goldberg , Adele . The Inherent Semantics of Argument Structure : The Case of the English Ditransitive Construction  . Unpublished manuscript , 1990 . 
Granger , R . H . FOUL-UP : A Program that figures out the meanings of words from context  . In the Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence . Cambridge , MA . 1977.
MacWhinney , B . Competition and Lexical Categorization . In R . Corrigan , F . Eckman and M . Noonan , Linguistic Categorization . John Benjamins Publishing Company , Amsterdam/Philadelphia ,  1989 . 
Martin , James . Knowledge Acquisition through Natural Language Dialogue  . In the Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applications  . 
Miami , Florida . December , 1985.
Martin , James . A Computational Theory of Metaphor . 
Berkeley Computer Science Technical Report no.
UCB/CSD 88/465. November 1988.
Norvig , Peter . Building a large lexicon with lexical network theory  . In the Proceedings of the IJCAI Workshop on Lexical Acquisition  . August 1989 . 
Norvig , Peter and Lakoff , George . Taking : A Study in Lexical Network Theory . In the Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics 
Society . Berkeley , CA . February 1987.
Paul , H . Principles of the History of Language . Long-mans , Green , London , 1891 . 
Rumelhart , D . , & McClell and , J . Learniug the past tenses of English verbs : Implicit rules of parallel distributed processes ? In B  . MacWhinney ( ed . ), Mechan-isms of Language Acquisition . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , New Jersey ,  1987 . 
Selfridge , M . Computer Modeling of Comprehension Development . In W . O . Lehnert & M . H . Ringle , Stra-tegies for Natural Language Processing . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hi Usdale , New Jersey ,  1982 . 
Skousen , R . Analogical Models of Language . Kluwer,
Dordrecht , ( in press).
Wilensky , R . , Mayfield , J . , Chin , D . , Luria , M . , Martin , J . and Wu , D . The Berkeley UNIX Consultant Project . 
Computational Linguistics 14-4, December 1988.

