Ambiguity resolution and the retrieval of idioms :
two approaches.
Erik-Jan van der Lin den Wessel Kraaij
Institute for Language Technology and AI
Tilburg University
PObox 90153
5000 LE Tilburg
The Netherlands
E-mail : vdlinden@kub.nl

When an idiomatic expression is encountere during natural anguage processing  , the ambiguity between its idiomatic ~ md non -idiomatic meaning has to be resolved  . 
Rather than including both meanings in further processing  , a conventionality-principle could be applied . This results in bestfirst processing of the idiomatic analysis  . 
Two models are discussed fot the lexical representation fidioms  . One extends the notion continuation class from two-level morphology  , the other is a localist , connectionist model . The connectionist model has an important advantage over the continuation class model : the conventionality principle follows naturally from the architecture of the conneetionist model  . 
Keywords : idiom processing , ambiguity resulution , two-level morphology , conneetionism . 
1 Introduction
In this paper we discuss the resolution of the ambiguity between the non-idiomatic and the idiomatic reading of a phrase that is possibly idiomatic  . A choice between these readings can be made using various kinds of linguistic information  , but we claim that it can be made on the basis of the mere fact that one of the analyses is idiomatic  , and that this choice does not have to be stipulated explicitly  , but follows naturally from the architecture of the lexicon and the retrieval process  , if an appropriate model of the lexicon is used . 
In section (2) , we firstly state our approach to natural language processing  ( NLP ) in general . Next (3) , we documen the claim that idioms should be store ' lin the lexicon as holistic lexical units  , and discuss the processing of idioms (4) . Then we present wo models for the lexical representation ad retrieval of idioms : one extends the notion continuation class of the two -level model  ( Koskenniemi 1983 )   ( 5 )  ; the other is a simple localist connectionist model  ( 6 )  . 
In this paper we limit ourselves to aspects relevant for our ' lexical ' approach  . We will not discuss such issues as semantic decomposability  ( Gibbs and Nayak 1989 ) of idioms ( but see van der Linden 1989 , for a model of incremental syntactic/semantic processing of idioms in Categorial Grammar  , and a more elaborate discussion of the issues mentioned in  ( 3 . 1)) . 
2 General approach to NLP
In case of ambiguity , the NL processor has to choose between a number of possible analyses  . In order to determine which one is most likely , all analyses can be examined using a breadth -first or depth-first strategy  . 
However , this results in a time and space consuming process  . Incremental bestfirst examination of ' promising ' analyse seems more appropriate  , and seems to be a property of human language processing  ( cf . Thibadeau , Just and Carpenter 1982) . However , this approach leaves us with the question what criteria should be applied to select one of the analyses for further examination  . In this paper we examine one aspect of this general question  , namely the choice between an idiomatic and a non -idiomatic analysis  . 
3 Idioms and the lexicon 3 . 1 Linguistics Within the literature ' Traditional wisdom dictates that an idiom is by definition a constituent or series of constituents where interpretation is not a compositional function of the interpretation fits parts  . ' ( G~dar et al 1985, p327) .   1 Rather than giving a definition of idioms that states what the meaning of an idiom isn't  , we prefer a definition that states what the meaning is  ( vantier Linden 1989 )  . 
Idioms are multi-lexemic expressions , the meaning of which is a property of the whole expression  . 
1cf . Wood ( 1986 ) : an idiom is ' wholly noncomposition ali meaning ' . 

Some attempts have , however , been made to assign the meaning of an idiom to the parts of the idiom  . These can roughly be divided in two :- assignment of the idiomatic meaning of the expression to one of the parts of the idiom  , and no meaning to the other part ( Ruhl , cited in Wood 1986) . In the case of kick the bucket , the meaning die is assigned to kick , and no meaning to the other part . This raises the question however , why one cannot say Patrested the bucke to mean Patrested  ( Wasow et al 1983 )  . 
- assignment of idiomatic interpretations to all parts  . 
Compositional combination of these meanings results in an idiomatic meaning for the whole expression  ( Gazdar et al 1985 )  . This analysis has a number of problems . 
G~daretal use partial functions to avoid combination of an idiomatic functor with a non -idiomatic argument  , but do not explain how to avoid combination of a non-idiomatic functor with an idiomatic argument  . In our view this can only be solved by introducing partial arguments  , to our knowledge a nonexisting notion , or by accepting that all functors are partial , which is not common in linguistics . 
We conclude that the meaning of an idiom is a property of the whole expression  , and should be represented in the lexicon .  2 3 . 2 Psycholinguistics The same observation arises from psycholinguistic research  . Idioms are stored and accessed as lexical items , not from some special list that is distinct from the lexicon  3   ( Swinney and Cutler 1979 )  . Furthermore , idioms are stored as holistic entries in the ment a lexicon  ( Swinney and Cutler 1979 ; ' Lancker and Canter 1980 ; Lancker , Canter and Terbeek 1981; cf . the notion ' configuration ' in Cacciari and Tabossi  1988  )  . 
4 Processing idioms
Phrases consisting of idioms can in most cases be interpreted non-idiomatically as well  . a It has however frequently been observed that very rarely an idiomatic phrase should in fact be interpreted non-idiomatically  ( Koller 1977 , p . 13; Chafe 1968, p . 123; Gross 1984, p . 278; Swinney 1981, p .  208) . Also , psycholinguistic research indicates that in case of an ambiguity  , there is clear preference for the idiomatic reading  ( Gibbs 1980 ; Schweigert and Moates 1988) . We will refer to the fact that phrase should be interpreted according to the idiomatic  , noncompositional , lexical , conventional , meaning , as the ' conventionality ' principle .   5 If this principle could be modeled in an appropriate way  , this 2Although other opinions exist ( Pesetsky 1985 )  . 
gAs has been defended by Bobrow and Bell (1973).
4Exccptions are idioms that contain words that occur in idioms only  ( spin and span , queer the pitch ) , and ungrammatical idioms ( trip the light fantastic )  . 
S The same can be observed for compounds : these are not interpreted compositionally  , but according to the lexical , conventional meaning ( Swinney 198) . 
would be of considerable help in dealing with idioms : as soon as the idiom has been identified  , the ambiguity can be resolved and ' higher ' processes do not have to examine the various analyses  . 
There is one more issue , that require some consideration : when can and does an incremental processor start looking for idioms ? From psycholinguistic research it appears that idioms are not activated when the ' first '  ( content ) word is encountered ( Swinney and Cutler 1979 )  . There is , from the computational point of view , no need to start ' looking ' for idioms , when only the first word has been found 6: that would result in increase of the processing load at higher levels  . 
Stock In Stock's ( 1989 ) approach to ambiguity resolution , firstly , the idiomatic and the non-idiomatic analysis are processed in parallel  . An external scheduling function gives priority to one of these analyses  . Secondly , Stock starts looking for idioms when the ' first ' word has been encountered  . As we have stated , both increase the load on higher processes . 
5 An extension of the notion continuation class Lex ica i representat ion Lexical entries in two -level morphology are represented in a trie structure  , which enables incremental lookup of strings . A lexical entry consists of a lexical representation  , linguistic " information , and a socalled continuation class , which is a list of sublexicons " the members of which may follow "  ( Koskenniemi 1983 , p . 29) the lexical entry . In the continuation class of an adjective , one could for instance find a reference tO a sublexic on containing comparative endings  ( ibid . p .  57) . An obvious extension is to apply this notion beyond the boundaries of the word  . A continuation class of an entry A could contain references to the entries that for manidiom with A  . An example is ( la )   ( Note that we use a graphemicode for the lexical representations  )  . 
(1 )   ( a ) k-i-c-k*---b-u-c-k-e-t-a-b-i-t*\e-e-l-s* 6One might argue that words that only occur in idioms could activate the idioms when encountered as ' first ' word  . There is however only psye holinguistic evidence that this occurs in a highly semantically determined contexts  ( Cacciari and Tabossi 1988 )  . 
2462 ( b)
DO reada letter
IF word has been found THEN
IF this wordforms an idiom with previous word ( s ) 
THEN make idiom information available to syn/semprocess 
ELSE make word information available to syn /semprocess UNTIL no more letters in input  . 
Algorithm A simple algorithm is used to find idioms  ( in ( lb ) the relevant fragment of the algorithm is represented in pseudo code  )  . The result of the application of the algorithm is that linguistic inlbrmation associated with lhe idioms is supplied to the syntactic/semantic processor  . 
The linguistic information includes the precise lorm of lheidiom  , the possibilities for modification etc . ( cf . vantier Linden 1989) . 
A toy implementation f the lexicon structure and the zdgorithm has been made in C  . 
6 A connectionist model ~ l'he second model we present here for the lexieal representation and retrieval of idioms is an extension of a simple localist comlectionist model for the resolution of lcxic~d ambiguity  ( Cottrell 19887 )  . The model (2) consists of four levels . Units at the lowest level represent the smallest units of form  . These units activate units on the level that represents syntactic discriminations  , which in turn activate units on the semantic level  . The semantic features activate relational nodes in the semantic network  . 
Within levels , inhibitory links may occur ; between levels excitatory links may exist . However , there are no innhibitory links within the semantic network  . 
The meaning of idioms is represented as all other relational nodes in the semantic network  . On the level of semantic features , the idiom is represented by a unit that has a gate function similar to so called SIGMA-PI units  ( Rumelhart and McClell and 1986 , p .  73 ) : in order for such a unit A to receive activation  , all units excitating A bottom-up should be active  . If one of the units connected to a unit A is not active  , A does not receive activation . 
Thus when lhefirst word of an idiom is encountered  , the idiom is not activated , because the other word(s ) is ( are ) not active . However , once all relevant lexemes have been encountered in the input  , it becomes active . Note that an external syntactic module excitates one of the nodes in case of syntactic ambiguity  . Since there is more than one syntactic unit activating the idiom  , the overall activation of the idiom becomes higher than competing r ~ odes representing non -idiomatic meanings  . Or , to put it differently , the idiom represents the simplest hypothesis that accounts for the meaning of the lexemes in the input  . 
7 For all introduction to conncclionist models , see Rumclharta . dMcClelland (1986) ; for a critical evaluation see Fodor and Phylyshyn  0988  )  . 
The idiom is the strongest competitor , and inhibits the non-idiomatic readings . 
Without need for feedback from outside the model , the conventionality principle is thus modeled as a natural consequence of the architecture of the model  . The connectionist model has been implemented in C with the use of the Rochester Connectionist Simulator  ( Goddard et al 1989 )  . In the appendix we give a description of technical details of this implementation  . 
7 Concluding remarks
Ambiguity in the case of idiomatic phrases can be resolved on the basis of the conventionality principle  . When compared to strategies as used in Stock ( 1989 )  , both models presented here have the advantage that they don't process idioms until all relevant lexical material has been encountered in the input and operate in a bestfirst fashion  . Therefore they contribute to the efficiency of the parsing process  . The conneetionist model has one further advantage : the conventionality principle results naturally from the architecture of the model  , and does not have to be stipulated explicitely . The obvious disadvantage of this model is the necessity for parallel hardware for realistic implementations  . Future research will include the true integration with a syntactic module  . Then , it will also be able to take the precise syntactic form of idiomatic phrases into account  . 

The authors would like to thank Walter Daelemans and the visitors of the Colloquium " Computer and Lexicon "  12  &  13 Oct ,  1989 , Utrecht for their useful comments . 
Wietske Sijtsma commented on English grammaticality and style  . 


Bobrow , S . and Bell , S .  1973 . On catching onto idiomatic expressions . Memory and Cognition 3, 343-346 . 
Cacciari , C . and Tabossi , E1988 . The comprehension of Idioms . Journal of Memory and Language , 27, 668-683 . 
Chafe , W .  1968 . Idiomaticity as an anomaly in the Chomskyan Paradigm  . Foundations of Language 4, 109-127 . 
Cottrell , G .   1989 A model of lexic~d access of ambiguous words . In : Small , S . , Cottrel , G . , and Tanenhaus , M . , 1988 . Lexical ambiguity resolution . San Mateo : Kaufmann . 
Fodor , J . and Pylyshyn , Z .  1988 . Connectionism and cognitive architecture : A critical analysis  . Cognition , 1988, 12, p . 3-70 Gazdar , G . , Klein , E . , Pullum , G . and Sag , I . 1985 Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar . Basil Blackwell , Oxford . 
Gibbs , R . , 1980 . Spilling the beans on understanding and memory for idioms in conversation  . Memory and
Cognition 8, 149-156.
Gibbs , R . , and Nay , "& N .  1989 . Psycholinguistic Studies on the syntactic behavior of Idioms  . Cognitive Psychology 21, 100-138 . 
Goddard , N . , Lynne , K . , Mintz , T . , and Bukys , L . 1989 Rochester Connectionist Simulator . Technical Report . 
University of Rochester.
Gross , M . , 1984 . Lexicon-grammarnd the synU~ctic analysis of French  . In Proceedings COLING'84 . 
Koller , W . , 1977 . Redensarten : linguistische Aspect e , Vorkommens analysen . Sprachspiel . Ttibingen : Niemeyer . 
Koskenniemi , K .  1983 . Two-level morphology . PhD-thesis . University of Helsinki . 
Lancker , D . van and Canter , G .  1981 . Idiomatic versus literal interpretations of ditropically ambiguous sentences  . 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 24, 6469.
Linden , E . vander , 1989 . Idioms and flexible categorical grammar . In Everaert and van der Linden ( Eds . ) 1989 . Proceedings of the First Tilburg Workshop on Idioms  . Tilburg , the Netherlands , May 19, 1989 . Tilburg :

Pesetsky , D .  1985 . Morphology and Logical form . Linguistic Inquiry , 16193-246 . 
Rumelhart , D . and McClell and , J .  1986 . Parallel Distributed processing . Explorations in the microstucture of cognition . Cambridge , Massachusetts , MIT press . 
Schweigert , W . and Moates , D .  1988 . Familia ridiom comprehension . Journal of Psycholinguistic Research , 17, pp .  281-296 . 
Stock , O .  1989 . Parsing with Flexibility , Dynamic Strateogies , and Idioms in Mind . Computational Linguistics 1, 119 . 
Swinney , D .  1981 . Lexical processing during sentence comprehension : effects of higher order constraints and implications for representation  . I:T . Meyers , J . Laver and J . Anderson ( eds . ) The cognitive representation fspeech . North-Holland . 
Swiney , D . and Cutler , A .  1979 . The access and process?ing of idiomatic expressions  . JVLVB 18,523-534 . 
Thibadeau , R . , Just , M . , and Carpenter , P .  1982 . A Model of the Time Course and Content of Reading  . Cognitive Science 6, 157-203 . 
Wasow , T . , Sag , I . , and Nunberg , G .  1983 . Idioms : an interim report . In Shiro Hattori and Kazuko Inoue ( Eds . ) Proceedings of the Xlllth international congress of linguists  . Tokyo:CIPL 102-115 . 
Wood , M . McGee , 1986 . A definition of idiom . Masters thesis , University of Manchester (1981) . Reproduced by the Indiana University Linguistics Club  . 
24848 emarlll ? network kick(ob ~) kick(~ , dion ) d~r , pa/I ( objocl ) aiP all
Semantic foalure 88yntactio features

Fig ( 2 ) Network representation : Un ~= im~ati ~ exte*ni li~l from sy~~lcl ~ module : Unils ~ al~o ~lom ~ k ~ put Irc ~ l ~  J6 ~ Iov ~
Fig (3) Unit structure
Fig ( 4 ) Activation level of tile word form and syntactic units  1 ooot IF . . . . . . . . . .
~1.;.iF!'\[ii iii ..: ..,,,..
750 ":  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ~"  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , o0_,t l , .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 

Cycles-El-kick bucket kickN ~; ;'~- kick V . ~! ~ i ; # . . bucket N "~ " I 000 ( I ) ? ? 750 . > "6 < 500 lg ( . ) Activation level of the semantic units and tile semantic network 
YFf / "% "% ~' ~5 10 15 20
Cycleskick as action die as idiom kick ( action ) die 52 49

The connectionist model for the retrieval of idioms as presented in section  6 is based on the mechanism of interactive activation and competition  ( IAC )  . An ideal IAC network consists of nodes that can take on continuous values between a minimum and a maximum  . The activation of the units is also supposed to change only gradually in time  . This ideal is approximated by dividing time into a series of small steps  . If we choose an activation function that cannot change very rapidly this discrete model acts as a good approximization for the ideal IAC-network  . 
The network ( Figure ( 2 ) ) consists of a set of nodes that are connected with links which can be excitatory or inhibitory  ( with a negative weight value )  . Some units can receiv external stimuli , e . g . input from the syntactic module . The internal structure of a unit is shown in Figure  ( 3 )  . The input links are connected to a site that corresponds to their type  . So each unit has distinct sites for external , excitatory and inhibitory links . The gate unit also offers a separate gates ite with a special site function  . 
The site functions for the external , excitatory and inhibitory links simply compute the weighted sum of the input values Iv  . 
Sv = ~ wiIvi
The site function for the gate site is a kind of " weighted AND " function  . Its behaviour is similar to the weighted sum function when all input links have a value different from zero  . However if one of the input links connected to the gate site is zero  , the output Sv of the gates ite function is also zero  . The output of each site is scaled in order to control the intluence of the different sites on the activation value  . 
Ne ~ input = ScinhSvi , ~ h+Sc , zcSvezc+Sc ~= tSv , zt+Scgat , Svo , ~ t  ~ The activation value Av for a new timestamp t can now be computed : 
When Net input is larger than zero :
Avt = Avt-l-4- ( maz-Avt-1 ) Net input_de cay ( Avt-1_vest ) 
When Net input is less than zero :
Avt = Avt-1 + ( Avt-1_min ) Net input_de cay ( Avt-1_ves ~ ) We see that the influence of Net input on Av decreases when Av reaches its minimum or maximum value  . On the other hand the influence of the decay rate is high in the upper and lower regions  . When Net input becomes zero , the Activation value slowly decreases to its rest value  . The output value of the unit is equal to its activation  , but only if the activation level is above a predefined treshold value  . Otherwise the output is zero . 
So a unit with maximum activation that does not receive input anymore  , slowly decreases its output value and than suddenly drops to zero be acuse its activation is below treshold value  . This nonlinear behaviour is at ~ essential property of connectionist models  . 
The bottom-up links are stronger than the topdown links because a unit may only be activated by bottom-up evidence  . Top-down information may however influence the decision process at a lower level  . 
The values of the parameters in the model are :
Sci , , h0.6
Se , , c0.6
Sc , , t0.6
Scaat ~0 . 6 treshold 0 . 5 decay 0 . 1 bottom-up weights 0 . 8 topdown weights 0 . 25 inhibitory weights -0 . 8 external input weights 1 . 0 max 1 . 0 min-1 . 0 rest 0 A simulation consists of a number of cycles in which activation spreads through the network  . In each cycle the output and activation values for a time t are calculated from the values on time  t1  . Figure ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) show the activation levels of the active units in the model : only activation levels above treshold  ( 500 ) are displayed . 
At the beginning of the simulation all units are in rest state  . We start the simulation for the disambiguation of " kick  ( the ) bucket " by setting the output value of the external unit " kick " representing the output of a subword form level to  1  . After three update cycles , the output of the external unit II ( representing the fact that bucket is recognized ) is set to 1 . The duration of an external input is always one cycle  . The availability of syntactic information is simulated by activating IIIb and III cbefore cycles even  . Figure ( 4 ) shows that the unit representing kick as a verb immediately follows this syntactic information and " kick as a noun " falls beneath activation treshold  . After some more cycles a stable situation is reached  ( Figure ( 5 ) ) which represents he best fitting hypothesis : the idiomatic reading  . 

