SEMANTIC MATCHING OF FERS ANDJ OBSE ARCHBET WEEN JOB 

COLING90
Jos 6 VEG A

72, Quaides Carri 6 res
94220 CHARENTON(FRANCE)
Phone : (1) 489 381 21 , Fax : ( 1 ) 4 3   75   79   79 The members of the development team were : B Carden  , A Chaouachi , BEuzenat , G Klintzing , MMacary , R Leborgne . We wish to thank the LEMONDE newspaper team for their collaboration during the specification phase  . 
I The primary objective of this system which was developed for the LEMONDE daily newspaper  , is to offer an efficient tool for a rapid and intelligent job searching service to professionals in the context of the ever increasing number of advertisements in the printed press  . 
Traditionally , offers of employment appear in newspapers and magazines and sometimes cover twenty pages  . The person in search of employment faces the daunting t~tsk of daily readings of lists of job offers  . 
the system will propose to the candidate 3 categories of job offers : 1  . -Project manager realtime-Project manager in process control-Project manager in automation & industrial computing-tlead of process control department  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
FUNCTION SPROPOSED BY THE SYSTEM 2 . -Project manager in softwar engineering .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
This system carries out an optimized comparison between the job offers in the advertise data base and the requests and/or curriculum vitae entered by end-users at their terminals  ( minitel )  . This is performed by extracting pertinent information from the input texts and comparing it at semantic level with the Knowledge Base and the data of the indexed offers  . 
3.- Project manager in computing

The End-User Interface
The requirements expressed in the job offer should resemble as closely as possible the characteristics of the candidate or at least be semantically close  . More precisely , the results of the matching process are grouped according to the three following criteria : - the requirements of the position are directly fulfilled by the characteristics of the candidate -the requirements expressed in the job offer are met only partially the job offers require characteristics other than those expressed in the candidate'scurriculumvitae  , but are in the same semantic field . 
For example , if the requested position is: (  1  ) ' project manager realtime computing ' , The end-user interface allows the candidate to enter his curriculum vitae in natural language  2  . 
Part of the interaction with the candidate concerns the identification of unknown words  ( typing errors and spelling mistakes ) at which point the system asks the user to correct his text  . When a user's request does not match with any requirements in the job offers database  , the system enters into a dialogue with the candidate in order to relax or modify the constraints he imposed on the job search criteria at initial request time  . 
The job offers proposed are assembled into groups according to their semantic pertinence with respect o the candidate's request  . 
Databases 1_ This system is in operation since September 89 and can'be consulted by Minitel , using telephone number 3615 and selecting the LM/EMPLOI service . 
The system uses linguistic data : 2- The user can express his attributes freely and without constraints  , contrary to SQL , for example . 
I verbs and a certain umber of nouns ; -a dictionary specialized in the universe of employment  ( professions , training , universities , software tools , regions ,  . .); - a Knowledge Base ( KB ) 3 . 
The conceptual , semantic and pragmatic models of this application are represented in the KB  . This KB describes certain facts which are universal truths and others which are only true within the context of the universe of employment  . 
The job offers and the curriculum vitae of the candidates  ( or users ) have been modelled using the object analogy . 
Each conceptual object has an associated attribute list  ( domains ) with values which instantiate them . The values , of a particular domain are linked together by semantic and pragmatic relations  . In the same way , relations may exist between values of different domains  . 
For example:

Qual ~ ionFu ~ Bran ~ / ~ marketing trade engl~a ~' ee ~ Icnnician compu ~ oase where POSITION is an  9  . b . j_e . ~ . Qualification , Function, . . . are the domains . Marketing , computing .   .   .   . the v_z3 Jl ~ . Moreover , we can see an " upper-level " relation between technician & engineer  , and a generic term relation between computing and database  . 
The al~xl . v ., ~, ~
Thesy . , ; temuses morphologic and syntactic analysers and a semantic analysis engine called the " matching machine "  ( MM )  . 
The rule sets ( see below for further details ) and grammars used by the morphologic and syntactic analysers in this application were designed to be linguistically robust and rapid in execution  . Given that the application was designed for 200 simultaneous Minitell 4 connexions by the response time for these analysers must be extremely short  . 
3- The combined size of the two dictionaries is approximately  30  , 000 words with 3000 referential wo Ids for the KB . 
4- This physical architecture consists of a : frontend which manages the connexions and serializes the user's queries  , and a backend supporting the analysers . 

With regard to questions of morphology , the analysers possess rule sets describing inflexion and derivation for the recovery of canonical forms of words  5stocked in the dictionary starting from the text of the user's request or curriculum vitae  . 
This analyser also possesses rules for treating initial letters  ( H . E . C . <==> HEC , CIA <==> C . I . A .   .   .   .   .  ) , abbreviations ( St 6<==> Soci6t6 , m <==> m~tre .   .   .   .  ) , " floating prefix " terms ( micro-informatique <---=> microinformatique <==> microinformatique  )  , concatenated or disjoint expressions ( mettrenoeuvre <==> les mesures ~ rapidement ng_q_9  . ? uvre . . . .
pomme deterre .   .   .   . ) and other morpholexical phenomena . 
Concerning syntactic analysis , the corresponding analyser possesses a grammar of " standard " French  . 
However , phenomena such as anaphora , coreferencing ( except in certain minor cases ) , the scope of negations , among others are not treated . This is a deliberate choice since the persons using this system  ( through their requests or curriculum vitae ) do not often use these elements of style in their texts  ( texts are chiefly noun phrases or verbal sentences  )  . 
It is important onote that the analysers described above  6 are independent of the application and can be reused for other applications  . 
Concerning the text comprehension phase , the MM treats the information received from the syntactic analyser in conjunction with information drawn from the Knowledge Base  . 
The MM uses functions or " methods " which carry out specific treatments according to the type of objects under consideration  . 
How the Matchin ~ Machine works
The functioning of the MM is at the same time semantic and pragmatic and  4 distinct steps are identified . They are : -1 . Recuperation of normalized terms from the user's request or curriculum vitae  ;  -2  . Identification of the domain and oftile object concerned by these terms  ;  -3  . Semantico-pragmatic spreading from tile initial terms according to the " method " used for their associated object  . 
5-For us , canonical words are : a singular , masculine nouns or adjectives , and roots of verbs . 
6- except some rules used to handle special words like the acronyms  , the " telematic language " , etc . 
-4 . Extraction , intersection and classification of the indexed job offers according to the initial terms and those identified by the spreading process  . 
~qp_ . _ 2_serves to unambiguously identify the objects designated by the normalized terms which were extracted from the user's request  . For example , in the following request : ( 2 ) Expert translator of text in English the analyser will assign the term " English " to the domain FUNCTION of the object POSITION since this term designates  , in this context , a specialization within the profession of the translator  . 
In contrast , if the request is: ( 3 ) Civil engineer spealing English in this case , the term " English " will be considered , in this context , as a value designating an object LANGUAGE ( which is one of the conceptual level objects found in the job offers  )  7 . 
consists in passing from one term to another , starting at an initial term , in a tree-walk through the semantic and pragmatic network of the KB  . This is performed in an outward spreading manner and is determined by the methods associated with the object types designated by the initial terms  . The arcs between the nodes of the network are weighted and the result of a spreading process is a new term Y at a distance n from a starting term X  . 
The distance that a spreading process is allowed to run through the network is determined by the methods  . This distance is one of the parameters necessary to calculate the final distance in the following step  . 
is charged with the ordering of the job offers by comparing initial and final terms  . 
The set . , ; of job offers then undergo set operations ( boolean operations )  . This treatment is directed by a number of dynamically acting rules  . That is , the actions of these set operations depend on the semantic role assigned to the terms during the second step of analysis and the objects concerned by these terms  . 
For example , for the request : ( 4 ) Computing journalist 7_ Among the examples mentioned here , we could consider the following : ( 6 ) English translator Given that the model does not take nationalities into account  , the system will interpret his request as in example  ( 2 )  . 
the job offers proposed must correspond to positions for journalist specializing in the computing domain and not to positions in the press and/or informatics  . 
However , in the following example : ( 5 ) UNIX/C programmer the system must propose positions for specialists in UNIX/C  . It will also propose job offers for software programmers in which n__qo mention of operating systems or programming language is made  , and others in which other operating systems or languages were mentioned  . 
The classification of job offers is made as a function of the distance and the criteria fulfilled by the request  . The job offers will be presented to the user according to this classification  ( see Example ( 1 ) ) . 

Although we use natural language processing as a communication iter face  , we have not neglected the strong points of ' formatted-screen based dialogue '  . 
Indeed , much emphasis was given to the design phase of the ~  rg0n0mics   ( creen content , fields , messages . . . ) and cinematics ( dynamic of screens as a function of the users ' actions  ) of the application i order to integrate the better aspects of both dialogue modes into the interface  . 
In fact , the experiments we conducte during the specification phase demonstrated that  , in such an application , it is not feasible to present othe user a virtually blank screen containing brief suggestions such as " Entery our CV " or " Enter a request "  . 
As a result we designed the interface to present o the user fields corresponding to conceptual objets in the knowledge base in which he is allowed to express himself without lexical or syntactic restriction  . In this way the user feels guided through the session without being constrained to reply to imposed questions  . 
By integrating natural language processing into the application we have implemented a new approach to man-machine dialogue in the field of online job offer services  ( contrary to the classical arborescent menu-driven interfaces  )  . 
The choice of combining the advantages of formatted-screen base dialogue and the constraint -free approach of natural language text input makes a significant advance towards the design of effective user-friendly man-machine interfaces  . 

