STS : An Experimental Sentence Translation System
Eric Wehrli *
University of Geneva
1211 Geneva 4


STS is a small experimental sentence translation system developed to demonstrate he efficiency of our lexicalist model of translation  . Based on a GB-inspired parser , lexical transfer and lexical projection , STS provides realtime accurate English translations for a small but nontrivial subset of French sentences  . 
1 Introduction
As a preliminary step towards the development of an online interactive system  , we develop the STS system to establish whether our lexical is translation model  , using a GB- . inspired parser , lexical transfer and lexical projection , provides the kind of efficiency required for online translation  2  . In its present implementation , STS translate sentences from French to English . It can handle a limited , although not trivial subset of clausal structures  , using a lexical database of more than 5 , 000 entries ( including compounds and idiomatic expressions )  . 
Accurate natural language translation requires a wide range of cognitive abilities  , including ram-matical knowledge of the languages involved but also some amount of extralinguistic knowledge and common sense reasoning  . Lack of we U-defined theoretical models of knowledge and conmlon sense reasoning makes fully automatic high quality translation unlikely in the near future  . 
In the meantime , what appears to be an increasingly appealing alternative is online interactive machine translation  , i . e . systems which can consult the user when they are unable to solve a problem  1  . However , in order to be a viable alternative to other machine or machine-aided translation models  , and in addition to the usual requirements of reasonable quality and low cost  , an online interactive system must also satisfy the requirements of realtime systems and in particular be fast enough not to use the user's patience  . 
* Part of the work described in this paper has been supported by a grant from the Swiss national science foundation  ( grant no 11-25362 . 88) . 
' For a discussion of online interactive translation see Kay  ( 1982 )  , Tomita (1986) , Johnson and Whitelock (1987) , among others . 
2 Architecture of the system
The basic architecture of the STS system is the familiar transfer model with its three main components : analysis  , transfer and generation . To see how these components interact , consider the following ( drastically over simplified ) sketch of the translation process : an input sentence in the source language  ( SL ) is first mapped onto some formal representation for this language  ( S-structure )  . This is done by the parser , on the basis of lexical information and detailed knowledge about the grammar of SL  . The transfer component maps then the S-structure : returned by the parser onto an appropriate S -structure in the target language  . The transfer is done constituent by constituent , in a topdown fashion , starting with the top S ( or S ) constituent . For each constituent , he lexical head is first considered : Its lexeme is associated with a set of possible translations  , i e . one or more lexemes in the target language . Once the relevant lexeme has been selected an appropriate structure is projected on the basis of its lexical properties  2For a description of the parser used in the STS project  , see Wehrli (1988) . 
1 language grammar . Notice that the projection is done solely on the basis of information internal to the target language  . 
In other words , the interface structure is minimal , as it should be , and is almost entirely a matter of lexical : napping  . Both the analysis and generation modules are completely independent of each other  . This again , is a desirable feature , in the sense that , for instance , the same parser can be used no matter what the target language : night be  . In fact , given that the S-structures in this system are solely justified in terms of the gra ~ unar  , the parser ( and generator ) do not have to be application dependent . 
2.1 Lexical database
The lexical database is the central piece of the STS system  . It contains crucial information used by the three active components of the system  . This information is distributed in two monolingual lexicons  ( SL lexicon and TL lexicon ) along with one bilingua lexicon . We shall consider them in turn : 2 . 1 . 1 Monol ingual exicons We assume a static - or relational-conception of morphology  , along the lines of Jackendoff (1975) , We hrli (1985) . According to this view , morphological relations between two or more lexical entries are expressed by a complex network of relations  . 
A monolingual lexicon distinguishes three basic entities : lexeme  , word and idiom . A lexeme is an abstract lexical unit , which can be compared , roughly speaking , to a standardictionary entry . It stands for a whole class of morphological variants  . By contrast , a word corresponds to a particular morphological instantiation of a lexeme  . In other words , we make a clear distinction among : features which may vary within flexion and those which are invariant  . To give an example , am , are , were , being , be , etc . are words , : nor-phological variants of the lexeme " be " . The lexemes are associated all the features which are independent of the morphological realization  , such as semantic features , subcategorization features , and the like . Features which depend on inflex-ional markers-e . g . tense , number , person , etc . 
-are naturaly attached to the words . In addition to words and lexemes , a monolingual lexicon also contains a list of idioms  , i e . pharses which have a fixed , noncompositional meaning , such as to kick the bucket or to be caught red -handed  . 
The notion of lexeme turns out to be one of great significance : Not only does it make possible to factor out basic syntactic and/or senmn-tic properties hared by morphologically related words  . At the same time , it also provides the abstract lexical level which is relevant for lexical transfer  . 
2.1.2 Bilingual dictionary
The bilingual dictionary specifies the set of possible relations between lexemes of the source language and lexemes of the target language  . Each entry in this dictionary specifies one SL lexeme and one TL lexeme  . In case one particular SL lexeme has more than one corresponding TL lexeme  ( e . g . aimer-7 to like , to love , etc . ) , the bilingual dictionary contains as many entries as there are correspondences  . The bilingual dictionary contains other kind of information as well  . 
For instance , in the case of argument-taking elements , such as verbs or predicative adjectives , an entry of the bilingual dictionary must also specify how the arguments of the SL predicate match the arguments of the TL predicate  . 
3 The transfer component
The role of the transfer component is to : napSL S-structures onto TLS-structures  . In STS , this mapping is done indirectly , by means of two mechanisms : lexical transfer and lexical projection  . 
Transfer applies to the syntactic structures returned by the parser  . In a topdown fashion , starting with the main S-structure , the transfer procedure considers the lexical head of a phrase  , look it up in the bilingual dictionary and selects the most appropriate TL lexeme  , based on contextual information , features in the bilingual dictionary . Once a lexeme has been selected , a process of lexical projection creates a TL syntactic structure on the basis of the lexical properties of the TL lexeme  , and of the general syntactic fer procedure considers the complements of the head  , using the same strategy . In addition to lexica J\[transfer and lexical projection  , the transfer procedure is guided by the argument mapping information found in the bilingual dictionary ~ as mentioned above  . 
In the STS system , discrepancies between SL and TL , such as differences in word order or argument matching  , can be handled quite naturally without the need of complex and adhoc structural transferules  . To illustrate this point , the fact that a sentence containing a modal verb must be assigned a bi-sentential structure in French  , but not in English follows from the lexical properties of modal verbs in French and in English  , i . e . French modals a remain verbs selecting an infinitival sentential complement  , while English modals are not marked as main verbs  . Within a linguistic theory which assumes that phrase structures are projected from their lexical elements  , the structural differences between French and English sentences follows from the lexical differences between  , say , pouvoir and car ~ . 
(2) a . l ' hommed on tvoussemble zavoir oublidle nom nepourra-t-ilp as vous four nirles renseignements dont vous avez be-so in ? b  . won't them an whose name you seem to have forgotten be able to provide you with the information that you need ? Such examples show that the STS system can succesfully handle structures of a nontrivial level of complexity  . The second example , in particular , shows the ability of this system to handle problems such as difference in word-order  , argument matching and idiomatic expressions . 
In addition , this model proved extremely efficient-total time for parsing and translation of the above sentences averages  150 ms/word 4 -which is a crucial prerequisite for online interaction  . 

Jackendoff , R .  (1975) . " Morphological and semantic regularities in the lexicon  , " Language 51:639-671 . 
4 Some examples
Two examples of translations produced by the STS : system are given below  . In the first example , a is the input sentence , b the structure returned by the parser , and c the sentence returned by the translators . The structure has been omitted in the second example  . 


leliv requevous regardez semble ~ tre facile ~ fire  . 
\[s\[NP\[I ~ plelivre\]j\[~\[ c0MP \[~Pquelj\]\[s\["NPeJk\["VP\["CLI v?usk\]regax dez\[NP eJj \] JJJi\[vP semble\[\[s\[NPe\]i \ [ uP  6tre \[ AP\["NPeJlfacile\[~h\[s\[sPe\]\ [vplire\[t ~ reSl\]\]\]\]\]\]\]\]\]\]c  . the book at which you are looking seems to be easy to read  . 
3The structures returned by the parser correspond to slightly simplified S-structure representations of a GB-granmlar  . The indexes in ( lb ) express A'-binding or control relations with empty categories  ( e . g . \[ NP el ) . 
Johnson , R . and P . Whitelock (1987) . " Machine Translation as Expert Task , " in S . Nirenburg ( ed . ) Machine Translation , Cambridge University Press . 
Kay , M .  (1982) . " Machine Translation , " American Journal of Computational Linguistics 8:74-78  . 
Tomita , M . (1986). Efficient Parsing for Natural
Language , Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wehrli , E .  (1985) . "Design and Implementation of a Lexical Data Base  , " Proceedings of the 2nd European ACL Conference , pp .  146-153 . 
Wehrli , E . , 1988 . " Parsing with a GB grammar , " in U . Reyle and C . Rohrer ( eds . ), Natural Language Parsing and Linguistic
Theories , Reidel , 1988.
4 CPU time on a DEC Vaxstation II computer.

