VIRTEX-a German-Russlan Translation Exper iment 
B . Busehbeck , R . Hensehel , I . H6ser , G . Klimonow , A . K ~ stner , I . Starke
Zentral institut f~rS prach wissenschaft
Aka demieder Wissense haft ends rDDR
Prenzlauer Prome nade 149-152 , Berlin ,  1100 , DD ~ Machine Translation from German into Russian did not gain the attention it deserves so far  . Especially such typical Russian phenomena like the aspect of verbs complicate the trans lation process  . The known MT approaches do not deal with such problems in a satisfactory way  . To over-come this lack , we started the German . -Russian translation experiment VIRTEX . We focussed our attention on the crucial po in t--a high quality translation of verbal groups  ( VIRTEX = Verbs-into-Russian Translation Experiment  )   . That means , VIRTEX is made to solve on princi-plethel inguistic difficulties connected wi th verb translation : - recognition of German analytical tense forms  , passive constructions , reflexive forms and verbs with detached pre fixes-analysis of complex German verb groups  ( modal and modal-like constructions ) -selection of Russian equivalents accor- ding to valency frames including seman~tic features of verb complements-choice of the appropriate Russian aspect form passive- active transformation in case of missing Russian passive form adequate translation of modal construc-tions  . 
The used vocabulary , above 200 sample verbs , is selected to represent these phenomena completely  . 
To translate verbal groups adequately , ? t is necessary to have some context . 
T berefore we accept as input simple sentence 9 with verb complements and adver-bials . That means we have also a set of nouns , pronouns , adverbs and some other words , The restricted syntax model is made for short main clauses  ; it excludes rela--tire and other subor d inated clauses  , at-tributes and infinitive clauses wi th complements  . VIRTEX can be classified as an NT system between second and third generation with a syntactic interface structure completed by some semantic in-formation  . The system's architecture is the classica lone  . Analysis , Transfer and Synthesis are sequentially p rocessed sepa-rater outines  . For each of them an extra lexicon has been imp lemented  . The input-work is supported by special too lsinclud-ing an automatic generation of the inflec-tional types  . While the procedures are written in LISP , the dictionaries and their editors are made in dBASE  . The format restrictions of dBASE are compen-sated by a special management of the en -tries and a corresponding way of LISP access to them  . VIRTEX runs on PC-XT . 
Some steps of the system will shortly be il lust rated  . 
ANALYSIS
The lexical . entries for German syntac-tic analysis are taken from the analysis dictionary which is combined with a system of inflection l ists  ; an analysis of in-flectional endings is embedded in the dictionary access  . A wordform entry con-tains word class info rmation  , morphologi-cal features and values , some semantic information and the name of the lexeme  . 
While the system is running , the lists of information and features are converted  1   321 into numbers . 
For syntactic parsing an ATN-grammar is used to recognize nominal and prepositio ~ nal phrases  , adverbials and verbs or verbal groups . A special embedded program analyzes the verb constituents  . Homonymous morphological and word class features are disambiguated as far as possible through-out the parsing process  . 

All transfer rules are written within our tree transformation ' language GRACOLI  . 
This is a universal software tool developed to handle MT transf  , r problems . 
GI~ACOLI manages the input and processing of t ree rewriting rules  . One rule consists of a lefts idean dar ight side tree  . 
According to the usual notation of syntac-t ictress  , every tree node can be labelled by a finite set of attribute-value-pairs  . 
So we have got a universal rule format for st ructure changing with assignment of new labe ls depending on the occurrence of the lefts idestructure and left side label condit ions  . It includes all simplier transferact ions like label tests  , structure tests , lexical transfer etc . The compilation of GRACOLI rule sequences in GRACOLI grammars allows high evidence and easy correction of implemented transfer a lgorithms  . 
The transfer lexicon comprises all lexeme -dependent translation information  . 
As for the verbs in case of lexical ambi- guity  , the equivalents are listed in an orders ui table for selecting the appropriate one by checking  ( I ) characteristics of valency frames ,   ( 2 ) semantic features of verb comple-ments or ( 3 ) other conditions . 
adI ) E . g . . the verb e in t rs ten may be d i sambiguated by the prepositions : e intre ~ en f~r-v ~ tu Datjza ' to standup for '  ; s intreten in - v stupat ~ v ' to joins th . ' ad 2 ) One or more semantic features are attributed to nouns  . They may be used for disambiguation , e . g . : absehlie ~ en ( accusative inanimated ) , -> ~' to lock ' absehlie Ben ( accusative process ) -> zakanchivati ' to terminate ' ad 3 ) Concrete noun lexemes can also be used as fil lers of verb slots  , e . g . 
abschlie Ben ( accusative Vertra ~' contract ' ) -> zakluchatj ( do_govor ) ' to conclude ' . 
The form of lexical entries allows to adapt them as GRACOLI rules  . With the held of the transfer lexicon lex ieal and valen-cy frame transfer is managed simultaneous ~ IF  . Passive sentences get a special pre ~ process ing before the lexicon is con-sulted  . After this , two distinguished GRACOLI procedures for a c tive and passive voice select the aspect fo rm according to a hierarchy of criteria  . Three groups of such criteria are dist inguished :  ( I ) a lexieal criterion ,   ( 2 ) syntactic-semantic criteria and ( 3 ) German tense criteria . 
edI ) For certain German verbs , the trans-fer lexicon specifies which of the two aspects of the Russian equivalent has to be chosen  , e . g . 
Pr~fun ~ bestehen -> s dati ~ k zamen ( perfective aspect ) ' to pass an examination ' sich be m hhenum -> dobivats a  ( imperfective aspect ) ' to try hard ' . 
ad2 ) In some eases verbal aspect depends on the va lency frame of the German verb or/and on semantic features of comple-ments : 
EF schriebaneinem Such- ) Onpisglknl_~'he wrote a book ' ( preposition an , case dative --> imperfective aspect ) . 
The reoccurrence of verbs with certain types of adverbials influences the verbal aspect choice  , too . Adverbs like jahrelang 32 22' for years ' , ~' o , ften ' , z n_E99_e_h~hmend ' more and more ' demand the imperfeetive aspect  , but ~ l~ts ! ich . ' suddenly ' , unerwar-te__~t'unexpected ' , de ~' soo ~' the perfective one . If there occur adverbials of both types with in the sentence  , the choice of Imperfeetive aspect is prefer - t'ed~ad  3  ) If none of the afore said criteria appl i es  , the tense of the finite German verb determines the verbal aspect : future  , perfect , pluper fect = -> perfective aspect present .   . --> imperfective aspect In case of ' preter ite  , perfect and future semantic verb subclassi fication as well as definiteness of the d i  . rect object are additionally taken into account  . 
A separate GRACOLI grammar is also used to car ry out the structural transfer of modal constructions because the descrip-tion of the complex conditions of these construct ions does not fig in the frame of the lexical entries of the transfer dic-tionary  . This shall be demonstrated by the transla tion of the German verb k~nnen'can '  , ' to be able to ' . It is necessary to select a limited number of translation patterns because of the wide variety of corresponding Russian construct ions  . Thus two Russian constructions were taken in to consideration  . Their choice depends mainly on the kind of the subject and the voice of the infiniti ve  . 
( I ) The impersonal construction with the pred icative mozhn_qo ' it is possible ' is selec ted if one of the following condi-tions to the subject is fulfilled :- indefini te-personal pronoun manor-a noun phrase wh ich belongs to the sub-class ' process '  , or - a formal is , or there is no subject , for example :
Eskann ( ibm ) geholfen . werden.
' It is possible to help him . '-> Emume , hagomoch ' ( 2 ) The personal construction with a fi-nl te form of the  . modal verb moth &' can ' , ' to be able to ' is ~ preferred if :- none of the above given conditions is applicab le  , and if-the subject is a personal ODe , for example :
EPkann die Aufsabel ~ sen'He is able to solve the task'->Onmoshetreshitjzadachu  . 

The transfer result is a constituent struc ture containing the Russian equiva-lents and information for syntactic and morpholog ical synthesis  . Since the valen-cy frame transfer is al readyd one  , only some tasks remain for syntactic synthes is  . 
The Russian verbs ! must be expanded if they demand analytical fcrms  , that holds for future , subjunctive and passive construc-tions . Adverbial groups which are handled as only one constituent will get their explici t form now  . Gender agreement for Russian preterite and re flexive forms is formed here  . Furthermore , ~ usai an word order processing is done . 
Input of the morphological synthesis are the results of the previous steps  . 
Information of the Russian dictionary entr ies is combined with the inflection all ists  . 
The experimental system VIRTEX proposes a so lution for the aspect problem  , and is therefore not only a new one in the long list of existing MT systems  , but a sub-stantial contribution to MT research  . 
VIRTEX will be demonstrated at COLING'90.

