Towards Personal MT:
general design , dialogue structure , potential role of speech
Clwistian BOITET
GETA , IMAG Institute
CIdJF&CNRS )
BP53X , 38041 Grenoble Cedex , France

Personal MT ( PMT ) is a new concept in dialogue-based MT ( DBMT )   , which we are currently studying and prototyping in the LIDIA project Ideally  , a PMT system should run on PCs and be usable by everybody  . 
Togethis/her text translated into one or several languages  , the writer would accepto cooperate with the system in order to standardize and clarify his /her document  . There are many interesting aspects in the design of such a system  . The paper briefly presents some of them ( HyperText , distributed architecture , guided language , hybrid transfer/interlingua , the goes on to study in more detail the structure of the dialogue with the writer and the place of speech synthesis  \[1\]  . 

Personal Machine Translation , dialogue-based Machine Translation , Man-Machine Dialogue , Ambiguity Resolution , Speech Synthesis . 

A first classification of MAT ( Machine Aided Translation ) systems is by user . " Classical " MAT systems are for the watcher , for the revisor ( posteditor ) , or for the translator . A new concept is that of " personal
MT ", or MAT for the writer.
MT for the watcher appeared in the sixties . Its purpose is to provide informative rough translations of large amounts of unrestricted texts for the end user  . 
MT for the revisor appeared in the seventies . It aims at producing raw translations good enough to be revised by professionals in a cost -effective way  . This implies that the system needs to be specialized to ra certain sublanguage  . For a system to be cost-effective , it is generally agreed that at least 20000 pages must be handled ( e . g . 10000 pages/year for at least 2 years) . 
Leaving " heavy MT " , not adapted to small volumes of heterogeneous texts  , several firms have developed MAT systems for translators  , in the form of tools ( e . g . 
Mercury-Termex ~) , or of integrated environments ( e . g . 
AlpsTSSrU).
The concept of MT for the author ( writer/speaker ) has recently crystallized , building on previou studies on interactive MT , text critiquing and dialog structures \[5 ,  6 ,  7 ,  9 ,  12\] . Its aim is to provide high quality translation /interpretation services to end users with no knowledge of the target languages or linguistics  . 
A sccond classification of MAT systems is by the types of knowledge felt to be central to their flmctioning  . Linguistic Based MT uses : core knowledge about he language  ; specific knowledge about he corpus ( domain , typology ) ; intrinsic semantics ( a term coined by J . P . Desclds to cover all information formally marked in a natural language  , but which refers to its interpretation , such as semantic features or relations : concreteness  , location , cause , instrument . . .  )  ; but not : extrinsic semantics ( tatic knowledge de ~ ribing the domain ( s ) of the text , e . g . in terms of facts and rules ) ; situational semantics ( describing the dynmnic situations and their actors  )   ; pragmatics ( overtor covert intentions in the communicative context  )  . 
Knowledge-Based MT uses extralinguistic knowledge on top of linguistic knowledge  . Finally , Dialogue-Based MT insists on extracting knowledge from a human  ( tile author or a specialist )  . These options are not exclusive , however . In KBMT ~89\[7\] , for example , ambiguities persisting after using linguistic and extralinguistic knowledge are solved through a dialogue with the writer initiated by the " augment or "  . In ATR's Machine Interpretation project , the dialogues center around a well-defined task ( organization of international conferences )  , but may also concern extraneous matters ( cultural events , health problems . . . ) . This feature , added to the enormous ambiguity inherent in speech input  , will likely force such systems to be dialogue -base A as well as knowledge-based  \[5\]  . Ii 1Personal MT , we may rely on some core extralinguistic knowledge base  , but not on any detailed expertise , because the domains and types of text should be unrestricted  . Hence , Personal MT must be primarily dialogue-based . 
A third classification of MAT systems is by their internal organization  ( direct/transfer/interlingua , use of classical or specialized languages , procedurality/declarativeness . . . ) through which socalled " generations " have been distinguished  . This level of detail will not be too relevant in this paper  . 
301\]\[, A project in Personal MT
ILoG ( ~ als
MDIA ( Large Internationalization of the Documents by Interacting with their Authors  ) aims at studying the theoretical and methodological issues of the PMT approach  , to be experimented on by first building a small prototype  , and more generally at promoting this concept within the MT community  . 
We are trying to develop an architecture which would be suitable for very large applications  , to be upscaled later within dustrial partners if results are promising enough  . For example , we don't intend to incorporate more than a few hundred or flmus and words in the prototype's  ( LIDIAol ) dictionaries , although we try to develop robust indexing schemes and to imt  ) lcment the lexical database in a way which would allow supporling on the order of  1 to lOM words in 10 languages . The same goes for the grammars . 
Even in a prototype , however , ttlesh ' ucture of the dialogue with the author must be studied with care  , and offers interesting possibilities . Clearly , the writer should be allowed to write freely , and to decide for himself when and on which part of his document to start any ldnd of interaction  . But changes in the text should be controlled so that not all changes would torce the system to star the interaction a new  . 
From a linguistic point of view , it is extremely exciting to see , at last , a possibility to experiment with Zemb's theme / rheme / pheme " statutory "  , articulation of propositions\[13\] , and/or Prague's topic/focus opposition , which are claimed to be of ut most importance for translation : both are almost impossible to compute automatically  , because the tests are very often expressed in terms of possible transformations ia given discourse context  . But , in PMT , we may ask the author . 
2. Outline
The prototype system for LIDIA-1 is constrained as follows . 
Translation from French into Russian , German and English ( inversing previousy stems ) , with other target languages being studied in cooperative frameworks  ; Small corpus from the Ariane-G 5 user interface ( containing some online documentation )  , in
HyperCard form;
Distributed computer architecture : writer workstation on a Macintosh  ( Plus or SE )  , MT server on a mini(IBM-4361) ; -Guided Language approach , as opposed to Free
Text or Controlled Language;
Linguistic architecture : hybrid
Transfer/lnterlingua.

The choice of HyperCard reflects the fact that Hypertexts are becoming the favorite supports for technical documentation  . It also relics on tile assumption that writers will more readily agree to participating in a dialogue if the tool they are using is very interactive than if they use a more classical text processor  , t : in all y , there are some linguistic advantages . 
First , the textual parts are clearly isolated in fields , and not cluttered with images , formulas , tabs , markups , etc . Scripts should not be . translated -- if they generate messages , these must be taken from normal fields , and not directly generated ( linguistic requirements may lead to better programming practices !  )  . 
Second , the textual parts may be typed , thus greatly facilitating analysis . For example , a given field may contain only titles , another only menu items , another only sentences without the initial subject  ( which is often contained in another field )  , etc . A distinct possibility is to define micro languages a types of very short textual fragments  ( less than 2 or 3 lines , to be concrete ) , and to define sublanguages as structured collections of microlanguages for longer textual fragments  . 
Distributed architecture
The idea to use a distributed architecture has both a practical and theoretical basis  . First , we want to use the Ariane-G5 system , a comprehensive gnerator of MT systems developed over many years  \[11\]  . Although some micros can support this system ( PC~AT/3 70 , PS2/7437) , their user-friendliness and availability are no match to those of the Mac  . 
Second , looking at some other experiences ( Alps , Weidner ) , we have concluded that some parts of sophisticated natural anguage processing cannot be performed in realtime on small and cheap machines without over simplifying the linguistic parts and degrading quality down to near uselessness  . Rather , it should be possible to perform the " heavy " parts in an asynchronous but still user-friendly way  , as IBM researchers have done for the Critique system  \[9\]  . 
Of course , this idea could be implemented on a single machine running under a multitasking operating system  , if such a system were available on the most popular micros  , and provided tile heavy linguistic computations don't take hours  . 
Guided Language
The " guided language approach " is a middle road between free and controlled text  . The key to quality in MT , as in other areas of AI , is to restric the domain in an acceptable way . 
2 natural language restricted in such a way that ambiguities disappear  . That is the approach of the TITUS system : no text is accepted unless it completely conforms to one predefined sublanguage  . While this technique works very well in a very restricte domain  , with professionals producing the texts ( technical abstracts in textile , in this case ) , it seems impossible to generalize it to open -ended uses involving the general public  . 
What seems possible is to define a collection of micro languages or sublanguages  , to associate one with each unit of translation , and to induce the writer/speaker to conform to it  , or else to choose another one . 
Hybrid Transfer/lnterlingua
By " hybrid Transfer/Interlingua " , we mean that the interface structures produced by analysis are multilevel structures of the source language  , in the sense of Vauquois\[4 ,  11 , see also 2 ,  3\] , where some parts are universal ( logico-semantic relations , semantic features , abstract time , discourse type . . . ) , while others are language-specific ( morphosyntactic class , gender , number , lexical elements , syntactic functions . . . ) . In PMT , because of the necessity of lexical clarification  , we should go one step further toward interlingua by relating the " word senses " of the vocabularies of all the languages considered in the system and making them independent objects in the lexical database  . 
II . Structure of the dialogue with the writer . Interactions concerning typology , terminology and style Hence , the first interaction planned in LIDIA concerns typology : given a stack  , the system will first constn~cta " shadow " file  . For each textual field , it will ask its typology ( micro language for very small texts , sublanguages for others ) , and attach it to the corresponding shadow record . In the case of " incomplete " texts , where for example the subject of the first sentence is to be taken from another field  ( as in tables containing command names and their explanations  )  , it will ask how to construct a complete text for translation  , and attach the corresponding rule to the shadow record  . 
The second level of interaction concern spelling.
Any spellchecker will do . However , it would be best to use a lemmatizer relying on the lexical database of the system  , as the user must be allowed to enter new words and will expect a coherent behavior of the entire system  . 
Level three concerns terminology . The lexical database should contain thesaurus relations  , indicating among other things the preferred term among a cluster of  ( quasi- ) synonyms ( e . g . plane/aircraft/ship/plane ) . Which term is preferred often depends on local decisions : it should be easy to change it for a particular stack  , without of course duplicating the thesaurus . Note that the lexical database should contain a great variety of terms  , even incorrect ordubious , whereas terminological databases are usually restricted to normalized or recommended terms  . In PMT , we only want to guide the author : if s/he prefers to use a nonstandard term  , that should be allowed . 
Level four concern style , understood in a simply quantitative way ( average lngth of sentences , fi : equency of complex conjuncts/disjuncts , rare verbal forms , specific words like dont in French , relative frequency of nouns/articles , etc . ) . From the experience of CRITIQUE\[9\] , it seems that such methods , which work in realtime , may be very useful as a first step to guide towards the predetermined text types  ( micro - or sublanguages )  . 
2 . Interactions concerning syntax , semantics and pragmatics Until now , the system has worked directly with the text as written by the author  . For the remaining types of interaction , it will work on a transcription contained in the shadow record  , as well as with some intermediate forms of processing stored in associated records of the shadow file  . This forces to lock the original textual field ( unless the author decides to change it and accepts to start again from level two  )  . 
Level five concerns the fixed forms . It is quite usual , especially in technical documentation , that some groups of words take a fixed meaning in certain contexts  , with specific , noncompositional translations . For example , " Save as " as a menu item Saue as . . . is translated in French as ? n regisl rersous .   .   , and not ~ ts " Sauvercomme " , which would be correct for other uses . As a menu item , this group functions as a proper noun , not as a verbal phrase . The writer should be asked whether a given occurrence of each such group is to be treated as fixed or not  . In the first case , an adequate transcription should be generated in the shadow record C&FXD_Save as "  , for example ) . Certain elements ( such as menu items ) should be automatically proposed for insertion in the list  . 
Level six concerns lexical clarification . First , polysemies are to be solved by asking the writer . For example , the word " dipl6me " is not ambiguous in French . However , if translating from French into English ,   2 possibilitie should be given : " diplfmen on terminal "  ( " diploma " ) or " diplt meterminal " ( " degree " )  . 
Some polysemies are source language specific , some depend on the target languages . We want to treat heminauni form way , by maintaining in the lexical database the collection of all " word senses " C acceptions "  , not really concepts of an ontology as in KBMT-89) , linked by disambiguating questions/definitions to the words/terms of the languages supported by the system  . 
Lexical ellipses can also be treated at that level  . This problem is particularly annoying in MT . Suppose a text is about a spaceship containing a " centrale  61ectrique  "  ( " electric plant " ) and a " centrale inertielle " ( " illcrtial guidance system " )  . The complete form is often replaced by the elided one : " centrale "  . Although it is vital to 32   3 disambiguate for translating correctly ( by the corresponding elided forms : " plant "/ " system "  )  , no automatic solution is known . A given occurrence may be an elision or not . If yes , it is even more difficult to look for a candidate to the complete form in a hypertext than in a usual text  . 
At levels even , the unit of translation ( the content of the shadow field ) has been submitted to a first step of automatic analysis  , which returns a surface structure showing ambiguities of bracketing  ( PP attachment , scope of coordiuation . . . ) . The questions to tim writer should not be asked in linguistic terms  . The idea is to rephrase the input text itself , that is , to present he alternatives in suggestive ways ( on screen , or using speech synthesis-see below ) . 
Some other ambiguities , for instance on reference ( unresolved anaphora ) or syntactic functions ( "Which firm manages this office ?"-- where is the subject ?  ) might be detected at this stage . They may be left for the next step to solve ( actually , this is a general strategy ) , or solved interactively at that point . In our view , that would best be done by producing paraphrases \[ Zajac  1988\]  , or by " templater solution "\[6\] . 
At level eight , the disambiguated surface structure has been . ; ubnfitted to the deep analysis phase , which returns a multilevel structure ( decorated lree encoding severa levels of linguistic interpretation  , universal as well as language specific ) . Some ambiguities may appear during this phase , and becoded in the structure , such as ambiguities on semantic relations ( deep cases )  , deep acmalisation ( time , aspect . . . ) , discourse type ( a French infinitive sentence may be an order or not  , ik ~ r example ) , or theme/theme distinction . Template or paraphraser solution will be used to disambignate  , as no rephrasing of the text can often suffice ( e . g . : " the conquest of the Barbarians ") . 
A suggestion of \[6\] was to delay all interactions until transfer . The view taken here is rather to solve as soon as possible all the ambiguities which cannot be solved automatically later  , or only with much difficulty . 
For example , word sense disambiguation takes place quite early in the above scheme  , and that may give class disambiguation for free . 
A more flexible scheme would be to ask about word senses eariy only if each lemma of the considered word lkm ~ has more t : a none accept km  , if ~ mt , the system could wait until after surface a , m . lysis , which reduce ~ almost all morphosyntacticambi ; ! , t . ' . ities . A variation wonk l be to disambigtm te word senses only after sur/ime analysis has been don  (  ;  . A prototype should allow ext ~ e ~ irnenth ~ g wilh vaious strategies  . 
~i\[o ~? ~ ace and q ~. ~ a ~. ~ y of speeck ~
Speect ~ synthesis has a pJ acc no ~ only h ~ the translation oJgpoker ~ dialogue '  ;  , bniaisoi : i ~ iiie transtati(m of written texts . We acma!\[y ~ hinkiraintrodtlcti ( miii Personal MT col ~ ldb cvery holp filli ~ enhancing ergonomy and allowing for more natural disambiguation strategies  . 
1. Speech synthesis and Personal MT
Speech synthesis and MT in general
Speech synthesis of translations may be useful for all kinds of MAT  . In MT for the watcher , people could access Japanese technical and scientific textual databases  , for example , throughrough English MT not only over computer networks  , as is cm'rently done in Sweden\[10\] , but also via the telephone . To produce spoken translations could be even more useful in the case of rapidly changing information  ( political events , weather bulletins , etc . disseminated to a large public through computer or telephone networks  )  . 
In the case of professional translation ( MAT for the revisor or for the translator )  , the main area today is the translation of large technical documents  . With the advent of wide ! y available hypermedia techniques  , these documents are starting to contain not only text and images  , but also sound , used for instmme to stressome important warning messages  . 
Personal MT could be used for translating technical documents as well as all kinds of written material not relying on creative use of language  ( io e . poetry ) . It could also be used for communication within multilingual teams working together and linked by a network  , or by phone . Finally , it could be used for the multilingual dissemination of information created onoline by a monolingual operator  ( sports events , fairs . . . ) and made accessible in written form ( electronic boards , minitel ) as well as in spoken form ( loudspeakers , adio , telephone ) , when ce the need for speech synthesis . 
Hence , spoken output does not imply spoken input , and should be considered for all kinds of machine aided translation  . As complete linguistic structures of the translations are create during the MT process  , speech synthesis should be of better quality than current ext-to-speech techniqocs can provide  . This does not apply to MAT for the translator , however ( although the translator , being a specialist , could perhaps be asked to insert marks concerning prosody  , rhythm and pauses , analogous with formatting ma'kups ) . 
Speech synthesis of dialogue utterances . l ) i a \] o guetltterancos COflCertt the3 ( ; ol~lnunicatiol ~ between the system and the user , the transtati(m process ( reformulatior ~ , clarification ) , and the translati(m system ((' , g . interrogation or modificatiou of i is lexical database  )  . 
i ~ Telephone lnterpretatio ~ ~ of dialogues , all dialogue utterai ~ ces , m . ~st obviously be in spoke ~ form , ikewrit mnR ~ rm being made available only if the pho ~ c is coupled to a scrce ~  . I ~ translatkm of writtm~materiai , ~ could be attractive to i : ~ co~porate speech synthesis i ~? the dialogue itself  , as an e . nhancemc ~ t to its visual form , tb . . , tilt ' ; ? allleoQ ~ ; oitolnicloasolL ' ~ as a hoy( ;  , ant it )( , X ; ~lngc spoken alternatives might be intrinsically more suggestive than written ones in order to resolve ambiguities ~ pauses and melody may help to delimit groups and pinpoint heir dependencies  , while phrasal stress may give useful indications on the theme/rheme division  . 
In the case of non-dialogue-basedystems , there are only fixed messages , and online speech synthesis not really necessary , because the acousticodings can be precomputed . In the case of dialogue-based Machine Translation  , however , an important part of the dialogue concerns variable lements  , uchas the translated texts or the dictionaries , where definitions or disambiguating questions could be inserted  . 
Speech in PMT : synthesis of input , texts or reverse translations Speech synthesis of input seems to be required when producing a document in several languages  , with some spoken parts . It would be strange that the source language documentation not have the spoken parts  , or that the author be forced to read them aloud . In the latter case , a space problem would also arise , because speech synthesis can produce an acoustic oding  ( later fed to a voice synthesis chip ) much more compact hanany representation f the acoustic signal itself  . 
The concept of reverse translation could be very useful in PMT  . The idea is to give to the author , who is presumed not to know the target language ( s )  , some control over the translations . In human translation or interpretation , it often happens that the writer or speaker asks " what has been translated "  . By analogy , a PMT system should be able to translate in reverse  . 
Technically , it would do so by starting from the deep structure of the target ext  , and not from the target ext itself , in order not to introduce spurious ambiguities ( although aving both possibilities could possibly help in detecting accidentalm biguities created in the target language  )  . 
Note that speech synthesis of reverse translations might be ergonomically attractive  , even if no spoken form is required for the final results  ( translations or input texts )  , because screens tend to become cluttered with too much information  , and because reading the screen in detail quickly becomes tiring  . 
2 . The need for very high quality speech synthesis in DBMT It has been surprisingly difficult for researchers in speech synthesis to argue convincingly about the need for very high quality  . Current ext to speech systems are quite cheap and seem acceptable to laymen  . Of course , it is tiring to listen to them for long periods , but in common applications , such as telephon enquiry , interactions are short , or of fixed nature ( time-of-day service ) , in which case synthesis can proceed from prerecorded fragments  . 
DBMT , as envisaged above , seems to offer a context in which very high quality could and should be demanded of speech synthesis  . 

First , the writer/speaker would be infrequent interaction with the system  , even if each interaction is short . The overall quality of speech synthesis depends on three factors : voice synthesis  ( production of the signal from the acousticoding )   ; linguistic analysis ( word class recognition , decomposition into groups ) , for correct pronunciation f individual words , or contextual treatment ( liaisons in French ) ; pragmatic analysis ( communicative intent : speech act , theme/rheme division . . . ), for pauses , rhythm and prosody . 
We will consider the first factor to be fixed , and work on the linguistic and pragmatic aspects . 
Of course , certain parts of the dialogue could be prerecorded  , namely the messages concerning the interaction with the system itself  . However , users might rather prefer a uniform quality of speech synthesis  . In that case , these messages might be stored in the same acoustic coding format as the texts produced under linguistic ontrol  . 
Ambiguity resolution by rephrasing
We have seen two main ways of disambiguating structural mbig ~ tities ha DB MT  , namely rephrasing and paraphrasing . Rephrasing means to present the original text in different ways  . Suppose we want to disambiguate the famous sentence " ties awagirl in the park with a telescope " by presenting the alternatives on a screen  . We might get something like : 1- He saw 2- He saw 3- Hes ~ v 4- He saw 5- He saw the girl in the park with a telescope the girl in the park with a telescope the girl in the park with a telescope the girl in the park with a telescope the girl in the park with a lelescope ~ If the disambiguation happens or all y  , the spoken forms should be presented in the same register as in the original  ( here , affirmative ) , but very clearly distinguished , so that a human could reconstruct the forms above  . The availability of complete linguistic structures is necessary  , but not sufficient , because understandability is not enough : distinguishability is a new ~ Zxluirement for speech synthesis  . 
Other types of linguistic interactions
In disambiguation by paraphrasing or template generation  ( generation of abbreviated paraphrases , as it were ) , question should be generated , with their locus clearly indicated by stress and prosody  . For instance : Ls " t ~ e girl or the par Ic with a telescope ? In the same manner  , speech quality is very important if word sense dismnbiguation is done or all y  . Since some new words or new senses of existing words may be added by the user  , the disambiguation processes should apply to their definitions in the same way as they do to the texts/ulterances to be translated  . 
All pr~eding remarks are of course even more valid in the case of oral input  , where speech is the primary means of interaction , and the quality of the signalism ducect by the mms mission channel  . 

The concept of Personal MT crysrtfllizes many kteas from previous systems and research  ( text--critiquing , interactive MT , dialogue-based MT , Machine Interpretation of spoken dialogues , controlled languages . . . ) . However , the perspective of interacting with the author , not require xl to have any knowledge of the target language  ( s )  , linguistics , or translation , puts things in an original framework . 
While the development of systems of this nature poses old problems in a new way  , and offers interesting new possibilities to the developers  , their acceptability and usefulness will perhaps result more from their ergonomy than from their intrinsic linguistic quality  , how necessary it may be . 
Promotion of the National Languages is becomi ~ gq ~fite important nowadays  , but , apmt of efforts to teach a few for ~ zigl ~ langt ~ages  , no technical . ~ ; olul:io ~ ~ ires y ( : t been proposed to help people write i ~ a mei ~ ow ~ lauguage and communicate with oilier people in ih cirown lang ~ ages  . Personal MT could bc such a solution . 
W c strongly hope that many researcher '; wilt ~ . ~ . a cinterest i ~ this new fieldel MT . 
Although speech s'ynthcsi , a of the ii ~ puior outpt ~ t texts had been considerecif ni hcmili ~ id csigr ~ o_~the project  , and though to be ~ tsefu ~ ii , ~) li ~ ocparis , i ~ was J . I . Tsujii who pointed tomehow interesting it would be to use it in ambiguity resolution  , provided we can reach the necessary quality . I am also grateful to J . Ph . Guilbaud , E . Blanc , and M . Embar for reviewing earlier drafts of this paper . While their help was very valuable for improving both content and form  , the remaining deficiencies am of course mine . 
References\[1\]BOITffFCh .   ( 1989 ) Motivations and architecture of the LIDIA project . 
Prec . MTS--89, Munich , 16--18 Aug . 1989, 5p.
\[2\]BOITET Ch .   ( 1988 d ) PROS and CONS of the pivot and transfer approaches in multiIingual Machine Translation  . 
New Directions in MT . BSOcent , Budapest , 13p.
1311 BOITET Ch . (1988 c ) ltybrid Pivots using re- . structures for multilingua I7' ran . sfer-Based MT Systems . Jail . lr~st , of Electr . , Inf . & Comm . Eng . , Jtrae1988, NI~C88-3, 1"7~ . 22 . 
\[4\]BOITET Ch .   ( 1988b ) Bernard VAUQUOIS ' Contribution to the Theory and Practice of building MT 
Systems : a historical persTJective.
2nd Int . Conf . on Theor . & Meth . Issuesha MT . CMT,
CMU , Pittsburgli , June 1988, 18p.
\[5\]BOITET Ch .   ( 1988a ) Representation ad Computation of Units of Translation for Machine tn~er pretation fSpoken Texts  . 
TR-I--0035, ATR , Osaka , 41p . Also Computers & Artificial
Intelligence 8/6,505.--546, 1989.
\[611 CHANDLERB . , It OLDENN . , HORSFALL tl . , POLLARDE . , McGEE WOODM . (1987) N-Tran Final Report . Atvey Project CCId UMIST Report 87/9,
Manchester , 30 p , 17\]NIRENBURG & aL(1989) KBMT . .89 Pr4ect Report . 
CMT , CMI_J ~ Pittsburgh , 286p.
\[8\] PECCOUD 1:: .   ( 1988 ) The Aims of fl~e French Nation at Project of Computer-Aided Translation  . In : International Fo~umon Information and Documentation  . 113/1,1I--i3 . 
\[9\]RICHARDSONS . D .   ( 1985 ) Enharmed Text Critiquing using a Natural Language Parser : the CRITIQUE system  . 
1BM Research Report RC11332, Yorktown Heights.
\[10\]SIGI)RDSONJ . &GRENI'EXR . (19871) MT of on . .line searches in Japanese Data Bases . RPI , Lund Univ . , 124 p . 
\[11\]VAUQUOISB . (1988) BERNARI ) VA UQU OISet la TAO , vhagt-cill qans de Traduction Automatique , ANA\[ , ECFES . BERNARD VAUQUOIS and MT , lwcmy , livey e ~ rs of M'F . Ass . Champollion & GETA , Grenoble , 700p . 
IJ2\]ZAJACR . (1988) imeractive ?)' anslatiot : ~: o~e; . va ! ~ pro~ch . Prec . COLIN (;-88, Budapest , At~g . ! % tLI ~ ! . 1\] ZEMB . LM . (1982) l ,, ~; occurre ~ cesi~hdmatiqz~es,rh / . ma~iques ~ thdmatiques de sarchilexO . mesmodau ~ . ! ~' q_,~notkmsdmaa ! . ico . logiqned modal it 6", (/ niv . de Metz & Klincksieck , l~echc . rchc's linguistiques V ! It , 75 ~ . t16 . 
- O-O-O-O , . O-O--O-OO-().-
