Gapping and Frame
A fresh look from a cognitive

perspective
Andreas Stolcke
Computer Science Division
University of California , Berkeley

International Computer Science Institute
1947 Center Street , Suite 600
Berkeley , CA 94704, U.S.A.

1 Intro'duction
The topic of this paper is one of the pet subjects of trar~g formational syntax--gapping  . Sev-er n'exa ~ ffple's belOw will show that gapping is actually affected'by'a  , combination of syntactic , semantic and pragmatic factors , thus being far from a purely syntactic phenomenon  . By looking at some basic properties of gapping from the point of view of interpretation and cognitive pro-  , cessing , it is possible to arrive at a global principle that can provide an integrated approach for these Various intluences on  . gapping . The principle proposed has the added advantage of being ndtjustian arbitrary formal rule but being motivated by eogniivh cOnsidei'ations  . Thus , tile view taken here is compat ! ble with tire basic tenets o\[Cognitive '!  , inguist , ics . '2 Gapping and Interpretation 2 . 1 Some examples Gapping constructions ifivolve two or more co-ordinated  . clauses where the verb is missing in all but one clause  , such as (1) Bill is reading a book , John ( Danewspaper , and Kathy@her favorite cartoon . 
Here Iuse '0 ' to indicate the position of the gap , i . e . the position the missing constituent would presumably have taken in the clause if it had been spelled out in  , full . This notation is merely a convenience and should not be taken to imply that some sort of empty constituent is present  . 
Also , for historical reasons , I will refer to the constituents ' left over ' in the gapping clause as ~ rrmants  , without implying that some sort of deletion has actually taken place  . 
The more interesting cases of gapping are those where the verb is missing along with other constituents  . In these cases the@-notation is essential to disambigu~te he intended reading  . 
(2 )   ( a ) Bill gave John the book and ~ )   ( D Kathy the newspaper ( b ) ? Bill gave John the book and Kathy ~ ) the newspaper ( c ) * Bill gave John the book and i ( a L hy the newspaper ? This example also shows that , in general , ' grammaticality ' acceptability ' is defined only relative to an intended interpretation  . 1 Thus , whereas sentence/interpretation (2a . ) is fine , most speakers don't get (2c ) and accc . pt(2b ) only when given a particular intonation , i . e . 
topic-focu structure.
The examples above all illustrate for ' uJ ar'd9 ap . .
ping , i . e . the gapping clause follows the non-gapping clause  . The converse , backward gapping , also occurs , but the question of what determines the direction of gapping will not be addressed here  . In fact , all the examples discussed in this paper are forward gapping constructions from English and German where backward gapping is not nearly as varied and flexible as the forward variety  . 
1Langa . cker ( 1985 ) makes the point that accept ~ tbility is a judgement about the appropriateness of a pairing bel  , we enaphonological form and the conceptualiz ~ Lt . ionit expresses , rather than some purely formal property of the phonological form per se  , ping at this point is that we want to consider gapping phenomena from the point of view of the cognitive processing demands they pose for the speaker/hearer  . As will be discussed in section 2 . 2 , it seems safe to make some very basic assumptions about processing in the case of forward gapping  , so that its implications can be studied without the burden of wildly speculative premisses fl'om a still largely unknown domain  . 
Most theories to date have tried to account for gapping on the basis of purely formal aspects of syntax alone  ( seev an Oirsouw ( 1987 ) for an overview )  , with the notable exception of Kuno (1976) , who explicitly considers functional and perceptual aspects  . Such approaches , mostly in a transformational framework , try to explain gapping as the result of some form of ' deletion under identity  . ' tlence these accounts are unable to consider question such as why  ( 2b ) becomes possible only when given the appropriate focus structure  ( stressing Bill , the book , and Kathg , the newspaper ) . In these frameworks focus is considered a matter of pragmatics and simply doesn't figure in a syntaxbased account  . Section a . 3 will show that the effects of focus on gapping are a natural consequence of the approach taken here  . 
Similarly , semantic on straints and contextual factors may have an inttuence on the interpretation of gapping clauses  . Compare the sentences in ( 2 ) above to those in ( 3 )  . 
(3 ) Mary got a lot of nice clothes on her sixteenth birth day  . 
( a ) II erparents gave her an expensive evening gown and her god mother ~ a fine pair of shoes  . 
( b ) ? tier parents gave her an expensive evening gown and ~@ hergod mother a fine pair of shoes  . 
(2a ) and (3a ) , and (2b ) and (3b ) , respectively , have identical phrase structure , yet the preferred interpretations of the gapping clauses are reversed  . Some of the ways in which semantics can influence gapping are discussed in section  3  . 4 . 
2.2 I'?ame Semantics
It is natural that researchers try to confine linguistic phenomena to subtheories  ( such as syntax )  , feeling that not doing so would inevitably for which no adequate principles and rules are available  . 
Cognitive Linguistics proposes that all levels of linguistic processing are embedded in the general human cognitive apparatus and that  , therefore , linguistic generalizations can only be derived by studying language as the product of cognition rather than of some autonomous formal system  ( Langacker , 1985; Lakoff ,  1986) . If this view is correct hen the study of processing constraints and applicable cognitive principles  ( e . g . , of categorization ) should provide us with a handle on some of the linguistics phenomena that apparently span a variety levels  . 
Of course nothing is won if we have to resort to uncertain or unjustified claims about the cognitive domain itself  , or have no certainty of its relation to the linguistic problems in question  . Fortunately , in the special case of gapping as discussed here , the assumptions we have to make about underlying semantics and processing structures are minimal  . I will adopt an informal version of frame semantics  , along the lines of Filhnore (1982) . In this view , the main verb of a clause determines a set of roles to be filled by the  ( meaning of ) remaining constituents . Thus , interpreting the first clause of ( 2a ) resu Its in a structure of the form give agent : Bill  ( 4 ) patient : bookrecipient : John It is a matter of debate how'deep'the roles or cases making np the frame representation should be  .   15br our purposes it is not crucial whether one prefers several levels of representation  , such as grammatical roles vs . semantic roles , or general roles ( like agent ) vs . frame-specific roles ( like giver ) . The only assumption here is that interpretation requires a process equivalen to the assignment of constituent meanings to slots in the frame  , and that this assignment has to be derived based on whatever linguistic and contextual clues are provided  . 
In the case of gapping , then , several such frames are obtained by partly retaining slot fillers from previous instances of the same type of frame  ( i . e . generated by the same verb ) . Thus a sequence of multiple frames with shared fillers can be linguistically realized in a single  , compact construction where multiple fillers are expressed only once  . In the case of example (2a ) above , the second , gapping clause refills the ' patient ' and ' recipient's lots of the give frame  , while retaining the ' agent's lot . 
In non-gapping sentences a combination of word order  , case marking , prepositional markers , selection restrictions , etc . is usually more than sufficien to assign fillers unambiguously to frame slots  . In gapping constructions the role assignment problem becomes potentially more difficult since some of this information is lost  , although in many cases the loss is marginal . Thus , in example ( 1 ) interpretation of the second clause is unproblematic since two constituents have to fill two slots  , and the usual rules of constituent order in English unambiguously determine the assignment  . In (2) , on the other hand , there are three potential role assignments consistent with the constituent order given  . 
The problem , then , is to identify the syntactic , semantic and pragmatic factors that render certain gapping structures  ( and their corresponding interpretations ) acceptable , while others axe ruled out ( or at least made less felicitous )  . 
3 A Conjecture
We can now state a tentative principle regarding the relation between the intcrI  ) retation of gapping constructions and their acceptability  . 
(5 ) Role Assignment Principle : A gapping construction with a specific interpretation will be acceptable only if it provides sufficient clues for the role assignment implied by that interpretation  . 
This principle is similar in spirit totile R , e-coverability Constraint proposed by I\[ankamer ( 1973 )  , although it is far more gener Masit potentially encompasses all kinds of linguistic phenomena that play a role in interpretation  , ot just syntax .  2
Note that ( 5 ) does not claim that interpretability alone will render a sentence acceptable  , a Top reven the conjecture from be-2IIankamer's principle was concerned with the recovery of ' deep structure ' after having undergone deletions and movement  . 
3If someone used apple green as a noun phrase referring to a green apple we will in general be able to make sense of  ( i . e . , interpret ) hat description while still recognizing it as ungramnlatical  . 
ing vacuous two points have to be addressed.
First , we have to show that there is a systematic repert oire of linguistic devices available for the interpretation of gapping constructions  . Secondly , it must be shown that these devices systematically affect the acceptability of gapping sentences in accordance with the principle  . 
In many cases gapping constructions will not be strictly ' good ' or ' bad '  , but felicitous to a certain degree , or acceptable to only some fraction of speakers . This is consistent with the principle stated above  , since ( 5 ) can easily be rephrased in terms of degrees of acceptability:  ( 6 ) Role Assignment Principle ( graded version ) : A gapping construction with a specific interpretation will tend to become more acceptable as more clues for the intended role assignment are made available  . 
Note also that this formulation effectively characterizes interpretation of gapping constructions as an evidential cognitive phenomenon  , i . e . one where multiple sources of evidence contribute to a perception or interpretation ia cumulative manner  . 
3.1 Syntactic clues
Despite the definite nonsyntactic nfluences on gapping  , syntax ( together with the rules governing its relation to semantics  ) is the major source of information for interpretation  , even when the syntactic structure is ' incomplete  '  . Clues such as linear order , case marking , and prepositions are still potentially available for the remnant constituents  . 
Van Oirsouw ( 1987 ) has recently suggested a theory in terms of constituent deletion under identity which probably covers as much ground as is possible in a purely syntax-oriented framework  . 4Interestingly , he was able to state some surprisingly far -reach in generalizations by ignoring all fine points of phrase structure and simply considering the top level ordering of constituents  . 
In a similar fashion , it seems that for forward gapping , the following simple rule captures a considerable range of cases  . It is a straightforward variant of the Minim M Distance Principle proposed by Kuno  ( 1976 )  . 
4His generalizations can be rephrased without necessarily assuming deletion transformations  . 
343  ( 7 ) Principle of Surface Proximity : A remnant constituent tends to fill a role whose previous filler is close in surface constituent order  . ( Fillers of the same role tend to be (: lose . ) Consider the following series of examples which have increasing amounts of material intervening between the two filler constituents  . 
(8 )   ( a ) John gave Peterabagel and abanana ( b ) : John gave Peterabagely esterday , and abanana ( c ) : ? John gave Peterabagely esterday before lunch  , and abanana ( d ) ::: John gave Peterabagely esterday before lunch after he had begged him  , and abanana ( 9 )   ( a ) Johnlent Peter some money , and 000 some clothes ( b ) ? Johnlenthis brother some money , and 00 his girlfriend 0 ( c ) ? Johnlent me some money , and Paul contrastive intonation to become acceptable  ( cf . 
section a.a).
Note that (7) is not arbitrary ; it makes sense from a cognitive point of view . If we assume that roles are sequentially processed and have to be retrieved when refilled  , it seems natural that the retrieval tends to become more difficult as the temporal distance from the previous processing event increases  . 
At a more abstract level , syntagmatic proximity can be viewed as symbolizing conceptual relatedness  ( Langacker 1985 )  . Hence the frame unit at the conceptual level corresponds  ( prototypically ) to a clause unit at the syntactic level . 
Gapping constructions relate not just the fillers of the roles in a single frame but also the various fillers of the same role in different frames  . 
Therefore we would expect those fillers to be syntagmatically close to the extent hat the two relational aspects can be accommodated simultaneously  . 
Note that the case of simple constituent coordination can be seen as the optimal solution to multiple frame realization as far as  ( 7 ) is concerned , and is generally preferred . 
344  ( d ) John and Paullentme some money It represents the case where clause unity has been traded off for for the conceptualized unity of the two fillers of the same slot  .   ( Accordingly we get a reading where John and Paul act as a single ' financial entity ' only in  ( 9 d )  , but not in the corresponding gapping construction  ( 9c )  . ) In (8a ) , on the other hand , we have a case where both clause unity and filler proximity can be integrated perfectly  . Note that the view presented here obliterates the question whether  ( 8a ) is the result of constituent coordination or a case of gapping  . A formally oriented theory might be troubled by a syntactic construction that can be ' redundantly ' accounted for by two different rules or principles  . For a cognitively oriented account such a coincidence presents no contradiction  . 5One might object that ( 7 ) makes the wrong predictions when comparing cases with one remnant to those with multiple remnants  . 
(10 )   ( a ) John offered memoney and 000 good advice ( b ) John offered memone y , and Paul 0   0 good advice Clearly the additional remnant in ( 10b ) increases the distance between the two fillers of the recipient role of offer  , yet both sentences in ( 10 ) seem equally unproblematic . However , note that as soon as more than one remnant is present heir role assignments mutually constrain each other  , thus effectively making more 5 Van Oirsouw ( 1987 ) has tried to develop a unified rule of deletion in coordinations  , covering cases otherwise treated as separate rules  , such as gapping , conjunction reduction , right-node raising , VP deletion , etc . One of the motivations for such an attempt is that these rules have a certain amount of overlap  , i . e . there are constructions which fall into the scope of more than one rule  , yet no single rule covers all cases . This is considered undesirable from a metatheoretical point of view since it apparently introduces ambiguity and redundancy  . 
A different view may be derived frmn the notion of radial categories as it arises in human categorization behavior  ( Lakoff ,  1986) . The sentences to be accounted for are apparently clustered around a small number of constructions  ( or rules )  . These constructions , however , are not completely unrelated ; rather they are linked to each other by those special cases where more than one rule overlap  . Thus the overlap between rules is not undesirable but cognitively advantageous since it allows the complete set of constructions to be perceived as a unified phenomenon  . 
information available to the interpretation process  .   ( ( ) lief undamental constrain that comes into play is that every filler can fill only one role  . Furthermore linear order information is now available  . ) 3 . 2 Case mark ing and prepos i t ions In languages that case-mark their verb arguments we would expect this device to provide very strong  ( in fact , mandatory ) clues for role assignment . This can be verified in German , where noun phrases are case-marked , except for those consisting only of single proper nouns  . 
(11) ( a ) Ich sah , wieder Englitnder den Fran-zosen begriigte und der Deutsche  0   ( 3
Is a whowthe English man-NOM the
Frenchman-ACC welcomed and the
German CNOM 1313 ( b ) ?: Ich sah , wie Peter Paul begriil 3 teund
Hans 13 (3
Is a whow Peter Paul welcomed and
Hans 130 ( c ) Ich sah , wie Peter Paul be griiflte und (3 Hans I3
Is a whow Peter Paul welcomed and 0
Hans 13 ( 11 a ) and ( llb ) have identical constituent structure ( up to the noun phrase level ) and are both non-optimal by proximity considerations  .   ( 1la ) can be made acceptable with appropriate contrastive intonation  , while (11b ) remain sawkward . Instead , the interpret a . tion corresponding to (11c ) is easily obtained , again in accordance with proximity . 
In English , where case-marklng is generally not available , prepositions can play a similar role . 
(12 )   ( a ) : Bill visited Jim yesterday after dinner , and 013 John 013 ( b ) Bill talked to Jim yesterday after dinner , and 313 to John 3Again , both examples are awkward due to the great distance between successive role fillers  , but in ( 12b ) the prepositional marker to gives a strong clue for the intended attachment of John thus enhancing acceptability  . 
3.3 Topic-Focus structure
In most of the cases seen so far a typical intonation pattern will naturally accompany the gapping construction  , focusing on and contrasting the various fillers of same frame slot  . In fact , as the distance between remnants and previous filler constituents increases  , the interpretation has to be supported by increasing amounts of stress  . Note that such a tradeoff between syntactic proximity and focus structure make sense in view of the evidential character of gapping proposed in  ( 6 )  . 
(13 )   ( a ) Lind a returned the text book to the liobrary , but not (3(30 to the one it belongs to . 
(b ) Lind a returned the text book to the library , but not 1313 the lecture tape 13 ( c ) Lind a returned the text book to the library , but not the other students in the class 00 ( Italics indicate intonation centers . ) This behavior fits well into the general principle of role assignment proposed  . In terms of our frame semantics account , focusett + ctively ' foregrounds ' a subset of the roles implying that those are the ones likely to be refilled  . 
There is evidence that the converse process works as well  , i . e . that circumstances which ' background'certain roles provide support for gapping structures where those roles are not re-filled  . It seems that this is at least part of what happens in  ( 3 )  . The preceding sentence sets up Mary ( i . e . her ) as a topic , relative to which the other roles are foregrounded  . 
Sgall et al ( 1986 ) have argued for incorporating descriptions of topic-focustructures into linguistic representations  ( rather than throwing them into the ' pragmatic waste basket '  )  . Clearly more work on the relation between syntactic configuration  , focus and gapping is needed . To get an idea of the possibihties Mong these lines consider the following : Let us assume  , following Sgall et al , that in the absence of special intonation in English declarative sentences elements towards the end of the sentence are increasingly ' focussed  . ' Then the gapping cases in ( 8 ) and ( 9 ) might be subsumed by focus structure : Re-filled roles tend to occur towards the end of the clause because that is where default focus is located  . It would be jumping to conclusion , however , to say that all gapping phenomena can be the other cases discussed here  . 
3.4 Semantic constraints
From the data presented so far we would expect any type of constraint which could potentially guide role assignment to have an impact on gapping  . Therefore , semantic ompatibility between the verb semantics and its arguments should make a difference in gapping contexts  . 
This is illustrated in the following example pairs . 
(14) ( a ) John like sice cream , but not ~0 chocolate gapping , VP deletion , conjunction reduction , right-node raising ) lend themselves to a similar analysis , hopefully using compatible principles . 
Still , gapping provides a striking case where a number of linguistic processes -- traditionally perceived as operating at different levels and largely independently--seem to follow a general principle  . More importantly , the principle can be understood as arising from cognitive constraints on sentence processing  . Forward gapping is a lucky case in point because ~ he role assignment problem can easily be identified as a major subtask in the interpretation  , thus giving us a handle on a cognitive analysis . 
(b ) * John like sice cream , but not chocolate 00 Acknowledgements ( 15 )   ( a ) ? John like sice cream , but not O0 his little sister ( b ) John like sice cream , but no this little sister @@ I would like to thank George Lakoff for introducing me to the view of linguistics that led to this work  , and many helpful cornments along the way . The author is supported by an IBM Grad-u . ate Fellowship . 
Note how ( 15 a ) is perceived as ' funny ' because the verb semantics are not kept exactly identical  ; rather a different sense ( and frame ) associated with like is invoked in the second clause f i  4 Conclusion The discussion so far leaves a number of important problems  . The syntactic on straints on gapping are obviously more complex than the simple rule proposed here  , and similarly for the non-syntactic phenomena ( semantic on straints , focus ) I appealed to . 
New questions arise in the framework proposed here  , regarding the precise nature of interactions between the processing of the various clues available  . It would certainly be nice if some kind of simple ordering or hierarchy between the various factors could be established  , although this may not be possible . The fact that gapping seems to be a phenomenon i volving so many processes and influences also implies that the interactions between them may be inherently complex and not compactly describable  . 
Another open question is to what extent other types of ' deletion transformations '  ( backward

Fillmore , C .  (1982) . Frame Semantics . In Linguistic Society of Korea , ed . , Linguistics in the Morning Calm . Hanshin , Seoul . 
Hankamer , J . (1973). Unacceptable Ambiguity.
Linguistic Inquiry , 4:17-68.
Kuno , S .  (1976) . Gapping : A Functional Analysis . Linguistic fnquiry , 7:300-318 . 
Lakoff , G .  (1986) . Women , Fire and Dangerous Things . University of Chicago Press,

Langacker , R .  (1985) . Foundations of Cognitive Grammar , Vol .  1 . Stanford University
Press , Stanford.
Sgall , P . , Haji?ov ?, E . , & Panevov ?, J .  (1986) . 
The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and Pragmatic Aspects  . Academia,

van Oirsouw , R . R . (1987): The Syntaxo/Coor-dination . Croom Hehn , London , New York . 
6The same humoristic effect is more pronounced in sentences such as " First the president cut the salami  , then the budget " . 

