Translation by Abduction
Jerry R . Hobbs
Artifici M Intelligence Center
SRI International
Menlo Park , California.
Megulni I ( a meya.ma
Center for the Study of Language
and Information
Stanford University
Stanford , California.
Machine Translation and World Knowledge.
Many existing approaches to machine translation take for granted that the information presented in the output is found somewhere in the input  , and , moreover , that such information should be expressed at a single representational level  , say , in terms of the parse trees or of " semantic " mssertions  . Languages , however , not only express the equivalent information by drastically different linguistic means  , but also often disagree in what distinctions should be expressed linguistically at all  . For example , in translating from Japanese to English , it is often necessary to supply determiners for noun phr  ; tses , and this ira general cannot be ( lone without deep understanding of the source ~ text  . Similarly , in translating fl'om English to Japanese , politeness considerations , which in English are implicit in tile social situation and explicit in very diffuse wwsira  , for examl)le , tile heavy use of hypotheticals , must be realized grammatically in Japanese . Machine translation therefore requires that the appropriate infer-  ( noes be drawn and that the text be interpreted to stone depth  ( see Oviatt ,  1988) . Recently , an elegant approach to inference in discourse interpretation has been developed at a number of sites  ( e . g . , ltobbs et al , 1988; Charniak and Goldman , 1988; Norvig ,  1987) , all based on timnotion of abduction , and we have begun to explore its potential application to machine translation  . We argue that this approach provides the possibility of deep reasoning and of mapping between the languages at a variety of levels  . ( See also Kaplan et al ,  1988 , on the latter point . ) 1 Interpretation as Abduction . Abductive infer-enee is inference to the best explanation  . The easiest way to understand it is to compare it with two words it rhymes with --- deduction and induction  . De-duction is ; when from a specific fa . ctp ( A ) and a gen-1The authors have profited from discussions about this work with Mark Stickel and with thel  ) arl . lcipants in the ' rransla-tionGroup at CSLI . The research was funded by the I ) e Dnse Advanced Research Projects Agency under Ot / iee of Naval Fie-search contract  N00014-85-Co0013  , and by a giftfl'om the Systems Development Fmm datlon  . 
eral rul(V *) v(:)q (*) we co , ch , deq(A) . Induction is when from a number of instances of p ( A ) and q ( A ) and perhaps other factors , we conclude ( Vx ) p(x ) Dq(x ) . Abduction is the third possibility . It . is when fl ' om q(A ) and ( Vx ) p(x ) Dq(a :) , : reconch , dep(A ) . Think of q(A ) as some observational evidence , of ( Vx ) p ( x ) Dq ( x ) ~s a gener a law that could explain the occurrence of q  ( A )  , and of p(A ) as the hidden , underlying specific cause of q(A ) . Much of tileway we interprethe world in general can be understood as a process of abduction  . 
When the observational evidence , the thing to be interpreted , is a natural anguage text , we must provide the best explanation of why the text would be true  . In the TACITUS Project at SRI , we have developed a scheme for abductive inference that yields a significant simplification i the description of interpretation processes and a significant extension of the range of phenomena that can be captured  . It has been implemented in the TACITUS System ( Itobbs et al ,  1988 , 1990; Stickel ,  1989 ) and has been applied to several varieties of text  . The framework suggests the integrated treatment of syntax  , semantics , and prag-mattes described below . Our principal aim in this paper is to examine the utility of this frmnework as a model for translation  . 
In the abductive framework , what the interpretation of a sentence is can be described very concisely : '  . Ibinterpret a sentence: ( 1 ) Provetile logical form of the sentence , together with the constraints that predicate siml ) ose on their arguments , allowing for coercions , 
Merging redundancies where possible,
Making assumptions where necessary.
By the first line we mean " prove from the predicate calculus axioms in tile knowledge base  , the logical 1155 form that . has been produced by syntacl . ic analysis and selnantic translation of t . he sentence . "In a discourse situation , the speaker and hearer hotll have their sets of private belie N  , and there is a . large overlapping set of mutual beliefs . An utterance stands with one foot in nmtual belief and one foot in the speaker's private beliefs  . It is a bid to extend the area of mutual belief to include some private beliefs of the speaker ' s  . It is anchored referentially in mutual belief , and when we prove the logical form and the constraints  , we are recognizing this referential anchor . This is the given information , the definite , the presupposed . Where it is necessary to make assumptions , the information comes from the speaker's private beliefs  , and hence is the new information , the indefinite , the ~ sserted . Merging redundancies i a way of getting a minimal  , and hence a best , interpre-tat , ion . 
An Example . This characterization , elegant though i ~ may be , would be of no interest if it did not lead to the solution of the discourse problen as we need to have solved  . A brief example will illustrate t . hatit indeed does . 
(2) The Tokyo office called.
This example illustrates three problems in " local pragmatics "  , the reference i ~ roblem ( What does " the Tokyo of tlce " refer to ' ? )  , t , be compound nominal interpretation problem ( What is the implicit relation between Tokyo and the office ?  )  , and the metonymy problem ( l to w can we coerce from the office to the person at the office who did the calling ?  )  . 
Let us put these problems aside , and interpre the sentence according to characterization  ( 1 )  . The logical form is something like (3) (3e , z , o , b ) calr(e , ~;) Ape , 'son(z)
Arel(x , o ) A office(o ) Ann(t , o)
A Tokyo(t )
That is , there is a calling event e by a person x related somehow  ( possibly by identity ) to the explicit subject of the sentence o , which is an office and bears some unspecified relation nntot which is Tokyo  . 
Suppose our knowledge base consists of the following facts : We know that there is ~ person John who works for O which is an office in Tokyo T  . 
(4) person ( J ) , work-fo , '(J , O ) , office(O ) , in(O , T ) , Tokyo ( T ) Suppose we also know that work-for is a possible coercion relation  , (5) ( vx , y ) y ) a . nd that in is a possible implicit relation in compound nominals  , (6) ( vy , z ) , : , ,(y , z ) y ) Then the proof of all buttim first , conjunct of (3) is straightforward . We tirosassutl\]e(~e ) call'(e , J ) , and this constitutes the new informal A on . 
Notice now that all of our local pragmatics problems have been solved  . " The Tokyo office " hms been resolved to O . The implicit relation between Tokyo and the office has been determined to be the in relation  . " The Tokyo office " has been coerced into " John  , who works for the Tokyo office . " This is of course a simple example . More complex examples and arguments are given in l to bbs at al  . , (1990) . A more detailed description of the method of abductive inference  , particularly the system of weights and costs for choosing among possible interpretations  , i given in that paper and in Stickel ,  (1989) . 
The Integrated Framework . The idea of interpretation as abduction can be combined with the older idea of parsing as deduction  ( Kowalski ,  1980 , pp . 52-53; Pereira and Warren , 1983) . C , on sider a grammar written in Prolog style just bigenought  , oh and le sentence (2) . 
(7) ( Vi , j , k ) np(i , j ) Av(j , k ) Ds(i , k ) (8) ( Vi , j , k , l ) det(i , j ) An(j , k ) An ( k , I)
Dnp(i , 1)
That is , if we have a noun phrase from " interword point " it opoint j and a verb from j to k  , then we have a sentence from i to k , and similarly for rule (8) . 
We can integrate this with our abductive framework by moving the various pieces of expression  ( 3 ) into these rules for syntax , ms follows : (9) ( Vi , j , k , e , x , y , p ) np(i , j , y ) Av(j , k , p)
Ap'(e , x ) AReq(p , x ) Arel(x , y ) s(i , k , e ) That is , if we have a noun phrase from i to j referring to y and a verb from j to k denoting predicate p  , if there is an eventuality e which is the condition of p being trne of some entity x  ( this corresponds to calf ( e , x ) in (3)) , if ~ satisfies the selectional requirement p imposes on its argument  ( this corresponds to person ( x ) ) , and if x is somehow related to , or co-ercible from , y , then there is an interpretable sentence from i to k describing eventuality e  . 
(10) ( Vi , j , k , l , w~ , w~ , z , y ) det(i , j , the )^( j , k , wd ^ ,  . ( k , l , ^^2(y)
Ann(z , y ) Dnp(i , I , y)1~562
That is , if l . here is the determiner " the " from i to j , a noun from j to k denoting predicate wl , and another noun from k to 1 denoting predicate w ~ , if there is az that w lisl , rue of anday that w2 is true of , arm if there is a . nnn . relation between z and Y , then there is an interprelable noun phrase fl'om i to I denoting y  . 
These rules incorporate the syntax in the literals like v  ( j , k , p ) , the pragmatics in the liter a . ls like p ' ( e , a : ) , and the compositional semantics in the way the pragmatics expressions are constructed out of tiltinl brmal  . ion provided by the syntactic expressions . 
To 1) arse wilh a grammar in the Pm log style , we ploves (0 , N ) where N is the number of words in I , he sentence . To parse and interpret in the integrated , , , eprove (3N , An appeal of su <: h declarative frameworks is their u  . ~ ability for generation as welt as interpretation ( Shieber ,  1988) . Axioms (9) and (10) ca . n be used for generation as well . In generation , we are given a newmtuality l'2 , and we need t . of indase utence with sorne number n of words that describes it  . Thus , wen , : edt . oprove(3,,)s(0, n , ?') . Whereas in interpretation il , is tile new informal . ion that is assumed , in general , i on it is I : . he terminal nodes , like v(j , k , p ) , that area , '; : ; umed . As . suming them constitutes uttering l , heln . 
Translation is a matter of interpreting in the source language  ( say , English ) and generating in the target language ( sa . y , Japanese) . Thus , it can be cha . rac-terized as proving for a sentence with N words the e : ~ l  ) ression ( \]:1 ) N , e ) a where sf . : is I . he root node of the English grammar and so is the root  . node of the Japanese . 
Actually , ~, his is not quite true . Missing in the logical form in ( 3 ) and in the grammar of ( 9 ) and ( 10 ) is the " relative mutual identifiabillty " relations that are encoded in the syntactic structure of sentences  . For example , theo\[lice in ( 2 ) should be mutually identifiable once Tokyo is identified  . In the absence of these conditions , the generation conjunct of ( 11 ) only says to express something true of e , not something that will enable the hearer to identify it  . Nevertheless , the framework a . sit is developed s of a . r will allow us to addressome nontrivial problems in translation  . 
Thisl ) o int exhibits a general problem in translation , machine or human , namely , how literal a translation should be produced . We may think of this as a scale . At one pole is what our current formalization yMds--a translation that merely says something true about the eventuality asserted in the source sentence  . 
AI . the other pole is a translation that translates explicitly every property that is explicit in the source sentence  . Our translation below of example ( 2 ) lies somewhere in between these two poles , ldeMly , tile translation should be one that will lead the hearer totile same underlyiug situation as an interpretation  . I ~ is not yet clear how this can be specified hm nally  . 
The Exam I)le Translated . All idiomatic translation of sentence ( 2 ) is ( 12 ) Tokyono office kara den wagaa . ri-nmshita . 
Tokyo's of llcef , ' om call Subj existed Let us say the logical form is ~ follows:  ( 13 ) aru ( e ) Aga ( d , e ) Adenwa ( d ) Akora(o , e)
A office(o ) A , , o(1., o ) A Tokyo(Q
A toy grammar plus pragmatics for Japanese , cor-resl ) onding to the grammar of ( 9 ) - ( 10 ) is ~ s follows ~: ( 14 )   ( V i , j , k , l , e , p)pp(i , j , e ) App(j , k , e)
Av(<t ,  ^ >  , ( i , l , e ) (15) ( Vi , j , k , z , e , pari) , ,p(i , j , ; , :) Apa , ' tide(j , k , l , a , ' t ) Apa , 't(x , e)-opp(i , k , e ) (16) ( Vi , j , k , l ,  . ~ , V) , u , (i , j , ~j ) Apa , 'iicle(j , k , , , o ) at , A , , , o(v ,   . p(i , l , z ) (17) ( Vi , j , w , z)n(i , j , w ) A w ( . ~) Dnp(i , j , z)pp(i , j , e ) mean . ~ that there is a particle phrase from i to j with the missing a  . rgumenl , e . part is a particle and the predicate it encodes . 
If we are going to translate between the two languages  , we need axioms specifying the transfer relao tions  . Let us suppose " denwa " is lexically ambiguous between the telephone instrument denwal and the calling event  denwa2  . This can be encoded in the two axioms ( 18 ) a enw (   ) Lexical disambiguation occurs & sa by product of interpretation in this framework  , when the proof of the logical form uses one or the other of these axioms  . 
"i ) enwagaaru " is an idiomatic way of expressing a calling event in Japanese  . This can be expressed by the axiom (20) ( Ve , x ) ca . '(< x)D (3, 0, 1 e , , . , , o . ~(, 0
A : ~, , ( a , e ) Aa , ', , ( e)
The agent of a calling event is M so its source : 2For simplicity in t . his example , we are assuming the words of the senl . ences are given ; in practice , this can be carried down to the level of characters  . 

We will need an axiomi , hat coarsens the granularity of l . he source . If Jolm is in Tokyo when he calls , then
Tokyo as well as a olln is the source.
(22) ( vy , ^; D
D Source(y , e)
If x worksfor y , then x is in y : (23) ( Vx , y ) work-for(z , y ) Din(z , y . ) Finally , we will need axioms specifying the equivalence of the particle " karl " with the deep cruse Source  ( 24 ) - and the equivalence between tile particle . << no " and the implicit relation in English compound nolniuals  ( 2r , )(vv ) - . , D Note that these " transfer " axioms encode world knowledge  ( 22 and 23 )  , lexical ambiguities (18 and 19) , direct relations between tile two languages ( 20 and 25 )  , and relations between the lang , \[ ages and deep " interling nal " predicates ( 21 and 24 )  . 
' the proof of expression (11) , using the English grammar of (9)-(10) , tile knowledge base of (4)-(6) , tile Japanese grammar and lexicon of (14)-(19) , and the transfer a . xioms of (20)-(25), is shbwn in Figure 1 . Boxes are drawn a . round the expressions that need to be assmned , namely , the new information in the interpretation and the occurrence of lexical it  . eros in the generation . 
The axioms occn rata variety of levels , from tile very superficial ( axiom 25) , to very langnage-pair specific transferules ( axiom 20 )  , to deep relations at the interlingual level ( axioms 2124 )  . This approach thus permits mixing in one framework both transfer and interlingual approaches to translation  . One can state transferules between two languages at various levels of linguistic abstraction  , and between different levels of the respective languages  . Such freedom in transfer is exactly what is needed for translation  , especially for such typologically dissimilar languages as English and Japanese  . It is thus possible to build a single system for translating among more than two languages in this framework  , incorporating the labor savings of interlingual approaches while allowing the convenient specifieities of transfer approaches  . 
We should note that other translations for sentence  ( 2 ) are possible in different contexts . Two other possibilities are the following : ( 26 ) Tokyono office gaden washirn ashita . 
Tokyo's office Subj call did-Polite
Ti , e ' tokyoom ce made aM , el call.
(27) Tokyonoo tlice kara node nwa gaarimashita.
Tokyo's office from's call Subj existed-Polite There was the call fl ' om the Tokyoomce  ( that we were expecting )  . 
The difference between ( 12 ) and ( 26 ) is the speaker's viewpoint . Tile speaker takes tile receiver's viewpoint in ( 12 )  , while it is neutral between the caller and the receiver in  ( 26 )  .   ( 27 ) is a more specific version of ( 12 ) where the call is mutually identifiable . All of (12) , (26) and (27) are polite with the suffix "- masu " . 
Non-polite variants are also possible translations . 
On the other hand , in the following sentence ( 28 ) Tokyono office karl den was himashita . 
Tokyo's office from call did-Polite \[1 made althe\]callfl'om the Tokyoomce . 
there is as ti ! ollghfference that the caller is the speaker or son\]e on else who is very salient hit he current coil-text  . 
The use of " shimashita " ( " did " ) in ( 26 ) and ( 28 ) indica . testim description from a neutral poiig of view of an event of some agent in tile Tokyo office Call Sill gatele phone call to occn rat the recipienWs end  . This neutral point of view is expressed in (26) . In (28) , tile subject is omitted and hence must be salient  , and consequently , the sentence is told from tile caller's point of view  . In (12) " ari-mash it ?'(" existed ") is used , and since the telephone call exists primarily , or only , at the recipient's end , it is a ~ ssumed the speaker , at least in point of view , is at the receiver's end . 
Although we have not done it here , it looks as though these kinds of considerations can be formalized in our framework as well  . 
IIard Problems . If a new approach to machine translation is to be compelling  , it must show promise of being able to handle some of the hard problems  . 
We have identified four especially hard problems in translating between English and Japanese  . 
1 . The lexical differences ( that occur between any two languages )  . 
2. Honorifics.
3. Definiteness and number.
4. The context-dependent " information structure ".
The last of these includes the use of " wa " versus " g ?'  , tile order of noun phrases , and the omission of arguments . 
1584 (7 e , n ) SW (0, 4, e)Sj (0, n , e)
PP(0,4,E)&PP(4,6,E ) & ~& aru(E)
NP (0, 3, P ) NP (4, 5, D)
NP (0, I,T ) ~' ~' . i ; !; i , /& NP (2, 3, 0)_% o , . 0 , & Tokyo(T ) /& office(O)/NP (0 , 3 , O ) ~ person(J ) & V(3 , 4 , call ) & ~& rel(J , O ) work-for(J , O ) Det (0 , l , the ) & Noun(l , 2 , Tokyo ) & Tokyo(T ) un(2 , 3 , office ) & office(O ) & nn(T , O ) in(T , O)
Figurei . Translation by Abduction 5   159 These are the areas where one language's roof phosyntax requires distinctions that are only implicit in the commous ense knowle  ( Igeor context , in tile other language . Such problems cannot be handled by existing senl . ence-by-senteuce translation syst . ems without unnecessarily complicating the representations for each language  . 
In this short paper , we can only give the briefest indication of why we think our framework will be productive in investigating the Iirst three of these prob-\]el /iS  . 
Lexical Differences . Lexical differences , where they can be specified precisely , can be encoded ax-iomatically : ( V ~) w . te , '(~)^, ~ . ,' . qhot , (~)-v ,, (~)( v ,), o . t~h(~)-tok~i(~)^ , , , o , , ( ~ )  '  ( yx ) clock ( x ) =__ tokei ( x ) A ~ worn ( $ ) Information required for supplying Japanese numeral classifiers can be specified similarly  . Thus the equivalence between the English " two trees " and the Japanese " nihounoki " can be captured by timaxioms  ( Vx ) t , ' ee(x)D cyli , , . d,'ica . l(~:)'(Vx ) eylind , ' ieal(x)-hon(x ) Honorilies . Politeness is expressed in very different ways in English and Japanese  . In Japanese it is grammaticized and \[ exiealized in  s6metimes very elaborate ways in the form of hou or if ics . One might think that the problem of honorifics does not arise in most practical translation tasks  , such as translating computer manuals . English lacks honorifics and in Japanese technical iterature they are conventionalized  . But if we are translating business letters , this aspect of language becomes very important . It is realized in English , but in a very different way . When one is writing to one's superiors , there is , for example , much more embedding of requests in hypotheticals . 
Consider for example the following English sentence and its most idiomatic translation : Would it perhaps be possible for you to lend me your book ? 
Go-honokashite-itadak-e-masuka.
llonorific-bookObj lending-receive-can-Polite ? In Japanese  , the object requested is preceded by the honorific particle " go "  , " it adak " is a verb used for a receiving by a lower status person from a higher status person  , and " rnasu " is a politeness ending for verbs . In English , by contrast , the speaker embeds and " possible " , and uses a more formal register than normal , ill his choice , for example , of " perhaps " rather than " may be " . 
The facts about the use of honorifics can be encoded axionmtically  , with predicate such as Higher Status , where this information is known . Since all knowledge in this framework is expressed uniformly in predicate calculus axioms  , it is straightforward to combine information from different " knowledge sources "  , stlch as syntax and the speech act situation , into single rules . 
It is therefore relatively easy to write axioms that  , for example , restrict the use of certain verbs , depending on the relative status of t imagent and object  , or the speaker and hearer . For example , " to give " is translated into the Japanese verb " kudasaru " if tim giver is of higher status than the recipient  , but into the verb " s ~ shiager u " if the giver is of lower status  . Similarly , the grammatical fact about the use of tim suffix "-masu " and the fact about the speech act situation that speaker wishes to be polite may also be expressed in the same axiom  . 
We can also express the facts concerning the use of the honorific particle " o "  ( or " go " ) before nouns . 
There seem to be three closes of nouns in this respect  . Some nouns , such as " cha " (" tea ") , always take the particle (" o-cha') . Some nouns , especially loan words like " kShi"("coffee ") , never take the particle . 
Other nouns , such ~" bSshi "(" hat ") , take the honorific prefix if the entity referred to belongs to someone of higher status  . For this class of nouns we can state the condition formally  . 
( Yi , j , k , p , x , y ) Honorific ( i , j , o ) ^ No . ( j , k , p ) Ap@)^poss(U ,
A Higher Status ( y , Speaker)
DNP ( i , k , x)
That is , if the honorific particle " o " occurs from point i to point j  , the noun denoting the predicate p occurs from point j to point k  , and pistrue of some entity x where someone y possesses x and y is of higher status than the speaker  , then there is an interpretable noun phrase from point i to point k referring to x  . 
Definiteness and Number . The definiteness and number problem is illustrated by the fact that the Japanese word " ki " can be translated into " the tree " or " a tree " or " the trees " or " trees "  . It in not so straightforward to deal with this problem axiomati-cally  . Nevertheless , our framework , based ~ it is on deep interpretation and on the distinction between given and new information  , provides us with what we need to begin to address the problem  . A first approximation of a method for translating Japanese NPs into 
English NPs is as follows : 1 . R . esolve deep , i . e . , find the referrent of the
Japanese NP .
2 . Does the Japanese NP refer t . o a set of two or more ? If so , translate it as a plural , otherwise as a singular . 
3 . Is the entity ( or set ) " mutually identifiable "? If so , then translate it~s a definite , otherwise as an indefinite . 
"Mutually identifiable " means first of all that the description provided by the Japanese NP is mutually known  , and secondly that there is a siltgle most salient suchentil  , y . " Most salient " means that there are no other equally high-ranking interpretations of the Japanese sentence that resolve tim NP in some other way  .   ( Generic definite noun phrases are ? ey ond the scope of this paper  . ) Conclusion . We have sketched our solutions to the various problems in translation with a fairly broad brush in t  , his short paper . We recognize that many details need to be worked out  , and that in fact most of l , he work in machine translation is in working out the details  . But we felt that in proposing a new formalism \[ or translation research  , it . wasiml ) or l , aut to sta . nd1) a . ek and get a . view of the forest be fot'e moving into examine the individual trees  . 
Most machine translation systems today map the source language text into a logical form that is fairly close to the source language text  , transfor , nit into a logical t brrn that is fairly close to a target  , language text , and generate the target language text . . What is needed is first of all the possibility of doing deep interpretation when that is what is called for  , and secondly the possibility of translating from the source to the target langua  . geat a variety of levels , from the most superficial to levels requiring deep interpretation and access to knowledge about the world  , the context , and the speech act situation . This is precisely what the framework we have presented here makes possible  . 
\[3\]I lobbs , Jerry It . , Mark Stickel , Paul Martin , and Douglas Edwards ,  1990 . " Interpretation as Abduction " , forthcoming technical note . 
\[4\] l(aplan , ll . . M . , 1( . Netter , J . Wedekind , A . Zaenen , 1989 . " Translation by Structural Correspondences " , Proceedings , Fourth Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computa  . --tional Linguistics , Manchester , United Kingdom , pp .  272-281 . 
\[5\] Kowalski , lobert , 1980 .  5/7~ . eLogic of Problem
Solving , North Holland , New York.
\[6\] Norvig , Peter , 1987 . " Inference in Text Understanding " , Proceedings ,   AAAI-8Z Sixth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Seattle , 
Washington , July 1987.
\[7\] Oviatt , Sharon L ,, 1988 . " Managenmnt of mis-conmmnications : ' l ~ oward a System for Aut  , on a atic'l ~ lephone Interpretation of JapaneseEnglish I  ) i-alogues " , Technical Note 438 , SRI International , 
May 1988.
\[8\] Pereira , Fernando C . N . , and \]) avid tI . D . Warren , 1983 . " Parsing as Deduction " , Proceedings of the ~ lst Annual Meeting , Association for Co~pu-rational Linguistics , pp .  137-144 . Cambridge , M~-sachusetts , June 1983 . 
\[9\] Shieber , Siuart M . , 1988 . " A Uniform Architecture for Parsing and Generation "  , Proceedings , l~th Inlernational Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pp . 614-619, Budapest , Hungary . 
\[10\] Stickel , Mark E .  1989 . " A Prolog Technology Theorem Prover : A New Exposition and Implementation in Prolog "  , Technical Note No .  464 . 
Menlo Park , Calif .: SR . I International.
R , eferences\[1\]Charniak , Eugene , and Robert Goldman ,  1988 . 
" A Logict br Semantic Interpretation " , Proceedings ,   25th An'n~tal Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 87-94, Buffalo , New York,
June 1988.
\[ . .2\] Ilobbs , Jerry R , . , Mark Stiekel , Paul Martin , and Douglas Edwards ,  1988 . " Interpretation as Abduc-tion " , Proceedings ,   26lh Annual Meeting of the Association for Co ~nputalional Linguistics  , pp . 95-103, ltuffalo , New York , June 1988 . 

