FINDING TRANS LATION EQUIV ALENTS : AN APPLICAT IONOF 
GRAM MATICAL METAPHOR
John A . Bateman *
USC/Information Sciences Institute
4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey , CA 90292 U.S.A.
( email : bateman@isi , edu )
April 4, 1990
Abstract
In this paper I describe how a significant class of cases that would involve  ( possibly complex ) structural transfer in nm chine translation can be handled avoiding transfer  . This is achieved by applying a semantic organization developed for monolingual text generation that is sufficiently abstractor emain invariant  , within theoretically specifiable limits , across different languages . The further application of a mechanismotivated from within monolingual text generation  , 'grammatical metaphor ' , then allows candidate appropriate translations to be isolated  . 
The incorporation of these essentially monolingual mechanisms within the machine translation process promises to significantly improve translational capabilities  ; examples of this are presented for English and German  . 
1 Introduction
Historically there has rather little interaction between work in text generation and machine translation  ( MT ) -- even though language generation needs to be an integral component of any cornplete MT system  . Current text generation systems are , however , achieving results which can be beneficially applied in the MT context  . In this paper , I describe one such area of possible interaction between mechanisms developed for monolingual text generation and the requirements of MT  . In particular , the increasing concern that text generation theories show for higher levels of semantics and its realization in linguistic form makes it possible to move away from lower-level  , ' structural ' transfer between languages . In Iket , some of the semantic specifications now being uncovered with in text generation arc sufficiently abstract as to capture significant informational invariances across languages  . Sophisticated monolingual generation components are able to generate appropriate linguistic structures from such abstract informational specifications  . This avoids , in many cases , problems of ( possibly complex ) structural transfer . There is no reason a priori for the * Much of the work reported here was carried out with the financial support of the Institut fi '  ,  . Angcw and tehfformations-forschung at the University of the Saarland  , S ~ m r b r i ' m k e n ' , additional support was provided by AFOS\[ contract  , F49620-87-C-0005 , and in part by DAIPA contract MDAg03-87-C-641 . 
The opil fions in this report arc solely those of the author  . 
Thanks are due to Erich Steiner , Jgrg Schi'ltz , and C ( ~cilcPro'is for significant contributions . 
linguistic structures generated by monolingual generators for distinct languages for a given abstract semantic specification to be structurally similar : therefore  , translations that involve very diverse structures are readily obtainable if they are semantically motivated  . Monolingual generation components of the type described are also independently motivated by language processing tasks that do not involve MT and so are illany case required  . Providing for their usage within the MT context also is therefore doubly beneficial  . 
The particular mechanism developed within text generation that I will apply to MT problems here is that of grammatical raelaphor  ( Ilalliday ,  1985) ; grammatical metaphor was originally developed within the tradition of Systemic-Functional Linguistics and is now beginning to be applied within the PENMAN text generation system  ( Mann and Matthiessen , 1985; The Penman Project ,  1989) . 
Systemic-functional linguistics posits sets of mappings between semantic information to be expressed and grammatical features  . One class of mappings is termed ' congruent ' , in that it offers an unmarked realization of a semantic concept type--e  . g . , that a processual semantic entity is realized as a verbal constituent in the grammar--while a further class of mappings is ' none ongrnent '  , in that it . 
enables marked marked correspondences between semantics and grammar--e  . g .   , in nominalizations where a processual , ; emantic entity is realized as a nominal constituent in the grammar  . Below I show how the set of linguistic structures related by grammatical metaphor for mauseful equivalence class for MT : i  . e . , when seeking an appropriate translation tbr some sentence  , one will often be found in the set of target language sentences formed by generating from the corresponding abstract semantic specification in -voldng grammatical metaphor for variations in the structures generated  . 
To show how this works in more detail , If irst describe the level of abstract semantic information that is currently used within the PENMAN system--this we term the upper model- and the user interface to the text generation system that it  . supports -- which is called SPL . Second ,   1 provide more concr?~te exam-pies of two distinct kinds of grammatical metaphor that we can now implement compntationally  . And finally , I go onto show their applica ~: . ion to MT using examples from English and German . 
i13///2 The Upper Model and SPL
The PENMAN tipper model organizes the ' propositional type ' meanings that need to be expressed in text  ; it provides a general semantic taxonomy of classes of experiences and objects  . This classification can also be seen as an inheritance hierarchy that organizes concepts according to how they may be expressed  . For example , the inheritance of certain roles defines the types of participants that processes may have and the types of qualities that may be ascribed to particular objects  , while class-subclass relations capture generalizations about possible grammatical and lexical realizations of concepts  . Significantly , this orientation toward support in grammatical realization renders the upper model independent of particular domains -- the semantic taxonomy offers an organization that is required for any domain if it is to support natural anguage generation  . Rather fine distinctions are drawn by the current upper model  , which contains approximately 200 concepts ; details are provided in Bateman , Kasper , Moore , and Whitney (1990) . 
The upper model supports specifications of sentence ' meaning ' that may serve as input to a text generation system  ( Kasper , 1989a ) , or as output from an analysis component ( Kasper , 1989b ) . Such specifications , which are expressed in the PENMAN Sentence : Plan Language  ( SPL )  , abstract beyond many syntactic variations ; they capture basic meanings -- defined in terms of the upper model -- that may be given a variety of linguistic realizations depending on other  , specifiable , criteria . One consequence of the abstractness of this representation is that many sentences taken from distinct languages that would require complex structural transfer for translation simply share a common SPL representation  , thus requiring no transfer at all . However , it is important onote that this is motivated by a commonality in linguistic function when a sufficiently abstracts t and point is taken rather than on any claims of universality  ; further details on the theoretical status of the shared representations are presented in Bateman  ( 1989 )  . We will see examples of the avoidance of structural transfer in Section  5  . 
A simple example of an SPL specification using the upper model is shown below  . This shows the SPL specification for the sentence  :   ( 1 ) Mary cuther finger . 
(cut / directed-action : actor ( mary/person ) : actee ( finger/body part : in a lienable-possession -inverse mary  )   ) The labels cut , mary , and finger are instan-tial variables which may provide lexical information  ; each of these has to be assigned to a type ( directed-action , person , body part ) drawn from the generalized meanings defined in the upper model  . Relationships between entities are specified by means of roles  ( : actor , : actee , : in alienable-possession-inverse ) , which are also defined in the upper model . We could , therefore , gloss the meaning of this expression as a , dircclcd-action of an actor which affects one of the inalienable-possessions f that actor  .   1 The positioning of the general types and relationships within the upper model provides much of the information that a grammar needs for constraining possible surface realizations  .   2   3 Grammatical Metaphors A powerful property of the relationship between the upper model and the grammar is the existence of grammatical metaphor  . Grammatical metaphor occurs when meanings are realized through ' nontypical' selections of grammatical features  ; such realizations can be described systematically and bring their own distinctive contributions to the meaning expressed  ( for a general typology , see Ravelli ,  1985) . Two types of grammatical metaphor which we are beginning to be able to control computationally a rerank shifling and complexity metaphors  . Figure 1 shows the first grammatical decisions that must be made when beginning generation of a grammatical unit according to a systemic -functional grammar such as that used within PENMAN  . For each meaning to be expressed , grammatical decisions must first be made as to the rank of the grammatical unit that will be used--i  . e . , clauses , groups ( nominal , verbal , adverbial and prepositional ) , words , and morphemes -- and the complexity of that grammatical unit--i  . e . , whether the unit is a single unit or some combination of similar units  ( e . g . , conjunction ) . Traditionally , the mapping between meanings to be expressed and these grammatical choices has been rather inflexible and limited to congruenl realizations  ; i . e . , by and large , a process-type meaning ( activity , state , etc . ) would be realized by a selection of a simple clause  , an object-type meaning by a selection of nominal , etc . Gram-tactical metaphor makes explicit the fact that this relationship between meaning and grammatical form is considerably more flexible and many noncongruent realizations are possible  . 
Consider , for example , the SPL specification for example sentence ( 2 ) The discharge of electricity re-suited in a break down of the system  . 
( ( cO/cause-effect : domain discharge : range break down  )   ( discharge/directed-action : actee ( electricity/substance ) )  ( breakdown/nondirected-action : actor ( system/object ) ) ) When the grammatical alternatives of the grammar are considered  , rather than automatically selecting 1 Definitions of most of these upper model terms are given in Bateman  , Kasper , Moore and Whitney (1990) . \]: have extended the actual classification given thereb ~  , t'ncluding inverse relations where necessary and by increasing the level of detail of description for the purposes of discussion  . In addition , as with all the SPL examples given in this paper , I have made the simplification of removing specifications of all non-upper model related information since these are not relevant for the present discussion  . 
2 The additional information ecessary to produce a unique utterance is factored in SFL into three functional components : the logical  , textual , and interpersonal ~ metafunctions ' . The information in the SPL is drawn from a fourth component : the experiential metafunction  . Only by combining meanings from all four components are sufficient constraints provided for a unique utterance  ( Matthiessen ,  1987:258) . In Sections 35 , we see examples of variations in the constraints of the logical metafimction  , and in the Conclusion I return briefly to the textual metafunction  . Interpersonal constraints have been assumed constant throughout  . 
142 ~ CLAU ~; F- . . . , NNG MINAL . ~ ~ . ~GROU!~~V~RBAL'~~'-'~PREPOSITIONAI ~ . 
Figure 1 The rank and complexity systems of the grammar some ' topmost ' node for immediate assignment to clause rank  , the mechanism of rank shifting gram--matical metaphor interposes a decision procedure which selects an input term most appropriate for realization as a clause  . Similar decisions are made concerning each rank in the grammar and the complexity at each rank  . This gives rise to the following possibilities for expression  ( focusing for the moment just on the expression of the cause-effect relationship and approximately preserving the textual organization  ) :  V-C1 Realization of cause-effect a clause complex rank  :   \]3ec~use lectricity was discharged , the system broke down . 
V-C2It . ealization of cause-effect a clause rank : Electricity being diacharged resulted in the system breaking down  . 
V -C3 Realization of cause-effect a nominal group rank : Electricity being discharged was the cause of the system breaking down  . 
V -C4 Realization of cause-etfect at circumstantial d -junct group rank :  \]3ecause of electricity being discharged thesy . ~ tembroke down . 
A further range of variation of this kind subsumes the problems of nominatization  . This is equally relevant to our current example . For example , the SPL specification of tile discharge situation alone could  , simply by altering the rank at which it is to be real-ize  ( l , support the following variations : rank realization clause electricity was discharged  ( V-N1 ) nominal group electricity being discharged ( V-N2 ) discharge of electricity ( V-N3 ) electricity's discharge ( V-N4 ) We can take this further : the relationship between the proce  , ~s and the actee of electricity can be realized within the modification systems of the nominal group at an even finer level  ; this gives ( cf . ttalliday ,  !985:160 ) :  ( epithet ) electrical discharge ( V-N5 )   ( classifier electricity discharge ( V-N6 ) These are all options provided by the current PEN -MAN grammar  . Example sentence ( 2 ) is then a combination of variation ( V-C2 ) at clause rank and ( V -
N3) at nominal rank.
These are all options provided by the current PEN -MAN grarrmlar  . Example sentence ( 2 ) is then a combination of variation ( V-C2 ) at clause rank and further similar variations at nominal rank  . 
4 The Application to MT
We can also characterize certain kinds of variation observable across languages in translation equivalents in exactly the terms provided by rank shifting and complexity grammatical metaphors  . For example , a German translation equivalent to example sentence  ( 1 ) would be: ( 3 ) Mary schnittsic hinden Finger .   ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) present problems for transfer because the number of participants and surface sen-fence structures differ  . This requires that the processes involved be assigned to different classes and structural transferules are then necessary to relate the translatkmal possibilities  . However , the state of affairs in ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) can be described in terms of the same upper model categories regardless of the particular language conside ~ vd  , and this permits the generation of ( 3 ) from the same SPL specification as ( 1 )  . 
Each monolingual grammar and lexicon will already directly control the congruent assignment of terms in the SPL to ranks of the grammar  , although this assignment will differ across languages just as it < lifters within languages when noncongruent assignments are made by the rank shift in grammatical metaphor mechanism  . Thus , for (3) , the first concept consume during generation -- wilich thereby becomes tim'head ' of the highest level structure  , i . e . : the process of the clause --- is the directed -action cut-ling  ( schneiden )  ; the second concept is the actor relationship between the process and the person Mary---this is realized by a simple nominative Subject  ( in the absence of other textual constraints that might effect voice  , diathesis , etc . ) ; the third concept consumed is the relationship of in alienable-possess wn between Mary and finger--- this governs the selection of beneficiary and its realization as a reflexive pronoun  ; the four this the actee relationship holding between tile body part finger and cutting -- this is realized as the prepositional head of a prepositional group  ; and , finally , tile fifth concept consumed is the concept finger it self---which gives the dependent nominal within the prepositional group  . This contrasts to the case for (1) , where assignment of SPL terms to ranks follows the order : cuzting : clause  , : actormary:nominal , : actee finger : nominal , : in alienable-possession-inverseteary:nominal -modifier  . 
The grammar of English'knows ' that the : actee /: in alienable-possession combination can be realized as a nominal group  ( her finger )  , while the German grammar needs to ' know'that the combination requires both a nominal group  ( sich ) and a location specification ( in den Finger )  . This in fofmarion is entirely motivated by individual anguage-internal considerations  ; both grammars and lexicons are entirely monolingual and independent of each other and of their use for translation  . 
An SPL expression can therefore receive a variety of linguistic realizations  , even across dis;tinct languages . This extension to muttiling nality does not 3   15 add to the complexity of the realization mechanism  , since the grammatical metaphor mechanism which supports it is already required for monolingual generation  ; once a monolingual grammar for any language is in place  , these realizational possibilities for MT follow also  . Grammatical metaphor thus provides a mechanism by which a syntactically neutral SPL specification licenses a set of metaphorically related realizations in any language for which an appropriate grammar has been constructed  .   3 A contextually suitable translation is then often found in the set of sentences related by grammatical metaphor that a target language supports  . The kind of translational mapping this provides is shown in Figure  2  . 
5 Fur ther examples o f the ut i l i ty o f the mechanism for 
MT 5 . 1 Verb and prepos i t iona l phrase combinat ions A likely German translational equivalent for example sentence  ( 2 ) above is : 4 ( 4 ) We gender elektrischeu Enlladung brachd as System zusammcn  . Again , the structures of the two sentences are quite different--a simple process in  ( 2 ) seems to have been decomposed into a prepositional phrase in  ( 4 ) -- and this would require complex structural transfer  . However , the SPL provided for sentence ( 2 ) already entails both realizations : the clause structure of  ( 4 ) is identical to variation type ( V-C4 ) of the metaphor set fiAll that needs to be altered is the lexical information pointed at by the instantial variables  . 
5.2 Nominalizations
The principles of grammatical metaphor also apply across languages within nominal phrases  . For example , in the translation pair of sentences (2) and (4) , we can also see a difference in the structure of the corresponding nominal phrases : discharge of electricity and elektrische Entladung  . In terms of the possible realization variants for this nominal phrase : the English has selected  ( V-N3 )  , the German ( V-N5) . The same holds for the other process in the pair concerning the system break down  . Here again , therefore , the metaphor set contains appropriate translations whose structures are rather different  . 
3 PENMAN provides an appropr iate grammar for English  , and a similarly appropriate grammar for German is currently under construction wath Jn the KOMET text generation project  ( Steiner et al ,  1989) . Bateman and Li ( 1988 ) reports on earlier experiments with similar grammars for Japanese and 

4 Note that I am not claiming that these sentences provide the only translations of each other  . The argument rests upon these being possible desired translation equivalents in some part icular circumstances  . 
3 Although a similar range of possibilities ( V-C1-V-C4 ) are theoretically available for the realization of the SPL in Germma  , not all possible variations are equally acceptable in all contexts  . For example , the realization of the cause-effect relation at clause rank calls for a process to realize that relation : a plausible selection on the basis of similarity with the English sentence might appear to be the verb ' resultieren'--however  , this is very marked . The realization at circumstantial adjunct group rank  ( in German with , e . g . , a wegen-adjunct ) is often preferable . 
5.3 Realizations of modality
Consider the following translation pair ( Schlitz ,  1989) , which is again problematic in a transfer-based fl ' a mework that relies on representations less abstract than that of the upper model and SPL because the structures are very different :  ( 5 ) John is likely to implement the algorithm A ) John implementier twahrs eheinlichdenlgorithm us ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) both share a common SPL representation : ( I implement ~/ directed , action ): actor John\[ . . ctoe Igor t m -- T / probable )) As before , several differential realizations of this SPL can be generated by allowing the grammatical metaphor mechanisms to order the consumption of terms as heads at differing ranks in the grammar  . 
For example , the ordering s\[DABC\] , \[ ADBC\] and\[ABCD\]support clause structures with the following dependency organizations respectively  , showing realizations of the statement of probability at clause complex rank  , verbal group rank , and circumstantial adjunct rank : ( i )   \[1 It is likely \]\ [ z that \[3 John \] implements\[ , tile algorithm \]\]( ii )\[ ,  \[ , John \] \[2   \[3 is likely to \] implement \]\[ s the algorithm \ ]\]   ( iii )  \[ ,   \[2 John \] will \[4 probably \] implement\[s the algorithm \]\]\ [ x  \[2 John \] implementiert \[4wahrscheinlich  \]  \[3 den algorithmus \]\] What would previously have required rather complex transfer mechanisms  , therefore , is here an automatic consequence of tile realizational mechanisms  . 
5.4 Across the text/grammar boundary
As a final example of the generality of the mechanisms described here  ( for further examples , see Bateman ,  1989) , it is also possible to consider dependency relations defined above the clause complex as possible targets  . The ' highest ' rank assignment for the cause -effect relationship suggested so far has been that of clause complex  ; this is the highest rank available in the grammar  . However , in current work in the PEN-MAN group on Rhetorical Structure Theory  ( RST : Mann and Thompson ,  1987) , there is the possibility of extending this view to consider the dependency relationships defined across sentences in texts  . If the following translation pair we redesirable , for example , then we see precisely this kind of variation mul -tilingually :  ( 7 ) After you had explained your views , I could see them much better . 
(8) Duerkl ~ irtest deine Position , Danachverstandichsieviel besser . 


RELATED8~Tatt.~o*~lnx,St-....
S ,/
SPL(p0/pmc~t ~: role , : rol~a:)
MRTAMIORIC , % LI.Y.
Ill ~ LATIrl )
TI ? lat ~ eoml ~ lu /
L ~ i ~ L a ~ c ~ e o ~ r n ~ u ~ r
LzL :
Figure 2: Mapping between sets related by grammatical metaphor Focusing on the temporal/causal relationship expressed between the two situations described  , both sentences can receive the combined SPL and RST specification :  ( ( rO / rst-sequence : domain erklaeren : range verstehen  )   ( erklaeren/verbal-process:sayeryou:message views  )   ( verstehen/mental-process : senserf . 
: phenomenon views : propel~y-ascription ( better/evaluative ~ quali Zy ) ) ) Sentence ( 8 ) preserves the realization of the RST relation at the text level and so produces two independent sentences  . The next available strategy for realization is within the grammar  , at clause rank with complexing . This realization is adopted in the English variant  ( 7 )  . Again , therefore , the metaphor-set provides a powerfulink between translationally equivalent texts  , even beyond the boundaries of the grammar . Work on this will continue as our development of RST and text organization continues  . 
oo 6Conclusmn . Future direc-tions
Following from earlier experiments in the integration of Machine Translation  ( MT ) and text generation ( Bateman , Kasper , Schlitz , and Steiner ,  1989) , we have found that the combination of two components of the Systemic-Functional Linguistic  ( SFL ) model of language ( Halliday , 1985; Matthiessen ,  1987) , such as are being developed for computational use within the PENMAN text generation system  , significantly reducest lheneed for structural transfer in machine translation  ( MT ) without requiring deep modelling of specific domains  . These two components may be described thus : ? a linguistically motivated organization of general semantic distinctions that are not highly language-specific and that hold across both differing domains and differing languages -- this level of organization is realized computationally within the PENMAN system as the upper model  ; ? a particular class of mapping relations between this abstract semantic organization and linguistic form-these mappings are motivated by the notion of ' grammatical metaphor '  . 
The examples of the previous section made the point that the level of grammatical metaphorical realization is not preserve during translation  , but the set of possibilities defined by granmmtical metaphor provide strong candidates for high quality translation equivalents  , t to wever , since SPL forms decom-mit from so much of the surface syntax  , it is necessary to control the range of linguistic realizations that are compatible with the constraints SPL specifications represent  . The types of control that are necessary already constitute major areas of active research within the PENMAN teXt generation project  , where the principal type of constraint under development is textual  . It is reasonable to assume that textual organization  , including the particular patterns of thematic development adopted by a text  , is one type of meaning which needs to be preserved in translation  . Metaphorically related clauses often have rather different textual organizations and so particular choices of clause may be motivated by the need to achieve particular thematic developments  . 
A rather more global kind of textual constraint is that created by the ' style ' of a text as a whole  . Thus , for example , the translation proces should not select as translation equivalent sentences whose stylistic import were radically divergent  . This , however , can only be established on the basis of analyses of what constitutes an appropriate text style for a particular communicative situation  . This is being addressed in text generation i terms of the SFL notion of register  ( Bateman and Paris ,  1989) , and its application to
MT is pursued in Paris ( forthcoming).
The relevance of textual constraints i also not limited to the simple types of grammatical metaphor illustrated in this paper  ; for example , there are also ' metaphors of transitivity ' which chang  ( : the process-type involved , e . g . :  ( 9 ) electricity was discharged : directed-action ( 10 ) there was a discharge of electricity : re -lation M  5   17 Variations such as these provide significantly different the matization options  . In certain cases , therefore , in order to achieve a particular thematic development for a text in a given language  , this kind of metaphor may be the only means available for achieving a syntactically thematizeable constituent  . 
This type of grammatic Mmetaphor can also be motivated by the need to preserve Aklionsarl  ( cf . 
Vendler , 1!) 67) . In the following translation pair , for example , we need to change the transitivity type of the predicate in order to preserve the accomplishment Aktionsart  .  6  ( 11 ) Witerarbeit et en uns die Theorie ( 12 ) We worked ourselves into the theory Finally , the lexical entries of certain languages may also restrict the types of alternatives that are available  . If one language simply does not have a lexical item for realizing a meaning at a given rank  , then another ank will be pursued . 
Many of the mechanisms that need to be supported for these capabilities to be achieved are equally relevant in the generation of texts from single languages  . We expect , therefore , that the results we are obtaining in a monolingual setting --- particularly those concerned with the creation of texts  , rather than sentences -- will generalize well to application in multilingual environments such as MT  . 
References\[1\]Bateman , John A .   ( 1989 ) ' Upper Modelling for Machine Translation : a level of abstraction for preserving meaning '  . EUROTaA-D Working Paper . Institut fiir Angew and te Informations for schung a der Uni-versit/~t des Saarlandes  , Saarbriicken . 
\[21 Bateman , John A . , Kasper , Robert T . , Moore , Johanna D . , and Whitney , Richard ( 1990 ) ' A general organization of knowledge for natural language processing - - the PEN MAN Upper Model '  . ISI Research Report , USC/Information Sciences Institute , Marina del Rey , California . 
\[3\] Bateman , John A . , Kasper , Robert T . , Schlitz , J Srg F . L . , Steiner , Ericht I .   ( 1989 ) ' A new view on the process of translation ' . Proceedings of the 4th . 
European Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Manchester , England . Also available in the ISI Reprint Series , report RS-89-234 , USC/Information Sciences Institute , Marina del Rey , California . 
\[4\] Bateman , John A . and Li , Hang ( 1988 ) ' The application of systemic-function M grammar to Japanese and Chinese for use in text generation '  . Proceedings of the 1988 International Conference on Computer Processing of Chinese and Oriental Languages  , Toronto , Canada , pp 443-447 . Also available in the ISI Reprint Series , USC/Information Sciences Institute , Marina del Rey , California . 
\[5\] Bateman , John A . and Paris , C&ile L .  (1 . 989 ) ' Phrasing a text in terms a user can understand ' . 
In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , IJCAI-89 , Detroit , 

\[6\] Haltiday , M . A . K . (1985) Introduction to Functional
Grammar . London : Edward Arnold.
6Thls is a very important capability to provide for the whole area of translation of gemnan and Slavic " Pr~fixverben "  ( Steiner , p . c . ) ,   \[7\]   \[8\]   \[9\]   \[10\]   \[11\]   \[12\]   \[13\]   \[14\]   \[15\]   \[16\] Kasper , Robert T .   ( 1989a ) A Flexible Interface for Linking Applications to Penman's Sentence Generator  . In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop  , Philadelphia , February 1989 . 
Kasper , Robert T .   ( 1989b ) ' Unification and Classification : an experiment in information-based parsing '  . In International Workshop on Parsing Technologies  , 28-31 August ,  1989 , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , USA , ppl-7 . 
Mann , William C . , and Matthiessen , Christian M . I . M .   ( 1985 ) ' A demonstration of the Nigel text generation computer program '  . In Benson , J . D . and Greaves , W . S . ( eds . ) Systemic Perspectives on Discourse : Volume 1 ; Selected Theoretical Papers from the 9th International Systemic Workshop . New Jersey , Ablex . pp 50-83 . 
Mann , William C . and Thompson , Sandra ( 1987 ) ' Rhetorical Structure Theory : a theory of text organization '  . In Livia Polanyi ( ed . ) The Structure of Discourse , Norwood , New Jersey : Ablex Publishing

Matthiessen , Christian M . I . M .   ( 1987 ) ' Notes on the Organization of the environment of a text generation grammar '  . In Kempen , G . ( ed . ) ( 1987 ) Natural Language Generation : Recent Advances in Artificial Intelligence  , Psychology , and Linguistics . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers , Dordrecht , pp 253-278 . 
Paris , C6cile . L . ( forthcoming ) ' User modelling , register , and machine translation ' . To appear as a EUROTRA-D Working Paper , Institut fiir Ange-wandte Informations for schung , Saarbriicken . 
The Penman Project ( 1989 ) ' The PENMAN documentation : Primer , User Guide , Reference Manual , and Nigel Manual ' . USC/Information Sciences Institute . 
Ravelli , Louise J . (1985)' Metaphor , Mode and Complexity : an exploration of co -varying pa  . tterns' . 
University of Sydney , Department of Linguistics.
B.A . Honours thesis.
Schi~tz , Jbrg F . L .   ( 1989 ) ' Towards a framework for knowledge-based translation '  . Proceedings of 13th German Workshop on Artificial Intelligence ,  1989 , Springer Verlag . Also available as IAI/Eurotra-D
Working Paper No . 10, Saarbr ~ ckeu.
Steiner , Erich , Bateman , John , Maier , Elisabeth , Teich , Elke and Wanner , Leo ( 1989 ) ' Of hills to climb and ships to sink -- generating German within a functional approach to text generation '  . 
Arbeitspapie reder GMD , Gesellschaft fiir Mathe-matik und Datenverarbeitung  , Integrated Pubhca-tion and Information Systems Insitute  , Darmstadt . 
\[17\] Vendler , Z . (1967) Linguistics in Philosophy . Ithaca,
N.Y .: Cornell University Press.

