Lexical gaps and idioms in machine translation
Diana Santos
1 BM-INt-SC Scientitic Group
R , . Alves P , edol , 9, 1000 l , is boa , Portugal
( internet : dms@inesc.inesc.pt )
Abstract
This paper deserihes the treatment of lexical gaps  , collocation information and idioms in the English to Portuguese machine translation system PORTUGA  . 
The perspective is strictly bilingual , in the sense that all problems referenced above are considered to behm g to the tran M ' cr phase  , and not , as in other systems , to analysis or generation . 
The solution presented invokes a parser firth e target language  ( Portuguese ) that analyses , producing the corresponding graph structure , the multiword expression selected as the result of lexieal transfer  . 
This process seems to bring considerable advantage in what readability and ease of bilingual dictionary development is concerned  , and to fiirnish maximal flexihility together with minimal storage requirements  . Finally , it also provides complete independence between dictionary-rod grammar formalisms  . 
Organization ' lhegeneral architecture of " the MT system is at first described very briefly  , emphasizing the features relevant to the full understanding of the problem at hand  . Then tim problem is presented , and a literature survey given . The solution putt brward is then described . Finally , we fiwn is hade tailed example , together with some evaluation results . 
The general MT system
The structure of the transfer MT system POR . TUGA is illustrated in Figure 1 . 
Figure I . General structure of PORTUGA : A-analysis , G-generation . Transfer : L-lexical , S-structural , T-tense , Sty-style . 
' lhemain characteristics of this English to Portuguese transhm  ) rare : the separation between possible translation  ( which may be multiple )  , and best or chosen translation ( decided in the " style Iransfer " module )  . 
? Complete independence between English and Portuguese processing  . English analysis is performed hyPEG\[8\] . 
? Bilingual dictionary being kept to a minimum , only the selection conditions for lexical transfer and contrastive knowledge are stored  . It should also be mentioned that all intbrmation in this dictionary is associated with the translations  , and not to the English index , as is usual for lexical transfer in MT . 
The reader is suggested to consult \[131 or \[14\] \[' or more details . 
The problem
Vagueness , together with nonoverlapping of ' semantic fields across different languages is widely known to give rise to lexical gaps  , and lexical ambiguity . 
For this reason , lexical transfer , the process of choosing the correct equivalent ( s ) for one lexical entry in another language , is one of the most ditticult problems that MT has to cope with  . 
This paper focuses on one aspect of lexical transfer  , namely the possibility to specify complex translations in the target language  . Under this broad description , the use of complex ( henceforth multiword ) expressions , change of part-of-speech required bY translation , and collocation restrictions , are meant . .
The process of actually choosing which entry ( or entries ) in the bilingual dictionary is more appropriate , and which in\[brmation is taken into account for that process has been described elsewhere\[  13I  . 
Some examples of instances of complex translation ( in opposition to simple translation , in the sense of word to one word translation , same part-of-speech , independently of the number of possible choices available  ) will illustrate the problem in the context off ' nglish-to-Portuguese translation  . 
l-to-N words miss-sentira falt a miss-deixar escapar drop-deixar cair kick-darum  pontap6 tonight-hoje 5  . node graduate-firarocurso
N-to-I words have fun-divertir-segetupearly - madrugar fall in love-a paix on ar-se take advantage-a proveitar television set-televisor swimming pool-piscina 
N-to-M wordskick the bucket-hater as bolas lose one's temper-pcrd cra  paci6ncia Figure 2  . Translathn gaps : One-to-many , many-to-one and many-to-many words translation . 
. . . z , ~?
Other approaches
In this section I mention related work and alternative sol-utions that have been proposed and which llind representative of the present day state-of-art  . ' l ' herelbre , primitive approache such as , for instance , treatment of complex expressions as simple strings will not be surveyed  . 
Machine translation :
It is acknowledged by outstanding machine translation researchers that there are MT problems which are bilingual in nature  . R . egarding the problem of lexical transfer , l'sujii\[17\] states " we cannot enumerate , by monolingual thinking , different concepts denoted by the verb'produce  '  .  ( . . . ) Only when we are asked to translate sentences into another language  , can we try to find appropriate target language words  .  ( . . . ) The above discussion bnplies that certain ' understanding proe-e ~ es " are target language dependant  , and cannot be fully specified in a monolingual manner  . "Specitically the problem of translating a word for an expression  , is one of the reasons presented by Schenk\[15\] to-se the concept of " Complex Basic Expressiorff in the de-~  ; crlp tion of one language .   ( ACBE is a basic expression liom a semantic point of view  , i . e . , it corresponds toa basic mearfing , and a complex expression from a syntactical point of vie  , , , ,' . ) " Expressions that are not idiomatic , but that consist of more than one word can be handled by means of a complex basic expression in order to retain the isomorphy JThis approach is related to the theoretical requirement of I he Rosetta MT system to bt fild isomorphic grammars for ihese verall : nlguages dealt with by tim system ? " Ib is implies that  , in this ti'amework , it is the set of all languages in presence that delines what is a basic meaning  . 
15ke this , it is possible to dispense altogether with structural 
Irarlsfer ~" Structural transfer is not neees . rary , since idioms are based onto basic meanings J hx general  , however , most M'F systems do not make the analysis phase dependant on the target language  ( s )  , and therefore it is usual to see statements like the  following\[4\]: " the lexical rule must mark words with the corresponding parts of speech  , " , in the " cases where a source language entry must be rephrased in the target language as a nad-hoe combination of words which does not form a lexieal entity "  . 
It is unclear , however , how much complexity of the result can be handled , or how r nuch syntactical transfo , mation the new expression carl suffer . 
Some hybrid approaches cart also be found in \[9\] , this time apparently putting the burden on the generation phase : " The second substep of German morphological generation is the application of German word list transformations  .  ( .   . ) these rules can also be used to handle noncompositional translations  . For example , " for example " can translate compositionally into far Beispiel  , and then a GP ltRASE rule can conver this to zum Beispiel  . " l lowever , the more comprehensive way to deal with this problcnL wilhout changing analysis accordingly  , is the one cx emplilied by Isabcllc\[7\] . It was developed " a special anguage called LEXTRA  , which makes it easier to state the type of tree transformations required by lexical transfer  .  ( . . . ) LEXTRA takes as data an explicit description of the admissible tree structures  , and guarantees that any tree it receives or creates is bMeed an admi ~' ible tree "  . 
Similar solutions can be found in the Japanese-to -I!nglish system  of\[10\]  , which handles both lexical gaps and changes of part of speech : " One can specify not only the Engh's hmain verbs but also arbitrmT phrases governed by the verbs as constants "  , allowing for variables and complex patterns in tile lexical rules  . " one can provide lexieal rules directly in GRADE  , and attach them to specific items .  ( . . . ) One can specify specific tree transformations in GRADE "  . 
and in the old ITS translation system\[12\]: " The contents of these records " ( dictionary entries ) " #rclude transfer language statements which performs the necessary transfers as well as other referential information  . "

In parsing , idioms have to be considered . A recent paper on idiom processing\[1\] lists some of their relevant properties ( my rephrasing ) : ? usual existence of ambiguity between literal and 
Miomatic readings , ? frequent discontinuity of idioms , ? applicability of regular application of syntactic rules  ( like adverb ( s ) or auxilia J T verb ( s ) insertion )  , ? applicability of " transformations ' to the idioms proper  , ( like passivation or relativization ) . 
The difference between " nonliteral reading " and " idiomatic " reading of an expression is also pointed out  . 
Metaphoric readings are proposed to be parsed by usu  . : d rules . The advantages of submitting idioms to " regular " syntactic rules and even to ' transformations '  , whenever possible , are emphasized . 
A more extreme view can be found in Gazdar et al3 l , who ignore idioms as far as syntax is concerned : " no additional devices need be added to the syntax in accounting for the peculiarities of fixed expressions "  . Since not only idioms can be assigned internal syntactic structure  , but an internal semantic structure as well , as " all syntactically active idiomatic expressions have a metaphorical basis "  . 
However , radically different views can be found Ibr instance in  \[5\]  , where , in the lexicon-grammar approach , the concern with the representation of compound words  ( adverbs , verbs , nouns ) makes Gross establish a classilica-lion according to their syntactical shape  , ranging fiom several degrees of variation , li'om completely frozen ( " at night " ) to having parts completely free ( " organize in one'shonor " )  . 
This author suggests that finite automata be attached to a given entry in Order to describe the compound w triation  . 
" The variations of form we have enumerated can be partly handled by attaching a finite automaton to a given entry  , and this automaton will describe the main grammatical changes allowed  . "Inbetween , the need to store several pieces of infbrmation concerning idioms is acknowledged by Stockllf\]  , such as 2331 undergoing passivization , weight in the whole idiom , re-mover of the idiom interpretation , semantic value , etc . 
This system stores idioms as " further information concerning words "  , divided in two cases , " canned phrases " and " flexible idioms " , the latter being stored under the ' thread ' of tile idiom  . 
Based on the claim that " the flexibility of an idiom depends on how recognizable its metaphorical origin is "  , one of the goals is to " integrate idioms in our lexical data merely as further information concerning words  ( as in traditional dictionaries ) " . 

Finally , research in natural language generation has also contributed to clarify and furnish solutions to the problem  , Clearly , generation is one of the issues in a machine translation system  . However , work in generation per seusually presupposes the existence of an unambiguous ' concept ' representation  , and so the problems begin with the correct stating of an idea in one particular language  . In this framework , it is clear that one key concept is that of " collocations "  , or how lexical items combine in a particular language  . 
In these systems , it is advocated ( see for instance \[6\] ) that in the specialized ' semantic " dictionary " storing the possible lexicalizations of a ' concept " in a given language  (  . . . ) the possibility of combining lexemes in collocations " should also be stored  , specifically in the entries for the bases ( which determine the possible collocates : a collocation is a pair base-collocate  )  . 
A remark of utmost importance can be found in \[11\]  , during the description of the DIOGENES generation system : " collocalional relations are defined on lexical units  , not meaning representations " . 
Summing up
The literature survey above supports some of our assumptions  , namely that ? there are problems which are bilingual in nature  , and cannot therefore be properly dealt within only one language  ; ? there is not a clear distinction between what should be accounted for as an idiom  , a metaphorical use of a word or a collocation . The boundaries between collocational restrictions  , metaphorical readings and idioms are blurred and may even not be pertinen to the automatic treatment of language  . 
to translate correctly , it is often necessary to use expressions instead of single words  . Those expressions can more over give origin to complex structure changes  , possibly discontinuous . 
Our approach
We are interested in solving the problem of translating one expression into another expression  , no matter whether the need arises because of a lexical gap  , a collocation difference or an idiom not literally translatable  . 
Therefore , we treat all these three problems the same way , namely , considering then ~ as instances of a contrastive lexical transfer problem in the scope of machine translation  . 
We must emphasize that we are only interested in expression-to-expression translations when tile literal ones are not acceptable  . This stems from the lhct that there is a considerable number of fixed expressions which do not require any special processing  , as can be seen in the following list , with examples taken from several anguages : ( E ) parents and children palse filhos ( E ) ladies and gentlemensenhorases enhores ( F ) monterlamoutar de aunez desubira mostardao narizd e  ( F ) attend reunenfantes per a ruma crianqaum filho ( E ) take into account to marem conta ( I ) prendereil to roperle comapegaro touropelos cornos  ( E ) in good hand semboas mY . os Figure 3 . Literally translatable idioms :
F-French , l-Italian

Our solution
Given that tile target expressions can be arbitrarily complex  , we impose no restrictions whatsoever on their \[ brmor structure  , and give unlimited power to the device intended to cope with them  . 
On the other hand , it didn't appeal to us to have to store , for each pair source-target ntries , the lull structural transformation implied , as in the most powerful approaches mentioned above  ( cf . \[101 and 171) . This approach gives origint overy heavy dictionaries  , with a lot of redundancy , moreover , since there may be similar transformations repeated to many entries  . On the other hand , not only the dictionary becomes very difficult to unde  , ' stand and modify ' ,   ( requiring someone who knows the " programming ~ language used  )  , but also it makes it tightly coupled to the structural representation and or particular linguistic formalism and options used in the machine translation system  , in both analysis and generation . 
We chose thus a different method that ? allows tbr maximal readability is independent of the linguistic  ( and programming ) decisions of file whole hit system ( being only concerned with lexical transfer ) * provides as much power as any unrestricted ( tree or graph ) transformation language The method proposed consists the no fu ~' p ~ a stile result value intim bilingual dictionary  , the re-\['orekeeping it independent of whatever structure it shouht be assigned  , and inv ~ la ~ e .   . d~rser that builds the structure required , on the Ily . 
Another advantage of the process above is that the new structure is dynamically built onlx when it is necessarz  ( that is , when it corresponds totile chosen translation ) . 
On the other hand , no separate ( and redundant ) lexical rules need be written in the dictionary , a stile very same grammar is used for all multiword target expressions  . "lhe grammar should be a " twirl " of that used in the analysis  332   3 phase , that is , it should obey the same formalism and linguistic options in order furthem to be compatible  . 
A detailed example
F ' or the sake of clarity , a full example will be presented , regarding the word miss , in its meaning of to feels or ry or unhappy at the absence or loss of  ( someone or something )   ( l . ongman ) . The Iqgure 4 shows an abridged fbrm of the entry for miss in the bilingual dictionary  . The information \[ br choosing among the several possible translations was omitted  am1 will not be discussed here . The examples presented will be in any case those that correctly trigger the translation sentira falta  ( literally , " feeltile lack ") . 
miss(Vl: . RBCIITPOSS(EVP sentira falta )) miss(VEI , H\]CIITPOSS(EVP tersaudades )) perder0/FA ~ . B ) faltar0/ERB ) miss ( VERB ( EVP deix are scapar ) ) men ina ( NOUN ) Figure 4 . l ) ktionary entry for " miss ": EVP stores the Portuguese string to be used as translation  . 
The first thing that should be exemplified , ist bat , after the choice of the mulfiword translation , the Portuguese grammar is invoked , building a equivalent graph fiagmen to the translation of ' Teel the lack "  . "' his graph fragment is then conveniently inserted in place of the one fbr miss  . 
imiss you.
I ) ECLtNPIPRONI*'T'
VERBI * " miss "
NP2PI~.ON2*"you"
PUNCI "" arvore portugues a .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
I ) ECI . 2NP 3PR . ON 3 * " eu "
VERB2*"s into "
NP4DETIADJI * " a "
DET2ADJ2*"tua"
NOUN 1 * " falta *
PUNC2 "" .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Geraq ~. o . . . . . > eus into a tua falta.
Figure 5. A simple example.
With this simple example , it can be seen that some structural manipulation took place  ( converting the English direct object pronoun into a Portuguese possessive adjective-triggered by tim CII ' IPOSS marker in Figure  4  )  , and that the words taking part in the multiword expression were conveniently intlected  ( in this case , only the verb ) . 
More complex processing can clearly take place , as is exemplified in Figure 6 . 
!'11 always miss people ilike.
.  .   .   . > eusentire is empreafalta depes so as dequem eugosto  . 
I miss the man who was here.
.  .   .   .   . > eus into a falta do homem que esteve aqui . 
he was missed , but who missed her ? .   .   .   . > foisentl daafalta dele , masquem 6 que sentiu a falta de la?he was the one who most missed his father  . 
.  .   .   . > elefoio que sentiuma is a falta doseu pai . 
they were the ones who were least missed.
.  .   .   . > eles for a mosdequems esentiume nos a falta . 
I miss having you in the neighborhood.
...> s into a falta deteter naviz in banqa.
I forgot missing you.
....  esqueci-me desentiratuafalta.
1 forgot to miss you.
.... . > esqueciqne desentiratuafalta.
Figure 6 . Several examples of " miss " translated as " sentira falta ": Complexter  , ses , passive , relative clauses , distinction between third person singular and others  , adverb position , etc . 
AstersmMades is also a valid translation for miss in the same context as sent i  , " a fatta , this choice belongs to style transfer . Follows the output of the system in that case : i miss that time  . 
..... > eutenhosau dades daquele tempo.
Figure 7 . Another style alternative : " miss " translated by " tersaudades "  . 
Other problems
It remains to be shown how tile other problems rnentioned above are solved in this framework  . We begin by change of part-of-speech , and continue by identifying source language ( English ) multiword expressions , which then comprehend the remaining cases , namely collocations arid equivalence of distinct idioms  . 
Change of part-of-speech
The change of part-of-speech should be transparent as fi~r as the dictionary is concerned  , being the assignment of the correct interpretation performed by the Portuguese parse  , ' . 
thank ( VERB ( NPOSAJP )   ( I ) REPOOBJECI'a )   ( EVP obrigada ) ) agradecer ( VF , RB(PREPOtbrpor )) agrade eimento(NOUN(PI~ . I'~POlbrpor )) obrigado(NOUN)I : igure g . Abbreviated entry for ttm ~ ord " thank ": Since the string " Obrigada " has three possible interpretations according to the Portuguese parser  , NPOS stores the phrase type to select . 
Only when there are more than one parse for the target expression and the one to choose implies a change of part-of-speech needs this to be stored in the bilingual dictionary  , as can be seen in Figure 8 above . 
Note : Mori Rimon pointed out to us that in cases of highly ambiguous target languages  , as is the case of written 4333 llebrew , the indication of which syntactical alternative , when different from the source one , could be needed very frequently , therefore reducing the economy we are asserting . We can only answer that while for English-to -Portuguese translation that structural marking is very rarely used  , further testing with different language pairs must be done in order to assessor deny the universality of this method  . Namely languages whose translation would require an extensive part of speech change should be tested  . 
Follows a very simple example of the case discussed above : thank you  . 

I ) ECLIVERBI * " thank "
NP IPR . ON 1 * " you "
PUN , el . . . .

& wore portugues a .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
I ) ECL2ADJI * " obrigada "
PPIPREP 1 " a "
PR.ON2*"fi"
PUNC2 "" .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Gera q ~ o . . . . . > o brigadati.
Figure 9. Change of part-of-speech.
This example would be improved if the whole phrase " thank you " were translated by " obrigada "  , but here we want to show the simplest case . 
It should also be mentioned in passing that whenever there is a generalized part-of-speech change on syntactical grounds  , that is not done through lexical transfer , but in the structural transfer , as is the case of a dieetival English present participle clauses  . 
311 VE-to-A1 IVE translation
Considering the general problem of identifying source language multiword expressions  , the philosophy we propose is similar .   ( We are indebted to Stephen Richards on for this suggestion  . ) The implementation is however not yet done , so what will be described in the rest of this chapter is only a proposal  . 
We consider that source expressions should be identified as a bilingual requirement too  , and therefore this process should take place ( only if needed ) during transfer . If the identitication succeeds , the whole phrase would then be replaced by the corresponding Portuguese translation  , be it a word or a complex expression . 
The next examples illustrate how the bilingual dictionary would look like : thunder  ( NOUN ( MWE thunder and lightning )   ( EV Prelf impagose trov 6 es ) ) Figure 10 . Collocation differences : The same device used tbr many-to-many translation can be used when  , lbrinstance , the order must be reversed . 
kick ( VERB ( MWE kick the bucket )   ( EVP bater as botas ) ) Figure ! I . Example of a many-to-many words translation : The MWE feature corresponds both to the context requited in order to choose that particular translation  , and to the piece of English tc~replace . 
Sonicn lunbers
In order to evaluate the interest and need for taking this problem into account in machine translation  , the following measures were performed , regarding an English-to-Portuguese NIT dictionary roughly containing  500 English entries and 2400 Portuguese translations . Only the case one English word to several Portuguese words was taken into account  . 
No . of English entries with EVPs : 80.
Total number of EVPs : 152.
No . of verbs translated by EVPs : 60.
No . of nouns translated by EVPs : 47.
No . of adjectives translated by EVPs : 14.
No . of adverbs translated by EVPs : 19.
No . of entries whose first translation is an EVP : 27 . 
No . of nodes whose correct ranslation is an EVP : 42 . 
Figure 12. Some relevant numbers
In order to guarantee impartiality of the numbers pre-seuted  , the criteria for selecting the English entries , and the actual translations , bore no relationship whatsoever with the problem mentioned in this paper  . 
The numbers arrived at , however impressive they may be , should nevertheless not be confused with percentages of occurrence in actual text  . Ontile contrary , there is some relationship between a rarely used word in one language and a set of words to express it in another language  . 
I lowever , we still consider that the numbers above unequivocally demonstrate hat this problem cannot be ignored in any real machine translation system  . 
As for tile actual testing of the proposed method , we rantile system on two test corpora , tile first , regarding tile verb " miss " , including several different syntactic environments  ( see Figure 6 )  , and the second containing several different instances of l-to-N translations :  3:34   5   1 stood in the door way . 
......> estive dep6n asolei radaporta.
1 dropped the camera while packing.
.  .   .   .   .   . > deixei cair amfiquina fotogrfilica en quanto estava a fazer as malas  . 
I missed the sunset to r , ight.
.  .   .   . ==> sentia\[hltadop 6 , " do solhoje finoite . 
The tihn starkicked her agent.
.  .   .   .   .   . > aest rela decine madeuum pontap6 ao see agent e . 
Vv ' atch the dog ! .   .   .   .   . > to macuid a do cornocac borro ! 1 bicycled and did not domy home work .   .   .   .   . > and eide hicicle taen-Cofizomeutrabal hode casa  . 
A then officer would not borrow a uniform.
.  .   .   .   . > umolicial do tempon impediria empresta doum tmitbrme  . 
Did\[trouble you when ! yellow edyour shirt . 9 = =  .   .   .   . > causei-te transtorn oquan doting idea mare loa tea cam is a ? l  , ' igt , re13 . Several examples of 1-to-N translation . 
Even though no thorough broadcoverage translation tests have been performed  , we believe these results can assess not only the feasibility but also the flexibility of the method proposed  . 

The approach presented in this paper handles in the same way the problems of lexical gaps  , collocation requirements in diil'erent languages , and nonliteral translation of idioms . 
Considering them a bilingual problem , the transfer phase was assigned as the proper place t br them to be treated  . 
I he method presenled has as advantage minimal storage icquired aml the least CO mlmtation  ( only on demand ) of I he several strt , ctures involved . Also , it only makes use of one single comprehending parser lor the target language  , instead of developing particular solutions to particular problems  . 
lheway the dictionary was conceived brings with it considerable readability  , making it independent of the linguistic and programming formalisms used in the other modules of the translation system  . Its format can , moreover , make il very easy to inheritinl brmation from human-readable bilingual dictionaries  . It and-coding by an expert is not required . 
R?fcrdtlCdS\[11 Abbeill ~, Anne and Yves Schabes . 1989 ~ Parsin ~, Idi-omsinl . exicalized TAGs " , Proceedings of the Fourth European Conference of the Eurc~pean Chapter of the Association for Computational  . inguistics , 1012
April 1989, Manchester , UK.
\[2\]P , eaven , John 1 . . and Pete Whitelock .   1988 " Machine translation using isomorphic UCGs *' , Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computational Linguirtics  , Budapest , 2227 August ,  1988 . 
\[3\] Gazdar , Gerald , I ! v , ' an Klein , Geoffrey Pullum and Iwm Sag . 1985 Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar , Basil Blackwell . 
14\]Golan , lgal , Shalon \] l . appin and Mori Rimon . 1988 " An Active Bilinguall . cxicon Ibr Machine Translation " , Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Budapest ,  2227
August , 1988.
\[5\]Gross , Maurice .   1986 " Lexicon-Grammar : The Representation of Compound Words ?  , Proceedings of the 1 lth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Bor , n 1986 , pps 16 . 
\[6\]11 eid , Ulrich and Syhille Raab . 1989 ~ Collocafions in Multilingual Generation " , Proceedings of the Fourth European Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lingui  . sties , 1012
April 1989, Manchester , UK.
\[7\]Isabelle , Pierre .   1984 " Machine Translation at the '\[' AUM Group " , Machine Translation Today : The State of the Art , Margaret King , ed . , 1987 . 
\[8\] Jensen , Karen .   1986 " PEG 1986: A BroiJd-coverage Computational Syntax of English  "  , IB . \I Research Report RC draft , Feb 1986, T . J . Watson Research
Center , Yorktownileights , NY 10598.
\[9\] McCord , Michael C . 1989 " Design of I . MT : A Prolog-Based Machine Translation System " , Computational Linguistics , Vol . 15, No .  1 . 
\[10\] Nagao , Makoto and Junichi "\[' sujii .   1986 " The transfer phase of " the Mu Machine Translation System "  , in Proceedings of COLING'86 , ACI . , pps 9% 103 . 
\[11\]Niremburg , Sergei and hene Niremburg .   1988 " A Framework for Lexical Selection in Natural I . an-guage Generation " , Proceedings - of the 12th International Conference on Computational . inguistics,
Budapest , 2227 August , 1988.
\[12\]Pd chardson , Stephen D .   1980 ~Alligh-Level Trans\[er Language for the BY UqS I Interactive Translalion System "  , M . A . \] hesis , Brigham Young University . 
\[13\] Santos , Diana .   1988 " A fase de transfer6ncia deum siste made traduq fioautom , 5_ticadoing l6s para oportugu6 s ' , Tesed e . Mestrado , Instituto Superior Tacnico , Universidade Tacnica de Lisboa . 
\[14\] Santos , l)iana .   1988 " An Nll prototype fiom I!ng lish to Portuguese  "  , Proceedings of the IBM Conference on Natural Language Processing  , October 2426 ,  1988 , Thornwood , pps 122-133 . 
\[15\] Schenk , Andr 6 . 1986 " Idioms in the Rosetta . \lachine Translation System " , Proceedings of the llth International ConJerenee on Computational Linguistics  , 
Bonn 1986, pps 319-324.
\[161 Stock , Oliviero . 1989 " Parsing with Flexibility , Dynamic Strategies , and Idioms in N lind " , Computational Linguistics , Vol . 15, No .  1 . 
\[17\]Tsujii , Jun-lchi .   1986 " l : uture directions of machine translation " , Proceedings of the llthlnternatic mal Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Bonn 1986 , pps 655-668 . 

This paper greatly benefited from tile comments o1' Jan\[-ngh , Stephen Richardson and Mori Rimon , and fi'om Paula Newman's critical reading of an earlier version  . 
1 am therefore gratefhl to them and to all members of the IBM-INI ! SCS cientific Group \[ br their support and discussion  , 
