Two Principles of Parse Preference
Jerry R . Hobbs and John Bear
Artificial Intelligence Center
SRI International
1 Introduction
The DIALOGIC system for syntactic , analysis and semantic translation ha~been under development for over ten years  , and during that time it has been used in a number of domains in both database interface and message -processing applications  . In addition , it has been tested on a number of sentences of linguistic interest  . Built into the system are facilities for ranking parses according to syntactic and selectional considerations  , and over the years , as various kinds of ambiguity have become apparent  , heuristics have been devised for choosing the preferred parses  . Our aim in this paper is first to present a compendium of many of these heuristics and secondly to propose two principles that seem to underlie the Jmuristics  . The first will be useful to researchers engaged in building grammars of similarly broad coverage  . The second is of psychological interest and may be a guide for estimating parse preferences for newly discovered ambiguities for which we lack the experience to decide among on a more empirical basis  . 
The mechanism for implementing parse preference heuristics is quite simple  . Terminal nodes of a parse tree acquire a score ( usually 0 ) from the lexical entry for the word sense . When a nonterminal node of a parse tree is constructed  , it is given an initial score which is the sum of the scores of its child nodes  . Various conditions are checked during the construction of the node and  , as a result , a score of 20 ,  10 ,  3 ,  -3 ,  -10 , or -20 may be added to the initial score . The score of the parse is the score of its root node  . The parses of ambiguou sentences are ranked according to their scores  . Although simple , this method has been very successful . In this paper , however , rather than describe the heuristics in terms this detailed  , we will describe them in terms of the preferences among the alternate structures that motivated our scoring schemes  . 
While these heuristics have arisen primarily through our everyday experience with the system  , we have done small empirical studies by hand on some of the ambiguities  , using several different kinds of text , including some from the Brown corpus and some transcripts of spoken dialogue  . We have counted the number of occurrences of potentially ambiguous constructions that were in accord with our claims  , and the number of occurrences that were not . Some of the constructions were impossible to find  , not only because they occurs or arely but also because many are very difficult for anyone except a dumb parser to spot  . But in every case where we found examples , the number supported our claims . We present our preliminary findings below for those eases where we have begun to accumulate a nontrivial number of examples  . 
2 Br ie f Rev iew o f the IAtera-tu re Most previous work on parse preferences has concerned itself with tile most notorious of the ambiguities -- the attachment ambiguities of postmod-ifiers  . Among the first linguists to address this problem was Kimball  ( 1973 )  . tie proposed several processing principles in an attempto account for why certain readings of ambiguou sentences were more salient than others  . Two of these principles were Right Association and Closure  . 
In the late 1970s and early 1980s there was a great deal of work among linguists and psycholinguists  ( e . g . 
Frazier and Fodor , 1979; Wanner and Maratsos , 1978; Marcus , 1979; Church , 1980; Ford , Bresnan , and Ks-plan ,  1982 ) attempting to refine Kimbali's initial analysis of syntactic bias and proposing their own principles govering attachment  . Frazier and Fodor pro~posed the principles of Minimal Attachment and Local Association  . Church proposed the A-over-AEarly Closure Principle  ; and Ford , Bresnan and Kaplanim troduced the notions of Lexical Preference and Final 

The two ideas that dominated their hypotheses and discussions were Right Association  , which says roughly that postmodifiers prefer to be attached to the nearest previous possible head  , and a stronger principle stipulating that argument interpretations are favored over adjunct interpretations  . This latter principle is implied by Frazier and Fodor's Minimal  162 \] Attachment and also by Ford , Bresnan and Kaplan's
Lexical Preference.
In recent computational linguistics , Shieber and Pereira ( Shieber , 1983; Pereira ,  1985 ) proposed a shift-reduce parser for parsing English  , and showed that Right Association was equivalent to preferring shifts over reductions  , and that Minimal Attachment was equivalent to favoring the longest possible reduction at each point  . 
More recently , there have been debates , for example , between Schubert (1984 , 1986) and Wilks et al (1985) , about the interaction of syntax with semantics and the role of semantics in disambiguating the classical ambiguities  . 
We take it for granted that , psychologically , syntax , semantics , and pragmatics interact very tightly to achieve disambiguation  . If act , in other work ( Hobbs et al , t988) , we have proposed an integrated framework for natural language processing that provides for this tight interaction  . However , in this paper , we are considering only syntactic factors . In the semantically and pragmatically unsophisticated systems of today  , these are the most easily accessible factors , and even in more sophisticated systems , there will be examples that semantic and pragmatic factors alone will fail to disambiguate  . 
The two principles we propose mawr be viewed as generalizations of Minimal Attachment and Right Association  . 
3 Most Restrictive Context
The first principle might be called the Most Restrictive Context principle  . It can be stated as follows : Where a constituent can be placed in two different structures  , favor the structure that places greater constraints on allowable constituents  . 
For example , in
John looked for Mary.
" for Mary " can be interpreted as an adverbial signaling the beneficiary of the action or as a complement of the verb " look "  . Since virtually any verb phrase can take an adverbial whereas only a very few verbs can take a " for " prepositional phrase as its complement  , the latter interpretation has the most restrictive context and therefore is favored  . 
A large number of preferences among ambiguities can be subsumed under this principle  . They are enumerated below . 
1 . As in the above example , favor argument over adverbial intepretations for postmodifying prepositional phrases where possible  . Thus , whereas in
John cooked for Mary.
" for Mary " is necessarily an adverbial , in " John looked for Mary " it is taken as a complement  . Sub-sumable under this heuristic is the preference of " by " phrases after passives to indicate the agent rather than a location  . This heuristic , together with the next type , constitute stile traditional Minimal Attachment principle  . This heuristic is very strong ; of 47 occurrences examined , all were in accord with tile heuristic . 
2. Favor arguments over mere modifiers . Thus , in
John bought a book from Mary.
the favored interpretation is " bought from Mary " rather than " book from Mary "  . Where tile head noun is also subcategorized for the preposition  , as in , 
John sold a ticket to the theater.
this principle fails to decide among the readings , and tile second principle , described in the next section , becomes decisive . 
This principle was surprisingly strong , but perhaps for illegitimate reasons . Of 75 potential ambiguities , all but one were in accord with the heuristic . The one exception was IIDTV provides television images with finer detail than current systems  . 
and even this is a close call . However , it is often very uncertain whether we should say verbs  , nouns , and adjectives subcategorize for a certain preposition  . For example , does " discussion " subcategorize for " with " and " about "? We are likely to say so when it yields the right parse and not to notice the possibility when it would yiehl the wrong parse  . So our results here may not be completely unbiased  . 
3 . Favor complement interpretations of infinitives over purpose adverbial interpretations  . In John wants his driver to go to Los Angeles . 
the preferred interpretation has only the driver and not Johngoing to Los Angeles  . 
Of 44 examples of potential ambiguities of this sort that we found  ,   41 were complements and only 3 were purpose adverbials . Even these three could have been eliminated with the simplests eleetional restrictions  . 
One example was the following tiepushed aside other business to devote all histime to this issue  . 
2  163 which could have been parsed analogously to He pushed strongly all the young researchers to publish papers on their work  . 
A particularly intriguing example , remembering that " provide " can be ditransitive , is the following : That is weaker than what the Bush administration needs to provide the necessary tax revenues  . 
4 . Favor the attachment of temporal prepositional phrases to verbs or event nouns  . In the preferred reading of John saw the President during the campaign  . 
the seeing was during the campaign , since " President " is not an event noun . In the preferred reading of The historian described the demonstrations during Gorbachev's visit  . 
the demonstrations are during the visit . This case can be considered an example of Minimal Attachment if we assume that all verbs and event nouns have potential temporal arguments  . Of 74 examples examined , 66 were in accord with this heuristic . Two that did not involved the phrase " business in ~ eAugust  1"  . 
5 . Favor adverbial over object interpretations of temporal and measure noun phrases  . Thus , in
John wo none day in Hawaii.
" one day int I awaii " is preferentially the time Johnwon and no this prize  . In
John walked 10 miles.
"10 miles " is a measure of how far he walked , not what he walked . This is an example of Most Restrictive Context because noun phrases  , based on syntactic criteria alone , can always be the object of a transitive verb , whereas only temporal and measure noun phrases can function as adverbials  . This case is interesting because it runs counter to Minimal Attachment  . Here arguments are disfavored . 
Of fifteen examples we found of such ambiguities , eleven agreed with the heuristic . The reason for the large percentage of examples that did not is that sports articles were among tlm seex a mined  , and they contained sentences like
Smithgained 1240 yards last season.
This illustrates the hidden dangers in genre selection  . 
6 . Favor temporal nouns as adverbials over coin -pound nominal heads  . The latter interpretation is possible , as seen in
Is this a CSLI Thursday ?
But the preferred reading is the temporal one that is most natural in 
I saw them an Thursday.
7 . Favor " that " as a complementizer rather than as a determiner  . Thus , in
I know that sugar is expensive.
we are probably not referring to " that sugar " . This is a case of Most Restrictive Context because the determiner " that " can appear in any noun phrase  , whereas the complementizer " that " can occur only after a small number of verbs  . This is a heuristic we suspect everyone who has built a moderately large grammar has implemented  , because of the frequency of the ambiguity . 
8 . An initial " there " is interpreted as an existential  , where possible , rather than as a locative . We interpret
There is a man in the room.
as an existential declarative sentence , rather than as an utterance with an initial locative  . Locatives can occur virtually any place , whereas the existential " there " can occur in only a very small range of contexts  . Of 30 occurrences examined , 29 were in accord with the heuristic . The one exception was There , in the midst of all those casinos , is ' Ptump's Taj Mahal . 
9 . Favor predeterminers over separate noun phrases . In
Send all the money.
the reading that treats " all the " as a complex determiner is favored over the one that treats " all " as a separate complete noun phrase in indirect object position  . There are very many fewer loci for predeter -miners than for noun phrases  , and hence this is also an example of Most Restrictive Context  . 
10 . Favor preprepositional lexical adverbs over separate adverbials  . Thus , in
John did the job precisely on time.
we favor " precisely " modifying " on time " rather than " did the job "  . Very many fewer adverbs can function as preprepositional modifiers than can function as verbal or sentential adverbs  . Of 28 occurrences examined , all but one were in accord with the heuristic . 
The one was
Who is going to type this all for you ?_k 164   3   11  . Group numbers with prenominal unit nouns but not with other prenominal nouns  . For example ,  "  I0 mile runs " are taken to be an indeterminate number of runs of  l0 miles each rather than as exactly l0 runs of a mile each . Other nouns can firnction the same way as unit nouns  , as in "2 cargarages " , t ) ut it is vastly more common to have the mlmber attached to the head noun instead  , as in "5 wine glasses " . Virtually any noun can appear as a prcnominal noun  , whereas only unit nouns can appear in the adjectival  "10-mile " constrnction . Iience , for unit nouns this is the most restrictive context  . While other nouns can . .~ ometirnes occur in this context , it is only through are interpretation as a unit noun  , as in '; 2 cargarages " . 
12 . Disfavor headles structures . Headless struc-l . nresim pose no constraints , and are therefore never the most re , ~trictive context , and thus are the least favored in cases of ambiguity  . An example of this case i , ~ the sentence
John knows the best man wins.
which we interpret as a concise form of
John knows ( that ) the best man wins.
rather than a qaconcise form of
John knows the best ( thing that ) man wins 0.
4 Attach Low and Parallel
The second principle might be called the Attach Low and Parallel principle  . It may be stated as follows : Attach constituents as low as possible  , and in parallel with other constituents if pos -sible  . 
The cases subsumed by this principle are quite het -erogene ou S  . 
1 . Where not overridden by the Most Restrictive Context principle  , favor attaching postmodifiers to the closest possible site  , skipping over proper nouns . 
Thus , where neither the verb nor the noun is subcategorized for the preposition  , as in
John phoned a man in Chicago.
or where both the verb and the noun are subcategorized for the preposition  , as in John was given a book by a famous profes-
SOIL the noun is favored as the attachment point , since that is the lowest possible attachment point in tile parse tree  . This case is just tile traditional Right Association  . 
The subcase of prepositional phrases with " of " is significant enough to be mentioned separately  . We might say that every noun is subcategorized for " of " and that therefore " of " prepositional phrases are nearly always attached to the immediately preceding word  . Of 250 occurrences examined , 248 satisfied this heuristic , and of the other two Since the first reports broke of the CIA's activities  ,   .   .   . 
He ordered the destruction two years ago of some records  . 
tile second would not admit an incorrect attachment  . 
in any case.
We examined 148 instances of this case not involving " of " , temporal prepositional phrases , or prepositions that are subcategorized for by possible attachment points  . Of these ,   116 were in accord with the heuristic and 32 were not . An example where this heuristic failed was They abandoned hunting for food production  . 
For a significant number of examples (34) , it did not matter where the attachment was made . For instance , in
John made coffee for Mary.
both the coffee and the making are for Mary . We counted these cases as being in accord with the heuristic  , since the heuristic would yield a correct interpretation  . 
This is perhaps the place to present results on two very simple algorithms  . The first is to attach prepositional phrases to the closest possible attachment point  , regardless of other considerations . Of 251 occurrences examined , 125 attached to the nearest possibility , I09 to the second nearest , 14 to the third , and 3 to the fourth , fifth , or sixth . This algorithm is not especially recommended . 
The second algorithm is to attach to the near : est possible attachment point that subeategorizes for the preposition  , if there is such , assuming verbs and event nouns to subcategorize for temporal prepositional phrases  , and otherwise to attach to the nearest possible attachment point  . This is essentially a summary of our heuristics for prepositional phrases  . Of 297 occurrences examined , this yielded the right answer on 256 and the wrong one on 41  . 
4 165 2 . Favor preprepositional readings of measure phrases over readings as separate adverbials  . Thus , in John walked 10 miles into the forest . .
we preferentially take "10 miles " as modifying " into the forest " rather than " walked "  , so that John is now 10 miles from the edge of the forest , rather than merely somewhere in tile forest but 10 miles from his starting point . Since the preposition occurs lower in the parse tree than the verb  , this is an example of Attach Low and Parallel . Note that this is a kind of " LeftAssociation " . 
3 . Coordinate " both " with " an ~" , if possible , rather than treating it a ~ sa separate determiner  . In John likes both intelligent and attractive women  . 
the interpretation in which there are exactly two women who are intel ! igmit and attractive is disfa -vored  . Associating " both " with the coordinated adjectives rather than attaching it to the head noun is attaching it lower in the parse tree  . 
4 . Distribute prenominal nouns over conjoined bead nouns  . In " oil sample and filter " , we mean " oils , -~i , q > lean do il filter " . A principle of Attach Lowwo, . ~ i , : l not seem to be decisive in this case . Would ~ .  ~ , e~m that we attach " oil " low by attaching it to " sample " or that we attach " and filter " low by attaching it to " sample "  . It is because of examples like this ( and the next case ) that we propose the principle Attach Low and Parallel  . We favor the reading that captures the parallelism of the two head nouns  . 
5 . Di  ~ . t . rimte determiners and noun complements over conjoined head nouns  . In " the salt and pepper on the table " , we treat " salt " and " pepper " as conjoined , rather than " the salt " and " pepper on the table "  . As in the previous case , where we have a choice of what to attach low , we favor attaching parallel elements low . 
6 . Favor attaching adjectives to head nouns rather than prenominal nouns  . We take " red boathouse " to refer to a boat house that is red  , rather than to a house for red boats . Like all of our principles , this preference can be overridden by semantics or convention  , as in " high stress job " . II ere again we could interpret Attach Low ~ telling us to attach " red " to " boat " or to attach " boat " to " house "  . Attach Low and Parallel tells us to favor the latter  . 
5 Interaction and Overriding
There will of course be many examples where both of our principles apply  . In the cases that occur with some frequency , in particular , the prepositional phrase attachment ambiguities , it seems that the Most Restrictive Context principle domina  . tes Attach Low and Parallel . It is unclear what the interacti6ns between these two principles should be , more generally . 
These principles can be overridden by more than just semantics and pragmatics  . Comma . s in written discourse and pauses in spoken discourse  ( see Bear and Price ,  1990 , on the latter ) often function to override Attach Low and Parallel  , as in
John phoned the man , in Chicago.
Specify the length , in bits , of a word.
It is the phoning that is in Chicago , and the specification is in bits while the length is of a word  . Similarly , commas and pauses can override the Most Restrictive 
Context principle , as in
John wants his driver , to go to Los Angeles.
Iterewep refer the purpose adverbial reading in which John and the driver both are going to Los Angeles  . 
6 Cognitive Significance;
The analysis of parse preferences in terms of these two very general principles is quite appealing  , and more than simply because they subsume a . great many cases . They seem to relate somehow to deep principles of cognitive conomy  . The Most Restrictive Context principle is a matter of taking all of the available information into account in constructing interpretations  . The " Low " of Attachbow and Parallelisan instance of a general cognitive heuristic to interpret features of the enviromnent ~ locally as possible  . The " Parallel " exemplifies a general cognitive heuristic to see similarity wherever possible  , a heuristic that promotes useful generalizations . 

The authors would like to express their gratitude to Paul Martin  , who is responsible for discovering some of the heuristics  , and to Mark Liberman for sending us some of the data  . The research was funded by tile Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Office of Naval Research contract  N00014-85-C-0013  , and by a gift from tile Systems Development Foundation  . 

References\[1\]Bear , John , and Jerry Iobbs ,  1988 , " Localizing Expression of Ambiguity " , Proceedings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural Language P~v-cessing  , Austin , 'I ~ x as , pp .  235-241 . 
\[2\] Bear , John , and Patti Price ,  1990 , " Prosody , Syntax and Parsing " , Proceedings ,   28th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-t  , ics , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . 
\[3\] Church , Kenneth , 1980 . " On Memory Limitations in Natural Language Processing "  , MIT Technical
Report MIT/LCS/TI-245.
\[4\] Ford , Maryly n , Joan Bresnan , and Ronald Kaplan ,  1982 . "A Competence-Based Theory of Syntactic Closure , " in J . Bresnan ( Ed . ) The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations  , MIT
Press : Cambridge , Massachusetts.
\[5\] Frazier , Lyn and Janet Fodor , 1979 . " Tile Sausage Machine : A New TwoStage Parsing Model "  , Cog-nilion , Voh 6 , pp .  291-325 . 
\[6\]I lobbs , Jerry R . , Mark Stickel , Paul Martin , and Douglas Edwards ,  1988 . " Interpretation as Abduction " , Proceedings ,   26lh Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 95-103, Buffalo , New York , June 1988 . 
\[7\] Kimball , John , 1973 . "Seven Principles of Surface Structure Parsing in Natural Language ''  , Cognition
Vol . 2, No . 1, pp . 15-47.
\[8\] Marcus , Mitchel , 1980 . A Theory of Syntactic Recognilion for Natural Language  , MIT Press:
Cambridge , Massachusetts.
\[9\] Pereira , Fernando , 1985 . " A New Characterization of Attachment Preferences  , " in D . Dowry et al . ( Eds . ) Natural Language Processing , Cambridge Univer , ~ ity Press : Cambridge , England . 
\[10\]Schubert , Lenhart , 1984 . " On Parsing Preferences " , Proceedings , COLING 1984 , Stanford , California , pp .  247-250 . 
\[11\]Schubert , Lenhart , 1986 . " Are There Preference Tradeoffs in Attachment Decisions ? " Proceedings  , AAAI 1986 , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , pp .  601-605 . 
\[12\]Shieber , Stuart , 1983 . " Sentence Disambiguation by a Shifl , -Reduce Parsing Technique " , Proceedings , IJCAI 1983 , Washington , D . C . , pp .  699-703 . 
\[13\] Wanner , Eric , and Michael Maratsos , 1978 . " An ATN Approach to Comprehension , " in Halle , Bresnan , and Miller ( Eds . ) Linguistic Theory and Psy~chological Reality . MIT Press : Cambridge , Mas . Jsachu . ~etts . 
\[14\] Wilks , Yorick , Xiuming Ituang , and Dan Fass ,  1985 . " Syntax , Preference and Right Attachment " , Proceedings , IJCAI 1985 , Los Angeles , Califonfia , pp .  779-784 . 

