
The Proper Treatment of Morphological Knowledge
Kiril SIMOV , Galia ANGELOVA , Elena PASK ALEVA
Linguistic Modelling Laboratory , Center for Inforlnatics
and Computer Technology , Bulgarian Academy of Sciences A cad . G . Bonchev Str . 25 a , 1113 Sofia , Bulgaria . 
1 Computer Morphology of
Slavonic Languages : State of the Art
One of the main features of Slavonic languages i their complex morphological structure  . Unfortunately , current industrial software in this field ( e . g . morphologieal components of spellcheckers ) supports only partial an-guage models ( and reflects as a rule the more or less primitive level of the morphological knowledge of its developers  )  . In the authors ' opinion , the time has come to develop advanced software products with the following capabilities :  1  . An exhaustive set of linguistic data . In this w ~' the kernel of the products could serve as a computer normative morphology and could even be built into profession all aboratory systems developed at Research Centers and Universities  ;  2 . Support of large and relatively complete machine -readable dictionaries  . In this way the user would only have to add some specialized terms-if needed  . 
The development of industrial products based on ex -austive morphological models will stop the stream of linguistically incomplete implementations  . 
2 A Brief Descript ion of Bulgarian Morphology Like the other Slavonic languages  , Bulgarian is a highly inflexional language-one lexeme produces an average of  10 different word forms ; in the discussed system there exist 58 types of alternation and 102 inflexional types ( 46 of them concern nouns )  . The verb paradigm is especially rich-up to 224 fbrms ( synthetic and amalytic )  . The numerous defects of the paradigm create : special diificulties : for example  , perfective verbs reduce their paradigm by either 10  , or 19 members ( depending on their transitivity ) . The numerous noncanonical defects , determined by the lexicosemantic characteristics of the individual lexicon unit can only be described explicitly in the dictionary  . The description of Bulgarian morphology becomes even more complicated because of the existence of boundary phenomena bet  . we enword inflexion and derivation which are treated differently in various descriptions depending o  . n the accepted volume of the paradigm . Such phenomen are the formation of participles in the verb paradigm  , the formatioi ~ of " semianalytical " comparison degrees of adjectives and the formation of aspectual pairs  ( grammaticalized and lexicalized )  . 
In our opinion , a computer model of such a complex morphology can be elaborated only by qualified linguists  , as far as the architect . ure of morphological knowledge is concerned , and its ; houtdwork on a sut ; -fieiently large lexicon base . Since Bulgarian lexicography does not possess its own Zalizniak  \[4\] so far . 
the morphological basis of the system is t'cmncted on all avalaible normative reference books on morphcA-ogy  ( orthographic dictionnaries , normative gramn , ars and works on Bulgarian inttexion ) . We hop , : , that the MORPHO-ASSISTANT system will serve as a basis for future implementations and research  . 
3 A Brief Description of
MORPHO-ASSISTANT
MORPHO-ASSISTANT is based on a Bulgarian morphology model of a ' classificational type where the morphological data are organized in three main sets  ( stem lexicon , endings lexicon and stem alternation patterns ) . The endings lexicon can be rebuilt as a li , ~ to finf lexional types as well , where every inflexional type is a list of letter values  0f the inflexions of ~ ach member of the paradigm . The processing of Bulgariat ~ word-inflexion is performed with the help of two basic operations - concatenation of the morphological and the lexical element  ( in inflexion ) and eventual transformation of substrings within the lexical element  ( in alternation )  . 
MORPHO-ASSISTANT provides five main functions : 1 . Analysis ( recognition ) of an arbitrary word form ( certain types of mistakes , due to incorrect concatenation and/or transformation of the letter substrings being processed  ; hypotheses about the source of incompleteness of user's knowledge are being built when the causes of the mistakes are analysed  )  . 
2 . Synthesis of an arbitrary form or a group of forms depending on parameters given by the user  . 
3 . An information-retrieval system in the area of Bulgarian morphology  . In fact it reflects the classifi-cational principles which served as a basis for the creation of the morphological model  . 
4. Support of user dictionaries.
5 . Test-creation facility . This function of the package can assist teachers and professors in devising and distributing drills in courses of second-language learning  . This function of MORPHO-ASSISTANT is based on the kernel of the system realizing analysis and synthesis of arbitrary forms  . 
4 MORPHO-ASSISTANT-A
Second Language Learning

Once such an adequate and complete model of the morphology is developed and a big basic dictionary is filled  , one is tempted to model the acquisition and the usage of this knowledge for the purposes of teaching  . It is on these principles that the teaching part of MORPHO-ASSISTENT is based  . It works in two modes : ? mode 1: the user of the system is a teacher preparing a variety of tests for his students learning Bulgarian and Russian  ; ? mode 2: the user of the system is a student performing ready test elements  . 
\? e will consider here the first mode.
The user is provided with two basic tools : the complete computer model of morphology realized by the first two basic functions of the system MORP ttO-ASSISTANT  ( organized in an already determined part , of knowledge ) and special test-generation riented tools which use undetermined knowledge in the designing  . 
The former provide the basic building material and the latter provide the rules for its assembly when different types of tests are built according to its conception of the acquisition and testing of the morphological knowledge  . Such are for example : ? the simplest classical tasks on morphologic Manalysis or synthesis of a given form or a string of forms  ( which can be a sentence as well )  . This type of drills examines the student's ability to analyse or synthesize word forms comparing directly the results with those of the same operation  , realized by the first two functions of MORPHO -ASSISTANT  . 
For the testing of knowledge ( in mode 2 , which will not be discussed here ) , also used are the created diagnostic tools for pointing out the types of mistakes when word forms are generated incorrectly  ( see above III )  . Thus the computer has actually accepted the functions of a tester of knowledge  . 
In the design of the testing part these functions can be enriched only by entering rammatical information  . We have in mind that the user may to some extent change the name of the grammatical categories  ( e . g . " presentense ", " pres . tense ", " present ", " pres . " or " pr . " ) and the order of their coocurence in the set of grammatical features for a given word form  . 
? a second type of drills tests the morphological knowledge  ( already situated in the framework of the given sentence  )  . The standard method in this kind of testing is to give an input sentence  , in which certain word forms are replaced by the basic forms  . 
At the output hese wordform should be restored.
These are the wellknown tasks of the type " Put the given words into the necessary form  . " Here , as well , the computer entirely replaces the teacher in checking the student's work  , because it restores the Mready given word forms in mode  1  . To this kind of drills also belong the drills in which the student corrects the spelling mistakes deliberately made by the teacher  . 
in a third type of drills certain morphological characteristics are replaced correctly by others  ( for example , a change in the grammatic M person or number of the narrator  , a change of the verb tense in a given story ) . Similarly to the previous type of drills , the organisation of knowledge goes beyond the framework of the first two functions of MORPHO -ASSISTANT  , although an intelligent help-system for diagnostics and correction of mistakes is provided  , which can be considered as a . 
4 56   2 superstructure over the diagnostics of MORPHO-

? the : fourth type of drills differs in principle from the others in the degree of grammatical abstraction ~ while the first three types deal with concrete lexieal units and their grammatical characteristics  , the fourth type of drills works with grammatical models of characteristics of a certain series of words in the sentence connected through a certain mechanism  . These series for maso-called unification string consisting of two elements - unifying  ( input ) and unified ( output ) elemenl ; ( they can consist of more than one word ) . The pattern which forms new unification strings is given by concrete word forms and the test generating system itself finds the elements ubjected to unification  . Such a word string can express phenomena such as syntactic agreement of any type  , correct . 
generation of a pronoun from its antecedent etc.
Such drills are usually formulated as follows : " Pill in the blanks with the suitable words "  . The drill can provide a list of lexemes in their basic forms or give the opportunity to choose freely the lexical units  ( relying on the : rich lexicon of the system )  . 
In fact , the mechanism connecting the elements of the unification string models phenomena from linguistic levels higher than morphology- syntax  ( as in the case with ~ greement ) and even semantics . In the latter we can imagine for example the connection between the verb tense and a given type of temporal adverbs  ( under the condition that the entry of the adverb in-eludes its type  )  , the connection between some verbs and pronouns pointing near or distant objects  . With the extension of the volume of the phenomena in the unification string it becomes more difficult to formulate them with the help of the grammatical categories of the wordform  . The extension of the linguistic scope of these tasks depends to a great extent on the user's skill to formulate  . g . the syntactic dependencies through the morphological categories  . 
Providing the user only with the " shell " of the test elements  , the system works with a kind of undetermined : morphological knowledge  , tending to get adapted in this way to the cognitive model of the user who generates the test  . Thus its teaching effects directly depend on the teacher's ability to find the correspondence among the elements of the various levels of language  . 
lexemes\[3\] . Our future aim is to develop a series of products assisting the use and the study of Slavonic morphology  . An analogous product is being developed for Russian in cooperation with the Institute of l ~ us -sianlanguage of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR  ; the basic dictionary of the system , based on Zalizniak's dictionary\[4\] , contains nearly 100000 lexemes . A possibility for simultaneous work with both languages will also be supported  . 
The test generation system doesn't require an orientation towards a concrete language  . The only restriction on its reasonable application is that the processed language must have a sufllciently developed morphology of the inflexional type  . 
We also plan to develop a computer model of the derivational morphology of Bulgarian based on the lexicon of MORP ttO-ASSISTAN rC  . 
References . Paskaleva , E . Bulgarian Morphology in Logic Programming . -Sludiesi ~ Honor of BerTzard Vauquois . Linguistica Com . pulazionale , Pisa , 1989 ( to appear ) . 
2 . Avgustinova , T . and Paskaleva , E . Computational Modelling of lnflexional Morphology  ( Based on Bulgarian and/ussian l_ ) at a )  . -?' lavica
Helsingienaia , 1989, Vol . 10.
3 . MOIPHO-ASSISTANT ( brief descript . ion ) . \]9S9 Humanities Computing Yearbook , Clarendon
Press , Oxford.
4 . 3 a a ~3 H g i ~ A . A . i'paM ga'r ~\[ qec~Hi~cJIo ~ : ~ l)F , pyccl < or o~i3bI~a:CJiol~oI~3Menem ~ e . M . , 1977 . 
5 Future Developments
MOI % PHO-ASSIST ANT will be offered on the software market with a basic dictionary of  60   000 Bulgarian 3   457 
