Automatic translation of support verb constructions 
Morris SALK OFF
Universit ~ Paris-7, L.A.D.L.
2, Place Jussieu , 75005 PARIS , FRANCE
Verb ,; like have , do , take , be , etc . , appear with verb nominalisations in sentences like the following :  ( 1 ) a Maxalluded to the crime ~> bMax made an allusion to the crime  ( 2 ) a Maxharmed the child ~> bMax did harm to the child  ( 3 ) a Maxwalked along the street ~> b Max took a walk along the street  ( 4 ) a Jim's story contradicts Max's confession ~> b Jim's story is in contradiction with Max's confession M  . Gross (1981) calls such verbs ' support verbs ' , and I shall adopt histerminologLv . These verbs exhibit many interesting properties which have been studied systematically for several French support verbs : faire  ( make )  , avoir ( have ) , prendre ( take ) , etre(be ) , etc . An examination of the results indicates that support verb  , ; must be taken into account in the parser and in the lexicon of a program of automatic translation  . I shall discuss the problem in the context of a possible program for French-English translation  . 
In what follows , V sup designates the support verb , and Nsup stands for the ' supported ' noun associated with V sup  . NO and N2 designate the subject noun and the indirect object noun  , respectively . The symbol '+' is used to indicate a choice . 
I . The support verb construction
In order to be able to parse and then translate correctly such sequences as make an allusion  , do harm , etc . , the nominalizations allusion and harm must be marked in the lexicon as appearing with the support verbs make and do  . There are several reasons for this : ( i ) The translation of a simple verb ( e . g . , allude ) or of a support verb construction may or may not be an equivalent simple verb or support construction in the target language  . For example ,   ( 1 ) a cannot be translated into French with a simple verb :  ( 5 ) Maxalluded to the crime = Max ( * alludait + a faitune allusion ) aucrime Conversely , there are French support constructions which am more easily be translated into English by a simple verb than by a support cotrstruction :  ( 6 ) Max faitune be uverie chaque same di ' = Max carouses every Saturday  ( ii ) A support verb can be zeroed , leaving behind a nelliptical construction that cannot be translated as it stands  . Consider the following sentences : ( 7 ) People who are on drugs ( are . .) = Les gens qui prennent des drogues ( sont . . ) The English support construction be on drugs is related to the sentence Ahz ~ c drugsh  #nself  . In French , the support verb must be prendre ( take ) . When who are is deleted in (7) , we obtain : (8) People on drugs ( are . . . ) But this sentence can only be translated into French as  ( 7 ) was , since the French support quiprennent ( who take ) is not deletable . Note that it is not a question here of on having a different meaning from its more common locative sense  ( usually translated as sur )  . Rather , the support verb be can be deleted in English , and the elliptical construction ( 8 ) has no direct equivalent in French where the support verb is not zeroable  . 
( iii ) More complicated cases of support verb deletion occur  . Certain support verb constructions contain a predicate noun that is not the nominalization of a verb  ; when the support verb is deleted , a problem in translation may arise . 
(9 ) a L ' attention que Maxapr St 6au probl ~ me ( est . .) = The care that Max gave to the problem ( is . .) (9)b L'attention de Max au probl~me ( est . .) = * Max's care to the problem ( is . . )   ( 10 ) a L'ent or seque Maxafai taux r6 glements ( est . .) = The violence that Max did to the rules ( is . .) (10)b L'entorse de Max aux r6glements ( est . .) = * Max's violence to the rules ( is . .)
I243
The French support verb constructions prater attention in  ( 9 ) a and faireu neentorse in ( 10 ) a translate without difficulty into English . However , the support verb can be deleted in French , as in (9) b and (10) b , but not in English . The latter sentences can only be translated by reintroducing the deleted support verb  . 
To handle all these difficulties , a link must be established in the lexicon between the support verb and all the nouns associated with it  ( since each support verb can appear typically with many hundreds of nouns  )  . Thus , be uverie ( in 6 ) and entorse ( in 10 ) must be marked as appearing with faire . In English , drug , s must be marked for be on . Then , after parsing , faireune be uverie will be a sequence of marked , hence linked , categories and the French-English transfer lexicon furnishes a translation specific to that sequence  . Similarly in (8) ,   ( 9 ) b and ( 10 ) b the mark associated with the nouns drugs , attention and entorse will enable the program to reconstitute the deleted support verb  . 
Cases like ( 10 ) brequire more lexical markers than the simpler cases of  ( 1 ) to ( 4 )  . The problem is that there are sentence similar to  ( 9 ) b and ( 10 ) b which yet do not require the addition of the deleted support verb in order for a translation to be possible  . This is the case in such sentences as the following :  ( ll ) a L'acquie scement que Max donneau projet ( est . . ) = The consent hat Max gives to the project ( is . . . )(ll ) bL'acquie scement de Maxau projet ( est . .) = Max's consent o the project ( is . .) In this case , it suffices to indicate that acquie scement can be supported by donner  , so that ( ll ) a can be parsed correctly ; then the transfer lexicon contains the translation of donner acquie scent gl = give consent to  . This entry further indicates that acquics cenlent , without donner , translates as consent . 
This part of the entry is sufficient for the translation of acquie scement ? t in  ( ll ) b . 
In (9) b and (10) b , the nouns attention and entorse are marked for the V sup  ( prater , faire ) with which they can appear , just as acquie scement is marked for donner . However , if the sequence de NO ~ N2 appears after the nominalizations , it has to be transformed into que NOVs up ~ N2 before it can be translated correctly . Therefore , the lexical entries of attention and entorse must contain more than just the translation of faire attention and faireentorse : they must additionally be marked as requiring this transformation of a prepositional phrase into a relative for the purpose of translation  . 
II . Parsing support verb constructions
The principal feature of the support verb construction is that the verbal slot in the sentence is occupied by the combination of a verb  , V sup , plus a noun , Nsup . 
Thus , if I schematize a sentence as follows: ( 12 ) Sent-->SVO then the verb slot V , when parsing (1) , can contain either allude or VsupNsup = make an allusion  . This means that the verb V must have at least two options in its definition : a simple verb  , or a support verb construction . This yields the following kinds of analyses :

SV 0
NP PP
NO alles Prep NP 2
IlI
Max to the crime
FIG1

SV01I1
NP VS UP OS UP
I \
NO Vsup NP
Max makes Nsup Prep NP 2
I/I an attusion to crime
FIG2
The symbol VSUP in Fig . 2 designates the whole support construction . In these two sentences , the object O and the support verb object OSUP contain the same prepositional phrase to the ctbne  . In other cases they may differ , e . g . , as in (2) , where O is an NP ( child ) and OSUP is a PP ( to the child )  . 
In order to obtain just the two analyses Of Figs . 1 and 2 , many details must be attended to: ( 1 ) The noun Nsup associated with Vsup in Fig .  2  ( allusion ) must be analyzed as part of a complete noun phrase NP  , and not just as a bare noun N . In effect , left and right modifiers may appear with this noun : Max makes a brief allusion in Latin to the crime In this sentence  , allusion takes an adjective left modifier , and a prepositional phrase as a right modifier . 
(2 ) Since the NP appearing after V suph as a slot for the prepositional phrase as a right modifier  , the parser will always try to place the sequence 244   2 OSUP = to the crime in that slot , as a modifier of allusion . This can be prevented by attaching the following test to the set of right modifiers in the NP : a prepositional phrase is not allowed as a right modifier of the noun Nsup if the preposition is precisely the one associated with Vsup  . 
(3) Conversely , the parser will try to analyze the sentence of Fig  . 2 with the schema of Fig .  1 . That is , it tries Nsup = allusion as a simple direct object of makes  . This should be disallowed , even if the sentence is such that OSUP is empty , e . g . , Maxmadea strange allusion . Whenever a Vsup appears with an N supit should be analyzed as a verb support construction  , and not as an ordinary verb followed by a direct object  . 
This is accomplished by adding a test which examines the markers attached to the verb and object in their lexical entries  . If the test can verify that the verb carries the markVsup  , as make does , and the noun object carries the mark of an Nsup , as a Uusion does , then the option ' ordinary vcrb ' of V is disallowed  . 
This forces the parser to choose the option VSUP for the verb  . All these tests and constraints on the parsing can easily be incorporated into the string analyzer of French that I have developped for the IBM  9370   ( 1973 ,  1979) , and which is currently being ~' e written iADA . 
Il LAdditional problems
Various difficulties have to be takcn care of when a  ~  , ; upport verb is added to the source sentence for the purposes of a smoother translation  . 
( i ) We have seen in ( 10 ) b and ( ll ) b that some modifiers of an N sup of the form de NOgi  N2 require the addition of the deleted support verb if a correct translation is to be obtained  . Adding the support verb implies that a tense must be supplied for it  . This tense can be derived , but not unambiguously , from the tenses of the verbs in which the support construction is embedded  . The problem is that more than one tense may be acceptable  , ven in the source language . \] Hence , only an approximate solution can be given . 
When the support verb construction is the subject , a tense can be added to the support verb as follows  . 
a ) If the tense of the principal verb is present , future or conditional , then the support verb can take the present tense :   ( 13 ) L'entorse de Maxaux r6 glements ( est+sera+serait ) nuisible -- The violence Max does to the rules ( is ++ will be + would be ) harmful b ) If the tense of the principal verb is some form of the past  , then the support verb takes a past tense : ( 14 ) L'entorse de Maxaux r6glemeuts ( 6 tait+a6t 6+ aurait 6t 6 ) nuisible = The violence
Max did to the rules ( was + has been + would have been ) harmful When the support verb construction is in tile direct or indirect object  , then either the past or presentense can be added  . The French construction is ambiguous : ( 15 )   ( Jere marque+J ' ava is remarqu6 ) l'entorse de Maxaux r6 glements = ( I notice + I had noticed ) the violence Max ( does + did ) to the rules ( ii ) Some support constructions , like ( ll ) b , do not require the addition of the deleted support verb  . The difference between those that do , as in (13) and (14) above , and those that do not must appear as a mark in the lexical entry of the supported noun  . 
Thus , the N supentors e ( violence ) has a first mark indicating that its Vsup is faire  ( do )  . A second mark indicates that the following transformation must be effected in order to obtain a correct ranslation :  ( 16 ) Nsup ( entorse ) de N0 hum~N-->Nsup ( entorse ) que N0hum fait ~ tNIn addition to checking for the presence of this second mark  , the program must also verify that the transformation of  ( 16 ) is applicable , i . e . , that the noun appearing after de is a ' human ' noun that can be an acceptable subject of faire uneentorse  . 
( iii ) In many support constructions , the noun phrase consists of a frozen expression , i . e , an invariable sequence of words : ( 17 ) a Max fait grand cas de cela-Max sets a high store on that  ( 17 ) bMax fait fide vos conseils = Maxscorns your advice There are many hundreds  , or thousands , of expressions of this kind in which no substitutions can be made  , nor any words added . 
To parse this type of support construction , the string VSUP , schematized in Fig .  2 , must contain a second option which is not a noun phrase NP  , but which consists only of a sequence of fLxed words  . Then , another test must be added to VSUP to ensure that grandcasor fi is not analyzed as a variable NP  , i . e . , as an occurrence of the first option . A mark can be added to the lexical entry of cas and fito indicate invariability  . In addition , one distinguished entry must contain the exact sequence of words constituting the  3   245 supported expression . For example , the entry for cas contains the sequence grand , standing for the supported expression grandcas . 
The passive transformation is possible for some of these support constructions  , but its applicability cannot be predicted : ( 18 ) a Grandcasa 6t6 fait decela = Highstore was set on that ( 18 ) b * Fia 6 t 6 fait devos conseils Hence , this possibility must also be marked in the lexical entry  , so that the absence of an article in the subject grandcas can be taken into account by the test for the wellformedness of the subject  . 
IV . Conclusions
Systematic studies of French support verbs have shown that there are many thousands of support constructions of the type discussed here  , for each such verb ( cf . J . Giry-Schneider , 1987; G . Gross , 1989) . The translations of such expressions is irregular  , but this is to be expected , and such irregularity will be confined to the lexicon  . The regularities of support verb constructions can be handled in the manner discussed here  , and this treatment simplifies considerably the parsing module of a program for automatic translation  . 

J . Giry-Schneider , "Les pr6dicats nominauxenf ranqais " , Droz , Gen6ve , 1987 G . Gross , " Les constructions converses du fran~ais " , 
Droz , Gen6ve , 1989
M . Gross , " Les bases empiriques delanotion de pr6dicat   s6mantique  " , in Langages , No .  63,
Sept . 1981, pp . 7-51, Larousse , Paris
M . Salkoff , " Unegrammairencha ~ nedu fran~ais ",
Dunod , Paris , 1973 ( out of print)
M . Salk off , " Analyse syntaxique du fran~ais ",
J . Benjamins , Amsterdam , 19794246
