Automatic Indexing and Government-Binding Theory
Robert J . Kuhns
205 Walnut Street
Brookline , MA 02146


This project note describes a systern that receives  , parses , indexes , and routes news reports . The core of this , 'mtomatic indexer is a parser based on Govermnent -Binding Theory which derives thematic and binding relationships of arguments of the sentences of slories  . These syntactic structures are interpreted by a semantic processor which is linked to conceptual representations of terms from a controlled indexing vocabulary  . As a result , the system is capable of indexing news with respecto a large set of let+ms that denote Ihe content of the articles  . 

With the rapidly increasing \ olume of text being generated  . 
transmitted , processed , and stored , it becomes critical that informalion retrieval and routing be highly efficient  , both in time of processing and accuracy . To this end , indexing techniques have become the prinmry focus of much research  , a ~ d 3'el dlese methods have relied on automatic keyword identification from texts  . This is not to say that natural hm guag c techniques have not been examined with respect to their relevance for indexing and retrieval  ( cf . /SparckJones and Kay 1973/ , /Walker , Karlgren , and Kay 1977/ , and more recently , /Sahonmid Smith 1989/) . It is that most systems rely on the presence or absence of keywords with additional mechanisms such as proximity constraints  , tatistical weighting , word-stem truncation , and boolean relrieval expressions . However , these methods do ~ ot take into account the syntactic and semantic structure inherent in tile text being indexed  . That is , they make virtually no use of the fact that it is natural anguage and not a collection of arbitrary strings of characters that is being processed  . 
Natural anguage processing ( NLP ) can make its most valuable cont , ' ibutions to those aspects of indexing where the keyword approaches fail  , viz . , the assignment of terms ~ . otext based on their semantic or conceptual content  . This involves deriving abstract relationships among conceptual units  . For example , consider a story stating : (1) China bought 6 , 000 to nncs of wheat from the
United States.
\[ ) he plausible categorization of ( 1 ) is thai it is about foreign trade . However , the phrase " foreign trade " does not appear in ( 1 )  , and it is invariably absent fl ' om foreign trade stories in general  . Furthermore , it is extremely unlikely that such foreign trade stories cottld be retrieved in an efficient manner  , i . e . , with a tew simple queries . The central issue is that although the particulars  ( e . g . , country names and types o fcommodilies ) wuy , the basic lneanings of foreign trades lodes are equivalent at some level  , and that this level is w duable for indexing purposes  . 
This suggests that systems that could operate at a conceptual level would be capable of indexing in ways that cotdd permit highly effective retrieval  . 
It is with the assumption that NLP technology can provide tile means of categorizing text that guide several recent efforts  . In particular , each of/Hayes et al1988/ , /Kuhns1988/ , and/Rau and Jitcobs 1988/ describe systems that characterize news reports with results that could ll Ot be obtained by keyword methods alone  . Since a news analysis system ( NAS ) was first reported in/Kuhns1988/ , a number of major enhancements to its design and underlying functionality have been incorporated  . 
It is the purpose of this paper to report on t be current state of NAS and ils CO lllpolle I\]ts  . 
SCO PEANDOB , IECTIVES
A primary design goal behind NAS is to develop a system employing NLP technology that wouh : t be capable of either routing news t'rom electronic news feeds in realtime or indexing news with respect overy large sets of indexing terms  ( authority files )  . ~ This vocabulary is broad and ranges over diverse domains  , with lerms representing proper names , concrete objects , or abslract relationships . The last type is dependent on the content of the stories and is particularly suited for the syntactic/semantic techniques of NAS  . 
The form of the indexes that NAS produces is a set of pairs of headings and subheadings or descriptors  . The headings are frequently proper names while the descriptors add detailed information to the index by denoting various relationships of entities mentioned in the news reports  . 
ARCHITECTURALOVER VIEW
Tile architecture of NAS is modular consisting of several main subsystems  , viz . , a set of preprocessors and template filters , a parser , a lexicon , a semantic interpreter , a set of concept bases , and an indexer ( Figure 1) . The system is transportable in that it can be interfaced to different news streams and indexing vocabularies  . 
A preprocessor receives a news stream which can be flom a satellite dish link  , a direct line , or a text file , and identifies the beginning and ending of stories in addition to their titles  , sentences , and words . Since the format of each news feed , e . g . , Reuters or Kyodo , is distinct from the others , a single preprocessor will accept only one news feed  . For rigidly-formatted articles that are numerical or non-text tlal in form  , a template filter , which is an indexing component of low-level routines  , categorizes them from lhetitle while deriving specifics l ' rom the body of tile story  . 

Lexicon I
Template Filter
Words ~1 ndexes

Stories\[Parseri
II % c ~ Ttl to . co , i Structures ~ I ~

An Architectural Overview of NAS
Figure 1
Figure 2 is an actual example ( from Reuters ) that has been indexed by the tern plate filter . The system outputs the company name with a descriptor  "3rd Quarter Earnings , " as well as the current and cumulative arnings or losses  . 
@ R101903647/& ACTMEDIAINC < ACTM . 0>3 RDQTRLOSS WESTHAMP TON BEACH , N . Y . , Oct19, Reuter-
Shr loss 14 cts vs profit 10 cts
Netloss 1,674,000 vs profit 1.207,000
Revs 26.7 mlnvs 19.1 mln
Nine Months
Shr loss 19 cts vs profit 34 cts
Netloss 2,280,000 vs profit 4,080,000
Revs 71.6 mln vs 59.8 rain
Reuter (2) Agent ( COMPANY )
Predicate ( INTRODUCE)
Theme ( PRODUCT).
This structure denotes that a product introduction is one where a company introduces  ( or , synonymously , releases ) a product . In short , it is a list of typed nodes . A report will be characterized as a product introduction story if it contains a sentence some of whose grammatical components  ( e . g . , agent , predicate , theme ) can be associated to the corresponding odes of 2 )  , Suppose , l : or example , a news item reports 3 ) Alpha Corp said it plans to release a new workstation in Japan  . 
The parser , in accordance with GB principles , produces : indexes :
Company Name-ACT MEDIAIN C
Descriptor-3 RD Quarter Earnings
Subject-Net loss 1,674,000
Descriptor-Current Earnings
Subject-Net loss 2,280,000
Descriptor-Cumulative Earnings ( 4 ) Agent ( Alpha Corp ) 
Predicate ( said )

Agent ( Alpha Corp )
Predicate ( plans )

Agent ( Alpha Corp )
Predicate ( release)
Theme ( a new work station )
In ( Japan )
A Numerical Story and Its Index
Figure 2
In contrast , textual stories require grammatical processing and these are sent to the parser and semantic interpreter  . The parser which relies on the principles of Government-Binding  ( GB ) Theory ( /Chomsky 1981/3 , outputs predicate-argument structure of each sentence of as to W  . a In doing so , the parser identities empty categories , viz . , PROs , traces , and variables , and thematic relations , and resolves antecedent and anaphor and pronominal bindings  . It should be noted that the parser is interfaced to a lexicon of over  17  , 000 items that was developed by analyzing strings ( words ) from a news wim . The size of the lexicon is sufficient for news processing  . 
The semantic interpreter maps the grammatical structures onto conceptual representations or filters stored in a concept base  . For instance , are presentation for " Product Introduction " is The parser binds the pronominal it  , the agent of plans , toA ~) haCor~tx , the subject or agent of the matrix clause . The parser also detects an empty category , viz . , PRO , in the embedded sentence ( proposition ) with release as the verb and binds the pronominal to it  . 
Since bound arguments share the same semantic features  , the semantic interpreter determines that the agent of release in  ( 4 ) is of type COMPANY . In other words , PRO inherits the property of COMPANY from the agent of the matrix sentence via the intermediate pronominal k  . It also determines that the predicate release is synonymous with introduce and the theme workstation is a product  . With the arguments typed and membership of the predicate within a synonym class known  , the semantic processor can match the corresponding nodes of the most deeply embedded clause of  ( 4 ) with ( 2 )  , and thus determines that the sentence is about a product introduction  . Associated with each conceptual filter is a set of indexing procedures that are invoked  398   2 by the indexing mechanism when a conceptual fi teris satisfied  . 
These thnctions are integrated with databases containing the indexing vocabulary and they identify specific information about a story including company  , personal , and product names , and descriptors indicating specific relationships  , Figure 3 illustrates the corporate and personal name identification capabilities and the level of " understanding " as reflected by the subheadings  . 
@R080100252/& ALCOHEALTH < AAIIS . 0 > CHIEFEXECUTIVERETIRES VALLEY FORGE , Pa . , Aug 1 , Renter-Alco Health Serv-ices Corp said Ray B . Mundt has been named acting chairman and chief executive officer  , succeeding John H . Kennedy , who is retiring . 

Company Name-
Descriptor-
AlcoHealth Services Corp
Officials and Employees
Personal Name-Kennedy , John H.
Descriptor-Retirement
Personal Name-
Descriptor-
Mundt , Ray B.
Selection ", Appointment
A Textual Story and its Index
Figure 3

Formal benchnmrks have been established based on news from Reuters  . On a Symbolics 36 40 , NAS can process entire days of news ( 500600 stories May ) in 3540 minutes and can assign indexes to approximately 75% of the stories .   ( The phumed goal of at least 85% coverage is certainly achievable . ) Accuracy was . judged exlremely high by a group of independent indexers and editors  . Quality cotdd not be judged quantitatively clue to the complexity art d subjectivity of the indexing terms and procedures  . 
FUTUREDIRECTIONS
In addition to continual extensions to the various colnponents of the system  , a design for an interface of NAS to deductive databases has begun  . The development of this extension would enable databases to be generated automatically with indexes being stored as logical relations  , thereby , permitting retrieval or alerting capabilities based on explicit as well a simplic it c  , r inferred information . 
ANOTEONTHEIMPLEMENTATION
NAS was developed in Zeta Lispon Symbolics workstations  . It has been converted to Common Lisp and runs on Maclvory and 
Macintosh computers.

The results of NAS demonstrate hat it is possible to employ natural language processing and  , in particular , linguistic-based parsers , to extract conceptual information from texts ( news )  . 
This coupling of theoretical ( GB ) results with a largescale application provides insights into the possibilities and limitations of computational as well as form a linguistics  . 
NOTESt The natural language component , however , is not restricted to news processing . With another preprocessor and links to an expert system  , the system has processed text found on insurance applications  . 
2The use of a GB-based parser within this application results flom the ongoing research and development on this type of parser  .   ( /Kuhns 1986/describes an earlier implementation fGB Theory . ) From a research perspective , a parser based on linguistic theory and applied to " realworld " text helps identify the boundaries or interface conditions between core and peripheral aspects of the theory  . In other words , since GB is a model of core grammar and language contains marginal or marked conslruc-tions  , a GB-based parser nmstco-routine principles of the theory with hmguage-specific rules in order to have wide coverage  . 
(/ Fomita 1988/makes a similar observation . ) Thus , it is this combination of a psychologically-real theory and an application using fl'ee text that may provide insight into the human sentence processing mechanism  . 

Chomsky , N . , ( 1981 ) Lectures on Government and Binding , For is Publications , Dordrecht , Holland . 
ttayes , P . J . , L . E . Knecht , and M . J Cellio ,  (1988) , " A News Categorization System , " in Proceedings o1' the Second Conference on AEplied Natural Langu ~ , ~c
Processing , Austin , Texas.
Kuhns , R . J . , (1986) , " APROLOG Implementation fGovernment-Binding Theory  , " in Proceedings of the Xlth International Conference on Computational Lin~t_fistic ~  , 
Bonn , West Germany.
Kuhns , R . J . , (1988) , " A News Analysis System , " in Proceedings of the Xllth International Conference on Computational Lin  , , , ,uistics Budapest , Hungary . 
Rau , L . F . , and P . S . Jacobs ,  (1988) , " Integrating Top-Down and Bottom-Up Strategies in a Text Processing System  . " in Proceeding8 of the Second Conference on Applied Naturall_ , an ~ e Process it ~ , Austin , Texas . 
Sahon , G . , and M . Smith ,  (1989) , " On the Application of Syntactic Methodologies in Automatic Text Analysis  , " in Proceedings of the Twelve Ammal International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Inflsmation 
Retrieval , C~ambridge , Massachusetts.
SparckJones , K . , and M . Kay (1973), Lij L . guistics and Information Science , Academic Press , New York . 
Tomita , M . , (1988) , " Combining Lexicon-Driven Parsing and Phrase -Structure-Based Parsing  , " in Proceedings of the X\]hh International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , 
Budapest , Hungary.
Walker , D . E . , H . Karlgren , and M . Kay ( eds . ), (1977) . 
Natural Lan ~ in Information Science . FID Publication 551, Skriptor , Stockhohn . 

