Identifying Subjective Characters in Narrative
Janyce M . Wiebe
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto , Canada M5SIA4


Part of understanding fictional narrative text is determining for each sentence whether it takes some character's point of view and  , if it does , identifying the character whose point of view is taken  . This paper presents part of an algorithm for perfomling the latter  . When faced with a sentence that takes a character ' spoint of view  , the reader has to decide whether that character is a previously mentioned character or one mentioned in the sentence  . We give particular consideration to sen-tences about private states  , such as seeing and wanting , for which both possibilities exist . Our algorithm is based on regularities in the ways that texts initiate  , continue , and resume a character's point of view , found during extensive xamina-tions of published novels and short stories  . 
i . INTRODUCTION . Part of understanding ficfion a ~ narrative text is determining for each sentence whether it takes some character's point of view and  , if it does , identifying the character whose point of view is taken  . This paper addresses the latter . We show how structural regularities of third -person fictional narrative text can be exploited to perform this task  . 
2 . BACKGROUND ? Our approach to point of view is based on Ann Banfield's  ( 1982 ) theory of narrative sentences . Banfield characterizes the sentences of narration as objective or subjective  . 
Objective sentences are those that objectively narrate events  . Subjective sentences are those that present the consciousness of an experiencing character within the story  . They express characters ' evaluations , emotions , judgments , uncertainties , beliefs , and other attitudes and affects . Kinds of subjective sentences include those that portray a character's thought or perception  ( represented thought or represented perception ; Banfield 1982) , and those that report a character's private state such as seeing  , wanting , or feeling ill---that is , some perceptual , psychological , or experiential state that is not open to objective observation or verification  , l We call the character whose cons-ciousness i presented by such a sentence the subjective character of that sentence  . 
The following passage illustrates different kinds of subjective sentences  . 
(1 )   1"1"What are you doing in here ?" 1"2Suddenly she\[Zoel was furious with him\[Joel . 
t . 3,, Spying , of course . "  l'4"Well of all dumb things ! 1"5I thought your an away . " l'6 joe Bunch was awful . \[ Oneal , War Work , p . 

Sentence (1 . 2 ) is a private-state rport : It reports Zoe's private state of being furious with Joe  . Sentence (1 . 6 ) is are presented thought : It presents Zoe's thought and it expresses her evaluation of Joe  ( that he isawful )  . Represented perceptions appear in the following passage : z ' ~ Certainly  , Dennys thought , anything would be better than this horrible -smelling place full of horrible little  pe?p~'e2There was a brief whiff off reshair .   2"3A l_glimpse of anightsky crusted with stars . LL'Engle,
Many Waters , p . 25\]
Sentence (2 . 1) is Dennys's represented thought and (2 . 2) and (2 . 3) are Dennys's represented perceptions . 
" l-bird-person arrative text is characterized by shifts in point of view : a single text can have objective sentences as well as subjective sentences attributed to different characters  . 2 To determine the current point of view , readers cannot consider sentences in isolation . In many cases , it is only in tSee Wiebe 1990 and the references therein for alternative categorization ~ of subjective sentences  . 
2 There are different kinds of point of view in narrative  . The kind addressed here is psychologicals opposed to  , for example , spatial or temporal ( Uspensky 1973) . In addition , we do not consider texts that take the point of view of an overt narrator  ( Chatman 1978 )  . 
1  401 context hat a sentence is subjective or has a particular subjective character  . Sentence (1 . 6) is such a sentence . 
We have developed an algorithm for recognizing subjective sentences and identifying their subjective characters in third-person fictional narrative text  . The algorithm is based on regularities , found during our examination of passages from over forty novels and short stories  , in the ways that texts initiate , continue , and resume a character's point of view . The rules of the algorithm were checked , by hand , on over four hundred pages from seven novels . We were able to categorize most exceptions according to particular problems that remain to be addressed  , such as the effect of certain spatial and temporal discontinui-ties on the psychological point of view  . These classes of exceptions , together with complete descriptions of the current algorithm and its implementation  , can be found in Wiebe 1990 . A preliminary version of the algorithm was presented by Wiebe & Rapaport  1988  . 
3. IDENTIFYING THE SUBJECTIVE CHARAC-

3 . 1 . Introduction . Black , Turner , & Bower ( 1979 ) claim the following result of their empirical investigation of point of view in narrative : " Merely making a character the subject of the narrative statement sufficed to establish is as the dominant point of view "  ( p .  187) . However , their stimulus materials were short , artificially constructed narratives . For extended texts ( i . e . , novels and short stories ) , this simple rule is inadequate . 
The subjective character of a subjective sen-tenee is sometimes identifiable from the sentence itself  . This is the case if the sentence has a narrative parenthetical  ( such as ' Dennys thought ' in ( 2 . 1)) ; it might also be the case if the sentence denotes a private state  , but not always . If the subjective character is not identifiable from the sentence  , it is often one of two previously mentioned characters : the subjective character of the previous subjective sentence or the actor of an action denoted by a previous objective sentence  . The availability of these characters is conditional  ; obviously , for example , the former is available only if a subjective sentence has previously appeared  . The subjective character also may not be identifiable when the sentence appears  . 
Thus , identifying the subjective character involves determining whether it can be identified from the sentence itself  , or , if not , determining whether it can be identified from the previous context  . In addition , as the text is processed , information that might be needed to identify later subjecotive characters must be gathered  . 
3 . 2 . Identifying the Subjective Character from the Previous Context  . A subjective character who is not identifiable from the sentence itself  ( see Section 3 . 3 , below ) is most often the subjective char ~ a cter of the last subjective sentence  . In this case , the current sentence continues a character's point of view  ( if the previou sentence was also subjective ) or resumes one ( if objective sentence . s have appeared since the last subjective sentence  )  . Sentences (2 . 2) and (2 . 3) illustrate the former , and sentence (1 . 6) illustrates the latter ; it has the same subjective character as (1 . 2) , the last subjective sentence , and is separated from (1 . 2) by objective sentences (1 . 3)--(1 . 5) . 
Less commonly , the subjective character is the actor of an action denoted by a previous objective sentence  . Since this character need not be the subjective character of the last subjective sentence  , this is a way to initiate a new point of view . 
Following is an example : 3(3) 3" I Jake felts our .   3"2He wished again that circumstances hadn't prompted him to come back  .   3"3He had already spent one full night on horse back ,   3"4and now the boys were expecting him to spend another , all on account of a bunch of livestock he had no interest in in the first place  . 
3"5 " I don't know as I'm coming , " he said . 3"6 " I just go there .   3"7If I'd known you boys did nothing but chase horses around all night  , I don't know that I would have come . "3' s " Why , Jake , 3 . Yl ~ Ulazy bean , " Augustus said , 3"9 and walked off . ?' Jake had a stubborn streak in him ,   311and once it was activated even Call could seldom do much with him  . \[ McMurtry , Lone some Dove , p . 162 \] As this passage appears in the novel , (3 . 10) and (3 . 1I ) represent the point of view of Augustus , the 3 Numbering within passages reflects the actual units of input given to the algorithm  , which are not always sentences . E . g . , the con-juects of compound sentences are separate input units  . Even so , an input unit can still have multiple clauses , each of which denotes an event . The algorithm uses heuristics to choose the most important of these for tracking point of view  ( most often , it chooses the event denoted by the main clause ) . Thus , when we refer to a sentence that denotes an action  , for example , we actually mean an input unit of which the event chosen for consideration is an action  . 
2  402 actor of an action denoted by a previous objective sentence  ,  (3 . 9) . But the last subjective character is ~ lake , so Augustus's point of view is initiated , not merely resumed or continued . 
In order to identify the subjective character in these situations  , the algorithm keeps track of expected subjective characters  , characters who are likely to become the subjective character  . Often , the last subjective character is one of these . However , drastic spatial and temporal discontinuities can block : the continuation or resumption of a character's psychological point of view  . We consider one kind of discontinuity , a scene break , which is a break from one parallel story line to another  ( Almeida 1987 )  . Thus , the last subjective character : is an expected subjective character only if a subjective sentence has appeared in the current scene  ( see Wiebe 1990 for examples )  .   4 The usual situation for a shift in point of view to an actor is one in which the action of a previous subjective character is focused by the text---specifically  , when the objective sentence denoting the action appeared earlier in the current paragraph and the entire paragraph so far has been objective  . "5 In these situations , the actor of the last such senl~ence , the last active character , is an ~' . xpected subjective character . 
If the subjective character is not identifiable from the sentence ~ then the algorithm chooses an expected subjective character  , if them is one . If there is n't one , then the algorithm cannot identify the subjective character at this point in the text  ( see Wiebe & Rapaport 1988 and Wiebe 1990 for ~ ; xamples i ~ x which the reader must read further in the text in order to identify the subjective charac?ter  )  . In the case of competition between expected subjective ctm racters  , the last active character is the prefenred choice  , since he or she is more highly focused by the text than the last subjective character as  . The last subjective character is chosen only if the sentence is about the last active character  .   6 The choice of the last subjective character is incorrect if the sentence is the last active character's self-reflection or self-perception  ; this n The algorithm cannot detects cenebreaks ; rather , it nmst be informed when one occurs . 
5 In addition , the action must be one that is actually performed hit he current scene  ; thus , the main verb phrase of the sentence denot-h~git must pass certain linguistic tests  , for example , that it not con-~a in a habitual adverbial such as ' usually ' or a modal adverbial such as ' probably '  . 
That is , if the last active character is the actor or experieneer of the event chosen for consideration  . 
heuristic relies on the relative infrequency of subjective sentences about oneself  . 
3 . 3 . Identifying the Subjective Character from the Sentence  . Most commonly in third-person arra ~ tire text , subjective sentences continue or resume characters ' points of view  , rather than initiate new ones . The previous section discussed one way , illustrated by passage (3) , to initiate a new point of view . In situations like those , the subjective character is determined from the previous context  . 
A subjective sentence is also able to initiate a new point of view if the subjective character is identifiable from the sentence itself  . A simple example is a sentence with a narrative parenthetical  , such as (2 . 1 ) -- the subjective character is always the subject of the parenthetical  . 
The subjective character may also be identifiable from a sentence denoting a private state  ( a private-state sentence )  ; in particular , it may be the experiencer of the private state denoted  . Thus , as noted by Dole~el 1973 , Cohn 1978 , and Banfield 1982 , a private-state sentence is another way to initiate a new point of view  . 7 An example occurs in the following : ( 4 ) 4" l " Drownme ? " Augustusaid . 4"2" Why if ' any body had tried it , those girls would have clawed them to shreds . "4"3 Heknew Call was mad , 4"4 but wasn't much inclined to humor him . 4"5 It wash is dinner table as much as Call's ,   4"6and if C all didn't like the conversation he could go to be d  . 
4748 ? Callknew there was no point in arguing . ? That was what Augustus wanted : argument . "9 ~ I edidnt really care what the question was ,   4"l?and it made no great difference to him which side he was on  . n'll He just plain loved to argue . \[ McMurtry , Lone some Dove , p . 16\] Sentences (4 . 3)-(4 . 6) are Augustus'subjective sentences and (4 . 7)-(4 . 11) are Call's . So , (4 . 7) initiates a new point of view . It is a private-state sentence and the subjective character  , Call , is the experiencer of the plivate state denoted . Passage (4) shows , however , that the subjective character of a private-state sentence need not be the experiencer  . In (4 . 6) , for example , " Call didn't like the conversation " denotes a plivate state  ( lik?ing )  , but the subjective character of the sentence is 7 If a subjective sentence denotes a private-state action such assighing or looking  , the subjective character might also be identifiable from the sentence itself  . See Wiebe 1990 for the algorithm's treatment of these kinds of sentences  . 

Augustus , not Call . In the following subsections , we will consider factors that can indicate that the subjective character of a private-state sentence is not the experiencer  . 
3 . 3 . 1 . Textual Continuity . Point of view does not typically shift from one character to another without a paragraph break  . 8 Thus , the lack of a paragraph break suggests that a shift has not occurred  . In the case of a private-state sentence following a subjective sentence  , where the experiencer is different from the last subjective character  , the lack of a paragraph break between them suggests that the private-state sentence is not the experiencer's subjective sentence  ; if it were , then a shift would have occurred without a paragraph break  . So , when a private-state sentence immediately follows a subjective sentence without a paragraph break  ( this is called the continuing ? subjective text situation  )  , the algorithm identifies the subjective character to be the last subjective character  , not the experiencer of the private state .  9 3 . 3 . 2, Subjective Elements . Another factor that suggests that a private-state sentence should be attributed to an expected subjective character rather than to the experieneer is the appearance of a subjective lement  . 
There are many linguistic elements ( syntactic , lexical , and morphological ) that can indicate that a sentence is subjective . Examples are evaluative terms such as ' the old bag '  ( Banfield 1982 )  , and evidentials such as ' evidently ' and ' apparently '  ( Dole~el 1973 )  . Although some of these elements always indicate that a sentence is subjective  , others only potentially do so . A subjective element is a linguistic element that actually indicates that a sentence is subjective in the context of use  .   10 Before we address the effect of subjective elements on identifying the subjective character of a private-state sentence  , we need to consider interpretations of private -state sentences  . Theres This observation is predicted by Nakhimovsky's work on the discourse structure of narrative text  , in which it is suggested that paragraph breaks accompany discontinuities  ( Nakhimovsky & Rapa-port 1988 ; Naldaimovsky 1988) . 
9Actually , the algorithm allows for a broadening or narrowing of point of view upon a private-states ntence  . This can occur because , as shown by Banfield 1982 , a subjective sentence can be attributed to a set of characters  . 
10We borrow this term from Bantield 1982 , but redefine it ; Banfield uses it to refer to linguistic elements that always indicate that a sentence is subjective  . 
are two subjective interpretations of private -state sentences : represented thoughts and private-state reports  . 11Interpreted to be are presented thought , a private-state sentence is someone's thought about a character's private state  . For example , (4 . 6 ) is Augustus's represented thought that is about Call's private state  ( Call's not liking something )  . A private-state sentence that is interpreted to be a private-state rport  , on the other hand , is a report of a character's private state ; it is not someone's thought about it . Examples are (4 . 3) and (4 . 7) .   12 The subjective character of a private-state report is always the experiencer  . Thus , the subjective character is identifiable from the sentence itself  . On the other hand , the subjective character of are presented thought cannot be identified from the sentence itself  , but depends on the context ( unless , of course , a narrative parenthetical appears ) . This is so regardless of whether the subjective character is referred to in the sentence  . For example , the subjective character of the following represented thought is the referent of ' she '  ( as the sentence appears in the short story ) : Why couldn't she ?\[ Mansfield , " The GardenParty "\] but the subjective character of the folk  ) wing ( as the sentence appears in the shorts to ~ y ) is not referred to in the sentence : What nice eyeshe had  , small , but such a dark blue !\ [ Mansfield , " The GardenParty "\] Thus , if something indicates that a private-state sentence is are presented thought rather than a private-state report  , then the subjective character should be identified to be an expected subjective character  ( as discussed in Section 3 . 2) . 
Subjective lements do this , as in tile following passage ; at the start of the passage , Sandy and Dennys are ( collectively ) the last subjective character : "13 n There is also an objective interpretation ( see Wiebe 1990 )  . 
tz Cohn 1978 does not acknowledge this ambiguity : She says that represented thought can be distinguished from plivate-state r-ports by " the absence of mental verbs " in the former  ( p .  104) . 
13 According to the rules of the algorithm , the event of (5 . 1 ) chosen for consideration is the private state denoted by the subordi-mated clause  . 
4044 (5) 5' lJap heth , evidently realizing that they were no longer behind him  , turned around 5'2 and jogged back toward them , seemingly cool and unwinded . \[L'Engle,
Many Waters , p . 24\]"l ~ he subjective lement ' evidently ' in (5 . 1 ) indicates that the sentence is not a private -state rport  . 
That is , (5 . 1 ) is not a report that Japheth realizes that they are no longer behind him  . Instead , Sandy and Dennys ( the subjective character ) ascribe this private state to him . 
However , subordinated subjective lements , those within the scope of the private-state trm , can appear in private-state reports . 14 Thus , they cannot ' be used to distinguish private -staterports from represented thoughts  ( and so cannot be used to identify the subjective character  )  . For example :  61 ) Ugh ! she\[the girl \] though L 6"2How could the poorthing have married him in the first place ?  ~'3johnnic Martin could not believe that he was seeing that old bag's black eyess parkling with disgust and unsheathed contempt at him  . \[ Caldwe U , No One
Hears But Him , pp . 98-99\]
Sentence (6 . 3) is a private-state rport and the subjective , character is the experiencer ( Johnnie Martin ) ; this is so even though (6 . 3 ) contains the sub ~ jeetive element ' old bag ' and even though there is an expected subjective character  ( the girl ) when it is encountered . Because ' old bag ' appears within the scope of the private-staterm ' believe '  , it is not considered in identifying the subjective char ? acter  . On the other hand , the subjective clement ' evidently ' in (5 . 1) is not in the scope of ' realizing ' ( i . e . , it is non-subordinated ) , so it can be used to identify the subjective character  . 
If a private-state sentence does not have a non -subordinated subjective lement and does not appear in the continuing-subjective situation  , then the algorithm identifies the expected subjective characmr to be the experiencer  . 
4 . SUMMARY . Following is the rule of the algorithm for identifying the subjective character of a subjective sentence  ( ' SC'stands for the subjective character of the current sentence  ) :  15   14 qhisis one reason why we define private-state r ports to be subjective  . 
1 5 Provisions for the following have been omitted for brevity : broadening and narrowing of point of view  , sentences denoting private-state actions , and private-states ntences that can be objective
To identify SC :
If the sentence contains a narrative parenthetical then SC is the subject of the parenthetical else if the sentence is a private-states ntence then if it has a non-subordinated subjective clement or the text situation is continuing-subjective h nSC is identified from the previous context else SC is the experience rendifels eSC is identified from the previous context end if To identify SC from the previous context : If there are two expected subjective characters then if the sentence is about helast active character then 
SC is the last subjective character else SC is the last active character end if else if there is an expected subjective character then SC is the expected subjective character else SC is unidentified end if  5  . CONCLUSION . We amextending this work along two avenues . First , we are developing psychological experiments to test whether the regularities on which the algorithm is based influence the reader's recognition of subjective sentences and identification of subjective characters  . Second , we are extending the algorithm to make connections with work on focus of attention and discom'se structure  ( such as Grosz & Sidner 1986 )  ; in particular , we are investigating how resolving anaphor and tracking the current point of view are related  ( Stark 1987 , He witt 1988) . An important direction for future research is reasoning about the plausibility of a suggested interpretation  , that is , whether it is plausible that the con?tent of a subjective sentence is a particular character's thought or perception  . 
Welmve presented part of an algorithm for identifying subjective characters that is based on regularities in the ways that texts initiate  , resume , and continue a character's point of view . When faced with a subjective sentence , the reader has to decide whether the subjective character can be identified from the sentence itself  . It can be if the sentence is a private-state r port  , but not if it is are presented thought ; we give rules for distinguishing between these two interpretations of private-state sentences that involve the textual situation and the appearance of subjective lements in the sentence  . A subjective character who is not ( see Wiebe 1990 )  . 
5  405 identifiable from the sentence itself is often one of two previously-mentioned characters  ; we identify those characters and specify when one of them should be chosen to be the subjective character  . 
Our findings are based on extensive xaminations of natural narrative  . 
Acknowledgments . I wish to thank the members of the SUNY Buffalo Graduate Group in Cognitive Science and the SNePS Research Group for many discussions and ideas  , and William Rapa-port , Graeme Hirst , and Diane Horton for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper  . 

Almeida , M . J .  (1987) , Reasoning about he Temporal Structure of Narratives  , Ph . D . dissertation , published as Technical Report 87-10 ( Buffalo : SUNY Buffalo Department of Computer Science  )  . 
Banfield , A .  (1982) , Unspeakable Sentences : Narration and Representation in the Language of Fiction  ( Boston : Routledge & Kegan Paul )  . 
Black , J . B . ; Turner , T . J . ; & Bower , G . H .  (1979) , " Point of Viewin Narrative Comprehension , Memory , and Production , "Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 18:   187-198  . 
Caldwell , Taylor (1966) , No One Hears But Him ( Garden City , NY : Doubleday ) . 
Chatrnan , Seymour (1978) , Story and Discourse : Narrative Structure in Fiction and Film  ( Ithaca , 
NY : Cornell University Press).
Cohn , D .  (1978) , Transparent Minds : Narrative Modes for Representing Consciousness in Fiction  ( Princeton : Princeton University Press )  . 
Dole~el , L .  (1973) , Narrative Modes in Czech Literature ( Toronto : University of Toronto

Grosz , B . J . & Sidner , C . L .  (1986) , " Attention , Intentions , and the Structure of Discourse , " Computational Linguistics ,  12: 175-204 . 
Hewitt , L .  (1988) , " Reduced Anaphor in Subjective Contexts , " unpublished manuscript , SUNY Buffalo Graduate Group in Cognitive Science . 
L'Engle , M . (1986), Many Waters ( New York,
Dell Publishing).
McMurtry , L . (1985), Lone some Dove ( New York:
Simon & Schuster).
Nakhimovsky , A .  (1988) , " Aspect , Aspectual Class , and the Temporal Structure of Narrative , " Computational Linguistics 14(2): 29-43 . 
Nakhimovsky , A . & Rapaport , W . J .  (1988) , " Discontinuities in Narratives , " Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING-88 , Budapest ) ( Morristown , NJ : Assoc . for Computational
Linguistics ): 465-470.
Oneal , Z . (1971), War Work ( New York : Viking

Stark , H . A .  (1987) , " Keeping Track of Characters in Narrative , " Ph . D . dissertation , Dept . of Computer Science , Stanford University . 
Uspensky , B .  (1973) , A Poetics of Composition ( Berkeley : University of California Press )  . 
Wiebe , J . M . , & Rapaport , W . J .  (1988) , " A Computational Theory of Perspective and Reference in Narrative  , " Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Assoc . for Computational Linguistics ( ACL-88 ; SUNY at Buffalo ) ( Morristown , NJ : Assoc . for Computational Linguistics ): 131-138 . 
Wiebe , J . M .  (1990) , Recognizing Subjective Sentences : A Computational Investigation of Narrative Text  , Ph . D . dissertation , published as a technical report ( Buffalo : SUNY Buffalo Dept . of Computer Science ) . 

