CARAMEL : A flexible model for interaction between the cognitive processes 
underlying natural language understanding.
G ~ rard Sabah.
L1MSI , B.P . 133
91403 ORSAYCE DEX-FRANCE
Tel:(1) 69858003-Fax:(1) 69858088
Email : SABAH@FRLIM 51 ( EARN )
Abstract :
In this paper we present a general natural language processing system called CARAMEL  ( in French : Compr dhension Automatique de R~cits , Apprent issage tModdlisation desE:changes Langagiers  ) o Over the last few years our group has developed many pro~ams to deal with differem : aspects of natural language processing : This paper describes a general m ' chitect t ~ retha ~ integrates them in a flexible way  , and provides a control strategy capable of adapting itself to the requirements of a particular ~ sko The model is composed o : r three ftmd~r ~ ental elements " - a struct m ? ex ~ memory containing pe~nanent l~owledge and w of ldng structures of the system-a set of processes  , dedicated to the execution of the various cogmtive tasks a supervisor  , whose function is to Ixigger , to run coherently and to synchronize the pm cesse so The sysmm contains a kind of black boaN  , which b ; enhanced with a control mechanism & iver ~ by recta-rules  . This a : rchitecture is fully implemented ? Weam etm'ently developing the  meta-m3es necessary to use the model for various tasks . 
io5usfifieati ~ ~ f the approae ~
Research in A\]\[ is base A on the assumption that intelliger tce can be thought of as the ~ ransforma fior~f ~ n for ~ na ~ or ~  ( Newell & Simon ( 63 )  , Fodor ( 68 ) ) in order to solve problems ? Viewed in this light  , NL processing consists in chang~rtgrepresek~tat ~ er~sfom a form a ~ language to another  . 
~ Ne?anglta gesued in CARAMEL are based on concepuuffgrap ~  ( Sowa 84 )  . q ~ is , qeuerag formalism has been exten & d in order to allow sophlseica - ~ edinference mechanis ~  . Its use facilitates ~ he commu ~ dcao ' on between ~ he processes  . 
Given the diversity of knowledge sources , we are confronted with the problem of conflict resolution and resource management  . The current a ' end in AI is to express knowledge in a declarative form  , but the independence of the know edge sources causes artificial ambiguity ? to order to be efficient  , NL systems may need to integrate all the knowledge sourees ~ btxt organizing the knowledge with this objective in mind is a rather difficult enterprise  . The essential problem is the inadequacy of the control mechanisms in classical systems  , no matter whether their architecture is serial , hierarchical or heterarchical . Ermanet Lesser ( 80 ) suggest hata solution is to base complex systems on a blackboard architecture  . This allows for distributed control , for autonomous 1 . For an application of this principle in a parser , see ( Sabah & Rady 83) . 
and a synchronous use of the knowledge sources . The implementation of increasingly elaborate systems leads All to multi-expert's systems  , that allow for complex communications and for flexible use of metal  . 
knowledge ( Haton 89) . . Nevertheless , one important problem remains : once a process is started no external control can intervene  . 
Hence , control remains intet rnitten l.
Our a ~' chitecture integrates ff~se ~ eas and eXo ~ en~ef ~ e  6l  , ~ ck 6 oard model 69 including a con ? in . uous control system , allowing a sophisticated rt ~ rl we men ~ of the Wocesscs and of H ~ eirin ~: ert  , ; . Ftion , q g is is read e possible by pars \ [ gelimp ( ementa~ion . 
TIaearc ~ igec ~ uref CAg AMEL
Omo model takes into account he fact that the vario ~ a processes cannot be  , we-ordered ( their order depends on the global task and the particular data to be processed  ) and that their management has to be based < map ~am-~h  , g process ? ~\ [ r , CARAMEL the sequence of pro . ? cesses to be applied in a given situation ia order to realize a given task is planned by a supervbsot  . Another important role of this supervisor is to update the working memory : as it is the only one to have a global view  , it is entitled to decide what representations should be kept and be updated in a global working memory  . 
Finally , it builds a general representation of the reasoning process  ; thus it can explain why a given process has been triggered  . 

The system may be used in such different applications as : user-friendly interfaces  , online help in text processors , ummaries of texts , intelligent tutoring systems , etc . 
2. The CARAMEL model 2.1 The memory
As we have seen , natural language processing can be conceived of as a change of representation  . To handle this task , we makes use of three kinds of memory : - a short term memory  , which receives the results of the perceptual processes  . 
-a working memory , which contains all the structures ( eventually provisional ) built by the different processes . The text is represented at the various levels differently according to the point of view  . Even though the working memory functions like a blackboard  , it is under the control of the master process . 
-along term memory which contains all the knowledge of the system  . This memory contains for example information about morphology  , words , grammar , syntax , semantics and pragmatics , and it is a stable representation f the current state of the world  . 
All this knowledge is permanent , declarative and expressed in terms of conceptual graphs  ( Sowa 84 )  , as this formalism facilitates the communication between processes  2  . 
2.2 Processes
Let us briefly mention some of the processes used in CARAMEL : a deterministic parser  ( Rady 83 , Sabahet Rady 83 , 
Francopoulo 88 ) based on case grammar ( Fillmore 68 ) and systemic grammar ( Halliday 73 )  , an ellipsis ( Sauvage 88) and an anaphora-solver , an error handler ( Fournier 88) , story inte I pretation processes ( Sabah 78) , ( Berthelin 80) , ( Grau 84) , a planner used in dialogue handling ( Vilnat 86 ) \[ the work on dialogue draws on work from linguistics  ( Roulet 86 ) and philosophy ( Searle 69 , Grice 75)\] , and a sentence generator ( Zock 90) . 
All these processes are triggered by a master process  , the supervisor . Before we explain its functioning , let us see how the processes are represented in the system  . 
2 . At present he implemented data corresponds to a French lexicon of  15   000 entries ( about 350000 conjugated forms )  , a semantic net of a thousand concepts , a grammar ( 350 rules ) allowing the analysis of complex sentences with preposition alnd relative phrases  ( in French )  , and pragmatic knowledge about he world ( at present , he system knows only a few frames in order to test hevalidity of the processes  )  . 
Representation of t,~e processes
In order to find the most adequate process in a given situation  , the supervisor uses a representation of each process specifying its inputs and outputs  . For example: ( Sentence analysis ( INPUT ( otr rP trr ( Type list )   ( Elements words ) )  ( Type cpt . graphs )   ( Element syntactic rp 0 ( Element semantic rpr ) ) ) CARAMEL distinguishes between the following two types of process : - Elementary processes  ( such as ellipse or anaphorae resolution )  , whose task is to comvlete gxi~st in_gr . /g presentations . In case of problem , they will call the supervisor . 
-Compound processes ( parsing , story interpretation , generation . , o ) , which are compo-sed of elementary or compound processes  . 
They build ~' ~ r . Lqp/ . ~ E ? ~ . ~ . In their turn , they can be considered sub-supervisors ( based on an internal planning process , they decide what actions have to be performed and they know how to represent what has been done  )  . 
3, The supervisor
The supervisor triggers the adequate processes in order to build the necessary representations  , it handles the various problems that can appear , and it represents the actions that have to be performed  . Moreover , the supervisor builds a dynamic representation f the sequence of processes activated to solve the global task  . This representation is built in the working memory and allows the system to give explanations about the strategy used  . As each complex process acts as a supervisor with regards to its subprocesses  , the system has a recursive structure . 
The supervisor analyses the representations stored in the working memory and deduces the processes that may be triggered  , it also takes into account he needs of the active processes and the global task : it has to handle interruptions coming from them  . Thus , the system integrates bottom-up and topdown control  . 
The basis of this reasoning is a planning process . If , for example , the task of the system is to understanda story , it knows a priori that it has to built a global representation fit  . First , a . static planner builds the sequence of complex processes that can build this type of representation  ( parser+story understanding )  . 
The same type of reasoning produce sub-plans for the complex processes involved  . For 2447 example , this means in the case of story understanding : action  , character and pragmatic interpretations , followed by a synthesis ) This first phase is independent of the data to be processed  , and , as some aspects are not yet well defined , several processes may be optional ( pronoun resolution , error correction . . . ) . 
In a second phase , a dynamic planner allows the system to adap the static plan to the specific data present in the working memories  . 
Whenever a problem arises , the dynamic planning process takes care of it , by determining ( based on the inputs and outputs of the available processes  ) the kind of process capable to solve it . This mechanism is similar to the " hierarchical planning " proposed by Stefik  ( 81 )  , or Wilkins (84) . We use a similar kind of meta-planning : if there are several solutions possible  , they are ordered by the supervisor such as to increasefficiency  . 
The existence of these two planning phases allows that a process selected in the static planning phase can break down  . When this occurs , a help request is sent to the supervisor which triggers a dynamic planning phase  . 
When the processe selected in this second phase solve the problem  , the original process is resumed 3 . 
4 o Co . clus ~ os
In this paper , we have presented a general architecture capable of adapting its control strategy to the requirements of different asks  . It permits a modular implementation , it makes the modification of existing processes and the integration of new capacities in the system easier ? Another characteristic of our system  ( not developed here ) is that it is capable to explain its actions . This has proven quite helpful when putting the final touch to the rule base  . 
This capacity has interesting consequences on the learning process : as the system remembers the actions it has performed in a given si-tuation  , it is able-in the near future-to find analogies between the memorized situations and the actual one  . In consequence it can by pass the supervisor when reasoning  . CARAMEL is thus a flexible system , capable to manage a great number of different asks  , with an adapta-tire architecture and an optimal use of processes  . 
3 . Parallelism offers another solution to adapt the static plan to the data  . Its implementation , currently under development , will permit a continuous control on the processes : the supervisor will be able to examine the representations that are being constructed and  , possibly interrupt a given process in order to wait for the result of another one or to give it some advice  . 

Berthelin Jean-Baptism 1980 Story characters constructed by program , Coling , Tokyo . 
Boguraev Branimiret Karen Spark-Jones 1987 A note on a study of cases , Computational linguistics ,  13 12 ,  65-68 . 
Davis R and all , Bruce Buchananet Edward Shorliffe 1977 Production rules as a representation for a knowledge-based consultation program  , Artifical intelligence ,  8 (1) , pp .  1545 . 
Erman L . D . , V . R . Lesser 1980 The HEARSAY-II speech understanding system : a tutorial  , in Trends in speech recognition , Lea , Englewood Cliffs Prentice Hall 361-381 . 
Fillmore Charles 1968 The case for case , in Universals in linguistic theory , Bach & Harms , Chicago , Holt , 
Rinehart and Winston , pp . 1-90.
Fodor Jerry 1968 The appeal to lacit knowledge in psycho-logical explanations  , Journal of philosophy ,  20 , p . 632 . 
Fournier Jean-Pierre 1988 Traitement deserreurs dans la communication Homme-Machineen LN  , A cresGRECO-PRC communication Homme-Machine , Paris . 
Francopoulo Gil 1988 Analyse du frane a is a vecappren ~ tissage induct Oedel a syntaxe  , th ~ seuniv . P&M Curie . 
Grau Brigitte 1984 Stalking coherence in the topical jungle , 5th ICGCS , Tokyo . 
Grice H . P . 1975 Logic and conversation , in Syntax a ~ d semantics 3: speech acts , Coles & Morgan , Academic press , New York , ppo 41-58o Halliday Michael 1973 Explorations in the functions of language ~ Arnold  , Londres . 
Haton Jean-Paul 1989 Panora mades systdmes mult Lagents , Haton ( ed) , Architect mesavanc despour I ' IA . 
Minsky Marvin 1974 A framework for representing knowledge , Memo 306 , MIT , Cambridge Mass . 
Newell Allenet Herbert Simon 1963GPS , a progran ~ that simulates human thought . In Computers and thought , Feigenbaum & Feldman , McGraw Hill , NY ~279-293 . 
Rady Mohamed 1983 L ~ ambigu ~ tddulanga genature lest-elle la source dun on-eM termin is medesproc /  . dums detraitement ? ~ Th~sed'dtat,Univ . P&M Curie . 
Roulet 1986 Stratdgies interactive set interprdtatives ~ franq ~ a is contempora in  , Cahier de Linguistique franeak ~ n ? '/ , Uuiversit 6 de Gen~ve . 
Sabah Gdrard 1978 Contribution hla compr dhen sion effective d ' un r4cit   , Th~sed'dt at , Univ . P&M Curie . 
Sabah Gdrard , Mohamed Rady 1983 A deterministic syntactic-semantic parser , 8 ? IJCAI , Karlsruhe . 
Sauvage Caroline 1988 Gestion desellipses dans unsyst~mede compr dhension du franea is  , note LIMSI 88-7 , Searle John 1969 Speech acts , Cambridge . 
Sowa John 1984 Conceptual structures : information processing in mind and machine  , Addison Wesley , 
Reading , MA.
Stefik M . 1981 Planning with constraints , Artificial
Intelligence , 16, pp . 111-170.
Vilnat Anne 1986 Relevant responses in man-machine conversation , Structure of multimodal dialogues , Venaco . 
Wilkins David 1984 Domain-independant planning : representation and plan generation  , A . L , 22, 269-301 . 
Zock Michael 1990 "See What IMean ?" Interactive sentence generation as a way of visualizing the meaning form relationship  , WCCE-90 , 5th World Conference on
Computers in Education , Sidney.

