Acquisition of Lexical Information
from a Large Textual Italian Corpus
Nicoletta CAL ZOL ARI-Remo BINDI
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale del CNR , Pisa
Dipartimento di Linguistica , Universita " diP is a
Via de Ilat ' aggiola 32
56 100 PISA-ITALY
e-mNl:GLOTTOLO@ICNUCEVM . BITNET
1. l.troduction : LDB requirements
The creation and development of a large Lexical Database  ( LDB ) which , until now , mainly reuses the data found in standard Machine Readable Dictionaries  , has been going on in P is a for a number of years ( see Calzolari 1984 ,  1988 , Calzolari , Picchi 1988) . We are well aware that , in order to build a more powel-ful I . DB ( or even a Le . ' dcal Knowledge Base ) to be used in different Computation Ml . inguistics ( CL ) applications , types of information other than those usually found in machine readable dictionaries are urgently needed  . 
Different sources of information must therefore be exploited if we wemt to overcome the ' q ch cal bottleneck ~" of Naturall  . .anguage Processing ( NIP ) . 
In a trend which is becoming increasingly relevant both m  c1 proper and in Literao " and Iinguistic Computing , we feel that very interesting data ibrour LI ) B sc:m be found b . v processing large textuM corpora , where the actual usage of the language can be truly investigated  . Many research projects are nowadays collecting large amounts of textuM data  , thus providing more and more material to be analyzed for descriptions based on measurable vidence of how language is actually used  . We uhhnately aim at integrating lexical data extracted from the an '  , dysis of large textual corpora into the I , DB we are implementing . These data refer , typically , to : i ) complementation relations introduced by prepositions  ( e . g . dividere < divide > subcategorizes for a PP headed by the preposition in < in > haone sense  , and by the preposition fra < among > in another sense  )  ; ii ) lexically conditioned modification relations ( ten a macch in a potent e < powerful car > , unfarma copotent e < potent medicine > and not / brte < strong >  , while uncajfe " forte < strong coffee > , unamoneta forte < strong currency > and not po -tente < powerful >  )  ; iii ) lefically significant collocations ( premiereut ~ a decision e < to take a decision > and not farez~n a decision e < to make >  , prest are attenzion e < to pay attention > and not dare < to give >  )  ; iv ) fixed phrases and idioms I ( donnaitz carriera , do ttorato diricer ca , a propo ~ i to di ); v ) compounds ( tarola calda , ~avescuo/a ) . 
All these types of data are a major issue of practical relevance  , and particularly problematic , in many NIP applications in different areas . They should therefore bedv cn very lm'ge coverage in any useful LDB  , and , moreover , should also be annotated , in a computer k , ' ed lexicon , for the pe~inentt ) equency information obtained fiom the processed corpus  , and obviously updated fl " om time to time . As a matter of fact , dictionaries now tend to encode all the theoretic cd possibilities on a same level  , but " if e ;' e ~ possibility in the diction : m , must be given equal weight , parsing is very diificult " ( Church 1988 , p . 3 ) : they should provide infornaation on what is more likely to occur  , e . g . 
relative likelihood of alternate pm-ts of speech for a word or of a hernate word senses  , both out of context and it " possible taking into account context u ~ d factors  . 
Statistical an Myses of linguistic data were very popular in the  "50s and '60s   , mainly , even though not only , for literary types of analyses and for studies on the lexicon  ( Guiraud 1959 , Muller 1964 , Moskovich 1977) . Stochastic approaches to linguistic analyses have been strongly reevaluated in the past few years  , either for syntactic analysis ( Gm'side et al 1987 , Church 1988) , or for NLP applications ( Brown et al 1988) , or for semantic analysis ( Zemik 1989 , Smadja 1989) . Quantitative ( not statistical ) evidence one . g . word sense occurrences in a large corpus have been taken into account for lexicographic descriptions  ( Cobuild 1% 7 )  . 
Illere and in the following we have not translate diiomatic phrases and compounds  , because there is no point in giving the literal translation of the single words  . 

The claim of this paper is that the above types of linguistic information  ( iv )  , to be made available for our LDB , can be partially extracted by processing and analyzing very large text corpora  , with quantitativ c/st , ~zistic methods . 
2. The Italian Reference Corpus
The corpus ( see Zarnpolli 1988 ) on which we are now conducting our analysis is being produced by the ILC and an Italian publishing house  ( see Bindi et al 1989 )  . The project was begun in 1988 . The corpus now contains about 12 milfion words , and the first goal is to reach 20 million words by the end of "90  . When completed , the corpus will be balanced among journals , novels , manuals , scientific texts , ' grey'literature , etc . The corpus is presently unproportioned , because we first processed and inserted up to about  8 million words from journals , newspapers , mag~ines , etc . , while we are nt ) w inserting data fi'om novels and from the scientific and technical literature  . 
The present study is conducted on the first section of the corpus  , but we obviously intend to extend them lMys is to the other sections as soon as they become available  . 
We describe two types of quantitative an Myses whose aim is to extract information on : a  ) the strength of associalion between two words ; b ) fixed phrases or idioms . 
3 . The strength of association within word pairs As regards the first point we have used the method of measuring th cassociation ratio between two words as described by Church and llanks  ( 1989 )  . The value of the association ratio reflects the strength of the bond between the two words taken into account  . The method is very simple . 
The association ratio between any two words x and y appearing together in a window of five words in the corpus is based on the concept of " mutu M information " defined as: 
I(x , y ) = log ~
P ( x)P ( y ) where P is the probability . We refer to Church and Hank, . ~(1989, pp .  77-78 ) for a detailed explanation of the fommla and of how the association ratio slightly differs from it  , given that we are more interested here in the linguistic m~d lexicographic evaluation of the numerical results deriving from its application  . 
In addition to this we have introduced the measurement of the so ~ calle dispersion  , in order to obtain-linked to the association ratio-quanti ~ tative information on the distribution of the second word of the word pair in the selected window  . We wanted in fact to complete the simple frequency notion for a word pair with that of frequency stability or dispersion  , i . e . to add to the frequency a measure of how it is distributed over the different positions of the window  . In this way we evaluate the uniformity of repartition of frequency of the second word over the considered span  . We have used the formula described in detail in Bortolini et al  . (1971, pp .  2331) , even though used here for different purposes . 
Wegj ' vesome ex , ' unples in Table 1 , where fix , y ) is the frequency of occurrence of words x and y together and in this order in a window of  5 words , gap is equal to the number of words between x and y  ( if gap = 0 then x and y are immediately adjacent )  , f(x ) and f(y ) are the frequencies of occu ; rence of x and y independently in the corpus , as s . ratio is the result of application of the formula to xat ~ dy  , dispersion calculates how tile second word is distributed within the considered window  . 
This last information is very useflfl not only to evidence words belongi'ng to fixed phrases  , but especially while trying to evidence syntactic relationships  . If the dispersion is 0 or ncm " to !) , all or most of tile occurrences of tile second word are concentrated in the same position  . This means that the position and distance of the two words is always the same  , and it is the retbre a strong measure for evidencing " fixed phrases " or " compounds " with no variation inside  . When vice versa its value approaches 1 , y is almost equally distributed in the four positions of the considered span  . Thus , the combination of a not very lfigh ( but above a certain level ) as s . ratio with dispersion values near to 1 is more typical of syntactic types of collocations  , giving e . g . information on preposition algovernment . 
We wish to highligh the resome of the results achieved by the application of these statistical measures to the Italian corpus  , and mainly to evaluate their linguistic relevance . 
Table 1.
f(x , y ) gap=0 gap=1 gap=2 gap = 3
Stall Uniti 2047   2042   0 puntovista 832   0   831 opinione pubblica 272   272   0 prestoa 33   14   9 spendereper 36   8   8 e " arn bizioso 20   5   5 ~x )   0   5   5850   0   1   4396   0   0   657   6   4   85   9   11   183   5   5   115476 f ( y ) as s . ratio dispersion 215 910 . 34 0 . 003 1974 9 . 58 0 . 002 1315 11 . 30 0 . 000 120969 4 . 68 0 . 736 101862 3 . 95 0 . 921 123 3 . 49 1 . 000 2 55
From the present corpus of 8 , 032 , 667 occurrences ( tokens ) and 178 , 811 different word forms ( types ) , we obtained 26 , 473 , 263 word pairs ( tokens ) in a window of 5 words ( and not 32 , 000 , 000 , as the window is not extended beyond any strong punctuation mark  ) and 8 , 716 , 446 different word pairs ( types) . After discarding all the pairs with f(x , y ) < 4 , because they were too rare and of no linguistic relevance  ,  787 , 878 word pairs were obtained , which were eventually reduced to 322 , 7 18 after eliminating those with association ratio < 3   ( the pairs seem to be linguistically irrelevant below this level  )  . 
We must also recall that the data to which we have applied our measures are articles from many differentypes of newspapers  , journals , etc . - i . e . 
many short texts - , so that there is no bias towards clustering tendencies of words such as could appear in longer texts  , like entire novels . 
If we order the word pairs by decreasing value of the association ratio  , and examine the types of word combinations appearing in the different positions of the file  , we observe a different typology of word combinations according to the different levels : i  ) at the top ; ii ) in the center ; iii ) towards the lower interesting values , which for Italian seems to be a little higher than for 
English , i . e . around 35; iv ) below this significant value , until reaching the few negative values . 
For example at the top , i . e . with very high values ( ranging from 22 . 93 to about 15) , we find the following categories of word pairs : - proper nouns  , titles , etc . ( e . g . Oci Ciornie 20 . 6, Cvrano Bergerac2 0 . 1, Montgomery Clift 20 . 1,
Ursula Andress 19 . 9) ; foreign ( usually English ) compound words or fixed phrases ( value added 19 . 8, paxChristi 17 . 7, teenager 17 . 7, drug administration 17 . 3) ; Italian compounds of words belonging to specialized languages  , which almost never occur in eve~day language ( bismuto colloidale 20 . 1, tornografia as siale 19 . 8, marmitte catalitiche 19 . 6, nitrato amrnonio 19 . 5, accoppiatore acu_~tico 17 . 5);-cooccurring technical words , which again appear very rarely ( laring it it raeheiti20 . 3, idrologia climatologia 20 . 2, capperice triolini 19 . 6, prefettique stori 18 . 5, antisetticheant is pasmodiche 17 . 8) ; -fixed phrases or idioms whose component words are not frequent in ordinary language  ( volentenolente20 . 6, specchiet to allodole 18 . 8, blabla 18 . 00, batter ciglio 17 . 2, cartonianimati 16 . 5, spronbattuto 15 . 5) ; modification relations between low " frequency Adjectives and Nouns  ( so stantiviplurali19 . 9, fbr-bicine affilate 18 . 4, gradazioneal co\[ica 18 . 1, giub ~ bottianti proiettile 17 . 4, salmone affumicato 17 . 1); - . modification relations between Noun and Noun of a PP  , both of tow frequency ( cartinator nasole 18 . 3, filettialici 17 . 7, siepibosso 15 . 9, spicchioaglio 15 . 5) . 
These wordpair share the following properties : both the words are of very low frequency  , and almost always appear only together in the same context  . 
The characteristics of the different types of combinations appearing within the other ranges of the association ratio value  , i . e . from ii ) to iv ) above ( for example , at the value levels when more specific grammatical/syntactic information appears  )  , are very different and present quite interesting properties  . 
Thus , we have observed how the measure of the association ratio gives quantitative/statistical evidence to a number of lexical  , syntactic and semantic relationships between word pairs  . These relationships are essential for codification in an LDB  , and cannot be act fieved with the same " objectiveness "  , and certainly not to the same extent , by other means such as e . g . le ~ cographers ' intuition . 
iMnong the syntactic relationships , particularly relevant is the data which regards the prepositions marking the different arguments of verbs  , adjectives and nouns , together with their relative frequency . 
This is very important hfformation to be inserted in the LDB  ( especially of Italian )  , provided we have no dictionary source for this type of complementation as for example the Lon ~n an dictionary for Emglish  . Other syntactic data concern the type of sentential complementation  , mainly for the verbs . 
We notice , for example , that in M1 their iIfflections the verb rischiare < to risk > and the noun rischio only subcategorize for the preposition di < of >  ; the same holds for the adjective capace < able > . Tiffs infom~ationiss in ll?lya confirmation of their only possible prepositional complementizer  . The verb pensare < to think > is found with a , che , come , di < to , that , how , of > , i . e . with all its theoretict d possibilities of prepositional and sentential government  , while parl are < to speak > is more frequently associated only with con  , di < with , about > , and not with a < to > , which should be found in principle . DM-dere is mostly associated with con , da , bl < with , from , in > , and not with Ira < among > . These quantitative data can be associated to the different subcategorization frames and can be helpful for cornplementation rules  , to decide on ambiguous attachments of PPs . 
As a next step , we are trying to con'e late the different eomplementation patterns evidenced by some word pairs with other lexical information  ( fbund in the environment of these th'st word pairs  ) which can be used as a clue for semantic disambiguation  . For example , if we take the word pairs divide recon , dividered a , dividere in , we must look at the surrounding context and see which generalizations can be done at the semantic level for  56   3 the three types of subcategorization . These may in fact correspond to different word senses  . 
Vmy useful data of both syntactic and lexical /semantic relevance concern the socalled support verbs  ( see Gross 1982 ) for Nouns ( usually deverbal or Action nouns ) or for Adjectives . WE observe for example : compiere accertamenti/0 . 8 fare , afjT damento 8 . 1 ayere ( lcee . ~ so 5 . 3 condwre:'e/fetmare analisi8 . 3/7 . 3 avutoaccoglienza 8 . 0 prendere decision e 9 . 7 rendere accettabile 8 . 9 re:~dere accessibile 9 . 4 This sort of intonnation on support verbs is of cs sential importance for language generation  ( see Mel'cuk , Polguere 1988) , and cannot be predicted in may other way , but can only be given either by observation or by introspection  . The automatic collection of these data is thu:s an impovtm:t shortcu towards their extensive coverage in a I  , DB . 
Theirse . mantics cm ~ be rather easih ' inferred by the type of support verb  ( there is a iinite list of them ) and given by rule . 
Purely semantic data mainly regard typical collocations  , e . g . between Adjective and Noun ( see below ) , or between Verb and : \d verb , or between \ : art ) and Lvpical Subjects and : or Objects ( flond are cohmia/I . 4, abbas : are coesterolo\]1 . 3, di~toggereattet ~ . Tiotze 10 . 9, attira reaztet ; 2iotze/0 . 7, pre . ~t are attenzion e10 . 5, sparo"co"po10 . 6) . 
Interesting dma are also found concerning the semantic field of c crtain wo  , ds , and obvious h . ' words bel , mging to a fixed phrase . For cooccurrences of ?' , ouns b clong in a , to the same semantic field an exmnple is : abbig /iame moacces  . ~ ori9 . 6 chiliacce . ssori9 . 4 her . u ? aeces . ~ ori9 . 3: carpe accessori 9 . 0 Examples of fixed and or idiomatic phrases :: re : battutaarresto  11  . 7(t ) attutad ' arresto ) pohnone acetate II . 6 ( pohnoned'acciaio ) primoacchito 10 . 1  ( diprimo acchito ) As this method is only used to work on couples of words  , it is clear that we do not generally obtain the whole phrase  . It is for this reason that we have developed , especially for this type of data , other quantitative tools which are described in section  4  , whose results will supplcm cn those provid cd by this method  . 
A number of different observations can be made for the word pairs  , according to whether they are sorted on the right or the left word  . If we examine the left contexts ( i . e . if ' words arc ordered on tt , eright ) , we arc more likely to gather information one . g . the Nouns which are typically modified by " a given t bllowing Adjective  ( so triso accattivat2te\]13 ; luce acce cante 10 . 8; h ? ceacces a 8 . 7, radioace e aa 9 . 7, co/oriaecesi10 . 0, toniacce si1/ . 2, for no acce : o10 . 7, ji~o coacceso8 . 5) . If vice versa we examine the right contexts , it is easier to collect data on the Nouns which are typically modified by a given preceding Adjective  ( costanteaumee ~ to 7 . 6 . co . ~ lante contal to 6 . 4, costante miglioramemo7 . 9, co . ~tan\[eriferitnenlo7 . 4, costantetet ~ peratura 8 . 1) . 
In the left contexts again we find together data which regard which Adjectives m'e typical premodifiers of a given Noun  ( for teae cel 2zo8 . 6, in confimdibile aecento 12 . 0, " difficile accesso 5 . 3, facile accesso 5 . 7, libero accesso 7 . 5, " buena acco-glienza 8 . 7; a mice a more 4 . & 1) uo : 2 amo ; e3 . ,1 . 
el errzoa more 7 . 0, grandeamo ,,' e5 . 2 . im ? ro~q % oa more 5 . .5, u#imo amore , f . 4, vecchioamore 3 . 7 . ; ' ereamore 3 . 7) , or which types of Nouns arc the governors of PPs with a given Noun as head  ( co , > tro I/o armament i 8 . 9, limit a zionear mamet ? ri/1 . ,? . 
riduzionear mamenti9 . t , set to reat w:a . , ? ze~m0 . 9) . 
When analyz hag the left contexts , we also find high association ratios for certain types : ~! " gammatieal structure such as : comD  . , ur~d\e . ,bs ( with essere < to be > or re'ere , " to have ;> ask'ft word) , rcfle . ,dve or intransitive propomina ! - orbs ( with tile par'icle . viontile left ), reciprt ~ ca : ! verb . , . 
with the particles ci , ri ), etc . A ! t ' , hose types of data are obviously iml , On ant for the c : cazio > < : ~ . ~':: ne?haustive LDB . 
As a final remark we can add that it would ce : ainlv be use ihl to make the same ca ! cul:  , ,tic , : : sonatagged ( for POS ) corpus , in order to ob~ait : relevant inf0nnation for the Iemmas ; however , wernust observe that different word forms c , f the same ~ . OIY lbllid\[( . 3 ! ILtl len-ana often present very different '- " ' properties  , both at the grammatical syntactic level and at the lexieal '  . , , cmanticlevel . \ V h ~; n compacting m , lommtic . n f0r as in ~ clcmma we must therefore be carclhl not to losed at awl fich are relevant oparticular inflected forms  . This kind of information is again particularly ' import mutbrpractical NI~P applications  . 
4. Fixed phrases and idioms
Mair dy for the detection of " stereotypes " in texts we have implemented and are now refining other quantitative/statistical tools not limited to couples of words  . 
In order to collect data concerning specifically fixed phrases or multiword units  , we first calculated the frequency of occunence in the corpus of all identical couples  , triples , and so on , up to seven-word syntag q ns . 
Also for this data wc calculated the di ~; persio : ~ , and we also cM culated the socalled use Ne . Also usage is defined according to Bortolinict al  . (1971) as : U = FI ), i . e . \[; sage equal to Frequent > by 457
Table 2.
'85"86'87'88 Totall ) is p . 17 sage perlaprim avolta 1361 1911 1123 489 0 . 96 468 . 13 dalpunto divista 6476 93773 100 . 92 286 . 20 ingustoilmon do 7378 6066 2770 . 9426 l . 22 unveroe proprio 43 232 125 112 0 . 82 9\[ . 74 ( Novels ) Dispersion . It is therefore equal to Frequency when the word is uniformly distributed in the different years  ( and genres )  , m : d is equal to 0 when D is persion is 0 , i . e . if all occurrences were concentrated in as in ~ e year  ( or genre )  . L'sage is as nearer to Frequency as much the distribution is uniform  , and decreases proportionally while
I ) is persion is decreasing..
In this case dispersion and usage werc first calculated on the sections of the corpus which refer to the  4   3'cars of publication of the journals ( from 1985 to 1988 )  , inc , rdertopoint out , :-~_mong others , the appearance ( or disappearance ) of phrases , compounds , and stereotypes in gcneral . We then compared as vbset of all the prcss data with a subset of novels of analogous size  , and again calculate dispersion midusage in order to evidence eventual difference of distributkm of these fixed phrases between t'ress and novels  . 
'\[ he data ( of the two types ) were then so ~ cd in different ways : by alphabetical order of then-: uples  . by frcque :: cyoi occurrence of the n-tuples , by dispcr . qou , by: . : sage . l : rome a chordering we anther data ~ hiei:can be used in a variety of ways or can evidence different bpes of phenomena  .   , - ~ ncx ~ impl cat : hebcg inniug of the filc of the quad:u:'!cse '  . dcrcdb\~:' . . , :- ge ( in decreasing order ) is I\mnd in Table 2 ( \ ~ i thiigurc sior disp crsion and usage c , : : i\cop . coming press data , i . e . the first four columns : the , : elu ,/ v . n for Novels , of the s~m:esize : is each ) - era " cc , lumn . has been inserted in the table from the second comparison just for curiosity  )  . 
Fhc data i . e . : d I then-tuples of different lengths , were aiso : nerged in a single file , to evidence the precise length of each Wen phrase  . For exa_mple , vetoe proyrio is in a , ' rex high position for its frequency in the set of tripies  , but the fact that unvetoe/~roprio is also in a very high position in the set of quadruples memas that this is the size of the ' true fixed phrase  '  . Other observations on the linguistic results evidenced by this method will be made in the presentation  . 
5. Final remarks
In the next months we intend to experiment with other statistical formulas  ( e . g . those used by Smadja and Choueka ) on the corpus ( which will ' also contain the novels and other types of texts  )  . 
The first stage of the research consists in a careful linguistic analysis of the results obtained by the different statistic N tools we are now implementing and applying  . By this analysis performed according to different parameters  , both from the slatistical and linguistic , lexicographic viewpoints-wea ~ imatachieving a twofold objective  . On the one side wemmat setting up the beginning of a sound methodology to semi-automatize the extraction of at least part of the relevant syntactic : semantic relationships flom the corpus : on the other : side we hope we shall be able to build a model of the " actuat " modification and complementation relations  ( out of the theoretical a priori possibilities )  , "> f the " actual " lcxical collocations , of the " actual " stcre(~types in the
Italian language.
One of the claims of this pro\] ; : cti'st tmt the linguistic information embodi , ed in all these quite different types of lexica I collocations - c  , nc , : they have been supplied in a ~ ystemati , : vc'tv by a computational lexicon which is also ar?p  ,  . ot~:tted "! brfrequency can be helpfult, . ) r!c: , :ic , d disambiguation i analysis and cmci a If br lexical selection in generation  . Our method should be seen as a strategy to obtain in a semiautomatic way  , and for a large portion of the lexicen , afi ~ rmali . ,:ation of many of the types of lexical relations coded  , ior example , in the_MeI'cuk lexicon . " Il- , is should be an enhancement both for a rnore concr < e and objective lexicography  ( the results will be in fact evaluated in the next months in a true lexicographic environment  )  , and t bramore comprehensive : rodq\]ata-based " li::g:dstics  . 

We wish toth:m kour Referees for useful comments : rod suggestions  , and A . Zampo ! li for helpful discussions . 

Bindi , R . , M . .Menachini , P . Orsolini , ( lq8% , "Italian Reference Corpus " , lI . C-'lI . N-3, Pisa . 
Bortolini , U . , C . Tagliavini , A . Zampolli , ( t971) , Lessico di Frequenza della LiI Nualtalia ~ Ta
Contemporanea , Garzanti , Nlilano.
Brown , P . , Cocke , J . , Della Pietra , S . , Della Pietra , V . , Jelinek , F . , Mercer , R . , Roossin , P . , (1988) , "A statistic N approach to language translation " , Proceeding so J " the 27th   b2ternational Cotference on Computafio ~ zal Linguistics , Budapest . 
Calzolari , N . , (1984) , "Detecting patterns in a I ~ exical Database " , Proceedings of the/Otk 5   8   5 ~' International Conference on Computational
Linguistics , Stanford ( CA ), 170-173.
Calz . olm-i , N . , (1988) , ': Fhe dictionary and the thesaurus can be combined "  , in M . Evens ( ed . ) , Relational Models of the Lexicon , Studies in Natural I , anguage Processing , Cambridge
University Press , Cambridge , 75-96.
Calzolari , N . , (1989) , '% exical Databases , and Textual Corpora : perspectives of integration for a Lexical Knowledge Base "  , Proceedings of the/st International Lexical Acquisition Workshop  , 1) et roit , Michigan . 
Calzolari , N . , E . Picchi ,  (1988) , " Acquisition of semantic intbrmation from ml online dictionary "  , Proceedings of the I2th International Conference on Computation all . inguistics , Budapest , I Iungary , 8792 . 
Choueka , Y . , (1988), " I . ooking for needles in a haystack " , Proceedings of the RIAO ,  609-623 . 
Church , K . , (1988) , " e\stochastic parts program and noun phrase parser t brun restricted text "  , Proceedings of the 2nd ACL Conference on
Applied Yatural Langucc?e Processing.
Church K . , P . I h m k s ,  (1989) , "% Vord association norms , mutual int brrnation and lexicography " , Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , 
Vancouver , British Columbia , 76-83.
Cobuild , (1987), Collins Cobuild English Language
Dictionary , Collins , Glasgow.
Garside , R . , Leech , G . , Sampson , G . , (1987) , The Computational Analysis of English-a corpus based approach  , Lonmnan , l . ondon . 
Gross , M . , (1982) , " On the notion of support verb " , semhmrat the Simon Fraser University , B . C . 

Guiraud , P . , (1959) , Probleme set methodes delastatistique linguistique  , D . Reidel , I ) ordrecht . 
Ilindlc , D . , (1989) , " Acquiring disambiguation rules from text " , Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Vancouver , British Columbia ,  118-125 . 
Mel'cuk , I . , Polgmere , A . , (1988) , "A formal Icxicon in Memfing-Text theory " , Computational
Linguistics , 13(3-4).
Muller , Ch . , (1964), Essaide Statistique Lexica/e,
Klincksiek , Paris.
Muller , Ch . , (1965) , " Frequencc , dispersion et usage : a propos des dictionnaires defiequence "  , 
Cahiers de , Lexicologie , I1, 32-42.
Moskovitch , W . A . , (1977) , " Polyscmy in natural and artificial ( phmned ) languages " , S , ~/// . , Journal of Linguistic Cak'u/us , Skriptor ,  1 , 5-2g . 
Smadja , J . , (1989) , " Macrocoding the lexicon with cooccurrence knowledge "  , Proceeding . s"q:z/:e\]qrstInternationall . exical:1cqui . ritio:z
Workshop , Detroit , Michigan.
Webster , M . , M . Marcus ,  (1989) , ":\uto:natic acquisition of the lexical semantics of verbs from sentence frames "  , Proceedings O~dw 2 ~':/t Annual Meeting o /" the Association_/br Computation all  . i : ~ guistics , Vmacouver , lh-i~ish
Columbia , 177-184.
Zarnpolli , A . , (1988), " Progetto Strategic, . Uetodiestrumentiperl:lndustria delle Li ~ zgue : : ella collaborazione internaAonale "  , ILC-CNR , Pica . 
Zemik , U . , (1989) , " Paradigms in lexical acquisition " , Proceed in s d so J " the \[' ir . ~t International Lexica / . , ic quifftion I Vorks /', o /),
Detroit , Michigan.

