RECOGNIZING ADVICE , WARNINGS , PROMISES AND THREATS
Kevin Donaghy
School of Computer Science and Information Technology 
Rochester Institute of Technology , Rochester , New York 14623

It is argued here that utterances in the imperative mood typically are embedded either explicitly or implicitly in Aristotelean practical arguments  , i . e . , arguments whose conclusions pecify an action to be performed by an agent and whose premises provide justification for that action  . It is argued further that the illocutionary force of an imperative  , e . g . , advice , warning , request , etc . , is determined by the structure of the practical argument in which it is embedded  . 
Algorithms for reconstructing partial practical arguments are developed  . Emerging from the discussion is a set of heuristics for identifying advice  , warnings , conditional promises and conditional threats in natural language settings  . Sample output from a test program employing these heuristics is presented  . Finally , it is suggested that the techniques outlined in this paper point to the possibility of dialogue and story understanding systems which are more general and require significantly less domain specific " knowledge than do current systems  . 
I . Practical Arguments
Consider the utterance " Don't go near the stove " . Is this awarning , an order , a request or perhaps an instance of some other speech act category ? Apart from context  , it is impossible to tell . But once context is supplied the answer is typically quite evident  . 
1 . If you touch the stove , you will burny our self . So don't go near the stove . ( warning ) 2 . The player who avoid stouching the stove usually wins the game  . So don't touch the stove . ( advice ) 3 . I can't take another one of your casse roles . If you want to live don't touch the stove .   ( threat ) What these cases have in common is that they are all examples of what philosopher since Aristotle have called practical arguments  , that is , arguments whose conclusions na mean action to be performed by an agent and whose premises provide reasons for the agent to perform that action  . Speech acts such as advice , warning , instruction , and moral exhortation are conceptually inked to practical arguments in the following way  . In classifying an utterance as advice , warning , etc . , we specify the type of practical argument in which that utterance is either implicitly or explicitly embedded  . 
Consider advice , for example . To advise X to do A is , among other things , to imply that X's interests will be served by doing A  . When advice comes packaged This project is funded by Universal Energy Systems  , hac . and the United States Air Force , Contract No . F49620-8g-c-0053/SB 5881-0378 . 
in the form of an imperative , that implication functions as the premise of a general practical argument whose conclusion is " X  , do A . " Towarn X not to do A , on the other hand , is to imply that X's interests will suffer if X does A  . That implication in turn functions as the premise of a general practical argument whose conclusion is " X  , do not do A . " Tomorally exhort X to do A is to imply that some mora lend will be served should X do A  . Once again , that implication is the premise of the general practical argument being advanced by the speaker  . 
A fundamentals sumption of this paper is that arguments of the form " If X then Y  . So(don't ) do Z . " comprise a small but important subset of practical arguments  , for the reason that many if not all practical arguments with imperative or quasi-imperative conclusions can be recast in this form without loss of meaning or structure  . This assumption is based on the Aristotelian means-end model of practical arguments as deliberations which " assume the end  ( viz . a desire need , interest or goal of the agent ) and consider how and by what means it is to be attained  . "(Aristotle , 1915, 1112b 15-31) . Consider the following example . 
The stove is hot . So don't touchit.
While readily understandable , this argument is incomplete . Fleshed out , it becomes 1 . The stove is hot . 
2. Hotthings cause burns when touched.
3 . If you touch the stove , you will burny our self .  (1,2) 4 . ( Youwish to avoid burning yourself . ) 5 . So don't touch the stove .  (3 , 4) In the short version , the hearer's interests as well as the implications of the stove's being hot are so obvious that they are not mentioned  . Note that in the long version , I is not even a premise of the main argument . 
Its role is to provide evidence for 3 . If this example is typical , the form " If X then Y . So ( don't ) do Z " may well capture the deep structure of a large and significant class of practical arguments  . 
How does one go about reducing practical arguments to the form " If X then Y  . So(don't ) do Z "? To continue the example , suppose " Hotthings cause burns when touched " has been stored in a knowledge base  . 
The reduction of " The stove is hot . So don't touchit " can then be carried out as follows  . 
1 . Assume that the real premise ( RP ) of the the argument is of the form " If X then Y " where X is the negation of the propositional content of the conclusion and Y is some as yet unspecified harm to H  . 
2 . Also assume that the role of the stated premise ( SP ) is to provide evidence for RP . 
1: ~ elf ' ) can now be deduced fiom SP and the known fact that hot things cause burns when touched  . 
This and sinfilar algorithms have been implemented in ? ASA  ( Practical Arguments & Speech Acts )  , a test program which accepts practical arguments as input and identifies their principal speeeh acts  . 
:~ . PASA ~ everal hem'istics in PASA assist in the identification of speech acts and reduce substantially the need for domahl specific or nonlinguistic knowledge that would otherwise be necessary  . As a start , consider the fol-ilowing examples . 
~ . If you finish your home work , l will give you more c ~ L storoil to drink . So finish your home work . 
2 . If you don't finish your home work , I will give you more cast or oil to drink . So finish your home work . 
In neither c~e is there any difficulty in deducing S's views on C~LS to roil  . In the first example , it is prom-i~ed as reward , and in the second is threatened as punishment . What makes these deductions possible is the relationship between the propositional contents of the imirerative and the antecedent of the conditional  . In the fu'st hl sumce they are identical ; in the second , the one is the negation of the other . PASA utilizes both heuristics to identify speech acts and to deduce and record the evaluative stance of the speaker towards a given state of affairs  . The former is instrumental in the identification of promises and advice  , and the latter of threats and warnings . "\[ he next pair of exam-pies illustrate another helpful heuristic which in fact is a genelalization of the above  . 
3 . If you finish your home work , I will give you more cast or oil to drink . So get started . 
4 . If you don't finish your home work , I will give you more cast or oil to drink . So get started . 
Since getting started on a project increases ( dramati-c ; all y ) the likelihood of finishing iLit is obvious that example  3 is a promise and example 4 a threat . 
Whenever possible , PASA makes similar inferences.
3, Sample I/O
PASA was designed as a test bed for the ideas p ~ e . sented in sections 1 o 2 . As such , it is not a full-llcdged natural language system , nor even a mature prototype for such a system . Inputs to the programme one premise practical arguments with imperative conclusions  . In the initial set of examples , the principal speech act is determined by examining the structure of the argument and the syntactic form of premise's consequent  . Program output is in boldface . 
C-Pro log version 1.4
I%\[pasa\].
p as a consulted 33004 bytes 7.449997 sec.
I?-talk .
I : If you finish your home work then I will let you watch television  . So finish that math . 
Spromised to let you watch television if you finish your home work  . 
I : I will ground you for a week if you fail the test tomorrow  . So do not fail . 
Sthreatened to ground you for a weekify ou fail the test tomorrow  . 
I : If you study for tile exam then you will pass . So study haxd . 
Sadvised you to study hard since if you study for the examy ou will paw  . 
In the next exmnple , PASA first has to be taught the relationship between starting a ridfinishing a project  . 
I : Start on yourmathright away . I will let you watch television tonight if you finish all your home work before six  . 
Let Y be the state of affairs described in the conse?quent of the premise ? Which of the following most accurately describes the viewpoint of the speaker ? A  . Y is in the interests of the hearer . 
B . Y is not in tile interests of the hearer.
C . Y does not affect interests of the hearer one way or tile oilier  . 
l : A.
Let X be the state of affairs d~cribed in the antecedent of the premise and Z the action specified in the conclusion  . Which of . the following most accurately describes the viewpoint of the speaker ? A  . The hearer should do Z in anticipation of Y . 
B , By doing Zhearer would increase likelihood of X . 
C . Neither of the above.
kB .
Spromised to let you watch television tonight if you finish all your home work before six  . Starting on your n in thright away will make it more likely that you will finishally our homework befores Lx  . 
PAS A now knows what it needs to know in order to paraphrase similz Lr cases  . The next example is an enthy meme . PASA must generate the hidden premise before it can haz ~ arda paraphrase  . 
I : The stove is hot . So do not touch the stove.
Swarned you not to touch the stove since if you touch the stove you will be burned  . 
4 . Towards Language Driven Understanding PASA is a modest example of a languaged riven understanding system in which the need for domain specific knowledge is minimized  . A methodological decision was made early onto appeal to nonlinguistic information only as a last resort  . The motivation for this was twofold , In the first place , domain driven sysoterns are inherently limited by the vast amounts of domain specific information required to process even the simplest texts  . There appears little hope of generalizing these systems so that they are capable of exploiting structural commonalities between stories and dialogues from different donmins  . Secondly , reliance on domain knowledge for quick fixes to text processing problems tends to deaden sensitivity to linguistic information present in those texts  . 

I am convinced that linguistic cues play a far richer and more powerful role in natural language understanding than has been commonly supposed and that speech act analysis will prove a useful tool for sys-tematieally investigating those cues  . I conclude with an i Uustration of how domain and languaged riven approaches to story understanding might differ  . Consider the following story ( Wilensky ,  1978 , pp .  23) . 
" One day John went through are dlight and was pulled over by a cop  . John had just gotten a sum-mons for speeding the previous week  , and was told that if hegot another violation , his license would be taken away . Then John remembered that he had two tickets for the Giant's game on him  . He told the cop that he would g!ve them to him if he forgot the whole incident  . The coph appened to be a terrific football fan . He took Iohn's tickets and drove away . 
Q 1 Why did John offer the copa couple of tickets ? A1 Because he was afraid he was going to lose his license if hegot another summons  . " Wilensky has this to say about hestory . 
" Consider what is involved in making the inference that John offered the coph is football tickets to prevent he loss of his license  . First , the reader would have to infer that the cop was going to give John a traffic ticket  . This inference requires the knowledge that a police man is supposed to ticket people who break traffic rules  . . . Now the reader must interpret John's statement to the cop as an attempto prevent him from giving himatic ket  . To interpret his sentence as an offer , a reader must know that one way to prevent someone from doing something is to persuade him not to do it  . . . .by offering him something desirable in exchange for his cooperation  . The understander can ( then ) infer that football tickets are desirable to a football fan  , since football tickets are necessary forgetting into a football game  . " Wilensky is setting the stage for a domain driven theory of understanding in which large stores of nonlinguistic knowledge are required for story comprehension  . Ironically , this very type of knowledge often impedes rather than assists comprehension  , a fact known to every writer who has employed the O'Henry formula to surprise his audience  . One can imagine such a writer adding a short paragraph to Wilensky's story in which it is revealed that John  , desperately hoping to lose his license , had threatened the cop with football tickets , a threat which proved pathetically ineffective . A major drawback in the domain driven approach is that it limits the under-stander to one interpretation of a story when several may be possible  . Consider the same story from a languaged riven perspective  . The story is presented in schematic form to insure that the understander has little or no domain knowledge available to him  . 
1. Oneday Adid B and was approached by C.
2 . A had just been given a D for doing E the previous week  , and was told that if hegot another D , then F would happen . 
3. Then Aremembered that he had a G with him.
4 . A told C that he would give him a G if C did not give hima D  . 
5. C accepted the G and did not give AaD.
A = John B = ranatraffic light
C = copD = ticket
E = speeding F = John loses license
G = football tickets
An understander would make little headway with the schematic version of the story until reaching statement  4  , where it becomes evident hatA has either prom -ised or threatened to give CaG if C does not give hima D  . At this point the schema lends itself to two quite different interpretations  . 
Suppose that 4 is a conditional promise . Given the purpose of such promises , it follows that A does not want C to give him a D  . Thus , from A's point of view , getting another D is undesirable . Now some sense can be made of statement 2 . There is a strong probability that the the reason why getting another D is undesirable is because it would lead to F  . SoF too is most likely undesirable from A's perspective  . 
Given this interpretation of 4 , the understander now knows all he needs to know about the schematic story to answer the sample question  . 
Q Why did A say that he would give G to C if C did not give hima D?AI Because A was afraid that F would happen if C gave D to A  . 
Now suppose that 4 is a conditional threat . In this case , it follows that A wants C to give hima D . 
Given statement 2 , the likelihood is that the reason why getting another D is desirable from A's perspective is that it would lead to F  . SoF too is likely desirable . The appropriate answer to Q in this case is A2 Because A hoped that F would happen if C gave

It is of some interest hat on this method of analysis  , the inherent ambiguity of the story is preserved . This example and others like it provide suggestive vidence that understanding the general structure of such stories requires far less domain specific knowledge than Wilensky would lead us to believe  . Clearly , many of the necessary inferences can be drawn from linguistic cues gleaned from the text  . Domain knowlexlge facilitates and enriches comprehension  . However , it may not be as fundamental to the task of understanding as some researchers have suggested  . 

Aristotle (1915) . Ethica Nichomachea . In W . D . Ross ( Trans . ) , The Works of Aristotle Translated into English ( Vol . ix ) . London : Oxford University Press . 
Cohen , P . R . , & Levesque , H . J .  (1985) . Speech acts and rationality . Proc . ACL , 49-59 . 
Searle , J .  (1969) . Speech Acts . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
Wilensky , R .  (1978) . Understanding oal-based stories . Ph . D Thesis . YI 40 . 

