Incremental Parsing and Reason Maintenance
Mats Wi % n
Department of Computer and Information Science
LinkSping University
S-58183 Link Sping , Sweden
mgw@ida.liu.se

The purpose of this paper is to compare different ways of adopting reason-maintenance techniques in incremental parsing  ( and interpretation )  . A reason-maintenance system supports incremental t brmation and revision of beliefs  . By viewing the construction of partial analyses of a text as analogous to forming beliefs about the meanings of its parts  , a relation between parsing and reason maintenance can be conceived  . In line with this , reason maintenance can bcused for realizing a strong notion of incremental parsing  , allowing for revisions of previous analyses . 
Moreover , an assumption-based reason-maintenance system ( ATMS ) can be used to support eftieicnt comparisons of ( competing ) interpretations . The paper argues for an approach which is an extension of chart parsing  , but which also can be seen as a system consisting of an inference ngine  ( the parser proper ) coupled with a simplified ATMS . 
Background and Introduction
This paper focuses on the problem of incremental parsing  ( and to some extent interpretation )  ; in particular , how reason-maintenance techniques can be used to achieve a strong notion of incrementality allowing for piecemeal construction  , revision , and comp ; ~ rison of partial analyses . 
Human language understanding is apparently incremental in the sense of proceeding in a piece meal fashion  , ( ideally ) carried out in small , grad=ual steps as each word is encountered ( Tyler and Marslen-Wilson 1977 , Marslen-Wilson and Tyler 1980) . Work on incremental parsing and interpretation is typically motivated by a desire to model  , or mimic , ( aspects of ) this behaviour , for example , Bobrow and Webber (1980) , Ades and Steedman (1982) , Mellish (1985) , Pulman (1985) , and Haddock (1987~1988~1990) . 
t lowever , there are also clearcut computational reasons for trying to attain incrernentality  . Sparked This research as been supported by the National Swedish 
Board for Technical Development.
off by the rapid development of increasingly powerful  , distributed computer hardware , a paradigm of " immediate computation " is gaining popularity in interactive applications like WYSIWYG word processing  , spread sheet programs , and programming-language ditors ( Reps and Teitelbaum 1984 ,  1987) . 
It is interesting to consider similar systems applied to interactive natural language processing  . The point is that incrementality is a prerequisite of there actiw ~  , real ~ time-based behaviour of such systems . 
Furthermore , systems that mix for example deictic and natural language input require that linguistic status be given to sentence fragments  , thus demanding incremental analysis ( Kobsa et al 1986 )  . 
One body of work which appears to be use fiflin incremental parsing and interpretation is re  , on ( or truth ) maintenance JA reason-maintenance system ( RMS ) supports incremental formation and revision of beliefs  . By viewing the construction of partial analyses of a text as analogous to forming beliefs about the meanings of its parts  , a relation between parsing and reason maintenance can be conceived  . 
An RMS is coupled with an inference ngine ( for example , a parser ) which makes inferences within the problem domain , and the overall , combined system can be seen as an inferential problem solver  . 
The RMS makes use of two data structures , nodes and justifications . A node represents a datum provided by the inference ngine  , such as an assumption or an inferred proposition . Whenever a datum is inferred from a conjunction of other data  , the RMS records this dependency ms a justification which relates the respective nodes  . The RMS thus keeps track of what data are believed and disbelieved  , and why , given the inferences made so far . 
The traditional approach , justification-based reason maintenance , JTMS ( Doyle 1979) , is to maintain a ( global ) belief by associating with each node a status of in  ( indicating belief in the corresponding datum ) or out ( indicating lack of belief in the datum ) such that every justification is satisfied . 2 The entire set of ( consistent ) in data make up the cur-1 For an excellent introduction to reason maintenance  , see
Reinfrank (1989).
2I prefer the term " reason maintenance " but use the standard abbreviations " ATMS " and " JTMS "   ( where " T " stands for " truth " )  . 
1287 rent context ( belief , interpretation 3) . In case of a contradiction , dependency-directed backtracking is invoked to identify the inconsistent assumptions and enable retraction of some of them  . 
A more recent approach is assumption-based reason maintenance  , ATMS ( de Kleer 1986) , which supports problem solving in multiple contexts simultaneously  . . . . there is no need to keep the overall database consistent as in the JTMS  . Thus , the ATMS is oriented towards finding all solutions  , whereas a JTMS is oriented towards finding only one solution  . In this and other respects , an ATMS resembles chart parsing ( Kay 1980 , Thompson and Ritchie 1984) , something which will be further dealt with below . Each ATMS node has a label with information about the minimal sets of assumptions on which it ultimately depends  . Thus , rather than associating explicit in/out information with nodes  , the status of a node with respect o a context can be determined by comparing the label of the node with the assumptions that underlie the context  . There is no dependency-directed backtracking in an ATMS since contradictions do not pose any problem and the assumptions underlying a contradiction are directly identifiable  . 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows : Sections  2 and 3 review and compare various ways of adopting JTMS and ATMS techniques in parsing and interpretation  . Section 4 carries on with discussing specifically how an A TMS-style system can be used in various applications of incremental parsing and interpretation  , and , finally , section 5 smn-marizes the conclusions . 
23 TMS-Style Approaches 2.1 Overview
An early example of adopting reason maintenance in parsing  ( more precisely , story analysis ) is the system RESUND ( O'Rorke1983 )  . O'Rorke considers the problem of correcting inferences  4 that conflict with subsequent information in the story  . He combines the story processor with a JTMS , using dependency-directed backtracking to determine incompatible assumptions  , and a collection of preference heuristics to choose from among candidate solutions  . 53 Sense-semantic interpretation ; possibly also contextual interpretation . 
4 An inference here corresponds to a selection ( assumption ) of a schema , a script-like knowledge structure used for deriving information ot explicitly mentioned in the text  . 
~ Other work , t t mugh not adopting down right JTMSs , makes use of somewhat similar techniques for the purpose of recovering from erroneous inferences  . For example , Jacobs (1988) , in dealing with the problem of " concretion "-- developing a most specific or metaphorical interpretation--lets his system  , TRUMP , treat each interpretation as an assumption . 
If an assumed interpretation results in a contradiction  , dependencies are used to discard ( chains of ) assumptions that conflict with the preferred interpretation  . Conflicting information is simply thrown away , ~hus in a sense making the system even More recently  , Zernik and Brown ( 1988 ) suggest a coupling of a DCG parser with a JTMS , both of which are embedded in a Prolog system . The DCG is extended with default rules to enable nonmonotonic reasoning  . These defaults are used to guide the entire parsing and interpretation process  . The division of labour is as follows : Given a new piece of input  , the parser outputs an ( extended ) analysis in the form of a dependency network . This , in turn , is fed to the JTMS , resulting in an updated in ~ out labelling of the network corresponding to the currently believed interpretation  . The purpose of the JTMS is to obtain a system which avoids  ( chronological ) backtracking and instead handles in consistent information  ( ambiguities ) by choosing to believe a different portion of the previous inferences  . For example , in parsing a sentence like " The childs old by his parents was found a live "  ( cf . Zernik and Brown 1988:802) , the system initially assumes " the child " to be the agent since the " default voice " is considered to be " active "  . When later the word " by " is parsed , a nonmonotonic supporter of " active " becomes in  , thus making " active " become out and " the child " be conside redirect object  . 
2.2 Problems
This section dis'cusse some general problems of JTMSs and JTMS-style approaches to increment M parsing with special reference to the framework of Zernik and Brown  ( 1988 ) whose notion of parsing comes closes to the one considered here  . 
Perhaps the most important characteristic of a JTMS is that it insists on global consistency  ; in other words , it is limited to one single solution ( one context ) at a time : " At each point \[ presumably after each new word \]  , the parser must deposita hypothesis based on a partial set of clues  , a hypothesis which might later be retracted . " ( Zernik and Brown 1986:802 . ) Unfortunately , in a domain like natural language analysis where local ambiguity constantly plagues the parser within consistent information  , this becomes problematic . First of all , when the set of assumptions admits multiple solutions  , these cannot be compared : since a JTMS only allows one context  , there is simply no way to examine two sets of beliefs simultaneously in order to gauge their relative strengths  . 
Furthermore , upon each incremental change ( i . e . , parsing of a new word ) , new JTMS labellings have more insistent on consistency than a JTMS  . Story processors like ARTHUR ( Granger 1980) , FAUSTUS ( Norvig 1983) , and ATLAST ( Eiselt 1987 ) keep track of successive ( candidate ) inferences and reconside rejected ones when faced with conflicting information  . It could finally be mentioned that in the postscripto his book  , Mellish ( 1985:114 ) suggests a combination of chart parsing and JTMS , but does not further developt iffs . 
2882 to be comlmted t br the network . If , in the com'se of this , a contradiction arises-tile probability of which increases with the size of the grammar  , i . e . , with the number of ( l ) oten tially competing ) default rules dependency-directed backtracking h ~s to be invoked to identify the sources of the contradiction and resolve the conllict  . This requires extensive search and often results in new contradictions  . 
Until all conflicts are resolved , the status of some nodes may have changed between in and out several times  . ' l?hus , " tile machinery is cumbersome " ( de Kleer 1986:139 ) fiA further problern is that their fl'erence engine works on only one part of the search space at a time  . 
For example , if a word has two senses , only one of them will be worked on by the parser . But all that is known in such a ca , se is that both senses cannot be part of the same final solution  ; it may still be important od raw int ~ rences Dora them independently  . 
For further discussion of these and other problems in connection with JTMSs  , seede Kleer (1986:138 ft . ) . 
3 ATMS-Style Approaches 3.1 Overview
Charniak and Gohlman ( 1988 ) make use of an NI ) MS for keeping track of alternatives arising in sense-semantic and co  , ltexl ; ual interpretation , for example , wil . h respect to word sense , case , and noun phrase reference . Each al Iernative is treated as an ATM Sassun ~ l ) tion and is fnr~her more assigned a pro/m-bility . By comparing segs of assumpl . ioi~s underlying various potential interpret a . lions , the system can choose the " best " alternative , i . e . , the one with the highest probability . 
Nagao ( 1989 ) provides an approach where ditfer-ent assumptions about sentence interpretations constitute different " worlds " of formulae in a way which resembles an ATMS representation  . A characteristic of these fra . meworks i that they only handle semantic -interpretation alternatiw '  , s and do not ( attempt to ) integrate this with parsing . 
A different kind of Ni'MS--style approach , and one that is grounded in parsing , can be obtained by extending a chart parser with dependencies  ; more specifically , by recording for each edge its immediate and ultimate source edges  ( Wirdn 1989 )  . The next section develops this . 
6Incident Mly , the sole explicit example provkted by Zernik and Brown  ( eited above ) ouly involves one default rule . Since the original as well as the revised interpretation represent coherent  , sets of justified beliefs , both c~m be arrived at by straightforward ( re ) labelling , titus avoiding the more cumbm~some process of dependency-directed backtracking -- in fact  , ~ernik and Brown do not mention dependency -directed backtracking at all  . They also do no state any systematic preference policy  , so it is not clear how they generally gauge the relative strengths of in compa /  . ible assumptions when trying to resolve contradictions  . 
3 . 2 An ATMS-Sty le Char t Parser tIow can a chart parser extended with edge depen-  . 
dencies be viewed as consisting of an inference ngine all da  ( simplified ) ATMS ? This section develops an infonnal answer to this question  . 
' llb begin with , an ATMS , just like a chart parser , can be seen as a tool for organizing efficient search through a space of alternatives by providing a " cache " of partial results and by sharing these results across different branches of the search space  . Both the ( I ) ; -usic ) A'I?MS and a chart parser are in onotonic in the sense of only providing monotonic derivability  ( and , in case of the ATMS , monotonic justifications ) . 
Both frameworks are incremental , performing pieceme alup dates in response to a constant stream of new assumptions  , nodes , and justifications . Furfller-more , the order in which updates are made does not affect tile final outcome of the process  . In particular , the following correspondences hold : ? A chart edge corresponds to an NI'MS  7~ode  . 
. A preterminal ( lexical ) edge corresponds to an assumption ode ) ' ? The immediate source information of an edge corresponds t  . oa justification . 
* Information about the set ( of sets ) of ultimate source edges of an edge corresponds to its ATMS label  . 
. The chart corresponds to an ATMS network.
. An analysis ( or interpretation ) of a phr~e , sentence , etc . corresponds to an ATMS context , i . e . , the theory of an environment , where the latter is a set of assumptions . 
? The ( standard ) chart-parsing algorithm corresponds to the inference ngine  . 
More precisely , information about so , tee edges ( i . e . , justifications ) can be derived as follows : An edge formed through a combination depends on the active- -inactive edge pair that generated it  . An edge formed through a prediction depends on the  ( one ) edge that trigger edit . ( Alternatively , predicted edges can be left out of the dependency trails altogether : since they only represent inferential hypotheses and do not carry any analysis structure  , they could be seen ~ s belonging with the inference engine rather than with the ATMS  . On this view , a prediction has neither dependants nor sources ,   ) A scanned edge does not depend upon any other 7Thus   , each word sense corresponds to an assumption . In a system whidlhaaldles noisy input ( e . g . , ill-formed or spoken input ) , one might insteadlet hypothesized word forms correspond to assmnptions  . 
8This would also so Nethe . problenl with topdown parsing pointed out in Wirdn  ( 1989:245 f . ) . - - - Note that , if we want to introduce gm'bage collect . ion of useless predictions , it would still be necessary to I mepare cord of their dependencies  . 
3289 edge ( but on an instance of a word or a lexicalized phrase  )  . 
Labels are likely to be simple in an ATMS-style chart parser  . Normally , each edge has a unique , stable set of sources ~- zero , one , or two edges which are determined once and for all when the edge is created  ) A potential exception to this uniqueness of source is the case of the parser attempting to regenerate an  ( existing ) edge , something which is prohibited by a redundancy test  . This attempted regeneration actually corresponds to introducing an additional justification for the edge  . Allowing this would require a more elaborate machinery for computing ATMS labellings in accordance with de Kleer  ( 1986 )  . 
Whether this capability is needed or not would have to be decided with respect to the demands of the particular application of the ATMS-style parser  ( of . 
section 4).
It could finally be noted that a chart parser , ~s normally conceived of , does not record " no goods " ( inconsistent combinations of assumptions ) aus does the ATMS . Instead , the chart parser by itself ensures that inconsistent combinations of edges do not get further worked on  ( through predictions , the agenda , etc . ) . 
4 Applications 4 . 1 Incrementa l Pars ing and In terpretat ion A strong definition of incremental parsing would require that text can be added or deleted in a piece meal fashion and  , furthermore , that the system behaves monotonically in processing such updates  ; i . e . , as words are added/deleted , the set of possible analyses increases/decreases monotonically  . An attractive property which follows from this is that the amount of processing of an update is roughly proportional to the size of the update  ( eftWirdn19 . 89:2, i2, Earley and Caizergues1 . 972:1040) . An ordinary chart parser as well as an ATMS-style chart parser as put forward above are incremental in this sense  , whereas the nonlnonotonic model of Zernikattd Brown  ( 1988 ) attd , say , an ATN parser are not . In the latter frameworks , a previously determined analysis can be modified by a subsequent step in the parsing process  , t ? As for interpretation with respect o a model or a context  , in order for a system to be incremental in the above sense  , it should be compositional ( and again monotonic ) such that the interpretation 9In bidirection Mchartpaa'sing ( Satta and Stock 1989 ) an edge might have three solwces . 
l ? One might ask which granunatical formalisms enable incremental processing  . Cai , egorial gratm no a-in its various in cantations i an obvious alternative  ( for example , Ades and Steedman 1982) . Unification-based grammar formalisms ( Shieber 1986 ) provide another alternative given that the rati -fication component is capable of incremental processing  ( Bres-nml and Kaplan 1982: xlivft . , Stee~:hnan 1985) . 
of a phrase is a flmction of the interpretations of its syntactic constituents and their associated contexts  . One computationally-oriented model which flfils this requirement  , and which is indeed tay lored for incremental interpretation  , is that of Haddock (1987 ,  1988 , 199 ( I ) . Haddock's model , which can be seen as a continuation and refinement of Mellish  ( 1985 )  , incrementally interpret singular noun phrases which refer to known contextual entities  . 
Translated into a chart-parsing framework , upon scanning a word , the corresponding set of predicates and potential referents  ( obtained from the context ) is associated with the new edge , and upon combining edges , a constraint-satisfaction algorithm is run to narrow down the set of possible referents  . 
The possibility of using dependencies also to incrementally handle deletions of words  ( assumptions ) is investigated in Wirdn ( 1989 )  . Actually , a machinery is developed to handle arbitrary sgutactic changes  , which can be thought of as edit operations ( insertion , deletion , replacement ) , and which can be fl'eely combined and applied to arbitrary portions of the text--for example  , input can be entered in any order . 
Edge dependencies are used to propagate the effects of a change precisely to those edges that are affected by the change  . IIT his has potential computational applications in interactive na  . tural danguage systems such as language-sensitive text editing  . In psycholinguistic terms , an edit operation might correspond to correction of a misread or misheard passage  . 
Since II addock's model for incremental interpretation is not in any way limited to left -to-right incrementality  , it is possible to adopt it also within the system of W ir ~  ;  . n (1989) . Furthermore , it is possible to conceive of a semantic analogue to this processing of syntactic changes  . Consider a dynamic context , for example a database representing the realtime state of some world  . By maintaining dependencies between entities and relations in the contextual model and their counterparts in the linguistic analysis  , a machinery for incrementally reevaluating previously made interpretations with respect o the changing context could be attained  . 
4  . 2 Compar i son o f In terpretat ions The chart allows comparison of  ( competing ) interpretations ill the sense that any analyses can be simultaneously examined  . WhaZone cannot do in ordinary chart parsing is to ~ k which particular edges  ( assumptions , etc . ) underlie a given analysis since edges are not labelled with justifications or assumptions  ( and all information from lower-level edges may not have been percolated upwards  )  . Put differently , the chart cannot " explain " its analyses . Of course , extending a chart parser to record dependencies i a simple thing  . The point is that , in doing so , one has in effect obtained a simple KI'MS-style problem  11 This could also be achieved in a JTMS-style parser  . 
2 90 example of how ATMS techniques could be used for comparisons  ( eft section a . 1) . 
4.3 Revision of Interpretations
The basic ATMS does not provide nonmonotonic justifications and hence no machinery for actually revising a previously held interpretation through default reasoning  , etc .   ( Similar effects are instead achieved by maintaining multil  ) le contexts and by switching between these . ) However , certain semantic and pragmatic phenomena , like anaphoric reference ,   , ~ eem to require a capability tbr default reasoning  ; processing such phenomena by gradually developing all possible analyses wouht lead to combina ~ to rial explosion  ( Asher 1984 )  . '\] ~ hus , although nonmonotonic devices destroy the strong notion of incrementality discussed above  ( the effects of an update cannot hr general be kept local  , the amount of com-pntation needed is not bounded by the size of the update  , etc . ), they are sometimes needed . A recent example of this is Pollack and Pereira ( 1988 ) who use a strict compositional semantics but . with nonmonotonic interpretation rules ; other examples are Asher (1984) , Dunin-Keplicz (1984) , and Appelt and
Konolige (1988).
Dre , ~sler ( 1989 ) shows how to extend the basic ArMS with a new type of node which  , in particular , allows the encoding of nonmonotonic justifications and default rules  . Given the relationship between chart parsing and ATMS  , it seems like there should be a way of translating such a default machinery to an ATMS -style parsing framework  . Furthermore , given a framework which integrates parsing and interpretation by performing interpretation online to the parser  , it might be advantageous to allow encoding of default reasoning at the level of the parser  , as indeed Zernikart d Browndo , but to use it in an mch more restricted way . 
5 Conclusion
This paper compares JTMS-and ATMS-based approaches to adopting reason-maintenance techniques in incremental parsing  ( arid interpretation )  . A major problem with the JTMS-based approach is that it is fundamentally imited to representing one context  ( one hypothesized interpretation )  . One consequence of this is that competing interpretations cannot be compared  . Another consequence is that the system is constantly forced to commitrash choices and to spend a large part of its time revising these choices when faced with couflicging information  . This situation appears even worse in light of the relative inefficiency of JTMSs  . Zernikarm Brown (1988) in a sen , m take this approach to its extreme , using de ~ fault reasoning and dependency -directed backtracking to guide the entire parsing and interpretation process  . It is however not clear why one would want to confine oneself to a single hypothesi  , ; at each step of this process , lp "\[ t is also not clear that default choices and dependency-directed backtracking is the best way to guides e ~ r chinnatural language analysis with respect ophenomena like syntactic alnbiguity  . 
From a computational point of view , there are wellknown and ell'icient teehniques , such as chart parsing , that work by developing syntactic alter , retires in parallel . Dora a psycholinguistic point of view , although the issue is under discussion , there are both theoretical arguments and empirical evidence supporting the claim thai  , alternative interpretations are explored in parallel  ( Crain and Steedman 1985 )  . Incidentally , one of the rationales for this c\]aim is that it is a prerequisite foreoml  ) eting interpretations l . obe compared . 
In contr~s to this , an ATMS solves or circumvents the major problems posed by a J'I'MS  . The ATMS support seificient development and coml ) ari-son of all legal ( possibly contradictory ) analyses ; an ATMS-style parser thus seems more in accordance with computational practice as well as with psycholinguistic evidence  . Furthermore , the relationship between NI'MSs and chart parsing is in itself an advantage  , because it facilitates cross-fertilization f the respective subtlelds  . In particular , it might be possible to make use of recert t advances within reason maintenance in encoding defatflt reasoning for the purpose of handling certain I  ) roblems in semantic and pragnmtic interpretation . Ultimately , this might provide for a more unit brm handling of syl > tax  , semantics , and l ) ragmatics . 

Ades , Anthony E . and Mark J . Steedman (1982) . On the Order of Words . Linguistics and Philosophy 4:517-558 . 
Appelt , Douglas and Kurt Konolige (1988) . A Practical No~l-monotonic Theory for Reasoning about Speech Acts  . lZ , ' oc . 
26th . Annum Meetingo \] the Association \] or Computational Linguistic  . s , Buffalo , New York : 170-178 . 
Asher , Nicholas (1984) . Linguistic Understanding and Non Monotonic Heasoning  . P'roc . Non-\]~, Io no to nict tea aon in 9
Workshop , New Pahz , New York : 120.
Bobrow , Hobert J . and Bomfie Lyre1 Webbcr (1980) . 
Knowledge Representation for Syntactic/Semantic Processing  . Proc . First Annual National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Stanford , California : 316-323 . 
Bresnan, . Ioaa ~ and Hon MdM . Kaplan (1982) . Introduction : Gramma , ~ as Mental Be present at lons of Language . In : Joan Bresnan , ed . , The Mental Representation o \] Grammatical l~e -lations  . MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts : xvii-lii . 
Cha * zfiak , Eugene and B . obert Goldman (1988) . A Logic for Semmltic Interpretation . Proe .   26th Annual Meeting of the Association \] or Computational Linguistics  , Buffalo , New
York : 87-94.
Crain , Stephen and Mark Steedmml (1985) . On Not Being Ledup the G ; u'denPath : The Use of Context by the Psychological Syntax Processor  . In : David R . Dowty , Lam'i 12Note that Zernik and Brown also do not make use of lookaheador delayed processing to facilitate intelligent choices  . 

Karttunen , and Arnold M . Zwicky , eds . , Natural Language Parsing . Psychological , Computational , and Theoretical Perspectives . Cambridge Univel ~ ity Press , Cambridge , England : 320-358 . 
de Kleer , Johan (1986) . An Assumptlon-based TMS . Artificial Intelligence 28(2): 127-162 . 
Doyle , ion (1979) . A Truth Malntcnance System . Artificial
Intelligence 12(3): 231--272.
Dressier , Oskar (1989) . An Extended Basic ATMS . In : Michael Reinfrank , Johan de Kleer , Matthew L . Ginsberg , and Erik Sandewall , eds . , Proc . 2nd International Workshop on Non . Monoton lcReasoning . Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 346 , Heidelberg , FRG : 143-163 . 
Dunin-Kepllcz , Barbara (1984) . Default Reasoning in Anaphora Resolution . Proc . Sixth European Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Pisa , Italy : 157-166 . 
Earley, . lay and Paul Caizergues (1972) . A Method for Incre-mentally Compiling Languages with Nested Statement Structure  . Communications of the ACM 15(12):1040--1044 . 
Eisclt , Kurt P .  (1987) . Recovering from Erroneous Inferences . 
Proe . Sixth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , 
Seattle , Washington : 540-544.
Granger , Richaxd H . , Jr .  (1980) . When Expectation Fails : Towards a Self -Correcting Inference System  . Proe . First Annual National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Stanford , 
California : 301-305.
Haddock , Nicholas J . (I987) . Inerement M Interpretation and Combinatory Categorial Grammar  . Proc . Tenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Milan , 
Italy : 661-663.
Haddock , Nicholas J .  (1988) . Incremental Semaaltics and In-tcractlve Syntactic Processing  . Ph . D . thesis , Department of Artificial Intelligence , University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh , 

Haddock , Nicholas J .  (1990) . Computational Models of\[n-crement MSem~ltic Interpretation  . Language and Cognitive
Processes 4(3-4): 337--368.
Jacobs , Paul S .  (1988) . Concretion : Assumption-Based Understanding . Proc .   12th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Budapest , Itungaxy : 270-274 . 
Kay , Martin (1980) . Algorittm ~ Schemat and Data Structures in Syntactic Processing  . I ~ eport CSL-80-12 , Xerox I ) ARC , Polo Alto , California . Also in : Sture All~n , ed . 
(1982), Text Processing . Proceedings of Nobel Symposium 51 . 
Almqvist & Wiksell International , Stockhohn , Sweden:327-358 . 
Kobsa , Alfred , Jfirgen Allgayer , Carola Reddig , Norbert Re-ithinger , Dagmar Schmauks , Karin Harbusch , and W of f gang Watdster (1986) . Combining Deictic Gestures and Nattu'al Language for Referent Identification  . Proc .   11th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Bonn , Federal Republic of Germany : 356-361 . 
Marslen-Wilson , William and Lorraine Tyler (1980) . The Temporal Structure of Spoken Language Understanding  . 
Cognition 8(1):1-74.
Mellish , Christopher S .  (1985) . Computer Interpretation of Natural Language Descriptions  . Ellistlorwood , Chichester,

Natal , Katashi (1989) . Semantic Interpretation Based on the Multi-World Model  . Proc . Eleventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Detroit , Michigan : 1467-1473 . 
Norvig , Peter (1983) . Six Problems for Story Understanders . 
Proe . Third National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , 
Washington , D . C .: 284-287.
O'Rorke , Paul (1983) . Reaaons for Beliefs in Understanding : Applications of N on Monotonic Dependencies to Story Processing  . Proe . Third National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Washington , D . C . : 306-309 . 
Pulman , Steven G .  (1985) . A Pal~er That Doesn't . Proc . 
Second Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Geneva , Switzerland : 128-135 . 
Pollack , Martha E . and Feruando C . N . Pereira (1988) . An Integrated Framework for Semantic and Pragmatic Interpretation  . Proc .   26th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Buffalo , New York : 75-86 . 
Reinfrank , Michael (1989) . Lecture Notes on the Fundamentals of Truth Maintenance  . Siemens Report INF2ARM-5-88,
Version 2. Siemens AG , Munich , FRG.
Reps , Thomas and Tim Teitelbaum (1984) . The Synthe-sizer Generator . Proc . ACM SIGS oft/SIGP lan Symposium on Practical Programming Environments  , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania : 4248 . 
Reps , Thomas and Tim Teitelbaum (1987) . Language Processing in Program Editors . Computer 20(11): 29-40 . 
Satta , Giorgio and Oliviero Stock (1989) . Formal Properties and Implementation f Bidirectional Charts  . Proc . Eleventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , De-trolt , Michigan : 1480-1485 . 
Shieber , Stuart M .  (1986) . An Introduction to Unification . 
Based Approaches to Grammar . CSLI Lecture Notes No .  4 . 
University of Chicago Press , Chicago , Illinois.
Steedman , Mark (1985) . LFG and Psychological Explanation . 
Linguistics and Philosophy 8:359~385.
Thompson , Henry and Graeme Ritchie (1984) . Implementing Natm'al Language Parsers . In : Tim O'Shea and Marc Eisen-stadt , Artificial Intelligence : Tools , Techniques , and Applications . Harper & Row , New York , New York : 245-300 . 
Tyler , Lol Taine and William Marslen-Wilson (1977) . The Online Effects of Semantic Context on Syntactic Processiug  . 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 16:683-692  . 
Wirdn , Mats (1989) . Interactive Incremental Chart Parsing . 
Proc . Fourth Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Manchester , England : 241-248 . Also : Research report LiTH-IDA-R-89-24 , Department of Computer and Infomaaation Science , Link ~ Splng
Univemity , Link & ping , Sweden.
Zernik , Uri and Allen Brown (1988) . Default Reasolfing in Natural Language Processing  . Proc . l~th International Con-\]erence on Computational Linguistics  , Budapest , Hungary : 801-805 . 

