Tenets for an Interlinguai Representation of
Definite NPs
Montserrat Meya
CDS Barcelona
Siemens SA , Spain
email : Montserrat Meyallopart@eurokom.ie
1 o Introduction
The main goal of this paper ( as in Keenan
and Stavi 1986) is to characterize the
possible determiner denotations in order to
develop a computational approach that
makes explicit use of this information . To cope with the constraints that languages impose when generating determiners  , a computational model has to follow the laws that map definiteness to structures and strings and vice versa  . 
In the following proposal I distantiate from K . Btihlers Deixis Theory and Weinrichs ( 76 ) proposal where in definites suggest subsequent information  , while definite point out facts from the previous intbrmation  . This very general position is insufficient if we want to formalize NP-definiteness  . 
The semantics of NP definiteness must be captured adequately in computational frameworks for such tasks as answering quantified NL--questions  , or in a MT system to convert NPs from one language into another  ,  . 
In the first part of this paper Idraw a typology of definiteness  ; later I reflect on the definiteness of NPs in an IL-representation  . 
The major result is given by the determiner generators  . Definiteness should be evaluated in a QA system and in MT  . The extensive functionality of definiteness is first elaborated in the parsing and results in an IL-representation  ; finally the determiner generators create correct morphological determiners and right determiner structures  . 
2, Parsing definite NPs
Weinrich ( 1976 ) distinguishes three types of anaphoric and cataphoric information : context  , situation and code . Code is the paradigmatic meaning that speakers find in the lexicon  ( standar definitions )  . 
The NPs parsing strategy-that copes with these three information types-comes down to these main questions : ? the question of building adequate semantic interpretation for the functional features fixed during analysis ? The question of reference resolution for definite NPs To achieve that goal the N p grammar must work with a sufficient : ? determiner subcategorisation ? strategy about constraints depending upon the semantic features of the nouns  , and on the context ( PPs , Rel-S , compounding , etc . ) This strategy , of course , cannot rely on the presupposition of existence and uniqueness  , i . e . the " accommodation " model of Lewis closely related to the analysis of " only "  , that would fail for sentences like : ( MacCawley 81 . p . 177): 1 . " The restaurant on the Clark street is excellent " because Russell's analysis did not allow truth value gaps or interactions between logical form and context  ( MacCawley . 
t) . 177) , if there is more than one restaurant on the Clark Street  , sentence 1 expresses a false proposition . 
Determiner Subcategorisation
The list of determiners i surprisingly long ( Keenan 86 ) and there is even the possibility to build complex determiners by adding modifiers to determiners  . According tokeenan and Stavit here are 3 types of determiners : cardinal , logical and nonlogical . 
Dets are taken into consideration according to the fact of being terminal or preterminal nodes  . This subcategorisation entails the following additional feature-value pairs  . 
Terminal determiners are subcategorized in the lexicon according to the features : ? definite  ( logical ) vs . indefinite ( nonlogical ) ? demonstratives . possessive ? type of quantification collective , distributional , numeral , amount , partitive , negation ? comparatives
Preterminal determiner features
When NP structures are built during parsing , the intermediate nodes must come up with values for the features : ? definiteness proper name  , bounded
NP ? negation ? topicalization ? genetics ? head -specifier relation ? apposition Titel  . . . .  ? genitives  possessive , partof . . . .  ? predication  equality vs . copula ? type of sta'ucture PP , Rel-S, . . . ? semantics of the NP mass vs . count noun , temporal , ocal , argument . . . .  Each feature configuration corresponds with a NP structure with full decoration  ( in a MT system )  , or a compositional formula representation ( in understanding systems )  ; in both cases it is built up rule-to-rule . 
The outgoing object of the parser is a IL -representation  . Later on the generators will define , according to the idiosyncratic laws of each language  , the morpheme assignment for this interlingua ( IL )  . 
Determiner functionality
The semantic value of the tags genetics , definiteness , topic for NPs is obtaine during analysis and it is the result of taking into consideration : ? the whole NP structure attribution  , apposition , genitives , head-specifier relation in compounds is relevant for definiteness  . 
? the NP typology together with the sentence aspect and time is relevant for generics  . 
? the semantic primitives tie the lexical item to an ontological class and is relevant for the possible word readings ? word order and negation is relevant for topic 

Generics do not underly universal or nearly universal quantifiers  . The reference of generics mirrors that of habitual propositions  . They are treated as predication of individuals though different truth values at different times  . 
Generics are expressed in the presentense with the aspect value habitual  ( usually , occasionally , always ) . The 3 different generic types reflect the different quantitication of the determiners in propositions like:  1  . " Men do not cry " ( Quant . = distrib ) (= usually every man does not cry ) 2 . "Germans are bad husbands " ( Quant . = distr ) 3 . % man does not cry " ( Quant . = mass ) ( whoever has the property of being ) 4 . " the lion is a mammal " ( Quant = coll )   ( The species . . . ) 5 . " I like lamb "
Contrary to MacCawley I think that indefinite plural generics as in  ( 1 ) are basically references to sets of objects . 
In definite singular generic NPs are references to properties of individuals  ( 3 )  , and definite singular NPs with count nouns ( 4 ) or indefinite ( without article ) mass nouns ( 5 ) are basically references to kinds . 
The final value " generics " on the NP is calculated from the verbal tense value  ( PR ) and from the aspect value ( habitual ) together with the determiner of the NP , the semantic type of the noun , and the whole NP syntactic structure . 
6 . " Wine is a drink " vs . " elvinoes unabe bida "\[$ SUBJ mass\]7 . "I drink wine " vs , " bebo(0)vino"\[$OBJmass\]
The same generic NP in examples 6/7 behave differently in spanish according to the sentence argument  . 
Both the generics and the syntactic role in the sentence have an effect on the article generation i different languages  . 
Head-Specifier Structure
The addition of features providing information about certain syntactic structures ivery useful in reflecting the nominal definiteness behavior  . 
The following structures assist in distinguishing ( between general and specific reference ) definite NPs : ? acronyms and proper names : " The Union "? appositions : " The Siemens company "? complex proper names  ( dates , time : 2o'clock ,  2 . 3 . 1990, . . . ) ? attribution ( with adjectives , relative clauses , genitive constructions , prepositional phrases , compounding . . . .)
Here some examples with the value definiteness = True : " The second paragraph "  , the cleanest water " , " The man that I remember " , 
Peter's hatred " , " the truth about his past " , " the picture on the wall " , " the king's daughter " ,  . .
Genitives in whatever morphol\[ogical form are always definite constructs : ? The king's daughter 
Die Koenigstochterlahi jadelrey ? House door
Haustiir la puerta de la casa
Germanic languages only have one determiner in compounds  , however the genitive relation must be captured to reflec the definiteness of the specifier in another language  . 
During NP parsing , constituents are marked according to their head- specifier function together with their semantic type  . In that way , represented in a uniform way . Additional feature constraints on head and specifier regulate definiteness  , depending on their semantic primitives : ? Druckfestigke it resistence alacompresion ? Druck knopfbout on a presion ? Einkommen steuer impotsurl arevenue ? E in fuhr steue impot d ' importation Directional and local compounds  , or the corresponding PPs in other languages contain the feature definiteness because they are usually tied to some deictic situation  ( See
Loebner 1985, semantic vs . pragmatic detiniteness ) . 
?im Palastenel palacio ? zum Palastal palacio

The series " definite article + Lexeme + indefinite article+Lexeme " reflects a methodological progress in the information situation  . If this direction changes , the direction of the predication also changes . 
That means that the noun ( or NP ) will be focused and therefore has a definite reference  . 
8 . the FBI employed American citizens ( laFB I emplea 0 aciudadanos )  9 . American citizens are employed by the FBI 10 . Losciuda dano samerica noss on emplea do sporla FBI  11  . a : DemKind gabichden Ballb : Esalnifioa quiendi lapelota  12  . The man I love Topicalized NPs must be marked as such  . 
Voice in example 9 topicalize the NP and demands in spanish definiteness for the NP  . 
The bare topicalizationiger man in example ( lla ) corresponds a marked extraposition is panish ( 11b )  . Languages make a discriminating use of this feature when generating determiner requirements  . 
Predicative constructions
In predicative constructions the relevant criteria for the use of determiners are the type of copula  ( NP expresses a property ( 1415 )  , or a reference (16)) , while with other verbs the relevant criteria is the aspect  ( process vs . 
accomplishment or achievement )
A sentence involving a noun X with definite article in predicate position does not asser that the subject is X  . We have to distinguish between a " be " of identity and that of copula  . 
13 . Felipees ( el ) presidente de Espafiaa : ( tx : presidente ( x , Espafia )) = ( Felipe , x ) 14 . Alex is an artist vs . A lexes artist a 15 . Felipees el presidenteque prefieroa : ( 3x )   ( PEx , ( Vy ) (~= yx , ~PEy) , Felipe , x ) English demands article for copula cases like ( 14 )  , existing the opposite referential value for the article " the "  ( the teacher )  . Referential examples are treated the same in english and spanish for identity predicate  . 
At the other hand arguments of predicates in accomplishments or achievements  ( not as a process ) are ( 16 ) individualized and as such demand definiteness . The sole exception are lexicalized expressions and sentences with function verbs  ( 17 )  16 . " voyalaplaya " vs . " I go to the beach " ( achievement ) " bese untigre " ( altigre ) vs . I kissed the tiger ( accomplish . ) " megustabes artigres " vs . " I like tokisstigers " ( process ) " pongolames a " vs . " Ich decked en
Tisch "" tengorazon " vs . Ich habe Recht "3 . Interlingual representation of definiteness Definitenessia means to satisfy coherence requirements  . Definite NPs have a scope just like quantifiers and they may be involved in scope ambiguities as Russell suggested  ( MacCawleyp . 178) . The most reliable test to decide about the definiteness of an NP is to use Peterson's  ( 1979 ) test of the re-insertion . The reinsertion requires that the existential quantifier be immediately above the clause into which there is to be inserted  . 
If an existential context is possible then there is no definiteness  . 
18 . there are two men in the garden * there are the two men in the garden  ( no possibility of there ) Definiteness in an extensional model it is a function from properties into sets of properties  . 
NPs in the IL representation used in MT are flat tree structures with decorations containing sets of attribute-value pairs  . 
These attributes were sketched above.
Feature configurations are equivalent to well formed formulas after lambda conversion  , so that this approach can be used in a NL understanding system as well  . 
Below arough outline of a PSR for nominals : 1: NP <-- . 2: DET+3:NO conditions: . . . . . .
structure : 1: nu = 2:nu   1 : Quant--=!VR aspect & Q type of determiner 1:Generics = ! VE tense & VB . aspect(i ) 1: semtype=!NO . semtype 1: definiteness = ! DET , NO . Compl(ii)l:comparative=!NO . compl ! PREP ( iii )  ?  ( i ) if tense = present and aspect = habitual and NO is plural then the quantification is distributional  ; if the tense is present but NO is singular then the quantification of the det is collective ?  ( ii ) if the determiner type is possessive or demonstrative  , or the NP contains genitives , relative clauses , etc . .the NP is definite ? ( iii ) this feature keeps track for predicative constructions like:  19  . he works as a teacher vs . trabajacomo0 maestro
The final value for definiteness and quantification is the result of the above mentioned calculus that is percolated to the NP nodes  . 
4. Generators for definiteness
It is straightforward to show that for any definiteness configuration there is a determiner assignment in a specific language  . The generation grammar is the inverse process of the analysis  . Below some rules :
Rule 1: if definiteness = T
NU=Sgsemtype=~ABS focus=T then
Ger . = definite DET+NO span=demonstrative DET+NO fran=demonstrative DET+NP " estabols avs  . die Trite "
Rule 2: if generics = T
Quant = distrib.

Germ . = no DET+NPpleng . = demonstrative DET+NO pls pn . = Definite DET + NO pl " los hombres nolloran "
Rule 3: if generics = T
NU = sg then
Germ . = In definite DET+NOsg
Spn . = In definite DET+NOsg " unhombre nollora " The difference between rules  2 and 3 is that 3 is a statement about the fact that something having the property of being a man does not 
CD '( is not allowed to cry).
5. Summary
A computational system must an aIyze and generate definiteness even for those cases where there is no unique referent to look for  . 
Here I assume that definiteness is not the only function of definite determiners  , and that it would be inadequate to use a brute force approach in looking for either uniqueness of referents no runiqueness of roles as proposed by Bosch & Geurts  89  . 
Definiteness as a semantic value of definite determiner sione of its possible values  ( the logical value of the quantifier " only " )  ; more common values are distributional , collective quantification , or a surface phenomena within generic constructions  , or in connection with the predicative value . 
Definiteness is unmarked when placed before proper names  , and becomes an existential quantifier when accompanied by an abstract noun  . NPs indirectionals and locals usually have a pragmatic value  ( for more detail ( Loebner 1985 ) ) . 
Romance languages have a higher use of " definiteness " than germanic languages  . While the latter use no article the former use them  ; while the latter use definite determiners the former use demonstratives  . 
The internal value , however , remains the same.
Compare : 20 . Freedom is essential vs . laliberta desesencial 21 . Love does not exist vs . elamor no existe Oris " love " and " freedom " more " definite " in 
Romance languages ?

Alonso , A .   1961 : Estilisticay gramatic a delarticuloen espa?ol , en Estudios LInguisticos . 

Barwise , J&R . Cooper : 1981. Generalised
Quantifiers and Natural Language . Linguistics and Philosphy , 4 . p . 159-219
Benthemvan , J & A.ter Meulen ( eds )
Generalised Quantifiers . Dordrecht
Bosch , R&B . Geurts 1989: Proccessing definite NPs . IBM . Lilog Project . 
Gardenfors , P ( ed ) 1987: Generalised
Quantifiers . Reidel . Dordrecht
Geurts , Bart 1985: Generics , in .: Journal of
Semantics . vol . 4, p . 247
Grimm , H . J 1987: Lexikon
Artikelgebrauch . Leipzigzum
Keenan , E . & J . Stasvi 1986: A semantic characterisation of Natural Language Determiners in : Linguistics and Philosophy  , 4 p . 159-219 Loebner Sebastian 1985: Definites . In . Journal of Semantics . vol . 4 . p . 2 79 linguist is have always wanted to know about logic  . Univ . Chicago Press Peterson , Ph . 1979: On the logic of few , many and most . Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic 20. p . 155 o1 79
Weinl:ich , H . 1976: Sprache in Texten . Klett.

