Automatic Processing of Large Corpora fbr the Resolution of 
Anaphor References
Ido Dagan * Alon Itai
Computer Science Department
Technion , tIaifa , Israel
dagan ~ techunix . bitnet , it ai ~ cs . technion , ac . il

Manual acquisition of semantic on straints in broad domains is very expensive  . This paper presents an automatic scheme for collecting statistics on cooccurrence patterns in a large corpus  . To a large extent , these statistics reflect , semantic on straints and thus are used to disambiguate anaphora references and syntactic ambiguities  . The scherne was implemented by gathering statistics on the output of other linguistic tools  . An experiment was performed to resolve references of the pronoun " it " in sentences that were randomly selected from the corpus  . Ttle results of the experiment show that in most of the cases the cooccurrence statistics indeed reflect the semantic on straints and thus provide a basis ' or a useful disambiguat  . i on tool . 
1 Introduction
The use of selectional constraints i one of the most popular methods in applying semantic information to the resolution of ambiguities in natural anguages  . 
The constraints typically specify which combinations of semantic lasses are acceptable in subject-verb-object relationships and other syntactic structures  . This information is used to filter on tsome analyses of ambiguous constructs or to set preferences between alternatives  . 
Though the use of selectional constraints ivery popular  , there is very little success ( if any ) in implementing this method for broad domains . The major problem is the huge amount of information that must be acquired in order to achieve a reasonable representation of a large domain  . In order to overcome this problem , our project suggests an alternative to the traditional model  , based on automatic acquisition of constraints fl ' omalarge corpus  . 
The rest of the paper describes how this method is used to resolve anaphora references  . Similarly , the constraints are used also to resolve syntactic ambiguities  , but this will not be described here . The * Part of this resem'ch was conducted wb . i levisiting IBM T . J . Watson Research Center , Yorktown Ileights , NY reader should bare in mind that like the conventional use of selectional constraints  , our method is inteuded to work in co , tjunction with other disambiguation means . These , such as various syntactic and pragmatic on straints and heuristics\[Carbonetl and Brown P  . )88 , tlobbs1978\] , represent additional levels of knowledge and are essential when selectional constraints are not sufficient  . 
2 The Statistical Approach
According to the statistical model , cooccurrence patterns that were observed in tile corpns are used as selection patterns  . Whenever several alternatives are presented by an ambiguous construct  , we prefer the one correspot ~ dingt . o more frequent patterns . 
When using selectional constraints for anaphora resolution  , the referent must satisfy the constraints which are imposed on the anaphor  . If the anaphor participates in a certain syntactic relation  , like being an object of some verb , then the substitution of the anaphor with the referent must satisfy the selectional constraim  . s . In the statistical model , we substitut each of the can didt~tes with the anaphor and approve only those candidates which produce frequent cooccurrence patterns  . Consider , for exam-pie , the following sentence , taken from the Hansard corpus of the proceedings of the Canadian parliament \ [ Brown et al  1988\]:   ( 1 ) They know full well that the companies held tax money aside for collection later on the b~s is that the government said it was going to collect it  . 
There are two occurrences of " it " in this sentence  . 
The first serves ~ the subject of " collect " and the second as its object  . We gathered the statistics for three candidates which occur in the sentence : " collection "  , " money " and " government " . According to the syntactic structure of the sentence  , each of them may serw ~' aL , s the referent for each of the occurrences of the pronoun  . The following table lists the patterns that were produced by substituting each  can-330   1 didate with the anaphor , and the number of times each of these patterns occurred in the corpus : subject verb collection collect  0 subject verb money collect S subject verb government collect  198 verb-object collect collection 0 verb . -object collect money 149 verb-~object collect government 0 According to these statistics " government " is preferred as the reti~rent of the first " it "  , and " money " of the second . 
This example demonstrates the case of definites e . -mantle constraints which eliminate all but the correct alternative  . In other cases , several alternatives may , ; at is fy the selectional constraints , and may be observed in the corpus a significant number of times  . 
In such cases the tlnal selection between the approved candidate should be performed by other means  , such as syntactic heuristics or asking the user . Another passibility may be to use statistical preferences  , and prefer the relatively more frequent patterns , t lowever , at this stage it is not clear to us how usef lfl the statistical preference can be  , and we use the statistics only relative to a certain threshold  , approving any patterns that pass this threshold . 
3 Implementing the Acquisition Phase
The use of the statistical model involves two separate phases  . The first is the acquisition pha . s e , in which the corpus is processed and the statistical database is built  . The second is the disambiguation phase , in which the statistical datab ~ Lse is used to resolve ambiguities  . 
The statistical database contains cooccurrence patterns for various syntactic relations  . In the experiment reported here we have used constraints for the % ubject-verb "  , " verb-object " and " adjective-noun " relations . To locate these relations in the sentences of the corpus  , each sentence is parsed by the PEG parser\[ Jensen  1986\]  . Then , a postprocessing algorithm identifies the various relations in the parse tree  . Aswa . snoted in \[ Grishman et al .  1986\] , the cooccurrence patterns reflect regularized or canonical structure  . Therefore the postprocessing algorithm has to map surface structures into the normalized relations  . During our experiments we have used two different implementations for this algorithm \[ Lappin et al  1988\] [ Jensen 1989\]  , which take into account structures like passives , subclauses , questions and relative and infinitive clauses . 
The use of an automatic procedure for extracting information from a corpus that was not preprocessed manually raises a basic problem of circularity  . Since the corpus was not disambiguated , it is not possible to distinguish the semantically correct patterns from the incorrect ones  . Both types of ambiguity , syntactic and lexical , may cause the system to acquire or use inappropriate patterns  . This problems is consid~ered very important when dealing with a corpus : it was there  , Leon for the substantial human intervention in the procedure of \[ Grishman et al  1986\]  , and it is the reason why other techniques use manually tagged corpora  ( e . g . \[Church1988\]) . 
In practice , however , we have discovered that the problem is not so cruciah semantically vMid patterns have occurred many more times in syntactically unambiguous constructs than in mn biguous ones  . Thus , they could be identified without the need of first disambiguating the sentences  . Semantically non-valid patterns indeed occurred in the inappropriate parses but they were too rare to pass the threshold  . Ast brlc xical ambiguities , the chance that one sense of a word will be confused with another during disambiguation seems to be very small  , and it never happened in our experiment . 
4 The Experiment
An experiment was performed to resolve references of the anaphor " it " in the II ansard corpus  . The examples of the ambiguou sentences were selected in tile following way : First  , sentences containing the word " it " were extracted randomly from the corpus  . 
Then , we manually filtered out sentences that were not relevant for the use of selectional constraints in resolving anaphoric references  . Such cases were nonanaphoric occurrences of " it  "  , cases where the referent was not a noun phrase and cases where the anaphor was not involved in one of the three relations that we used  . In addition , we have excluded cases where there was only one possible referent  , so that our results will reflect correctly the perfor~mance of the disambiguation method  . The filtering process eliminated about two t . hirds of the original sentences , and we proceeded with 59 examples . The alternative candidates for the referent ( which satisfy definite syntactic constrair , ts such as number , gender and requirements for reflexives ) were identified manually in each example .   1 The statistics were collected from parto\[the corpus  , of about 28 million words . For 21 out of the 59 examples the statistics were not meaningful ( we used a threshold of 5 occurrences for each of the alternative patterns )  . In these cases the algorithm cannot approve any of the candidates  , getting a " coverage " of 38/59 (64%) . 
As explained in Section 2 , the output of the statistical method is used to represent the selectional  1 The llansard corpus , as maintained by the speechg\]'oup at IBM Watson Research Center  , does not contain consecutive sentences . Therefore , we identified only candidaLes within the same sentence as the anaphor  . " I'o provide enough candidales , we examined occurrences of " it " ~ ffter the 15th word of the senLence . The examples provided between 2 to 5 candidates , with an average of 2 , 8 candidates per anaphor . 
2331 constraints . This is done by approving all patterns which appeared a significant n unaber of times  . 
Therefore , the output is considered correct if the appropriate candidate is approved  . This happened in 33 cases , getting " accuracy " of 33/38 (87%) . In 18 of these cases , the appropriate candidate was the only one which was approved  , getting a complete resolution of the ambiguity . 
This last result demonstrates the advantage of the statistical data over semantic on straints  . While semantic constraints should approve any combination of arguments in a syntactic relation that may occur in the text  , the statistics approve only those combinations that actually occur and reject others  . 
Manual observation of the 18 sentences in which the statistics completely resolved the ambiguity showed that only in  7 cases the ambiguity could be eliminated by traditional selectional constraints  . This is consistent with the evaluation in \[ It obbs  1978\]  , where only in 12 out of 132 sentences the ambiguity was eliminated by selectional constraints  . 
An additional note should be made concerning the technical methodology of the experiment  . Within the limited resources of our research , it was not feasible to build the statistical database for the entire Itansard corpus  , which contains about 60 million words . The expensive resources are the parsing time and the storage for the cooceurrence patterns and their statistics  . ~ However , it turns out that parsing the entire corpus is not necessary to evaluate the success of the statistical model ! As the evaluation relates to a limited number of examples  , it is sufficient o collect the statistics only for patterns that are relevant for the disambiguation of these examples  . Therefore , we have extracted from the corpus only those sentences that contained at least one cooccurrenee of words from a relevant pattern  . This procedure allowed us to parse only 10 , 000 sentences . 
5 Conclusions
We have suggested using cooccurrence patterns , automatically acquired from a large corpus , as an alternative to selectional constraints . The initial results indicate that even in its basic form  , as presented here , the approach is useful for disambiguation , and many times performs even better than the traditional model  . This should be considered relative to the effort that would have been required to achieve such coverage and accuracy by manual acquisition of constraints  , for the broad domain of parliament proceedings . 
S Although the constnlction of the full size database is not feasible for us  , it is clearly feasible for a largescale project . 
This is shown by a similar database that w~s implemented as part of the lasl gllage model of the IBM speech recognition system  .   3?his database contalns counters for occurrences of sequences of three words in lm'ge corpora  ( trigrams )  , which arc much more numerous than our syntactic patterns  . 
In a general perspective , this project promotes the use of a large corpus for linguistic research and applications  . Processing such large corpora is a nontrivial engineering problem  , the solution of which enables research to focus on complicated realworld sentences  . Our research demonstrates how statistical methods can be built on top of more ' traditional ' linguistic tools  , achieving a better and more feasible environment for the resolution of ambiguities  . 
6 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Mori Rimon , Shalom Lappin , Wlodek Zadrozny , Slavs Katz , John Justeson , Lisa Braden-Harder and Peter Brown for their fruitful advice and technical support  . 
7 References\[Brown et al1988\] Brown , P . , Cocke , J . , Della Pietra , S . , Della Pietra , V . , Jelinek , F . , Mercer , R . L . and Rooss in P . S . , A statistical approach to language translation , COLING 1988 . 
\[Carbonell and Brown1988\] Carbonell , J . G . and Brown , R . D . Anaphora resolution : A multistrategy approach , COLINGI988 . 
\[Church1988\] Church , K . W . , A stochastic parts program and noun phrase parser for unrestricted text  , ACL Conf . on Applied NLP , 1988 . 
\[Grishman et al1986\]R . Grishman , L . Hirschman and Ngo Thanh Nhan , Discovery procedures for sublanguage selectional patterns initial experiments  , Computational Linguislics , vol .  12,205-214, 1986 . 
\[ Hobbs1978\]ttobbs , J . R . Resolving pronoun references , Lingua , vol .  44,311-338, 1978 . 
\[Jensen1986\]K . Jensen , PEG 1986: A broadcoverage computational syntax of English , Technical Report , IBMT . J . Watson Research
Center , 1986.
\[Jensen1989\] Jensen , K . PEGASOS : Deriving predicate-argument structures after a syntactic parse  . Presented at the International Workshop on Parsing Technologies  , Carnegie Mellon
University , August 1989.
\[Lappin et al1989\]S . Lappin , I . Golan , M . Ri-mon , Computing grammatical fimctions from a configurational parse tree  , Technical Report 88 . 268 , IBM Israel Center of Science and Technology ,  1989 . 

