A Formal Description of Arabic Syntax in Definite Clause Grammar 
Hisham E1-Sllis Mny
IBM Scientific Center ,  56 , Gamea at El-Doual EI-Arabeya St . 
Mohandesseen , Cairo , Egypt

Arabic has some special syntax features which lead to complex syntax structures  . 
We have developed a formal description of Arabic syntax in Definite Clause Grammar  . This grarn rnar is characterized by its high descriptive power due to its dual formulation in terms of functions and in terms of grammatical categories  . The developed grammar has a high coverage of Arabic language and has context sensitive capabilities  . It is suitable for the advanced applications of natural language processing  . 
1 o Introduction
Arabic has some features which lead to comlpex syntax different from those of the 
European languages . Moreover , Arabic grammar exists cmly in a descriptive form and there is no comprehensive formal rep ~ resentation for it so far  . 
The few attempts to give a formal mod-e ~ for Arabic sentences were based on transformational generative grammar  -\[111  ,  \[2\] ,   \[3\] and others-but some linguists adopted more recent linguistic models such as Lexical Functional Grammar  \[4\]  , dependency grammar \[5\] and functional grammar 16\]  . 
Selecting a suitable grammar formalism for Arabic and the formulation of the grammar itself is the subject of a big debate in the Arab countries nowadays  . Our descriptio : n of Arabic syntax in Definite Clause Grammar is different from the attempts undertaken so far  . 
2. Deft , ire clat , segram , , ar for Arabic syntax
In this grammar , the arguments of nonterminals are used to hold special features of Arabic words such as the definitely or indefinitely determined feature of norms which is essential to recognize many structures  . Also , the ability of Definite
Clause Grammar to provide a general treatment of context sensitivity through the proper use of arguments of nonterminals makes it easy to account for agree-meats such as number  , gender and person agreements . 
Another important characteristic of l ) efinite Clause Grammar , which suits Arabic , is the possibility of imposing extra conditions on the constituents of a phrase which must be satisfied for a rule to be valid  \[7\]  . 
3. The develol , ed/ormalg , ' ammar
Due to the fact that there is IIO single basic word order for Arabic sentences  , three basic sentence types were defined : a . Nominal sentence : a sentence that does not contain a verb or contains a verb which follows the subject  . 
b . Verbal sentence : a sentence that contains a verb which precedes the subject  . 
c . Sentences with special structure such as vocative sentences  . 
Sentences are further classified functionally and according to their modalities  . 
Larger sentences are also described in this grammar by conjoining sentences or embedding simpler sentences  . 
We have used the grammatical categories together with the functional roles to define the syntactic structures  . Grammatical categories alone were considered not sufficient to describe all the structures ly classified into verbs  , nominals and particles only . Nouns , adjectives and adverbs for example are differentiated in tt'te sentence according to their functions  . 
This dual formulation increases the descriptive power of the grammar  . In order to use this dual formulation to define the syntactic structures  , some nonstandard definitions of grammatical categories were used  . 
A nominal sentence ( ns ) is defined formally as composed from a ' mobtada a ' phrase  , mbp , and a predicate phrase , predp:ns(ns(MBP , PREDP )) - ~ mbp(N , G , m ,  - . , MBP ), pred p(N,G,n,PREDP) . 
Ambp is defined as a noun phrase ( np ) that can have ' motaal kat'which are either a prepositional phrase  ( PP ) or adverbial . 
A predp can be one of the following : ? a noun phrase that can have ' motaal-kat ' ? a prepositional phrase or adverbial-a sentence which can be : - a verbal sentence-a nominal sentence  ( under certain conditions )  . 
Verbal sentences ( vs ) can be followed by either a subject phrase , sp , or a subject phrase and a complement phrase , cop : vs(vs(VP )) - ~ v p(T , V , S , I' , VP) . 
vs(vs(VP , SP , COP )) + v p(T , a , S , P , VP ) , sp(- , - , S , - , P , SP) , cop(M , COP) , M = < T cop(o , cop(\[1))-~I1 . 
For verbs in the passive voice the sp is replaced by ' na abfael ' phrase  ( nsp )  , which can be either an porp p . 
For nonterminal argument definitions the reader is referred to sections  3  . 1 . 1 . , 3 . 1 . 2 and 3 . 1 . 3 . Tlle values of the arguments indicated above are : a for active voice  , n for indefinite determination , m for definite determination ad-for acceptance of any value  . 
Verb phrases ( vp ) are defined as follows : vp -- ~ ( cop )  , ( particle ) , verb , ( cop ) . 
whereas noun phrases ( rip ) are defined as follows : np - ~ ( particle )  , noutL(post-moditiers ) . 
Subject phrases are noun phrases whereas complement phrases modify the verbs and are one or more noun phrases  ( such as tile direct object ) and/or prepositional phrases . 
The cop category is used to cater for the cases where the sp separates the verb from some of its modifiers  , which is a characteristic of Arabic syntax . 
Sentences with special structures haw , , different structures which vary from one case to anotller  . 
Sp and cop can be relative pllrases and in some cases the predp can precede them bp  . Categories with no equivalent in
English are indicated between single quotes and categories inside the brackets are optional  . 
3.1. NonTerminal mgu , tents
Nonterminal arguments are used to hold features of Arabic words necessary for recognizing some structures and for allowing agreements between the different costituents of the sentence  . Arguments are introduced in the lexical entries of words and are inherited by the phrase in which the words are constituents  , h't this grammar , arguments are defined as fol-\]OWS:3 . 1 . 1 . Arguments associated With verbs T transitivity , V voice , Pperson , S semantic feature . 
3.1.2. Arguments associated with nouns
N number , G gender , D definite or in definite determination , I :' person , S semantic feature . 
3.1.3. Arguments associated with pronouns
Nnumber , Ggender , Pperson.
M is an argument associated with senre nonterminals to test the possibility of modifying a verb witll objects  . 
3 . 2 . Use of semantic features to reduce ambiguity in Arabic senstences  . 
Semantic features art , used with verbs semantic agreement . 
The use of the described semantic features in the developed grammar helps in the diifferentiation between the subject and the object in Arabic sentences  , ince it is not possible on purely grammatical basis  ( except in some exceptional cases ) to differentiate between them . 
3.3. Examples
In this section , examples of the syntactic structures of a nominal sentence and a verbal sentence according to the developed grammar are given  . 
3.3.1. Example of a nominal sentence:
Which means : the big dog is in the garden.
In arabic , the definite article is a prefix , there is no copulative verb and direction of writing is from right to left  . 
SIS/\pFp7 pppnp ~ pad noun
IIII the garden in big the dog 3 . 3 . 2 . Example of a verbal sentence :
Which means : the boy drinks the water in the housev  , ~ copsp . - cop

PP/\np np np p
Ir I the water the child the house in v
L drinks 4. Conclusiml
This grammar has been implemented in a syntactic analyzer  \[8\] developed in Prologona 1'C/XT-286 and tested on a large number of Arabic sentences . 
It is hoped that the developed grammar will contribute to the efforts undertaken recently in the Arab countries towards the development of a comprehensive  , agreed upon , formal grammar for Arabic syntax . 
References\[1\]Bakir M . ' Aspects of clm , sestructure in Arabic : a study of word order variation in literacy Arabic '  , 
Ph.d ., Indiana University , 1980.
\[2lAI-Khuli M . ' A contrastive transformational grammar : Arabic and English '  , Leiden : Britl ,  1979 . 
3\]A youb G . ' Structure delaphrase verbaleen Arabe standard  '  , Ph . D . , in : Analysis/Theories , 1981 . 
14 l Fehri F . ' Complementation ctamophoren Arabe moderne : t , neap prochelexl cale fonctionnelle ' , These de Doctor at d ' Et at , Univ crsit cdcParis3 ,  1981 . 
\[5\] Owens J . ' Structure ,   ( : lass and Dependency : Modern linguistic themy and the Arabic grammatical tradition '  , in : Lingua 64 ,  198 , 1 . 
\[6) Mout(makilA . ' Pragmatic functi ( ms in a unctional grammar of Arabic ' , Dordrecht : Forts Publicatiolls ,  1989 . 
\[71 Pereira F . , Warren D ' Definite clause grammar for language analysis - A survey of the formalism and a comparison with transition networks'  , Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 13, pp .  231 - 278, 1980 . 
\[8\] Hisham E1-Shishiny . ' A syntactic analyzer for Arabic sentences ' , IBM-CSC Technical Report #32 ,  1989 . 

