Bilingual Generation of Weather Forecasts
in an Operations Environment
L . Bourbea.u , D . Carcagno , E . Goldberg,
R . Kittredge and A . Polgu~re
1 Introduction
In 1986 the first experiments in text generation applied to weather forecasts resulted in a prototype system  ( t ~ AREAS\[6 , 3\] ) for producing English marine bulletins from forecast data  . Subsequent work in 1987 added French output to make the initial system bilingual  ( RAREAS-2111\] )  . During 1988-1989 a full scale operational system was created to meet the needs of daily marine forecast production for three regional centres in the Canadian Atmospheric Environment Service  1  . In contras to the earlier systems , the most recent one uses general models for both text planning and sentence realization  ( see sections 4 and 5 below )  . 
This new implementation , dubbed FoG for Forecast Generator , may constitute one of the first " indu ' ~- trial " uses of text generation  . FoG is of interesto computational linguists for three additional reasons :  , * the conceptual input to the text generation process is derived from data that also drive a graphic display on a workstation for forecasters  ; this determination of text fror a a selected subset of graphically displaye data represents an important paradigm for the transformation of information  ; ? conceptual processing results in an " interlin -gual " representation  , a kind of deep syntactic structure for both English and French in this sublanguage  ; ? sentence generation is carried out using a " streamlined " version of the Meaning-Text linguistic model  ; this may represent the first time that such a general model has been adapted to the descriptive problems arising intelegraphic sublanguages  . 
1This work was carried out at Odyssey Research Associates  , Montreal , url der contract with Enviromnent Canada . 
Curren ~ affiliatiolm of the authors are : Bourbeau  , Kittredge and Polgu ~ reat Universitg de Montrdal \[ c-mail:bourbeau/ldttredg/polguere@iro  . umontreM . ca \]; Carcagno at CGF- , -Marcoussis , France\[carcagno@crcgel . cge . fr\]; Goldberg at Environment Canada , Toronto\[eli@aeshq . uucp\] . 
2 The Graphical Environment of Weather Forecasting Operational meteorologists normally work with graphical representations of the information available to them  . " Charts " are used to display the large volumes of observational data and also the results of global simulations of the atmosphere  . The graphical entities displayed on these charts ( such as weather fronts , and low pressure systems ) are manipulated to adjust for more recent data , and for perceived errors in the simula?ions . This results in manually created weather depictions which are valid at some future time  ( 24 to 36 hours in the future )  . 
The weather situation is always being monitored and updated as new information is received and assimilated  . During the normal course of events , much of the communication between forecasters i done using these charts  . When it is time to write a forecast for some user community  , the forecaster has to extract the pertinent information from these charts and recast them into a structured text  . In addition , the ' primary ' information taken from the charts has to be modified for local geographic effects  . The forecaster appears to do this while the text is being composed  . This mental transposition of meteorological information from graphical to text form is believed to be open to a number of subjective rrors  . In addition , the pressure to compose text often conflicts with the scientific demands of analyzing an emerging weather situation  . 
FoG is part of the recently implemented Forecast Production Assistant  ( FPA ) \[7\] , which uses interactive computer graphics to Mlow the meteorologist to view and edit a display of the weather situation  . All of the fields produced by the largescale computation are directly available on the FPA together with any manually produced products  . This makes it possible to obtain numerical values directly from the charts and to use them in other application such as FoG  . 
All of the fields required to produce forecas text can be obtained from the computer graphics  . 
318 i3 From Data to Concepts
A sampling procedure is used to determine values of these fields at specific latitude and longitudes which have been preselected as being representative of weather conditions over a specified geographic area  . 
Computer animation techniques are used to interpo ~ late between the standard chart times  ( normally ew . 
cry1 . 2 hours ) to whatever time resolution is required for the text product  . Currently , charts are available at intervals of three hours through the forecast period  . The problem is that this yields nine values for a  24 hour forecast . Practical considerations limit the number of events  ( e . g . shifts in wind speed or direction ) in a forecas to three or four , depending on the severity of the weather . The conceptual phase of the processing treats the sampled data so that only the significant events in time and space are passed onto textual encoding  . 
Conceptual processing involves several stages .  1 ) Events requiring " weather warnings " are identified and stored before any data smoothing is done  ,  2 ) Sampled data is smoothed with respect otime so that only the significant weather changes are retained  ,  3 ) Spatial smoothing is done so that are as sharing similar weather conditions can be grouped together in the text  . We have noticed , however , that the notion of " significance " is partly dependent on the ability of the lexicon of the forecast language to make semantic distinctions  . Thus , a wind change of 30 degrees is more likely to be judged significant when it crosses the boundary between  , say , north-easterly and easlerly , than when it stays entirely within the range of one of these terms  . The semantic granularity of temporal adverbs has a similar " antic-ipatory " effect on the way generalizations are made over tirne  . This constitutes a kind of filter on content determination that precedes formal text planning  . 
tion ( the conceptual representation corresponding to one future text  ) into sentencc ~ sized chunks of infor ~ mation ( " sentence partitioning " ) within the complex text structure . The chunks are then linearly ordered according to principles that are sometimes domain-specific  , but often more general ( e . g . , temporal sequence ) . There is a subsidiary problem of making hill or partial copies of certain concepts to assure continuity of reference between consecutive sentences  . 
The output of the text structuring process gives , f breach forecast area , a partitioned and possibly enriched structure called the " text representation "  . 
The final stage in text planning involves converting the single partitioned text representation into an a  ( > tual sequence of conceptual representations for individual sentences  . The strong similarity between forecast styles and structures used in Canadian marine forecasts in the two official languages makes it possible to formulate a single interlingual structure  , which can map quite directly to the " deep " syntactic structure of the corresponding sentence in either English or French  . The primary issue here is the identity of information conveyed in the two parallel sublanguages  , and the fact that sentence scoping may be performed in identical ways on the text con--tent representation sued for English/I~'ench  . There is no guarantee that such an interlingua would suffice for a language using a very different conceptual system or communication style for weather phenomena  ( e . g . , hmktitut ) . 
5 Meaning-Text Realization
Component 4 Text Planning
Text planning in l , bG consists of three stages : content determination  , text structuring and interlingua production . Content determination covers the problems of ( 1 ) converting the smoothed at a on significant meteorological events into complex objects appropriate for inferencing  , one object for each meteorological event of interest  , and ( 2 ) using the structured data objets to compute additional concepts needed to talk about transitions between weather events  . ':\[' he output of content determination is , for each ! Forecast area , an enriched data object called a " text content representation "  . 
Text structuring consists basically of finding the optimal way of cutting each text content represents - The last part of forecast generation involves the relatively well-developed technique of sentence realization  . By this we mean the conversion of interlingual representations of English/French sentences into acceptable word strings in one or tile other of these two languages  . To guarantee generality and longterm flexibility of linguistic modelling  , we have chosen to use the Meaning-Text linguistic theory of  Mel'auk\[8\]  , which has also served as the framework for text generation in other technical  sublanguages\[5  , 4\] . Because of the lack of semantic paraphrase in the forecasting sublanguage considered  , however , we have eliminated the semantic net representations from the processing stages  , passing directly from interlingual representations to deep syntactic dependency  trees\[10\]  . 
We have implemented a fragment of an existing Meaning-Text model for  English\[9\] and adapted this model for 15"each  . 
431 96 Implementation
FoG is written in Quintus Proleg and runs on a Hewlett-Packard  9000 workstation as part of the FPA system . The graphics software on the FPA workstation is programmed mostly in C  . As of April 1990 , the entire FPA is undergoing testing by three region alweather centres in Eastern Canada and is being phased into daily production  , initially during one of the three daily work shifts  . 
7 Future Plans
Since FoG is now configured only to produce marine forecasts for the Halifax  , Gander and Great Lakes regions of Canada , an early priority is to adap the software ( mostly the text planner ) to the different content and style of forecasting found in Pacific Canada and othermarine regions  , and to specialized marine forecasts ( e . g . , for small craft ) . Concurrently , investigation should continue into extending the system to other forecast types  , including a griculturalnd general public forecasts  . We expect hat our linguistic model will also facilitate the addition of high-quality voice output as an option at some future time  . 

Kittred ~ eR ., Polguhre A . and Goldberg E.
(1986 ) " Synthesizing Weather Forecasts from Formatted Data "  , Proc . of the 11th Intl . Conf . 
on Computational Linguistics , Bonn.
McLeod J . C .   ( 1990 ) " The Forecast Production Assistant " Preprinls Sixth International Conference on Interactive Information and Processing Systems for Meteorology  , Oceanography and Hydrology , Anaheim CA , Amer . Meteor . Soc . 
Mel'6uk I . (1981) " Meaning-Text Models " , Annual Review of Anthropology , vol . 10, pp . 27-62 . 
Mel'0 . ukI . and Percov N . (1987) Surface Syntax of English , Benjamins . 
Polgu ~ reA .   ( 1988 ) A Dependency Grammar for Marine Weather Forecasts  , Technical report , Odyssey Research Associates , Montreal . 
Polgu ~ reA ., Bourbeau L . and Kittredge R.
(1987) RAREAS . 2: Bilingual Synthesis of Arctic Marine Forecasts . Technical report , Odyssey
Research Associates , Montreal.
References\[1\]CarcagnoD .   ( 1989 ) Text Planning for Generation of Weather Forecasts  , Technical report , Odyssey Research Associates , Montreal . 
\[2\] Carcagno D . and Iordanskaja L .   ( 1989 ) " Content Determination and Text Structuring in GOSSIP "  , Extended Abstracts of the Second European Workshop on Nalural Language Generation  , Edinburgh . 
\[3\] Goldberg E . , Kittredge R . and Polgu ~ reA .   ( 1988 ) " Computer Generation of Marine Weather Forecast Text "  , Journal of Atmo-spheric and Oceanic Technology , vol . 5, no . 4, pp . 473-483 . 
\[4\] I or dans kaja L . , Kittredge R . and Polgugre A . 
(1988 ) " Implementing a Meaning-Text Model for Language Generation " supplement to Proc  . 
of the 12th Inll . Conf . on Computational Linguistics , Budapest . 
\[5\] Kittredge R . , Iordanskaja L . and Polgu ~ reA . 
(1988 ) " MultiLingual Text Generation and the Meaning - Text Theory "  , Proc . of the 2nd International Conf . on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Languages  , Carnegie Mellon University . 

