tV Io deling syntactic constraints on anaphoric binding 
Mary Dalrymple
SRI International

Stanford University
John Maxwell

Annie Zaenen


CSLI , Stanford University
Abstract
Syntactic on straints on antecedent-anaphor relations can be stated within the theory of Lexical Functional Grammar  ( henceforth LFG ) through the use of functional uncertainty ( Kaplan and Maxwell 1988 ; Halvorsen and Kaplan 1988 ; Ks-plan and Zaenen 1989) . In the following , we summarize the general characteristics of syntactic constraints on anaphoric binding  . Next , we describe a variation of functional uncertainty called inside-out functional uncertainty and show how it can be used to model anaphoric binding  . Finally , we discuss some binding constraints claimed to hold in natural language to exemplify the mechanism  . We limit our attention throughout to coreference possibilities between definite antecedents and anaphoric elements and ignore interactions with quantifiers  . 
We also limit our discussion to intrasentent iM relations  . 
1 Genera l character i s t i cs o f syntact i c constraints on anaphoric binding The relation between an anaphor and its antecedent is semantic in nature  . In the simple cases that we limit our attention to here  , the two are coreferent .   1 This semantic relation is subject to syntactic constraints  , however , and it is the statement of these constraints that we focus on  . 
In the LFG approach to these constraints proposed in Bresnan et al  ( 1985 )  ,   2 binding conditions are stated as conditions on f -structure configurations rather than conditions on c-structures  . Two kinds of syntactic fac-1This is of course not always the case . Reciprocals and binding by quantified NP's are two wellknown cases in which the semantic relation is more complicated  . 
2 For a summary of the views in Bresnan et al ( 1985 )  , see Sells (1985) . 
tots are shown to influence anaphoric binding possibilities : the grammatical function of the potential antecedent  ( in particular whether or not it is a subject ) and the characteristics of the syntactic domain in which the potential antecedent and the anaphor are found  ( for example , whether that domain is tensed or whether it has a subject  )  . In Bresnan et al (1985) , anaphors are consequently annotated for both domain and antecedent constraints  . 
Some constraints are stated in positive terms : the antecedent must be tbund within a particular domain or have a particular function  . In other cases the constraints are negative : the antecedent and the anaphor cannot both be part of a particular domain  , or the antecedent cannot bear a particular grammatical function  . Under such negative conditions , the anaphor is disjoint in reference from its antecedent  . 
2 Mode l ing b ind ing const ra in ts w i th funct ional uncertainty F-structure relations are in some cases not characterizable as a finite disjunction over paths : for example  , dependencies between ~ fillers ' and ' gaps ' in , for example , relative clauses and wh-questions . Functional uncertainty was developed for the analysis of such dependencies  . 
Kaplan and Maxwell ( 1988 ) and Kaplan and Zaenen ( 1989 ) develop a formal specification of relations involving disjunction over paths by allowing the argument position of function M equations to denote a set of strings  . Suppose ( t is a ( possibly in finite ) set of symbol strings ; then (1) ( f a ) = v holds if and only if a . f = v and e6a , or b . (( f s ) Surf(s , a )) = v for some symbols , where Surf(s , a ) is the set of suffix strings y such that s y 6 a . 

An equation with a string-set argument holds if and only if it holds for some string in that set  . 
This kind of equation is trivially unsatisfiable if  . c , denotes the empty set . If a is a finite set , this\[brmula is equivalent to a finite disjunction of equations over the strings in a  . Passing from finite disjunction to existential quantification enables us to capture the intuition of unbounded uncertainty as an underspecification fexactly which choice of strings in a will be compatible with the functional information carried by the ~  ; urrounding surfacenvironment . 
Kaplan and Zaenen ( 1989 ) require that a be drawn from the class of regular languages  . The characterization funcertainty in a particular grammatical equation can then be stated as a regular expression over the vocabulary of grammatical fllnction names  . 
Functional uncertainty can also be used in the case of negative constraining equations  . In that situation , the requirement is that there be no path picked out by the regular expression that makes the equation true  . That is , the negation of an expression ivolving functional uncertainty has the effect of negating an existentially quantified expression  . 
Kaplan and Zaenen ( 1989 ) consider only expressions of the form ( f where a is a . regular expression . In expressions such as tihese , are presents a path through the f-structure f . We refer to paths of this type as Path In , and to functional uncertainty of this type as outside-in functional uncertainty  . 
In II alvorsen and Kaplan (1988) , expressions of the form ( af ) are introduced . We will refer to the path in expressions of this form as PathOut  , and to func-tion M uncertainty of this type as inside-out functional uncertainty  . Expressions involving inside-out functional uncertainty are interpreted as denoting fstructures fi'om which f is reachable over some path in a  . 
More formally: ( 2 )   ( af ) = gehi3sea\[ ( hs ) --~ f\] ( af ) denote some f-structure g through which L here is a path in the set of strings a leading t of  . The equation = ~ is a constraining equation checking for the existence of such an f -structure  . 
Relations between anaphors and their antecedents are also in some cases not characterizable as a finite disjunction of paths within fstructures  ; for this reason , the use of functional uncertainty in characterizing the anaphor antecedent relation seems appropriate  . 
In our view , modeling anaphoric binding constraints consists of specifying a set off-structure paths relating anaphors with elements that are either possible or disallowed antecedents  . We use inside-out functional uncertainty to characterize the relation between an anaphor and these elements  . 
To illustrate , the antecedent of the Norwegian anaphorseg must be a subject outside of the minimal complete clause nucleus  3 in which seg appears ; this antecedent can be at an indefinite distance away from the anaphor  , as long as only the highest nucleus in the domain contains a tense marker  ( tIellan 1988 ; p . 73): (3) Jonba doss for soke if ? degtil
Jon/asked us to try to get you to?s nakkepentom segtal knicely about himi Under an LFG analysis  , the path between the antecedent and the anaphor in  ( 3 ) contains three XCOMPs , as diagrammed in Figure 1 . Assume that TA denotes the f-structure for seg , the structure labeled 9 in : Figure 1 . The set of nested fstructures containing 9 is characterized by the regular expression ( 4 )   ( XCOMP*OBJTA ) In Figure 1 , this set consists of the structures labeled 1 ,  2 ,  3 , and 4 . The expression in ( 5 ) designates the subjects of these four fstructures  , those labeled 5 ,  6 , 7 and 8: (5) (( XCOMP*o . JsvBJ ) F-structures 5 ,  6 , and 7 are the fstructures of the possible antecedents of seg : the subjects outside of the minimal clause nucleus in which seg appears  . F-structure 8 is not a possible antecedent for seg , since it appears in the same minimal clause nucleus asseg  ; f-structure 8 will 3A clause nucleus is formed by any predicate ( regardless of its syntactic ategory ) and its dependents . A complete clause nucleus is a clause nucleus with a subject dependent  . 
2731: suBJ5:\[\]
XCOMP2:s,BJ6:\[\]
XCOMP3: XCOMP4:\[OBJ9:\[(anaphor)i
Figure 1: F-structure for sentence ( 3 ) be excluded from the set of possible antecedents for seg by a negative constraint  . 
More schematically , the set of possible antecedents of an anaphoric phrase can be characterized by an expression of the form in  ( 6 ) :  ( 6 )   ( ( PathOut TA ) Pathln )   ( Path Out TA ) picks out the set of fstructures which contain the anaphor and in which the antecedent must be located  . Path In characterizes the functional role of the antecedent  . I is a general constraint on antecedent-anaphor relations that the the antecedent must f - command  4 the anaphor ; for this reason , the Path In is always of length one . The Path In , then , consists of ( and constrains ) the grammatical function borne by the antecedent . 
Conditions on the binding domain a reformal-izable as conditions on the PathOut  , since the PathOut characterizes the domain in which both the anaphor and its antecedent are found  . ~ Ve will look in detail at one such constraint ; before doing so , however , we make a simplifying assumption about the semantics of the anaphorantecedent relation  . 
In the simple cases we are considering here , the relation is be represented as identity between the semantic ontent of the anaphor and its antecedent  . Elaboration of this representation would require us to introduce the LFG mechanism of projections  ( HM vorsen and Kaplan 1988 )  , which is beyond the scope of this paper . 
Here we will use the informal notation in ( 7 ) :  ( 7 ) < cr > ( ( PathOut \]' A ) Path In ) =< a>TA4 Bresnan ( 1982 ) defines f-command as follows : for any functions GF1  , GF2 in an f-structure ,   GF1 f-commands GF2 iff GF1 does not contain GF2 and every f-structure that contains GF1 contains GF2  . 
to indicate that the semantics of the anaphor , < a > TA , is to be identified with the semantics of its antecedent  . The material in angle brackets stands for the mapping  ( not further specified ) between the syntax and the semantics . 
To preven the anaphoric element from being contained in its antecedent  , we formulate the constraint in (8) , where TANT stands for the f-structure of the antecedent :  ( 8 )  -1 \[ ( TANTGF + ) = ~' A \] The effect of this constraint is very similar to the i-within-i condition in Government -Binding Theory  ( Chomsky 1981 )  . It has been argued that this constraint should be relaxed  ( see e . g . 
Hellan ( 1988 ) ) but the correct analysis of putative counterexamples is not clear  . We will assume here that the constraint can be maintained  . 
We now describe how to model a domain constraint hatholds of some anaphors : some anaphors must be bound within the minimal complete nucleus -- the minimal nucleus containing a subject  . 
Let F1 designate an f-structure containing the anaphor . We can characterize F1 in the following way : ( 9 ) F1 = ( GF+TA ) where GF denotes the set of grammatical function labels  . 
For F1 to be a valid binding domain for anaphor subject othis constraint  , it ; must not contain any smaller f-structure that properly contains the anaphor and a subject  . That is , FI must be the smallest complete nucleus . We will define DPF ( ' domain path f-structure ' ) as any of the fstructures that contain the anaphor and are properly contained in FI :  74   3   ( i0 )   ( DPF , GF +) = ~ TA
DP F1 == ?( F1GF+)
It is these intermediate fstructures that must n . ot contain a subject : ( 1\] )  -~ ( DP F1 SUBJ ) The constraint that an anaphor must be bound within the minimal complete nucleus can  , then , be stated as follows : (\] . 2) a . < o "> ( F1GF ) = < cr > TAb . - ~ CD PF1 SUBJ ) These two equations ensure identity between the semantic content of the anaphor and its antecedent  , where the an . tecedent is the value of some GF of an f -structure  F1 that contains the anaphor . There may not be a f-structure DPF1 that is properly contained in F1 which has a subject . 
% Examples of anaphoric binding
We now illustrate the use of these binding constraints with some of the conditions that have been proposed for English  , Marathi , and Scan-dinavian pronouns and reflexives , The English retlexive pronoun was described in Bresnan et al  ( 1985 ) as having to be bound in the minimal complete nucleus  , as illustrated by the following contrast : (11 . 3) a . He it old us about himself / . 
b . We told himia bouthimselfi.
c.*Hei asked us to tell Mary about himself/.
As discussed in Section 2 , this pattern of grammaticality judgments can be modeled by the constraints given in  ( 9 ) through ( 12 )  . 
The an . tecedent of the Marathi reflexive , ~: wataah must be a subject , but may be at an ia definite distance from the anaphor  , so long as the antecedent and the anaphor appear in the same minimal tensed domain  . Th . isreq , irement can be translated into the following path specification  . 
(~14) a.<o>(F ~ SUBJ ) = < cs > TA
S Data are from Bresna . net al (1985) , ttellan (1988) , and D ~ flrymple ( in prep . ) . 
b .  -~ ( DP F1 TENSE ) = + where F1 and DPF1 are as defined above According to these equations  , the antecedent of the anaphor must be contained in an f-structure  F1  ; further , there must not be an f-structure DPF1 properly contained in F 1 that has a TENSE attribute with value + . 
A more interesting ease arises when a binding relation is subject to both a negative and a positive constraint  . An example is the Swedish anaphor honornsjiil v . Its antecedent must appear in its minimal complete clause nucleus  , but it must be disjoint from subjects . This anaphor occurs Micitously within the following sentence :  ( 15 ) Martin badoss bergtt afhr honom
Martini asked us to talk to him/omhonoms jglv about himself/Conditions on honoms jiilv do not prohibit Martin and honoms jiil v from being interpreted as coreferent  , though Martin bears the grammatical function suBJ  . This is because Martin appears outside the binding domain of honoms fiilv and is thus not considered when either positive or negative binding constraints are applied  . 
In our framework , two constraints are required for honoms jiilv . One , (16) a , states the positive constraint : the domain in which the antecedent of ho nom sj filv must be found  . 
The other , (16) b , states the negative constraint : honoms jhlv must be disjoint from the subject in that domain  . 
(\]6) a . \[ F1 = ( ( J'F + TA ) A < ~ r > ( F1 GF ) = < cr >\] AA - ~ ( DP F1 SUBJ ) \] b . ~\[ V := ( aF + ~ A ) A < a > ( F2 SUBJ ) =<~> TA-~ ( DPF2SUBJ ) \] The negative constraint rules out coreference only between the anaphor and the subject of the minimal complete clause nucleus  ; it does not prevent coreference between the anaphor honomzjiilv and a subject Martin outside the binding domain  . In general , negative binding constraints do not hold in a larger domain than is specified by the positive equation  . 

For the Norwegian anaphoric for mhans , the only specifications are negative ( Hellan ( 1988 )  , Bresnan et al (1985)) ; it must be disjoint from the immediately higher subject  . We can encode this requirement as: ( 17 ) -1\[F1 = ( GF+~A ) A < ~2 > ( F1 SUBJ ) = < cT > TAA ~ ( DP F1 SUBJ ) \] This is the same negative requirement as was illustrated above  , in example (16) . As no positive requirement is given , no antecedent relation is imposed . It is assumed that another module , presumably the discourse component , will supply a referent for the pronoun . 
4 Conclusion
We have sketched a way to use inside-out functional uncert Mnty to constrain the relation between an anaphor and an antecedent  . A formal theory of anaphoric binding will involve a specification of a universal inventory of anaphoric binding possibilities and possible dependencies between them  . 
A general discussion of such a theory is beyond the scope of this paper  , but we conclude by indicating how our approach captures a few of the crosslinguistic properties of anaphoric binding  . 
If the domMn and the antecedent binding requirements for an anaphor are both positive or both negative  , the requirements must be satisfied by the same element  . This is enforced by requiring that only one positive and one negative equation can be associated with each anaphor  . 
Additionally , only elements that are superior to the element should be considered in applying the constraints  . GF1 is superior to GF2 if ( 1 ) GF1 asymmetrically f-commands GF2 , or (2) GF1 and GF2f-command each other , and GF1 is higher on the hierarchy of grammatical functions given in  ( 18 ) :  ( 18 ) SUBJ > OBJ > OBJ2>OBL > ADJAs noted above , the f-command requirement is enforced by the requirement that the PathOut be non-null and the Path Inbe of length one  . 
The modelling of the functional hierarchy given in  ( 18 ) within on r framework is , however , a task that remains to be done . 
Af in Mobservation is that inside-outfllnc-tional uncertainty can interact without side-in functional uncertainty as used in the analysis of dependencies between ' fillers ' and ' gaps '  , as in the following : (19) a . * Bill said that Suelikes himself . 
b . ttimself , Bill said that Suelikes.
Preliminary research indicates that no special machinery is needed to model the right interactions in these cases  . 

Bresnan , J .  1982 . Control and complementation . In J . Bresnan ( Ed . ) , The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations  ,  282-390 . 
Cambridge , Mass .: MIT Press.
Bresnan , J ., P . - K . Halvorsen , and J . Ma.ling.
1985. Logophoricity and bound anaphors.
Ms , Stantbrd University.
Chomsky , N .  1981 . Lectures on Government and Binding . Dordrecht : Foris Publications . 
Dalrymple , M . in prep . Syntactic CoT~straints on Anaphoric Binding . PhD thesis , Stanford

ttal vorsen , P . -K . , and R . M . Kaplan .  1988 . Projections and semantic description in Lexical -Functional Grammar  . In Proceedings of the International Co@fence on Fifth Generation Computer Systems  ,  1116-1122 , Tokyo , Japan . 
Institute for New Generation Systems.
ttellan , L .  1988 . Anaphora in Norwegian and the Theory of Grammar . Dordrecht : Foris Publications . 
Kaplau , R . M . , and J . Maxwell .  1988 . An algorithm for functional uncertainty , in Proceedings of COLING 88 . 
Kaplan , R . M . , and A . Zaenen .  1989 . Long-distance dependencies , constituent structure , and flmctional uncertainty . In M . Baltin and A . Kroch ( Eds . ), Alternative Conceptions of Phrase Structure . Chicago University Press . 
Sells , P .  1985 . Lectures on Contemporary Syntactic Theories . Stanford University : CSLI/University of Chicago Press  . CSM Lecture Notes , Number 3 . 

