Discourse Processing in MT :
Problems in Pronominal Translation
Hajime Wada : wadah@yvax.by u.edu
Department of Linguistics , The University of Texas at Austin

ECS , 455 North University , Suite 202 , Provo , UT 84601 , U . S . A . 
Keywords : Machine Translation , Anaphora , Discourse Representation Theory , Focus 1 . Intrcnluction Translation of anaphoric expressions has been problematic in most of the MT systems  ( Key 1986 )  . 
One ot'themain reasons for the difficulties lies in the lack of discourse information representation in the MT systems  . In this paper , we report an implementation f the Discourse Representation Theory in an LFG-based English-to -Japanese MT program  , and discuss problems in translating anaphoric expressions in this system  . 
2. Problems in Translating An aplmra
Problems in translation of anaphoric expressions can be seen on three different but interactive levels of linguistic information : lexical  , syntactic and pragmatic . 
The main problem on the lexical level is due to a difference in the language specific parameters in the pronominal system such as F features  ( person , gender , number , etc . ) . Surface forms of pronominals depend on the F features of their antecedents  , o that the translation of a particular pronominal form cannot be determined sorely by the pronominal itself  . For example , ' ship ' in English is feminine , but its translation , ' hune ' , is neutral in Japanese . Thus , a preform ' she ' for'ship ' should not be translated as ' kanojo '  ( 3rd , sing , fem ) , but as ' sore ' (3rd , sing , neut ) . 
Problems on the syntactic level are mainly due to a difference in the distribution of anaphoric expressions  . 
Mapping relations between English pronominals and their Japanese counterparts are shown below : 
E ~ ! ~ ish ~ oanes e
Overt Pronoun ~-., ~ Overt Pronoun
Reflexives ~ zibun

Empty Pronoun - - ~ Control-Zero\Topic-Zero The most crucial case is English overt pronouns  . As Kurodanoted (1965:107) , overt pronouns are not repeatable in Japanese , while they are in English . 
(1) a . He does Iris work when he feels like doing it . 
b . * Kare-wa kare-gasitai toki-nika re-no he'FOP he NOM like to do when his GEN sigoto-wo suru  . 
work ACC do
Instead of repeating overt pronouns , zero pronominals and ' zibun ' should be used though there are some variations in their use  . 
c . Kare-wa 0 sitaitoki-ni ~ sigoto-wo suru.
d . Kare-wa zibun-gasitai toki-ni0sigoto-wo sum . 
e . Kare-wa 0 sitaitoki-nizil ) un-no sigoto-wo suru . 
Resumptive pronouns are also problematic.
Possessive relative pronoun ' whose ' in English must be translated as a resumptive pronoun whose antecedent is the head NP of a relative clause in Japanese  . 
The last set of problems is on the level o1' pragmatics . It has been known that in many languages certain types of pronominal expressions represent a focus in a discourse  . For example , in English , overt pronouns play this role while zero pronouns  ( topic-zero ) do the job in Japanese . In a certain discourse context , a discourse focus should be translated as a reflexive ' zibun ' instead of a zero pronoun  . 
Some cases may be induced to lexical properties of predicates and pronominal such as functional and psuedo-functional control cases and reflexivity  . 
Nonetheless , most of the above problems are not easily separable  ; they should better be solved in a unified model . 
3. Treatment of Pronominal Translation
In this paper , we will focus on the problems of translating English overt nonreflexive pronominals into Japanese  . Thesel ) ronominals must be mapped into 1 ) overtl ) ronominals , 2)' zibun ' , 3) pro , or 4) discourse proin Japanese . 
3.1. Role of Discourse
To explain some exceptions on locality conditions and ambiguous cases in anaphora resolution  , recent studies have focused on the role of discourse  ( Grosz 1981 ; Sidner 1983 ; Joshi & Weinstein 1981 ; Kameyama 1985 ; Roberts 1986) and world knowledge . Discourse factors affecting anaphora resolution are discourse structure and discourse focus /center  . This report concerns only the latter ; in particular , the selection of focus and its maintenance . 
Following Grosz , we assume that a focus is the most salient NP in a sentence  , and every sentence has one and only one focus 1 . Often a focus is marked by the use of pronominal , stress , thematic role and particular syntactic construction such as clefting  , question , passivization , etc . However , there seems no clear generalization on the organization of the focus marking factors  . We simply assume the most marked NP with respect odie number of found factors  ( asher & Wada 1989 ; Alshawi 1987) . 
We have adopted the Discourse Representation Structure  ( Kamp 1981 ) to represent a current discourse structure which will be appended to an f-structure representing a sentence  . DRS+f-structure gives a ground for examining logical conditions based  1 We concern a local focus only , and multiple focicases are excluded from our discussion  . 
173 on the accessibility condition , and locality conditions such as disjoint reference on each anaphoric expression  ( cf . Roberts 1986) . 
Now consider 4) discourse pro . Its characteristic is that it may not be bound in the current sentence  , but must be bound by the focus in the previous discourse  . 
In other words , when a pronominal cannot find its antecedent in the current DRS  , we assume that it must be bound by the previous discourse focus unless the focus has been shifted  , and in such a case we translate it as ~ , a lexical zero pronominal . 
3.2. Proform Selection by FU
On the other hand , when an antecedent is found in the DRS , the anaphoric link will be noted not only in DRS , but also in relevant fstructures via feature such as Ant  ( ecedent ) and Desc ( endent ) with a common index . However , we still need to determine which form should be used : pro  , ' zibun ' , or overt pronominals . The selection should be syntactically made on the Japanese side since no additional information is available for the selection in the English fstructures  . 
Let us discuss the syntactic mechanism for the proforrn selection  . Suppose that a proform be lexically presented in each noun in the lexicon such as  follows2: I ~ ENDER mscGENDER msc ) ROFORI'I'he'PROFORid'he'When the two shown above are anaphorically linked in a sentence  , LFG offers a syntactic solution , namely , the Functional Uncertainty ( Kaplan & Maxwell 1988 )  3 . The link is represented by a functional -application equation  ( FU ) such as follows: ( 2 ) <^/GF*\GFPREFORM >=<^ PREFORM > In the above FU  , the second GF after the right slash represents an f-structure that dominates a possible antecedent  , and the first GF * after the left slash , f-commanding path to the antecedent from the current f-structure  4  . That is , the FU imposes a constraint such that the right hand side of the equation in  ( 2 ) represents an f-structure containing a pronominal , and if there is an f-structure within the path represented by the lefthand side of the equation  , then it must be the case that their PROFORMs are unifiable  5  . 
For the generation of surface PROFORMs , we assume that a pronominal element possesses a lexically unspecified PREFORM  , and it will be specified by its antecedent . In other words , given that a pronominal and its antecedent are coindexed  , an FU such as follows should be satisfied . 
(3 ) <^/GF*\GF*Ant >= c<^Desc > 2plural PROFORMs should be assigned to NPs syntactically . 
3The stone mechanism has been used in other cases uch as the noun classifier selection for numeral expressions and negative scope domain setting by ' wa ' in Japanese  ( Wadaforth coming )  . 
4 This has been done by pointing the antecedent from the current l'-structure  . 
5 Note that the equation is far more powerful than this description  . 
This equation can be solved only when the indices are identical  . Once the equation (3) is solved , PREFORM will be unified between the antecedent and the pronominal  6 Selection on pro and ' zibun ' can be considered as solving particularly restricted FU equations  . For example , ' zibun'will be selected when the following
FU equation is satisfied 7.
(4) <^/ GF(ADJUNCT)GF*' , SUBJAnt >= c<ADesc > This equation says that if there exists a SUBJ that f-commands GF  ( s ) that may contain an adjunct which includes an f -structure in which the current prore sides  , then it must be the case that the Ant value of that SUBJ and Desc value of the proare identical  . 
Each unspecified'pro'will carry a set of equations  , each of which selects a particular PREFORM disjunctively  . 
(5 ) \[< A/G F ( ADJUNCT ) GF*KSUBJAnt >= c < ADOSC > <^ PREFORM >=' zibun'\]\[<A/GF*ADJUNCT xSUBJAnt >= c < ADesc > <^ PREFORM >=  0 \]\[<^/GF*\GF*Ant >= c<^Desc > < A PREFORM >=<! APREFORM >\]  4  . Implementation of the Treatment The anaphora resolution mechanism in our program consists of three functional units : the DRS construction  ( DRSCONS )  , the salient element storing ( SLSTOR ) , and the antecedent searching ( ANSR ) . 
4.1. DRSCONS
This module constructs DRSs compositionally , following Montagovian tradition ( Wada8 , : Asher 1986 , Reyle 1988) . Thus , we assume that a semantic representation , SMS , is appended to each F-structure . 
SMS is a pair < SemType , DRS > , where SemType is a semantic type . 
4.2. SLSTOR
SLSTOR's main function is to store the most salient  , focused element in the current discourse for the next sentence processing  ( Alshawi 1987 ; Asher & Wada 1989) . In order to find the most salient NP , SLSTOR sets three kinds of filters among others such as grammatical function  , use of pronominal , and syntactic onstruction ( See Asher & Wada 1989 )  , and check all of the NPs appeared in the current sentence with respect o the three filters  . 
After the most salient element has been selected , SLSTOR checks whether the current focus has been shifted or retained by comparing the current SLSTOR value and the newly selected one  . If their gender , number , person , etc . are unifiable , the discourse focus is considered to retain and SLSTOR keeps the previous NP in the storage  . If they are not unifiable , the focus has been shifted , and SLSTOR stores the newly selected element as a current focus  . 
4 . 3 . ANSR 6Resumptive pronouns are treated in the same way shown above , except for the coindexation . Since an antecedent for a resumptive pronoun is always the head NP of the relative clause and therefore  , the coindexation is not necessary . 
7 This is the condition that Kuroda ( 1965 ) proposed , and still has been a basically correct generalization  . 

This module consists of three functions . The first function is SEARCH . SEARCH searches antecedents by testing the accessibility on the DRS and morphosyntactic constraint such as gender  , number , and binding features ( sub , nuclear , etc ) on the current f-structure . If a search in the DRS fails , SEARCH further searches in SLSTOR , and check a focused element in SLSTOR . In effect , we distinguish pronominals into three classes according SEARCH's result  ; 1) an antecedent found in the current DRS , 2) an antecedent not found in the current DRS , but controlled by a discourse focus , and 3 ) an antecedent not found in either in the current DRS or in the previous focus  . 
The second function is LINK . In the case in 1) above , \] LINK will set a unique anaphoric index in both F-struct m'es of the antecedent and its pronominal and assigns an unspecified ' pro ' to the pronominal  . 
The last function is SETPRO , which assigns 0 to the pronominal in the case of 2  )  , and assigns a default word-for-word translation i the case of  3  )  . 
5. Examples
Let us take some examples . First , consider the following donkey sentence . 

Every man who loves a ship treats her tenderly.
' Her'will be linked with ' aship ' by SEARCH due to the accessibility of ' aship ' to'her ' on the DRS  . Then , the same anaphoric index is assigned to the transfer f-structure of ' aship ' and of ' her ' by LINK  . ' Her'is translated as an unspecified'pro ' as shown below  . 

Hune we aisuruo to kowamina soreweitukushimu.
ship ACC lovem an TOP every it ACC treat-tender In this result  , an overt pronominal , ' sore ' , is selected for'pro'since the f-structure for ' hune ' and ' pro'sh are an anphoric index  , and the last clause in the FU equation in ( 5 ) is satisfied . 
Suppose that the next sentence appeare discourse -initially  . 
(7-a ) John believes that she is a genius.
Since there is neither a sentence-internal antecedent nor a previous focus  , ' she'gets a defaul translation , ' kanojo ' . However , if the following sentence precedes the sentence in  ( 7- a )  , a lexical ~ will be selected as the target for ' she'because ' Mary ' is the focus of  ( 7-b ) since it is a SUBJ and appears in a passive construction  . 
(7-b ) Mary was aw , ' uded as a distinguished artist . 
Now , consider the next example.
(8-a ) John works when he wants to do his work.
In the above example , ' his'should be linked to'he'and'he'to ' John '  . Each anaphoric index has a different value , but both of the pronominals will be translated as unspecified'pro's  . However , the equation (5) gives them different PROFORMs , ' his ' ' zibun ' and ' he ' ~ . 
This is indeed a desired result as shown below.

John-wa 0 zibun-no sigoto-wo sitai-toki-ni hataraku . 
John TOP POSS work ACC want-to-do when work 6 . Remaining Problems A note on defects and shortcomings i in order  . 
It is no doubt that world knowledge plays an important role in anaphora resolution  . We assume that in the near future , a world knowledge inferencing module should become available  , and that it will be incorporated into our system . 
We assumed that an input text as a whole consists a discourse segment  ; however , this is due to the lack of a treatment in discourse segmentation i our program  . 
One related problem is on tim distinction of the global focus and local loci  . Since our program considers only one segment at a time  , there is no way to handle complex foci . 
Another , are a which we need to handle but has been neglecting is number related expression such as plural antecedents and split antecedents  . 
Also , the salient element selection mechanism in our program is still based on a crudestipulation  . We need to conduct furthere search on this topic . 
Finally , it is desirable to map a source DRS to the target DRS and handle language-specific discourse-based expressions  . These will be our next task . 

Alshawi , H .   ( 1987 ) Memory and Context for Language Interpretation , Cambridge University Press . 
Asher , Nicholas (1986) " Belief in Discourse
Representation Theory ", in Journal of
Philosophical Logic , 5, pp . 127-189.
Asher , N . & H . Wada (1989) . " Computational Account of Anaphora " , ms , CGS , Univ . of Texas . 
Gmsz , B .  (1978) . " Discourse Knowledge " , in Understanding Spoken Language , ed . by Donakt
Walker , pp . 228-345,.
Grosz , B .  (1981) . " Focusing in Dialogue " , in TINLAP-2 : Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing  . pp . 96-103 . ACM antiACL . N . Y . 
Joshi , A . & S . Weinstein ( 1981 ) " Control of Inference : Role of Some Aspects of Discourse Structure-Centering "  , in proceedings of 7th IJCAI , pp . 385-387 Kmneyama , Megumi .  (1985) . Zero Anaphora . " Ttw Case of Japanese . Ph . D . dissertation . Stanford

K , ' unp , H .   ( 1981 ) " A Theory of Truth and Semantic Representation " , in Groenendijk and Janssen ( eds ) , Formal Methods in the Study of Language , 
Gronningen : Amsterdam , pp.l-41.
Kmnp , H . (1983) " Situation in Discourse ", ms , CSLI . 
Kaphm , R . & J . Maxwell (1988) . " An Algorithm for Functional Uncertainty " , in the proceedings of
COL1NG-88, pp . 297-302.
Kay , M(1986) " Machine Translation will not work " , in the proceedings of ACL , p . 268 . 
Kuroda , SY .   ( 1965 ) Generative Grammatical Studies in the Japanese Language  , Ph . D . dissertation , MIT . 
Roberts , C . (1986) Modal Subordination , Anaphora , and Distributivity , Ph . D . dissertation , UMASS . 
Reyle , W . (1988) " Computational Sem~mtics for LFG " , in Natural Language Parsing and Linguistics Theories  , eds by U . Reyle and CRohrer , pp . 448-47& Sidner , Candice (1983) . " Focusing in the
Comprehensionf Definite Anaphora ", in
Computational Models of Discourse , eds by R.
Berwickanti M . Brady , pp . 267-330.
Wada , Hajime ( forthcoming ) . " Applications of Functional
Uncertainty in ECS System ", ms.
Wada , Hajime & N . Asher (1986) . "BUILDRS : An hnplementation fDR Theory and LFG  "  , in the proceedings of COLING-86 , pp . 540-546 . 

