Semiautomatic Interactive Multilingual Style Analysis  ( SIMSA ) 
G/inter Winkelmann
TAT riumph-Adler AG
TA Research
Ftirther Strasse 212
D-8500 Nuremberg 80
1 Abstract
A style checker is a tool which supports
authors during the process of writing :
Certain style markers are analyzed , their
values are compared with a given norm,
deviations are detected , and
recommendations are given to the author.
The power of a style checker depends on available tools such as lexica  , parser , etc . 
This paper describes a style checker which will be integrated mawor kbench  ( Translator's Workbench ) and which has access to lexica and parser . The style checker can be used for different languages and for different kinds of text  . 
defined with the help of these values : A stylistic norm fl ~ r technical texts  , for user manuals , for a certain author , etc . 
With respect to these premises we now define style checking as : matching the densities of the features in a given text agains the densities of the corresponding features in the norm  . " Correct style " is correct style concerning a certain  ( group based ) norm . " Incorrect style " is the degree of deviation between the norm values of the style markers and the values in the actual text  . 
3 Recent Approaches 2 Introduction
Within ESPRITII-Project 2315,
Translator's Workbench ( TWB ) , a tool is under development which checks stylistic markers of texts  . According to the goals of Translator's Workbench as an integrated multilingual toolkit  , the concept of the style checker includes multilinguality  , and it uses other tools of Translator's Workbench such as parser and lexicon  , which provide
SIMSA with more power than comparable approaches.
Style as it is understood in SIMSA is not reduced to simply a personal impression  . 
Its description is not restricted to informal classification such as " good style "  , " style like the style of author x " . Within a functional , group based definition , style is the selection of certain words , phrases , sentences or structures out of a set of grammatically correct words  , phrases , sentences or structures . These linguistic features in which texts can differ stylistically are called style markers  . Group based means that these style markers have equal characteristics within a certain group of texts  . 
The stylistic characteristics of a group of texts , their values of style markers , can be set as a norm . Thus , different norms can be Similar approaches ( but within different contexts ) have been done during the last decade . Beside approaches translating style from one language to another via abstract universal categories like text complexity and readability  ( Dimarco/Hirst 1988 )  , two approaches to style checking , Writer's Workbench and EPISTLE , should be mentioned . 
Writer's Workbench ( Cherry 1983 et al ) has influenced the development of commercial software such as Right writer  , 
PC-Style and Grammatik . It does style critiquing , but it cannot do critiquing that reqmres a parser output  , such as noun phrase complexity . Embedded in EPISTLE ( Heidorn et al 1982 ) is a style checker which uses the parse tree of the grammar check  . So , EPISTLE covers a wider range of style markers . Nevertheless , stylistic critiques have to be adapted to the field of application  . 
Compared with Writer's Workbench and
EPISTLE , SIMSA is a more universal approach . Its main feature is multilinguality . The same parser can be used for different languages  ( cf . Hellwig 1988) , which allows to use the same format of parser output for the style analysis of different languages  . Additionally , style markers are more universal and can be 1   79 used in different languages too , as well as in different kinds of text . The adaptation to a language or a special kind of text will be done automatically if a sufficiently large text corpus is put in for the setting of a new norm  ( " Sufficiently large " means sufficient for significant values concerning each feature  ; therefore " sufficiently large " depends on the selected features  )  . 
4 Style markers
On the very beginning of style analysis , we need an inventory of style markers . 
Style errors can be detected on several different levels : word  , phrase , sentence and text . 
Relewant stylistic features are on word level : word length  ; fillers ; nominalisation ; compound nouns , terminology ; on phrase level : noun phrase complexity ; cumulation of adjectives ; complex prepositional phrases ; on sentence level : sentence length ; compound sentences ; distance between verb stem and . prefix ; on text level : passive voice ; pronouns ; phenomena of cohesion/coherence : reference , conjunctions , etc . 
Within the project , two teams ( Siemens
AG , Germany and Triumph-Adler AG,
Germany ) are working on the development of : relevant style markers  . The development is conducted in four steps . 
First , principles of good style and possible stylistic markers in general had to be identified by examining literature on good technical writing and linguistic literature on style markers  . 
For each style marker the information needed has been identified  , so that it can be used by the style checker . Some style markers can be transferred into an algorithm just by using statistical methods  , others need lexical information , and a third group needs syntactic information which has to be provided by the parser within the 
TWB project.
In a third step , the style markers are formalized and checking algorithms are being developed  . 
Finally , functions are being developed to transfer given values  ( average , standard deviation , etc ) in a barchart representation including thresholds and the degree of deviation from the predefined norm  . 
5 Architecture
SIMSA consists of three main parts . The user has the option to set the norms and thresholds of the stylistic features by putting in a representative or paradigmatic text corpus  ( standardization of style marker values )  . He can perform an analysis of a given text ( Analysis ; batch mode ) and he can start a dialogue for more information on a given analysis  ( Analysis dialogue ; interactive mode ) . 
Standardization of style marker values
Importance of style markers , their average values , and thresholds of their values depend on the analyzed language  , and they differ with the kind of analyzed texts . How can stylistic critiques be adapted to different fields of application '? In principle  , there are three possibilities : First , stilistic norms can be fixed once and for all without any possibility of change  . 
This case allows only one conception of " one good style "  . But what about functional concepts in which deviations concerning style markers are understood as deviations in the functionality of a text ? And what about different functionalities of style markers in different languages ? A second approach is to set the standard norm by the users themselves or at least by a superuser  . This is the approach in
EPISTLE where " thresholding , together with adjustable weights , allow tailoring of style critiques to individual environments  . . . " ( Heidorn et al \]982:323) . 
A somewhat different approach was taken in SIMSA : SIMSA provides the user with default norms for several kinds of text  . 
Moreover , it offers the option to set norms according to a given text corpus  . The user puts in some texts which belong to a given  80   2 language and a given kind of text . SIMSA will analyze the text corpus and will set and store the norm of the style markers accordingly  . 

The analysis part of SIMSA is under developinent by the abovementioned teams of Siemens AG and TA Triumph-Adler  . I ) ue to the nature of TWB as an integrated toolkit , analysis functions will USe other TWB tools as far as possible  . The analysis functions can be divided into three main groups  , in purely statistical functions , in functions with lexical access , and in functions using parser output . 
Statistical algorithms are sulficient for style markers as e  . g . sentence length and word length . The analysis functions check the size of the text corpus  ( a certain size is necessary to get significant devialions  )  , compute average , standard deviation and other necessary vahies and compare these values with the norm values  . 
Functions using lexical information arc necessary for style markers as e  . g . l\]llers and slang expressions . The access to lexica can be managed in two ways . Either words can be matched against small lexica specially designed for stylistic purt  ) oses containing only a small lnlot lnl and seirlantically restricted class of words  ( e . g . 
fillers or slang expressions ) , or words can be matched via the parser output against the lexicon used by the parser  , lit the second case , necessary stylistic information ( e . g . " word is a chemical technical term " ) is contained in the lexicon entry . 
Functions using parser outpul are necessary for style markers as e  . g . noun phrase complexity , distance between verb stem and verb prefix , sentence complexity . 
These functions filter the parser output for necessa : ryinformation  . 
The style checker still works if parser access is not possible  . In this case ( and in cases the user doesn't want an analysis concerning all style markers  ) the analysis of certain style markers can be suppressed  . 
The results of the analysis ( values of deviation from the norm , etc . ) are stored in a separate analysis file . 
Analysis dialogue
There are two ways to start the anal ~ , -sisdialogue . First , an option " analysis dialogue " will be offered to the user after the style checker has finished its analysis  . 
Second , the user can call the analysis dialogue separately if there is an analysis file and a corresponding text file  . 
" Analysis dialogue " opens a window containing bar charts which demonstrate for each analyzed style marker the degree of deviation from the norm  . The user can ask for more information about certain style features in general and he can ask for the occurrences of the criticized style markers in the text  . Due to the nature of stylistic errors as grammatically correct but more or less inadequate usage of linguistic features  , the " Analysis dialogue " is thought to give recommendation as lar as possible  , but not to correct text passages automatically . 
6 References
L . LCher ! yetal : Compuler aids for text analysis , m : Bell Laboratories P , ecord . 
Vohime 61, Number 5, Short Hills , New
Jersey , 1983, 1016.
(2 . 1) imarco/G . Hirst : Stylistic Grammars in Language Translation  . in : Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computation all . inguistics ( CO ! . ING ),
Budapest , 1988, 148-153.
G . E . Heidorn et al : The EPISTLE text-critiquing system  , in : IBM System Journal , vol . 21, Nr .  3 .  1982, 305-326 . 
P . llell wig : Chart parsing according to the slot and filler principle  , in : Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics ( COLING),
Budapest , 1988, 242-244.
G . Heyer , R . Kese , M . L0dtke and G.
Winkelmann : Translator's Workbench-A toolkit for translators  , in : ESPRIT'89 . 
Office and Business Systems . Results and
Progress of Esprit Projects in 1989.
Brussels , November 1989.
Enkvist , N . E . : Linguistic Stylistics . Paris , 1973 . 

