THEGENERATION OF HIGH-LEVEL STRUCTURE
FOREXTENDE DEXPLANATIONS
David J . Mooney ( mooney@dewey.udel.edu)
Sandra Carberry ( carberry@dewey.udel.edu)
Kathleen F . McCoy(mccoy~dewey . udel . edu ) Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware
Newark , Delaware 19716
ABSTRACT 2
This paper analyzes the structural features of naturally-occurring extended explanations and argues that current generation methodologies are inadequate for determining high-level structure  . It presents a computational model based on the hypothesis that high-level structure-composed of a unifying framework and its associated basic blocks-can be determined by bottom-up rocesses that attempt to satisfy speaker  , listener , and compositional goals , after which topdown strategies can be used to organize the material about the selected framework  . 
1 INTRODUCTION
In this paper , we describe the structural characteristics of extended  , planned 1 explanations involving complex physical devices and present a computational model for generating such explanations  . Our investigation suggests that the organizational strategies currently employed for structuring short explanations are inadequate for generating the high-level structure characteristic of that found in naturally -occurring extended explanations  , which typically require several pages of text . Our computational model is based on the hypothesis that text structure is not completely recursive as others have claimed  ( \[GS86\] , \[Rei78\] , \[ Po186\] , \[ MT88\]) , but rather that the high-level structure of extended explanations is deter-  . 
mined by processe separate from those which organize text at lower levels  . 
Section 2 . 1 provides a brief overview of current models for structuring text  , followed by a description of the basic block , the unit of discourse on which our model is based  , in Section 2 . 2 . Section 2 . 3 describes the characteristics of high-level structure of extended explanations  , followed by a description of our strategy for generating this structure in Section  3  ; a complete description is contained in \[ MCM89\] . 
1Emphasis is placed on planned to distinguish these explanations from discourse in which the material is developed mutually by the participants as the discourse progresses  . 

THEBASICBLOCK MODEL OF
EXTENDEDDISCOURSE ill order to generate an extended explanation  , a natural language system must determinetile basic content to be conveyed  ; the next step is to cohesively organize this material  . As anyone who has had to organize large amounts of information into a coherent text can attest  , there are many possible combinations of that material  , some more cohesive than others . Frequently , deciding how to orgauize a large body of material is more difficult than determining what to include  . Our research is concerned with the identification of a coherent unifying framework about which an extended explanation can be organized and the criteria for selecting from among several frameworks when more than one viable alternative xists  . 
2.1 OTHER APPROACHES
TEXT STRUCTURE
TO 2.1.1 COMPUTATIONAL

A number of researchers ( e . g . , \[ GSS6\] , \[ MT88\] , \[ Rei7S\] , \[ PolS6\] ) have argued that discom-seis con > posed of hierarchically structured segments and that this structure is completely recursive in nature  . 
Two general methodologies have been applied to the structuring of explanations : schemas  ( \[ McK85\] , \[ McC85\] , \[ ear S7\] ) and rhetorical structure theory ( RST )   ( \[ HMS9\] , \[ HovS8\] , \[ MPS8\] , \[ MSSS\]) . 
A schema is a discourse strategy that captures a typical pattern of discourse associated with a particular discourse purpose  , ( e . g . , providing an analogy or evidence ) . Schemas can be thought of as templates composed of an ordered sequence of rhetorical predicates  , which " characterize the predicating acts a speaker may use and delineate tile structural relation between propositions in a text  . " ~'  2From  \[  McK85\] page 9 These predicates are intended to capture the structural relations that hold between clauses in a text  . 
The predicates are used recursively , capturing the structure of text at any level . 
RST , developed by Mann and Thompson(\[MT88\]) , was originally a tool for the analysis of text . RST claims that , except for a small number of highly-stylized forms  , all coherent texts have an RST , decomposition . RST posits a small number of relations , comparable to McKeown's rhetorical predicates , that exist between segments of text . Because each relation has associated with it well -defined intended effects and conditions necessary for it to hold  , RST lends itself well to a generation methodology based on a topdown  , hierarchical planning formalism (\[ Sac77\]) . Thus , like MeKeown's rhetorical pred--icates , RST claims to account for the structure of text at any level of the discourse hierarchy  . 
While these methods have proven to be effective for organizing short pieces of text  , we maintain that they are inadequate for generating the characteristic structure of extended explanations at the level of the primary segments  , which occupy the first level of the discourse hierarchy  . We contend that the characteristics exhibited by the primary segments of extended explanations  , to be described in the next section , cannot be captured by recursive processes . Rather , we maintain that high-level structure must be gener--ated ' by a separate  , bottom-up process , after which recursive organizational strategies can be applied at lower levels  . 
2.1.2 RHETORIC
Rhetoric , the formal study of the art of good writing , provides general strategies for organizing text at a high level that are absent from the computational models  . Analysis -" the method of explanation whereby a subject is divided into its separate component parts  ''3 - is possibly the most instrumental of these strategies  . There are no hard-and-fast rules for determining what constitutes an appropriate analysis of a subject  . As\[WA60\]observes , a subject may be classified in as many ways as it has characteristics/parts/stages/etc  . However , there are three criteria which experts (\[ WA60\] , \[Are75\] , \[ Tho57\] , \[ Dan 67\] , \[ KP66\] ) mutually consider essential for a satisfactory organizational strategy :  1  . The tent ( e . g . 
scheme should be logical ; a single , consis-criterion should be used for tile analysis time  , steps in a process ) . 
2 . The scheme should exhaust all of the possibilities  ; everything to be conveyed should been-compassed by the scheme  . 
3 . The resultant categorie should be mutually exclusive  ; nothing should belong to more than one . 
3\[Are75\]page 107
While the type of explanation with which this paper is concerned exhibits a high-level organization reflective of these criteria  , the criteria by themselves do not provide the specificity necessary for computational generation  . These guidelines include no suggestions for dealing with situations in which no logical  , all-inclusive framework C all bc identified , nor do they offer suggestions for selecting among several organizational schemes which meet the prescribed criteria equally well  . Furthermore , the guidelines are not sufficient in-and-of themselves to account for all of the observed phenomena discussed in the following sections  . 
2.2 BASICBLOCKS
Our model is based on a discourse unit which we have termed a basic block  . A basic block consists of two elements : 1 . an organizational focus , such as a person or location , and 2 . a set of concepts related to that focus . 
The focus is what makes a cohesive unit of the material in the block  ; it is the thread comin onto all of this material , whether directly or indirectly . 
A basic block will be realized as a primary segment of text which occupies the first level of the discourse hierarchy  . In a coherent discourse , the locion which the basic blocks are based are themselves related  , each representing a different aspect of some unifying framework  . These points are demonstrated by the test imony fi ' om which the basic block in Figure  1 was extracted 4  . 
This block references a particular time frame : zero to thirty seconds of the accident at Three Mile Island  5  . The remaining blocks of that test imony are similarly constructed around time frames  , e . g . , one to six minutes , six minutes to one hour , etc . Observed frameworks demonstrate a gamut of types : properties of the concepts  ( location , time ) , planning strategies in which events are involved ( medical diagnosis )  , and characteristics that are not only inherent in the material but also due in part to the speaker 's perception of them  ( significant factors )  . There appears to be no limit to what can constitute an acceptable framework  , only that it is derived from the material itself and not from an independent device solely concerned with text structure  . What may be a potential framework for one set of material may be totally inadequate for another  . Note that these features are reflective of the guideline suggested by analysis  . 
In addition to forming a cohesive unit , basic block structure is explicitly distinguished in the following two ways  . First , it is often explicitly marked . In 4 Space limitations prevent inclusion of the complete text  . 
5Three Mile Island is a nuclear power plant located in the state of Pennsylvmfia n the United States  . It suffered a near-melt down in 1979 . 

Now , what happened at Three Mile Island was that a feedwater transient was experienced  , and by that I mean , simply , we lost feed water to the plantmo-mentarily . 
Now , wittlloss of feedwater to the steam generator , the plant will experience amomentary pressuriza -tion above its normal pressure  . This pressurization is released by a relief valve located at the top of the pressurizer  . It simply opens and lets out a little bit of stean ' to take care of the excess pressure that is-interruption-Then at  15 seconds into the event-keeping in mind that the valves opened may be  5 seconds into the event-at 15 seconds the pressure started coming down because the valve had opened and cutoff the pressure  . 
The valve should have reclosed when it got back down to about  2  , 250 pounds ; it did not reclose . The pressure proceeded to come on down . At about 30 seconds into the event , this water here started disap-pearing , of course , because now you are continuing to remove a very large amount of heather e  , which is then coming off as secondary sidesteam generation  , and this water will proceed to disappear if you do not start replacing it  . 
And the auxiliary feedwater which normally comes onto make sure this does not godry came on at about  30 seconds into the event . And at least the pumps were running . So this picture here is just the first 30 , ~ econds and - or there abouts . 
And this figure here is indicative of the situation from  1 to 6 minutes into the event . 
Figure i : A Typical Primary Segment
Figure 1 , the speaker closes the block with explicit reference to its focus : " So this picture here is just the first  30 seconds and - or there abouts . " The subsequent block ii ~ this testimon y is also well marked  , this time by its initial sentence ( which is the last sentence of the figure ) : " And this figure here is indicative of the situation from  1 to 6 minutes . " The basic block structure is further distinguished by certain forms of repetition  , whose use is closely tied to the basic block structure  . While a brief allusion to these forms is made below  , a detailed discussion is contained in \[ MCM89\] . 
2.3 CHARACTERISTICS
OF COHERENT , HIGH-LEVEL

Giventile existence of a high-level structure as evidenced by explicit markings and repetition  , we must consider how such a framework is chosen . If the only consideration were the identification of a set of related foci which can partition the material to be conveyed  , then any set of related concepts about which the material can be cohesively organized would suffice  . Consider the motivation behind the block of Figure  1  . On the surface , the events in this block all occurred within the first thirty seconds of the accident  . However , it is doubtful whether the driving force behind the construction of this block was to communicate the time frame in which these events occurred  ; rather , what is of importance is their relative sequence in the total series of events  , their cause-effect relations , and their impact on the resulting accident . One could argue that the individual events in this block represent a cause-effect chain  , and hence their mutual grouping ; but this chain is continued in the next block of the test imon y  . Thus , this argument alone cannot account for this segmentation  . 
Apparently , other factors beyond the ability to cohe-sively juxtapose clauses contribute to the segmentation and the high-level framework about which it is constructed  . 
In all of the dialogues examined , the blocks are of approximately the same size . Apparently , speakers choose organizations that tend to be well-balanced  . 
However , balance does not seem to be the only criterion taken into consideration  ; if it were , we could expect to see perfectly balanced organizations in which each of the concepts to be conveyed is realized by its own basic block in addition to those well-bahmced organizations found in our text analysis whose blocks are comprised of many concepts  . The size of the component basic blocks seems to be a further consideration in determining what constitutes an acceptable framework  . No lengthy discourse organized about a single primary segment has been observed  , nor have any in which primary segments are composed of single concepts  . The " ideal " size of a basic block seems to be three or four paragraphs in length for an explanation of three pages  . 
We contend that the high-level structure of extended explanations reflects the characteristics of an " ideal " framework in which : The basic block loci about which the material is organized reflect various aspects of the unifying framework  . 
? Basic blocks are the same size.
? The length of each basic block approximates the ideal size  . 
Our basic block model of discourse posits that the attainment of each of these features  , termed compositional goals , is instrumental in the selection of a high-level framework  . 
However , not all observed explanations conform to the basic block model as presented thus far  . For example , in explanations that are concluded by a final size the major points stressed by the speaker in the body of the text  . In fact , there is a strong correlation between the segments comprising such a summary and the foci about which the basic blocks are constructed  ( see\[MCM89\] )  . I lowever , some explanations have been examined in which material that appears in a summary has not been included in the text  . Another apparent exception has been observed in explanations that exhibit a well-defined high -level structure that accounts for all of the basic blocks except for the final one  , which is at best loosely related to the others . 
We postulate that a speaker attempts to identify a framework that is capable of coherently expressing all of the material he wishes to convey while satisfying the compositional goals equally well  . However , a speaker is rarely blessed with such an ideal situation  . 
The problem appears to be one of finding a satisfactory  , rather than an optimal , unifying framework . 
We hypothesize that the satisfaction of some goals will be sacriff cedill favor of others so that a framework that provides the best overall solution can be achieved  . This relaxation of goal constraints explains the above anomalies and the variability of size and balance observed in basic block structure  . 
3 A MODEL FOR GENERATION
We have developed a computational n to del of discourse generation that captures the structural characteristics observed in naturally-occm:ring explanations  . Our model is based on the hypothesis that the high-level structure of a discourse can be determined by bottom-up processes that attempt to satisfy speaker  , listener , and compositional goals . 
Once this organization has been established , topdown processes are used to organize the information into basic blocks and to supplenlent that information based on the choice of framework  . Only after the basic block structure has been established will detailed organization within a block and realization into text proceed  . The remainder of this section describes our strategy for identifying an organizational framework and the resulting basic blocks given an initial set of concepts to be conveyed  . We conclude by establishing our model within the context of a complete text generating system  . 
3.1 IDENTIFICATION OFCANDI-
DATE FRAME WORKS
We suggest hat a speaker , when organizing nilextended explanation , will be faced with one of the following general situations : ? II e already has a well-defined organizational structure in which the material to be conveyed has already been organized  . 
? lie has a set of goals about which he wants to structure the discourse  . In this situation , the goals serve as basic block loci about which he must now attempto partition his material  . 
* The speaker is starting " from scratch " ; he needs to find a unifying framework about which he can structure what he wants to say  . It is this situation which our strategy intends to capture  . 
Our strategy assumes that the generation process starts with some initial state of affairs and a communicative goal to be achieved  . Based on this , a rough set of information to be conveyed will be iden-  . 
tiffed . The selection of this material is not our concern  ; rather , we are concerned with determining a reasonable high-level structure for this information  . 
We assume that the material to be conveyed has been categorized into at least two levels of importance : that which must be included at all costs  ( tile kernel )  , and that which would be nice to include , but due to time , style , or coherence may be left out . The process of identifying candidate frameworks begins with the kernel  . 
The implication of the discussion in Section 2 is that a unifying framework will be some feature to which all of the kernel concepts can be related  . In our model , wea . ssmne that the domain knowledge is maintained as a hierarchical network  . Such a representation suggests that a node to which all of these concepts converge could serve as the unifying framework  . Tile basic block loci , which represent various aspects of this framework  , would then correspond to children of this node . 
Given a set of propositions to be conveyed , one is randon fly selected from the kernel and a trace is performed upwards from each of its arguments through the hierarchy  . The traversal of the hierarchy is pertbrmed using generalization links  , e . g . , ISA , IS-PART , and SUBG()AL , incrementing counters associated with each node that is traversed  . Additionally , CAUSE/EFFECT links can be followed when events are encountered  . Property links , such as color and size , are used only if they were included as part of the kernel  . Once the traversal has been completed for each element of the kernel  , the nodes are ranked according to their counters ; this will give some idea of tile number of concepts that converge on each  . 
At this point , the general characteristics of basic blocks can be used to eliminate some obvious non-candidate frameworks  . Since no extended explanations have been observed to be composed of a single  , massive basic block , a node that has the same value as its parent can be eliminated from consideration as a candidate framework  . By the same token , since no organization has been observed in which a basic block is constructed for each concept  , any node that has a number of children on the same order a stlle number of concepts in the kernel carl also be eliminated from consideration  . Furthermore , nodes garded since an acceptable framework must account for most  ( ideally all ) of the kernel . 
The remaining nodes represent the potential candidates for the unifying framework  . In all likelihood , none of these candidates will account for all of the kernel concepts  . However , it may be possible to connect such concepts to a candidate by finding a link between these concepts and ones which are already associated with a candidate  , possibly via a property they have in common . Additionally , it may be possible to include such material in a final summary or in a " catchall " block  . That speakers do introduce such material in this way is evidenced by our transcript analysis  . We claim that the inclusion of such material in a final summary is warranted if the speaker initially intended to include a final summary and if the amount of material is of the same order as that comprising the individual segments of the summary  ; for the creation of a catchall block to be viable  , there must be sufficient material to construct an adequate basic block and the material must form a cohesive unit  .  6 3 . 2 SELECTION OF THEUNIFY-
ING FRAME WORK
Once potential fl'ameworks have been identified , each must be evaluated according to how well it meets the criteria described in Section  2  . 3: ? ttow thoroughly does a candidate account for the selected material ?  , , How uniformly does a candidate distribute the concepts among the resulting basic blocks ?  , , IIow closely do the generated blocks conform to the ideal size ? Additionally  , a candidate may be evaluated ~ to how well it meets the needs of a user model  . 
The actual blocks are constructed around a can -didate's immediate descendents  , not the candidate itself . So , for example , if a candidate were the node workstation . s , its children-actual workstations at which things occurred-will become the basic block fool  . The ideal case is one in which each child of the candidate accounts for approximately the same number of concepts  . The balance ach candidate achieves can be determined by comparing the counters of its children  . At the same time , the candidate will be rated according to how closely its blocks conform to the ideal size  . Lastly , we can rate the candidates on how well they meet the demands  , if any , imposed by a user model . For example , if we know the user is familiar with the location in which the events occurred  , basic blocks based on location should be given higher ratings  ; organizing an explanation around a framework with which the listener is familiar will fadlitate his assimilation of the information  . 
6See\[MCM89\] for a more complete discussion.
3.3 GENERATION OFTEXT
At this point , the high-level structure of the explanation has been determined  . In the remainder of this paper , we will attempto place our strategy in the context of a complete system by giving a brief overview of the remaining phases of our model  . 
Once afl'ame work has been selected , the concepts to be conveyed can be partitioned about each of the resulting foci  . At this point , there may be some concepts for which the framework does not account  . The system must determine whether to include them as a separate  , trailing basic block , as part of a final summary , or to eliminate them altogether ( refer to Section 3 . 1) . In addition , depending on several factors ( e . g . , verbosity constraints , choice of framework , etc . ) , those concepts of moderate import may be integrated into the framework by performing a traversal of the networks or by finding links to concepts already incorporated by the framework  ( as described in Sections 3 . 1 and 3 . 2) . These steps complete the process of partitioning the material about the unifying framework  . 
The next step is to determine the order of presentation for the blocks  . The order in which the basic blocks are presented may be inlposed by the mate-rimitsel for by some external factor  . If no overriding considerations exist , the material may present obvious " natural " choices  , such as sequential ordering by time or by cause -effect  . On the other hand , there may be a predetermined preference for a particular order  , e . g . , by their importance as determined by some external process  . 
Once the blocks have been ordered , text generation can proceed . We intend to use an established , low-level text structuring strategy ( e . g . , RST or schemas ) for this phase . We anticipate that additional information may be included in order to satisfy low-level discourse goals  ( e . g . , supplying information requisite for the user's comprehension of the material to be presented  )  ; thus , we do not claim that the entire contents of a text have been determined before structuring is performed  . Rather than organizing and realizing text for the block senmass  , we have adopted a strategy in which these steps are performed for each block individually  . Text for one block is presented to the user before proceeding to the organization and generation of text for the next block  . This is to preclude wasted effort which may result from reorganization necessitated by a user 's questions  . 
4 CONCLUSIONS
This paper has presented a computational model for generating the high-level structure for extended explanations  . It is being implemented as part of DIALS ( Delaware Intelligent Advisory Language System )  , using the NIKL knowledge representation system . 
No claims are made that the methodology represents a psychological model of composition  . However , it is typical of that encountered in many naturally--occurring extended explanations  . The model does not presume to generate all acceptable organizations  ; indeed , there are many welLs truetured xplanations for which it does not account  . We have presented the simplest ease in which a high-level organization is constructed from a parent and its children in a taxonomic hierarchy  . However , many other possibilities exist , several of which are currently being examined within the semantic network paradigm  . In addition , we are investigating the generation of appropriate recovery strategies in response to interruptions and their impact on the planning strategy  . We are also incorporating several forms of repetition that are widely used in extended explanations  . 
The unit of discourse which is the major motivation t br this model is the basic block  , a primary segment of text which occupies the tirst level of the discourse hierarchy  . It consists of an organizational focus and text constructed about that focus  . Wilile method such as RST and schemas are adequate for local organization of text  , they are insufficient for the determination f high-level structure  , providing neither criteria which describe what constitutes an acceptable framework for a discourse  , nor any clues as to how this framework should be constructed  . This paper provides both . We believe that our model provide strategies essential for bridging the gap between the generation of short explanations and the successful generation of extended explanations  . 
References\[Are75\]L . A . Arena . Linguistics and Composition . 
Georgetown University Press , 1975.
\[Dan67\]R , . W . Daniel . A Contemporary Rhetoric . 
Little , Brown and Company , 1967.
\[GS86\]B . J . Grosz and C . L . Sidner . Attention , intentions , and the structure of discourse . 
Computational Linguistics , 12, 1986.
\[ttM89\]E . lIovy and K . McCoy . Focusing yourrst : a step toward generating coherent maltisentential text  . In Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society  , Cognitive Science Society ,  1989 . 
\[tIov88\]E . Hovy . Approaches to the planning of coherent text . Fourth International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , i988 . 
\[ KP66\]T . S . Kane and L . J . Peters . A Practical Rhetoric of Expository Prose . Oxford
University Press , 1966.
\ [MeC85\]  \[  MeK85\]  \[  MCM89\]  \[  MP88\]  \[  MS88\]  \[  MT88\]  \[  Par87\]  \[  Po186\]  \[  Sac77\]  \[  Tho57\]  \[  WA6O \]K . F . McCoy . Correcting Object-Related Misconceptions . PhD thesis , University of
Pennsylvania , 1985:
K . Me Keown . Text Generation . Cambridge University Press , 1985 . 
D . Mooney , M.S . Carberry , and K . Mc-
Coy . 7' he Identification of a Unifying
Framework for the Oryanization of Exotended , Interactive Explanations . Technical Report 90-1 , University of Delaware ,  1989 . 
J . Moore and C . Paris . Constructing coherentext using rhetorical relations  . In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society  , Cognitive Science Society ,  1988 . 
J .  13 . Moore and W . R . Swart out . A reactive approach to explanation . Fourth International Workshop on Natural Lain guage Generation  ,  1988 . 
W . C . Mann and S . A . Thompson . Rheto > ical structure theory : toward a functional theory of text organization  . Text , 8, 1988 . 
C . Paris .   7'he Use of Explicit User Models in Text Generation : Tailoring to a User's Level of Expertise  . PhD thesis , Columbia
University , 1987.
L . Polanyi . The Linguistic Discourse
Model: 7bwards a Yormal Theory of Dis?course Structure . Technical Report 6409,
BBN , 1986.
R . Reiehman . Conversational coherency.
Cognitive Science , 2, 1978.
E . Sacerdoti . A Structure for Plans and
Behavior . Elsevier North-lloll and , 1977.
W . N . Thompson . Fundamentals of Comomunication . McGrawttill , 19 . 57 . 
C.V . Wicker and W . P . Albrecht . The
American Technical Writer . American
Book Company , 1960.

