ALARGERUSSIAN MORPHOLOGICAL VOCABULARY
FORIBM COMPATIBLE ~,
AND METHODSO FITS COMPRESSION
Igor A . BOLSHAKOV
VINZTI , Academy ' of Sciences of USSR Moscow 125219 , Bal-t ; iy skay E ~ u \] . . 14 , USSR There are only few Russian vocabularies in computerized form in the USSR new  , so development of a new Russian vocabulary large enough for spellchecking is still topical  . 
The requirements for such a vocabulary are at least as follows : lsore than  iO0  , O00 lexemes included ;  2 ) modern and diversified lexicon well covering the sciences  , many technological fields , the humanities , and may be the everyday life ;  3 ) mapping the most of numerous lexeme forms implied by the ~ lectional nature of Russian  , and at the same time acceptance of wellformed words only  ;  4 ) orientation to IBM-compatible PCs most commonly used in the USSR ~ ow a day  . 
Suchaw ) oabulary has been recently built by the a ~ thor . Its parameters are as follows : 67 , 400 stems covering more than 104 , 700 Russian lexemes and their ~ . 425 million word forms ( i , e .  21 . 2 forms/stem ); the ~ isimal , the mean , and the maximal stem lengths amounting to 1 ,  7 . 8 , and 32 letters accordingly ; the textual form size being about 865KB , Our morphologic ~ lci assific ~ tlo ~ of stems is quite original and deals not only with ~ ord formation  , but also with word derivation . The scheme includes i18 classes and 1901 various fieetions ( variable suffixal chains )  . Separate classes were introduced among mentioned ones for invariant words  , irregular forms , and abbreviations , The first 38 classes cover more than 83X of all stems . 
The split borders of stems were freely moved to the left while classifying  , if morphological alternations or identical final letters in a whole stem class have been encountered  . The shortest flection is an empty one , the longest flections include up to 12 letters ( e . g . HPOMB ~ WHC ~) , so them ~ an fleetion length grew up to 6 letters , which is comparable to the mean stem length . 
The textual form of vocabularies i not convenient for applications and has to be transformed into binary working form  . The wellknown are hivization packages such as PKA ~ q/PKXARC are not acceptable for this per pose because of lows queezeratio and uselessness of the are hivized form as a working one for spellers or any other application  , So several other methods of compression were analyzed  , Basically the Huffman method has been selected for coding morphological class numbers  , and the Cooper method has been picked up for the stems  , Additionally the RADIX-50 method was applied to both of the components of a vocabulary entry  . 
Several other techniques are turned out to be useful for additional stem compression in large vocabularies  . They are based on l frequent recurrences of differently classified  , but literally identical stess ;  2 ) coamoness of events in nearly saturated vocabularies  , when the first letter in the deflecting part of a stem is alphabetically adjacent to the letter in the same position within previous stem  ;  3 ) availability of several free positions in RADIX-50 codetable ( only 33 of gO are grasped by Eussian letters and a delimiter  )  . These unoccupied values night be used for recoding final stem letters  , digrams , and trigrams most frequent in different stem classe ~  , This techniques queezes the letter part of a vocabulary entry and make the delimiter preceding the next entry unnecessary  . 
All methods mentioned were investigated , separately and in combinations . The Huffman's + the Cooper's + RADIX-50 combination has given us a sqeeze ratio about 3  . 4 , whereas addition of the rest techniques has incremented the ratio up to  4  . 2 - 4 . 5 . 
So only about l ~ OKB in memory is needed for this working form  , which is easy allocatable as a resident part of a modern text processor  , As compared tevo cabularies in available English language spellers  , the size achieved seems to be highly competitive in our more complex inflectional case  . 
The vocabulary is available beth in the textual and in binary forms  , Several utilities concerned with its compiling , debugging , and squeezing are ready too . 
The utilities were written using Turbo Pascal 5 . 0 and Turbo Professional packages and are wholly applicable for processing any other natural language vocabulary  ,  1 317
