The E-Framework : Emerging Problems
Ian Crookston *
Department of Language & Linguistics
University of Essex
Colchester UK
1 Introduction
Beth & Nygaard (1988) have described a for-
malism for NLP , the E-Framework ( EFW).
Two kinds of problem are emerging . Formally , there are problems with a complete formalisation of certain details of the EFW  , but these will not be examined in this paper . Substan-tively , the question arises as to what mileage there is in this formalism t br the MT problem  . 
Possibly this question arises about any new NLP formalism  , but Raw et al ( 1988 ) describe the EFW in an MT context . 
The EFW arose in reaction to the CAT for-realism for MT  ( Arnold & des Tombe ( 1987 )  , Arnold et al (1986)) . This was a sequential s-tratificational formalism in which each level of representation was policed by its own grammar  . The essentials of this process can be di-agrammed  :   ( : ) 
Grammar , Grammar./
It generates generates
Repni-t-grammar--*l % ep nj * This research has been carried out within the British Group of the EUROTRA project  , jointly funded by the Conunission of the European Colran unities and the United Khlgdom's Department of Trade and Industry  . I an1 grateful for suggestions and comments from Doug Arnold  , Lee Hmnphreya , Louisa Sadler , 
Andrew Way , and a COLING reviewer.
The " t-rules " of the t-grammars were the problem . 
In the most compact version of this notation , that of Sharp (1988) , the t-rules consist of little more than the annotated subtree on each end of the mapping  . For instance , in at , -grammar mapping from a predicate-argument representation to a surface one  , such as might be necessary in the monolingual modules of an MT system  , there might beat-rule like (2)(? , cat : s) . \[$ GOV : ( gov , cat = v ) , $ ARGI : argl , $ ARG2: arg2\] => ( s) . \[SARG1, vp . \[$ GOV ,  $  ARG2 \]\] This had the attractiveness of explicitness and clarity  , but when it was applied over a wider range of phenomena  , two problems emerged . Firstly , the right hand side ( RttS ) of the t-rules repeated the target grammar . 
In (2) , the RtlS repeats the statement of the surface grammar that the verb and object are dominated by aVP  . Secondly , the set of t-rules exploded combinatorially . How this emerged depended on details of the grammars involved  . 
For example , in the above case , if a second 66   1 rule were added Ibrpassive sentences , then a third and fourth would be needed inserting will on the RHS in future active and passive sentences  . \[ t is impossible to nmke separate provision for passive and future -- there is a passive simple -tense rule and a passive future rule  . To add provision to lower the negation operator into its surface adverbial position now requires not anothe rule but another four rules  . 
The general route of the EFW to solving these problems is to separate the output of the t -grammar fom the finished representation i the following way  , as described in Bech & Nygaard (1988): (3) Repni
It-grammar

Igrg illlitar j


The RtIS of each t-rule specifies a local part of a special representation called a DE-SCRIPTOR  . This descriptor is then further processed by the grammar to produce a true representation  . So (2) becomes (4)
S : cat=s\[GOV : role = gov,
ARGI : role = argl,
ARG2: rolo = arg2\] = >
S < ARGI , GOV , ARG2 >
The descriptor % treed by the I~ttS is then , crucially , parsed according to the target grammar . All structures defined by the grammar with that mother at the top and those daughters at the bottom are built : specifically  , VP is inserted above the verb and object . Given the extra devices available within grammars  , will could be added to the descriptor of a future tense sentence after t-rule application  , so the four rules covering voice and simple /future tense mentioned above could be reduced to two  ( or one using the unorderedness device described in Bach & Nygaard  ( 1988 ) ) . 
This is what makes the EFW the EFW.
Without the separatentity called the descriptor being parsed to create the representation  , the EFW would lose its defining characteristic . So is there any mileage in this insight for

It should be noted that what is at issue here is the special characteristics of the EFW  , those which distinguish it from other stratificational system such as CAT  . The latter have no analogue of the EFW's " consolidation " idea and therefore no analogue of the particular problems discussed here  . The EFW is not in these respects representative of stratification MT formalisms in general  . 
2 Consolidation and Simple

What target grammars do to the information specified oil the RHS in CA'I'can be viewed as a special case of what they do in EFW  . The EFW can parse , inserting mid-tree nodes and even extra daughters  . Successful consolidation includes a judgrnent that the output representation is acceptable  . A special case of this is the geometrical check , where the parser inserts nothing , and delivers an acceptability verdict on the output  . CAT is limited to performing the latter special case  , which we will refer to as " trivial consolidation  "  . Its complement is " nontrivial consolidation " , and it is this latter that is at issue in this section  . 
There is a well-motivated research programme with the aim of making the transfer  2   67 stage of MT as simple as other factors permit ( van Eynde ( 1986 )  ; Arnold , des Tombe & Jaspaert (1985 , section 2 . 2 . 3); Leermakers &
Kous (1986)).
Transfer in the EFW is as in (3) . The need to make transfer simple must be interpreted as a need to make the two representations as similar as possible  , rather than to make the source representation and the target descriptor as similar as possible  , for methodological reason-s . Simple transfer is furthered by researching theories and grammars that assign representations that are similar crosslinguistically  . But descriptors are not governed by theories and grammars  ( other than the bare formal restriction that they must be trees  )  . The only way theories and grammars get access to descriptors in the EFW is by consolidating them into representations  . Since there is no theory of descriptors that can be researched in a id of simple transfer  , simple transfer must mean similarity of representations rather than of representation and descriptor  . 
Where the simple transfere search strategy is successful  , then source and target representations are identical except for lexical unit-s  . Target descriptor and representation nmst therefore be identical  , at least geometrically . 
Consolidation is therefore trivial checking , as in CAT . Where si , uple transfer is possible , parsing of descriptors i over kill . 
Where simple transfer is not . possible , consolidation would be useful if the descriptor resembled the source representation more than the target representation resembled the source  . 
There are two possible subcases of such a situation  . Firstly , there could be a general failure of interface theory to assign similar enough representations  . Suppose for example interface theory permitted but did not require VP nodes  , and there was a language pair SL and TL such that SL had no VP nodes and TL had them  . The TL interface descriptor might then have no VP nodes  , and consolidation could add them to the interface representation  . In practice , such language-wide ifferences in interface geometry seem to be easy to avoid  , but in any case there is a problem of modularity . 
The output of the bilingual component , the transfer t-grammar , is non-trivially altered by a monolingual component  , he target interface grammar . This makes the modularity of the bilingual component questionable  . In general , it is questionable whether at-grammar requiring nontrivial consolidation is a separate module from its target generator  , and in transfer , this matters , because it is highly desirable that the numerous bilingual components be modular  . 
Secondly , there can be failures of simple transfer caused by a peculiarity of a specific source expression  , ff consolidation were used here , this would lead to such processes as :@( a )


Repn:l ' as censeurs ' estaba/ss 4
It-grzm , mar

the llft went
I grammar the lift went down@(b )


Repn:lavoitures'enestall4 e
It-grammar the car went
I grammar the car went away
In such cases , using consolidation to fix up the output of over -simplet-rules is impossible  . 
Such a strategy is always in danger of destroy-68   3 ing the desired translation of some expression other than the one being fixed  . 
In cases of this latter type t-rules have to take the whole load of the mapping  , and the consolidation stage becomes trivial . 
So , to recapitulate , where simple transfer is possible ,   ( nontrivial ) consolidation is never called upon , and where simple transfer is not possible , it is never useful . 
3 Consolidation and Ambi-guity
Consolidation has a peculiar property , that in certain restricted circumstances it throws away disambiguation results  , recreating earlier ambiguities . 
Suppose there is a sentence S that according to grammar G has a set of representations r t = r :  , r2 ,  . . . r, . 
In the EI " W these are trees , but consider them as labelled bracketings . Every rl will have a " stretch set " S(r ) = , ' Ircrtr has at least the same brackets as ri Suppose then that some ri is consolidated according to a G ~ that also assigns R as the representations of S  . ri will consolidate ambiguously , yielding S(rl ) . 
The linguistic claim that this embodies is obviously false  , if G and G ~ are similar enough to yield the same set of representations for S  , then each ri of G is intruth equivalen to a single representation  , identical to ri ~ in G ': it is not equivalent to a set of G~representations that partly recapitulates the ambiguities that are already identified  . 
An example is coordination . Consider the coordinated NP Bob and Carol and Ted and Alice  . This is 11 ways ambiguous and might be represented
The parses ( 6 ) ( a ) as such at English interface level . 
include np\[Bob , and , Carol , and , Ted , and , Alice\](6) ( b ) np\[np\[Bob , m ~ d , Carol \] , and , np\[Ted , and , Alice\]\]Plausiblet-rules into some target language will map these on to descriptors identical totile source representation  . Each local tree of these descriptors will then be parsed  . It is obvious that this process will ill the case of  ( 6 ) ( a ) will produce 11 consolidations identical to the original 11 parses .   ( 6 ) ( b ) will consolidate unambiguously into something identical to  ( 6 ) (b )  . 
This is because ( 6 ) ( a ) is a case where S ( ri ) = R , and (6) ( b ) a case where S(r , ) = r ,  . Lessfiat representations have a smaller stretch set and in this example will consolidate into  3 or 1 translations . 
The claim that ( 6 ) ( a ) is 11 ways ambiguous in any target language is false .   ( 6 ) ( a ) represents one interpretation of the surface string  , and the one interpretation has one translation into any other language  . 
It is obvious that this weakness also affect-s the EFW as a formalism for NLP  . Suppose ( 6 ) ( a ) were a representation at a predicate-argument level  , to be mapped to a surface syntax level of the sarne language  . The EFW embodies a claim that ( 6 ) ( a ) is 11 ways arn bigu-ous on the surface , which is false , just as the claim that ( 6 ) ( a ) has \]1 translations if alse . 
hifact , reparsing descriptors adds another dimension to the normal problem of the parsing ambiguity of conjoined structures : the first surface parse will in general be ambiguous  , and each of its representations will in general map  4   69 onto many representations at the next level , each of which will in general breed again at the next level  , and so on . Some sample figures are
Level No . of Conjuncts 2345 1131 145 ( 7 )   2   1   5   31   215   3   1   7   61   595   4   1   9   101   1269   5   1   11   151   2321 The number of representations is ome function of l  ( ~-2 )  , where l = number of levels and c = number of conjuncts  . 
4 Consolidation and the
Symmetry of Translation
It is often assumed that the relation " possible translation of " is symmetrical  ( Wanying Jin & Simmons ( 1986 )  , Isabelle (1988) , Arnold & Sadler (1989)) . This is plausible : if w in language A translates into x  , y , and z in language B , it is surely correcto say that w will appear in the set of possible translations in A of each of x  , y and z . 
Many MT notations , including CAT , fail to embody this observation in a reversible notation  , and thus fail to force linguists to implement a symmetrical translation relation  . The EFW makes it impossible to implement a fully symmetrical relation  .   ( 6 ) ( a ) translates into 11 things in any target language , but ( 6 ) ( a ) does not appear in the set of possible back -translations of any of those  11 except one , the one identical to (6) ( a ) . 
5 Conclusion
The descriptor-representation separation and the parsing of descriptors may not be the rightway to tackle the problems of the CATMT formalism  . This is a result which increases the urgency of exploring other avenues to tackling these problems  . The obvious other avenue is improving the t-rules themselves  , omething which is attempted for example in Arno\] \[d et al  ( 1988 )  , 6 References Arnold , D&L des Tombe ( 1987 ) " Basic Theory and Methodology in EUROTRA " , in SNirenbur8 , ed , Machine Translation : Theoretical nd Melhod . 
ological issues , CUP , Cambridge , 114-135 Arnold , D , Ldes Tombe & LJ as paert ( 1985 ) " Eu-rotra Linguistic Specifications Version 3" , DGXI-
II , CEC , Luxembourg
Arnold , D , SK rauwer , Ldes Tombe & L Sadler (1988) , "' Relaxed ' Compositionality in Machine Translation "  , in Second International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Languages  , Carnegie
Mellon Univ , Pittsburgh
Arnold , D , SK rauwer , M Rosner , Ldes Tombe & GB Varile (1986) " Thei C , AL , TFramework in EUROTRA : A Theoretically Committed Notation for MT "  , in Proceedings of the llth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING 86 )  , Association for Computational Linguistics , 29% 303 Arnold , D , & L Sadler ( 1989 ) " MiMo : Theoretical Aspects of the System " , Working Papers in Language Processing 6 , Dept of Language & Linguistics , Univ of Essex Bech , A , & A Nygaard ( 1988 ) " The E-Framework : A Formalism for Natural Language Proces ~ ing '  , in Proceedings of the 12th International Confer . 
ence on Computational Linguistics ( COLING 88) , Association for Computational Linguistics , 3639 Isabelle , P (1988) , " Reversible Logic Grammars for MT " , in Second International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Languages  , Carnegie Mellon Univ , Pittsburgh Krauwer , S , & Ldes Tombe ( 1984 ) " Transfer in a Multilingual MT System " , in Proceedings of the 70   5 l Oth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING 84 )   , Association for Computational Linguistics , 464-467 Leermakers , R , & J Rous ( 1986 ) " The Translation Method of ROSETTA " , in Computers and Translation 1 , 169-183 Raw , A , BV and ecapelle , & Fvan Eynde (1988) " Eurotra : An Overview " , illb~te ~ Jace3 , 5-32 Sharp , tt(1988) ,  "  CAT-2--Implementing a For-m~dism for MultiLingual MT " , in Second International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Languages  , Carnegie Mellon Uni L Pittsburgh van Eynde ( 1986 ) " The interface structure level of representation " i Multilingua  5  , 1 ~ 5-i , ~6 Wanyins ; Jin & RF Simmons ( 1986 ) " Symmetric Rules for Translation of English and Chinese "  , in
Computers and ~' anslation 1, 153-168671
