The semantic representation of spatial configurations : 
a conceptual motivation for generation in Machine Translation 
Cornelia Zelinsky-Wibbelt
IAI-EUROTRA-D
Martin-Luther-Str .14
D-6600 SaarbrOcken3
Email : cor@iai.uni-sb.de

This paper deals with the automatic translatiou of prepositions  , which are highly polysemous . Moreover , the same real situation is often expressed by d ifferent prepositions in different languages  . We proceed from the hypothesis that different usage patterns are due to different conceptualizations of the same real situat ion  . Following cognitive principles of spat ial conceptualization  , we design , a semantic interpretation process for spatial relations in which our translation system uses semantic features derived from a semantic sort hierarchy  . Thus we can differentiate subtle dist inctions between spatially significant configurations  . 
1. Introduction
This p . q per deals with a general phenomenon of ( machine ) translation . The same real situation is often expressed if ferently in different languages  . This is especially true for situations which are expressed by prepositions  . We hold that different usage patterns resulting from this fact are due to different conceptualizations of the same real situation  . The motivation for this phenomenon is given by the theory of Cognitive Grammar : Proceeding from the hypothesis of basic cognitive domains  ( cf . Langacker 1988 . pp . 54 ) it is possible to define all and only the properties which n my become salient in spatial conceptualizations of entities and tht  , s distinguish sufficiently one spatial conceptualization from another  . Basic cognitive domains refer to basic cognitive capacities as  , e , g . , the ability to conceptualize space and time . They are basic , because in any hierarchy schematizing conceptual complexity they constitute the lowest level and thereby the range of the conceptual complexity  . They are the most general cognitive capacities and are fixed in certains on somotorie as well as logical schemata  , and as we have said , in some languages of tim world they are morphologically manifested  . This is in line with ontologies based on prototype semantics  , as they have been developed by Dahlgren (1986 , 1989) , Hobbs (1987) , Moens (1989)) , Miller & Johnson-Laird ( 1976 ) for word sense disambiguation in different NLP systems  . A hierarchy of semantic sorts is defined over basic cognitive domains  , which is used for lexical representation , thus facilitating transfer ( cf . Zelinsky-Wibbelt 1988, 1989) . We design a semantic interpretation process for spatial relations in which our translation system uses semantic features derived from the semant ics ort hierarchy  . The implementation of this interpretation process is based on assumptions about the cognitive process of configuring spatially s ignificant entities by operating on conceptual representations of word meanings  . The EUROTRA-D CAT2 system shows that with the definition of word meanings with respect to cognitive domains  , we can interpret subtle distinctions between spatially significant configurations in an econmni can delegant way  . 
2 . Schematlz at lonas the spatial organization of entities The main point we want to illustrate with the translation of prepositions is how certain circumstances and purposes of an utterance instantiate int portant principles of conceptualization  . 
We will consider particularly pragmatic factors resulting from the specific environment of the language and the situation of utterance  ; we will investigate how these pragmatic factors determine the relevance  , salience and typicality of the entities constituting the conceived situation  . Moreover , we consider these moaning constituting factors which depend on the culture-spec if ic environment of the language user to be conceptual motivations of meaning in the broadest sense  , namely in the sense that abstract situations , which may not be perceived sensorically are conceived in terms of concrete  , sensorically perceivable situations . This perceptually driven conceptualization of abstract scenes  , by which metaphors are created and interpreted , cannot , however , be considered in this paper ( We deal with this phenomenon in Zelinsky-Wibbelt 1989b and Zelinsky-Wibbelt forthcoming )  . 
Prepositions are called relational express ions because they express how the conceptualizer profiles the relation between two participants : between the moving of moveable lrajeet or  , usually referred to by the NP mentioned first , and the more stationary backgrouttded landmark , usually referred to by the second NP . 
In this assymetrical partitioning of the real scene  , the relation between trajector and landmark is profiled in that the trajector is located with respect ot belandmark  . The asymmetric relation between trajector and landmark becomes obvious when we try to turn the relationship around as in the following examples : Tile cat is on tilemat  . / ~' Thematist ~ nder the cat . 
Industry is situated on tile Rhine . /' The Rhine is situated on industry . 
Assuming that language does not express reality but bow we conceive of reality  , tile semantic distinctions made by language with respect to our spatial environment do not necessarily agree with the entity's real spatial extension  , but with its conceptual sehematization . Schematization is the fundamental principle underlying the linguistic expressions of spatial configurations  ( cf . Talmy 1983:225) . It is the selection of those properties which becomes alient with the conceptualization of a scene  , while the non-salient properties do not participate in this process  . This means that in addition to prepositions being highly polysemons  , most entities are Ioxically vague with respect to their possible spatial properties which they may realize in the respective configurations  . 
The process of schematization is led by the following related principles which iustantiate certain spatial properties : - By the salience principle we prefer to associate an entity with a certain shape of one of its parts in a given relation  . For instance in the conceptualization of the sentence " lhe children are riding o  , r the bus " " bus " does not refer to the whole entity  , which is three-dlmensional , but only to its two-dimensional floor . 
This becomes salient by the typical relation assumed between the entities  , which implies the localization of the trajector within the space occupied by the landmark  ( place = ( tr = part of Im ) ) . This is an example of IDEALIZATION by which we focus on the salient dimension  ( s ) of an entity and abstract from the non-sal ient dimensions  , in this case the vertical dimension . The INTRINSICORIENTATION of " bus " , which is FRONTAL , iS also abstracted away from in this example ; within this relation it is salient that the bus has an interior bottom which functions as a SURFACE  . 

The relevance principle implies that dependent on the communicative goals we can choose one of disjoint prepositions for a specific spatial configuration  . The communicative goals depend on the speaker's viewpoint  , which in turn depends on the situation of utterance  . The following example might illustrate this principle : Imagine a scene in which Mary is inside the building of a supermarket  . If the speaker is far away from the scene he would designate Mary's location by saying " Mary is at the supermarket '  , thus expressing that his idealization of the three-dimensional extension of the supermarket to apoint : by using the preposition " at " he assert sttmt Mary's position coincides with that of the supermarket  . If the speaker , however , is himset f on the premises of the supermarket , he would designate Mary's location by saying " Mary is in the supermarket " thus referring to the three-dimensional extension of the build ing of the supermarket functioning as an ENCLOSURE  . Thus different utterance situations result in disjoint conceptualizations and hence different expressions of the same real situation  . 
The tolerance principle controls the pragmatic onditions under which expressions chosen by the speaker are adequate  . This principle may for instance control whether idealization of trajector and landmark to a point  , as in the above given example , is adequate with respect to the specific position of the speaker  . The tolerance principle also controls the specific range of PLASTICITY of a relation  . PLASTICITY is the general possibility of stretching the boundaries of a spatial schematization type with respect other ange of possible scenes conforming to it  . Thus " in front of " may be used even if the located entity is not exactly in front of but also beside another entity  ( of . Herskovits 1988) , as indicated in the following schema , whereby focal adjustment we may view X to be located in front of Y within the given orientation : 



X is located in/rentel Y
Discourse situation
The discourse situation may be provided by the verbal predicate of the sentence  . 
Tile typicality principle implies the designation of a spatial configuration in dependance of typical relations existing between the entities  . In our example " The children are riding on the bus *  , the motion verb implies the discourse situation which instantiates the typical relation to be that the children are located inside of the bus and not on top of it  . 
The typicality principle also makes possible the interpretation of an entity's INTRINSIC or TYPICAL orientation as the default case  , if information to the contrary is lacking . For instance , human bodies , churches and other buildings have an intrinsic frontal orientation and a prominent vertical axis  . 
Other properties by which we can distinguish different spatial configurations are the BOUNDARY CONDITIONS of an entity  , including whether it is COUNT or MASS , but they may also be related to the SHAPE properties  ; that is , it may be of importance whether an ENCLOSURE is BOUNDED like a suit case  , PARTIALLY BOUNDED llke abow l , or UNBOUNDED like an area . Moreover , the BOUNDARyCONDITIONI\]imply whether the entity is temporally UNBOUNDED like a STATE or an ACTIVITY or temporally BOUNDED like an ACHIEVEMENT or an ACCOMPLISHMENT  ( cf . Vendler 1967 and Dowty 1979 for this classification ; for the explication of the spatiotemporalnalogy cf  . e . g . Talmy 1983:pp . 255) . 
The GRANULARITY of an entity . This refers to an entity's subdivision , which may be conceptualized with a more finegrained or more coarse grained resotution  . 
The process of schematization results in the a symmetric relation between trajector and landmark  . This means that prepositions are two-place predicates  ( which is an old assumption of formal semantics ; of . also Hawkins 1985 . 61) . The relational concept-the trajector's spatial disposition - is designated by the preposition  . 
Let us now organize the relations developing between trajeetor and landmark with respecto how they condition each other and how they result from the relevance  , salience , and typicality of the entities constituting the conceived situation  . This will be the precondition for implementing these relations in the form of rules in our translation system  . In figure 1 we represent hose relations which we assume to determine obligatorily the process of coneeptuallzing the spatial configuration of entities  . We start with the relational concept which is part of the interpretation of the source language and which keeps constant during translation  . 
Universal relation /
An interllngually constant PLACE relation is pre- \[ supposed that implies the global space in which the trajector is localized with respect o the landmark  . 
~ an__a alaod mar____~kurse situation instantiates I eertaln spatial properties of trnjeet or l and landmark  . 
\] As a consequence of the spatial properties of I It rajector and landmark the language specific I 
I relation is conceptualized.\[
The verb provides the discourse situation by predicating a motion  . 
L and mark ( the bus )
As the sentence is about MOTION , with tile PLACE of the trajector within tile space_-of the landmark  , tile bus has the normal , -typic'd function of a LAROI'IVE II If 3L ~ ; together with this the SUR' , ~' ACE of the floor become salient . 
Universal relation " I'he relation PLACE = ( tr = part of Ira is presupposed . 
Trajector ( the children )
Depending on the situation of MOTION , with the trajeet or within the space of the landmark  , and tile normal VEIIICLI~function of the bus being salient  , the TRANSPORTABILITY of the children is tile typical property ill this relation  . 

Language specific relation ( o~t )
The salient part of the landmark being the SURFACE of its floor and tile typical property of the trajector being its TRANSPORTABII  , ITY , the relation of support is conceptualized . 
Figure 2 lnstantiation of the spatial properties of children and bus Let us now exemplify how these properties and relations getirr stantiat ~  , d with an English speaker's conceptualization of our example sentence " The children are rid htg Oiltire bl * s " on tile basis of the German source sentence  , in figure 2 we give an overview of this . 
In the configuration of the designated spatial scetle " the bus " establishestile landmark  . Its spatial conceptualization is the condition for the relational concept designated by " o ~t ": Depending on the action of " riding " and tile TYPICAL FUNCTIONOf " bus " being that of a LAI ~ O ~ VE lll CLI ~  , the T~'LANSPORTAnlL1TY becomes the typical property of the trajcctor , which is realized by the " chi idrepff ' ( see rule 9 below ) : This view of the entities excludes all other schematizations from being possible  ( e . g . , that in which the chi ldren are on top of the bus  )  . An additional condition for this schernatization is the information about the PLACE relation  , which keeps constant during translation and which implies tile fact that the trajector is located within the space occupied by the landmark  . In this configuration the SURFACE of the floor of the bus becomes salient  , because it is relatively large , thus instantiating the relation of SUPPORT to be conceptualized between " children " and " bu  . s " see rule 11 below ) . 
A concel : ~ tualization where the surroundings become more salient has to be expressed by the preposition " hd '  , which designates the relation of INCLUSION as for example in " the customer intire taxi "  . 
3 . The process of schematization within a unification based environment Our implementation is done in the  CAT2 system ( cf . Sharp 1988) , an extension of the MT prototype ( cf . Arnold et al 1986) formerlynsed in EUROTRA . Although differing primarily in the implementation  , the basic translation philosophy has been preserved  . The translation procedure is stratificational in that it is split up into the translation between several linguistically motivated levels  , representing constituency , syntactic functions and semantic relations . In this paper we are only concerned with the semantic level  , the Interface Structure ( IS ) , which should contain the semantic information required for transfer  , analysis and synthesis . For a more detailed description of tile current CAT2 system and the current 1S conception see Sharp 1988  , Zelinsky-Wibbelt 1988 and 1989 , and Steiner et at .  1988 . 
Let us now relate the process of schematizatlon to generating a representation by stepwise rule application  , where the rules include the instantiations of the schematlz at lonprinciples given in section  2   ( " st " stands for semantic feature , "; " for disjunction , " pred " for predicate , " arg " for argument , and " rood " for or odifier ) . The language-specific semantic representation which unifies with tile correct preposit ion is generated in the respective target language component  . We illustrate the translation of our example sentence " Die Kinder fahrenirn Bus " into " The chitdret zare riding on the bus "  . In order to keep the representation clear we give the rules in a very simplified version  , containing only the information relevant in this context  , namely tile information about the typicality , salience , and relevance of basic cognitive domains and domain-specific typical functions : 
German lexical rules : (1) ( pred , cat=prep , lu=in , place = ( tr = part of hn ) . \[*\] . 
Feature cooccurrence rules : (2) (? , cat = pP , place = m ) . \[( pred,(cat=prep,piace=A )),*\] . 
Transfer rules : (3) ( mod , cat=pp , Place = A )) => ( mod , cat=pp , place=A) . \[*\] . 
English lexical rules : (4) ( pred , cat=n , lu = bus , sf = typieal function = large vehicle ) . \[*\] . 
(5) ( pred , cat = n , lu = ehild , sf = animate=human ).\ [*\].
(6) ( pred , cat = prep , lu = on , retevant = support)) . \[* \] . 
(7) ( pred , (cat=v , iu = rlde , sf = ( activity = motion , argJ = sf = animate=human) . \[*\] . 

Feature cooccurrence I'nles:(8)(? , cat-np , sf=A)) . \[(pred,(cat=n . sf ~ A ),*\] . 
(9) (?, ( cat = s)) . \[( pred , cat=v , sf = aetivity = motion ) , ( argl , cat = np , sf = salient = transportable , idealization = three-dimensional ))) , ( mod , (cat=pp , plaee = tr = part_oflm , sf of _np = salient_shape = surface , idealization = two-dimensional , typical function = large vehicle D , *\] . 
(10)(?,( cat = pp , sf_of np = ( salient shape=A)D . \[pred , argl , ( arg2 , cat=np , sf=(salient_sbape=A))l . 
(1I )( mod , cat = pp)) . \[( pred , (cat=prep , place = ( tr = part of Ira , relevant = support ))) . \[( argl . cat = np , sf = ( typical = transportable)) . 
( arg2,(cat=np,sf~(sallent shape=surface)\].
Rule (3) guarantees that the information about Pt , ACE . which is preserved during translation , is transferred . Rules ( 5 ) to ( 7 ) are lexieal rules denoting basic cognitive domains  , whereas rule ( 4 ) denotes a typical function of a domain-specific entity  . Both knowledge types are used in sentence rule ( 9 )  , which effects that in sentences in which the verb inherently predicates a MOTION and has a PP-Modif ier with an NP argument whose designate do biect- the landmark-typically functions as a LARGE VEt IICLE  , TRANSpOIt . TABILITY is i astantiated as the salient property of the first NP argument of the verb  , the trajector . What can then be instantiated is the idealization of the PP's NP-argument oa TWO-DIMENSIONAL SURPACE which is its salient part  . Now the schematlzation type may be generated by rule  ( 11 )  . This rule effects that in a spatial conf iguration with a typically TIt /  . ,NSPOItTABLE trajector and a landmark which has a surface as its salient part  , the relevant concept relating both trajector and landmark is that of SUPPORT  , which unifies with the lexical rule ( 6 ) for the preposition on . 
The result of the generation process is represented in a simplified version in figure  3  . 
4. Literature
Arnold , D . J . , S . Kranwcr , M . Rosner , I . . des Tombe , G . B . Varile 1986 " The < C , A> , TFramework in Eurotra : A Theoretically Committed Notion for MT  . " In : t ' roceeding so / the Ilth Co , l/ere , ce on Computational Linguistics , Bonn 1986 . 
Dahlgren , K ,   1986 " Using Common sense Knowledge to Disambiguate Prepositional Phrase Modifiers  . " Proceedingso / the AAAI-86 Veil ( 5th National Con/erence on Arti/icial Intelligence  . August 11-15, Philadelphia , PA . 589~593 . 
Dahlgren , K . and J . McDowell 1989 " Knowledge Representation for Common sense Reasoning  . " Computational Linguistics 15(3) .  149-170 . 
Dowry , D.R.
1979 Word Meaning and Montague Grammar . The Sema , ticso/Verbs and Times in Ge . erative Semantics and in
Montague's PTQ , Dordrecht , Reidel.
Hawkins , B.W.
1985 The Semantics el Eng Ush Spatial Prepositions . L . A . U . T
Paper 142.
llerskovits , A.
1986 Language and Spatial Cognition . Cambridge University
Press . Cambridge.
Herskovits , A.
1 988 " Spatial Expression and the Plasticity of Meaning  . " In : Rudzka-Ostyn , B . To t~ic ~ in Cognitive Linguistics . John Benjamins Publishing Company . Amsterdam . 
Hobbs , J , R . , W . Croft , & T . Davies 1987 " Common sense Metaphysics and Lexical Semantics  . "
Computational Linguistics t 3. 241-250.
Langacker , R.
1988 " A View on Linguistic Semantics . " In : Rudzka-Ostyn , B . 
Topics in Cognitive Linguistics . John Benjamins
Publishing Company . Amsterdam.
Miller , G . A . and P . N . Johnson-Laird 1976 La , guage and Perception . Cambridge University Press,

Moens , M . , J . Calder , E . Klein , M . Reape , and 11 . Zeevat 1989 " Expressing Generalizations in Unifica tionBased Formalisms  . " Proceedings of , . tie ACL . Manchester 1989 . 174-181 . 
Retz-Schmidt , G.
1983 " Various Views on Spatial Prepositions . " Al--3fagazi . , w9 . 2 . 95- 105 . 
predicate argtrnent l modifier eat = v cat = np cat = pp activity = motion index = Oplace =  ( tr = part of Im ) typical = transportables f of np = ( salient shape = surface ) 
I predicate argument l cat = prep cat = np relevant = support type = empty index = D typical = transportable idealization = three-dimensional  argument2 cat=n~shape=surface Figure 3 Spatial configuration as the result of unif ication While in this example the discourses i tuation was given intrasententially by the action of riding  , it will often only be given extrasententially . This opens an area for future research , which will also comprise interaction with a knowledge base  . 

I would like to thank Wiebke Ramm , R and all Sharp , and J6rg Sch0tz , as well as many other colleagues whom I cannot mention here for helpful discussions  . 
Sharp , R.
1 988  "  CAT2 -Implementing a Formalism for Multilingual MT . In : Proceedings of the 2nd htternational Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation o / Natural La  , guages . CMU Carnegie
Mellon University , Pennsylvania.
Steiner , E . \[ I . , U . Eckert , B . Roth and J . Winther-Thielen 1988 " The development of the EUROTRA-D system of Semantic Relations  . " In : Stelner , E . II . , P . Sehmidt and C . 
Zelinsky-Wibbel L From Syntax to Semantics . Insights from Machine Translation . Pinter Publishers . London . 

Talmy , L.
19~3 " How Language Structures Space . " In : Pick , H . L . & L . P . 
Acredolo . Spatial Orientation . Theory , Research , and
Application . New York & London.
Vendler , Z.
196"/Linguistics in Philosophy . Cornell Uuiversily Press . 

Zelinsky-Wibbelt , C.
1 988 " From Cognitive Grammar to the generation of semantic interpretation i machine translation  . " In : Steiner , E . tI . , P . Schmidt , and C . Zellnsky-Wibbelt , From Syntax to Semantics . Insights from Machine Translation . Pinter
Publishers . London.
Zelinsky-Wibbelt , C.
1 989a Machine Translation based on Cognitive Linguistics : What lexical semantics contributes to the semantic unit yo/a sentence  . Eurntra-D Working Paper 16 . 
IAI-EUROTRA-D . Martin-Luther-Str .14, D-6600
Saarbr 0cken3.
Zelinsky-Wibbelt , C.
1 989b The Spatial Organization of Concrete Entities and their Abstract Metaphorical Target Senses  . L . A . U . D . Paper A2 57 . 
Zelinsky-Wibbelt , C . forthcoming 1990 " The Boundaries of Universal Semantics : Prepositions as a Case for Conventional Meaning  . " In : Grabski , M . 
Semantics/or Translation between Natural Languages  . 
Mouton de Gryuter . Berlin.



