ATEXTGENERATION SYSTEMFOREX PLAINING CONCEPTS INGEONETRY 
Ruslan Mitkov
Institute of mathematics
P.O . Box 373, Sofia


The project note presents the computer program GECO  ( GEometry COnsulter )   , which generates explanations ( descriptions ) of geometrical concepts in Bulgarian . Tile program replies to questiot ~ s such as " What is X "  , " Compare X and Y ' , where X and Y are concepts in geometry . The idea to design GECO was initially inspired by \[ HcKeown  , 1985\ ]  , which gives information on missiles ? However , unlike TEXT , our system is able to give two types of descriptions : detailed and brief  . For instance , if weask " What is a triangle " , GECO gives a detailed description , including definition , the characteristic and non~characteristic features of the triangle  , but if we ask once again within a dialogue the same question  , the program remind ~ us shortly the definition of the concept triangle  . This is done by means of a special stack , which keeps a formalized dialogue history . As in normal human dialogue , the Systems replies to a repeated question in past tense  ( this is specific at least of Bulgarian )   . Here is a " recorded " dialogue between user and GECO: 
User : What is a triangle ?
GECO : The triangle is a convex straight'l in earplane geometrical figure  , which possesses 3 sides . According to its sides the triangle can be equilateral  , is osceles and scalene and according to its angles ~ right-angled  , a cute-angled and obtuse-angled . 

User : What is a triangle ?
GECO : The triangle was a convex , straight linear and plane geometrical f igure  , which has three sides . 
In our model of natural language generation , we assume , that the task of language 9enerat ion can be divided into two stages : a conceptual and a linguistic stage  . We agree with Danlos ' claim\[Danlo ~ ,  1985\] , that the conceptual and linguistic stage cannot be completely independent  . That is why not all decisions in the Conceptual stage of GECO are to be fixed invariably  . 
In \[ Roesner , 1986\]i ~ given a typology of explanations . According to this typology , the explanations , generated by our system are " informative xplanations  , of static kind " ( this type includes the explanations of concepts  , what is our case ) . Roesner proposes , that this type of explanations should possibly include definitions  , short descriptive information , indication , where more information can be found , relations between concepts etc . Originally , GECO was intuitively so designed , that it practically met these formal demands  . 
Sublangua ~ and discourse
The system has to do with the sublanguage of school geometry  ( taught in bulgarian schools )  . 
This sublanguage uses a comparatively restric ted lexicon and not too great variety of syntactic constructions  . Its texts ( what is to be read in the text books )  , however , are often overloaded with very complicated complex sentences  . Goodsct ~ oolgeometry texts are presented in ba lanced way by simple and complex sentences  . 
Studying discourse pecualiarities of school geometry instructional texts helped us to design discourse rules  , made use by the conceptual module , when ordering the content within a text . 
Generation of text requires the ability how to organize individual sentences  . A reasonable writer does not randomly order the sentences in his text  , but rather plans an overall framework or outl in e  , from which the individual sentences are produced . Characteristic of the description of a geometrical concept is the introduction of its superordinate  , its constituents and providing some additional information to it  ( e . g . 
varieties ) . In this way the description of the geometrical concept " quadri lateral " possibly includes i ts superordinate  ( polygon )  , its constituents (4 straight linear sides , which build up a convex figure and lie in one plane  , i . d . it has 4 sides and is convex , straight linear and plane ) and its varieties ( parallelogram , rectangular etc .  )  . 
Semantic kr~w1ed@e repremen J ~ tionm ~ lel The semantic knowledge representation model used in the System and proposed by the autor is an extension of the model of Tiemann and Markle\[Tiemann and Harkle  ,   1978\] for concept semantic t 425 knowledge representation . The proposed model describes each concept as a set of critical and variable attr ibutes  . The concept introduces a class of things , objects , events , ideas or relations , so that each member of this class possesses the same label  , On the other hand it is possible that all the members of a class differ in one way or another and nevertheless are classified together  . The characteristic features , possessed by all the members in a class a recal led critical attributes  . Variable attributes are defined as characterist ic features  , which might differ within class members . 
Consider the concept " triangle " . Our semantic knowledge representation model wil l describe it formally as follows: Triangle  ( geometrical figure/plane , convex , straight linear , three sides/a cute-angled , right-angled , obtuse-angled ; equilateral , is osceles , scalene/O ) . 
The forllalism of functi~nal descripti~s Different Formalisms require different approaches  , whose variety may be sometimes ( especially in implementation ) problematic , We have adopted in our model and system an extended functional description  ( FD ) formalism , developed by Rousselot\[Rousselot ,  1985\] . This formalism enables the representation of al l types of knowledge  . AFD represents a list of attribute- value pairs  , j Rousselot's formalism is a very extended form of the functional grammars \[ Kay  ,  1985\] . Within the notation of FD were present in the domain knowledge base the geometrical concepts  ( using the above concept semantic representation approach  ) and the relations among them . We represent also as FDs the grammar rules in the linguistic knowledge base  . 
The role of l ~ i calemphasis
Different text generation systems make use o f different syntax selection approaches  . The phenomena of focus is widely used in text generation \ [ Derr and McKeown  ,  1984\ ]  , \[ McKeown ,  1985\] . In brief , if the focus is on the protagonist of the sentence an active construction is chosen  , and if the focus is on the goal-a passive one . Thus if the system TEXT\[McKeown , 1985\] should express the fact , that a triangle and circle touch each other and if the focus is on the protagonist  ( say triangle )   , the system would generate " The triangle touches the circle "  , but if the focus is on the goal ( say circle )   , the followiing sentence would be produced " The triangle is touched by the circle "  . 
Danlos \[ Danlos , 1985\] makes use of " discourse grammar " , that specifies the syntax of each sentence . 
In our work we have elaborated for the first time on the logical emphasis approach for the sentence syntax selection  . The logical emphasis in free order BulBarian is laid on the last word of the sentence  . It plays a leading role in choosing the word order in a sentence : the fact that the triang le has three sides may be verbalized as " the t riangle has three sides " if the logical emphasis is on " sides " or as " three sides has the triangle " provided the logical emphasis is on " triangle "  . 
Production of text
The grammar used to produce the preliminary sur face structure of the generated sentences is the functional unification grammar\[Kay  ,  1985\] . 
If a simple sentence grammar pattern ( subject verb object ) with value " protagonist " for the funcional role  ( attribute ) " logical emphasis " is unified with the FD from the domain knowledge base  , describing the relation , that each triangle has three sides , the following sentence will be generated : The triangle possesses three sides  , while the value " goal " for the attribute " logical emphasis " yields the result : 
Three sides has the triangle.
However , the sentence generated by u~if ying the functional unification grammar with the input and representing a fact about or related to a concept is not the final sentence thE  ) system offers to its users . Although the resulting sentences of the previous examples sound quite reasonably  ( in Bulgarian )  , the system would not be able to impress always i ts users if it accepts the sentence as f in a l  . The problem is that each explanation of a concept is not a single sentence  , but discourse . To illustrate our position , assume that the system has to give a detailed ( initial ) description of the concept " triangle " ( such description is actually given by our system  , see in the dialogue first answer ) . 
After consecutive unifications of the grammar rules with the relevant inputs  , the system would generate in the best case the following ' text : 
The triangle is a geometrical figure . The triangle is straight linear . 
The triangle is plane ( plane as adjective ) . The triangle is convex . The triangle has three sides . The triangle can be is osceles , equilate ral and scalene according to its sides  . The triangle can be right-angled , a cute--angled and obtuse-angles according to it sangles  . 

This is a clums y text , that no reasonable man would write . The three main linguistic operations ( part of the system's linguistic knowledge ) that will process this priliminary text are coordination  , pronominalization and ellipsis . Note that coordination will work on the fir st ' four sentences  , pronominalization-on the fifth sentence and ellipsis-on the sentence obtained from coord ination of the last two sentences  ( before these three operations arhetoric rule w ill have operated  , which says , that " according to " sounds better at the beginning of the sentence and is not subject to deletion during coordination  )  . The processed text will be : The triangle i sa straight linear  . 
plane and convex geometrical figure , It has three sides . The triangle can be is osceles , equilate ral and scalene according to its sides  . The triangle can be right-angled , a cute-angled and obtuse-angled according to it sangles  . 
According to its sides the triangle can be equilateral  , is osceles and scalene and according to it sangles -right-angled  , a cute-angled and obtuse-angled . 
There are also further linguistic decis ions to be made : should the sentence be in act ive or in passive voice  , should two or more simple sentences be combined into a single complex one  ( in the last sample text the first two sentences can be combined into a complex one  )  , how subordinate clauses should be handled ( we have developed several procedures to treat the production and connection of subordinate clauses  )  , should 9 erundium be used etc . In text generation systems such decisions are made on the basis of  lin9uistic phenomena such as focus , logical emphasis ( in our case ) , causality etc . 
and are hot to be discussed in the present paper.
Grmti~l accordance
Since Bulgarian is a highly inflective language  ( inflection affecting not only nouns , but also adjectives , numerals , pronouns etc . ) , we have developed additional algorithms for grammatical accordance  . We have developed an algorithm , which determines automatically the gender of the Bulgarian nouns  ( consisting of 254 steps )  . Another algorithm gives the definite article ( in Bulgarian as a inflection ; there exist various definite article inflections  ) of each noun and works parallelly to the first one  . 
However , if a Bulgarian noun is in its definite ar ticle form  , it is impossible to determine algorithmical ly its gender  . Therefore we have developed additional algorithms for transforming definite artic leform of nouns into indefinite article  ( normal ) forms . Moreover , the adjectives , numerals , the demonstrative and personal pronouns in Bu lgarian accord with the nouns  . Consequently we have developed and implemented algorithms for ' determining the indefinite a rticle form of adjectives  ( numerals , pronouns ) and from it the gender form and definite ar ticle form of adjectives  ( numerals , pronouns ) . 
Iiplementation
GECO is a program , designed for instructional and experimental purposes  . Its most part has been already programmed on IBM PC/XT/AT  ( in KsiProlog )  . The FDs are described within Prolog Definite Clause Grammars  ( DFG ) notation . 
Thus we have implemented a surface generation based on both the DFG formalism and the formalism of FDs  . This idea we have adopted from Derr and McKeown \ [Derr and HcKeown  ,  1984\] . The result is a generator with the best features of both grammars : simplificatiion of input by using functional information and effi ciency of execution from Prolog  . 

Danlos , Laurence Generation automatique de textes en langue naturelle  , Masson , Paris , to generate complex and simple sentences , 
COLING , 1984
Kay , Martin-Parsing in functional unification grammar  . In Zwickky et aleds ): Natural language parsing , Cambridge , 1985 McKeown , Kathleen Text generation : using discourse strategies and focus contstraints to generate natural language text  . Cambridge university press , Cambridge , 1985 Mitkov , Ruslan-A knowledge representation model and i ts applications  , Models of meaning , 
Varna , 1988
Roesner , Hannelore-Generierungyon Erklaerungenaus formalen Wissens repraesentation  . Bericht
No . 3, Verbund vorhaben WISBER , 1985
Rousselot , Francois--Unsystems comprenant destextes en utilisant unformalisms unique  . 
T . A . Informations , No . 2, 1985
Tiemann P . , Markls S - Analyzing instruct ional content : A guide to instruction and evaluation  . Champaign , Zllinois : Stipes publishing company ,  1971 3 427
