Enjoy the Paper : Lexical Semantics via Lexicology
Ted Briscoe & Ann Copestake Bran Boguraev
Computer Laboratory , Cambridge University IBM Thomas J . Watson Research Center
Pembroke Street , Cambridge , CB 23 QG , UKPO Box 704 , Yorktown Heights , New York 10598 , USA
Abstract : Current research being undertaken at both Cambridge and IBM is aimed at the construction of substantial lexicons containing lexical semantic information capable of use in automated natural language processing  ( NLP ) applications . This work extends previous research on the semiautomatic extraction of lexical information from machine-readable versions of conventional dictionaries  ( MRDs )   ( see e . g . the papers and references in Bogura ev & Briseo e , 1989; Walker et al ,  1988) . The motivation for this and previous research using MRDs is that entirely  marina1 development of lexicons for practical NLP applications k s infeasible  , given the labour-intensive nature of lexicography  ( e . g . Atkins ,  1988 ) and the resources likely to heallocated to NLP in the foreseeable future  . In tiffspaper , we motivate a particular approach to lexicai semantics  , briefly demonstrate its computational tractability  , and explore the possibility of extracting the lexical information this approach requires from MRDs and  , to some extent , textual corpora . 
1. Lexlcal Semantics
A theory of lexical semantics should provide an efficient representation f lexical semantic information in the paradigmatic plane which is capable of integrating with a genuinely compositional semantic account in the syntagmatic plane  . Our starting point for this research is the work of Levin  ( e . g .  1985 ) and others on verbal alternations ( diathesis )  , Pustejovsky ( e . g . 1989) on lexical coercion and qualia theory , and Evans & Gazdar ( e . g . 
1989 ) on default inheritance within unification-based formalisms  . It can be seen as a further contribution to the use of unification-based for mahsms in linguistic description and specifically as an enriching of the minimal sort-based lexical semantic taxonomy incorporated into the Esprit ACORD system  ( Moens et al ,  1989 ) and the SRI ( Cambridge ) CLE system ( Alshawi et al ,  1989) . We propose a system in which a standard graphbased unification formalism  , such as PATR-II , is augmented with minimal disjunction ( of atomic terms ) and minimal default inheritance ( allowing only ' orthogonal ' multiple inheritance in a manner similar to Evans & Gazdar's DATR  )  . Using such a system we are able to see the beginnings of solutions to three problems concerning the integration of lexical semantics with a general theory of linguistic description and processing-alternations  , coercion , and decomposition/representation . 
The first problem emerges with systems , such as the Alvey Tools grammar ( Carroll & Grover ,  1989) , which attempt to characterise the grammatical behaviour of lexical items in terms of sets of subcategorisation frames  . 
Intuitively , this often seems arbitrary and inelegant because the occurrence of alternation seems to be semantically motivated  . This problem has been discussed in connection with w ~ rbs mostly  , but also arises with nouns and adjectiw ' ~ a . For instance , in the Tools lexicon the verb believe has eight entries  . Six of these separatentries relate to the same or a very similar sense of believe  ; namely , believe 3 ( Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English , LDOCE ) ' to hold as an opinion ; suppose ' which is a relatlon between an individual  ( the believer ) and a proposition ( what is believed )  . Treating the various grammatical realisations of this sense of believe separately predicts that it is pure accident hat they share the same sense  . It also suggests that the range of possible alternations is unpredictable and must simply be listed from verb to verb  . Most of the work on alternations has concentrated on attempts to characterise semantic lasses of verbs which undergo similar alternations  ( e . g . Levin , 1985) . This enterprise has not been particularly successful  ( Boguraev & Briscoe , 1989b ) , but in any case ignores or simply assumes the prior point that it is possible to construct a system in which there is just one entry for  believe3  . 
Nevertheless , it seems correct that examples like John believed that Mary was clever/Mary  ( to be ) clever/Mary/the rumour should be related to one entry for believe because this would allow us to account for the interpretation of John believed Mary as something like ' John believed something  ( s ) that Mary asserted ' ; thai : is , as standing for some ' understood ' proposition involving Mary  . Pustejovsky ( 1989b ) refers to this process as coercion and compares it to examples such as John considers Mary a genius where it is usual  ( e . g . in GPSG , Gazdar et al ,  1985 ) to claim that a genius functions predicatively because the subcategorisation frame for consider forces this interpretation  . In general , coercion is a problem in theories which take the syntactic aspect of grammatical realisation as primary  , but would be a natural consequence of a theory which took the sense and rite fact that  believe3 is a relation between an individual and a proposition as basic  . In such an account an NP complement of a verb denoting a relation between an individual and a proposition would either denote a proposition ' directly '  ( the rumour ) or be coerced to the appropriate semantic type ( Mary )  . 
When coercion occurs some additional information is required to'fleshout'the elevated semantic type of the complement  . Pustejovsky (1989) dubs this logical metonymy . In the case of believed Mary this is that it is some assertion of Mary's which is believed  . This information appears to be inherited from the verb  . In other cases , such as John enjoyed ( watching ) the film , John began ( reading ) the book , or John finished ( drinking ) the beer , it is more plausible that the missing information is provided by the lexical specification of the  ; NP complements ( cf : John enjoyed ( drinking ) the beer , John finished ( reading ) the book ) . Pustejovsky (1989 , 1989b ) and Pustejovsky & Anick ( 1988 ) propose that the lexical representation of nouns is enriched to include a specification of processes typically associated with the objects they denote and that  , in cases of coercion , this information is utilised . In their terms , this is the tdic role of the qualia structure of the noun  . 
We see the inheritance of this information from the verb or complement as a default process which operates in the absence of more marked pragmatic information  . For example , one would normally enjoy ( watching ) the play , but it would not be difficult to construct a discourse context in which someone  ( say lecturer or student ) enjoyed 142 ( reading ) the play , and so forth . So we propose that enjoy in this sense is a relation between an individual and mlevent m-Kl that  , by default , nouns such as fihn or play inherit ' watch ' as a specitication of the typical event  ( process ) in which they participate . The entry for enjoy will , also by default , state that in cases of coercion the specification of the process will be imherited from the nominal comt  ) lement . In cases where tim defanlt is over riddm , , by pragmatic information more specific instances of the entries to ten joy and/or play are created in which the defaults are replaced by pragmatically appropriate '  ; pecitications .   ( The precise nature of the processes which trigger this or the retxic val of tile relevant int brnmtion we take to be almrt of ' pragmatics ' and not lexical semantics  , ) One tinal ( mostly methodological ) tx ~ int is that the approach we are advocating provides a slightly different viewt x finlon the problem of lexical decomposition / represenlation  . Early approaches to lexical semmltics within the generative hadition were criticised for the  , ' ubitrariness of the representations produce * t . Following Dowry (1979) , Pustojevsky (1989) and others , we suggest that one strategy for uncovering the optimal lexical representation  , or level of ' decomposition ' , is to tx ) sit representations which provide elegant accounts of the interaction of lexiegd semantics with grammatical realisation and with comtmsitional semantics  . Pursuing this methodology , we have been led to a model of lexical semantic representation which suppo~ts a  ( somewhate michexl ) com t ? ) sitional account of ( sentence ) meaumg by enrich hlglexieal ~ e presentations of nouns and collapsing those for verbs with alternate grammatical realisations  . In this framework , there arc . still many inferences which are not captured " tl . 
the level of lexiea \] organisatien , bu ! we argtlt ' that these inferences are . ' pragmatic'i ~ l the sense t\]la\[theyart : lh  ) fb'v- ; ed on default processes operating within tim lexicon  . 
T tms , our position is OplX ~ S ~ . dlalha : : offlobbscta1 . (1987 ) who argue that there is no disti~ction between lexical semantic : ~ and general knowledge  , hiour approach , simple default ' lexicat ' if derence l ~ , rocedure . s do quite a lot of work . Of course , the way is always open to us to argue that rely inference which cannot be captur ~ xl by these procedures is ' nondefault '  . New : Ilheless , in section 3 we argue thai this distinction is supt ~ ; rted by natural data both in terms of the fruity of nondefault cases and also the marked  , info~mationally-rich nature of the contexts in which lexical defanlts ark over ridden  . Thus , our approach gives us a handle on which as lxacls el'k  ; xic N meaning sheukt be represented in the lexicon m~d therefore on the type of information wewmat e extract from our MRI  ) s . 

PhysObj Artefact Abstract . S , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  /"' . .
>", " X "-"\"- . . .  "  . ~ Representation equation l
P ? tat?lcake 2 X statuel\l
X Literature Visual Repbo 6~k\]film 3
Figure 12. An Implementation
It is possible to implement a system capable of ' coercion and default specification using a unification-based formalism extended with ' orthogonal'default inheritance of  ( paradigmatic ) lexical specifications . We also make use of minimal disjm~ctive specifications to allow for the range of grammatical alternation within one sense of a tmxlicate  . 
Our prototype extend , ; PATRolI ( Shieber ,  1986 ) with disjunction of atomic terms and uses the template mechanism to imt ?  ) seanatural m ~ bsumption ordering on the lcxical taxonomy which defines the inheritance network  . The taxonomy implicit in the fragment implemented so far is shown in Figure  1  . q\]fist~monorny is adequate to cover the metonymies discussed in this paper and others discussed in Pustejovsky  ( 1989 )  .   ( Numbers on concepts are relate xl to LDOCE sense numbers  . ) An entry for book is given in template from in Figure  2a   . Its position in the network in Figure 1 defines the pattmn of inheritance for the qualia struct me  . 
Lexica \] entry for " book ": book--iNLite rature PhysObj  ; 
Dag for " the book ":\[ CAT:NP
SEM t~'S:\[CAT:OBJ
TYPESHIFTED : FALSE\]
TI~ANS:\[DET:DEFINITE
PRED:BOOK 1
VAR : < DAG 61>=REF 25
ARG!:<DAG61>\]@UALIA:\[TS'I'\]:~,UC' . \[':\['?' RANS:\[PRED:?REAl :)
VAR : < DAG , 62>=\[\]
EVENT : < DAG 62 >
ARGI:<DAG 63>=\[\]
ARG2:<DAG 61>\]
COMBINES :\[ FIRST:\[TANS:\[ VAR:<DAG63>\]  \] \] \]\]
Figure 2a
The relicrole furbook is thus inheritex li'om file default role associated with ' Literature '  . The entry will also inherit reformation from ' PhysObj ' lint the orthogonality const ~ aint rules out conflicts with the attributes inlmrited from ' Literature '  . In fact the template ' PhysObj ' does not contain any information about the telie part of the qualia structure  . 
The DAG for rite NP the book is " also shown in Figure  2a   . This still denotes an object ; when combined with a norrnal , non-amrcing verb the telic role makes no contribution to the semantic structure  . However some grmmna rules allow type-shifting ; one allows NPs with an associated telic role to be type-shiftex l to be equivalent to untensed VPs mad to denote events  , Figure 2b shows the NP after application of this rule . 
Once type-shifted , the logical formula associated with the book is the same as that associated with reading ttw book  , except that the question mark indicates defeasibility and could be inteq  ) reted as ' possibly ( P = read ) & P ( e ' j x ) ' . 
243\[CAT:NP




ARGI:\[DET:DEFINITE

VAR : < DAG40>=REF 25

ARG2:\[PRED : ? READ




COMBINES :\[ FIRST:\[TRANS:\[ VAR:<DAG41>\]\]\] 
Figure 2b
In ( la ) we show the formula which can be read off the DAG in Figure  2b given straightforward assumptions about the semantic interpretation of the formalism  ( e . g . Moore , 1989) . The lexical entry for enjoy specifies that its complement must denote an event which can be syntactically an NP or progressive VP and that  , if the NP is type-shifted , the relic role supplies the understood predicate . The resulting formulae associated with the VP and S are shown in  ( lb , c) . 
(1 ) a ) ~xe ' ~ y?read ( e ' x y ) & book ( y ) b ) ~ x3 ee'y past ( e ) & enjoy ( exe ' ) & ? read ( e ' x y ) & book ( y ) c ) 3 e e ' y past ( e ) & enjoy ( eje ' ) & ? read ( e ' j y ) & book ( y ) We follow Hobbs ( 1985 )  , Alshawi et al (1989) , Moensetat .   ( 1989 ) and others in using an event based calculus for reasons of computational tractability  , and also because distinctions amongs types of events are likely to be important in the characrerisation of the recovery of unc~rstood predicates in logical metonymies  . In a fuller account it would be possible to constrain the type of event selected by a particular verb  ; for instance , enjoy might be constrained to unify by default with the telic role of a norm if this specified a processor culminating event  . This would predict the relative oddity of example such as John enjoys his house  , in which we assume that the telic role is somettfing like ' living in ' and that this specifies a state rather than process  . It would also be possible to alter the aspect of qualia structure selected by a particular verb  . An example like John regrets that book by default receives an interpretation i which ' writing ' is selected to flesh out the metonyauy  . In this case , we might specify that regret , in contras to enjoy , selects the agentive path in the noun's qualia structure  . 
Another area in which this approach to lexical semantics i suggestive relates to adjectival modification  . It is wellknown that adjective such as good , fast , long , and so forth , have meanings which are hard to specify independently of some ' aspect ' of the noun they modify  . 
Pustejovsky ( 1989 ) suggests that in examples like fast car , fast typist , or fast waltz , fast should be treated as a modifier of the telic role associated with these nouns  , so that : these examples can be paraphrased fast cartod rive or fast waltz to dance  . The adjective long appears to be ( at least ) ambiguous between a telic role modifier and a for rnal role modifier-along book can either be a comment on shape  , size or number of pages , or a comment on the length of time required for reading  . In the event based calculus we adopt we could associate the logical form in  ( 2b ) with the interpretation f ( 2a ) where long is a telic role modifier . 
(2 ) a ) John enjoyed the long book b ) 3ee'e " xyenjoy ( eje ' ) & ? read ( e ' j y ) & book ( y ) & long ( e " ) & ? read ( e " x y ) However , note that it would be inappropriate to automatically conflate the events e ' and e " because this would predict that John's reading of the long book was necessarily along event which  , whilst plausible , is not entailed under this interpretation flong . In order to avoid this effect using unification -based techniques it is necessary to explicitly copy the structure that specifies the telic role  . 
We suggested in section 1 that NPs , such as the fact , can denote propositions ' directly ' . Similarly , we think that there is no metonymy involved in example such as John enjoyed the experience / film-making and so forth  . In these cases , we claim that the NPs in question denote events ' directly '  . Thus , we are lead to an ' ontologically promiscuous ' semantics  ( Hobbs ,  1985) . However , recent developments in model theoretic semantics which treat properties as basic entities  ( e . g . Chierchia & Turner , 1988) support this position . Indeed the interpretation of event-denoting NPs in complement position with enjoy strongly suggests that these NPs must be analysed as denoting propositional function since their ' missing argument ' must be associated with the subject of enjoy  . For instance , John likes marriage can mean that John likes the institution but John enjoys marriage can only mean that heen joys being in the state of marriage  ( to someone )  . 
3. Data concerning Logical Metonymles
The previous sections have demonstrated the nature of the phenomenon of logical metonymy and have outlined a computationally-tractable unification -based trealment  . A crucial aspect of this treatment is that , with the predicates we have considered , the missing information is supplied , by def at flt , by the qualia structure of the head noun in the type-shifted complement  . In order to demonslrate the presence of logical metonymies in naturally-occurring text and to evaluate the plausibility of our default approach  , we examined data drawn from the Lancaster-Os lo /Bergen  ( LOB ) corpus containing predicates capable , in principle , of coercing the type of their complements . 
A set of type-coercing predicate similar to enjoy was obtained by extracting verbs coded to take both NP and progressive or infinitive VP complements in LDOCE  ( see Boguraev & Briscoe ,   1989b for an account of these codes and the extraction techniques  )  . Further manual editing of this list led to 24 predicates which we felt were capable of exhibiting logical metonymies parallel to that of enjoy  . To date , we have analysed all the data obtainable from the LOB corpus for seven of these predicates  . The results of this analysis are summarised in Figure  3  .   ( Numbers after predicates refer to LDOCE sense numbers  . ) 44 3
Pred ProgInf NPEv Met Pragenjoyl 6  /  59   21   25   4 prefer 1   4   30   3  ( 110 131 finish l 8/3 182 36 start / , 3  45   28   63   42   21   0 tmg in l 1   5'1   11   8   3   2   miss5   3 /~ A 10   13   4   regret1   2  \]  17   14   0   0 
Figure 3
Columns headext NP , lnf ( initiv c ) and Prog ( ressive ) show the number of times each predicate occurred with this tYt Ve of complement  .   ( A stroke inflteseeolunms indicates that this complementy pew  ( mld be ungrammatical with a particuh ~ r predicate . ) The remaining cohunns give further information about the NP complements  . Ev ( cnt ) indicates then tlLm ber of times that the NP complentent was judgex l to denote an event  ( or hi a few cases a proposition ) directly : Met ( onymic ) indicates then tunbar of times we judged that coercion had occmred  . And Prag ( matic ) indicates the number of times that we judged the understood predicate was not recovered via the head noun's qualia structure in the metonymic as es  . In some cases , the number of NP complenmntsi greater than the stun of Event and Metonyntic because we felt unable to classify some exmnples  . These examples were either ( senti ) idiomatic , such as miss the boat , or involved NPs whose status was unclear because of modification of the head norm  , such as enjoy the warm evening . 
The first thing to note about Figure 3 is rite comparatively high numbers of metonymic exmnples relative to the complete sets  . It is inslructive that the apparently more complex metonymic omplement pattern is selected quite frequently despite the availability  , with ~ dlttms e1) redicates , of an explicit VP complement pattern . For instanc x ~ , enjoy and moq ~ hological vmimlts occurs 65 times in the relevant sense midcoerces its NP complement in  25 of these cases . The second and crucialohs e~v ~ , tion , from the perspective of our default theory of the recovery of the understood predicate in the metonymice as es  , is that the numbers in the 15ragmatic olumnm'e relatively low by comp~dson with the total nunt ber of metonynfic exmnples  . 
Given the defimlt theory , we would expect most rnetonymi examples to be resolvable via the head noun's qualia structure and there to be relatively few'pragmatic ' examples involving less constrairted lind ntore complex inferences  , and , in fact , these cases represent aixmt 17% of the metonymic examples and about 4% of the total set of exanaples considered . Further examination of these 17 cases revealed that , in most , the hnmediate context was informationally-rich arid therefore marked enough for the appropriate pragmatic inference to go through  . For example , compare the a ) examples with the b ) examples in ( 3 )  . 
(3 ) a ) Willie enjoyed the hotsweet te~hstanding on the deck in the cool of the night b  ) Site can lieback and enjoy her babytmtil the mid wife  , knowing the after birth is ready to pop out , a ) Lod donpaid Irisown account , finished lf is cigarette , and gotup . 
b ) The Ix ) ok was never finished , for his illness ~ mdd eath intervened while he was in the course of wriling it  . 
a ) If you prefer a Burgundy trya 1955 Charmes
Chambert in costing round 1 t ? mnd .
b ) Then agains or n any t ~ ople much prefer these a or river to the  1  ) at hs . Having learned to swim in these a . . . 
in each of the a ) examples we think that the tm ( terstood predicac is supplied via the qualia structure of the head noun in the NP complement  , ht theb ) cases , it seems implausible that the telic role of babies is to be cuddh  ; d , or that seasor rivers are ( mainly ) for swinuning in . "\[' heagent iw . " role of book will specify the predicate ' wriuz  '  , s t ) we could treat finish as selecting this role by defm dtm~d this would  , in fact , deal with four of the ' pragmatic ' cases , but othexs would become'pragmatic'since in our implementation only one unification path hato the qualia structure c~m be selected by default  . However , hi each of these examples the context shown provides enough information to infer the relevant predicate  , it is not ~ fl waystim case that the ( remah ~ der of the ) context provides the relevmit information or intuitively seems so ' rich ' in the default cases  . 
/ML other way in which we can evaluate the default theory is by considering the status of the predicates which are supplied explicitly when a VP complement is selected  . 
We might expect VPs to be selected precisely in those situations when defimlts based on qualia struct tue would lead to the wrong intewretations  . We tested this idea by exmnining the VP complements of start  . In many cases , the prtxticates were intransitive , dilransitive , and solbrth , so that rite hypothesis did not apply , t lowever , in the srraiOtfforwardly trmtsitive cases 21 exmnptes exhibited clear nondefault pre ( ficates , such as started to open the bottle , started to play a Waltz , or started flirting with the first pretty girl that youmet  , whilst only 4 cases arguably in wglv ~ ldefmflt predicates recoverable from the head ~ otm's qualia structure -- start making a fuss  , started to fire disitress rockets , started pulling the commt mication cord , art d started making bubbling twises . 
This analysis is hardly conclusive , however it doe '; , we think , demonstrate that logic ~ dmetonymies occur quite regularly with certain predicates in natural text  . We have also provided some evklence that default inference based on lexical organisation  ( in this case the qnalia structure of nouns ) would succeed in a large number of cases . 
Furtheimore , there seems to be some support in this data for the claim that contexts in which ' pragmatic ' recovery of the understood predicate occurs are quite infbrmationally-rich mid would therefore constrain m ~ otherwise rather unconstrained process  . Finally , we have shown that , in the case of start there is evidence that VP complen rentation is chosen when default recovery of understood predicates on the basis of qualia structure would lead to the wrong interpretation  . 
4 . Acquiring Lexlcal Semantic Information In this section  , we describe three exploratory studies aimed at tile  ( semi- ) automatic acquisition of qualia structure , in particular telic roles , f Tomlv lRDs . The first involves exploiting subject and box codes in the LDOCEMRD  ( see papers in Boguraev & Briscoe , 1989 fbrafull description ) , while the second is based on an analysis of the LDOCE definitions  . These tecl miques are aimed at allowing qualia structure to be inherited appropriately  ; the flfird attempts to determine the predicates associated with a word by analysis of dictionary definitions and  , to some extent , more general corpus material . 

The mach hae-readable version of LDOCE contains some residual ' database-like ' fatures which do not appear in the printed dictionary  . These include a taxonomy of many words in terms of ' subject matter '  . This taxonomy defines a'fat'hierarchy of , at most , two levels and many relationships are left implicit  ; for instance , ' sports ' is a main extegory with subdivisions uchas ' archery ' but ' football ' is a main category with subdivision such as ' rug by '  . Nevertheless , this taxonomy can be used to identify ' lexical conceptual paradigms '  ( Pustejovsky & Anick , 1988); for example , there is a class'beverages ' (147 word senses ) , a class'motion pictures ' (113 word senses ) , and a class'literature ' (377 word senses ) . These words c . ould straightforwardly be associated with the ' deeper ' inheritance network given in Figure  1 with default telic ( and possibly other ) roles , such as ' drinking ' , ' watching ' and ' reading ' associated appropriately  . There are a few problems though , for instance the category ' beverages ' includes publican  , and ' motion pictures ' includes usherette . It is possible to exclude these examples from the target network by making use of box codes which  , amongst other things , associate semantic features with nouns , because the exceptions are coded ' animate ' and ' hmnan '  . Nevertheless , this approach is limited because the LDOCE semantic taxonomy will undoubtedly not contain all the classifications which eventually will prove desirable and there will be errors of omission in its construction  . In addition , we are ufilising an idiosyncratic feature of the LDOCE MRD  , wl filst we would like our extraction techniques to be generally applicable  . 
An improvemento this approach is to utilise taxonomies constructed from the dictionary definitions  . For example we have built a taxonomy of substances by extracting the genus senses of LDOCE definitions in which  145 word senses such as Burgundy appear directly or indirectly under the main nominal sense of drink  . We are currently investigating an approach whereby lexical entries inherit some of their structure from higher nodes in the taxonomy  . Qualia structure could thus be inherited from word senses rather than abstract emplates  ; for example Burgundy would inherit its telic role from the noun drink  . 
If abstract templates were still needed they could be inserted into the inheritance hierarchy at the appropriate points  . 
The approaches above only specify how the qualia structure is inherited  , rather than how it is initially det ~' mined . In recent work , the IBM lexical systems group have used their lexical database system  ( e . g . Neff & Boguraev ,  1989 ) with a number of MRDs to generate lists of pre ~licates which are applied to books by searching through definition fields for the occurrence of bookina position denoting ' typical object ' of the head word  . For instance , LDOCE defines sag with ' ( of a book , performance , tc . ) to become uninteresting during part of the length '  . Using these techniques with three dictionaries resulted in the following list of verbs : a bridge  , abstract , annotate , appreciate , autograph , ban , bang about , borrow , bring out , burlesque , bowdlerize , call in , castigate , castrate , catalogue , censor , chuck away , churn out , classify , collate , commission , compile , consult , cross-index , dramatize , entitle , excoriate , expurgate , footnote , page , pirate . It is obvious that this technique yields specific  , often rare , predications with typical objects . Whilst qualia structure is likely to involve typical predications with specific  ( classes of ) nouns . 
In Order to automatically obtain typical ( frequent ) predications of book , four corpora were searched-LDOCE example sentences  , the Brown corpus ,  1 . 2 million words of Readers ' Digest , and 26 million words of tapes from the American Publishing House for the Blind  . 
Analysing those citations in which book occurs as direct object revealed that read and write are the two most common predicates across the four corpora  , although ~ l ~ reare considerable differences within each corpus ' ~ see Boguraev et al  , 1989 for details) . This approach could and should be extended in several ways  , for instance by dealing with semantically related nouns such as novel  , and , of course , by attempting a similar analysis for many more nouns  . Nevertheless , these preliminary results do suggest that a noun 's qualia structure should be recoverable from MRDs and corpora in a semiautomatic way  . 
5. Conclusion
We have attempted to motivate an approach to iexical semantics which enhances the representation f nouns in terms of their qualia structure  . We have shown that incorporating this information into a default inheritance hierarchy and enriching the notion of compositionality o allow for type-shifting of NPs allows for a computationally tractable and plausible account of logical metonymy  . We have , however , said very little about what qualia structure is . Whilst Pustejovsky ( 1989 ) relates this idea back to Aristotle's four causes  , we think that for the purposes of the computational implementation described above we need only assume that qualia structure constitutes  ( part of ) the lexical information associated with a word sense  , in the sense that it is the information which is most accessible given the organisation of the inheritance network  . One could imagine that other more general or ' encyclopedic ' information concerning concepts would simply be less accessible or ' dose ' in terms of the same network  . The preliminary work with MRDs/corpora suggests that both types are recoverable semiautomatically  . 
6. References
Alshawi , H . , Carter , D . , van Eijck , J . , Moore , R . , Moran , D . , Pereira , F . , Pulman , S . & Smith , A .  1989 . Final Report : Core Language Engine . SRI ( Canlbridge)
Technical Report , Project No . 2989.
Atkins , B . T .  1988 . Course Notes . ESF Summer School on Automating the Lexicon . To appear in Atldns , B . T . & Zampelli , A . Automating the Lexicon , Oxford University
Press , Oxford.
Boguraev , B&Briscoe , E .  1989 . Computational Lexicography for Natural Language Processing  . 
Longman/Wiley , London/New York.
Boguraev , B . & Briscoe E . 1989b . Ufilising the LDOCE grammar codes . In Boguraev & Briscoe 1989 . 
Boguraev , B . , Byrd , R . , Klavans , J . & Neff , M .  1989 . 
From structural analysis of lexical resources to s e  , mantics in a knowledge base . IBM Research , Mimeo . 
Carroll , J . & Grover , C .  1989 . The derivation of a large computational lexicon of English from LDOCE  . In
Boguraev & Briscoe 1989.
Chierchia , G . & Turner , R .  1988 . Semantics and property theory . Linguistics & Philosophy , 11, 261-302 . 
Dowty , D .  1979 . Word Meaning and Montague Grammar . 
Reidel , Dordrecht.
Evans , R . & Gazdar , G .  1989 . Inference in DATR . Proc . 
of 4th Eur . ACL ., Manchester , pp . 66-71.

Ga ~' Aar , G . , Klein , E . , Pullum , G . & Sag , I .  1985 . 
Generalized Ptwase Structure Grammar . Blackwell,

Hobbs , J .  1985 . Ontological promiscuity . Proc of 23 rd
ACL ., Chicago , pp . 61-9.
Hobbs , J . , Croft , W . , Davies , T . , Edwards , D . & Laws , K . 
1987 . Common sense metaphysics and lexical semantics . 
Computational Linguistics , 13, 241-50.
Levin , B .  1985 . Lexical Semantics in Review . MYY Working Papers on the Lexicon & in Walker et al  1988  . 
Moens , M . , et al 1989 . Expressing generalisations in unification-based grammar formalisms  . Proc . of 4th Eur . 
ACL ., Manchester , pp . 174-81.
Moore , R .  1989 . Unification-based semantic interpretation . 
Proc . of 27th ACL ., Vancouver , pp . 33-41.
Neff , M . & Boguraev , B .  1989 . Dictionaries , dictionary grammars and dictionary entry parsing . Proc . of 27th ACL . ,
Vancouver , pp . 91-101.
Pustejovsky J .  1989 . Current Issues in Computational Lexical Semantics  . Proc . of 4th Eur . ACL . , Manchester , pp . xvii-xxv . 
Pustejovsy , J . 1989b . Type Coercion and Selection . Proc . 
of WCCFLVIII , Vancouver.
Pustejovsky , J . & Aniek , P .  1988 . On the semantic interpretation of nominals . Coling 88, Budapest , pp . 518-23 . 
Shieber , S .  1986 . An Introduction to Unification-based Approaches to Grammar  , U . Chicago Press , Chicago . 
Walker , D . , Zampolli , A . & Calzohtri , N . 1988, in press . 
Automating the Lexicon : Research and Practice in a Multilingual Environment  . Cambridge University Press,


