ANINTEGRATED SYSTEM FOR MOR PHOLOGIC ALAN ALY SISOF THESLOVENE 

Toma ~ Erjavec , Peter Tancig
NLU Lab . , Department of Computer Science and Informatics
Joker Stefan Institute
Jamova 39, 61000L jubljana

ABSTRACT : The paper presents an integrated environment for morphological analysis of wordforms of the Slovene language  . The system consists of a lexicon input and maintenance module  , a lexicon output module for accessing lexical wordforms  , a two-level rule compiler and a two-level morphological analysis/synthesis unit  . The basic paradigms and lexical alternations of wordforms are handled by the lexicon system  , while the two-level component a kescare of phonologically induced alternations  . 
1. Introduction
We present an integrated environment for morphological nalysis of  ( written ) wordforms of the Slovene language . The language belongs to the Slavic family of languages  , but exhibits some very idiosyncratic properties ( e . g . having also a " dual " number and very rich inflection  )  . Our project of writing a morphological analyzer and synthesizer  ( MAS ) for the Slovene language has had primarily two aims  . First , to write a useful MAS , which could serve as a frontend to other Slovene language processing systems  , and second , to implement a model general enough to allow us to facilitate the study of Slovene morphology  . 
The work on the project itself is split into two parts much along the same lines  . First of the task of selecting and implementing a model versatile nough to cover the quirks of Slovene morphology  , and second , the task of writing down the rules of Slovene morphology  ( Toporigie 84 ) in the formalism of the chosen model . 
The two-level model of Kimmo Koskeniemmi ( Karttunen 88 , Koskenniemi 84 , 85 , 86) was selected as the basic scheme for our MAS , our choice being influenced-among other things -by its prevalence in current  ( computer ) morphological studies . This makes the system well documented and thus easy to implement  , as well as simplifying the task of writing the rules for  ( phonologically ) induced alternations of
Slovenian wordforms ( Erjavec89).
2. Structure
The system was implemented on VAX/V-MS in Quintus Prolog and consists of the following parts :  ( 1 ) The compiler , which takes as its input two-level rules and produces final state automata  ( transducers )  . 
(2 ) The lexicon module which provides a user interface for the creation and updating of tile lexicon-the lexicon input module  . This module embodies that part of morphological knowledge of Slovene inflectional morphology which cannot be  ( elegantly ) covered by two-level rules . It is also the part of the system responsible for passing lexical wordforms to  ( 3 ) -the lexicon output module . 
(3) The MAS itself , which , having access to the transducers and ( indirectly ) to the lexicon , is able to analyze Slovene word forms into their lexical counterparts  , and to synthesize wordforms from lexical data . 
( TWO-L ~


WORDFORM
MODULE@JWORD-FORM
USERINPUT
OFNEWWORDS




Figure 1: System structure
As we can see , the MAS with its knowledge of phono-morphological alternations embodied in the transducers guides the lexicon module in choosing  348 \] the correct lexical word from the lexicon . The MAS module is of course also able to synthesize words  , given their lexical representation . The ' Tceding " of lexical words to the MAS is however application dependent  , and will thus not be dealt with further in this paper  . The workings of the compiler will also not be discussed  , as this is not its first implementation ( Karttmmrt 87 )  . 
3. Lexicon module
A basic part of our MAS system is the lexicon . The ~ tructure of the lexicon accords with the two qevel model type lexicon  ; that is , the lexicon is composed of letter-tree sublexicons  ( tries )  , consisting of morphemes with a comnlont ) ropelty . We can have , \[brinstance , a sublexic on lot stems , another for endings of male noun declension , another for conjugativendings of certain verbs , etc . A set of . ,; ub-lexicons is marked as initial , meaning that a ( recognizable ) word can only start with a member of I hese sublexicons  . The other sublexicons are connected to initial sublexicons through pointers  , ~ypically making them inflectional paradigms of various word classes  . 
An entuin a sublexicon consists of three parts : ( 1 ) the " morpheme " , which , insteins u Mexicons ( two--level rules aside ) , isll ~ c invariant part of the stem l cx cme , written in the symbols of I helc xical alphabet ; (2) the continuation lexicon(s ) of the morpheme ; (3) morphosyntactic features of the n ~ , orphcme . 
'\[' oillustrate : bolez Endecl subst 12 /bv = substgen=fenl ; 
O )   ( 2 )   ( 3 )   ( t ) -the stem of the lexeme " illness " ; the lexical sylnbol " E " denotes an unstressed " e "  ( schwa sound )  , deleted in wordforms with non-nullendings Cbolczen''-nora  . sg . , but " bolezni "- gen . sg . ) ;   ( 2 ) -the name of the lexicon with endings of second female declension  ;   ( 3 ) -inherent morphosyntactic properties of the lexeme  ( noun , female gender ) . 
We can see that the lexicon system can take care of regular paradigms of inflecting words of the languag c  ( at least l br suffixing languages , such as Slovene ) , while the two-level rules handle phone -morphological alternations  . The Slovene language , however , abounds in alternations that are lexically conditioned  . This is not to say that no rules can be constructed to cover these alternations  , but rather that they are not ( purely ) phonologically conditioned . There is for instance an alternation that affects only nouns of male gender which have the " animate " property  , and another one which pertains only to the plural and dual of certain Slovene noun  , ; . 
Since two-level rules are sensitive only to the form of the word  ( string ) they proces , they arc insufficient to rexpressing such alternations  . 
To handle texically conditioned types of alternations  , we have concentrated on the linking mechanisln between the sublexicons  . The " continuation " information belonging to an entry can also  , along with a pointer to another sublexic on , include a list of lexical alternations . When accessing wordforms from the lexicon , these alternations tell the lexicon output module how to modify the continuation sublex i conto express the desired changes  . The rules governing such modifications of the continuation sublexicon can pert brma certain number of primitive " transformational " operations on the sub lexicon in question  . 
To make the point clearer , we give a simple case of an alternation that affects certain nouns of male gender  . The alternation " jepenthesis " inserts a " j " in the stem final position in word forms with a non-nulle Ming  ; e . g . " krompir "- potato , but " krompirja " for the singular genitive form . The lexicon entry looks like this : krom pir decl_subst_m  ( pod_j ) /bv = substgen = mas?anim ; When the lexicon output module " jumps " to the continuation lexicon  , the " pod_j " item will trigger the corresponding alternation in the morphological rule base of the system  . The alternation procedure then takes as its input the continuation lexicon  , modifies it , and returns the modified lexicon ( with " j " prefixed to the non-nullgram atemes )  . Analysis then proceeds with entries of the modified lexicon  . 
4. Input Module
If new entries are to be added to our lexicon by persons not acquainted with implementation details of the system  ( lexical alphabet and alternations )  , an input module with a friendly user interface is of prime importance  . In our system the user is therefore expected to enter only the base form of the new word  ( e . g . nor a , sg . for nouns ) along with inherent morphosyntactic properties of the word  ( e . g . noun , male , animate ) , and another " comparative " word form of the same word  ( e . g . gen . pl . ) . Both wordforms are entered in the surface alphabct  . 

With this information at its disposal , the input module must , in order to store the entry into the lexicon , do the following :- extract form the word its lexical stem  ; -transcribe it from surface into lexical characters  ; -determine the continuation lexicon ( s )   ( paradigms ) and lexical alternations ; Extracting the lexical stem and assigning lexical alternations are performed by comparing the  ( base and comparative ) wordforms entered . For example the comparison of " ladja " ( ship ) and " ladij " ( gen . pl . ) shows an insertion of " i " into the stem , so the name of the lexical alternation for " i " epen thesis added to the entry  . 
The " lemmatization " of words , especially the mapping from surface to lexical symbols  , is basically nondeterministic; . e . the input module " guesses " the correct lemmatization of the word  , produces the lexical word form of the comparative word  , and synthesizes its surlh ce word form . If the synthesized wordform matches the one entered by the user  , the lemmatization is correct ; if not , the module tries again , with a different mapping . 
the Study of Language and Information , Report
No . CLSI-87-108 ( 1988 ) Unpublished lectures/PreCOLING'88 , 
Morphological analysis ; Computational
Linguistics Conference
Koskenniemi K .   ( 1984 ) A General Computational Model for Word-Form Recognition and Production/Computational Linguistics  , Conference
Proceedings ; COLING'84- ( 1985 ) A General Computational Model for Word Form Recognition and Production/Computational Morphosyntax  , Report on Research 1981-84 ; University of Helsinky , Dept . of General
Lingusistics Publications No .  13  ( 1986 ) Compilation of Automata from Morphological Two -Level Rules/Papers form the fifth Sc and in avian Conference of Computational Linguistics  1985  ; University of Helsinky , Dept . of General Lingusistics Publications No . 15'\] ? op ori ~ i ~ J . (1984) Slovenska slovnica/Zalo ~ ba
Obzorja Maribor 5. Conclusion
Our system is in a certain sense redundant , since it has two ways with dealing with alternations - two-level rules and lexicon rules  . The two-level rules are more linguistically justified  , while the lexicon rules offer greater ~ , ower in expressing alternations . 
This ( partial ) overlap is to a large extent intentional , as Slovene morpholo ~ has been-to say the least -insufficiently studied and our aim was to have at our disposal a variety of tools for expressing various morphological processes which occur in our language  . 
We have also tried to simplify the input of new words into the lexicon  ; a problem which in our opinion , has received insufficient attention in the two -level framework  . 
6. References:
Erjavec T . , Tancig P .   ( 1989 ) Dvo-nivojska pravilaza alternacijes loven skih samosml nigkihsklanjate v  ( Two-Level Rules for Alternations of Slovene Noun Declensions  ) /V . kongreszveze dru ~ tevzaup orabnojeziko slovje Jugos lavije  ; Ljubljana Karttunen L . , Koskenniemi K . , Kaplan R .   ( 1987 ) A Compiler for Two-Level Phonological Rules/in " Tools for Morphological Analysis "  , Center for 3503
