DEMONSTRATION OFGENESYS :
AVERYLARGE , SEMANTICALLY BASED SYSTEMICFUNCTION ALGENER ATOR
Robin P . Fawcett and Gordon H . Tucker
Computational Linguistics Unit
University of Wales College of Cardiff
email : fawcett@uk . ac . cardiff , tucker g@uk . ac . cardiff This paper provides background material to the demonstration t be given at COLING  '90 of the GENESYS component of the COMMUNAL system . A presenter of such a demonstration should say ( 1 ) what he system is good for ; (2) why it is good for it ; and ( 3 ) what makes it different from alternative systems . The system to be demonstrated is just apart ( though the single most important part ) of a much more complex system , and some of the answers to the questions must be related to the overall system  . So I shall describe that first , and then the generator itself . 
1. The COMMUNAL Project
The acronym COMMUNAL stands for COnvivial Man -Machine Understanding through NAtural Language  . 
The long term goal of the project is to contribute to the development of systems that will enable computationally naive people to interact naturally  ( ' convivially ' ) with the Intelligent Knowledge Based Systems ( IKBSs ) that we should expect a decade a head . The reason why it promises well is that it is a holistic  , integrated approach , built around a strong , rich theory of natural language in social interaction  ( Halliday's systemic functional grammar ( SFG )  . The concept of choice between meanings , which lies at the heart of the model , fits particularly naturally with the concept of planning  , and this is probably why so many successful models of generation have drawn  , either explicitly or implicitly , on SFG . Some of the differences from a wellknown sister project  ( Penman ) will be mentioned below . 
The project is based at the University of Wales College of Cardiff and the University of Leeds  , with financial support coming from RSREMalvern and industry  . Phase 1 ran from 1987-89 , and the main funding has now been secured for Phase  2  , which runs 1990-93 ( with further negotiations i progress to enhance this  )  . 
In a young field such as natural language processing  ( NLP ) it is important to develop alternative approaches . 
Tile COMMUNAL Project is based on a number of principles  , some of which are different from the mainstream assumptions  , with some being explicitly innovative . These principles include the following : ( 1 ) The way in which ' knowledge ' ( or , preferably , ' belief ' ) is organized should be influenced by the way in which language is modelled  , rather than vice versa ;   ( 2 ) Priority in the system is given to the generator , with the parser and semantic interpreter being derived from the generator  ;   ( 3 ) The organization of the grammar in the generator gives priority to paradigmatic  ( i . e . systemic ) relations rather than to syntagmatic ( i . e . structural ) relations , and to the level of semantics ( or functions , in Halliday's broad sense of the term ) , rather than to form ( syntax , etc ): i . e . it is a systemic functional grammar ; (4) The meanings of iexica items ( i . e . vocabulary ) are modelled in the same way as the meanings of syntax  , i . e . in system networks ; there is therefore no separate ' lexicon ' ( though a word list is available to the parser )  . 
(5) To develop a full model of generation , it is necessary to model generation in the framework of social interaction  , and not only monologue . 
(6 ) Attention is given to the paradigmatic systems and syntagmatic structures of discourse  ( as well as sentences )  . 
(7 ) Strong emphasis is placed on the semantic generation of intonation  ( as well as punctuation )  , thus generating an output ready for speech synthesis  . 
For a fuller overview of the principles underlying the project  , see Fawcett 1986 and 1988 ; for the particular version of SFG around which the project is built see 
Fawcett 1980,1987 and to appear b.)
The project has three sub-teams , each of whom works closely with the others . In Phase 1 these worked on: ( 1 ) language generation ( at Cardiff : Fawcett , Tucker and Wright , assisted part-time by Tench and Young ) ;   ( 2 ) language parsing and understanding ( at Leeds : Atwell ( part time , the Leeds team leader ) , Souter and O'Donoghue ); and (3) beliefs , inferencing and planning ( at Cardiff : Wright and , part time , Atkinson ) . Thus , while the project has a firm linguistic base in NLP  , it already encompasses , in a small measure , other central aspects of artificial intelligence ( AI )  , and these will be greatly extended in Phase 2 . 
Note that COMMUNAL is an interactive system , rather than one that only generates monologue . In outline , the major components of the overall model are : 1 . The parser . 
2. The semantic interpreter.
3 . The belief system , which includes general and specific beliefs about  ( ' knowledge of ' ) situations and things in some domain ( currently , personnel management in a large organization ) ; specific beliefs about the content of the preceding discourse  , about various aspects of the current social situation  , about head dressee ( s ) and their beliefs of all types , their attitudes , and their goals and plans . 
4 . The planner , which makes general plans , drawing on knowledge of : ( a ) genres ( scripts , schemas , etc ) , introducing where appropriate subunit such as transactions  ( see below ) and more detailed plans , using ( b ) the local discourse grammar , which is modelled as a ' systemic flow chart ' ( i . e . a flowchart containing many small system networks at the choice points  , and which generates exchanges and their structure  )  ,  5 . the lexicogrammar , i . e . the sentence generator ( see below ) . 
There were four main achievements in Phase 1 . The filet was the size and scope of the generator  . Its two main subcomponents are the system networks  , which are described more fully in the next section  . The second achievement was to build a large probabilist k parser  . The Realistic Annealing Parser ( the RAP ) parses any 1   47 output from GENESYS on the basis of cooccurrence probabilities  . 
In Phase 2 we shall also build a nonprobabilistic parser , with the intention of incorporating the advantages of both in the final system  . The third major achievement relates to the semantic interpreter  . It has been a longstanding oal in NLP to build a largescale system that uses the same grammar to either generate or interpret a sentence  .   ( Many current systems use a different grammar for each process  . ) We are developing at Leeds an interpreter which , roughly speaking , runs the realization rules in reverse , drawing where appropriate on the system networks . This component ( which is called REVELATION because it reveals the ' meaning ' from the ' wording '  ) depends on the generator being built in such a ' way that this is IX  ) Ssible ; this will be refined and reported on fully : in Phase  2  . The final achievement is that small but principled mini-components were built for an exemplar situation to demonstrate the passage of information through the whole system  ; these will be considerably develope during Phase 2  . 
2. The sentence generator : GENESYS
The generator is called GENESYS , because it GENE rates SYS temically , i . e . by using a systemic functional grammar . It is a lexicogrammar ( to use the term of Halliday , the chief architect of the theory ) , because it generates from one unified semantic component both grammar  ( in the sense of syntax and grammatical items ) and lexieal items-as well as punctuation or intonation  , as required . Its two main subcomponents are : ( a ) The system networks . These are complex networks of choices between a wide variety of types of semantic features  . Some denote situations and are realized in the clause  . Types of meaning covered include theme and information structure as well as transitivity  , mood , negativity , modality , affective meaning and logical relationships . There are equivalent system networks for the semantics of things and qualities  . 
(b ) The realization rules , which turn the selection expressions ( or ' bundles ' ) of semantic features that are the output from passes through the system networks into quite relatively richly labelled syntactic structures - and into the entities at their terminal nodes  , i . e . items ( grammatical nd lexical ) and markers of punctuation or intonation . ( For those unfamiliar with systemic grammars , it would help to see a demonstration ; see also Tucker 1989 . ) Here are a few facts to give you a perspective on GENESYS at the end of Phase  1  . McDonald , Vaughan and Pustejovsky (1987:179) , referring to a wellknown NLP project at the University of S  . 
California which also uses SFG , say: . ' Nigel , Penman's grammar . . . .
is the largest systemic grammar and possibly the largest machine grammar of any kind  . ' Although GENESYS was developed independently , it has in two years grown to be even larger than Nigel  ( using the criterion employed by Mann ( the Director of Penmantill 1989 ) to characterise Nigel's size ; see further below ) . 
( Nigel reached its present size some years ago ; it has not grown in the interim because the team have been working on other components of Penman  )  . The first point about GENESYS is therefore its size and scope  . 
A reasof grammar covered so far include the following  ( using theory-neutral terminology possible , sometime supplemented by specifically systemic functional terms  ) : complex structures realized in any of eight different auxiliary verbal elements  , most of which can cooccur in the same clause , realizing choices in MOOD , MODALITY , TENSE , ASPECT and VOICE , etc ( including , as well as the usual forms that are standard in all treatments  , " used to " , " would " in its ' habit'sense , " begoing to " , " be about to ") ; an almost complete range of TRANSITIVITY types ( defined in terms of configurations of participant roles  , including covert roles ) ; three types of ' passive ' construction ; many types of verb COMPLEMENTATION ( including some ' extraposition ' )  , finite and nonfinite , handled as embedded clauses and regarded as situations that ' fill ' the Phenomenon  ; realizations of INFORMATIONSTRUCTURE in both punctuation and intonation  ; in MOOD both polar and Wh-questions ( including multiple Wh-items in the same clause )  ; five types of potentially cooccurring TIME ADJUNCI ~  ( including two types of frequency , and repetition ) ; adjuncts of PLACE AND MANNER ; Adjuncts expressing a LOGICAL RELATIONSHIP ( e . g . clauses with " because . . . ", " if ", purposive " to . . . " ) ; marked THEMATIZATION of all non-Subject PARTICIPANTROLES  ( Complements ) and of all types of CIRCUM STANTLM . ROLES ( realized in Adjuncts ) ; the handling of MANNER ADVERBS in the same network as ADJECHVES  , with provision for COMPARATIVE and SUPERLATIVE meanings and forms  , both regular and all types of irregular forms ; a represent a tive range of TIME ADVERBS ; a full range of irregular verbs and noun plurals ; complex NOMINAL GROUPS with provision for mass and count nouns  , for NUMBER , for appropriately sequenced multiple prehead MODIFIERS  ( which may themselves be filled by structure such as " fairly rich "  )  , for three types of determiner selection , as in " five of the biggest of those apples " , ( i . e . ( a ) selection by QUANTIFICATION , including weak " one " and " a(n ) " , ( b ) selection by SUPERLATIVISATION , and ( c ) selection by one of three types of DEIXIS , realized in " the " , demonstratives and possessives ) , and for post-head QUALIFIERS filled by prepositional groups  ( with clauses as qualifiers ( i . e . ' relative clauses ') currently being added ) ; a full range of PRONOUNS ( personal , possessive , demonstrative and indefinite ) and PROPERNOUNS ( names of individuals , with their own quite complex internal grammar , names of social groups , names of places ) ; complex genitive constructions , e . g . " the new doctor'scar's door " ; PREPOSITION ALGROUPS , with a representative range of PREPOSITIONS ; a wide range of TEMPERING items for use with adjectives and adverbs  ( with embedded groups and clauses as in " bigger than him/it used to be " currently being covered  )  ; ' special'grammars of dates , addresses and human proper names ; and much else . 
Examples of sentences that can be generated include :  ( 1 ) I like being here . 
(2 ) Ivy might have been going to be being looked at by them  , buts her an out of the room . 
(3 ) The Director doesn't like it that the new manager was about ole ave because we didn't give hima bigger office  . 
(4 ) Some of the most unpleasant of that rather angry man's better friends are amazingly rich  . 
(5 ) I until next month/T/12 \] he will be living a televen Romilly Crescent/T/21Canton/NT/1 I ( i . e . 
with intonation marked for input to a speech synthesizer  , where "1"= fall and "2"= rise ) Note that so far the system only provides principled motivation for choosing between the semantic options for only a small subset of the semantics  . The research strategy , as stated above , is first to model the full richness of the semantics and its realization  , ~ . These areas will be greatly extended in Phase 2 . 
An important theoretical difference between GENESYS and Nigel is that the system networks in GENESYS are structured specifically to express semantic choices  , while Nigel's are at the level of lexicogrammatical form  ( though reflecting ' meaning ' , as always in a systemic grammar) . 
Let us attempt the difficult task of a comparison . \] If , following Mann , we use the number of systems to characterise the grammar's size  , we find that Nigel has a little under 400 systems ( i . e . ' choices between features ' ) realized in grammar ( Bateman , personal communication 1990) , while GENESYS has about 600 ( the greater number possibly reflecting the explicit semanticity of GENESYS  )  . 
GENESYS also has hundreds of systems that generate vocabulary that are integrated into the lexicogrammar  ( as Halliday has always suggested should be done )  . In Nigelt here is a separate lexicon ( which was unfortunately necessary to meet a sponsor's research collaboration requirements with a more traditional approach  )  , whereas in GENESYS the networks generate not only syntax and morphology but also lexis  , intonation and punctuation . At the end 48   2 of Phase IGENESYS had a total of around 1  , 100 systems of semantic features . In addition GENF ~ SYS has some 1 , 400 realization rules , involving about 4 , 000 operations , and these appear to be more complex than those in Nigel  . This results in part from the semanticity of the networks  , and in part from the complexity of the phenomena covered  ( See Tucker 1989 for an overview of
GENESYS at work.)
The above informal comparisons with the Nigel system illustrate the difficulty of comparing even closely related grammars  . The fact is that there are no agreed criteria for measuring rammars  , and even less are tl here criteria for evaluating holistie models of language that have  ( in addition to the usual areas of syntax and morphology  )  , vocabulary , intonation and punctuation - and , in the case of GENESYS , semantic networks that generate all of these . Despite the lack of agreed criteria it is clear that GENESYS is already one of the largest of such models in existence  . 
As Phase 2 gets under way , we are already increasing the model's coverage . By its end we expect o more than double the number of grammatically realized systems  , and so to be able to handle something approaching unrestricted syntax  .   ( We have plans to implement certain novel possible solutions to some wellknown syntactic problems  , but even if all are successful with these there will of course still be many problems that remain at the end of Phase  2  . ) The vocabulary in GENESYS should grow to 34 , 000 word senses ( or possibly more if an ambitious planned procedure is successful  )  , and it will have a near--complete coverage of both punctuation and intonation  , the latter being a complex matter where there is little previous work to build on  ; for the generation of semantically motivated intonation see Fawcett  1990b   . GENF ~ SYS needs . a special speech synthesizer to turn this into a phonetic output  ; we hope that there will be a sister project at University Collegelxmd on to work with us on this  . Finally , GENESYS introduces probabilities into the operation of the system networks  ; see Faweett ( to appeara ) . 
GENF . SYS was developed using Pop log Prolog on a SUN 3/50  , using a special tool for writing and testing grammars developed by Wright  ( called DEFREI . , because it defines relations ) . 
3. Other future developments
In a complete model of generation we need , as well as a sentence generator , rich components for belief , inferencing and planning ( which includes discourse planning )  , as described in section 1 . 
At present these components are much less well developed in COMMUNAL than in some other projects  , as is to be expected in a project that is explicitly ' language-led '  . But we do already have small but principled components that enable the system to accept sample utterances from the parser and interpreter  ; to add appropriately to its beliefs ; to draw inferences from a new belief ; and to make an appropriate discourse plan as input to GENF ~ YS  . 
( Comparisons with Penman are even harder here , because Penman generates monologue , not dialogue . ) Phase 2 will develop these components further , exploring several new ideas . The parsers and semantic interpreter will also be developed further  . 
There are many possible spinoff applications.
One longstanding oal to which we hope to make a significant contribution is what is known as text to speech  . This is the process of mechanically turning vo ' ittentext into natural-sounding speech  . 
This mt~st includes enmntieally motivated intonation  , which is something that has been handled inadequately so far in work on text to speech  , but which GENESYS has already made good progress in attending to in a principled way  . Other possible spinoff applications include interactive tutors for automated language learning  ( potentially achievable as an application because of the possibility of using quite limited domains  )  , the development of metrics of text complexity , and possible applications in the games industry . At the appropriate point we shall seek industrial interest in our original sponsors and in others for these  ( and no doubt other ) possible applications . 
This project is still young ( barely two years old , in terms of actual research ) . Many of the reports are still confidential to the partners  , but papers referring to the project are now beginning to appear  ( see the references )  . As Phase 2 gets under way , COMMUNAL is already becoming increasingly well known to the relevant research communities  , both academic and industrial . 
If you would like to visit the project , please contact us . 
The research reported here was supported by grants from RSREMalvern under contract no  . ER 1/9/4/218 1/23 , by the University Research Council of International Computers Ltd  , and by Longman . 

Note that , for reasons of space , these have mainly been limited to papers about COMMUNAL that are in the public domain  . Off prints/copies of the papers listed here by Fawcett and Tucker are available fi'om the address below  . 
Berry , M . M . , Butler , C . S . , and Fawcett , R . P . , ( eds . ) to appear . 
Meanhtg and Choice in l . anguage : Studies for Michael II alliday . 
Vohtme 2 Grammatical Structure : a Fanctional Intelpretation  . 
Newark , N.J .: Ablo =
Fawcett , R . P . , 1980 . Cognitive linguistics and social bueraction : towards an integrated model of a systemic functional grammar and the other components of an interacting mind  . Heidelberg : Julius Groos and Exeter University . 
Fawcett , R . P . , 1986 . ' Meaningful relationships ' . Interview with Tony Durham , published in ' Over the horizon ' column in Computing : the 
Magazine (6.2.86), pp . 67.
Fawcett , R . P . , 1987 . q ~ he semantics of clause and verb for relational processes in English '  . In II alliday , M . A . K . , and Fawcett , R . P . ( eds . ) 1987 . New developments #7 systemic linguistics , Vol 1: Theory and description . I . ond on : Frances Pinter . 
Fawcett , R . P . , 1988 . ' Language generation as choice in social interaction '  . In Zock , M . , and Sabah , G . , ( eds ) 1988b . Advances in natural anguage generation Vol 2 . London : Pinter . 
Fawcett , R . P . , 1990a . ' The COMMUNAL Project : two years old and going well '  . In Network No .  13 . 
Fawcett , R . P . , 1990b . ' The computer generation of speech with semantically and discoursally motivated intonation '  . In Procs of 5th International Workghop on Natural Language Generation  , Pittsburgh . 
Fawcett , R . P . , to appear a . ' A systemic functional approach to selectional restrictions  , roles and semantic preferences ' . Accepted for Machine Translation . 
Fawcett , R . P . , to appear b . ' A systemic functional approach to complementation '  . In Berry , Butler and Fawcett , to appear . 
McDonald , D . D . , Vaughan , M . M . , and Pustejovsky , J . l ) . , 1987 . 
' Factors contributing to efficiency in natural language generation '  . 
In Kempen , Gerard , ( ed ) 1987 . Natural language generation . 
Dordrecht : Martinus Nijhoff.
Tucker , G . II . , 1989 . ' Natural language generation with a systemic functional grammar '  . In Laboratorio deglistu dilinguistici 1989//1 . 
Camerino : Italy : Universita degli Studidi Camerino  ( pp . 7-27) . 
Tucker , G . H . , to appear . ' Cultural classification and system networks : a systemic functional approach to lexical semantics  '  . In
Berry , Butler and Fawcett , to appear.
Contact address : Dr R . P . Fawcett , Director , Computational Linguistics Unit , Aberconway Building , University of Wales College of Cardiff , Cardiff CF 13 EU , UK . email : fawcett@uk . ac . cardiff and tucker g@uk . ac . cardiff 2 . 5 . 5 . 90 3 49
