TRANS LATION AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION
BASEDONTEXT CORPORA
OFSOURCE AND TARGETLANG UAGES
Shinichi DOI and Kazunori MURAKI
NEC Corp . C&C Information Technology Research Laborator i es  4   1   1  , Miyazaki , Miyamae-ku , Kawasaki216 , JAPA Ne-mail : doi % mtl . cl . nec . co . jl/~sj . nee . corn

We propose a new method to resolve ambiguity in translation and meaning interpretation using linguistic statistics extracted from dual corpora of sourcuaud target languages in addition to tim logical restrictions described on dictiom try and gramma rules for ambiguity resolution  . 
It provides reasonable criteria for determining a suitable equivalen translation or meaning by making tile dependency relation in the source language be reflected in the translated text  . The method can be tractable because tile required staffs-tics can be computed semiautomatically in advance from a source language corpus and a target language corpus  , while an ordinal corpus-based translation method needs a large volume of bilingual corpus of strict pairs of a sentence and its translation  . Moreover , it also provides the means to compute the linguistic statistics on the pairs of meaning expressions  . 
1 Introduction
It ~ ecently many kinds of natural lauguage processing systems like machine translation systems have been developed and put into practical use  , but ambiguity resolution ill translation and meaning interpretation is still the primary issue in such systems  . These systems have conventionally adopted a rule -ba  . ~ed disambiguation method , using linguistic restrictions described logically in dictionary and grammar to select the suitable equivalent translation and meaning  . Generally speaking , it is impossible to provide all the restrictions ystematically in advance  . Furthermore , such machine translation systems have suffered from inability to select the most suitable equivalent translation if the input expression meets two or more restrictions  , and have difficulty in accepting any input expression that meets no restrictions  . 
Ill order to overcome these difficulties , following methods . ~ r ~ proposed these years : 1 . F , xample-Ba . sed Translation : tile method based oil trans\ [ atiou examples  ( pairs of source text , amlits translation )\ [ Nagao 84 , Sato 90 , 
Smuita 90\]2 . Statistics-Based Translation : then mthod using statistical mr probabilistic information extracted from a bilingual corpus \[ Brown  90  , 
Nomiyama 9\]\]
Still , each ( ff them has inherent problems and is insufficient for ambiguity resolution  . For example , either all e?amplc ~ b~mcd translation method or a statistics-based translation method needs a largescale database of translation exaln pl ~  , and it is difficult to collect all adequate amount of a bilingual corpus  . 
In this paper , we propose a new method to select the suitable equivalen translation using the statistical data extracted independently from source and target language texts\[Muraki  91\]  . The statistical data used here is linguistic statistics repre:senting the dependency degree on the pairs of expressions in each text  , especially statistics for cooccurrence , i . e . , how frequently the expressions cooccur in the Sallles eutence ~ the sanle paragraph or tile same chapter of each text  . The dependency relation in the source language is reflected in the translated text through bilingual dictionary by sc~lecting the equivalent translation which ma  . ximizes both statistics to t cooccurrence in tile source and targ  ( ~t language text . Moreover , the method also provid ~ the means to compute tile linguistic statistics on the pairs of meaning expressions  . We call tlds method for equivalent translation and meaning selection DMAX Criteria  ( Double Maximize Criteria based on Dual Corpora )  . 
First , we make comments on the characteristics and the linfits of the conventional methods of ambiguity resolution in translation and meaning interpretation in the second section  . Next , we describe the details of DMAX Criteria for equivalent translation selection in the third section  . And last , we explain the means to compute the linguistic statistics on the pairs of meaning expressions  . 
ACRESDECOLING-92, NANTES , 2328^ of . rr 1992525 PROC , oJ , COLING-92, NA ~ CrEs . AUG . 2328, 19922 Conventional Methods of
Ambiguity Resolution 2 . 1 Rule-Based Translation In conventional methods , linguistic restrictions described in the dictionary and grammar are used to select the suitable equiv Mcnt translation or meaning  . In general , these restrictions are de~scribed logically on characteristics of another expression which modifies or is modified by the expression to be processed  . For example , to translate predicates ( verbs and predicative adjectives )  , semantic restrictions are deacribed on essential case arguments in forms of semantic markers to indicate features of words or terms in the thesaurus to show a hierarchy composed of word concepts  . 
Though these conventional methods have been very useful to realize natural anguage processing systems  , ttmy have the following problems : 1 . It is impossible to decide the most suitable equivalent translation if the input expression meets two or more restrictions  . 
2 . Analysis fails when the input expression can meet no restrictions  . 
3 . Actually the practical systems depends on such heuristics as pre-declded application order of restrictions or some default equivalent translations or meanings  . 
4 . The description of the restrictions i based on direct structural dependencies  , therefore it is quite difficult to describe the restrictions based on sister-dependency or between expressions belong to different sentences or paragraphs  . 
5 . Restrictions on any dependencies cannot be thoroughly described in advance  . 
For example , a Japanese word " booru " has two meanings , one is ' abail ( around object used in a game or sport ) ' and the other is ' a bowl ( a deep round container open at the tape specially used in cooking  ) ' . When this word occurs in the following sentence , it must mean ~ a bowP . 
JAP : Booru-nlmizu-oire rubow ldative water obj , pour , or marker marker put in ball or fill
ENG ; To pour water in % o a bow l
In this case , to selec the meaning by the logical restrictions on dependencies  , it is necessary to have described even the appearance or usage of the indirect object of the verb " irer n "  . To describe such detail restrictions on , all expressions may be possible , but it is quite difficult because the trouble of description and the cost of calculation  . 
2.2 Example-Based Translation
Besides the conventional translation method above , a machine translation system based on translation examples  ( pairs of source texts and their translations ) is also proposed \[ Nagao 84 , Sato 90 , Sumita 90\] . This type of system , called Example-Based Machine Translation , has stored a large amount of bilingual translation examples ms a database  , and translates input expressions by retrieving an example most similar to tim input from the database  . There is no failure of output in this method because it selects the most similar example not the identical one  . 
However this example-based translation system needs a largescale database of translation examples  , and iL is difficult to collect an adcxluate amount of bilingual corpora  . Even if it is possible , there is no means to divide the sentences of such corpora into fragments and link them automatically  , and it costs us too much time and money to divide and link manually  . Besides , this method can neither achieve precise meaning interpretation because it selects equivalent translation directly from the input expression and leaves meaning interpretation out of consideration  . 
To overcome this problem , we have also proposed a new mechanism based on sentential examples in dictionary  , which utilize the merits of both the translation by logical restrictions and the example-based methud  , by selecting the equivalent translation which ha . stlle most similar example to the input expression IDol  92\]  . This mechanism can guaranteen of ailure in selecting an equivalent translation  , but the description of relations are still based only on direct structural dependencies  . 
2, $ Statistics-Based Translation
Several new methods especially of machine translation have been proposed lately  , which select a suitable equivalent translation using statistical or probabilistic information extracted from language text \[ Brown  90  , Nomiyama 91\] . Because many machine readable texts have been already collected nowadays  , it is not difficult to extract statistical information of each expression in the texts semiautomatically  . Moreover , the statistical information reflects the context in which eact tword occurs and implies the logical restrictions based on indirect structural dependencies  . 
Although we call the systems in a same word " statistics-based translation "  , statistical information used in the methods is diverse  , such as translation probability , connectivity of words , statistics for ( co-)occurrence , tc . We make comments on the characteristics and the limits of these systems  . 
The first method uses fertility probabilities , translation probabilities and distortion probabilities \[ Brown  90\]  . Fertility means the number of the words in target language that the word of ttle AcrEs DE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOOT1992526 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES . AUG .  2328 , 1992 source language produces , and distortion mean stile distance between the position of the word of the source language and the one of the target language  . 
Tile method has been applied to au experiinental translation system from French to English  . However , since these probabilities are extracted from a large amount of text pairs that are translations of each other  , this method must be suffered from tiles anto difficulties  , as exampl c~b~sed translation in collecting and analyzing an adequate amount of bilingual corpora  , and it's very difficult to apply this method to the languages whose linguistic structures aren't similar each other  , such as English and Japanese . 
The second method use stile statistics for occur -fence in target language text\[Nomiyama  91\]  . It is calculate dill advance how frequently the each expression occurs in the t~r get language text  , which needs only to belong the same tiehl as the source language text beblngs  , but not to be a translated text of tile source language text  . If there are more than one possible quivalent translations  , the most frequen translation is selected through this calculated data  . Moreover , this n rethod can be applied to make good use of the conventional methods of selecting equivalent translations  , t brit employs the frequency data exclusively when logical restrictions cannot select one out of candl dates  . 
However this method hmsone big problem . The high frequency of the expression in the target language text may not originate from the frequency of the expression in the source language text to be translated  , because one target language x pression does not correspond to only one source language expression ill general  . 
Suppose the following sentence is a first examph . ':
JAP : Sorlosai bankan-wa kooto-to that judge subj . coat and marker or courtneku taiokatta . 
tie obj . bought marker
ENG : The judge bought a coat and a tie.
Figure 1 indicates translation process through bilingual dictionary and the statistics for cooccurrence of each pair of expressions in both Japanese and English necessary to translate tile sentence  1  . The Japanese word ' qmoto " has two equivalent English translations : '  ( over ) coat ' and ' ( tennis ) court ' . We cannot decide which is eligible 1The statistics for cooccurrence of expressions shown in the figures are given provisionally for understanding  . 
with only logical restrictions on tile direct object of the Japanese verb " kau "  , because we can buy both ' coLt ' and ' court ' tile sentence " Tenisu-  . kootookau "::' To buy a tennis court ' is also quite acceptable  . In this case , the statistics for cooccurrence in the target language English text denotes that the most frequent pair is ' court-judge '  , because the word ~ COllr ' also lneans a qaw court '  . Then using only statistical data on the targct language text misleads a wrong expression ' court ' ms the  . C < luiva-lent translation of " kooto " , and the exanlple sen-teach may Im translated into ' The judge bought a courtandatic  . ' . 
Tile second examph ! is this sentence ~:
JAP : Koto rinokago-nimizuo bird of cage dative water obj  . 
or marker marker basketire tabooru-o ella.
filled bowl obj , put or marketball
EN ( ; : I put a bowl filled with water in the bird cage  . 
q ' ranslation process of this sentence and the statistics for cooccurrence are shown in Figure  2  . 
Because the pair of ' basket ' and ' ball ' cooccurs most frequently in the target language  , tiles en-teucenlay be translated into ' I put a ball filled with water in the bird basket  . ' . 
3 Equ iva lent " Ih ' ans la t ion Se lec t ion by Statistical Data on Dual 
Corpora of Source and Tat-get

Now we propose a new method to provide reasonable criteria for selecting a suitable equivalent tral Mation or meaning using the simple statistical data extracted from source language text in addition to tile one from target language text  . These source and target language texts don't have to be translations of each other  . The proposed method gives us a way to select tile expression with the highest frequency of the target language text that keeps high frequency of the source language text attim same time  , so it overcomes the difficulty of the method using the frequency data on the target language text only  , because it does not select the expression with the highest frequency of only the target language text  . 
~ The subject phrase " watashi-wa "= T is omitted in this sentence  . 
AcrEsDECOLlNG-92, NANT . ES , 2328AObq "199 2527 PRec . O1~COLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992 3 . 1 Us ing stat ist ical data on source language text The method using only statistical data on the target language text may mislead a wrong equivalent translation  , because in general each target language x pression corresponds to nmre than one source language x pression  . 
The equivalent translation selection with statistics for cooccurrence in the target language text when a source language x pression S  , has n equivalent translations in target language T  , i(i = 1? . . r ~) is shown ~ s this:

Sb where

Tkl(i = 1...n)
SCO(Ei , Ej)
T , , i - - ~ SCO(T , i , Tbi)
T 6j source language x pression n target language qnivalent translations of Sk statistics for cooccurrence of two exprt ~ sions EI  , Ej The method using only statistical data on the target language text selects T  , i which maximizes the statistics for cooccurrence in the target language text  3 as the equivalen translation of S , , where the partner of the cooccurrence Tbj plays the part of the basis for the equivalent translation selection  . 
The bigg~t problem of this method is that Tbj which depends both b and j is selected by only statistical data on the targct language text  . 
Our new method provides reasonable criteria for selecting the basis for the equivalent translation selection using the statistical data on the source language text  . First the source language x pression Sb which maximizes the statistics for cooccurrence in the source language text  4 is selected , then the equivalen translation T , i which maximizes the statistics for cooccurrence in the target language text  5 is selected . The dependency relation in the source language is reflected in the translated text through this method  . We call this method for equivalen translation and meaning selection DMAX Criteria  ( Doable Maximize Criteria based on Dual Corpora )  . 
~,.2 Double Maximum Criteria based on
Dual Corpora
The algorithm of this method is summarized as follows:  1  . Prep are the source and target language texts ( the target language text needs not to be a translated text of the source language text  )  . 
~T . ilmaxb , 15SCO(T . ~, Tbi ) 4 Sb\[maxl,SCO(S . , Sb ) bT . dmax , 5SCO(T . I , Tbj ) 2 . Accumulate the statistics for cooccurrence of every expression in both texts  . 
3 . When it source language expression Sa has n equivalen translations in target language 
T ~ i ( i = 1 .   .   . n ) ( a ) Select S~lmaxbsco(s .   , sb ) ( b ) Select T ,   , Imaxl , jSCO(T , I , Tbj ) 3 . 3 Operat ion Example Figure 1   3 show operation examples . Figurc 1 and 2 are examples of Japanesc ~ Engllsh translation . In Figure 1 , with only statl stic , t \] data on the target language text , ~ court ' may be chosen as an equivah ; n translation of " kooto " because timpair of ' e on rt-judge ' cooccurs most frequeatly in the target language  . However with DMAX Criterio , the equivalent translation of " kooto " is selected correctly  . 
? The expression which cooccurs with " kooto " most frequently in the source language is ? The pair of the equivalent translation of " kooto " and the one of " nekutai " which cooccurs most frequently in the target language is ' coattie '  . 
? As a result , " kooto " is translated into ' coat ' . 
It is the same ms shown in Figure 2 . A pair of ' basketball ' cooccurs most frequently in the target language  . But using DMAX Criteria , giving attention first to the most frequent pair in the source language text  , " kotori-kago " cart gain the correct equivalent translation ' cage '  . Next , a pair of " mizu-booru " decides ' bowl ' as an equivalent translation of " booru '  . Finally , correctrauslation can be acquired in this way . 
Figure 3 shows the translation proct . ~s and the statistics for cooccurrence of another English ~ 
Japanese tr ~ tn slation example.
~ NG : The coiling of the court was cleaned quite well  . 

JAP : Saiban shonoten joo ~ wa court of ceiling subj  . marker kirein is on jl-sareteita . 
quite well be cleaned
In this case , the English words ' court ' and ' clean ' have two meanings respectively  . 
' court's aibanshoaroom or building in which law cases can be heard and judged koot o  ( a part of ) an are a specially prepared and marked for various ball games  , such as tennis Acr Es DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOOT1992528 P Rec . OFCOL1NG-92, NANaT . S , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 ' clean'souji-surn to clean room skuri in ingu-surn to clean clothes with chemicals instead of waterApair of " kooto-knriining'u " cooccurs most frequently in the target language  , so the sentence may be translated into " Kooto- not enjoe-haki reinlkuriiningu-sareteita  . " . But using DMAX Criteria , ' ceiling ' is selected as a basis for the equivalent translation selection of ' court '  , and " saibans ho " is selected as an equivalent translation of ' court ' by the comparison between statistics for cooccurrence on the pairs of " ten joo-saibans ho " and " ten jook ooto '  . 
4 Calculation of Linguistic
Statistics for Semantic

In language understanding systems or machine translation systems throngh semantic expressions  , one suitable meaning must be selected out of the ones described in a dictionary according to an entry word  . However in conventional systems the meaning selection mechanism isn't robust and cannot select the most suitable meaning only by logical restrictions described in the dictionaries  . We presented a new method for the equivalent ransla-tion selection in the former chapter using statistical data on source language and target language through bilingual dictionary  . To apply this method to meaning selection , it is necessary to calculate statistical data on the pairs of each meaning in advance  , but there is no means of calculating them automatically  . 
We have already devdoped an interlingua-based machine translation system whose interlin-gun named PIVOT doesn't depend on artyparticular natural language\[Muraki  86  , ichiyama 89 , Okumura 91\] . In its dictionary , a . sillustrated in Figure 4 . , expressions in the source language are mapped onto some interlinguavo cabularies  ( CONCEPTUAL-PRIMITIVE : CP )  , which are next mapped onto some equivalent translations  . 
Then we propose a new method of computing linguistic statistics for occurrence of meanings automatically using this format of dictionary  . 
Suppose linguistic statistics on the pairs of expressions in both source and target language texts have already been calculated  . In case of translation , when an expression Si occurs in the source language text  , an equivalent translation Tijk is decided through the passage of Si :=*' Cij ~ Tij ~  , and as a result , CPCIj is also selected from the CPs corresponding to the expression Si  . Therefore , the linguistic statistics on the pairs of CPs or meanings is nothing but coupling linguistic statistics on the pairs of corresponding exl  ) ressions in the target language text . Thus , the linguistic statistics ~ Z on the pairs of the meaning expressions in the dictionary can be obtained as the sum of the linguistic statistics won the pairs of target language oxpressious according to the following equation  . 
fi(C . ,, Cb , , ) = ~ wm(T a . ,v , T~ , , , q ) p , q This linguistic statistics can be added to the dictionary in advance I and we c~n select the meaning in the same way as equivalent translation selection  . 
5 Conclusion
We lu ' oposed a new method DMAX Criteria ( Double Maximize Criteria based on Dual Corpora ) in this paper . It can select a suitable equivalent translation or meaning using the statistical data extracted from both source and target language corpora even when linguistic restrictions described in the dictionary or grammar cannot  . The dependency relation in the source language is reflected in the translated text through bilingual dictionary  . 
Moreover , then mt hod has the following features : 1 . It utilizes linguistic statistics as context in fermotion in addition to logical restrictions effective for ambiguity resolution  . 
2 . The source of the linguistic statistics is the dual corpora of source and target languages  , not the bilingual corpora ( the target language text doesn't have to be the translation of the source language text  )  . 
3 . The linguistic statistics can be coml ) uted send-automatically in advance . 
4 . Tim linguistic statistics on the pairs of meaning expressions are computed from the linguistic statistics in source and target language texts with the interlingua-based biling mddic-tlonary to resolve ambiguity in meaning inter-  . 

Based on this method , we have carried out an experinmnt on a limited -scale translation system  , attd confirme deti + ctiveness of the method . We are preparing further experiments on a large -scMedual corpora with PIVOT interlingua dictionary  . Their result will here ported on another paper . 
6 Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Mr . Masse WATARI for his continuous encouragement . The authors also thank the members of Media Technology Lal > oratory for their good suggest kms  . 
Acrgs DE CoLING-92 , NANT ~ , 2328 Aot ~ r1992529 PRec . OFCOLING-92, NA ~ rES , AUG . 2328,1992 ~ eferences\[Brown90\]P . F . Brown et al " A Statistical Approach to Machine Translation "  , Computational Linguistics , Vol . 16, No . 2,1990\[Doi92\]S . Doi and K . Muraki " Robust Translation and Meaning Interpretation Mechanism based on Examples in Dictionary "  , Prec . of 44th Annua \] Conference of lPSJ , 1P-2 , 1992 ( in
Japanese )\ [ Ichiyama 89\] S . Ichiyama " Multilingual Machine Translation System  , " O~ce Equipment and Products ,  18-131 , pp . 46-48, August 1989\[Muraki86\]K . Murakl " VENUS : Two-phase Machine Translation System  , " Future Genera-tions Computer Systems ,  2 , pp . 117-119,1986\[Muraki91\]K . Muraki and S . Dol " Translation Ambiguity Resolution by using Text Corpora of Source and Target Languages "  , Proc . of 5th An~ua/Conference of JSAI ,  11-7 , 1991 ( in
Japanese )\ [ Nagao84\]M . Nagao " A Framework of a Mechanical Translation between Japanese and English by Analogy Principle  "  , Artifici M and Human Intelligence , ed . A . Elithorn and R . Banerji,
North-Holland , 1984\[Nomiyama 91\]H . Nomiyama " Lexieal Selection Mechanism Using Target Language Knowledge and Its Learning Ability "  , IPSJ-WG , 
NL 868, 1991 ( in Japanese )\ [ Okumura 91\]A . Okumura , K . Muraki and S . Aka-mine " Multilingual Sentence Generation from the PIVOT interlingua  , " Prec . of MTSUM-
MIT III , pp . 67-71, July 1991\[Sat,o90\]S . Sato and M . Nagao " Toward Memory-based Translation " , COLING90 , 1990\[Sumita90\]E . Sumita , H . Iida and H . Kohyama " Example-based Approach in Machine Translation "  , hf fo Japan ' 90 ,   1990 ~tatistics for cooccurrence ~ bilingual dictionary t statistics for cooccurrence in source language text I ~ in target language text fnekutai ~  ; nekutai--te , ,  . -tle ~ ~5050 , '' ~- coat ~ ,   , '_~- coat ;\ Yi " . . . . . ' saibank an . . , ~ . salbank an - - Judge ; Baibansho J .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ~  .   .   .   .   .  ? . saibans ho .   .   .   . court " , , F igure 1 -sono saibankan-wa kooto-tone kutai-okatta . "' The judge bought a coat and a tie . ' Acr Es DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt'rr 1992530 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,  1992 ? ~ , ~' f statistics for e o-occurr cll CeJ statist ics for co-occurrence  ,   . ~I bilingual dictionary ; .   .   ,   , m source language text ~; , , in ta rget langoage text , _ ~ oe or l ~ - - - - - ~ , - - - ~ r ~ oeori . bird ~ ~ bird " ~ , , / 50 " ~ , ' ~ - e " . L________N . cat le ~!' ,   ,  60  ,  4 , 0I ij ba ,   , be , , I l booru ~ b o o r u ~ ~ ! 3 . i ~--'- bowl ~ v----"~--~bOWl\]=izu ~= izu ~ water ~ water '  1  $  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . e , .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . *' Figure 2 " Kotori-nokago-nimizu-oi retabooru-ooita . "' I put a bowl filled with water in the bird cage  . '$ st ; statistics for co-occurrence , l .   .   .   . , ' I statistics for co-uccurrence . I , bihngoal dictionary , in source language text ~ I , , ~ in ta rget langmige text cel l lnn - . @ celllng--een 3 oo ~ , ~ eon3 oo4;'~;'?'2 ~ court ~-----~- ~ , Crourt < : ~ kooeo ~ kooeo ~\] ~030 i?N ,   ,  -  ,   , --7"" q-/:~20~~!;/20 . . A t i X I ' , $ ~ sou ~ i - ~ , - ~ s?u J:L'-~"d~l:x . cle and ~ r clean < z ~ .  "  ,  ? ~ "~ , ~kuri in in ~"~-~~" ,   ,   , Kurllnln ~- ~ u : ~ . o ~, ' ~ ~ ~ "' coat J .   .   .   .   .   .   . ~ o . - ~- coatkoo e o Figure 3 ' The ceiling of the court was cleaned quite well  . ' " Saiban shonoten joo-wa kirein is ouji- sareteita  . " source language expressions interlingua target language expressions ? ~'--~  . ~ .   . ~_  .  ? ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . ? Figure 4 Bilingual dictionary of the interlingua -based translation system AETES  DECOLING-92  . NANTES , 2328 AOt ~"1992531 I'ROC . OVCOLING-92, NANIT , S . AtJc; .  2328 .  1992
