A Kn0wledge-based Machine-aided System for Chinese Text Abstrac tion  1 
Benjamin K Tsou
Hing-cheung Ho
Tom Bong-yeung Lai
Caesar Suen Lun
Hing-lung Lin
City Polytechnic of Hong Kong
Hong Kong

The production of abstracts from input source texts  , using computers , is a subject in natural language processing that has attracted much attention and investigative study  . It not only poses interesting theoretical challenges but also promises useful practical applications  . At the City Polytechnic of Hong Kong , a largescale research project on automated Chinese text abstraction has entered its third year  . The project aims to investigate the issues related to text abstraction through the building of a prototype system  . 
Recognising the impracticality , at this stage , of attempting to construct a fully automatic system for abstracting random freetexts  , we have adopted a pragmatic approach by defining three design parameters at the outset :  ( 1 ) The input texts consist of Chinese newspaper editorials  .   ( 2 ) The universe of discourse is on the safety of the nuclear power plant at Daya Bay  ( which is situated some 50 Km to the east of Hong Kong )  . 
(3 ) The target system will be fully automatic only at the final text generation stage  , but will enlist informant input in the text understanding stage  . 
The result of our investigations and efforts is a prototype known as Machine-Aided Chinese Text Abstraction System  ( MACTAS )  \[6\] , To begin the process of text abstraction in MACTAS  , an unsophisticated human informant first reads and understands a given Chinese editorial  . Based on his understanding of the editorial , he wingo through an open-ended question -answering session with the system  . At the conclusion of the human machine dialog , which draws on a previous project \[7\] , MACTAS will generate an abstract of the editorial in Chinese  . 
System Architecture
The system architecture of MACTAS is illustrated in the diagram below : 
Human Informant
I Engine
Representation of Abstract
O2:: tor
Output Text
I Research reported here has been supported by Earmarked Research Grant No  .   904007 from the University & Polytechnic Grants Committee of Hong Kong  . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 A our 1992l039 PROC . OPCOLING-92, NANTEs , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 The Parser performs linguistic analysis on the response provided by the informant  , and delivers relevant syntactic and semantic nformation to the Discourse Manager  . Guided by the Inference Engine , the Discourse Manager supervises the interaction with the informant  , producing an internal representation of the abstract  . The Inference Engined raws on the knowledge contained in the domain-specific knowledge base to provide the basis for extracting the flow of argumentation f the editorial during the dialog session with the informant  . Finally , the Text Generator transforms the internal representation of the abstract into output ext  . 
The remaining sections of this paper will discuss the salient features of each of these system components  . 
Knowledge Base Management and Inferencing Knowledge about the universe of discourse is derived from a detailed analysis of newspaper editorials on the subject  , and codified into the Knowledge Base , which consists of a set of if-then rules . Rules can be used for deductive reasoning , and thus are best suited for capturing the flow of argumentation in editorials  . In MACTAS , these rules are used to trigger queries to be posed to the informant  , for the purpose of identifying conclusions in the editorial and the chains of reasoning leading to such conclusions  . 
The basic building-block of a rule is the predicate  , which is an assertion that something is true . 
Since the Knowledge Base plays a crucial role in the process of a grume at a tionelicitation  , a fundamental requirement is that the queries posed to the informant will be in simple natural language  . To this end , nine predicate templates have been designed . The design of such templates is based on linguistic knowledge of Chinese  . Each predicate reflects a simple Chinese sentence  , based on the subject-predicate sentence structure . 
On the macro level , a focus structure is used to provide a framework for partitioning the rules in the Knowledge Base intologically related groups  . 
The purpose of partitioning is twofold . Firstly , it enables the Discourse Manager ( discussed below ) to identify relevant conclusions in the editorial in an efficient manner  . Secondly , it aids the text generation process during the production of the final abstract  . 
The Inference Engine performs inferencing on the Knowledge Base to supporthe Discourse Manager in identifying possible conclusion  ( s ) in an editorial , and in assisting the informant to relate the flow of argumentation leading to each conclusion  . Key features of the Inference Engine , designed to simulate the dialog between two human beings  , include : ( 1 ) It does not query the informant about facts either deducible from the Knowledge Base or from the current dialog  .   ( 2 ) Within the context of a given inferencing goal , consecutive queries bearalogical relationship to one another  , thus defining the flow of argumentation leading to a particular conclusion  .   ( 3 ) It does not mechanistically pose queries to follow every step that leads to a conclusion  . Rather , it is possible to jump a head more than one step , to minimize the number of queries asked of the informant before a conclusion is reached  . 
Discourse Management
The Discourse Manager \[1\] controls the interactive session with the informant  , in accordance with a discourse model for Chinese editorials  . The design of this discourse model is based on the concept of schemata proposed by McKeown  \[5\]  . There are four schemata for an editorial : ( I ) Background schema , recording items that are common to editorials in general  , such as name of the newspaper . (2) Identification schema , indicating the conclusions put forward in the editorial  . (3) Argumentation schema , expounding the logical flow of arguments leading to each conclusion  .  (4)
Recommendation schema , containing suggestions by the editorial writer for possible actions  . The discourse model provides the base framework for organising the internal representation of the abstract which is subsequently used by the Text Generator for producing the output ext  . 
The Discourse Manager performs a four-phase dialog session with the informant  , each phase being designed to capture relevant information AcrESDE  COLING-92  . NANTES . 2328 AOt ~'1992 l040 PROC . OI:COLING-92, NAl WrES , AUG .  2328 .   1992 for filling a corresponding schema in the discourse model  . In particular , it calls upon the services of the Inference Engine for filling the argumentation schema  , which constitutes the main body of the abstract . 

As MAC q~AS does not aim at fulltext understanding for the production of abstracts  , the main function of the Parser is to support the Discourse Manager in the task of response evaluation  . A datadriven deterministic parser for Chinese sentences has been constructed  . " I he syntactic rules used are adapted from the syntactic framework for Chinese sentences proposed by Zhu  \[8\]  . Because Chinese sentences do not always require both subject and predicate in the surface form  , a bottom-up , rather than a topdown , parsing algorithm has been implemented . Moreover , to avoid unnecessary backtracking and the build up of non-occurring constituents  , the lookahead principle of Marcus \[4\] has been adopted to check contextual information . Thus , tests are performed before a suitable path is selected  . For the current prototype , conjoined sentences can be parsed , but not complex sentences with multiple verbs . 
Text Generation
The Text Generator performs generation of Chinese abstracts at three conceptual levels :  ( l ) Discourse model level . This determines the structure and content of an editorial  , based on the discourse model mentioned above . Its role is to monitor the progress of succeeding utterances so that the output text is well organised  . (2) Rhetorical structure level . This generates a paragraph of logically related multiple-sentence text using suitable Chinese conjunctions so that a coherent and rhetorically sound output ext can be produced  . Its design is based on the rhetorical structure theory proposed by Mann and Thompson  \[3\]  , adapted here for the Chinese language\[2\] . (3) Single clause level . This is responsible for generating a grammatically correct clause for a given predicate  , using the predicate templates discussed earlier . 

Communication using language is a unique ability which distinguishes humans from the uther members of the animal king dom  . The ability to simplify information , while retaining essential logical meaning and structure  , represents a yet higher order of faculty . The successful attempt through MAC-WAS to simulate some aspects of this process would not have been possible without recognising the truly interdisciplinary nature of computational linguistics  . MACTAS , as it now stands , could offer significant functional value within the devoloping language industry  . The comparatively low cost associated with unsophisticated ' informants ' in using systems such as MACTAS for the production of abstracts could be more cost-effective than the employment of subject specialists for largescale and regular monitoring of textual information is pecific domains  . The abstracts thus produced provide the initial screening of information contained in a growing corpus which may be subsequently selected and examined at a higher level  . Further efforts in MAC ~ FAS will be aimed at improving :  ( 1 ) The range of natural anguage it can process and generate  , such as the inclusion of complex sentences with multiply embedded verbs  ,   ( 2 ) The refinement of the Discourse Manager on the basis of an enlarged corpus base  , and (3) The deductive ability of the system , including consistency checking to cope with in felicities natural to humans  . 
A Note on Implementation
MACTAS was implemented in a personal computer environment under DOS  , using
Turb o PROLOG and the Eten Chinese
System . To circumvent the limitations imposed by a single PC  , the full system runs on two PC's interconnected by an  RS-232C interface . A single-PC demonstration version is also available  . 
\] ~ eferg?lces\[1\]Ho , H.C ., Tsou,
T . B . Y . and Lun , C.S.
B . K . , Lin , H . L . , Lai , " A Knowledge-Driven Acr Es DECOLING-92 . NANTES . 2328 ho~rr 1992104l Pltoc . oF COLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328 , 1992 Discourse Manager For Chinese Editorials . "Paper to be presented at the International AMSE Conference on Modelling and Simulation  ( New
Orleans , Oct 1991).
\[2\] Lin , H . L . , Tsou , B . K . , Ho , H . C . , Lai , T . B . Y . , Lun , C . S . , Choi , C . Y . and Kit , C . Y . " Automatic Chinese Text Generation Based On Inference Trees  . " In Proceedings of the ROCLING 1991 Computational linguistics Conference IV ( Taiwan , 
Aug 1991), pp . 215-236.
\[3\] Mann , W . C . and Thompson , S . A . " Rhetorical Structure Theory : Description and Construction of Text Structures  . "In Natural Language Generation -- New Results in Artificial Intelligence  , Psychology and Linguistics , G . 
Kempen ( Ed . ) . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers (1987), pp .  85-95 . 
\[4\] Marcus , M . P . A Theory of Syntactic Recognition for Natural Language  . MIT Press (1980) . 
\[5\] McKeown , K . " Discourse Strategies for Generating Natural Language Txt  . "In Readings in Natural Language Processing , B . J . Grosz et al ( Eds . ) . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , California (1986) , pp .  479-500 . 
\[6\] Tsou , B . K . , Ho , H . C . , Lin , H . L . , Liu , G . K . F . , Lun , C . S . and Heung , A . Y . L . " Automated Chinese Text Abstraction : A Human -Machine Cooperative Approach  . " In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Processing of Chinese and Oriental Languages  ( Changsha , 
Apr 1990), pp . 57-62.
\[7\] Tsou , B . K . , Lun , C . S . , and Heung , A . Y . L . " An Open-ended Chinese Question-Answering System  ( ECQUAS )  . " In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Helsinki ( ed . H . Karlgren ) (1990)
Vol . 1.
\[8\] Zhu , Dexi . Yufa Jianyi ( Lectures on Chinese Grammar) . Commercial Press , Beijing (1982) . 
Acres DECOLING . 92, NANTES , 2328AOfn "1992 1042 PROC . OFCOL 1NG-92 . NANTES . AUG .  2328 .  1992
