THEKANTSY STEM:FAST , ACCURATE , HIGH-QUALITY
TRANS LATION IN PRACTICAL DOMAINS
Eric H . Nyberg Ill
Teruko Mitamura
Center for Machine Trmlslation
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh , PA 15213 USA
Project Note/Demonstration
Major Topic Area : 5"c ( Machine Translation )
Minor Topic Area : 7* a ( Language Engineering)

Knowledgebased interlingual machine translation systems produce semantically accurate translations  , but typically require massive knowledge acquisition  . Ongoing research and development a the Center for Machine Translation has focussed on reducing this requirement to produce largescale practical applications of knowledge-based MT  . This paper describes KANT , the first system to combine principled source language design  , semiautomated knowledge acquisition , and knowledge compilation techniques to produce fast  , high-quality ranslation to multiple languages . 
1 Overview
Any expert system is only as good as the knowledge programmed into it  ; the same is true of a knowledge-based translation system  . AKBMT system can only produce accurate , high-quality translations if it can unambiguously determine the meaning of the inputext and choose an appropriate phrasing of that meaning in the target language  . This implies a significant domain knowledge base in addition to the usual syntactic grammars  , lexicons , etc . The question is , how much knowledge is enough ? It is probably the case that the implementation faw or ld knowledge base sufficient to support knowledge-based translation in any domain of discourse is some years from realization  . Nevertheless , there are significant practical problems in translation that can be solved with current knowledge-based technology  , because they do not require general translation iu all domains of discourse  , In particular , we have explored the use of machine translation for multi-language output in a controlled authoring environment for technical documentation  . 
Our goal has been to identify and develop the following : ? Principle designs for source language txts that encourage concise  , expressive authoring while supporting efficient ranslation  ; ? Algorithms for knowledge-based interpretation f text that effectively disambiguate source language sentences  ; ? A powerful yet efficient rule for a ralism for target ext generation  ; ? A combination of automatic and semiautomatic knowledge acquisition tools to streamline the creation of largescale knowledge bases for translation i a particular application domain  ; ? Techniques for the compilation of knowledge bases that support a clear  , declarative style of input for the lin-guist /knowledge engineer and producefficient runtime knowledge sources for translation  ; ? A modular system architecture that allows extension to additional target languages without any change to existing knowledge  . 
In this project note , we describe the development of these ideas in the KANT system  , a knowledge-based interlingua translation system for multilingual document production  . We believe that KANT is the first system to bring these ideas together in a system that provides fast  , accurate , high-quality knowledge-based translation . 
A complete working prototype of the KANT architecture which translates to French  , German , and Japanese has been demonstrated successfully , and KANT is currently being extended in a largescale commercial pplication for document production is everal languages  . 
1.1 Controlled Input Language
There are two broad classes of restrictions which KANT places on the source text  . The first concerns the vocabulary used by the author  . The general ( non-domain specific ) words used in the source text are limited to a basic vocabulary of about  14  , 000 distinct wordseuses . The domain-specific technical terms are limited to a predefined vocabulary  . The second restriction concerns the level of syntactic complexity present in the source text  . KANT limits the use of constructions that would create unnecessary ambiguity or other ACRESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES . 2328 Atilt 1992 1069 Pkoc . OFCOLING-92, NANTES . AUG .  2328 . 1992 difficulties in parsing , while still providing the author with a subset of English which is large enough to support authoriug of clear  , understandable technical prose . For example , KANT allows the use of subject-gap relative clauses with an explicit relative pronoun  ( e . g . , " Clean the ventilation slots which are located on the rear of the chass is "  )  , but does not allow reduced relative clauses . An example of a controlled input language text is shown in Figure  2  . 
Previous attempts to define controlled input languages for translation have tried to reduce complexity by either limiting the vocabulary to a very small size or by limiting syntax to just a few constructions t  . In contrast to systems which limit vocabulary to just a few thousand words  , KANT allows a larger vocabulary to be represented in the lexicon  . KANT also places principled grammatical limitations on the source text that are loose enough to allow a degree of stylistic variation which supports productive authoring  , while controlling the complexity of the input in areas that are crucial for accurate translation  . 
1 . 2 Knowledge-Based Parsing and Interpretation Although it is possible to reduce ambiguity by limiting the use of certain kinds of phrases  , some phrases which introduce a high level of ambiguity  ( such as prepositional phrases ) cannot be ruled out . To resolve the ambiguity introduced by multiple possible phrase attachments  , KANT uses an explicit domain model to narrow the set of potential interpretations  ( cf . Figure 1) . For every phrase ( such as verb phrase or noun phrase ) that accepts a potentially ambiguous phrase attachment  ( such as a prepositional phrase )  , KANT constrains the set of allowable attached phrases to just those that meet the narrow semantic restrictions of the particular domain  . The system's domain model is rich enough to allow all interpretations possible within the domain  , but narrow enough to rule out irrelevant interpretations  , The complexity of the domain model is only as deep as required to resolve ambiguity  , which is the appropriate criterion for limiting the size of a domain model in a practical KBMT system  . 
By constraining the set of possible syntactic structures and ruling out ambiguous interpretations  , it is possible for KANT to assign a complete and accurate semantic representation to each input sentence  . Although the creation of a comprehensive set of mapping rules requires intensive development  , we have eliminated redundancy through structure -sharing adprecompilation  ( Mitamura , 1989; Mitamura and Nyberg ,  1990) . Interpretation rules are organized into an inheritance hierarchy  , so that general rules can be shared via inheritance  ; the hierarchy is then precompiled into cached structures for fast access a tran-time  . 
1 . 3 A Powerful Rule Formalism for Generation High -quality output in an Interlingua-based system presupposes a generation component that is powerful and flexible  , I For example , the Multinational Customized F . nglish used by XEROX Corporation ( De Mauro and Russo ,  1984 ) helped to decrease postediting to I hepoint where semiautomated translation became  5 times faster than manual translation . 
allowing the system to create accurate target text realizations which do not necessarily reflec the syntactic organization of the source text or the structure of the Interlingua Text  . The Mapper module of the system makes use of a set of mapping rules and a lexicon to create the appropriate Target F-Structure for each Interlingua representation  ( cf . Figure 1) . Each mapping rule is intended to apply to a single Interlingua concept  , which may contain other Interling an concepts as slot fillers  ; the Mapper uses a recursive-descent fsructure composition algorithm  , which is discussed in ( Nyberg et al ,  1991) . 
A mapping rule combines three types of information : a pattern slot  , a context that must match the Interlingua concept to be mapped  ; a synslot , a pointer to the lexical item to be used to realize the concept  ; and a map slot , which specifies how the embedded components of the Interlingua maptogrammatical functions in the Target F-Structure  . For example , the following rule maps the lnterlingua concept * E-REMOVE to the French verb dd poser in the appropriate context : lgle ~* remove  ( pattern ( theme ( * or ** o-frame*o-chass is ) ) )   ( syn ( cat verb )   ( root " d6 poser " )   )   ( map ( theme obj )   )   ) The English sentence Remove the chass is would be translated to Dr poserlect Mss is using this rule  . 
1.4 Automated and Semi-Automated Tools for
Knowledge Acquisition
Since knowledge-based translation systems rely on the use of complex knowledge sources  , knowledge acquisition becomes the single most important  ( and time-consuming ) task during system development . The system must provide the developer with an efficient way to specify and incrementally refine both domain knowledge and linguistic knowledge  . In addition , those parts of the development process that are most repetitive  ( such as the extraction of vocabulary lists from a text corpus  ) should be automated . The tools that are currently being used in the development of KANT applications include :  , , Structured Tools for Editing Domain Knowledge Sources  . We use the ONTOS knowledge acquisition tool , developed at the Center for Machine Translation , for the creation and update of our domain model ( Kaufmann ,  1991) . ONTOS incorporates a graphic browser interface for rapid access with an integrated  , structured editor to support development of largescale domain hierarchies  ( Carlson and Nirenbuig ,  1990) . 
? Automatic Corpus Analysis Tools . To analyze quickly sample corpora for a domain under development  , KANT makes use of automatic corpus analysis tools that segment the text and pre-proeess it to produce preliminary vocabulary lists  . The tagged corpora rethen available for selective online development and debugging of linguistic knowledge sources  . 
ACl ~ SDECOLING-92 , NANT nS , 2328 not'rr 1992 1070 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTEs , AUG . 2328,1992* Semi-Automated Acquisition ~ lbols . Following corpus analysis , KANT automatically extracts a syntactic lexicon and set of interpretation rules for the sample corpus  . 
This is achieved by extracting the relevant vocabulary items from a master lexicon  , and using a predefined mapping rule hierarchy and default mapping rule templates  . These knowledge sources are then incrementally refined by the system developer once the bulk of the tedious work has been done automatically  . 
We are currently extending our tools so that they may be used to partially automate the process of knowledge acquisition for generation lexicons  , grammars and mapping rules . 
We anticipate that this should not be difficult , since the formalisms used for generation knowledge are similar to those used in analysis  . 
1 . 5 Knowledge Ire-compilation for Runtime Efficiency Knowledgebased translation systems require the use of several complex knowledge sources  ( e . g . , grammars , mapping rules , domain models , etc . ) . It is important to supporthe declarative specification of knowledge sources to facilitate knowledge acquisition by human experts  ; on the other hand , it is absolutely necessary to encode that knowledge at runtime in the most efficient procedural form possible  . Our system uses the Generalized LR Parser -Compiler  ( Tomita et al . , 1988 ) to compile the LFG source grammar into a last , efficient runtime parsing table . The GenKit grammar compiler ( Tomita & Nyberg ,  1988 ) is used to compile the LFG target grammar into a set of efficient Common Lisp functions for generation  , which are further compiled into object code by the Common Lisp compiler  . Our analysis and generation mapping rules are compiled into decision trees which optimize the amount of processing required to locate and evaluate the most appropriate mapping rule for a given syntactic structure or Interlingua concept  . Although these compilation techniques have afforded us a high degree of runtim efficiency and acceptable translation speed  , we are currently investigating the cross -compilation four system into C to achieve further speedup  . 
1.6 Modular System Architecture
To support efficient development of multilingual translation capability  , KANT has a modular system architecture . The parser and generator ae independent components  ( ee Figure 1 )  ; as a result , any source language supported by the system can be translated to any target language supported by the system  . This architecture allows knowledge sources for different languages to be combined easily in new applications to support ration source and target combinations  . It is also the case that a modular design decreases development time  , since it allows parallel development of knowledge bases for the source and target language  ( s )  . 
Each linguistic processing module in our system consists of a proceduralnda declarative component  , the procedural component capturing the general algorithm to be used  , and the declarative component representing the specific knowledge required by that algorithm for a particular language  . 
This makes it possible to add new knowledge for additional languages without having to rewrite the general code for the system modules  . 
2 Character i s t i cs o f the KANT System The KANT architecture has the following characteristics : ? Semantic Accuracy and Completeness  . 
" lb be semantically accurate , a system must produce a complete , correct and unambiguous Interlingua representation for each input sentence  ; it must also produce a complete , correct and unambiguous output sentence for each Interlingua representation  . In a narrow technical domain , KANT achieves near-perfect semantic accuracy . 
Once all relevant domain knowledge has been acquired by the system  , the Interpreter is able to disambiguate any potentia Uyambiguous structural ttachments to remove spurious interpretations of the input  . The Interpreter also discards any lnteflingua representations which are not complete interpretations of the Source F-Structure  . 
? Grammatical Accuracy.
To achieve the objective of no postediting , semantic accuracy by itself does not suffice . Accurate Interlingua representations cannot be produced unless the system has an adequate grasp of the source language syntax  ; nor can the system produce accurate target ext from an accurate Interlinguaunless it has adequate coverage of the target language syntax  . In addition to purely semantic information , the Interlingaa must also represent certain features of the input text  , such as modality , aspect , discourse markers , etc . in order to generate grammatically accurate output exts  . Our system uses explicit syntactic grammars , written in the LFG grammatical formalism , for the source language and target language(s) . Our grammars include rules to handle both the basic semen-tial syntax of the language and discourse-level markers  . 
? High Quality Output.
To go beyond semantic and grammatical ccuracy and produce stylistically correct output  , a translation system must have a good grasp of the textual structure of the target language as well as its sentential syntax  . This requires an explicit representation f textual relations between clauses and sentences  , and the ability to select and produce complex sentence structures when appropriate  . The mapping rules used by KANT's Mapper cannot only select the correct single phrase for an Inter-linguaconcept  , but also create more complex syntactic constructions when appropriate  . Thus the ability of the system to generate stylistically correct output is limited only by the amount of effort dedicated to the construction of mapping rules for the target language  . 
ACT VLS DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt ~ T1992I071 PRO(: . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328 ,   1992   3 Current Results The present KANT prototype produces very accurate translations  , without human disambiguation r postediting , such as those illustrated in Figures 35 . The system has been tested on a corpus of several hundred sentences of pre-authored text  , with 100% accuracy and good quality . We intend to extend incrementally the coverage of KANT  , while simultaneously maintaining the current level of accuracy and speed  , in order to provide a smooth transition path from prototype to a larger-scale application system  . 
? The KANT prototype has been implemented in the domain of technical electronics manuals  , and translates from English to Japanese , French and German . 
? The current English lexicon contains about 14 , 0 00 general word senses and several hundred technical terms  . 
The target language lexicons contain these technical terms and a smaller subset of the general terms  , and are currently being extended . The eventual goal is to support a lexicon of 30-40  , 000 terms . 
? The current Domain Model contains over 500 concept frames , which correspond to the meanings present in the sample corpora currently translated  . We expect hesize of the Domain Model to grow rapidly as more knowledge is acquired  . 
? KANT is implemented in CMU Common Lisp , and runs on IBMAPC/RT workstations , which are rated at about 2 . 5MIPS . Using this hardware , our system has achieved a translation speed of 13 seconds per sentence Faster translations are expected with newer hardware  . 
References\[1\]Carlson , L . and S . Nirenburg (1990) . World Modelling for NLP . Technical Report CMU-CMT-90-121 , Center for Machine Translation , Carnegie Mellon University . 
\[21 De Mauro , P . and M . J . Russo (1984) . " Computer Assisted Translation at XEROX Corporation  , " Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the American Translators Association  . 
New York , NY , September 1923.
\[3\] Kaufmann , T .  (1991) . The ONTOSUser's Guide . Technical Memo , Center for Machine Translation , Carnegie Mellon University . 
\[4\] Mitamura , T (1989) . The Hierarchical Organization of Predicate Fraraes for Imerpretive Mapping in Natural Language Processing  , PhD thesis , University of Pittsburgh . 
\[5\] Mitamura , T . and E . Nyberg (1990) . " Multiple Inheritance and Interpretive Mapping in Machine Translation  , " unpublished manuscript . 
\[6\] Nyberg . E . , R . MeCardell , D . Gates and S . Nirenburg (1991) . 
" Target Text Generation , " in Goodman and Niranburg ( eds ) , A Case Study in Knowledge-Based Machine Translation  , San
Mateo , CA : Morgan Kaufmann.
\[71 Tomita , M . , T . Mitamura , H . Masha , and M . Kee (1988) . The LRParser-Compiler User's Guide , Version 8 . 1 . CMU-CMT-88-MEMO . Center for Machine Translation , Carnegie MeUon

\[8\] Tomita , M . and E , Nyberg (1988) . The GenKit and Transfor-malion Kit User's Guide , Technical Memo , Center for Machine " I Yanslation . Carnegie Mellon University , CMU-CMT-88-MEMO . 

E : io , ? ?
Figure 1: KANT : Knowledge-Based Natural Language " h 'anslation 
Safety Warnings
Read the " General Installation Information " section of this manual  . Then , follow the instructions in the "' Safety Warn - ings " section  . 
In order to prevent a firehazard , do not overload AC outlets . 
In the following cases , TV sets can overheat : 1 . The ventilation slots are blocked . 
2. The ' IV set is placed in a builtinenclosure.
Periodically clean the ventilation slots with your vacuum cleaner  . 
If the " IV set has been dropped , a shock hazard may exist . In this case , unplug the TV set . Then cally our dealer . 
Figure 2: Sample English Source Text Input to KANTA cres DE  COLING-92  , NArcrEs , 2328 Aofrr 1992 1072 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328, 1992
Conseils des ~ eurit ~
Consulterla section dece manuelintitul ~" Renseignements pour installation "  . Ensuite , seconf or meranx instructious figurant ~ tla section in titul Oe " Conseils des Ocurit C '  . 
A find ' O viter toutrisqued'incendie , nejama is surcharger lesprises CA . 
Danslescassuivants , unt 616 viseurpeut surchauffer : 1 . Lagrille de ventilationest bloqu Oe . 
2. Let Ol 6 viseurest plac6 dans uncoin renfon cO.
D ~poussi6rer l ~ riodiquement lagrille dentilation Al ' aide d ' unaspirateur  . 
LachutedutOviseurpeut provoquer unrisque de choc  61ectrique   . Encecas , d6 brancherlet 616 viseur . Ensuite fake appelaud Otaillant . 
Figure 3: French Target Text Produced by KANT

Lesen Sieden Abschnitt " Allgemeine Information en zur Installation " in diesem Handbuch  . Folgen Sied an nden Anweisungeni dem Abschnitt " Sicherheits best immungen "  . 
Vermeiden Sie Feuerge fahren , idem Siedie Netzans chllls senicht 0 berlasten . 
Femsehger ~ ltekt ) nnen in denfol genden Fftlle nilber hitz~en : 1 . Die Ktihl schlitzes in d blockiert . 
2. I ) as Femsehger litsehtin einem Einbaus chrank.
Reinigen Sieregelm/t Bigdie Ktlhlschlitzemit dem Staub-sauger  . 
Wenn Sied as Femsehgerilt fallen lassen , kann die Gefahreines Elektroschocks bestehen . Ziehen Sie in diesem Fall den Netz-stecker . Verst/indigen Siedannlhren Kundendienst . 
Figure 4: German Target Text Produced by KANT , )~ , , a)#l!~tt~Pliqt . : ~ lZ , zl > ' ~'/ blZ ' lll ; 131a ) lllt\]~D49~l-l ' ~' . c ~%' T~-~ , ~l ~ Wl ~: t-71 ~ U hl ~-- , ";-L:--I-'? . & C~hl~9?T . 
2 . ~g"9t'i'~"l'tl:t,::ill'lflzif"L . Ic ' hl /)( , . 
Figure 5: Japanese Target Text Produced by KANT = ( transletes elltS ) " Pevtodicelly , cle~ltl~vent4 1ation slots wl~h ~ ~ ctlmill v . ~tX~tJr ~ Bf-structtl ~( s)ft3uadin 0 , 89 ~ ec~-ds of rmsi time ( ( MOOD niP )   ( FORMBOOTFOII 4 )   ( GAP- )   ( VALE/ICYOWLS )   ( CATV )   ( ROOT " clee ~" )   ( PBE ~ ( ( CAr ADV )   ( Boor " periodically ' ) ) )   ( OBJ ( ( COUNt + )   ( cArN ) $ ~ r " slot " )   ( SL'MtI ~ . VENTILATION-~t0r )   ( ! PL )   ( ( CAr ~ r )   ( Boor " the ~ ) ) ) ) )   ( w ( IL  ~ , -) ( CATo ) ( Boor " . l ~") ( sl ~ or ~ tsrm Meer ) (~+) ( CArN )( ~ , O-VACLJ ~) ( Boor " cl ,  . . . ,-") (( CAT DEr ) ( toOl %~ , Jr " ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) 1 intei~llriliUa r'eP"osoritlltlon ( s ) round : / ~ A : ~ I ; IJENCY~IOOICALLY ) THEME(~O-VEN rKATIOM-~_OT
I~)DEF~ITE ))) ( INSTRLI4EN r(*O-VACLU4-CLE/~
PE~ONSECOND ttn~tetf-structure ( s ) fotm ~ l : ( ( riME ( ( mor PBESl3WT ) ) )   ( rOmtt .  + )   ( cAu ~ rivE- )   ( PASSIVE- )   ( MOOD ( ( ROOt iMP ) ) )   ( BOOr Sou Jrs UBU )   ( car V )   ( SUBCA rTPA ~ )   ( VT VPEV-SNEN )   ( SteJ-ca ~ GA )   ( OB . ~ A , ~ O )   ( OBJ ( ( CASE O )   ( BOOrTLtIKIKOU )   ( CATN )   ( ~ - ) ) )   ( AI~/gfidI . INCT ( ($~\] OT TEIKIIIgqNI )   ( cArADV ) ) )   ( PPADJUNCT ( ( ROOT ~ CUJIKI )   ( CaTN )   ( ~ - )   ( l ~ rDE )   ( OMPNO~C/O ) ) ) ioJ t outstrife ( s ) four ld : , 1 1\] Figure 6: Sample Translation to Japanese of One Selected Sentence  , Showing Intermediate F-Structures and Inter -lingua Representation ACT ~ DE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOU'I"1992I073 PROC . OFCOL1NG-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328, 1992
