Preventing False Temporal Implicatures :
Interactive Defaults for Text Generation *
Jon Oberland Alex Lascarides
Centre for Cognitive Science and Iluman Communication lcsearch Centre 
University of Fdinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place , F , dinburgh Ell 891 , WScotland
Introduction
Given the causal and temporal relations between events in a knowledge base  , what are the ways they can be described in text ? Elsewhere  , we have argued that during interpretation , the reader-hearer H must iufer certain tempe , ra\[information from knowledge about the world , language use and prugmatics . It is generally agreed that processes of Gricean implicature help determine the interpretation of text in context  . But without a notion of logical consequo_nce to under write them  , the infer cnccs ~ ftcn defea ~ sib\]e in nature will appear arbitrary  , and unprincipled , llence , we have explored the requirements on a formal model of temporal implicature  , and outlined one possible nonmonotouic framework for discourse interpretation  ( La . scarides & Asher\[1991\] , Lascarides & Oberlander\[1992a \]) . 
ttere , we argue that if the writer-sllcak crS is to tailor text to H  , then discourse generation can be informed by a similar formal model of implicatur c  . 
We suggest wo ways to do it : a version of \[\[ obbs et al's  \[1988  , 1990\] Generation as Abduction ; and the Interactive Defaults strategy introduced byaoshi et al  \[1984a   , 1984b ,  1986\] . In investigating the latter strategy , the basic goal is to determine how notions of temporal reliability  , precision and coherence call be used by a nonmonotonic logic to constrain the space of possible utterances  . We explore a defea . sible reasoning framework in which the interactions between the relative knowledge bases of S and H helps do this  . Finally , we briefly discuss limitations of the strategy : in particular  , its apparent marginalisation of discourse structure  . 
The paper focuses very specitically on implicatures of a temporal nature  . ~lbexaminetile relevant exam-pies in sufficient detail  , we have had to exclude discussion of many closely related issues in the theory of discourse structure  , ribmotivate tb is restriction , let us therefore consider first why we might want to generate discourses with structures which lead to temporal complexities  . 
* The ~ uthors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Science and Engineering Research Council through project number  on/G22077  , tIORO is supported by the Economic and Social Research Council  . We thank our anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments  . Email contact : jonQ cogaci . ed , ac . uk
Getting Things Out of Order
Consider tile following suggestion for generating tex : tuul descril  ) tions of causal-temporal structures , I ) e-scribe things in exactly the order in which they happened  . If textual order is maAe to match eventual order , then perhaps little can go wrong ; for the bearer can safely a . ssume that all the texts she bears are narrative . Under these circumstances , the problem of selecting adequate regions in the space of utterances pretty much  ( lis~solw~s . We do not believe that this suggestion will work , in general , and consider here two 0 . rgunlellt S against it . 
Hovy's argument
Basically , the generation strategy snggested above fails to emphasise the force of some eventualities over others  ( cf . then n cleus-satellite distinction in RST ) . 
A useful device for emphasis is is the topic-couuuent structure : we mention the important event first  , and then the others , which tillout orgive further detail about that important event  . These ' comments ' on the ' topic'may be elfects  , but they could also bc the cause of the topic . If the latter , then textual order and temporal order mismatch ; the text is a cmlsal explanation i such cases , and having only narrativ c discourse structure available would preclude its gen--era  , ion . Compare(1) and (2), modified from I lovy\[199 o\] . 
(1) First , Jim bumped Mike once and hurthim.
Then they fought . Eventually , Mikestabbed him . As a result , aim died . 
(2) aim died in a fight with Mike . After Jim In unped Mike once , they fought , and eventually Mikestabbed him . 
The textual order in (1) matches temporal order , whereas ill ( 2 ) there is mismatct LAndy et ( 2 ) is nmch better than ( 1 )  . This is bccause the ' important ' event is Jim's death  . Everything mentioned in (1) leads up to this . But because , the events are mentioned in their temporal order , the text obscures the fact that all the events led to Jim's death  , even though syntactic markers like and then and as a re-suR are used  . 
The causal groupings are clearer in ( 2 ) because it's clear during incremental processing that the text following tile mention of Jim's death is a description of how it came about  . This is so even thougt l , to Ac'II ~ , SDECOLl NG-92 , NAN WI . .'S , 2328 AOt~-r 1992 7 2 1 Pnoe . or : COLING-92, Nnrct T . s , Auo .  2328 ,   1992 syntactic markers indicate this causal structure . By contrast , in ( 1 ) the reader realises what's going on only attile last sentence  . The discourse structure is therefore unclear until the whole text is heard  , for the narrative requires a common topic which is only stated at the end  . 
So(2)'s a better discourse than (1) ; but we would never generate it , if textual order had to mirror eventual order . If a generation system were permitted to generate  ( 2 )  , however , a price must be paid . The proper interpretation of ( 2 ) relies on the recruitment of certain causal information  , left implicit by the utterance . The generator thus bassome responsibility for ensuring that the interpreter accomplishes the required inferences  . A formal model of impticature must be folded into the generation process  , so that the appropriate reasoning can proceed . 
States nteract with causal information Ill La  . scarides and Oberlander\[1992\] , we considered in detail the following pair of examples :  ( 3 ) Maxopened the door . The room was pitch dark . 
(4) Max switched off the light . The room was pitch dark . 
Now , no one would want to say that ( 3 ) involved a room becoming pitch dark immediately after a door was opened  . Rather , most accounts ( such as those based in or around DRT , such as t tinrichs\[1986\] ) will take the state of darkness to overlaptile event of door-opening  . That's how one might say states are dealt with in a narrative : events move things along  ; states leave them where they are . But if we have a piece of causal information to hand  , things axe rather different . In (4) , it seems that the state doesn't overlap the previously mentioned event  . 
If one wishes to preserve the assumption about the role of states in narrative  , it would have to be weakened to the constraint that states either leave things where they are  , or move them along . This is not a very convincing move . An alternative is to formalise the role of the additional causal knowledge  . Informally , the basis for the distinct interpretations of ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) is that the interpretation of ( 4 ) is informed by a causal preference which is lacking in the case of  ( 3 ) : if there is a switching off of the light and a room's being dark that are connected by a causal  , part/whole or overlap relation , then normally one infers that the former caused the latter  . This knowledge is defeasible , of course . In generation , such knowledge will constrain the space of adequate utterances  ; if Hlacks the defeasible causal knowledge that switching of flights cause darkness  , then (4) won't be adequate for H , who will interpret (4) in the same way as (3) , contrary to S's intentions . Given this , S must contain a defeasible reasoning component to compute over such knowledge  . 
The important point for now is that even if we describe things in the order in which they are assumed to happen  , this doesn't necessarily make the candidate utterance a good one  . if the speaker and the hearer possess differing world knowledge  , there may be problems in retrieving the correct causal-temporal structure  . 
Two Methods of Generating with
Defeasible Knowledge
Generation by Defeasible Reasoning There is a very general way in which we might view interpretation and generation in terms of defensible reasoning  . Consider the process of discourse interpretation as one of KB extension  . The K8 contains an utterance-interpretation , and a set of knowledge resources ; the latter may include general knowledge of the world  , knowledge of linguistic facts , knowledge about tire discourse so far , and about the speaker's knowledge state . We then try to extend the KB so as to include the discourse interpretation  . Consider now the process of generation ; it too can be thought of as KB extension . Tillstime , the KB contains a temporal-causal structure , and a set of knowledge resources , perhaps identical to that used in interpretation . We now try to extend the KB so as to include the realization of a linguistic structure's semantic features  ( with predicates , arguments , connectives , orderings ) , where these features ensure that the final linguistic string describes the causal structure in the KB  . This view might be described as generation by defeasible reasoning  . 
Modulo more minor differences , these notions are close to the ideas of interpretation as abduction  ( Hobbs et al\[1988\] ) and generation as abduction ( ltobbs et al\[1990:26-28\] )  , where we take abduc-tion , in the former case for instance , to be a process returning a temporal-causal structure which can explain the utterance in context  . Correspondences between a defensible deduction approach and an abductive approach avebeen established by Konolige  \[1991\]  ; he shows that the two are nearly equivalent , tire consistency-based approach being slightly more powerful  \[1991:15-16\]  , once closure axioms are added to the background theory  . Lascarides & Oberlander \[1992b \] discuss ill detail how such a generation process produces temporally adequate utterances  . 
Interactive defaults
Here , we turn to another , less powerful but simpler , method of applying defensible reasoning : the Interactive Defaults  ( ID ) strategy introduced by Joshi , Webber and Weischedel \[1984 a , 1984b ,  1986\] . Rather than considering the defeasible process a . sapplying directly to the KS's causal network , we instead consider its role as constraining or debugging candidate linearised utterances  , generated by someotim r process ; here we will remain neutral on the nature of that originating process  . 
A speaker S and a hearer H interact through a dialogue  ; a writerS and a reader tl interacthrough a text  . Joshi et alargue that it is inevitable that both S and H infer more from utterances than is explicitly contained within them  . Taking Griee's \[1975\] Maxim of Quality seriously , they argue that since both . 5' and Hknow this is going to happen , it is in cumbent upon S to take into account he implicatures II is likely to make on the basis of a candidate utterance  . If S detects that something S believes to be false will be among H's implicatures  , S must block that inference somehow . The basic way to block it is for S to use ACRES DE  COLING-92  , NAN rF ~ , 2328 Aot Yr 1992722 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 . 1992 a different utterance ; one which S does not believe will mislead H . 
In terms of defeasible reasoning , the point is that S must use it to calculate the consequences of the candidate utterance  ; if the process allows the derivation of something S believes to be false  , the utterance should not be used in its current form  . Joshi et al illustrate with tile following example  ; given the KB in (5) , and the question in (6) , they want the process to show why the answer in ( 7b ) is preferred to that in ( 7a ) :  ( 5 ) Sam is an associate professor ; most associate professors are tenured ; Sam is not tenured . 
(6) lsSaman associate professor ? (7) a . Yes.
b . Yes , but he is not tenured.
We wish to elaborate this interactive defaults trat-egy  0D   )  , and consider in greater formal detail the defeasible reasoning al  ) out causal-temporal strnctures that S and H are assumed by Sto indulge it l  ; and to consider which candidate utterances arc eliminated on this basis  . 
Discourse Structure and Temporal
Constraints
ID requires a theory of implicat nrc in terms of defaults  , and an underlying logical notion of nonrnono -tonic or defensible inference  . We also require a formal eharacterisation f the properties an adequate candidate utterance must possess  ; we define these below in terms of temporal coherence  , reliability and precision . Fnrthermore , we assume a model of discourse structure is required  . For certain discourse relations , such as Narration and Explanation , are implicated from candidate utterances ( cf . texts (1) and (2)) , and these impose certain temporal relations on tile events described  . We turn to this latter issue first . 
Discourse Structure and Inference The basic model in which we embed ID assumes that candidate discourses possess hierarchical structure  , with units linked by discourse relations modelled after those proposed by Hobbs  \[1985\]  . Lascarides & Asher\[1991\] use Narration , Explanation , llaek-ground , Result and Elaboration . They provide a logical theory for determining the discourse relations between sentences in a text  , and the temporal relations between the events they describe  . The logic used is the nonmonotonic logic Common Sense Entailment  ( CE ) proposed by Asher & Morreau \[1991\] . 
Implieatures are calculated via default rules . For example , they motivate the following rules as manifestations of Gricean-style pragmatic maxims and world knowledge  , where the clauses a and/3 appear in that order in the text . Informally : ? Narration If clauses ~ and/3 are discourse-related , then normally Narration ( c ~ , /~) holds . 
? Axiom on Narration
If Narration ( c ~ , /3) holds , and c ~ and /3 describe events e1 and e7 respectively , the nel occurs before e2 . 
* Explanation
If claus ~~ and fl are discourse-related , and tile event described in flcaused that described in ? v  , then normally Ezplanalion(e ~ , \[ t ) holds . 
* Axiom on Explan at loxt
If Ezplanation ( c ~ , \[ t ) holds , then event el described by c ~ does not occur bc for e event  e2 described by/3  . 
? Causal Law
If clauses c ~ and fl are discourse-related , and ( ~ describes the event cI of x fidling and fl the event  e2 of y pushing x , then normally c2 cause sel . 
? Causes Precede Effects
If event e~eansesel~t\]lell cI doesn't occur bcfore  e2  . 
The rules for Narration and l " x planation constitute defe ~ iblcting nistic knowledge  , and the Axioms on them , in defeasible linguistic knowledge . ThcCausal Law is a mixture defeasible linguistic knowledge and worhlknowledge : given that tim clauses are dise ourse-rclated somehow  , the events they describe mus the commet cd in a causal  , part/whol cor overlap relation ; here , given the events in question , they must staudilla causal relation ~ if things are nor-real  . That Causes Precede the . it Etfcets is in ( let htmi-ble world knowledge . These rules arc used under the cE inference regime to infer the discourse structures of candidate texts  . Twoi ) atterns of inference are particularly relevant : Defensible Modus Ponens  ( birds normally fly , Twecty is a bird ; snT weety flies ) ; and the Penguin Principle ( all penguins are birds , birds normally fly , penguius normally don't fly , q ' weet y is a penguin ; so Tweety doesn't fly ) . 
For example , in th cab sence of information to the contrary , the only one of the rules whose antecedent is satisfied in interpreting text  ( 8 ) is Narration . 
(8) Maxstoodup . John greeted hinl.
Other things being equal , wc infer via Defeasible Modus Ponens that the Narration relation holds between  ( 8 ) 's clauses , thus yielding , assuming logical omniscience , an interprctation where the descriptive order of events matches their temporal order  . On the other band , in interl ) reting text (9) , in the absence of further information , two defanl tlaws haw ~ their antecedents satisfied : Narration and the Causal 

(9) Maxfell . John pusbed him.
The consequents of these default laws cannot both hold in a consistent Ks  . By the Pengu in Principle , the law with the more specific antecedent wins : the Causal Law  , because its antecedent logically entails that of Narration  . \]\[ lence , (9) is interpreted a . saca . sew here the pushing caused the falling . In turn , this entails that the antecedent to Explanation is verified  ; and whilst conflicting with Narration , it's more specific , and hence its consequent--Ezplanation--follows by the Penguin Principle  . Compare this with (8): similar logical forms , bnt different discourse structures , and different emporal structures : I The formal details of how the logicoE models these AOrES DE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 Aour \] 9927 23I ) ROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AtJ(J .  2328, 1992
Temporal Constraints
So against this background , what are tile properties we require of cmldidate utterances ? We concentrate on those constraints that are central to temporal import  . Following Bach\[1986\] , we take ' eventualities ' to cover both events and states  . We define lemporal coherence , temporal reliabilily and lera-petal precision - -the notions that will characterise the adequacy of an utterauce--iuterms of a set C of relations between eventualities  . This set intuitively describes when two eventualities are connected  . The relations ill C are : causation , the part/whole relation , 2 temporal overlap , and the immediately precedes relation ( where ' et immediately precedes e2 ' means that el and e 2 standilla causal or part/whole relation that is compatible with eltcmporally preceding  e2  )  . s The definitions are : ? Temporal Coherence A text is temporally coherent if the reader can infer that at least one of tile relations in C holds between the eventualities described mtile sentences  . 
? Temporal Reliability
A text is temporally reliable if one of the r cla -tions in C which the reader infers to hold does in fact hold between tile eventualities described in the sentences  . 
? Temporal Precision
A text is temporally precise if whenever the reader infers that one of a proper subset of the relations in Cholds between the eventualities described in the sentences  , then she is also able to infer which . 
A text is temporally incoherent if the natural interpretation of the text is such that there are no in-ferrable relations between the events  . A text is temporally unreliable if tim natural interpretation of the text is such that the inferred relations between tile events differ from their actual relations in the world  . 
In addition , a text is temporally imprecise , or as we shall say , ambiguous , if the natural interpretation of tile text is such that the reader knows that one of a proper subset of relations in C holds between the eventualities  , but the reader can't infer which of this proper subset holds  . 
It follows from the above definitions that a text call be coherent but unreliable  . On the other hand , there may be no questiou about reliability simply because we cannot establish a temporal or causal relation between the two eventualities  . At any rate , a generated utterance is adequate only if it is temporally coherent  , reliable and precise . We intend to apply tile ID strategy to eliminate candidate utterances that are inadequate in this sense  . 
interpretations , and those of (3) versus (4) , are given in Lascarides & Asher\[1991\] . Note that although double applications of the Penguin Principle  , as in (9) , are not valid in genera \] , they show that for the particular case considered here  , o ~ validates the double application . 
2We think of ' el is part of e2 ~ in terms of Moens and Steedman's \[1988\] even terminology , as ' el is part of the preparatory phase or consequent phase of  e2'  . 
a Wea~S Ullle that a neYeutel precedes an event e2 if el's culmination occurs before e2's   . So there are part/whole relations between el and e ~ that are compatible with eltemporally preceding  e2  . 
Applying the ID strategy
Before applying ID with temporal constraints , we must consider the possible relations between the knowledge of speaker S and that which speaker S has about hearer H's knowledge state  . Notice , in-cidentally , that Joshi et al explicitly adopt the view that \] Disforde bugging candidate utterances  . In principle , their framework , however , is more general . 
Although the idea of debugging is intuitive , we shall sometimes talk in terms of constraining the space of possible utterances  , rather than of debugging specific utterances . The definitions of temporal constraints are relevant either way  . 
Relative KBs
Let B(S ) be S's beliefs about the KS , linguistic knowledge ( LK ) and world knowledge ( WK )  . Let B + ( H ) be S's beliefs about what H believes about ttle KB  , LK and WK . And let B- ( H ) beS's beliefs about what H doesn't know about the KILLK and WK  ( so B + ( H ) and B- ( H ) are mutually exclusive )  . 
Problems concerning reliability and precision arise when B  ( S ) and B+ ( H ) are different , and when S's knowledge of what H believes is partial  ( i . e . for some p , p ? 13+(H ) and pqB-(II )) . Suppcme that S's goal is to convey the content of a proposition corntained in his KB  , say q . Suppose also that a WFF p is relevant o generating a particular utterance describing q  . Then there are several possible relations between B  ( S )  , B + ( H ) and B- ( H ) that concern p : ? Case 1 Sknowspand also knows that H does not : pCB ( S ) and p ~_B- ( H ) ? Case 2 Sknow span disn't sure whether H does or not : p e  13  ( S ) and pqB + ( H ) and pqB- ( H ) ? Case 3 H potentially knows more about p than S does : p f\[B  ( S ) and p? . B + ( H ) and pf\[11- ( II ) ? Case 4 S thinks Hism is taken in believing p : pff 11  ( S ) and p eB + ( H ) Of course , the cases where both S and H both believe p ( pEB ( S ) and p eB + ( II ) ) and where neither do ( pqB ( S ) and pCB- ( H ) ) are unproblematic , and so glossed over here . We look at each of the above cases in turn , considering tile extent o which tile definitions of reliability  , coherence and precision hell ) use on straiuthe utterance space ( or alternately , debug candidate utterances ) . 
Case 1: ~' ? knows more about p than H We now examine the problems concerning reliability that arise when p EB  ( S ) and pEB- ( H )  . There are two possibilities : either prepresents defeasible knowledge of tilelml guage or the world  , or p is some fact in the Km We investigate these in turn  . 
p is defeasl ble knowledge Let p be adc feasible law that represents knowledge that S has and which Sknows Hlacks  . ~l billustrate , take the case where p is the causal preference introduced earlier : A CrEs DE  COL1NG-92  , NANTES , 2328 ho~r1992724PROC . OFCOL1NG-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 ? Causal Law If the clauses , ~ and fl are discourse related , antic ~ and /7 describe respectively the event sel of x falling aud  e2 of y pushing x , then normally e~cause de I?Consider the ca . q c where S in tends to convey the proposition that John's pushing Maxca used the latter to fall  . Suppose S has a KB which will allow her to generate the description in  ( 9 )  , among others . 
(9) Maxfell . John pushed llim.
We have argued that this text is coherent , precise and reliable for S because tile causal aw  ( about the usual causal relation between pushings and failings  ) is more specific than the linguistic ride ( Narration )  . 
But since Hlacks the causal law ,   ( 9 ) will trigger a different inference pattern in H ; one in which Nar-ration wins after all . S must block this pattern by changing the utterance  ; she hase as cntially two options . If clause order is kept fixed , then , 5' could shift , tense into the pluper fectim in (10) ; or else S can insert a clue word , such as because , into tile surface form , to generate (11): (10) Max fell . John \] lad pushed him . 
(11) Max fell because John pushed him.
The success of tile lattertactic requires , '5' and Htonmtually know a new linguistic rule , more specific ttlan Narralion , such as the following : 4 ? Non-evl dential ~ Becaus & If c ~ and/3 are discourse-related , and the text segment is ( r because f l , then normally tileewmt liescribed in ~ caused that described  in/7  . 
Ontileotim rh and , if clause order is not taken to be fixed , then 5' can simply reorder ( 9 ) :  ( 12 ) John pushed Max . Maxfell . 
So , when 5"b clicves Hlacks the relevant causal aw , 5" can simply reorder , and let Na ~' atioud otherest . 
However , recalling the above discussion , in some cases a discourse structure that invokes Explanation is better than one that invokes Narration  . So simply reordering events and letting the rule for Narration achieve tile correct inferences won ' twork success fidly in all cases  . Furthermore , recaning tileiliscussion about states and causation above  , it becomes appar . 
ent that this tactic of always letting Narration dotile work will lead to problenls with texts like  ( 3 ) and ( 4 )  . 
(3) Maxopened the dnor . The roon l was pitcll ( lark . 
(4) Max switched off the light . The room was pitch dark . 
q'lle reason is that , in the absence of the causal aw which relates light switching to darkness  , (4) will be analysed exactly as (3) , giving the wrong result . A solution would be to replace the state expression with all event expression :  ( 4/ ) Max switched off the light . The room wen ~ pitch dark . 
4 This is a pragmatic , rather than semantic rule ; it's not obvious tll~t this is tile best choice of representation  . 
An obviolts alternative is to introduce further clue words  , and appropriate linguistic rules for reasoning about them  . This means exploiting linguistic knowledge to overemnetile gaps in H's world knowledge  . 
This tlelps explaintile observation that texts which  ( lescribc events ill reverse to temporal order , without marking the reverse , mayb quiter are . It's easy enough 1 o interpret such texts , when we have the all : l > ropriate WK . lhlt if a considerate speaker or writer ha ~ reason to believe that some or all of her audience lacks that WK  , then she will either avoid such descriptive reversals  , or mark them with thc type of clues we have discussed  . 
p is a fact in the Krl We now turn to the case where p is a fact about tim Kn which Sk nows and which Sknows Hlacks  . Suppose that passerts a causal relation between two events  ( lilt does not represent an excelltion to any ( lefi ; p ~ qible causal preferences , and that Swishes to conveytile information that p  . Then S can simply state p by exploiting H's available LK  . Cluewords may not be needed . 
For example , if pisttle fact that Maxstoodup and tt len John greeted him  , Scantell Httlisby uttering (8) ; Na * ~' alion will make (8) reliable and precise for

(8) Maxstood Ul ). John greeted him.
Similarly , if pistile fact that M axopened tile door , and wtlile this was going on tile room was pitch dark  , then ( 3 ) is reliable and precise for 11: ( 3 ) Maxopened timdoor . The room was pitch dark . 
But what if passerts a causal relation between two events that violates adcfe~mible causal preference that Hhas ? Snppose passerts that Max'sfalliumlediately preceded aolln's puslling hinl  . And suppose that Sknows that Hhastile defeasible causal lawmel ~ tioned above  , but lacks p . Then neitller (9) nor (12) are reliable for // , indicating that S cannot generate all atomic text  , to assert p . 
(9) Maxfell . John pushed him.
(12) Jobn pushed Max.lief ell.
tf wouhlinter pret (9) a ~ an explanation ; and (12) as a narrative , for nothing willeontliet with Narra- ( in n in that case : tile causal preference for pushings causing failings would simply reinforce the temporal structure imposed by Narration  . The obvious option is to n love from (9) to 113) ; a not beroption is to recruittile pluper fi:et , msill114); note that 115) is not a sohttion , since so can be read evidentially . 
(13) Maxfi~ll . And then John pushed I lint.
(14) J(?a ~ pushed Max . lie had fallen.
(15) Maxfell . So John pushed him.
These edit ) utter ( 13 ) rather tllan ( 9 ) explains why it c ~ L tl be necessary to use and then  , event l lought h , ' ~ thll-stop is always available and , by Narration , has the default effect of temporal progression . So , ill general , one might wish to paraphrase Joshi et all if a relation CtUlbe defeasibly referred to hohl between two eventualities  , and S'wants solnething dilferent , it is essential to mark the desired relation with sometlling strunger  . 
ACRESDF . COL1NG-92, NANTES , 2328AOt'rl 1992725 PROC . OFCOLING 92, NAN qES . AUG .  2328 ,   1992 Case 2:   6: knows p but isn't sure if H does In general , S will have only partial knowledge about
H's beliefs . This has its drawbacks.
p is a defeasible causal preference Suppose that Sisn't sure whether or not H believes the defeasible causal law relating falling and pushing  . Then there are at least two ways in whicbS's model of H's knowledge can be expanded to a complete statement of H's knowledge  . The first , B1, contains the causal aw . The second , B2, does not . Nowuppose that Swishes to convey the proposition that John's pushing Maxca used Maxto fall  . Then , if S assumes H's knowledge corresponds to Bl , then H will find a reliable interpretation for ( 9 )  . 
(9) Maxfell . John pusbed him.
On the other hand , if S assumes that H's knowledge corresponds to BT  , then H will interpret (9) in an undesirable way , witt , the falling preceding the pushing ; as we said before , Narration would w in . 
Under this model , S isn't sure how H will interpret (9) , because S doesn't know if H's knowledge correo sponds to B ! or  B2  . Hence the ambiguity of ( 9 ) manifests itself to the generator S , if not to the hearer H , because S doesn't haw . ~sufficient information about H to predict w bich of the two alternative temporal structures H will infer for  ( 9 )  . This is slightly different to the previous case where Sactually knows Hlacks the causal aw  , making (9) unreliable . 
" l bavoid uttering unreliable text , S will have to utter something other thmJ (9) . Indeed , it may be possible for Snot to worry about tim ambiguity of  ( 9 ) at all , if some's afe'strategy can bct bund that would guide S's expansion of H's knowledge in a way that wmd densure the generation of reliable text for H  . A plausible strategy for S's reasoning about H would he the following : if S isn't sure whether or not Hk nows p  , then assume H doesn't know p . On the face of it this seen ~ splausible . But just how safe is it ? We state it in terms of B +  ( H ) and B- ( H ) : ? lfpqB + ( H ) and pqB- ( H )  , assume pEB- ( H ) and generate-and-test under this assumption . 
But this won't work in general . If S wants to convey a violation of the causal law p  , but H actually believes p , t ben the strategy will suggest he use of (9) , which will actually be unreliable for H . 
In fact , there is no safe strategy , save timouc where S consider several alternative xpansions of H's knowledge  . As a result , ambiguity of text will manifest itself to S in certain cases  , because of her partial knowledge of H . This is perhap somewhat surprising . Nonmonotonic reasoning is designed as a medium for reasoning witb partial kuowledge  . And yet here we have shown S cannot maintain textual reliability on the basis of a partial statement of H's KB  , even if nonmonotonic nference is exploited . 
p is a fact about the KB : Ambiguity Suppose that  5' wants to convey the information that Max's fall immediately preceded John pushing \] tim  , and suppose Sknows that Hk nows the causal aw , but S doesn't know for sure if H knows already that Max fell before John pushed him  . Then , for similar reasons as those mentioned earlier , S isn't sure if (9) is reliable or not . 
(9) Maxfell . John pushed him.
'17 obesure that text is reliable in this case, . q will again have to exploit linguistic knowledge  ; for exam-pie , by uttering (13) instead of (9) . 
(13) Max fell and then John trashed him.
Case 3: Hasadvisor , S as pup il Suppose that for a certain proposition p  , p?B(S ) , pqB4"(H ) and pf/B-(H ) . This corresponds to H potentially knowing more about p than S  , but Snot knowing what more . That's pretty much the position of the tute e in a tutorial dialogue  , and the advice-taker in an advisory dialogue . 
Case 4: S thinks that Hism is taken Suppose that pf\[ B  ( S ) and pEB + ( H )  . Then S doesn't believe p even though site's aware H does  . 
This implies that 5' thinks His mistaken in believing p . 
The fact that p qB ( S ) and pEB + ( tt ) could entail that a text that's reliable for S isn't for H  . 
For example , suppose that H believes , by some weird perception of social convention , that there is a defeat sible can sal preference that greetings causes tanding ups  . Supposet bat S wants to describe the situation where Maxstoodup and then John greeted him  ( i . e . 
an exception to H's causal preference ) . Then this is like the exception case above concerning falling and pushing :  ( 16 ) is reliable for S but not for H . 
(16) Maxstoodup . John greeted him.
Again , S could compensate for this by explicitly marking the temporal relation  . Alternatively , the fact that p ? B ( S ) and pEB + ( H ) could entail that a text that's unreliable for S is reliable for H  . Again , let p be the causalaw that says that greetings causestanding ups  . But this time suppose that S wants to describe the situation where John's greeting Maxca used him to standup  . So this time , Swants to describe an instance of the causal aw . Then both (16) and (17) are reliable for H , but only the latter is reliable for S . 
(17) John greeted Max.ties too dup.
(16) is unreliable for S . Arguably , it wouldn't be in the set of possible linguistic realisatious  , but only if this set is assumed to be characterised by what S finds reliable  . But web are no argument for this assumption , and so we don't make it . 

Ilere , we summarise the current state of the model , and briefly discuss two of its limitations . 
We admitted that that job of defeasible reasoning in generation could be very general  ; butttlat we were going to look at it in the context of the Interactive Defaults strategy  . ID applies to the candidate utterances ( or tile space of utterances )  , and criticises the utterances ( or the space ) , producing better utterances , or a smaller space . The notion of logical Ac-rEs DECOLING-92, NA rm . ;s , 2328 Ao~r1992726 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 .   1992 consequence supported by CE was used to make precise how utterances are constrainted by m  . Crucially , we used Defensible Modus Ponens and the Pengu in Principle  . The grounds for criticism were the tempo . 
ralramifications of the utterance ; if it was incoherent for // , unreliable for Hordangerously ambiguous ( for 5' )  , it was bad . 
One limitation of the model is that , although it permits reasoning about the knowledge or beliefs of interlocutors  , it neglects their goals and intentions to do actions  . ID does not deal with the phenomena which motivate the work following Cohen and Perrault  \[1979\] and Allen and Perrault \[1980\]  , ( cf . 
Cohen , Morgan and Pollack\[1990\]) . In particular , ID does not let Stake into account hose inferences H will make in attempting to ascribe a planto S  . 
Hobbs et al\[1990:44-45\] argue that inferences leading to plan recognition are less significant in interpreting long written texts or monologues  , llence , it might be argued that the generation of such discourses need not give H's plan recognition particular weight  . Nonetheless , ID is incomplete , to the extent that such inferences in flncncc discourse generation  . 
Secondly , discourse structure and temporal structure have become somewhat detached  . Sometimes , it's only the causal-temporal structure derivable front the candidate that is being criticized  . It may therefore be thought that the discourse structure is a aidle wheelas things stand  , and should be either eliminated ( el . Sibun\[1992\]) , or bctrusted with a greater share of the work , enriching the discourse with useful clue words ( cf . Scott and Souza \[1990\]) . Our tentative viewistimt tire latter view is plausible  , and anyway is closer to the idea of generation by defensible reasoning  , can vassed early on . 
The D strategy examined here seems to involve a lot of hard work generating simple eamlidates which almost always required ebugging  . It would be preferable if we could do this work in advance  , by defanlt . 
The alternative is explored in Lascarid cs and Oberlander  \[1992b  \] , in which we abduce discourse structures from event structures  , mid then interleave deduction and abduction to derive linguistic realisations  . But in turning to the more global approach , we should not lose sight of the fact that simple texts are sometimes best  .   ( 2 ) illustrates this point : the rhetorical relations inferred aren't syntactically marked  , arid yet the text is more natural than (1) , where the relations are marked . As might be expected , there seems to be a tradeoff between the naturalness of the output and its computational cost  . 
References
Allen , J . F . & Perrault , C . R . \[1980\] Analyzing intention in Dialogues . Artificial Intelligence , 115, 143178 . 
Asher , N . & Morreau , M .   \[1991\] Comnt on SenseEntailment : A Modal Theory of Nomnouotonic Reasoning  . 
In Proceeding so \] the 12th International Joint Con\]cr-ence on Artificial Intelligence  , Sydney , Australia , August 1991 . 
Bach , E . \[1986\] The algebra of events . Linguistics anti
Philosophy , 9, 5-16.
Cohen , P . It . & Perrault , C . R .   \[1979\] Elements of a Plan-Based Theory of Speech Acts . Cognitive Science , 3, 177-212 . 
Cohen , P . R . , Morgan , J . & Pollack , M . E . \[1990\] Intentions in Communication . Cambridge , MA : hilTpress . 
Gtice , H . P . \[1975\] Logic and Conversation . In Cole , P . 
and Morgan , J . l , . reds . ) Synlaz and Semantics , Vol-rune 3: Speech Acts , pp 41-58 . New York : Academic

ilinrichs , E .   \[1086\] Temporal Anaphora in Discourses of English . Linguistics and Philosophy , 9, 63--82 . 
llobbs , J . it . \[1985\] On the Coherence and Structure of 1 ) is course . Report OSL1-85 , 37 , Center for the Study of Language and htformation , Stanford , Ca . , October , 1985 . 
Hobbs , 3 . , Stickel , M . , Martin , P . & Edwards , D . \[1988\] Interpretation as Abduction . In Proceedings of the 261h Annual Meetin 9 of the Association \] or Compu ? rational Linguistics  , suNY , lluffMo , N . Y . , June , 1988, pp 95103 . 
flobbs , J . , Sticket , M . , Appelt , D . & Martin , P . \[1990\] Interpretation as Abduction . Technical Note No . 499, sl~llnternation M , Menlo Park , Ca . , l ) e cember 1990 . 
llovy , E .   \[1990\] Pragmatics and Natural Language Generation . Artificial Intelligence , 43, 153-197 . 
Joshi , A . , Webber , B . & Weisehedel , R . M . \[19849\] Preventing I " Mse Inferences . In Proceedings of the lOth h~tern at lonal Con . \[vrence on Computational Linguistics and the $2nd Annual Meetingo \] the Association . \[ or Computational Linguistics , Stanford University , Stanford , Ca . , 26 July , 1984, pp 134~138 . 
Joshi , A . , Webber , B . & Weischedel , It . \[1984b \] Default reasoning in interaction . In Proceedings o . \[ the NonMonotonict leasoning Workshop , AAAI , N . Y . , October , 1984, pp 144150 . 
Joshi , A . , Weblrer , B . & Weischedel , R .   \[1986\] Some Aspects of Default Re~oning in Interactive Discourse  , lteport MS-C1S-86-27 , University of Pennsyl-vasia . 
Konolige , K . \[1991\] Abduction vs Closure in Causal Theories . Forthcoming Research Note in Artificial In . 
tellige acc . Page references toms.
I , ascarides , A . & Asher , N.\[1991\]
Discourse Relations and Couuoon Sense Entailment.
Submitted to Journalo \] Logic , Language and In . for-mation . DYANA deliverable 2 . 5b , Centre for Cognitive
Science , University of Edinburgh.
Lasearides , A . & Oberlander , J .   \[19929\] Temporal Coherence anti Defeasible Knowledge . Theoretical Linguistics , 18 . 
Lascarides , A . & Oberlander , J . \[1992b \] Abducing Temporal Discourse . In Dale , R . tlovy , E . R Ssner , D . and f<t , ck , O . reds . ) Aspeets o \] Automated Natural Language Generation  . Berlin : Springer-Verlag . 
Scott , l) . R . & Souza , C . S .   \[19911\] Getting the Message Across in nsT-based Text Generation  . In It . I ) Me , C . 
Mellish and M . Zockreds . ) Current Research in Nat-oral Langua~le Generation  . London : Academic Press . 
Sibun , P . \[1992\] Generating Text without Trees . To appear in Computational Intelligence : Speciol Issue on 
Natural Language Generation , 8.
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AO(n'1992727I ) ROC . OFCOLING-92, N^N ^ NTES , AUo .  2328, 1992
