The Automatic Creation of Lexical Entries for a Multilingual MT 

David Farwell , Louise Guthrie and Yorick Wilks
Computing Research Laboratory
Box 30001
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces , NM 88003-0001

In this paper , we describe a method of extracting information from an online resource for the consmaction of lexical entries for a multilingual  , interlingual MT system ( ULTRA ) . We have been able to automatically generate lexical entries for interlingual concepts corresponding to nouns  , verbs , adjectives and adverbs . Although several features of these entries continue to be supplied manually we have greatly decreased the time required to gener at each entry and see this as a promising method for the creation of largescale lexicons  . 
1. Introduction
For some time , researchers in Computational Linguistics and Natural Language Processing  ( NLP ) have eyed machine-readable dictionaries with interest because they might provide a practical resource for overcoming the " lexical acquisition bottleneck "  . Many researchers , however , view this problem of lexical acquisition as too difficult to solve at present using a machine -readable dictionary  , and the result has been that the focus of much research has shifted to identifying the kind of information needed in NLP lexicons\[Atkins  , 1990; Miike , 1990; McNaught , 1990; Normier & Noss in , 1990; Nirenburg et al , 1990; Hanks , 1991; Pustejovsky & Bergler , 1990; Warwick , 1990; Kay ,  1989\] , the goat being eventually to create a lexical database that will allow the creation of a lexicon to be used for processing natural language  . While we agree that it is unlikely that the information in machine-readable dictionaries is sufficient for this grand database of facts that will support NLP as a whole  , we are optimistic about making use of the information they do provide to supporthe creation of lexical enU'ies for specific natural language processing systems  . 
In this paper , we present initial results which are specifically related to extracting information automatically from entries in the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English  ( LDOCE )  , in order to construct lexical entries for the ULTRA multilingual machine translation system  . 
We give an overview of the ULTRA
Machine Translation System and its lexicon ( focusing on the information requirements of its lexical entries  )  , and then discuss the lexical entry construction process  . Finally , we offer some suggestions for fully automating the entire pro-c~ss  . 
2. ULTRA
ULTRA ( Universal Language TRAnslator ) is a multilingual , interlingual machine translation system which currently translates between five languages  ( Chinese , English , German , Japanese , Spanish ) with vocabularies in each language based on about  10  , 000 word senses . It makes use of recent AI , linguistic and logic programming techniques , and the system's major design criteria are that it be robust and general in purpose  , with simple-to-use utilities for customization . 
Its special features include : a multilinguat system with a language-independent system of intermediate representations  ( interlingual representations ) for representing expressions as elements of linguistic acts  ; Ac'res DECOLING-92 . NANTes , 2328 AOU'r1992 S32 PRec . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 .   1992 -bidirectional Prolog grammars for each language incorporating semantic and pragmatic constraints  ; use of relaxation techniques to provide robustness by giving preferable or " near miss " translations  ; access to large machine-readable dictionaries to giver a pidscaling up of size and coverage  ; ? multilingual text editing within X-windows interface for easy interaction and document preparation is pecific domains  ( e . g . , business letters , pro-forlnamemor and a , telexes , parts orders ) . 
Below is a sample screen from the ULTRA system . Each of the Spanish sentences in the " SOURCE TEXT " window have been translate xl into Japanese  . The system has ~ cut and paste " facilities which allow a sentence from tim source text to be moved to the bottomleft " SOURCESENT : " window where it can then be translated by selecting a target language from the choices above the " TRANSLATION " window  ( bottom right ) and choosing the " TRANSLATE " button at the bottom of the screen  . The translation then appears in the bottom right " TRANSLATION " window  . From there , the translation can then be moved to the " TARGET TEXT ' window  . 
Lan . Iara ~ ~ l:n#.. an ~_. Marade , lm Sa.
~m.~a , "-..,-~ mue.L~tvnta~ttem ~, #. mnt = M.
~_,~ . ~ 2 . ~ . t , ~ .   . ~-~1~  . ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . r The System of Intermediate Representation The interlingual representation  ( IR ) has been designed to reflect our assumption that what is universal about language is that it is used to perform acts of communication : asking questions  , describing the world , expressing one's thoughts , getting people to do things , warmng them not to do things , promising that things will get done and so on . Translation , then , can be viewed as the use of the taaget language to perform the same act as that which was performed using the source language  . The IR serves as the basis for analyzing or for generating expressions as elements of such acts in each of the languages in the translation system  . 
The representation has been formulated oil the basis of an ongoing crosslinguistic comparative analysis of hand-generated translations with respect o the kinds of information eces-sary for selecting the appropriate forms of equivalent expressions in the different languages in the system  . We have looked at a number of different types of communication including expository texts  , business letters , and email messages and dialogues . This , coupled with the fact that the language selected for the initial development sage are of differem historical and typological background  , has led to a solid foundation for developing a flexible and complete descriptive framework  . 
The Language Components
Each individual language system is independent of all other language systems within ULTRA  . Corresponding sentences in different languages must produce the same IR and any specific  1R must generate corresponding sentences in the five languages  . However , the particular approach to parsing or generation which is used meach of the languages may differ  . 
Each language has its own procedures for associating the expressions of the language with the appropriate IRs  . These independent systems communicate by handing each other IRs  , and no actual transfer takes place . 
Independence of the language-particular systems is of both theoretical midpractical interest  . Given the required equivalence of the input -output behavior of each of the language systems  , this paradigm is excellent for comparing various approaches to parsing or generation for their coverage aim efficacy  . 
A new language may be added to the translation system at any time without unpredictable or negative side effects on the previously developed language systems  , or on the system's overall performance . 
Furthermore , the addition of any new language system will have the effect of multiplying the number of language pairs in the translation system by the number of languages already in the system  ( having developed an English-Japanese system , we need only develop the Spanish module to have an EnglishSpanishys-temanda Japanese-Spanish ystem  , and so forth ) . 
At present , we have developed five prototype language systems for ULTRA  . Each system has been implemented in PROLOG as a bidirectional parser/generator  . That is to say , in a given language system , the same algorithm is used to do either the analysis or the generation of the expressions of the language  . 
The system is capable of handling a wide range of phenomena  , including compound and complex sentences , relative clauses , complex noun phrases , questions ( yesno and Wh types ) and imperatives . ~ lllere will always be certain classes of nonstandard input  ( e . g . " Where station ?" ) which fall outside the system's normal capabilities and to deal with such irregular input  , we are developing a number of techniques which together we call " relaxation "  . Our assumption is that if a given stying or IR cannot be successfully processed even though all the lexical items are available in the system  , it should be repro-cessed with the various constraint systemati-cally weakened  . 
ULTRA'S Lexicons
There are two types of entries related to the specification of a lexical item in the ULTRA system : those for intermediate representation  ( IR ) word sense tokens , and those for the words of the individual languages  . 
Currently , there are eight IR word sense categories including entities  ( often corresponding to nouns )  , relations ( often corresponding to verbs and adjectives )  , entity specifiers ( often corresponding to determiners )  , relation specifiers ( often corresponding to auxiliaries )  , case relations ( often corresponding to prepositions )  , pro-AcrEs DECOLING-92 . NAN ' r l ; s . 2328 Ao~r1992 S34 PRoc . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 position specifiers ( often corresponding to complementizers )  , proposition modifiers ( often corresponding to sentential adverbials )  , and conjunctions . Each category is associate A with a special set of constraints which ranges in number fiomone for sentential adverbs  , to nine for relations . The number of lexical categories for the individual language lexicons varies from eight to fourteen  . There is no simple correspondence between the language-particular lexieai categories and the IR categories although the gross relationships stated above appear to hold  . 
All entries take the general form of simple
Prolog unit clauses in (12): (12) category ( Form , F1 , F2 ,   . . . ) . 
where FI , F2 and so on , are constraints . For language-particular entries , the searc gener ' , dly syntactic constraints associated with an orthographic form  , Form , such as the gender of a noun , whether a verb is reflexive , and so on . 
For example ,   ( 13 ) is a simplified and readable version of a Spanish enlxy for the noun banco  . 
113) noun ( banco , third singular , masculine , bank 4_1) . 
Similarly ,   ( 14 ) is a Spanish entry for the verbing reso: ( 14 ) verb ( ingreso , third singular , finite , past , simple , indicative , active , depositl3) . 
The final argument represent she IR word sense the Spanish form is used to express  . This sense token is associated with a sense definition in LDOCE and is used to index the corresponding 
IR entry.
For IR entries , t be features FI , F2 , and so on , correspond to universal semantic and pragmatic constraints on the word sense  , Form , such as the classification of an entity as countable or not  , the semanticase structure of a relation , and so on . For example the IR entry for bank4   1 would look something like : ( 15 ) entity ( bank4_l , class , countable , institution , abstract_object , economics banking ) . 
while the IR entxy for depositl 3 would look like: ( 16 ) relation ( depositl_3 , dynamic , placing , agent , patient , human , amount , human , abstract_object , economies_banking ) . 
3. The Automatic Construction of Lexieal

The work on automating lexieal entry has drawn upon extensive research at the Computing Research Laboratory in deriving semantics true-threes automatic '  , dly fiom large machine-readable dictionaries\[ Slator  , 1988; Wilks & Slator , 1989; Guthfiee Lal 1990\] . Much of the core IR lexicon has been deiived fi ' om the  72  , 000 word senses in LDOCE . Codings fi'om the dictionary for such properties as semantic ategory  , semantic preferences and so on have been used , either directly o ~ indirectly , to generate partial specifications of some 10 , 000 IR tokens for the system . 
The partially antomated lexical entry pro-eess proceeds in three steps :  1  ) given a sense in LDOCE , an entry is constructed by a process of automatic extraction and formatting of intorma-tion in the foml of a standardize data structure  ,  2 ) any remaining unspecified information in that structure is provided interactively  , followed by 3 ) the automatic mapping from the fuUy specified data structure to the corresponding Prolog facts  . Step 3 ) is very straightfolward and will not be de , scribed here . Below we give a short description of LDOCE and then discuss the techniques we have used to accomplish steps  1  ) and 2 )  . 

The Longman Dictionary of Contemporary
English \ [ Procter et al ,   1978\] is a fill l-sized dictionary designed for learners of English as a second language  . It contains 41 , 122 head worden wies , defined in terms of 72 , 177 word senses , m machine-readable form ( a type setting tape ) . 
With few exceptions , the definitions in LDOCE are stated using a control vocabulary of approximately  2  , ( X ) 0 words . Theeonn ' ol vocabulary words tend to b chighly ambiguous  ( approximately 17 , 000 senses are listed in LDOCE fortile 2 , 1X  ~ . ) s ? clling forms ) . 
Both tile book and tape versions of
LDOCE use a system of grammat teal codes of about 1111 syntactic ( sub ) categories which vary in generality . Nouns , for example , may be assigned categories nc has noun , or counl-noll nor count-noun-followed-by -infinitive-with-TO  , or vocative-noun-used-in-direct-address . The syntactic categories for verbs are particularly exten-Acres Dr COLING  . 92, NANa '~, 2328AOOT 1992535P ~ oc: . ol:COLING-92, Nhbrrt!s,At~6 . 23-28 ,   1992 sire and include categorie such as transitive -verb-followed-by-the-infinitive-without-TO  . 
In addition , the machine-readable vrsion of LDOCE contains codes which are not found in the book and among them are codes which specify the semantic lass of a noun  ( as one of 34 categories ) and the semantic preferences on the complements of verbs and adjectives  . 
From LDOCE to a Partially Specified Entry
The mapping process from LDOCE to
ULTRA word sense entries assumes a particular linguistic context  . All the information contained in the LDOCE defimtion is automatically extracted and used in the appropriate ULTRA specification  . For some parts of speech ( e . g . , nouns ) , most of the information stored in the interlingual entry can be ex~acted automatically  ; for others ( e . g . , verbs and adjectives ) , only a portion of the information is available . 
For this project we began with a Lisp version of LDOCE  , which formats the information from the type setting tape\[Boguraevetat  . , 1987\] . To date , we have extracted information from LDOCE nouns for specifying IR entries for entities  , from verbs and adjectives for specifying IR entries for relations  , and from adverbs for specifying IR entries for relation modifiers and proposition modifiers  . These are the major open class categories of IR word sense tokens and constitute over  95% of the tokens defined thus far . Below we summarize the information required by the categories corresponding to nouns and to verbs  ( the information which is currently provided automatically is marked by @  )  . 
Entities : @ the sense token indexes a corresponding 
I . DOCE word sense definition , @ whether it is a class term , the name of an individual , or an anaphoric element , @ whether it is countable or not , ? the semantic lass , @ the LDOCE semantic class , @ the LDOCE subject domain ; Below is a sample screen of the interactive session for completing the IR lexical entry for one sense of " bank " in LDOCE  . The first screen is created automatically and completed manually to produce these e?rid screen ~ 
India ? ~ ttm
Lnxic ? iFecN ( Countnt~n )
Iiit dum : bmk4 J.
ca ~: mtttya ~ eaJt ~-~; count . able?1M " cl?ssIldoc~cl ~ : a hs~oct_ob . Jnctldacadamln ~ mlcs .   . hanktnlihilah control : Aw-/Mtat/llltr~2/m~t~t  . z ~ txt , , I do c ~ ~ ~ ? ? . arrtm-Imteonn lacks In the cttW
RIt ~ c=:m~=0 atzypt as lneacn wdt?t . mII ~- ~ mta~m
I . macll Far ~ mun)
IIIt dtmZIm~d_lmtt~mt ~ u ~ r ~ Z cmnt ~ lot'y~g clmnJelm:tmtlla~t~ldocecim:abstract  . obJect l do ? odo~n : talcs . banking ~!1~~ nt~t:/u ~ r/ . t ~ llltra2/ . mn . ~/ t  ~ . ld ~ urkld ~ ? ccrtm " I ~ aamIgnke In the at VAc ' r~sDl ~  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 Aol Ir 1992536 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 Note that for entities ( nouns ) only one feature , described above as " the semantic lass , " is not provided automatically from LDOCE . This field corresponds to the semanticategories used in 
ULTRA prior to the use of LDOCE for automatic extraction  . These categories were handcrafted , based on surfaceling nistic phenomena and are used to satisfy the semantic preferences of adjectives and verbs  . The automatically created entries to tentities contain the LDOCE semantic categories as well  , but these will not be used by ULTRA until we have examined the consistency of the LDOCE categories as a basis for semantic preferences  . 
Relations : @ the sense token indexes a corresponding 
LDOCE word sense definition , ? whether it is stative or dynamic , ? the semantic class , @ the number of case roles , ? the case roles , ? the semantic preferences for the fillers of the case roles  , @ the LDOCE semantic preferences for the fillers of the case roles  , @ the LDOCE subject domain ; In the case of relations , LDOCE does not provide case roles or semantic lasses  ( for verbs )  , or a direct marking as to whether a verb is stative or dynamic  . We have developed a verb hierarchy from LDOCE , based on the genus ( hypernym ) of a verb definition , and are in the process of disambiguating the terms in this hierarchy  . 
These then will be used as the verb classes for ULTRA's relations  . We have been able to extract case role information in some cases \[ Wilks et al  ;   90\] from implicit information in Longman's and will include this in the lexical entxies  . Again the semantic preferences for the fillers of the case roles are those originally used in ULTRA  . As in the case of entities above , the LDOCE semantic preferences are also included in the entry for future use  . 
Extraction is performed by applying a sequence of flex programs  ( a new generation version of the UNIX lexical analyzer utility  , lex ) which transform information from the LDOCEL is p format into a Lisp association list  , the data structure used by the interactive lcxical entry interface for the ULTRA system  ( sample screens appear in the previou sect on )  . 
The word senses added to file ULTRA system using these techniques were chosen first on the basis of whether they were exemplified in the diction a ~   3  , entry , and second , whether they were one of the first three senses of a given homonym  ( the LDOCE senses are listed in order of frequency of use  )  . Files containing the definitions of all noun . verb , adverb and adjective senses for which there were example sentences were first automatically generated  . An additional file containing example sentences tagged by the word sense being exemplified was also created  . Next , association lists conespond-ing to IR entries fur each of the word senses were generated  . Finally , another procedure was applied which automatically supplied a pointer to the example context in the example sentence file  . 
4 . Approaches to Achieving Full Specilication It was clear at the outset of this projec that a great deal of lexical acqttisition could be done automatically and we have initiated projects to investigate whether the missing information can be identified automatically through further analysis of the defintions  , examples , gramatic ' dl categories , etc . 
Finally , in order to automate the construction of lexical items fully on the fly during translation  , procedures must be defined to select specific senses on the basis of the source language linguistic context of the item being defined  . Similarly , procedures must be developed to automatically , specify the different language-pazlicular lexical entries  ( these procedures do exist in English to a limited extent  )  , and these must be adapted to other langnages . 
Finally , tecbniques for using bilingual dictionaries in the language-specific lexical specification process must be developed  . 

Atkins , B . (1990) The dynamic database , a collaborative methodology for developing a largescale lectronic dictionary  . Proceedings of the International Workshop on Electronic Dictionaries  , Japan Electronic Dictionary Research Institute , Ltd . , Oiso,

Boguraev , B . , T . Briscoe , J , Carroll , D . Carter , and C . Grover . (1987) l qhederivation of a ACl'ES DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt '; r1992537 PROC . of . . COLING-92, NANTES , AUG . 2328,1992 grammatically indexed lexicon from the
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary
English . Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp .  193-200 . 
Guthrie , L . , B . Slator , Y . Wilks and R . Bruce (1990) Is the recontent in empty heads ?
Procedings of the 15th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING90 ) Helsinki , Finl and pp .  138-143 . 
Hanks , P .   ( 1991 ) The role of dictionaries in language engineering , an Oxford view , 

Huang , XM . (1988) Semantic analysis in
XTRA , an English--Chinese machine ~ ans-lation system . Computers and Translation , 3:1, pp .  101-120 . 
Jin , W ., and R . Simmons . (1986) Symmetric
Rules for Translation of English and
Chinese . Computers and Translation , 1:3, pp .  153-167 . 
Kay , M .   ( 1989 ) The concrete lexicon and the abslxact dictionary . Proceedings of the 5th Annual Conference of the UWC entre for the New Oxford English Dictionary  , 
Oxford , England , pp . 35-41.
Miike , S .   ( 1990 ) How to define concepts for electronic dictionaries  . Proceedings of the International Workshop on Electronic Dictionaries  , Japan Electronic Dictionary Research Institute , Ltd . , Oiso , Japan . 
McNaught , J .   ( 1990 ) Reusability of lexical and terminological resources : steps towards independence  . Proceedings of the International Workshop on Electronic Dictionaries  , Japan Electronic Dictionary Researcfi Institute , Ltd . , Oiso , Japan . 
Nagao , M ., JC . Tsujii , and JC . Nakamura.
(1985 ) The Japanese government project for machine translation  . Computational
Linguistics , 11:2-3, pp . 91-110.
Nirenburg , S ., L . Carlson , I . Meyer , and B.
Onyshkevych . (1990) Lexicons for KBMT.
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Electronic Dictionaries  , Japan Electronic Dictionary Research Institute , Ltd . ,
Oiso , Japan.
Normier , B . and M . Noss in .   ( 1990 ) Genelex project : Eureka for linguistic engineering  . 
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Electronic Dictionaries  , Japan Elec-l~onic Dictionary Research Institute , Ltd . ,
Oisu , Japan.
Pereira , F . , and D . Warren .   ( 1980 ) Definite Clause Grammars for language analysis : -a survey of the formalism and a comparison with augmented transition et works  . Artif-icial Intelligence , 13, pp .  231-278 . 
Procter , P ., R . Ilson , J . Ayto , et al (1978)
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary
English . Harlow , UK : Longman Group

Pustejovsky , J . , and S . Bergler .   ( 1987 ) The acquisition of conceptual structure for the lexicon  . Proceedings of the 6th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pp . 

Slator , B .   ( 1988 ) Lexical semantics and Preference Semantics analysis  . Memorandain
Computer and Cognitive Science , MCCS-88-143 , Computing Research Laboratory , New Mexico State University , Las Cruces , 
New Mexico.
Uszkoreit , H . (1986) Categorial Unification
Grammars . Report 66, Center for the
Study of Language and Information , Stanford , CA.
Warwick , S .   ( 1990 ) Automated lexical resources in Europe : a survey . University of Geneva working paper . 
Wilks , Y . , D . Fass , C . Guo , J . McDonald , T . 
Plate , B . Slator (1990) . Providing Machine Tractable Dictionary Tools . Journal of Machine Translation , 2 . Also to appear in Theoretical and Computational Issues in Lexical Semantics  , J . Pustejovsky ( Ed . ) Acr Es DECOLING-92, NANTES . 2328 Aot ~'1992538 PROC . OrCOL1NG-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
