PRESENTATION OFTHE
EUROL ANGPROJECT
B.SEITE , D . BACHUT , D . MARET , B.ROUDAUD

12 rue de Reims-94700 Maisons-Alfort-FRANCE
tel:+33 1614 3967 200
email : DBachut@site-maisons-alfort , fr

International trade in general and particularly the Single European Market will bring about a considerable increase in the already huge documentation market  . NLP products will contribute to improving the competitiveness of industry in this strategic field  . 
The ind a slaial objective of EUROLANG is thus to provid efficient NLP tools and to give the European business community a better opportunity to maintain a command of multilingual technical and commercial communication  . 
The technical objective of the EUROLANG project is to build an MT/NLP toolbox  , offering a wide range of ' open ' and powerful tools  , which reflect the state-of-the-art in computing and linguistic techniques  . 
These tools will then be validated via the production of amnltiling unlMT system based on second generation principles  . 
With respect to the computing aspects , the main technical choices are : portability , maintainability , openness , possibility of evolution and ergonomy . This implies the u ~ of standard techniques and tools  ( UNIX , 
Xll , MOTIF , C , SQL , SGML).
The linguistic developments , based on a syntactic n-semantic analysis , will follow an industrial methodology , implying form a linguistic specifications . 
The use of speciatised languages will ensure a better separation between software and lingware  , and thus better modularity . The three-phase translation process guarantees the multilingual aspect of the MT system  . 

In the light of the communication society , which is leading industrial companies to become involved in NLP technology  , the EUROLANG parlnexs have decided to pool their technical  , human and commercial resources in order to define and develop a new ' high quality '\]' low cost 'MT system  . This system will be based on state-of-the-art computing and linguistic techniques  , and is aimed at the market for quality translation with postediting  . 
To ensure the reusability of the linguistic resources and the possibility of evolution of the system  , a powerful toolbox , providing different NLP tools and useful'plug and play'functionalities  , will be developed . 
This toolbox will be a linguistic plaffoml providing a usex-liiendly environment to design and dave lop different kinds of NLP applications  . 
In the following paper , we present more specifically the aims and motivations of the project and the main technical choices  , with regard to both computing and linguistic issues  . 
GENERAL PRESENTATION
Aims and motivations of EUROLANG
The technical objective of the project is to build an MT/NLP toolbox  , offering a wide range of ' open ' and powerful tools  , which reflect the state-of-the-art in computing and linguistic techniques  . These tools will then be validated via the production of a multilingual MT system ' based on second generation principles  . This system will process five European languages ( English , French , German , Italinn , Spanish ) . Only ten language pairs ( chosen according to the market and partner needs ) will be dealt with : the eight pairs involving English language  , and the two French/German pairs . The dictionaries will contain 50   000 terms in each language , and their equivalents in the other ' languages . 
The general objective is to yield products at the end of the project  , which will be targeted on the ' low cost '/' high quality ' market  . This goal is made possible by the 1991 state-of-the-art MT technology and will considerably increase the share of the nmrket currently occupied by the commercial MT systems  . 
The market is estimated at 12 billion dollars ( Gartaer Group figures )  , and israpidly increasing . The following trend suggest a boom in this market : continuous increase in intematiounl trade  , enormous need within the Single European
Market , shortage and ever increasing cost of qualified

ACTESDECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AO~1992l289 PROC . OFCOLING-92, N^NI"ES,AUt ~ .  2328 ,   1992 strategic need for a company involved in a competitive xport market to possess high quality trauslatinns of techuical and commercial documents rapidly available  . 
The Japanese were the fhst to appreciate the strategic importance of substantial investment in this field  . The major coqx ) ratious invest considerable sums arid participate in project such as EDR  , ATR . . . The state-of-the-art in computing and linguistic technologies associated with skills to deM with different European languages seems to be a good opportunity for Europeto 
I > ecome a leader in this sector.
The linguistic quality of a translation is of course one of the major criteria involved in the evaluating of nnMT system  , however there are others ( cf . \[ Roudaud 91\]) . Some linguistic phenomena are very complex , and thus very costly , to deal with , whereas another technical solution , less resource-consuming , could lead to an equivalent ( or even better ) result , as far as efficiency is concerned . The industrial issue implies that a compromise must be reached  , betwean cost , efficiency and linguistic quality : the right solution to the right problem  . For example , anaphor are a very difficult linguistic problem to solve  , whereas inteclmical docun ) eutation the French pronoun il can more often he translate diu English by it  . In such it case , a better solntion would be to propose it , as the default translation , and he and sheas alternatives , o that the revisor can choose one or the other . 
This last point shows that we must adopt a global approach for the design of an MT system  . Not only is the MT kernel of major importance , but also a user + fiiendly environment , providing many useful tools fi ~ r the end-user ( IJ ' anshator , writer ,  . . . ), must be desigued . 
T iffs is the reason why special attention is paid in this project orite design of the pre-and IX  ) st-editing tools . 
For users , an MT system is only a part of the docume , ttarys stem and integration and connectiou with other tools must be Ioreseen  . 
It is wellknown that second geueration MT systems it revery time-consuming  . Predictions for the coming years show that workstations will very rapidly  ) ' each 50 or 100 MIPS , and that the cost of MIPS will continue to decrease  . All these factors coulribute to the reduction of exploitation costs of MT systems and to the improvemeut of delivery fime/vohanenitio  . 
Organisation and main technical choices EUROLANG is a three-year EUREKA project which began in I ~' cember  '91  . The first year will mainly consist of specifying both computer and linguistic developments  . The two following years will be devoted to development  , integrafiou , tests and evaluation . 
The global cost of the project is 684 MFF ( about 14 ) MUS $ )  . It involves five European countries : France , Germany , Italy , Spain , United Kingdom . The partners of the project are : - in France : - SITE group  ( prime contractor ) -CAPGE MINIINNOVATION o CNET-GETA-LADL- MATRASPACE MARCONI-in Germany : - SIEMENS NIXDORF-KRUP Phidustries-IAIS aarbrilcken- in United Kingdom : - RANKXEROXLtd  . 
-UMIST ( Manchester ) -University of Essex-hi Spain :- BDE-Univ c ~sidad de Barcelona - Universida dan lonomade Barcelona - in Italy : - LEXICON-THAMUS- Universith di Salerno 
Uinversit ~ tdiP is a - Universith di Torino Most of the partners participate in projects in the field of MT/NLP  ( EUROTRA , ESPRIT . . . ) and have practical experience . The other partners are industmlisls with needs in this area  , and they will be very active in the definition of the end-user stations  ( pre/post-editing . . . ) and in the evaluation of the products . 
The project is co-managed by SITE and

SITE , prime contractor of the project , has the twofold competence : MT/NLP , in particular via its subsidiary B ' VITAL , and industrial documentation management , with respect to writing as well as translation . SITE's translators have validated the quality of die translations produced using the ARIANEMT system and SITE is thus convinced that this technology can be used profitably in an industrial environment  ( cf . 
\[Bachut 91 a\]) . Unfortuuately , the cost of such machine translation is currently so high  , that the gain obtained by reducing the translators ' work is lost when the cost of the CPU used is added to the human cost  . Furthermore , the linguistic quality of the product is not a sufficient condition for improving the translators ' efficiency : the translator workstation should be designed to fit the necessary ergouomic requirements  . 
SIEMENSNIXDORF , which is developing , maintaining , using ( SIEMENS ' translators use METAL ) and Commercialising META LMT system ( cf . \[Slocum83\] , \[ Schneider 91\]) , is particularly interested by the Ac~l~s DE COtiNG-92  , NAP ? rEs . 2328 Aot ) I 19921290 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 definition of a common european NLP platform and wishes to improve METAL technology  . This is the reason why SIEMENSNIXDORF decided to play an active role in the EUROLANG project  . Its commercial experience is one major advantage illtile commercial perspective of EUROLANG  . 
On these bases , SITE and SIEMENS
NIXDORF decided that it was neces ~ try to develop a new MT system  , based on a considerably improved ARIANE and METAL technology  , considering the advanced state of cun'ent computer technology and the evolufioo of linguistics  . Technical choices are thus being made bearing in mind the industrial needs : portability  , maintainability , openness , possibility of evolution and ergonomy . 
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Computer aspects
As already mentioned , the main objective is to provide a powerful toolbox  , contahling tools dedicated to linguistic developments  . One of the most important characteristics of such a toolboxistile implied reusability of its components  . A plug and play strategy will thus enable the linguists to develop different kinds of applications using file existing ' components ' of the toolbox  . A ' lingware work bench'will provide all thc facilities required to specify  , implement , test and maintain these applications . To facilitate the communication between the tools and with external systems and t it usenable tile plug and plays Wategy  , an API ( Application Programming Interface ) will be defined . 
The toolbox will be designed ill such a way that new tools can easily be added  , ensuring its durability . 
Any evolution of the ' state of fileart ' in computational linguistics can thus be rapidly tak coint o account in the 
EUROLANG product.
Most of the initial tools will be specialized lml guages  , allowing the developer ( or linguist ) to handle concepts he is used to . Such linguistic languages will consist of 4GLs ( 4th Generation Languages , i . e . 
specialized progranlming hmguages adapted to specific developments  ) and the associated compilers and iuterpreters . This architecture ensures a better independance of tileling w are and the softwarc  ( for instance , rite pattern matching nmchanism is part of tim software and should not be programmed by the linguist  )  , and consequently a better linguistic nlodularity . 
Lexical and textual data I ) ases are also needed in the toollx ) x , to enable an easy management of the lexical and textual resoumes  . The lexical database will provide a user -friendly interface to ' add or modify terms  . A flexible underlying model is necessary to ' allow modification of the linguistic model  , and thus modification of the linguistic information needed in tile dic fiol marics  . 
l~ . eprc sentatiOll of texts and charactels in a mull ! lingual enviromuent is a crucial issue  . Although works have already been undertakento solve this problem  , no general stmt dard exists as yel , " rod an external and an inlcmal representation should be design exl  , taking into accouut filly standard of rccoln fl lendation  ( c . g . Tex !
Encoding hilt ! a liver ccomlnendation).
A geueral exchange humat , bitted on SGML ( Standard Generalized Markup I auguage )  , will thus Iv . : defined lot both lexical and textual data . It will guarantee the opennessel the system by allowing the reusability of the ling wam  . 
The fiuul MT ciivironnle ut will luovide a user ~ friendly translator's workstation  . Two kinds of functionalities are f in , ' seen : pre-edit hlgfnt dl U~St-cdiling function ~ dities  . Prc-ediling functionalilies will comprise conveuthmal t  ~  ) ls ( e . g . spelling checker ) and euhunced functionalities ( e . g . tools to handle\[n ; w words and predict their linguistic behaviour ) . Postediting functional ! tics will comprise functionalities needed by any ltanslator  ( even to translate a bin ! tie ) and functionalities specialised 10 rMT revisiou . Among all the for scenfunctionalities , the following are worlhult derliuiug : direct accc~ss to dictionaries  , iu ~ uulgeulent of succcssiw ~ annotations , intelligent search and replace manipulalions , easy access to al~ernalive trauslations offered by the MT system  , request fl ) rinformation concera iut , the MT system , and other specific word processing functinns . 
To cns me that the system is portahle , develolu Uents will be umde in C or C ++ poitable lauguage  ( ANSI )  , under UNIX . Graphics will he produced under X-W/ND OW/MOTIt; . ' Filestaudards cmrenlly illfuL Ce will be respected  ( St ) \]  , , SGMI , , elc . ) . 
Althuugh UNIX hlt ~' , Imcn chosent tntile deve hllnncnls during the pmicct  , he I'C world ( with WINDOWS ) is one of our Inture objectives . 
Linguistic aspects ' file first applicalion of the toolbox will hca auiltiliuguai MT system  , based on second general ! on technology : the use by linguists elspecialised languages  , e , nsnrillg it better Sellaratiol lI ) etweell the liagwm caud the st ) ltwzue , a Ihree-ll has chanslaliol l :: all Rlysis , It ansler und yeneration , cn :; uring a better l nulliltilgual a Plu Oach . 
The underlying liuguisiic thculy is based on a syntactico-semantic analysis  , giving a deep represenlaliouf the text illan atom/died lree structure  ( ill which each tuxle is ' ; unlotated ' by a set of linguistic featutes ) . The mail ! tools used in imrfi ) rming such anaualysis will bc as lighlly contc: ( tnal parser , based on METAl , pm scr , and a ROBRA . -Iike Ire(:ti'ansduc GlAcrEs Dr COLING-92 , N ^ Nt'i ! s , 2328 AO(Yl 19921291 lq~oC . OVC()I , ING-92, NANII ! S . At ; c; .  2328 ,  1992  ( ROBRA is the tree transtla cordesigned by GETA in the ARIANEMT system  , cL\[Boitet82\] , \[Boitet86\]) . The transfer phase makes it possible to translate words in context and the generation phase allows the linguis to specify the surface structure of the text  , depending on the deeps guct m'e calculated . 
Linguistic development methodology , already used by B'VITAL and SITE linguistic teams  , implies form a linguistic specifications to describe the desired deep slructure  . These specifications will be perfomed using a speeialised  4GL inspired by the GETA's static grammar formalism ( el . \[Vauquois85\]) . 
Common linguistic interface structures are being defined  ( in the fast project phase ) to facilitate the plug and play mecanism between different linguistic components  . These linguistic interfaces will consist of the definition of the minimal requirements which should be followed by the linguistic speficications of all the involved languages  . This will also ensure a better multiling nalism and make it possible to reduce the transfe ~ phase between two languages  . 
Given that he MT product is designed for use in industry  , a certain umber of characteristics are essential to the final system : the system should always provide at least one translation  , when several translations are possible , the presentation of the different solutions to the revisor should be use x-f fiendly  , an predicted phenomena or new words should not block the whole translation process  ( robustness )  . 

Considering the industrial objective of the project  , EUROLANG will provide not only an efficient European MT system  , to compete with Japanese and other MT systems abroad  , but also an unequalled NLP platform for large scale NLP application developments  . 
This industrial goal will not prevent all linguistic and computing developments from being based on the current state-of-the-art technology  . To ensure the durability of the toolbox , an R&D stratum will prepare for future versions of the product  , in which new tools may be added and old ones may be improved  . 
The EUROLANG system will thus give the
European business community a better opportunity to maintain the command of multilingual technical and commercial eommunication  , which is crucial for developing international cooperation and fors a fegumding all language specificities  . 
BIBLIOGRAPHY\[Alonso88\]
ALONSO , J . , " A model for Transfer Control in the METAL MT -System "  , COLING 88 , 
Budapest , 1988.
\[Bachut 91 a\]
BACHUT , D . , & at . , " Industrialisation d'un syst~me de TAO fran~ais -anglais pour la documentation technique "  , G6 nie Linguistique 91 , 
Versailles , 1991.
\[Bachut91b\]
BACHUT , D ., & al ., " Traduction et
Terminologie: exp6rience t perspectives industrielles " , 2 ~ mesjourn 6 escientifiques du
RL'IT , Mons , 1991.
\[Boitet82\]
BOITET , Ch . , & al . , "  ARIANE-78: an integrated environment for automated translation and human revision "  , COLING-82 , Prague ,  1982 . 
\[Boitet86 a\]
BOITET , Ch . , " The French National MT-Project : Technical organization and translation results of CALLIOPE -AERO "  , IBM Conf . on Translation
Mec'hanization , Copenhague , 1986.
\[Boitet86b\]
BOITET , Ch . , " Current Machine Translation systems developed with GETA's methodology and software tools "  , ASLIB , London ,  1986 . 
\ [ Boitet871
BOITET , Ch . , " Current state and future outlook of the research at GETA "  , MTSummit , Hakone ,  1987 . 
\[Chandioux 76\]
CHANDIOUX , J . , " METEO : un syst~me op6rationnel pour lat raduction desbulletins m6t6orologiques   destin6s augrand public " , Meta21 ,  1976 . 
\[Chappuy 83\]
CHAPPUY , S . , " Formalisation de la description des niveaux d'interpr6tation des langues naturelles " , Th ~ se3ecy cle informatique , 
Grenoble , 1983.
\[Gross 75\]
GROSS , M , , " M6thodes en syntaxe : R6gime des compl6tives " , Editions HER MANN , Paris ,  1975 . 
\[Gross90\]
GROSS , M ., GUILLET , A ., " Mod 61es
Linguistiques ", Traitement des Langues
Naturelles , E coles d'6 t6 du CNET , Lannion , 1990 . 
\[Hutchins86\]
HUTCHINS , W.J .," MACHINE
TRANSLATION : past , present , future ",
AL'T ~ DECOLING-92, NAN'I ~ . 2328 AOt ~' l "1992 I292 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES . AUO .  2328 , 1992 Chichester , Ell is Horwood series in Computer and their applications  ,  1986 . 
\[ lsabelle78\]
ISABELLE , P . , & al . , " TAUM-AVIATION : description d'un syst~me d traduction  automafs6 desmannels d'entretienen a6ronantique"  , 
COLING , 1978.
\[ Kugler 91\]
KUGLER , M . , & al . , " The Translator's workbench : An Environment for MultiLingual Text Processing and Translation  "  , MTSummit
III , Washington , 1991.
\ [ Perschke89\]
PERSCHKE , S ., " EUROTRA ", MTSummit II,
Munich , 1989.
Roudaud 91\]
ROUDAUD , B . , " A procedure for the evaluation and improvement of an MT system by the end-user "  , Workshop on Evaluation of MT Systems , 
SteCroix , 1991.
\[ Schneider 91\]
SCHNEIDER , T .." The METAL System ", MT
Summit HI , Washington , 1991.
\[Schlitz91\]
SCHOTZ , J . , & al . , " An Architecture Sketch of Eurotra-II " , MT Summit HI , Washington ,  1991 . 
\[Scott89\]
SCOTT , B.E ., " The LOGOS System ", MT
Summit II , Munich , 1989.
\[S6 it 691\]
SEITE , B . , " Enjeux du TALN en gestion docnmentaire : Strat6gie de SITE en ing6nierie documentaire " , Salon International des Industries de la Langue , OFIL , Paris ,  1991 . 
\[Sloctan83\]
SLOCUM , J .," A Status Report on the LRC
Machine Translation System " , First Conference oll Applied Natural Language Processing  , ACL , 
Santa Monica , 1983.
\[Uchida89\]
UCHIDA , H .," ATLAS ", MTSummit II,
Munich , 1989.
\[ Vanquo is 85\]
VAUQUOIS , B . , & CHAPPUY , S . , " Static grammars : a formalism for the description of linguistic models "  , International Conference on Theoretical nd M ~thodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Language  , Colgate
University , 1985.
AcIESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 A Ol;r 1992 1293 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992

Miscellaneous
ACTOrsDECOLING-92 , NA  ~ , ql~s , 23 ~28At ) ~ JT 1992 1294 PRO(: . OFCOLING-92, NA ~" rI~S,AUG .  23~28, 1992
