Christian BOITET , Coordinator of the proceedings
propos decesactes About these proceedings
Mespremiers remtrciements troutaux auteurs des 206 
communication sth6matiqut set notes de projet , sans qui
cesactes n ' auraient 6 videmment p as vule jour . /I so at contribu 6h la qualit 6 scientifiquet , 5  I'hmuog6t~6it6   pr6sentationntlle dleurs articles enre fondantles versions iuitiale soumises an  comit6 de programme , a acceptant desuivreles r~gles de pr6sentation i diqu6es   , et ennous envoyant parrots plusieurs versions am61ior6es surun point ous url ' autrc . 
Malgr6le hombre des communications , quiue eessed ' ailleurs d ' augmenter de COLING en COLING  . nousavons 16g~rement   augment6 lalimite de longueur : 7 pages pour une communication th6matique   , 5 pour unenote de projet . Deplus . les auteurs pouvaient prol?~ser . 
darts une page suppl 6mentaire , un " long r6 sum 6" , ' h\]a condition expresse qu'il so it r6dig6 dausane autrelangue qellt del ' article . 
Parlfi , It comit6 de programmet nten dait encourager lapratique du multiliuguismechezles " linguistes informaticiens "  , Lesauteur squioat us6 decctte possibilit6 aur on taussipermish unplus grandhombre de lecteurs d ' avoir apidement une  id6e as mz complete deleurtravail . Certain so at m~me6t6jnsqu ' autrilinguisme , tn propommt deux r6sum6s moths longs duns deux autres langues que celle de l ' article  . Peut-~treya-t-il~une id6e happrof on dirpottrd ' autres colloquesen " informatiqut linguistiqae "  . 
D ' au cun so at remar qu 6 que , dans Its versions fran ~ aises diverses annonces de  COL1NG-92  , uous avons remplac6 l ' ancienterme " linguistique compotatkmnelle " par " linguistique inlormatique "  . Bienstir . l ' adject if " computationnel " sonne tr6s realenfran ~ a is , m6 mes'ilestr6guli ~ rement form & Mats surt out , ilsemble limiter not redomain e~t l'6tude desprocessus algorithmiques dewaitement effect if detextes  . 
Or , depuisplusieurs an n6es , lesprobl~mes de repr6sentation desconnaissances liuguistiques , t autltxicales que grammaticales , outdeven usaussi importants que ceux deleur traitement  . Desefforts importants sonten cours pour d6finir et r&diser detr~sgraudes bases lexicules . I ~ lr 6 alisatio , d'environ mements convivia uxpour la recher che linguistique  ( investigation de corpus , validation deth6ories grammaticales ) est 6galement deveuueune aclivit6 de rechercher c ~ on nue . 
Leterme de " linguistique iulkmnatique " semble doncmieux rccouvrircequ'estaujourd'htlii otre cloluaine  . Enanglais , nous pourrion sanssi proposer depasser de " computational linguistics " h " computer linguistics "  . 
Autrtid 6esoumise aux cougressistes !
My first thanks will go to the authors of the 206 topical papers and project notes , without which these Proceedings would evidently not have existed  . They have contributed to the scientific quality and presentational homogeneity of their papers by revising the initial versions submitted to the Programme Committe  , by accepting to follow the presentational rules , and by sometimes sending us several versions improved on one point or another  . 
In spite of the number of communications , which does not cease to increase from COLING to COL1NG   , we have slightly augmented the length limit : 7 pages for a topical paper , 5 for a project note . Moreover , authors were allowed to propose , in a supplementary page , a " long abstract " , on the express condition that it be written in another language than that of the paper  . 
7 7~is was intended by the Programme Committee to encourage tile practice of multilingualism among " computer linguists "  . Authors having used this opportunity will also have permitted a greater number of readers to quickly get a reasonably complete idea of their work  . Certain authors have even gone to trilingualism , by proposing two ( less long ) abstracts in two languages different from that of the paper  . 
Maybe this idea could be investigated in the context of other conerences in " computational linguistics "  . 
Some have noticed that , in the French versions of the various announcements of  COLING-92  , we have replaced the term " linguistique computationnelle " by " linguistique informatique  "  . Of course , the adjective ' ~ computation nel " rings badly in French  , although it is regularly formed . But , above all , it seems to limit our fieM to the study of the algorithmic processes for the effective processing of texts  . 
Since several years , however , the problems of representing linguistic knowledge  , be they lexical or grammatical , have become as important as those of their processing  , hnportant efforts are being done to define arid implement very large lexical databases  . 
Constructing user-friendly environments for linguistic research  ( corpus investigation , validation of lingistic theories ) has also become a recognized research activity . 
The term of " linguistique informatique " , hence , seems to better cover what our field has become . In English , we could also propose to replace " computational linguistics " by " computer linguistics "  . Another idea submitted to the participants ! AcrEs DU  COL1NG-92  . NAN'rES , 23+28AOt ~ rr 199210 PROC . O\[:COLING-92, NAN rI is . AU ( ; .  2328 , 1992 Ontrouver adunsce suctes , ellquatre vohwacs , les communication sth6matiques , puts lesnotes deploje lave cd6 monstrations , puts lesnotes deprojct sans d6 monstrations , eten finque klues communications atriv6es troplatr dounon confolT/lesllux desideratadn comit6 de programme . Lestro is premieres cat6gorics sent trices scionles neuf grandsth ~ mesretenus parl c  comit6 de programme , t and is que latle rai ~ ren ' ap as d ' or dre significatif  . 
Chaque communication th6matique sera pr6sent6e dansune plage de 30 minutes , durant I ' unedestro is sessions parall ~ les consacr6es aux conf6rences   ( 8:45-10:25 ,  10:45-12:25 ,  14:45-16:25 ,  16:45-18:25) .   ( ' ellcsquid onner ontlieu huneddmonstration ( pr 6 sent 6 eens us del ' expos 6 , durantune plage ded 6 monstration ) on t6t6 plac~esenti~te , dunsune sections p6ciale . 
Pourles notes de projet , on trouved ' abord routes losnotes a vec dfmonstration  . Chacunesera pr6sent6e dans tro is plage successives de 30 minutes , dnrautl'uneties dixouonze sessions parall Slcs  consacr6cs aux d6monstrations   ( 12:45-14:25 )  . 
Ontrouveen suiteles notes tie projets ans d6monstration   , quiser on tpresquctout cs pr6sent6es lclundi 27 juillet , chacuned unsune plage de 30 mndedeax sessions parall ~ lesde conf6rences   ( latroisiSme 6tant consacr deh hprd sentation de grands proj cts coop6ratifs eurol ' , 6 ens , am6ricainsctjaponais ) . 
Jevoudraister mineren remerciant teasles coll6gues duGF:I'Aqui , d ' unefa ~ onoud'mteautrc , ont particip dh l'61 aboratiou decesactes(M . Axtmeyer , N . Bachut , H . Blanchon , J . Ph . Guilbaud , K . Levcnbach , N . N&lobejkine , F . Peccoud , G . S6 rasset) , ainsiqucles membres de I'ICCL quim ' ont prodigu6 lcurs conseils 6clair6s   ( N . Calzolari , E . l laji ~ ov ( ~, H . Karlgren , W . Lenders , M . Nagao , D . Walke L ', Y . Wilks , A . Zampolli ) , ett out particuli ~ rement DonWalker , quia fairtaut depuistant d'ann6es pour not re communant6 de recherche , et no Hsa ~ onstaff a nenlettr ~ se on cr ~ tement aid6s h pr6parer nf at scalement cesactes , mats to utle colloque . 
, ~ Grenoble , le12 mat 1992
We find in these l ' roceeding , ~ , in four volumes , the topical papers , J bllowed by the project notes with demonstrations  , then the project notes without demonstrations , and finally some communications arrived too late or not conform to the desiderata of the Programme Committee  . The first three categories are sorted according to the nine main themes identified by the Programme Committee  , while the last one has no sigmficant order . 
Each topical paper will be presented in one 30 minutes slot , daring one of the three parallel sessions dedicated to the lectures  ( 8:45-10:25 ,  10:45-12:25 ,  14:45-16:25 ,  16 . '45-18:25) . Those which will be accompanied by a demonstration  ( presented on top of the lecture , during a demonstration slot ) have been put at the beginning , in a , special section . 
For the project notes , we first find all notes with demonstrations . Each will be presented in three success iw ~ 30 minute slots , during one of the tenore leven parallel sessions dedicated to the demonstrations  ( 12:45-14:45 )  . 
We then find the project notes without demonstration  , a hnost all of which will be presented on Monday 17 July , each during a 30 minute slot of two conference sessions ( the third being dedicated to the presentation of large Europe ~ ln  , American and Japanese cooperative projects ) . 
I would like to conclude by thanking all colleagues of GETA who  , in one way or another , have participated in the preparation of the , ~ e Proceedings ( M . Axtmeyer , N . Bachut , I1 . Blanchon , J . Ph . Guilbaud , K . Levenbuch , N . Nddoh(jkine , F . Peccoud , G . S ~ rasset) , as well as the members of the/CCL who have given metheir well-inspired advices  ( N . Calzolari , E . llaji&~v6,11 . Karlgren . W . Lenders , M , Nagao , Y . Wilks , A . Zampolli ) , and especially DonWalker , who has done so much for our research conlmunity for so many years  , and has constantly and very concretely helped as lo prep are not only these l ' roceedings  , but also the whole Conference . 
Grenoble , May 1"2ttt , 1992
At : rEsDI~C ( ) LIN ( . ;-92, NA ~ rL ; s . 2328 A()I'JT 19921 lP~O:: . tlFCOl,ING-92 . NANII ~ S . AUC; .  2328 .  1992
