AREUSABLELEXICAL DATABASE TOOLFORMAClt lNE TRANSLATION 
BRI(HTTEBL,~SERULRIKF,SCHWALL
IBM Germany IBM Germany
Institute for Knowledgc Institute for Knowledge
Based Systems Based Systems
P.O . Box 103068 P.O . Box 103068
W-6900 lleidelberg W-690 0 lteidelberg
Email : alscbweeschwall
at dh dibm 1. bit net at dh dibml.bitnet
O.ABSTRACT
This paper describes the lexical database tool LOLA  ( Linguistic-Oriented Lexical database Approach ) which has been developed furthe construction and maintenance of lexicons for the macl fine translation system I  , MT . First , the requirements such a tool should meet are discussed  , then I , MT and the lexical information it requires , and some issues concerning vocabulary acquisition are presented  . 
Afterwards the architecture aml the components of the I  , OLA system are described and it is shown how we tried to meet the requirements worked outem ' -hier  . Although I , OI , A originally has been designed and implemented for the German-English I  , MT prototype , it aimed from the beginning at a representation of lexical data that can be reused for uther LMT or MT prototypes or even other NLP applications  . A special point of discussion will therefore be the adaptability of the tool and its cumponents as well as the reusability of the lexical data stored in the database for the lexicon development for I  , MT or for other applications . 
i . Introduction
The availability of largescale lexical information has widely been recognized as a bottleneck in the construction of Natural Language Processing  ( NLI' ) systems . The lexical database I , OLA has been developed in connection with the Logic-programming-based Machine Translation  ( LMT ) system and shall be presented here . This work is part of the objectives of the project Transl  , exislaunched in 1991 at the Institute of Knowledge Based Systems of the IBM Germany Scientific Center  . Transl , exisaims at the theoretically and empirically well motivated lexical description and the management of the lexical information of LMT in a database  . It is conceived as a first step towards a reusable lexical knowledge base  . 
1 . 1 . Requirements for convenient construction and maintenance of Lexicons Based on our experience and existing literature  , a tool for the construction and maintenance of large NLP lexicons with a complex entry structure should meet the following requirements : tJ Adequate expressive power of the representation formalism : the expressive power must be sufficient to cover the facts of lexical description  . 
ANGELIK ASTORRER
University of Tiibingen
Seminarffirn at firlichs prach l . Systeme
Wilhelmstr . 113
W-7400' Fiibingens torreratar buckle.sns.
ncuphilologie . uni-tuebingen . det ~ Methodology for the description of lexical information : criteria and guidelines relevant for encoding should be developed and documented  . 
n Orientation towards lexicographic procedure : the design of the tool should take the logical course of the lexicographie work procedure into consideration and support it during all its steps and phases  . The lexicographer should be enabled to concentrate on the lexicographic description of lexical units while the tool itself automatically takes care of the remaining tasks in lexicon development  . 
n Consistency mid integrity checking of the lexical data : when entries are added or updated  , the system should reject invalid values for particular features and check if the input leads to inconsistency of the database  . 
t ~ Data independence : An extreme dependency between the structuring of lexical data stored in the database and the structure of the lexical entries in a given application system should be avoided  . In tiffs way the lexical data will remain resistant to modifications in the NLP/MT-systems that make use of these data  . 
t ~ Reusability/R cversability of the data ( cf.
Calzolari 1989 , tlc id 1991 ) : lexical data should be represented in such a way that it can--apart from its transfer specific components-bere used for other MT-prototypes with the same source or target languag c  , or with the reverse language pair ( e . g . German-English and English German ) . Ideally , the lexical data should be independent to such a degree that they are also reusable for other 

D Multi-user access : it should be possible for several users to work on the lexicon simultaneously  . 
Dllelp facilities : the criteria and guidelines for lexical description should be easily accessible  . 
The availability of monoling nal and bilingual dictionaries are to suppor the lexicographer's linguistic ompetence  . 
1.2 LMT
LMT , developed by Michael Me Cord , is in basic design a source-based transfer system in which the source analysis is done with Slot Grammar  ( cf . 
McCord 1989, 1990, forthcoming) . Two main characteristics of LMT should be emphas ~ ed :  1  . the lexicalism , arising from Slot Grammar source analysis ; ACRESDE COLINO-92 . NANTES , 2328 AOt'rr 199 2510 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  23-98, 1992 2 . a large language-general X4o-Y-translations hell . 
Both features facilitate the development of prototypes for nc whm guage pairs I  , Versions of I , MT ( in wu'ious stages ) exist currently for nine language pairs . 
I , MT currently requires the lollowing types of information to b c specified k  ) r lexical units ( I , lJ ): pat1 of speech ; u wordSellSCS iu morphological properties ; rl agreelnent features ; othevalency , i . e . the li ' anl c of optiom d/o hligatory complement slots  ; o the specification of the fillers ( N l ) s , suhordinate clauses ) for each slot ; t ~ semantic compatibility constraints and collocations  ; n characterization fmulli word lexmncs ; u subject area ; translation relations ; t q lexieal transtbmmtions . 
In McCord ( forthcoming ) , an external lexical to rmat(l' ; lA : ) is prescntcd wtfich allows the representation of the above information  . 1 Jntil now , however , the lexical data has been kept in sequential files attd updating t in s been done with a text editor  . Thtls most of tile above-mentiun cd requirenlents eoukl not be met  . 
1.3 Vocabulary Acquisition
The hand-coding of dictionaries ialaborious and timc-e on suming task  . The rc for can mn bcr of attempts have been made to exploit corpora and/or machine readable dictionaries  ( MRDs ) for the buildup of NIA ) -lexicons ( el .  3 . 5) 2  . In many cases , however , the lexical information in MRD's is nci-th or complete nor sufficiently explicit for NLP/MT purposes antihasto hercvised hy lexicographers  . 
Ideally , the demands on a lexicograpt tershoukl only bc of linguistic nature  . For this reason a sophisticated tool is necd cd to gukl cantisup pnrt the NlJ'/MT-lexicographer in revising entries auto-matica Hy converted from machine readable sources as well as in buikling up new vocabulary  . 
2 . LOLA-architecture and components The lexical database tool I  , OLA aims at meeting the abovement k med requirements  . Its design and development are based on work achieved in the l  , EX-project and the COIJ '; X-proj cct3 . LOLA makes use of automatic on sistency and hltegrity checks as well as of the support of multiuser access provided as standard facilities by the relational I  ) BMSSQL/I ) S . Updates are made with the help of a user interfacetlt at support stim lexicographer during the encoding process  . The representation f the lexical data has been worked out to be as independent as possible of the format of a specific ap-plicatiun lexicon  , thus increasing the degree of reusability of the lexical data  . In additiun , a catalogue of criteriand guiddhms for lexical description is being elaborated and will be integrated in totim tool  . 
IXlLAL ~ xtcalI ) ar . aim ~'1"~lk .   .   .   .   . 3//\]~x ~
Figure I . IX ) I , A-architecture
The main components of the architecture of the 1 , OI , A system arctile following ( of . l : igure 1):1 . LO1, A-I ) B : the database itself . 
2 . COI , OI , A(COder's interface to LO 1 , A ) : Interface tilth and-codiug and modific atkm of tim lexical data  , stored in I , OLA-I)B . 
3 . I ) BTOLMT : program tll~d generates I , MT lexicon matfies from the lcxieal data stored in  1 I ) I , A-I)B . 
4 . I , MTTO 1) 11: program that loads already existing 1 , MT lexicons into I , OI , A-I)B . 
5 , I , I ) 11 TODB : program that converts data from ~ Ml ( l ) 's into I , O1 , A-1) B . 
In the tbllowing we give a brief description of these components  . 
2.1. The Database
The database was desi~mdiu two steps : develop -merit of the conceptual scheme and dcvclopment of tim database scheme  . 
In the conceptual design phase , the lexical objects , ttmir properties , and their interrelations were represented in an entity-relatinns hip diagram  ( of . 
I , MT is file technical basis of an international project at IBM wifll cooperation between IBM Researdl  , tile IBM Science Centers in lleidelber g , Madrid , Paris , llaif a , and Cairo , and IBM Europeanl . anguage Services in
Copenhagen ( cf . Rimon et al 1991).
2Cf . Byrd et al 1987 ; for an overview of related activities within file l  , MT-project , cLRimon et al 1991 , pp .  1415 . 
Cf . Barnett et al 1986 ; Blumenthal et al 1988 ; Storrer 1990 . 
Ac~s DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 ao ( Tr 199251 l PR Oe . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG . 2328, 1992 Chen 1976) . Although the ER-model does not have the expressive power to cover all aspects of lcxical description  , especially complex constraints , it has been chosen here as a compromise between a cmn-plete lexical representation and the realization in a traditional database system  . 
The resulting ER-diagram for the German-English lexicon is shown in Figure  2 a . 
The conceptual scheme is still independent of the choice of a specific DBMS and of other implementation aspects  . The basic principles of the conceptual design of our database will be sketched out in the following  . 
Orientation towards linguistic structure , not towards the structure of the application lexicon  . 
The diagram reflects , in the first place , the structure of the linguistic objects , their properties and and their interrelations , and it is influenced to a smaller degree by the structure of the application lexicon  . 
As a consequence , the data is quite resistant ostructural changes hit he format of the application lexicon  . The abstraction from the structures of the application lexicon has a positive side effect with regard to the exploitation of machine readable lexi-caire sources : on one hand  , we can handle cases , in which not all information required by LMT is provided in the entries of MRD's  . The information acquired can be stored as entries to be completed and revised later  . On the other hand , we are free to store types of lexical information that are of relevance for NLP applications and can be acquired from MRD's or other NLP lexicons but are not processed in a current LMT-version  . We can save them in the database as coding aids for the lexicographers  , for future prototype versions , or other NLP applications . 
Analogous structure for source and target language wherever possible  . 
The lower part of the ER-diagram represents the German source  , tile upper part tile English target language . For both languages , an entity of the type entry can have one or more homonyms  , each of which can have one or more senses . The senses themselves can open one or more sense -specific slots  ( one-to-many relations )  . A sense-specific slot can be filled by several types of fillers and the same type of filler can flU several sense-specific slots  ( many-to-many relation )  . The basic types of entities and relations , which are the same for all languages , are described by their characteristic features represented as attributes  . The number of attributes as well as their values may differ according to language-specific peculiarities s  . 
Many-to-many relations between the lexical objects of both languages  . 
We represent the relation of lexical equivalence between source and target senses  , as a many-to-many relation ( one source sense can have multiple target equivalents and vice versa  )  . This breaks with the traditional hierarchical entry structure of bilingual dictionaries  ( Calzolari et at .  1990) , but it avoids redundant description and storage of one target sense that is lexically equivalent to different source senses  . 
Another relation holds for the sense-specific slots of two senses that are regarded as lexicMly equivalent  . We decided to establish this relation between slots and not between slot frames  . This way we caa a elegantly describe lexically equivalent senses with non-corresponding slot frames ~  . In this way the relations between the two languages may be used to a great extent bidirectionally for the XY-as well as for t be Y X-language pair  . 
The conceptual scheme captured in the ER-diagram was then mapped into a database scheme and implemented in tile relational DBMSSQL/DS  . We chose a relational DBMS , because -- for the maintenance of the large LMT -GE lexicon  ( about 50 , 000 entries ) -- we were in need of a stable DBMS which supports multiuser access  , has facilities for automatic checking of consistency and integrity of the lexical data mad allows for the specification of multiple user -specific views on the data  . To avoid redundancy and update anomalies we tried to normalize our relations as far it was useful with respect to our approach  . In total ,   32 tables are implemented : 25 tables describe lexical objects and relations by means of attributes with associated values  ,   7 tables serve to store " knowledge about the lexical knowledge "  , e . g . the admitted values for attributes sucia as semantic type  , filler-type , slot-type for both languages . 
2 . 2 . COLOLA : the user interface to LOLACOLOLA is the user interface to LOLA-DB that looks up the lexical data of a given search word and displays it on sequentially connected menus  . The design of the menus as well as their sequential order was guided by the manner in which lexicographers describe lexical entries  . The following operations can be performed : 4 The boxes represent types of entities , the diamonds represent types of relations between entities  , the ellipses represent attributes which characterize types of entities or relations  . The labels of the connection lines indicate whether the relation in question is a one-to - one  , one-to-many , many-to-one or many-to-many relation . 
The ER-diagram is a simplified version of the actual conceptual model  . For the purpose of this paper , several entity types , attributes , and relations have been leRout . 
sE . g . : in German a preposition like " auf ' can govern either an accusative NP  ( " warren au f ' ) or a dative NP ( " lasten au f ' ) depending on the verb that lakes the prepositional phrase with the respective preposition as a complement  . 
Therefore " case " is a feature , relevant for the description of German slot fillers filling a prepositional complement slot  , sE . g . cases like " like " and " gefallen " where the subject of the English verb corresponds to the dative object of the German verb  ; or cases like " geigen " and " play the viol in " where the English direct object filler " the violin " is incorporated in the semantics of the German verb " geigen "  . 
ACTESDECO\[JNG-92 , NAbrl ~ , 2328 AOt ~' r1992512 PROC . or COLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328 , 1992\]"-"7"~/~"1"\"\n , Figure 2 . Entity Relationship Diagram for\[ ; erman-Engli ,  -  . hn addition of new source or target entries n deletion of existing entries n change of existing or addition of new features to existing entries \ [\] deletion of features from existing entries u assigmnent of new or deletitm of existing transit  ( innequivalents for a given source sense N update , insert in nor deletion of transfer in fnr-mation for each pair of translation equivalents  . 
For each part of speech , a specific sequence of menus is defined . There arent cnus for homonyms and senses of source and target entries  ; the qinkiug " of the source senses and target senses regarded to be lexically equivalent is clone via transfer menus  . 
This allows lexicographers to spcci ~ dize on specific parts of speech or on specific fi ~ atures which can be locally updated  . 
COI , OLA controls multiuser access to the LOI , A-I ) Bsotlt at several lexicographers ( : an update the lcxical database simultaneously . The logical unit of work is the source or target homonym : when alcxicn graph crrc qucsts to update a homonynt  , this homonym , together with its senses , is locked tarother users . 
If a new entry contains blanks , a multiword menu is called where the multiword is split up into its components  . For each component , the following lexical information is gathered : the part of speech  , whether the word may inflect within the multiword  , and whether a phrase can be inserted between one multiword component mKltire previous one without doing away with idiomaticity  . 
If new hot nonylusor 8 ellses ; : ire inserted ou the multiword menu as well as on other menus  , default w ducs fort catur cs arc displayed . They can either be accepted or rejected and over writt cn by the lc xiengraph cr  7   . The assumptions on dethult values for attributes nf lcxi calint brmation may differ according to diff cr cnt grammars and systems  . We therefore decided to store the complete lexJ calin-fbrmatinn and used cfaultw dues as proposals inti reuser interface  . With this approach we a Uow for two advantages : on one hand  , the data in thc database can be used lot diflls reutappficatin rts having distinct theory specific assumptions on defaults  . On the other hand , the user of CO1 , OI , A can b cue titli'om the economic advantages ( ) f default assumptions . 
C ( )I~OLA does extensive crmsistency chccking of the values entered by tire lexicographers  . Illegal values arc rejected and warning messages are displayed in situations where errors n fight easily occur  . Although much of tim consistency cttecking issup . .
pnrted by the database management system , some extensions were necessary . 
Further support for the lexicographers is provided by an interface tn the WordSmithnn-lincdict it  ) nary system ( cf . Byrd/Neff 1987) . Several machine readable dictionaries are available  . g . Collins German-tinglish , F , nglish-German , Longman's I ) ictionai T of Contemporaryl ' : uglish , and Webster 7th Collegiate dictionary . The lexicographer can lookup entries in these dictionaries during the encoding process  . 
Furthermore , help menus are provided in which ttrevMid values tbr specific features can be looked tip  . 
7Default values are provided , for instance , for slot fillers . German direct obj cct slots get an accusative noun phrase as lhede fault filler  . The lexicographers may accep this , add other fillers or write over it with an n ( fie filler . 
AC1T ~ BECOLING-92 , NAN'fES , 2328 AOUf1992513I ) ROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328, 1992 2 . 3 . DB7"0 LMTA conversion program I ) BTOLMT has been dc-veloped which extracts lexical information stored in the relations of I  , OI , A-DB and converts it into l , MT-lbrmat . 1) 11fl'O_I , MT consists of two components : uad at alms c extractor and 
Oa conversion program
The databas extractor selects the source entries and the corresponding target entries and stores them in database format  . This format can be regarded as an intermediate representation betwccn database scheme and I  , MT-format . It consists n fase t of Proh ) g predicates which correspond to the relations of thc database scheme  . Th crc are , for instance , entry , homonym , sense , and slot predicates which correspond to the entry  , homonym , sense , and slot relations in the database . The conversion program finally converts the database format into the LMT-format  . It has to be adapted according to the changes or extcnsions of " thel  , MT-ff~rmat . 
2.4. LMTTODB
Before and during LOLA design and development , I , MT lexicons in EI , F were already cr cated and updated inf des . Since these lexicons still need updating and since this is much better supported by  1  , OLA , a conversion program LMTTODB was needed which converts EI  , Ir entries c~f lext confiles into the database format and loads them into I  , OI , A-DB . IMT_TO_I ) I~consists of three corn-ponents : t ~ the lexiemt cm npiler of LMT  , t J a conversion component , and \[\] a database loader . 
The lexicon compiler is the component of the I , M'I " system which converts the EI , F into tire internal I , MT formats . In the internal form at all abbreviation conventions and default assumptions are already interpreted and expanded accordingly so that the complete lexical itf formation is represented explicitly  . The conversion component then converts the internall  , MT-format to database for rnat . The database loader generates the SQL-statements and updates the database  . It has to check first whether the hmnonym or sense to be inserted is identical with  , an homonym or sense stored in the database . 
If all the features of two homonyms or senses can be unified  , they are regarded to be identical and the already existing entry is merged with the converted entry  . In all other cases the homonym or sense is inserted into the database and merging has to be done by the lexicographers with COI  , O1 , A . 
2.5. LDBTODB
To supplement the lexical coverage of the LMT system  , a dictionary access module has been devel-opcd which allows realtime access  ( cf . 
Neff/McCord 1990 ) to Collins bilingual dictionaries awfilable as lexical databases  ( l , l)Bs ) 9 . The module includes a language pair independent shell component CO l  , 1  , XY and laoguage-speeific components , ' rod converts the lexical data of the Ll ) ll into the l , Ml ' - format , l , DllTOl ) ll is based on these programs . It consists of \[\] a pattern matching component , t J are stroet trringenmlmnent , a corrvel ' si one onll lofi errt , and t ~ the database loader of 1 , MTTOI ) B . 
With the pattern matcl fing cmnlmnent , those features ( subtrees ) that are to be converted are selected from the dictionary entries  . In printed dictionaries , features colnnlont O more th , ' mone subtree are of . 
ten factor cdout in order to save space . With there , structuring component , those features can be moved 1o the subtrees they logically belong to . 
The conversion ennlponent converts the restructured dictionary entry to database format  . The database loader of LMTTOI ) Bmerges the entry with a possibly already exit in gone in I  , OI , A-DB antigenerates the SQ l , -staternent so update the database . The converted entries can be revised by the lexicographers with COI  , OI , A . 
3 . Reusability of the LOLA system 3 . 1 Reusability of the tool components The first I , OI , A prototype wast leveloped to support lexicon development for the language pair German -English  . In the meantime , work has been started to make the toolusable for lexicon develop-rnent of the Fnglish-I  ) anish and EnglishSpanish I , MT systerns . As a positive result of the design principles described in section  3  . 1 . , the database scheme had to be modified only slightly with regard to prototype-specific differences I ?  . The values for "1 , ' m guage-specific attribute such as types of slots mad fillers will be defined for " the " new " languages Spanish and Danish and will be stored in the database  . Th cy can then bc used fi ~ r consistency checking ( only defined valucs can be updated in the database  )  . In COI , OI , A we had to take into account the homonym level on thctarget side  , where sIntile morpholexical processing and compiling phase  , I ~ , I . F entries are converted into an internal format ( cf . McCord ( forthcoming ): sect .  2 ) which represents file initial source and transfer analysis of an individual input word string  . 
9 An LI ) II provides a tree representation ftile hierarchical structure of tile dictionary entries  . The nodes of tile tree are labeled with attributes having specific values for each individual entry  . Thet , DB can be queried wilt the specialized query language LQL  ( cf . Neff/Byrd/Rizk 1988) . 
~o English-Daoish and EnglishSpanish use lexicon driven morphology for the target languages Spanish  ( cf . Rimonetat . 1991) and Danish , whereas German-Engllsh uses a rule-based target morphology for English  ( el ' , McCord/Wolff 1988) . 
ACRESDECOL\[NG-92 , NANTES , 2328 AUra "199 2514 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NA . ' CrES , Auo .  2328 , 1992 the features of Spanish , antil ) anish morphology have to be specitied . The programs that conver the databasentries into the timnat of the application lexicons and vice versa  (  \ ]  ) llfl'OI , MTmul I , MT_TODIt ) need generalization \] ilnr dei to achieve an abstraction from prototype-specific lea-lures of \]   , MT . 
3.2 Reusability of the lexical data
In order to meet the requirement of data independence  , the representation f lexical entries in the database is highly independent of that in the application lexicon  . In the database , the description of linguistic entities and their interrel at kms is given in a set of tables where specitic values air stored lor the characteristic attributes of each individual entity  . 
On these tables , different views can be defined for different types of users  , l ) iffer cnt programs ( like I ) B TO I , MT ) can extract exactly the attribute values needed furtheir respective appficatiou and convert them into each given format  . This way , from one and the same database several lexicons can be generated  , in which the same " lhaguistic world ' is structure differently or represented in a completely ditti~rent way  . The possibilities of reusability , are naturally defined and limited by th c number of the registered types of lexical information in the origin '  , d database . As far as the LOI , A database is concerned , the very detaile description of slot frames as well as the information about nmlti-words and the properties of their emnponents may be reused for other NLP applicatkms with one of the languages in wf lved  . The reusability of the transter intormation ( specitied in the transfer relations between the languages of a given language pair  ) for other MT systems depends highly on the respective MT approach  . As to the question of rcusabilty of the data in the LMT system " family "  , three different cascs have to be distinguished : 1  . lexical-data description given for a source language X is reused for another language pair having X as source language  ,  2 . lexical-data description given for a source language X is reused for another language pair having X as target language  ,  3 . lexical-data description given for a target language Y is reused for another language pair having Y as source language  . 
In the tirst two cases , reusability of tim lexical data of language X is very high  . In timttfird case , the description of Y as source 1 ; mguage may have to be more detailed in order to achievem ladequate syntactic analysis n  . New attributes or even new types of entities or relationships may be needed mad the database scheme will have to beet d ~ a need accordingly  . 
4. Outlook
Our long term goal is a multiling nal database , in wl fich the lexical knowledget breach language involved in the  1  , MT project is represented only once . 
Application lexicons lor I , MT prototypes with different language pairs arc generated by extracting tile requit vd informatiun from the database and by converting it into the respective l  , MT-format . 
Furthermore , tim tool is to be extended in such a way that it is not restricted to the construction of MT lexicons  , hutc~malso be used as a terminology work bench and thus support tim construction and m  ; dntenance of terminology . An integraed MT and tcrminulogy database would have the advantage that the Icxical knowledge encoded by terminn logists aud translators can be used by timtr  , ' ulslalk m system as w clh For refinement and completion of the description of the German language  , it is pl~mned to integrate lurt be ri~f furmation from available Gerinan NI  , I ' lexicons into the I , OI , A-DII . A basic proldem concerning this undertaking will bc to identify and to match the basic categories " entries "  , " homonyms " , " senses " , which arc detined in various Icxical resources according to diffbrent criteria  , only some n f which being transparent . With this erfurt , we hope to gain I hrther knowledge on the limits and possibilities concerning the reusability tff lexical data  . 
5. References
Barnett , B . , 11 . l , ehmann , M . Zneppritz (1986): " A Word Database for Natured I , anguage Processing " , l ' roceedings Ilth International Con\]erence on Computational Linguistics  COLlNG86 Augast 25th to 291h   ,  1986 , Bonn , Federal Republic of Germany , pp . 

Btumcnthalctal .   ( 1988 ) : " Wasist eigent lichein Verweis ?- Konzeptuell c Dateu modellier ungals Voraussctzung comput crgestiil zter Verwc is behand-lung  . ", Ilarras , G . ( ed . ): DasW Orlerbuch . Artikel und Verweisstrukturen . l ) fisseldor f 1988 . 
Byrd , R . , N . Calzolari , M . Chodorow , J . Klavans , M . S . Neff , O . Rizk ( 1987 ) : " Tools and Methods tbr Computat kmal I , exicography " , Computational Lin-guistics , 13 ,  34 . 
Byrd , R . J . , M . S . Neff " (1987): Word Smith User's Guide , Research Report , IBM Research Division , 
York townlleigbts , NY 10598.
Chen , Peter P . -S .   ( 1976 ) : " The lintity-Relationship Model-Towards a Unified View of Data "  , ACM Tratt ~ actioas on Database Sy . v t e t r t v 1, p p .  9-36 . 
Calzolmi , N . (1989): " The Development of l , arge Muno - and Bifingual I , exical Databases " , Contrib-ution to the IBM Europe Institute " Computer based iiii  . g . in a source-based translation system like LMT , tile information on whether a target slot is obligatory is not directly encoded in tile I  , MT transli ~ r-lexicon ; tile system controls target slot as slgnme at by tile presence of a corresponding source slot in a given input sentence and tile mapping relalion specilied within tim transfer lexicon entry  . 
On the source side , however , the feature of slot obligator lnessiused for purposes of analysis disambiguation  . 
A ~' ESDE COLING-92 . N^I,n " ~ S , 2328^ot)r1992515PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 Trar Lffation of Natural Language " , G ~ ua ' nisch-

Calzolari et al ( 1990 ) : " Computational Model of the Dictionary F . ntry-Preliminary P , epnrt ", Pro/ect
AQUILEX , Pisa.
IIeid , U . (1991): A short report on the EUROTRA-7
Study , Univ . of Stuttgart 99t.
MeCord , M . C .   ( 1989 ) " ANEw Version of the Machine'l'rans latkm System I  , MT " , Literary and
Linguistic Computing , 4, pp . 218-229.
McCord , M .  (' .   ( 1990 ) : " Slot Grammar : A System for Simpler Construction of Practical Naturall ~ tH-guage Grammars "  , In R . Studer ( ed . ) , Natural Language and Logic : International Scientific Symposium  , Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Springer Verlag , Berlin , pp .  \] 18-145 . 
MeCord , M . C . ( forthcoming ): " The Slot Grammar System " , In J . We de kind and Ch . P , ohrer ( ed . ), Unification in Grammar , to appear in MIT Press . 
McCord , M . C . , Wolff , S . (1988): The Lexicon and Morphology for LMT , a Prolog-based MT system , Research P , eport RC 13403 , IBM Research Division , York townlleights , NY 1 (1598 . 
Neff/Byrd/Rizk (1988) M . S . Neff , R . J . Byrd , O . 
A . P . izk : " Creating and Querying lierarcl ficall , cxical Data Bases " , l ' roceedings of the 2rid ACI . 
Conference on Applied NLP , 1988.
Neff , M . S . , M . C . McCord ( 1990 ) : " Acquiring Lcxicall ) at a From Machine-readable Dictionary Resources for Machine Translation "  , Proceedings of the 3rd Int . Conf . on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Languages  , pp .  8792 . Linguistics Research
Center , Univ . of Texas , Austin.
Storrer , A . (1990):"() berlegungen zur
Reprhsentation der Verb syntax in einer multifunktional-polyth coretise hen lexikalischen I  ) atenb . ' mk ", Sehaeder , B . /Rieger , B . ( ed . ): Lexikon und Lexikographie : ma . ~ chinell-maschine llgest at zt . 
Grundlagen Entwieklungen Produkte,
Hildesheim , pp . 120-133.
Ri\[non , M . , McCord , M . C . , Schwa U , U . , Martinez , P .   ( 1991 ) : " Advances in Maehiue Translation Research in IBM  , " Proceedings of MT Summit III , pp . 
1118, Washington D.C.
ACRESDECOLING-92, NANTES . 2328 AO~"1992516 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUC .  2328, 1992
