ATTITUDEEMERGENCE-ANE FFECTIVE IN TERPRETAT IONSCHEME 
FOR PERS UASIVE DISCOURSE
It OR . NG-JY HP . WU and STE VENL . LYTINEN
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
The University of Michigan
Ann Arbor , MI 48109. U.S.A.

Previous approaches have used a reasoning mechanism called belief percolation to determine the actual speech intent of the speaker  ( e . g . , ( Wilks and Bien 1979)) . 
In this paper , a similar mechanism , called attitude emergence , is proposed as a mechanism for inferring a speaker's attitude toward the propositions in a persuasive discourse  . It is sbown that in order to adequately interpret the statements in advertisements  , associations of relevant semantic information , through br * dg-lug inferences , are to be percolated up through attitude model contexts to enhance and calibrate the interpretation of statements  . A system called BUYER is being implemented to recognize speech intents through attitude emergence in the domain of food advertisements taken from Reader's Digest  . An example of BUYER's processing is also presented in the paper  . 
Introduction
One of the most significant characteristics of persuasive discourse is that it involves the expression of people's beliefs  , desires , preferences , etc . These beliefs , desires , and preferences constitute a model of mental a ~titudes  ( or , an attitude model ) which characterizes the mind of the speaker engaging in a persuasiw '  , discourse . An attitude model is important for figuring out what the speaker means  ; i . e . , his speechiutent . More specifically , often when the speaker expresses his beliefs , desires or preferences in persuasive discourse , he means to induce a reaction , in the forms of comparable mental attitudes , on the part of a hearer . For example , an expression of the speaker's belief can be intended to induce such an belief in the hearer  . However , in general , inferring the speech intent through attitud c model reasoning is complex  . For instance , in our domain of persuasive discourse- advertisements - a major statement may be followed by minor statements  , as demonstrated in the following passage . 
(1.1) Nabiscois great.
(1 . 2) It is nutritious whole wheat , (1 . 3) low in cholesterol and saturated fat , (1 . 4 hazplenty of fiber and vitamin . 
Arranged in this fashion , t be expression of the speaker's preference in (1 . 1 ) -Nabisco is great comes to be supported by statements  ( 1 . 2) through (1 . 4) . 
This makes tile acceptance of (1 . 1) as the heater's own much more compelling , intending to induce in the hearer the same preference x pressed in  ( 1 . 1) . Althought ills explanation sounds intuitively simple and correct  , the question remains : how do statements such as ( 1 . 2) to (1 . 4) , which are oil the surface ~" disjoint " expressions of the speaker's belief  , come to have a real psychological impact on the hearer ? Some sort of reasoning must have been employed to bridge them with  ( 1 . 1) and to produce the persuasiv effects . 
Previously , model-based reasoning has been investigate ( \[ for many tasks , such as belief ascription and metaphor understanding  ( Ballim et al 1991 )  , logical reasoning ( Dinsmore 1987) , and natural anguage understanding in general ( Faueonnier 1985 )  . One previous approach to attitude model reasoning concentrates exactly on issues of inferring speech intents  . As discussed concisely in ( Wilks and Bien 1979) , the statement " Frank is coming tomorrow " can be interpreted in many ways  , depending on the context . For instance , if the hearer believes that the speaker believes that Frank is hostile to the hearer  , and the hearer hasuo personal knowledge about Frank  , then this statement might be interpreted as a threat to the hearer  . 
To account for different possible interpretations of statements like these  , Wilks el al . propose an altitude percolatiou mechanism , in which a statement is pushed down to the frame of the system's belief to create the attitude context-the system's belief of the speaker's belief  . Since in this more specific context , the following statements are simultaneously present I : Frank comes tomorrow and Frank is hostile to the system  . Thus , tile system can infer that Frank may harm the system  , which in turn , allows the system to interpre the original statement ms a threat to itself  . 
In our domain of advertisement persuasive disconrse ~ much fewer facts arc privately known compared to what are mutually known  2  . Therefore , it is argued ~ If tile system has person M knowledge otherwise about Frank  , then this may affect the reasoning proces , q . 
2It is also an essential criteria for " good " advertisements to adheret of a shionable viewpoints  . 
AC1-ESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt ~ r1992911 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , Auo .  2328 . 1992 that the pushdowa operation , which investigates into the personal knowledge about one another  , will be limited . Instead , in this paper , a more relevant mecha . 
nism , called attitude emergence , is investigated . It is a more conlprehensive treatme Tit of attitudel node ls~nti--lizing mutually known semantic and world knowledge to convey speech intent  , a . sobserved in the interpretation of our earlier example  . More specitically , attitude models for statements are eonstnmted , auda ~ q similated through bridging inferences based on mntual knowledge  . The semantic association resulting flor a as s in f i -lation then gets percolated up along attitude model contexts so that the proper interpretation of speech intent is recognized  . This attitude emergence mechanism is being implemented in a system called BUYEI ~  , which understands food advertisements taken fl'om l geader's Digest  . A corpus of 129 advert is ( mmnts has been collected . Part of the ads are used R ) r constructing tile system , while the rest of them are used to verify the generality of BUYI'  ; ll . 's knowledge base . In this papm , we present an examl ) le of 1111 Yl , 2d , processing onenf the seads . 
The basic framework of at ttil ; ude emergence As observed above , the recognition of speech intent in persuasive discourse is rather com j  ) lex . Various sorts of mutual knowledgentay be employed in bridging the statements and bringing out the speech intents  . In ( Wn and Lytinen 1991), we proposed a three . ste procedure of attitud emergence : Step 1: Construct tile initial altitude model ( or A-model )  . 
Step 2: Assimilate the successive statements cnherently into one A-model  ( if possible ) antire cognize the semantic a . qsociation Imtweentile models . 
Step 3: Percolate upwards & tOltgA-model contexto effect attitude hauge due to the semantic association recognized in Step  2  . 
A-models are rceursive structures of infi ) rmation with attitude contexts , each layerel Milch consists of an agent and an attitude he holds toward the deeper h wel information  . A simple passag ; e is analyze dill ( Wu and
I , ytinen 1991), (2.1) Peter loves antique cars.
(2.2) His favorite model is tile 1887I ) ury ca.
Ti reevolution fA- . models through this three-step ro-cedure can be summarized as follows : Attile end of Stepl  ( see Fig .  1) , a , mA-model is coastructed consisting of an attitude context  ( Reporti ; pcak(~r . . . ) , which eml ) eds another attitude context ? ( Love Peter . . . ), which contains ~, . * lobject antique . ea . k's . Note that , these linear R)rmulam'c just , shorthand sik ) rulod-els . We take thai , ill implmnent at in n , models are ibr-mulaplus indexing ; roden capsulation , a stile boxes ill Fig . I is intended to capture : the indice , ~ on agents are called S-boxes and on attitude ~ qA -boxes  . 
l' ; a chattitude context creates it ' ~ oegn environnient R  ) rsimulative reasoning ( Wilks and llavtley 1990 )  ,   . FaTV_A ? . \[--V&-~ .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Antique eara \]
Figure 1: The initial attitude model after (2 . 1) h&s been processed . 
.....~,.ak--......
I . ,'igure 2: The attitude model and reasoning when ( 2 . 2) is assimilated . 
which involves only entities with comparable attitude  , q tatus . In turn , simulative reasoning call produce re-suits app\ ] icable to the attitude context where it takes place  , and may sometimes affect related contexts , e . g . , causing re-Evaluation of the attitude in the embedding attitude contexts  . Thus , illStep2, while statement (2 . 2) is being assimilated with statement (2 . 1) , some reasoning takes place marked as ( A ) , ( B ) and tO ) in
Fig . 2.
At point ( A ) , an ISA semantic relation is recognized between " antique_cars " and  "1887_Duryea " in the semantic space whicb ,   , as depicted as orthogonal to attitude space in Fig  .  2 , stores attitude-independent semantic information . Ill order to trigger emergence of more attitude related information  , the recognition of the L qoA relation is percolated up a long layers of e ~ t t it  . u de contexts to reachtile ( Report Speaker . . . ) context , where ( B ) and ( C ) occur . At points ( B ) and ( C ), ~' ~ ta ~, emeuts (2 . 2) and (2 . 1) are found to be related ; in particular , tile ( Report Speaker . . . ) context of (2 . 2) is calibrated to be " evidential " ( to (2 . 1)), w bile , that of (2 . 1) to be " snl ) l ) orted " ( by (2 . 2)) . " lhat ( B ) and ( C ) occur is due to tile following world knowledge ( WKI ) :  , '\~: lis)IJ()I . INi1-97, I<IAitii ~ s,2328 Ao()r 1992 . 9I2Pltoc . OFCOLING . 92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,  1992  ( Ru = alng ~ )   ( R ~ lng = ( 84 )  ~  p4ar llti~dInAIBlud~=apm~e Figure 3: The two attitude ruodels for the readings of $ I . 
If the speaker provides more detailed information about a clMm  ( Y ) in a statement ( X ) Then Y is " supported " by " evidence " X and becomes more believable As demonstrated by  ( A )  -  ( C )  , semantic association emerges from embedded attitude contexts to calibrate the attitude in higher contexts - i  . e . , how attitude emergence happens . 
In this simple example , the attitude emergence mechanism has involved , nonetheless , a large amount of knowledge . This knowledge is briefly reviewed below . Yet , more sophisticated reasoning is required to process realworld ads  ( see below )  . First , there is knowledge concerning A-model construction based on the following mapping rules  :   ( 1 ) Sentence types to A-boxes , e . g , a declarative sentence type maps into a belief ; (2) Attitude verbs to A-boxes , e . g . , " loves " into a preference ; (3) Evaluative predicates to A-boxes , e . g . , " favorite " into a preference ; (4) Adverbs to A-models , e . g . , " certainly " into a belief ; (5) Cue phrases to A-models , " it is time that " into a desire ( recommendation )  . 
Secondly , there is knowledge concerning A-model assimilation and bridging inferences  . For example , in passage (2) , the expression " his favorite model " is resolved through the following three separate bridging inference steps :  1  . That " his " refers totldngs pertinent to Peter . 
2 . That " favorite " is a nev Muative predicate translated into a " prefer " attitude box  . 
3. That cars have models.
For step (1) , a focusing mechanisnr is required to locate the S -box-Peter  , since a pronominal expression usually ( but not always ) refers to some object in the focus . 
For step (2) , the A-model helps to guide the resolution filrther into the most relevant Abox  ; in other words , an A-model itself carl serve as a marker to find the most relevant A-model earlier in tile discourse  . For step (3) , a basic semantic association occurs to recognize pos ~ sit de semantic relations  . In summary , the resolution of the expression " his favorite model  , " and similarly for all other expressions , is achieved by bridging inferences which synthesize many knowledge sources  , including focusing , A-models themselves , and semantic association . 
A realworld example from BUYER.
In this section , a realworld advertisement is presented to demonstrate the application of attitude emergence in processing persuasive discourse  . As discussed above , a simple version of A-model construction and assimilation has to be extended to include more general world knowledge  . The following a d , which BUYER has processed , demonstrates this . 
The Folger sad.
SI . l . syour decaffeinated ~ s dark as ours ?$2 . Star ~ with one tea spoon of both . 
$3 . Hut just be c&tl set hean munts are cquaJ does n ' ~ t : lean the results w ~ l lhe  . 
$4. Mount , ~ t ~ Grown ~ blgersdark , sparkling
Crystals are the dilt ~ reJtce.
S6 . So dark a 3~drich , shouldn't you switch ? Intile process of understanding this ad  , tim system has to tigure out many t bings , for example : ls S1 a question or a prompt fursuggesting an action ( for tile hearer to perform ) ? Is $ 2 , given tile proper interpretation of $1 , an order or a recommendation ; Does $3 affect the status of tile at t ii . udex pressed in 817 and so on . In order to answer these questions concerning speech in t cuts  , tile attltude model of each statement h ~ to go through more involved calibration and enhancement tban the simple version presented in the previous section  . First , the reading of statement 5' I is ambiguous . It could mean that the speaker wants the hearer to inform him as to whetber the bearer's decaffeinate disas darka ~ sours  . Or , it can have another reading : the speaker wants the hearer to know whether the hearer's decaffein atcdisms dark as ours  . 
The latter reading is inferred by the following world knowledge  ( WK2 ) ~: If the advertiser already knows everything about his products  ( which is reasonable to assume )  , Then a questio ~ concerning the product is actually all intention to i u  . \[orm . 
The two possible attitude models for the two readings of  $1 are depicted in Fig .  3 . Note that the two variables el and el'st and for tile different events specified by  ( Inform-whether Hearer . . . ) and ( Know-whether Hearer . . . ), respectively . The two events are indexed by their event types , as demonstrated by the ovals in the boxes in Fig .  3 . Then , when $2 is processed , from its sentence type ( imperative ) , it is inferred that its attitude context is compatible witll both readiugs of  $1  , 3 For simplicity and readability , we represent BUYER's knowledge in this and following examples as English-like rules  . 
AcI~:SDE COLING-92 , Nntcn~s , 2328 ^ o\[rr 1992 913 I ) r to c . or COLING-92, NANTES , AU ~ .  2328 ,  1992  ( 83 ) aaa conditional In Attitude Sp~ce\[P1 )  ; The arr lour ~ t ~ are equal , Q1): Tim resut bs are riot equal . 
Figure 4: The attitude models of tim conditional $3  . 
i . e . , ( WantSpeaker ( PHearer . . . )) . Hence , the semantic association begins to emerge when the events  e2  , specified as " start witbone tea spoon of both , " and elorel'(see Fig . 3) are being assimilated . The coherence reasoning component of BUYER .   ( Wu and Lytinen 1990 ) is able to recognize the following Enable coherence relation : That tile hearer starts with one temspoon of both kinds of coffee can enable that hcknows which coffee is better  . 
That is , the action e2suggested in $2 is an e ~: perirnent to find out something . The choice between el and el ~ is now clear , due to the following world knowledge ( WE3 ) : If an agent has a goal to find out something about X  , Then he can perform an experiment with X . 
Since eL'-(Know-whetl ) erttearer . . . ) -- is acquired as a goal for the hearer according to Reading  2  , el ' and hence , Reading 2 is determined as the speech intent . 
Then , when $3 is processed , it logically means : It is ) lot the case that Plimplies Q1 . 
where P1 stands for-the amounts are equal ; Ql the results are equal . The corm nonsense logical reasoning employed in constructing the attitude model of  $3 proceeds ms follows : assume P1 is a fact/observation , should we assmne QI or ~ Ql according PFI ? If Q1 is assumed , then it produces : P1 implies Qt , which wo nk l be contradictory . So , the only alternative is to choose Q1 . The result is then the attitude model shown in Fig  .  4 . Following attitude percolation , the attitude model of Fig . 4 is pushed down into the one in Fig . 3 for t ? ~ eading 2 , creating the attitude context of ( Want Speaker ( Believe Hearer . . . )) . At this point , BUYER is able to reason that Pl-the amounts are equal-is a fact  , by resolving " the amounts " to " the amounts of coffee used in  e27' Given that the conditional PF1 has a satisfying antecedent , he conseqnent ~ QI ( or " the results are noteqnal " ) is derived as a fact . Note that , similar to how " tile amounts " is resolved , " the results " would be resolved ms " the results in the experiments with the two coffees  . " Next , when $4 is processed , by pushing down and resolving " the difference " to " the difference between the resnlts in the experimellt  , " it is recognized tl ~ at $4 issupl ) orting the implicit speech intent made in $3- . 
5 3: The speaker claims that the results of Yar ~ florent  .   ,   $5: Tile speaker molivates the use S~:t ~ Ot feooxpepa0kOr~na  ~  to~eKrl~0~  . ~ fcofr Fl~cl ~ mo0ffeo , dnawing = ppert $4: The apeaker gives evidence supporting the claim . 
$1: The speaker wants the hearer to KnowX.
Figure 5: The statements of the Folgers adin view of their attitude models  . 
the speaker wants the hearer to believe that t be results of the experiments are not equal  . This is due to the following world knowledge ( WK4 ) : If the speaker gives the physical cause of a consequence statement  , Then the consequence statement becomes more believable  . 
Thus , the intended belief that tim results are not equal is further enhanced  . Finally ,  $5 , like 83 , is not a literal conditional statement . It logically means :
P ~ implies should ?(- , Q2 ) where P7 is that Folgers is so dark and rich and Q2  , switch to Folgers . However , the intended meaning is , obviously-switch to Folgers . The derivation hinges on the following " dogma " about " abnormal vs  . nor-real states ": ( 1 ) Unfamiliar external states may be abnormal ;   ( 2 ) If unknown external states are indeed abnormal , people query about them using " should X ?' ; (3) Abnormal states are to be corrected . Due to (1)-(3) , the intended meaning can be derived , since ~ Q2 is abnormal and to be corrected ; in addition , Pz is also a fact . Fig .   5 summarize stim speech intents reasoned by attitude emergence for the Folgers ad : 
Related work
Work on belief percolation (( Wilks and Bien 1979) , ( Wilk ~ and Bien 1983) , ( Wilks and Ballim 1987) ,   ( Hal-lira et al 1991 ) ) has strongly inspired our work . flow-ever , n ~ lost of this work concentrates on one single operation of attitude/belief percolation  . -the " pushdown " operation . Although this operation is important for in -vestigative reasoning and assimilating attitude models  , effects on attitude models themselves due to attitude percolation are more important for our domain of per-snasive disconrse  . Thus , attitude emergence stands as a more relevant mechanism to reason about persuasive speech intent  . Moreover , the proposed thretr-step r~cedure for computing attitude emergence proves to be a general framework for recognizing speech intents  . 
The mapping rules proposed in ( Hinkelman and Allen 1989 )  , as well as those in ( Gerlach and Sprenger 1988) , are similar to the attitude model construction rules  , while deeper reasoning may underlie some of Acl T . st)ECOL1 NG-92 , NA/VIq!S , 2328 AOt '; r19929 l4I'ROC . Ol : COLING-92 . NANTES . AUG . 2328, 1992 their rules , e . g . , the interpretation of should?('~Q ~) as Q2 , as we have done to ours . Ill ( Hiukelman and Allen 1989) , they also proposed plan-recognition to further identify the speech intent  . However , we believe that in persuasive discourse , identifying speech intent through A-models can be done more locally using coherence and bridging inferences  . In this sense , our approach is closer to those proposed in ( Cohen 1987 ) and ( Mann and Thompson 1988 )  , while ( Cohen 1987 ) considered only support relations and ( Mann and Thompson 1988 ) remained as a descriptive theory , and both did not consider A-models as essential lot inferring speech intent  . 
A-models also arc somewhat similar to model -theoretical approaches to semantics  . While theories of the more formal kind--e . g , Discourse Represen-talional Theory ( DRT )   ( Kamps 1981 ) -- and of then rore cognitive-e . g . , Mental Spaces ( Fauconnier 1985 ) -emphasize the fundamental issues of reference and presupposition  , attitude mergences es application of model reasoning to recognize speech intents  . These also demonstrate hatmental attitude serve as only one  ( though important ) way to organize information . 
There are other ways information should be organized  . 
I , brexample , our formulation of conditionals ( for $3 ) is organized not according to attitudes , but principles studied in DRT and mental spaces . 
Conclusion and future work
In this paper , a mechanism called attitude mergence is discussed  . The basic framework of attitude emergence , which consists of attitude model construction , assimilation , and effects propagation , was first proposed in ( Wu and Lytinen 1991 ) with limited operations . The mechanism is filrther in r proved aud extended to recognize more indirect speech in persuasive discourse  , by adding other common sense and logical reasoning  . The generality of attitude emergence is demonstrated by a realworld ad which BUYER has proce ~ ed  . BUYER is the computer implementation fattitude mergence and is implented as a rule-based system which currently has  348 rules organized in 1O problem-solving modules . These problem-solving modules are organized in a way that rules are both forward-and backward -chained  , depending tim deductive and abduetive nature of the rules  , respectively , and allows efficient backtracking . 
One future work of attitude emergence lies on tile further systematization the dynamics of attitude models  . Only the force aspect of a statement is present in the current formulation  . A tidier formulation of attitude dynamics should include both force and counterforce  , reflecting the enforcement and the resistance toward an expressed attitude  . For example , in Folger sad , the " counterforce " induced by $2 -- the inertia of the hearer not to be told what to do-can he over-corned by the  ( attracting ) force expressed in $1 -the speaker wants the hearer to know something important - and the force due to the common knowledge that the experimenturged ill  $2 can enable the attainment of such knowledge . Relating statements opsychological forces arc steps toward explaining the psychological reality of persuasive force and pressure  . Along this line , it is found that the work on " force dynamics " proposed in  ( Tahny 1988 ) is highly relevant . We are currently looking into the relation between the two  . 
Referencestlallim , A ; Wilks , Y . ; and Barnden , J .  1991 . Beliefascription , metaphor , and inteitsional identification . Cognitive
Science 15: 133171.
Cohen , R .  1987 . Analyzing the structure of argumentative discourse  . Computational Liguistlcs 13: 11-23 . 
l ) in smore , J .  1987 . Mental spaces from a functional per~spective . Cognitive Science 11:1-12 . 
Fauconnier , G .  1985 . Mental spaces . The MIT Press,
Cambridge , MA.
Gerlach , M . and Sprenger pM .  1988 . Semantic interpretation of pragmatic clues : Connective  , modal verbs , and indirect speech acts . In Proceddings of the Eleventh Inter . 
national Conference on Computational Linguistics .  191 195 . 
ltinkelman , E . and Allen , J .  1989 . Two constraints on speech act ambiguity . In Proceedings of the Twenty See . 
enth Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics . 212-219.
Kamps , H .  1981 . A theory of truth and semantic representation . In Groenendijk , J . ; Janssen , T . ; and Stokhof , M . , editors 1981 , Formal methods in the studyo\] language . 
Mathematish Centrum , Amsterdam . 277-322.
Mann , W . and Thompson , S .  1988 . Rhetorical structure theory : q bward a functional theory of text organization  . 
Text 8: 243-281.
q'almy , L .  1988 . Force dynamics in language and cognition . 
Cognitive Science 12:49100.
Wilks , Y . and Ballim , A .  1987 . Multiple agents and heuristic ascription of belief  , htProceedings of the Tenthhater-natior ~ alJoint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  .  118-124 . 
Wilks , Y . and Bien , J .  1979 . Speech acts and multiple environments . In Proceedings of the Sith International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  . 
Wilks , Y . and Bien , J .  1983 . Beliefs , points of view and multiple environments . Cognitive Sclence 8: 120-146 . 
Wilks , Y . and Hartley , A .  1990 . Belief ascription and model generative reasoning : joining two paradigms to a robust parser of messages  . In The 1990 DARPA Workshop .  219-239 . 
Wu , HJ . and Lytinen , S .  1990 . Coherence reasoning in persuasive discourse . In Proceedings o\[the Twelfth Conference of the Cognitive Science Society  , Cambridge , Massachusetts .  503-510 . 
Wu , It-J . and Lytinen , S .  1991 . Attitude and coherence reazoning in persuasive discourse  . In Proceedings of the 1991 AAA 1 Spring Symposium on Atyumentation ad Be-lie\] , Stanford , California . 
AL'rF . SDECOLING . .92, NANTES , 2328 ^ ot"rr 1992 9 1 5 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , Aua .  2328, 1992
