HIERARCHIC ALLEXICAL STRUCTURE AND INTERPRETIVE
MAPPINGIN MACHINE TRANS LATION
Teruko Mitamura Eric H . Nyberg HI
Center for Machine Translation Center for Mach in e Translation 
Carnegie Mellon University Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh , PA 15213 USA Pittsburgh , PA 15213 USA
teruko@cs.cmu.eduehn@cs.cmu.edu

Large-scale knowledge-based machine translation require significant amounts of lexical knowledge in order to map syntactic structures to conceptual structures  . Tfi is paper presents a framework in which lexical knowledge is separated into different levels of representation  , which are arranged in a hierarchical model based on principles of knowledge representation ad lexical semantics  . The proposed methodology is language-independent , ad has been used to organize lexical knowledge for both English and Japanese  . 
1 Introduction
The basic premise of knowledge-based machine translation is that accurate  , high-quality ranslation requires a complete semantic interpretation f the input text  ( Carbonell and Tomita ,  1987) . Therefore , the analysis and generation components of a know lodge-based MT system must have at least he following functional parts : a grammar for the language  , a lexicon for the language , a shared set of domain concepts , and rules that map syntactic structures onto semantic structures  ( or vice versa for generation )  . 
.The goal of our work has been to develop a methodology for the hierarchical organization f lexical knowledge  ( lexical entries and mapping rules ) for knowledge-based MT ( Goodman and Nirenburg , 1991; Mitamura ,  1989) . Interpretive Mapping refers to the relationship between predicate conceptual structures and syntactic structures  , and involves two kinds of processes : one is a mapping between grammatical fnnctions  ( e . g . , subject , object ) and semantic roles ( e . g . , agent , theme ); the other is a mapping between words ( e . g . , naguru ' hit ') and domain concepts ( e . g . , * HIT) . 
We have developed a shared hierarchical structure for lexical knowledge which can capture significant linguistic generalizations  , eliminate rexlundancy , and facilitate both knowledge acquisition and efficient processing  . We have implemented our hierarchy using Franae Kit  , an AI knowledge representation language that supports frames and multiple inher-fiance  ( Nyberg ,  1988) . 
Our system demonstrates rite integration of a linguistic for-realism with a frame-based knowledge representation system  . 
We have analyzed a large corpus of Japanese verbs and created a set of lexical frames  , mapping rules , and an inheritance hierarchy for use in a working translation system  . 
2 Linguistic Motivation
Our methodology is based in part on recent work in lexical semantics  ( Jackendoff 1983 , 1987; Levin , B .  1985 ,  1987 , 1989; Hale and Keyser 1986; Fukui , Miyagawa ,   , and Tenny 1985; Rappaport and Levin , B .  1986) . The field of lexical semantics i concerned with the representation of syntactically relevant aspects of word meaning  , especially the properties of argument-taking words like verbs  . 
Many researchers have noticed that semantically similar predicates tend to be syntactically similar  , too . B . Levin (1987 ,  1989 ) examines many systematic semantic-syntactic correspondences  , including linking regularities and transitivity alternations  . Linking refers to associations between semantic arguments and grammatical relations  . Common cor-respondenees between semantic arguments and grammatical relations are called linking regularities  . 
2.1 Linking and Alternation
For example , in the causative use of break ( e . g . , John broke the vase ) , the subject John is linked to the agent semantic role  , and the object vase maps to the theme semantic role  . Break can be classified as a change-of-state verb  , and the same pattern is observed in the causative use of other change-of-state verbs  , such as crack and melt . Moreover , it is important to note that this pattern also holds for other classes of verbs  ( e . g . , change-of-possession verbs like give ) . 
It is also the case that the same verb can have more than one way of linking syntactic functions with semantic roles  . 
These different linkings are called valency alternations  , which include both transitivity alternations and alternate linkings of semantic arguments with syntax  . 
For example , break can also appear in sentences like The vase broke  , where the verb assigns the theme semantic role to the syntactic subject  . This is in contrast to the causative use of break  , described above , where file verb assigns the agent semantic role to the syntactic subject and a theme se-ACRES OE  COLING-92  . N ^ wrEs , 2328 ho~r1992l254 Pgoc . oF COLING-92, NANTES , AUG . 2328,1992 mantic role to the syntactic object . This alternation , known as the Causative/lnchoative altrnation , is also associated with change-of-position verbs like drop  ( John dropped the ball vs . 
The ball dropped ) , change-of-psychological-state verbs like worry ( John worried vs . Billworried John ), etc . ( B . Levin , 1989) . 
With some verbs , rite mapping of one syntactic function may remain constant while others alternate  . For example , in the sentence John cut the meat , the patient semantic role is assigned to the syntactic object  ; in John cut at the meat , tile goal semantic role is assigned to the prepositional object  . 
In both sentences , the agent semantic role is assigned to the syntactic subject  . 
Classes of verbs which undergo the same alternation tend to be semantically similar  . Verbs like hack and slash , which belong to the same verb class as cut , undergotile same alternation mentioned above . However , semantically different verbs like break do not exhibit hest one alternation :  ( I ) a . He broke the cup . 
b . * He broke at the cup.
Linking regularities and transitivity alternations are used to identify the semantic roles of arguments and the semantic classes of verbs  . That is , an argument which displays the same linking regularities a another argument might be assigned the same thematic role  , and verbs which have the same transitivity alternations can be placed in the same class  . 
Transitivity alternations in English are marked in various ways  . Many of them involve the alternation of an argument between object add prepositional phrase  . In Japanese , however . valency alternations ,   ( including transitivity alternatious ) are usually indicated by different case markers lx3rne by the argmnents of the verb . Every noun phrase in Japanese is marked postpositionally by a particle  , such as ga , o , ni , and de . These markers indicate tile case or other grammatical fanction of the nominals they are associated with  . 
For example , the o/dealternation appears with verbs like o yogu  ( swim )  , sanposuru ( rake a walk ) , and hashir u(run ) < (2) a , Tarogakawaoo yoida ~ Taroswam downther iver ' b  . Tarogaka wa deo yoida ~ Taros wam in the river  '   2  . 2 Lexical Mapping Another part of building a lexical semantic representation is to for a mlate links from lexical items to conceptual meanings  ; these links are called lcxical mappings . Since the semantic properties of relations and objects  ( which are crucial in stating subcategorization restrictions  ) reside most naturally in a semantic domain model , it is necessary for a system to integrate the lexical level and the domain model so that semantic restrictions can be satisfie during parsing and generation  . 
In some cases , a lexical item may be linked to more than just a semantic head  . For exmnple , in the sentence The pencilrolled off the table , the meaning of roll must be repre-iF or further detail and examples  , see ( Mitamura ,  1989) . 
seated by both a semantic head ( e . g . , * MOVE ) and a semantic modifier indicating the manner of motion  ( e . g . , ( manner * ROTATION )) 2 . As a result , lexical mapping may also require semantic feature assignment  . 
2.3 Summary
The motivation for our work has been the following set of observations  , drawn from the linguistic phenontenamentioned in this section  . An appropriatelxical representation must be able to represent tile following : ? The linking of a particuhu " syutactic function with a particular semantic role  ; ? A set of linking rules that indicate a partian larlternation  ; ? A group of alternations that capture the general behavior of a class of verbs  ; ? An explicit representation fverb classes , to which particular lexical items may be linked ;   . A set of lexical items , which contain both links to verb classes and links to semantic oncepts in the domain conceptual hierarchy  . 
3 The Lexical Hierarchy
Our lexical hierarchy has five levels of representation  , each corresponding to a linguistically meaningful nit of structure :  ( 1 ) Mapping Rule Frames , which capture a particular correspondence between a syntactic function and a semantic role  ; (2) Mapping Pattern Franes , which capture a particular set of mapping rules , which correspond to one way of linking the arguments of a particular verb  ; (3) Mapping " b/p c Frames , which capture tile set of alternations ( mapping patterns ) al-luwed by a particular class of verbs ; (4) Verb Class Frames . in which the generalization in verb linking behavior is captured  ; (5) Lcxical Frames , in which tmrtic nlar lexical items ( verbs ) are represented as frames which are linked both to appropriate verb class frames and to conceptual frames in the donm in concept hierarchy  . 
Figure 1 illustrates the inheritance rlations between mapping rules  , mapping patterns , mapping types , verb classes , aml lexical frames in English . 
3.1 Mapping Rule Frames
The nmpping rule frames each map one grammatical function  , such as subject or object , onto a semantic role , such as agent or theme . Each mapping rule is specified in a separate frame  , as in the lollowing : a .   ( ~agent-subj-mapping ( : agent subj )   ) b . (* theme-obj-mapping (: theme obj )) c .   ( * theme-subj-mapping ( : theme subj )   )   2This is similar to the nouon of conflation fiscussed by " litlrny  ( 1985 )  . 
Ac'lxs DECOLING-92 , NANTiS , 2328 AOUI 1992I255 PROC . OFCOLIN(i-92, NANTES . AUO .  2328, 1992 3 . 2 Mapping Pattern Frames The mapping pattern frames represent particular bundles of mapping rules  . For example , a mapping pattern frame which contains the agent -subject mapping and the theme-object mapping represents one mapping pattern  , whereas a frame which contains just the theme -subject mapping represents  . another mapping pattern 3 ( of . Figure 1) . 
Syntactic on straint rules can be written in a mapping pattern frame to indicate that the associated mapping rnles can apply only when these constraints are satisfied  . Some exam-pies of mapping pattern frames are shown below :  ( * mapping-pattern l ( syntactic-constraint ( passive =- )   )   ( contain * theme--obj-mapping*agent-subj -mapping  )   )   ( * mapping-pattern 2 ( syntactic-constraint ( passive =- )   )   ( contain * the me-subj-mapping )   ) The frame * mapping-pattern I captures one way of mapping the syntactic argument of a verb  . The subject is mapped to the semantic agent and the object is mapped to the semantic theme  . The *1napping-pattern2 frame indicates a mapping where the verb has one argument  , the subject , and maps the subject o the semantic agent . 
3.3 Mapping Type Frames
Mapping type frames contain sets of mapping rule patterns  , and have the ability to capture both transitivity alternations in English and case alternations iu Japanese  ( Mi-~uura ,  1989) . The two mapping patterns we mentioned earlier ,  1 ) the agent-subject and the theme-object mapping , and 2) the theme-subject mapping , can be generalized as the causative-inchoative verb mapping type  . In Figure 1 , the causative-inchoative alternation is represented by * causative-inchoative  , hi Japanese , the alternation between an oblique argument with particle o and an oblique argume at with particle de is captured by * obl-o/obl-de  . 
An example of a mapping type frame is shown below :   ( * causative-inchoative ( contain * mapping-patternl * mapping-patte rn2   )   ) The * causative-incl to a tive frame contains two mapping pattern frames  , indicated by a contain link that includes * mapping-patterul and *  mapping-patteru2  . 
3This is similar to the notkm of lexicalforms in lexical mappi  . g theory ( nresnanid Kanerva ,  1989) , but fire difference is that we incorporate case assignment tule ~ into argument m spping nlles to make the mapping ao  . estep operatitx ~ for use in generating or par~ing sentences  . In LFG , case zarets signed in each lexical entry through grammatical encoding theory  , which identifies ~ t . d assigns an appropriate ease for t grammatic all ' unctionill each lexie a lealtry  . 
3.4 Verb Class Frames
Verb class frames generalize over verbs with a common core sense and common syntactic behavior  , Some example verb class frames ( * verbs-of-breaking , * motion-path-verbs ) are il-lu strate A in Figure 1 . The * verbs-of-breaking frame has an is a link to the * causative-inchoative mapping type  , indicating that verbs in the * verbs-of-breaking class can undergo the causative-inchoative alternation  . 
3.5 Lexical Frames
Lexical frames represent the language-dependent lexicon  , and include pointers to corresponding conceptual frames  . These frames also have is a relations which link them to verb class frames  , which are organized hierarchically according to the particular language  , The SEMANTICS slot in the lexical frame contains ref-ereaces to the concept tml frames associated with the lexical item  . Particular restrictions on the meaning of the lexical item are captured by semantic role or feature assignment rules that may appear along with each SEMANTICS pointer  . 
For example , the SEMANTICS slot shown below for the verb roll points to the conceptual frame * MOVE  . Included with the pointer to * MOVE is an assignment rule which indicates that the manner of * MOVE must have the meaning indicated by the conceptual frame * ROTATION  . The * roll-1 frame has an isa relation to the verb class frame  , * motion-verbs . 
(*rol l - i  isa * mot ion - verbs )   ( semantics ( * MOVE ( : manner=*ROTATION )   )   )   ) More examples of lexical frames are shown in Figures  1  . 
I11 Figure 1 , * break-1 is a lexical frame , corresponding to the semantic notion * BREA ' K , which is a member of the * verbs-of-breaking verb class  . 
4 The Domain Conceptual Hierarchy
Conceptual frames represent knowledge of the world that is language-independent  , lbrexample , general concepts such as ? EVENT and * PHYSICAL -OBJECT  , as well as more specific concepts , like * BREAK and * SWIM4 . Conceptual frames are organized hierarchically using inheritance rlations  . Selec?tional restrictions can be specified in conceptual frames  , and appear as the fillers of semantic role slots . 
5 Multiple Inheritance and Interpretive
Mapping in Machine Translation
Oar operational goals in constructing this hierarchy and its inheritance relations include the following : '* An asterisk prefix is used to indicate frame names  . Uppercase frame names ( e , g , , * BREAK ) indicate conceptual frames . Lower ease is used for all other frame names ( e . g , , lexical frames , veal ) class frames , etc . ) . 
ACTESDECOLING-92 , NAtZI'eso 2328 AOL'T 1992 1256 PROC . OFCOLING-92 , NANTES , AUO ,  2328 , 1992 Mapping (* m-zu) . al*~rul~(*a-rt*Im3~u~o~:,g,~t . ttb :)) (: tlwm ~9) 1 (: tlw , ~  , ub3)) conlai ~ co ~ aint ? ? ~ laink ~ ap~h30( , l_lmtt ~ rnI ( * ml~tt *= ~ Pallems ( oontab ~* = xattal ( c ~ nt at n * m-ra / . ~3))/ contain ,/1-'" g~c . ontain
M~PP~O * ~ uut lv . .-la~eholtiw \[ yp~s o0~tain ~ m=i~ttto~nl ~-~ tt , xn2)) l is a
Vopb (* vl rbl-o ?- bzaakin (/
Classosim-a * caul ~ tivo-Inchoat ? v4)) l . oxi Cal ( * br~k-I ( * ~ m ~-% Frafr~s ( m~ntl ~* 14PX . tl )   ( ~mumt ? ~* cl~t ~ ( ) Figure 1: Lexieal Hierarchy Example : English ? Support of rapid  , straightforward acquisition of large amounts of texical knowledge in an interactive environ ~ meat  ; ? Elimination of unuecessary ( and costly ) redundancy in the representation flexical knowledge  . 
5.1 Efficient Knowledge Aequisitinn
Productivity in the kuowledge acquisition task is greatly ea-hance x l by this hierarchical methodology  . Rather than exliting an ASCII file containing rednndant mapping rule definitions for each lexical entry  , the per sou entering new lexical concepts utilizes a  2-dimensional browsing and editing tool to add new knowledge to the system  ( Kaufinann ,  1991) . 
Once the initial mapping rules , alternations attd verb classes are specified , the user can easily link new lexical frames to existing verb classes  , perhaps refining some of the knowledge in tile upper portions of the hierarchy  , but in general taking advalt lage of the compact uatur c of the hierarchy to avoid redund  , ' mt data entry . 
The fiame representation presented here has a great advtm-rage lot the development of largescale NLP systems  , namely , that each mapping r if le need only be defined once  , anti is thereafter inherited by all the lexieal frames that require it  . By positing intermediatelvels of structure ( mapping types and mapping patterns )  , significant generalizations can be captured which farther enhaace the compactness of tile representation and the ease of knowledge acquisition  . 
5.2 Multiple Inheritance
The delinition of containment , however , is not as straight-lorwm'd as a simple is a relation in traditional frame-based knowledge representation  . " lhe containment relation that obtains between mapping pattems and mapping rules is the usual conjunctive  ( nmltiple ) type of inheritance , since a mapping pattern contains each and every mapping rule that it is linked to via a contain link  . On the other hand , the containment relation that holds between mapping types and mapping patterns in disjunctive  , since anmpping tyve contains different types of alteraations  , only one of which can be active at a given time for a particular verb  . As a result , inheritance is pert'ormed in a different manner at these two levels in the hierarchy  . 
By default , Frame Kit supports only conjunctive inheri-lance , which is most common in system where inherit . mtee hierarchies are built using simple is a links . We have developed user-delined inheritance methods for Frame Kith at perform rite appropriate inheritance operations at each level in the mapping Itierarchy  . When all of the possible subcate-gorization /nmpping pairs must be retrieved for a given lexical frame  , these inheritance methods perform the appropriate conjunctive inheritance  , bundliug the mapping rules together into mapping patterns  , followed by disjunctive inheritance of mapping types to create any " alternative radings of the lexical item  . Simply speaking , the inheritance methods must recreate the explicit structure that is implicit in the inheritance hierarchy when it is necessary to represent distinct mappings for verbs at system runtime  . 
A next uuple of how iuberitance works at runtime is illustrated in Figure  2  . The two franles shown in the figure are instantiated by the inheritance methods from the lexical frame * break-l  , and represent the two possible alternations of break  ( the causative reading and file in choative reading )  . 
(* BF , EAK-1153 ( Ttl EMEOBJ )   ( AGENTSUBJ )   ( SEMANTICS * BREAK )   ( CREATED-FROM * BREAK-I )   )   ( * BREAK-If 54 ( THEMESUBJ )   ( SEMANTICS * BREAK )   ( CREATF , D-FROM * BREAK-I )   ) Figure 2: lnstantiated Frames for * break-15 . 3 Interpretive Mapping The architecture in Figure 3 illustrates how our lexieal hierarchy fits into the overall machine translation system  . During prosing , tile lexieal entries to rediuthesource lexical hievarochy are accessed by the LF  ( I parser ; during the mapping of source f-stractures to interlingua representations  , file mapping rules in the lexical hierarchy are accessed by them apper via instarlliated mapping structures like those shown in Figure  2  . During generation , tile target language lexical hierarchy is utilized in a similar fashion  . First , instantiated ntapping structures arc used to create target fstructures  , adthen target lexieal entries are utilize x l by the LFG generator to produce target language strings  . 
6 Status we have developed an extensive interpretive mapping hierarchy for Japzmes e  , which includes 36 mapping rule frames , AcrusDI~COLING-92 , NAtal , S . 2328 AOUT 1992I257 PRoc . OFCOL1NG-92, NANTI~S . AUG .  2328, 1992
Data Procnelng Knowledge
Flow Modules Sources
Figure 3: System Architecture for Machine Translation 45 mapping pattern frames , 37 mapping type frames , 54 verb class frames , and 100 lexical frames . Hundreds of additional lexical frames could be added to the hierarchy without modification of the existing hierarchical structure  . We believe that our mapping frame hierarchy accounts for the syntactic behavior of a significant number of Japanese verb classes  . 
The hierarchy is based on data for about 1000 verbs , taken from ( Ishiwat and Ogino , 1983) and the IPAL report on basic
Japanese verbs OPAL , 1987),
We have also developed an initial mapping hierarchy for English verbs  . The English and Japanese lexical hierarchies were utilized in the  KBMT-89 system for the interpretation of Japanese sentences  ( Mitamura , et al ,  1991) . We are currently integrating our hierarchical structure into a largescale system for translation of service manuals from English to Japanese  . 
Since the argument mapping knowledge represented in our hierarchy is declarative rather than procedural  , it can be used either in analysis or generation ( cf . Figure 3) . 
7 Conclusion
High-quality machine translation requires an adequates man-tic interpretation of the source text  . To achieve this goal , we feel it is necessary to incorporate he kind of lexical knowledge and structure that has been explored in the theory of lexical semantics  . We have presented a methodology that can be used to construct lexical hierarchies which represent lexical knowledge in a compact  , efficient representation which captures relevant linguistic generalizations  , as well as providing a useful framework for knowledge acquisition and system-building  . 
This methodology is declarative and language -independent  , and can be used either for parsing or generation . 
References\[1\]Bresnan . J and J . M . Kanerva ( 1989 ) "Locative Inversion in Chichewa : A Case Study of Factorization i Grammar  , "
Linguistic Inquiry , 20:1.1-50.
\[2\] Carbonell , J . G . and M . Tomita (1987) . " Knowledgebased Machine Translation : The CMU Approach  , " in Nirenburg , S . 
( ed , ) , Machine Translation : Theoretical and Methodological Issues  , New York : Cambridge University Press . 
\[3\] Fukui . N . , S . Miyagawa . ndC . Tenny ( 1985 ) " Verb Classes in English and Japanese : A Case Study in the Interaction of Syntax  , Morphology and Semantics , " Lexicon Project Working Papers #3 , Center for Cognitive Science , MIT , Cambridge , 

\[4\] Goodman , K . and S . Nirenburg , eds .   ( 1991 ) A Case Study in Knowledge-Based Machine Translation  , San Mateo , CA :
Morgan Kanfmann.
\[5\] Hale , K . and J . Keyser ( 1986 ) " Some Transitivity Altematinns in English , " Lexicon Project Working Papers #7 , Center for Cognitive Science , MIT , Cambridge , MA . 
\[6\]Ishiwata , T . and T . Ogino (1983) " Nihongo Yougeno Ket-sugoka , " Bunpouto Imi LAsakura-shoten , Tokyo .  226-272 . 
\[7\] Jackendoff . R . S . (1983) Semantics and Cognition , MIT Press,
Cambridge . MA.
\[8\] Jackendoff , R . S .   ( 1987 ) '' The Status of Thematic Relations in Linguistic Theory  , " Linguistic Inquiry ,  18:3 , 369-411 . 
I9\] Johou shorish in koujig you kyoukai , ed .   ( 1987 ) Keisanki-you Nihongo Kihon-doushi Jsho IPAL- Basic Verbs : jisho-hen  . 
\[10\] Kanfmann . T (1991) . The ON'I"OS User's Guide . Technical Mmno , Center for Machine Translation , Carnegie Mellon University . 
\[11\]Levin , It .   ( 1985 ) " Lexical Semantics in Review : an Introduction . " Lexicon Project Working Papers #1 , Center for Cognitive Science , MFF , Cambridge , MA . 
\[12\]Levin , B .   ( 1987 ) " Approaches to Lexical Semantic Representation , " Unpublished Manuscript . 
\[13\]Levin , B . (1989) " English Verb Diathesis , " Lexicon Project Working Papers #32 , Center for Cognitive Science , MIT , Cambridge , MA . 
\[14\] Mitamura , T .   ( 1989 ) " The Hierarchical Organization fPredicate Frames for Interpretive Mapping in Natural Language Processing  , " Ph . D . dissertation , University of Pittsburgh . 
\[15\] Mitamura , T . , et al (1991) " Analysis Lexicon , " in Goodman and Nirenburg , eds . , A Case Study in Knowledge-Based Machine Translation  , San Mateo , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . 
\[16\]Nyberg , E . (1988) The Frame Kit User's Guide : Version 2 . 0 , Technical Report , Center for Machine Translation , Carnegie
Mellon University , CMU-CMT-88-MEMO.
\[17\] Rappaport , M . and B . Levin (1986) "' What to Do with The ta-Roles , " Lexicon Project Working Papers #11 , Center for Cognitive Science , M1T . Cambridge , MA . 
\[18\]Talmy , L .   ( 1985 ) " Lexicalization l ' a nems : Semantic Structure in Lexical Forms  , " in T . Shopen , ed . . Grammatical Categories and the Lexicon , Language Typology and Syntactic Description 3 , Cambridge University Press . 
ACTESDECOLING-92 , NAN'rES , 2328 AOI~T19921258 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
