CONCEPT-ORIENTED PARSING OF DEFINITIONS
WILLY MARTIN
Free University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
0. Introduction
Computational lexicology/lexicography
currently favours issues related to the
~, there or esentation and the
application of iexical knowledge functioning within a NLP-environment  . Within the first domain , that of acquisition , one finds e . g . such topics as the extraction of information from corpora and machine readable dictionaries  ( MRD's )  . This paper-which is the result of a project in which  , next to the author , also
M . Reedijk , E . tenPas and L . Willekens participated - , falls within this first domain as it will explicitly deal with the extraction of  ( lexicai ) knowledge from ( dictionary ) definitions . However , it will be evident hat acquisition without a representational framework does not make  ( much ) sense . 
Furthermore we will also indicate how to use the knowledge obtained  . 
1. Definitions and Meaning Typ ? ~
Our starting-point is the fact that words , with regard to their meaning , can be classified into meaning_t~zpes . Words can have meanings that are predominantly conceptual  , collocational , grammatical , figurative , connotative , stylistic and contextual/discursive . A word such as the geological term magma typically has a conceptual meaning only  , another one such as bloody ( as in ' you bloody fool ' ) typically combines collocational meaning ( intensification ) with stylistic meaning aspects ( very informal )  , whereas the same word , bloody , e . g . in a sentence like ' I got my bloody footcaught in the bloody chair '  ( example taken from
LDOCE ) mainly gets a discursive , a contextual , meaning ( functioning as an ( emotional ) stop word )  . Different kinds of lexical meaning types require different descriptive treatments  . Soe . g . terms , showing'parex cellence ' conceptual meaning , will require first and foremost conceptual meaning descriptions i  . e . concept-oriented definitions . In what follows then we will concentrate on terms and their meaning as expressed in definitions  , the typical locust br conceptual meaning information  . Accordingly the parser we will present will be concept-oriented  . 
2. Conceot-oriente do arsim , of terms
The parser under discussion is set up to analyze definitions of medical terms in En ~  , lish . As such it is but one of the components of a system which at the moment consists of a preprocessor  , a segmentor , a lexicon , a set of conceptual relations and a parser proper  . In order to better understand the approach under discussion we will first give a general overview of the overall algorithm thereafter globally comment upon those aspects which are most relevant from a computational linguistic point-of -view  ( as it is impossible , given the amount of ACTESDE COLING-92 . NANTES , 2328 AOt3"r1992 9gg Prtoc . OFCOLING-92 . NAr CrES , AUG .  2328 . 1992 space and time , to give a full and detailed picture of the whole project  )  . 
2.1 Overallal ~, or ithm
The basic algorithm can be roughly characterized as consisting of the following steps : a  . read definition b . segment definition c . look for head of definition d . check cluese . look for subhead ( s ) of definition f . fill frame subhead ( s ) taking into account ( checks on ) coordination clues postmodification g . fill flame head h . write sense frame
A typical input reads like this : " r heumatoid " arthritis : a chronic disease of the musculo -skeletal system  , characterized by inflammation and swelling of the joints  , muscle weakness , and fatigue " ( taken from Collins Dictionary of the English Language  19862   ) 
The corresponding output looks liker heumatoid arthritis:\[disease gaffects musc_skel_syst\] \[ disease has_qual chronic\]\[disease has symptom fatigue \]\[ disease has_symptom weakness l\[disease has_symptom inflammation l\[ disease has symptoms welling l 
I weakness-g affects musclells welling g affects joint sll in flammation g_affects joints\]In what t bllows we will try to make clear the main features  ( a system leading to ) such a result implies . 
2 . 2 Basic features 2 , 2 , 1 Input soecifications Up till now we have only dealt with definitions for ~ lhS  . C,~Cdi(terms for no soiogy concepts ) . 
These definitions can be taken from all kinds of sources  , e . g . from term banks or from ( terminological ) dictionaries . The example given above should make clear that we work with analytical definitions exhibiting all kinds of difficulties in both lexis and ~  ( such as structural ambiguities cf . ' inflammation ' vs . 
' inflammation of the joints').
2,2,2 Lcmmatizer-tagger as Frontend
It goes without , saying that a lemmatizer-tagger is a basic requirement for the efficient operation of the parser  . This way text words ( : wordforms occurring in the definitional text ) can be linked up with the items occurring in the lexicon  ( see below )  . For that purpose we use an adapted version of Dilemma  ( see Martine . a . 1988 and Paulussen-Martin 1992) . 
2.2.3 Minimal syntax
After having been lemmatized and tagged , the definition gets , split up into smaller parts ( segments ) by the Ee . g ! llgaI ~ . This module is a minimal syntactic processor which  , on the basis of categorial information ( such as Boolean values for NP compatibility and NP delimitation  )  , delimits word groups in the input string . Unlike other approaches ( such as Alshawi 1989 ) which make use of syntactic pattern matching techniques  , yntax is kept to a strict minimum as one of our claims is that ACRESDE  COL1NG-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOOT1992989 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTEs , AUG .  2328 . 1992 much of what is done ( by others ) syntactically , can be left out when one disposes of more powerful  , i . c . conceptual , knowledge . As a result our input definition ow looks as follows  ( \[ indicating delimiters , \[\[ indicating boundaries ) : a chronic disease l of the musculo-skeletal system I  ,   ( characterized ) I by inflammation I and s welling I of the joint ( s ) I , muscle weakness l , and fatigue II . 
2 . 2 . 4 Conceptual knowledge and calculation The knowledge banks which form the core of the system are the ilg_xJ gg  . and the set of conceotual relations . 
A lexical entry , e . g . aids , is a three-place predicate consisting of the actual lexeme  , its concept type and its word category . So : ( aids , concept ( no sology-concept , aids , lu , u , u , u , u , ul ) , n ) . 
As one will observe , the second argument , he conceptype , consists of a six tuple , i . c . six unspecificied slots . The parsing of definitions i precisely aimed at fill in f  , or snecifving these slots . 
It is the set of conceptual relations that a conceptype may have that determines this specification  . At the moment such a I~for diseases ( no sology concepts )  , somewhat simplified , looks as follows : nos-concept g affects ( nos , macro , embryo)o_affects(nos , organism ) caused_by(nos , etiology ) has_symptom(nos , finding ) transmitted by ( nos , trans ) has qual(nos , qual ) micro , funct , In our approach the universe of discourse is split up into  22 interrelate do on cept types , which , as a rule , form homogeneous subsets . 
At the center of it one finds no sology concepts which show relations with other concept types which in their turn may show relations with other concept types  , which in their turn are related to other concept types  , etc . 
At this point it is important to see that implicit concepts such as no sology concepts  ,   ( and so the conceptual meaning of theie x emeaids e  . g . ) can a . o . be defined/specified by concepts taken from the domain of macro - and micro-anatomy and that  , in the given case , the relation between both arguments will be established  . In this respect it is crucial for the parser to find the head conceot of the definitional phrase  . It does so by setting up a syntaxbased hypothesis  ( taking the rightmost noun occurring in front of the first delimiter  ) and checking it with conceptual knowledge . In case of a definition of aids as " a group of diseases secondary to a defect in cell-mediated immunity associated with a single newly discovered virus "  ( taken from
Eurodicautom ) in a first instance group will be taken up as head  . Afterwards it will be rejected on conceotual grounds  , a . o . because of the fact that group is not considered a medical concept  . 
In other cases head shift in ~ will take place because of the fact that the head candidate can not be conceptually specified by its subheads  ( conceptual incompatibility between the assumed head and its subhead  ( s ) ) . In the same vein , when being confronted with " classes of phenomena that present great difficulties for all syntactic formalisms  (  . . . )\[ One of l , the most important of these being conjunction ( . . . ) " ( Winograd 1983 ,  257-258) , the parser again will solve ( or try to solve ) these cases by making use of conceptual information  . That , in the case of rheumatoid arthritis , it does not yield parses such as ' s welling of muscle AcrEs DE  COLING-92  , NANTES . 2328 AOt ~'1992990 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES . AUO .  2328 ,  1992  ( weakness ) ' and that it manages to combine ' joints ' both with's welling ' and ' in flammation ' proves it to be fairly successful in this respect  . 
Other examples of conceptual calculation imply the establishment of new conceptypes out of old ones  . ' Throat'e . g . , being a macro-anatomical concept , becomes a finding concept when in combination with a qual concept such as in ' so re '  , this way'sore throat'can'fill'a symptom relation with a no soiogy concept  . 
This example also shows that the ~ is conceived as an ~ one : concepts are thought of as atoms from which more complex structures can be derived  ; if the latter are composition alnd can be computed however  , they are not taken up as such . Other examples of conceptual par~ing include the application of rules for PP-attachment  . Compare : " a disease characterized by a sense of constriction chest " vs  . " a disease characterized by a sense of constriction i children "  . In the tbrmer case the PP ' in the chest ' will be attached to the preceding concept ' constriction '  , in the latter the PP ' in children ' will be attached to the head concept ' disease '  . Local attachment of PP's ( other than those introduced by ' ot ~ ) only prevails on global attachment ( othe head ) if certain conceptual conditions are met , such as the nature of the concept types in the PP tollowing a finding concept such as ' constriction '  . 
2.2.5 Frames
Given a definition of which the head or conceptual type has been established  , the parser tries to fill its conceptual template or frame as much as possible  . It does so by looking recursively for pre-and postmodifiers  ( the latter are called subheads )  , which ' fit'the head ( or its modifiers ) . Fitting here means that the concept type of the governed lexeme corresponds with the concept type of one of the arguments of the template of the governing i exeme  . In the ' rheumatoid arthritis ' example above e . g . the functional concept type of which ' musculo -skeletal system ' is an instantiation  , ' fits ' or ' fills ' the first argument or slot of the concepty per heumatoid arthritis belongs to  . 
M . m . the . came can be , said tor all the other slot-fillers . 
Front the above it will have become clear that for the representation of conceptual meaning we have chosent braframe-based system  ( see e . g . Habel 1985): concept types are defined by frames , i . e . sets of conceptual slots , attributes or features . 
3. Usefulness
The parser described here tries to serve a twofold aim  . In the first place its aim is p_~aJ_Citl . By making definitions conceptually explicit it is first of all possible to enhance the access to databases  ( by making search items available in a systematic way  )  . Secondly because of the fact that definitional knowledge becomes available in a systematic way  , it also becomes possible now to generate from pilrtial conceptual knowledge  ( answering such questions as : what is the term for the disease caused by HIV ?  , how is the disease affecting the immune system called ? etc  . ) . Finally , by yielding ' semantically relational knowledge' , syntactically ambinuous structures can be more readily solved  ( think of PP-attachment , cf . he treated the children with epileps y ) . 
In the second place the system-cure-parser was set up as a pilot project in order to shed some light Oll such notions as lexicon ~ tructure and  ( power of ) conceat-oriented parsing . Judging from the results obtained uptill now , we d are say that , with regard to the former , a relational-conceptual model of the lexicon offers interesting perspectives  ( although we still have to tackle in more detail such problems as concept disjunction and nonmonotonic default AcrEs DE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOUT 1992 991 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 reasoning ) , and that , with regard to the parsing , in as far as analytical definitions reflect a conceptual structure  , syntactic problems in parsing become by far more feasible to overcome  . 
4. Bibliom ' ao hv
M . Reedijk , Een concept uele o arservo or definities van medischetermen  , ms . ,
Amsterdam , 1991.
Winograd , T ., l ~ lneuage as a cognitiv ?
EtO ?_? ~. Vol 1: Svntax , Addison-Wesley , 1983.
Alshawi , H . , Analysing the dictionary definitions , in : B . Boguraev and T . Briscoe , ( Eds . ) , Comoutational Lexicography for Natural Languaze Processing  , london/New
York , 1989, 153-169.
-Burkert G . and P . Forster , Representation fsemantic knowledge with term subsumption languages  , ms . , Stuttgart , 1991 . 
-Habel , C . , Das Lexikon in der Forschung der kiinstlichen Intelligenz  , in : C . Schwarze and
D . Wunderlich , ( Eds .), Handbu?ta?ler
Lexikologie , K/3nigstein , 1985, 441-474.
Mars , V . e.a ., Eindrapportage Saoiens-
P_r_oj ? ~, UT-gedeelte , Twente , 1991.
Martin , W.e.a ., Over Aflex . Relset.
Conceotore . a . , VU-bijdrage tot bet Sapiens-prototype , Amsterdam ,  1991 . 
- Martin , W . e . a . , Dilemma , an automatic lemmatizer , in: . CA/lJllg ~, 1988, 5-62 . 
-Martin W . and E . ten Pas , Metatools for
Terminology , in : Corpus gebaseer de
Wo ord an alv se . Jaarboek 1991, Amsterdam , 1991, 83-99 . 
-H . Paulussen and W . Martin ,   Dilemma-2: a lemmatizer-tagger for medical abstracts , conference on Aoolied Natural Lan ~ , uaee Processing . Trento . 13 Aoril 1992, ACL
Morristown 1992, 141-146.
AcrEsDECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328^O ~' r1992992 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
