Lexical cltoice in context : generating procedural texts 
Agn6sTntinl , Richard Kitu-edge
l ) 6 partetnent tieling n is lique ,
Universit 6 de Montrdal
C . I '.6128, Sacc"A",
Montrdal P . Q . If 3C3 J7 Canada

This paper shows how lexical choice during text generation depemls on linguistic context  . We argue that muking c ( Irrect lexieal choice in rite textual context requires distinguishing properties of concepts  , which arent meorless independent of file language  , from language-specific representations of text where lexemes and their semantic and symantic relations are represented  . In particular , l . exical Fnnctions are well-suited to tormalizing anaphoric lexical links in text  , including the introduction of superordinates . This sheds new light on the notion of " basic level "  , which has recently been applied to lexie M selection in genaration  . Some consh'aints governing rite generation of lexical nnd grammatical naphor are proposed for procedural text  , using examples front tim sublanguage of recipes . 
O . Introduction
Lexical choice cannot be made dining text generation wifl to ttt taking into account he linguistic context  , both the lexical context of inmmdiately surrounding words and rite larger textual context  . 
a ) Lexical context consists of the words ( or lather , the lexicnl specifications of n ascent words ) that enter into syntactic relations with the lexical item being generated  . 
This intrn-clausal context is crncial lorlk ) rmnlating collocational constraints , which restrict ways of expressing a preci ~ meaning to certain lexical items  , lot example as in expressions like pay attention , receive attention or narrowescape . The importance of eollocational constraiuts hlts IR3en emphasized in the literature on text generation aud in a chine translation  ( Bateman & Wanner 1990 , lordanska ja et al 1991 , Nirenbnrg & Nirenbnrg 1988 , Held & Raab 1989) . 
b ) Textual conlext consists of the linguistic content of previous and subsequent clauses  . This contextistile scope for cohesive links ( ttalliday & Hasan 1976 ) with the lexical items m be generated in the current clause  . 
The gn ' eat majority of cohesiv clinks are anaphoric in nature  2  . A textnal element T is an attaph or with reslmct to an antecexlent A  ( previtms ly introdace xl in the text ) if the semantic or referential interpretation of T ~ depends on the interpretation of A  . When genmating auallhttrs , it is I be refot ~ the previotts context hatntust bctaken in loacconn\[  , It Sill:I ) Now in Centre Nationald ' Etudes des T61dcommunications   , LAA/SLC\]AIA , Route de Trdgnstel BP 4022301 l . .unifion
Cddex , Frmice.
2) In the case of ca ! alphorn , as in rite following sentence , If you wanto , peel and chopthelual atoes . 
tile subsequent context mr , st be taken into account . 
3 ) Reference of a textual elemeut is file association betwean textual eleme  , nt and extralinguistic reality . 
(1) ihel ) amtile carrots , the celery mid the as paragus . 
Cooktile vegetables in I ~ iling wat , ~" for ten minutes . 
Two textual clement are coreferential if they t -eli : r to the same exlralinguistic reality  . Coreierential elentenls in our examples are often written illitalics  , or indicated by identicals nb sctipts . 
Faihue Rtch ~ . R ) seall appropriate anaphoric expression daring generation typically lcads to awkward or nn acceptable txt such as  ( 2 ) :  ( 2 ) a . l :' repmethet:aTmts , the celery and the as paragus . 
b . Cooktile caners , the celcly and tile as lmragos in N ) iling wate Lc . Taketile carrots , tile celery and the as paragusotltat'teltell ninltltes  . 
Ill this paper , we examine the mechanisms required fox ' making natural lexical choice as alunetion of preceding text tlud its reference to extraling ttistic objt x : ls or concepts  . In particular , we are interested ill lexical anal ) her a , wlle reopen-class lexical items or exl ) ressions provide a coroference link to one or nlores nch items ill preceding clanses  . For example , ill ( 1 ) vegetable sialexicat corefer cntial anaphor of the carrots  , the celery and the as paragus . .
ht what fallows , we ainl to show that correct lexicalization in context reqnires access to both the ctntcepnml relmence and the linguistic prolmrties of preceding text  . For it pipelined generation archit cctmc which\[ naps froln abstract representation levels towards text  , this implies distinguishing at conceptual level , more or less independent of the language , ti ' oln language-specific representation levels which encode lexemes and the grammatical relation between then l  . In particular , we illustrate the paradign latic Lexicall ' unctkms  ( hereafterl , Fs ) of Mel'cnk's Explanatory Combinatorial Dictionary  ( hereafter F , CD ) ( Mel %nk et al 1988;
Mel',Suk & Polgn~re1987).
1. Varieties of lexical an apbora
Beft ) rereviewing conshaints on tile introduction of lexical anal  ) her a during generation , we give examples of inlportant YlmS of cm ' eferential naphoric links  4  . 
We consider an an all her 1013 ( 3 lexical only if we can establish a semantic link between the attaphor and its antecedent  . Therefore , in the following example : ( 3 ) Edith Cress on arrived Mondayut 9:00 . At 11:00 , the Prbne Miniater of France gave apxess conference  . 
4 ) We will not treat here non-coml Erantial anaphora like : Marie threw away all her old dre ~es becauses he wanted to buylle V ?  Ollt2S  . 
ActTzs DECOLING-92 , NANT t'S , 2328 Ao~r 199276 3l'rttx : . OFCOLIN (;-92, NAt , arES , AU(; .  2328 ,   1992 Prime Minister of France is a cognitive coreferential anaphor of Edith Cress on  , but not a lexical one because the coreferential link between the two phrases is based on world knowledge  , and not on linguistic semantics . 
One type of coreferential lexical anaphora is called " reiteration " by Halliday & Hasan  ( 1976 ) with three subtypes : exact repetition , illusWated by (4b ) , synonym substitution (4b ') , and superordinate substitution (4b ") . 
We can add to this group partial repetition ( 4b "' ) :  ( 4 ) a . 1 bottle of light red bordeaux . 
b . Pour the light red bordeaux on the meat.
b '. Pour the liehtred bordeaux wine on the meat.
b ". Pour the ~ oct the meat.
b '". Pour the ~ on the meat.
Nominalization provides another way of introducing a coreferential link to a previous verb :  ( 5 ) Cookther abbit for two hours . 
Ten minutes before the end of cooking , add the spices . 
Coreferential lexical links can also be established between an action and its result  . 
(6) Meanwhile . mix the eggy olki with the sugarj.
Pour the milk on the mixture i+j.
In this example , mixture has no direct semantic link with its antecedent seggyolk and sugar  . The link appears indirectly through the verb mix . 
Another type of lexical anaphora occurs with nouns denoting typical actants of an antecedent verb :   ( 7 ) Margai was lecturing to third year students k . The lecture ri was very interesting and the audience k quite attentive  . 
In this case , lecturer is linked coreferentially with Marga because it is the " agent noun " of lecture  , while audience is the corresponding " patient noun "  , and is coreferential with third year students . 
These examples illustrate some of the diversity of lexicosemantic resources needed to build coreferential links in text  . Text generation therefore requires a lexicon which gives access to the full range of such resources from the " viewpoint " of the antecedent lexeme  . As seen in the next section , LFs provide an appropriate access mechanism for choosing the correct anaphor  . 
2 . Lexical Functions of the ECD for creating lexical anaphora Lexical Functions of the ECD provide a formalism representing many common instances of coreferential anaphora  . Formally defined , a Lexical Function f is a correspondence btween a lexical item L  , called the keyword of f , and a set of lexical items f ( L ) -the values of f ( Mel'~uk & Zholkovskij 1970 , Mel'~uk 1988b) . 
Approximately sixty standard Lexical Functions have been defined  ( for a recent description of LFs in the ECD in English  , see Mel ' ~ uk & Polgu ~ re 1987) . They can be divided into two subsets : syntagmat icLFs and paradigmatic LFs  . 
-Syntagmatic or collocational LFs are used to link unpredict a blexical cooccurrences in texts between the keyword and its values through a specific semantic relation  . Typical examples of syntagmatic LFs are Operi ( semantically empty verb which takes the ith arrant  5of the keyword as its subject and the keyword as its direct object  )  , like Operl ( attention ) = pay , Oper 2 ( attention ) = receive or Magn ( escape ) = narrow . These examples show that these LFs convey eo occurrence rlations  . 
-Paradigmatic LFs are used to express semantic relations in the lexicon between the keyword of the LF and its values  , but not cooccurrence relations . Typical examples are Sl ( lecture ) = lecturer ( Sl : Noun of the first typical actant )  , Sloc ( box ) = ring ( Sloc : Noun of typical place )  , So(buy ) = purchase(So : Derived noun) . 
Some paradigmatic LFs can be used to analyse or generatelxical coreference rlations : - Syn : synonym-ConvUkl:conversive-aener:generic word-St : typical noun for the ith actant- Slratr:noun for typical instrument-Sm~:noun for typical means-Site:noun for typical place -Sr ~: noun for typical result-Stood : noun for typical mod~-Sa:name of action 
Syn(callhlg ) = vocation
Conv 32t 4(sell ) = buy
Gener ( apple ) = fruit
SI(lecture ) = lecturer
Sinsn(palnt ) = brush
Smed(ltolsalt ) = salt
Slo~(box ) ~ ring
S~(mix ) = mixture
Stood(write ) = writing
S0(buy ) = purchase
Relations encoded by these LFs can appear in di recteoreferential relations in texts when the value of the function and the keyword maintain a semantic relationship directly formalizable through a LF such as 
Sres , Gener , Syn and Convijkl , as in : (8) Gener(lamb ) = meat Buylamb . Besure theme at is very fresh . 
LFs can be used to formalize indirectiexieal coreference when coreference xists between lexical items and a dependent  . The dependent may be an actant as in ( 7 )   ( lecturer , the Sl ( lecture ) is coreferential with the fn'stactant Marga of lecture whereas audience  , the S2 ( lecture ) is coreferential with the second actant of lecture  )  , or an adverbial , as in the following example : ( 9 ) Sloc ( patiner ) = patinoire Margueritet Jeanant patin6 sur le canali Rideau . 
Cenepatino ireifait 8km delong.
\[ Marguerite end Jean skated on the Rid ~ au Canal . This " skating rink " is 8km long . \] In (9) , patinoire , Sloc(patiner ) is coreferential with canal Rideau . 
Moreover , LFs can be combined , as we see in the following table : 5) In the ECD , lecture will be described as a noun which has three syntactic actants : X's  ( actant I ) lecture to Y ( arrant II ) on Z ( arrant III )  , for example Jean's ( actant I ) lecture to third year students ( actant II ) on semantic causality ( actant I1\] )  . 
ACRESnECOLING-92 . NAm'ES , 2328 AOfn " 199 2764 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NXlS rrES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 keywurd values LFs or eumposlthmnfLb '









Geuero Gener
GeIlero Syn
Genero Conv 3214
Genero SO
SOoConv 31 24
C onY3214   oS0 a chat\[lmrclu~se\]venteIsale\]transaction Ideal \] auto\[car \] voiture lear \] voiture lcarlacheter\[buy\]acheter\[buy\]vendre lsell\]achat\[purchase\]auto\[carlvente \[ sale\]acheter\[buy\]achetcr\[buy\] acheter\[buy\]transaction\[deal\] transaction Ideal \] action\[action \]  v6hicule \[ vehicle\] v6hicule \[ vehicle\]autotear\]venth'e\[sell\] a chat\[purchase\]ventelsale\]action\[ acthl  ( livghicule\[vehicle\]trm~sactiouIdeal\] uausactionIdeal\]venteIsale\]vente\[s~de \] = Table  1: LFs aud compositions of LFs fltr direct coreference links The following facts should be not cxlabout compositions : Composition is not commutative  . Thus , So ( Conv3214 ( ae heter ) ) = Conv3214 ( So ( a cheter ) ) = vente but Gener ( So ( a cheter ) ) ~ S0 ( Gener ( a cheter ) ) because Gener ( a cheter ) does not have a value . 
-Some compositions are reducible . For example , the LF Synplays a transparent role in composition  . 
In the perspective of text generation , this formalism appears very interesting for building coreferential expressions  . To point back to a referent already introduced , LFs and compositions of I , Fs offer many possible ways for lexicalizing a given relerent  . For example , let us suppo ~ that after having introduced the following sentence  , (10) a . L ~ fisser & uverlavi and e . \[ Letheme at stem a . \] we have to refer again to the action lavian de Ftuve  . We could try to use an outinalization ( So ) . But , as fltere is no nominalization for the verb Ftuver  , we could use instead the nominalization of the generic term  , So(Gener(dtuver )) = cu is a~n . We could thus produce the following sentence : ( 11  ) b . Alafind elacuiss on , a jouterlescpiees\[Atile end of cooking , add the spices \] In the next section , we will examine the case of a complex lexical anaphor : file super or dilm term  . 
3. Superordinates and basic nouns
The use of superordinate terms as anaphors raises several interesting questions  . 
First , to the extent hat a generic concept ( for two or more specific concepts ) has a simple expression in a language , this is not necessarily the same term as the superordinate trm  ( for the term corresponding to the specific concepts  )  . For example , from a conceptual point of view , knife and scissors are " cutting instruments " . 
Nevertheless , it is not possible to naturally st thstitute cutting instrument for knife and scissors  , as in : (12) a . Useaknife mids cissors to cut up the duck , b . ? If you don't have these cutting instruments , pull the duck apart . 
ACIES DECOLING-92 , NANTES ,   2328 AO~f 1992   7   6   5 There is no consistently used term 12tr expressing tile generic concept of knife or scissors  . ~llt is can be cutting instruments as well as instruments for cutting or cutting uten sils  . Whether or uot such at eNllex is Ls varies among lauguages  . For example , in Mandarin Chinese , file term d~o is fidly accepted as a superord in a term to point to the Chinese equivalents of knife amls cissors  . Ill English , a term like vegetable is the superordiuate of carrot  , tomalo Orcucumber because it is consistently used for tlte ~ previous words in texts  . 
This entails that choice of sn per ordinate terms as lexical auaphors cannot be made attile conceptual level alone  . 
Moreover , saperordinate term scall often bc:lnorce asily nsed to lexiealize reference to auon-homegeueous set of elements than for reference to a single element or homog cueous ~ t  , as illustrated in (13) and (14): (13) a . Puttile carrots ill to boiling water . 
b . ? Remove the vegetables after l0 mimnes.
(14) a . Throw the carrots , the leeks alt dIhelx ~ tatoes into boiling water . 
b . Remove tile vegetables after l0 minutes.
However , the ease with which as n per ordinale can be used depends our ite particular noun  . For example , in French , vi and e\[meatl can be snbsit uted for bleuf I beeflevenill singular :  ( 15 ) a . Menreleb ~ eufhcuired mlsl'eau I ~ ouillante . 
I Put the t~_ef in the I~iling water lb . Retirer lavian deml bout de 20 minutes . 
\ [ Remove the meat aft c'r20 minutes\]
This somewhat suri ) rising i ) he nome noncan be analysed with the help of the notion of basic level object proposed by Rose het al  ( 1976 )  . The iml x ) rtance of the basic level distinction for text generation has recently been shown by Reiter  ( 1990 )  . Roschetal demonstrated that the taxonomy of concepts could be organized using a stnlcture with three levels : superordiuate  , haste and subordinate . They define the basic level as follows : " basic objects a ~ e the most inclusive categories whose members :  ( a ) posses significant numbers of attributes in cmm non  ,   ( b ) have motor programs which are similar to one another  , ( c ) have similar shapes , and ( d ) can be identified from averaged shapes of members of the class "  ( Rosch et al 1976:382 ) It has been shown that lexemes correspomling to basic level objects seem to be the most natural terms to introduce referents already id cntified  . For example , if one wants to refer to some champignons de Paris\[button mush rootos\]  , one would prctk : r to call them champign on s\[ nm shrooms\]  , provided that there is no potcntial amttiguity with auy other mush rooms  . 
Champignons de Paris would sccm too specific in this context and vegetables would seem too vague  . This choice is not made randomly : champignon is the noun corresponding to the highest basic level coucept to designate these objects  . This would explain why in (15) , one can refer to b ~ euf with the superordinate vi and e  . 
Nevertheless , ritenotion of basic level object does not always seem well suited to explain phenomena such as that observed in  ( 15 )  . For example , it seems that the concept " volatile "\[" fowl " \] fits perfectly the four criteria given by Rosch  . But , volatile\[fowll does not seem a PROC . ol ; C1LIN (;-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 natural French term for referring to a chicken , particularly in the sublangtmge of recite es . 
It is also problematic that the naming of basic level objects varies a great deal among languages  . For example , in Mandarin Chinese , the most natural term to design at eak nife when there is no ambiguity is the term d~o  , which corresponds to " cutting instrument " in English  . We could argue that conceptual representation differs with the mother tongue of the speaker  ( which is plausible , without joining the debate about language and thought  ) and that the lexicon reflects the conceptual views  . Nevertheless , this position does not solve the problem of terms like volaille  , a unuatural term for a basic level object . 
It is significan that this position creates practical problems for text generation : if conceptual representation is reflected too closely in the choice of lexemes  , this representation cannot be used as an interliugua for multilingual generation or machine translation  . 
In the light of this evidence , we have decidcd in favor of a strict theoretical separation between conceptual representation ad lexical representation  . We believe that an appropriate couceptual representation can be used for multilingual generation because it is a nonlinguistic generalization above specific lexical representations  . We therefore distinguish the notion of basic level object  , which belongs to cognitive science , from the notion of basic noun , which is a linguistic notion 6 . We consider " vi and e " and " volatile " to be basic level objects while only viande is a basic noun  . 
For lexical choice in text generation , we thus have to distinguish two very different processes : - Superordination should be used to introduce a noun which points back to a set of different nouns  . This is the case in carrots , leeks , cucumber --> vegetables . This processobeys a principle of economy . 
-Basic denomination is used to introduce the most natural term for a given referent or a set of referents  . 
This processobeys a principle of " naturalness ": it introduces the most closely basic noun that corresponds to the concept obe lexicalized  . Basic denomination is often used in texts like recipes : objects are first introduced with extreme precision and subsequently referred to with the basic term  . 
4 . Knowledge sources for determining lexical anaphors In the course of our work  , we have proposed a series of algorithms for generating rammatical nd lexical anaphora in procedural texts  ( Turin 1992 )  . Contrary to lexical anaphora , grammatical naphor a makes use of closed lexical classes  ( determiners , pronouns and a few special verbs ) as well as ellipsis . 
These algorithms are derived from an empirical study of French recipes  , using a representative corpus of over 16 , 000 words . Recipes serve as a good prototype of procedural texts for assembling complex objects from parts  . Even this modest corpus presents a wide variety of lexical and grammatical naphora which are typical of assembly instructions  . 
6 ) Wierzbicka ( 1985 ) has shown in lexicographic descriptions that he nantes of  ( words for ) basic level objects have special semantic properties  . , We describe below some of the knowledge sources and organization eeded to generate lexical and grammatical naphora  . For lack of space , however , we leave out the model of state change management  ( needed to describe recipeing redients being mixed together and transformed  ( Kosseim 1992 ) ) , a ~ ld the focus model used . 
4.1 Input
We limit our scope to the linguistic part of generation  ; therefore , we assume that on r input is the ontput of a text planner  , which has already grouped actions into discourse structures as proposed by Grosz and Sidner  ( 1986 ) and ( Dale 1988 )  , The input is thus a sequence of actions and states in which participants  ( ingredients , instruments and agent ) are represented by indices . 
4.2 Dictionary of concepts
The dictionary of concepts has been inspired by Nirenburg and Raskin  1987  ; concepts are mainly subdivided into actions or objects  . We have added a category of properties , needed to describe relations between concepts ( e . g . , temporal limit ) or attributes ( e . g . 

Relations between concepts are is a , part-o for result , the latter one useft d in a domain where state changes are frequent  . Thus , one can relate the action " cut " to the concept " piece " which is the result of " cut "  . The dictiouary of concepts is not a copy of the language and there are Concepts without any corresponding lexicalization  . Taxonomic organization is fimetional and depends greatly on the field for which it has been established  . In other words , our description of concepts has limited value outside the domain of recipes  . 
4.3 Dictionary of lexical entries
The representation of lexical entries is strongly infhlenced by tile ECD  ( Mel'~uk & Folgu & e1987 , Mel'~uk et al 1988) . Two parts of tile entry are particularly interesting for our topic : the semantic zone and the LF zone  . 
The semantic zone contains four types of information : - Tile semantic field to which the lexeme belongs  . For example , the verb simmer would have feature/cook / . 
-The mass/count feature.
- The " basicness " feature , if the lexical item is a noun , indicates whether or not the noun is a basic noun . 
-The keyword ( s ) for which the lexeme can be a value . 
For example , for the lexeme mixture , it will be stated that it is the Sres of mix . 
In the LF :, . one , we simply enumerate he values of the lexical item as a keyword  . For example , the entry for the verb hacher\[chop\]may contain  , among many others , hach is ( Sres ( hacher ) ) and hacho i r ( Smed ( hacher )   )  . 
5 , Constraints for generating anaphors We now turn to the constraints which apply to the choice of grammatical or lexical anaphors during text generation  . Our aim here is to generate the most appropriate anaphor with respect to the textual context  . 
To determine what is appropriate , we have used an empirical approach , rather than appeal to general principle such as Gricean conversational maxims  ( see Reiter 1990a & Dale 1988 for use of these notions for lexical choice in text generation  )  . A detailed ACRES DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 not'rr 1992766 Paoc . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 examinatiou of our corpus of cooking recipes has st to wu that anaphora is not governed so muct  , by sU'ict rnlcs as by tendencies . Thus , in a given context , a set of possible anaphors can " compete " for selection  . When choosing from multiple possibilities we flavort ttemost " economical " anaphor  , i . e . , the due which conveys the least information 7 . 
Space limitations prevent a complete discussion of all factors required for an anaphor choice algorithm  ( see Tut in 1992 )  . Here we give the most iln porfant constrai , ~ts on choice among the principal anaphoric devices s  . 
The selection of an anaphoric device Ires two slages : ? First  , at choice is made among of grammatical devices ( e . g . personal pronoun , verb complement ellipsis , coreferential definite NP , demonstrative NP ) . 
? Then , if a lexical NP has been chosen , the corrcct lexical eataphor is determined . 
5.1 Grammatical naphnrn
The introduction of a given grammatical naphor depends mainly on  4 kinds of paranmt crs : a ) the conceptual nature of referents , b ) distance In antecedent and discourse structure , c ) focaliz ~' ~ tion add ) potential ambiguity . 
We briefly review these different parameters to r each type of grammatical anaphor : verbal complement ellipsis  , persomtl prolmml , demonstrative NP , corefereutial definite NP . 
Verbal complement ellipsis as in the following exaraple is very widespread in recipes  , and characteristic of procedural instructions in general  . 
(16) Prep are the carrots , the celery and the as paragus . Cook in the boiling water and take O out after 10 minutes . 
Verbal complement ellipsis is generally used to designate a heterogeneous  . set of objects , coutrary to personal pronouns . " llm distance from the antecedent can be quite farbat focalization coustraints  , in particular global focus-defined as the subset of the most salient items-play a determining role for the production of this anaphor  . 
A personal prononn must nalnean object or a set of similar objects  . It is governed by very strong locality constraints  ( Hobbs 1978 ) and , as previously noted ill the literature , personal pronouns often mainla in the tlmntatic continuity  ( Van Dijk & Kintseh 1983 )  , i . e . pronoun is the local focus ( what the clause is about ) of both the previous and the current clauses . In fact , local focus generally supplies enough information for the healrer to correctly interpret the pronoun  ( as emphasized by Grosz , Joshi & Weinstein 1983) , even if it is morphologically ambiguous . 
Choice of a demonstrative NP does not dependou the conceptual nature of the referent  , which may be either the local focus or the global focus  . Its contrastive functions with respect to personal pronouns and definite NPs are rather complex  . Since demonstratives are 7 ) Anaphoric devices thus have a default ( strict ) order of priority for application . 
8) We omit the realization constraints , such as the fact that certain verbs do not allow their complements to be pronominalized  . 
infrequent in onr corpus , l bey are not treated furllter here . 
Fura definite NP , there is no conceptual iestriction on the refm ' ent  . A definite NP can be introduced at substaulial distance from its textual antecedent  , and typically dnesnotoccl , r in the following clan . ~ , especially if the antecedent was the local focus of its clause and there is no potential ambiguity  9   . 
For each NP to be generated , potential ambiguity must be taken into account . This has to tlo with lexieal choice . For example , choice of an anl bignons NP such as & vin\[the wiue \] must be blocked if there is white wine and red wine in the context  . The context in which the anaphoric NP must be distinctive depends on the annphor chosen : it is tile preceding sentence for demonstrative NP while  , for definite NP , a larger context nmst be taken in account lO ,  5 . 2 Lexical amlphoru We now tun , to the constraints on choice of lexical anapho L When the grammatical mechanism chosent klrex prc  . ssing at naphora involves a corellare utial ( definite or den:t on strative ) lcxical NP , the sec ( ms traiuts conic into play to pick the most appropriate lexical form  . The anaphoric lexical devices presented here for recipes constitute only a subset of those that conld appear in the language as a whole  . Nevertheless , we hyl X ) the size that the CO l ) ceptual and linguistic on straints governing their usage are generalizable to other kinds of text  . Lexical anaphor a differs significantly on this point from grammatical naphora  , whnse constraints , like discourse structure or focalization , vary greatly according to rite kiud of text . The refilr c , while a give u kind of text might use only a subset of possible lexie a lauaphoric devices  , these devices are governed by themt me constraints in all kinds of texts  . For exautple , typical result mention ( m/x --> mixture ) is widespread in procedural texts but constradlt S governing th Cn laretile same illally kind of lext  . lu contrast , it appears that tile constraints governing usage of granlmalical naphoric devices  , antieven the devices then lselves , are much more depent tent on the variety of text . 
Given that a lexica \] NP has been chosen , as the general type of anaphoric device , two kinds of constraints , conceptualnd linguistic , apply to selec the the specific kind ( s ) of lexical a Ualth or a which may bensed . In case of anthiguity , i . e . if file NP produced is not distinctive , addilional processing will t ' . crequire xl . 
Conceptual Cmlsl raittts concern mainly :
The state of the object . l , ' or example , all object whose state is being transfonued by an action should be relcrenced via its resulting state  . 
-Groupings of ohjects : is the referent to be generated a set of identical objects  , a heterogenous set , a homogenous sc to rasingle element ? A heterogenons set is composed of elements which just have no close  9  ) For example , die definite NP hifile second clause is ra ) t very natural in French : Mariea rencontr6 uncharcufier . ~_?If ~ iton tr~s bunp ht&\[Marie meta pork butcher  . ~Ii ~ makes very go ~, dl ~ . l10) For recipes , we use Date's ( 1988 ) proposal to take the whole text as context , since it is usually short . This would of CoIIr Senothesatis factory hlr longer texts  , ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AO~r 1992767 PROC . O1~COLING-92 . NAN n . : S . AU ?; .  2328 , 1992 generic concepts in common , such as , " salt " , " knife " , " table " . 
Linguistic constraints involve mostly the lexical form and relative order of the coreferential NPs that have been lexicalized in the preceding text  . Therefore , we do take advantage of referents already lexiealized in the previous context  ( which must be stacked for being available when lexicalizing  )  . 
The following properties are examined : - The linguistic form of antecedent NP : is it a single noun  , a compound noun or a complex NP?-The existence of a lexicosemantic association for the antecedent like the generic term or the typical result  ( which can mostly be formalized through a LF )  . 
- The " basicness " of the head word of the antecedent NP  . 
Ambiguity constraints are used to check if the lexicalization is not ambiguous  . 
If a unique object or a set of identical objects cannot be lexicalized in a nonambiguous way  , we lexicalize it the same way it has been first introduced in the text  ( Initial strict repetition )  . We use this adhoc strategy because first mention of a referent is generally the most accurate  . Of course , this would not always be the minimal distinguishing description  ( Dale 1988 )  , but as Reiter (1990a ) points out , determining a minimal distinguishing description may require overly complex processing  . 
In case of potential ambiguity for a set of heterogeneous objects  , we use " complex coordination " . 
With this process , were group first the first level superordinates and apply the other devices to the remaining list of objects  11  . 
Table 2 shows several important kinds of lexical anaphoric devices  , with their associated conceptual , linguistic and nonambiguity conditions . 
Concepicual Properties Linguistic Nonambiguity " Lexleal anaphor Properties Constraints Examples Unique object ' or set of Antecedent is a ' single No instance previously lapin-->lapin\[rabi~it\ ] Strict Repetition 
Initial Strict Repetition identical objects
Unique object or set of noun ( or fixed compo-und ) and is a basic noun introduced has the same repetition No constraints Tile other devices are A small rabbit  . . . the identical objects ambiguous rabbit --> the small rabbit Partial Repetition Unique object or set of Antecedent is a not fixed No previously introduced pet it lapin\[small rabbit\] identical objects compound  ( except " part-NP has the same partial--> lap in of " types  ) and the NP repetition head is a basic nt ~ un Superordlnatlon Set'of objects having a\[ Nominal heads of ante-No previously introduced carottes  , poireaux , close common generic lcedents have the same NP has the same concept common superordinate  , supemrdinate term
LF : Gener
Basic Denomination Umque Objector set of Nominal head of NP is No previously introduced identical objects not a basic noun NP has the same basic denominationN?mlnallzatl?nAction'"No constraints 
Object(s ) having been , affected by a strong transformation
Set of different objects which have no common genetic oncept 
Typical Result Mention
Antecedent verb can be nominalized or superordinate of antecedent verb can be nominalized  . 
LFs : Soor SOo Gener
There is a result noun for file actants having been affected by the tranformation  . 
LF : S , , ~
No element of the coordination is ambiguous


No previously introduced
NP hast be same result mention
No constraints to mates \[ carrots , leeks , tomatoes \] --> 16~umes \[vegetables\]petites girolles\[small chanter elles l --> e hampig nons\[mush rooms\] faire cuirele poulet\[cook the chicken \]--> lacuiss on dupoulet\[the cooking of the chicken \] mt langer lespatates i\[mix the potatoesi \] --> lemt langei\[the mixmrei \] pet it lap in  , grosses chanter elle s\[small rabbit , big chanter elle s\]--> lelapine tlescham -pignons\[lelapinetleschampignons\]Table  2: Constraints governing the introduction of lexical anaphora  11  ) We choose here to apply supe ~ ordination separately to each instance : we do not allow regroupings of elements for superordinatinn or typical result mend on because  , as Koss eim has noticed , we would have to process all the subsets to generate correct lexicalizatinns  . 
AcrEsDECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 hO ~"1992768 Paoc . OFCOL1NG-92, NANTES , AUO . 23-2g , 1992

In this tmper , we have described some of the problems raised making lexical choice in textual context  , in particular for coreferential lexical anaphora . We have showed that paradigmatic Lexical Functions are well suited for creating lexical coreferential links  . We have also distinguished the selection tff superord in a term  , which is used to point back to a set of different words  , from selection of basic denomination , which is use tl to name in the most natural way a concept already introduced by a previous noun  . 
A series of constraiuts has been formulated which can be implemented in an algorithm for selecting among natural grammatical nd lexical anaphors in procedural texts  . Most of these algorithms have been implemented by Kosseim  1992  . The generator uses Prologant is pecifically Definite Clause Grammar  ( DCG ) to produce text . 
We find that determination fgrammatical anaphom is more dependent on the genre and sublanguage than is lexical anaphora  , which appears governed by fairly general constraints  . However , morn work needs to be done to check these results in other precedural texts  , and then more broadly in less similar text types , Also , it would be interesting to see to what extent anaphoric expression share common constraints with deictic expressions for which the context of interpretation is not the previous text  , but the extralinguistic on text ~

We would like to thank Guy Lapalme , Igor Mel'~uk , Alain Polgu~re , Marga Alonso Ramos and Xiaobo Renfor fruitful discussions and helpful suggestions  . Special thanks to Le'fla Kosseim , who collaborated in this research and with whom we shared many interesting discussions  . The work reported in this paper was supported by a Government of Canada Award  . 

Bateman J . A . & L . Wanner (1990) . Lexical Cooccurrence Relations in Text Generation  , in Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , 
Dawson , Pennsylvania , 31-38.
Dale , R .  (1988) . Generating Referring Expressions in a Domain of Objects and Processes  , Ph . .D . thesLs , University of

Dtcary M . & G . Lapalme (1990) . An Editor for the Explanatory Dictionary of Contemporary French  ( DECFC )  , Computational Linguistics ,  163 ,  145-154 . 
Grosz B . J . , Joshi A . , Weinstein S .  (1983) . Providing a Unified Account of Definite Noun Phrases in Discourse  , in Proceedings of the 21st Annual Meeting of the ACL , MIT , Cambridge , Mass . , 1517 june , 1983, 44, 49 . 
Grosz B . J . & C . Sidner (1986) . Attention , Intentions and the Structure of Discourse , Computational Linguistics ,  12 ,  175-204 . 
Halliday M . A . K&R . Hasan (1976) . Cohesion in English
London , Longman.
Heid U . & S . R ~ b (1989) . Collocations in Multilingual Generation , iProceedings of FACL ,  130-136 . 
Hobbs J .  (1978) . Resolving Pronoun References , Lingua ,  44 ,  311-338 . 
Iordanskaja L . , R . Kittredge & A . Polgu\[re (1991) . Lexical Selection and Paraphrase in a Meaning -Text Generation Model in C  . L . Paris , W . R . Swart out & W . C . Manneds . ,Natural Language Generation in Artificial Intelligence and 
Computational Linguistics , 293-312.
Kosseim L . (1992), G~n ~ . ration automatique de proc~dg scoh~s if vdarts les recettes decuisine  , M . Sc . thesis , Dt partement d ' informatique et de reche op & ationnalle  , t J niversit 6 de

McDonald D .  (1991) . On the Place of Words In lhe Generation Process in C  . L . Paris , W . R . Swastout & W . C . 
Manneds . ,Natural Language Generation in Artificial Intelligence arm Computational Linguistics  ,  229-247 . 
Mel'fiukLA . et al (1988a ) . Dictionnaire Explicatif et Combinatoire du Franga ~ Contern pora in  . Recherches Lexico-sbnantiques .  11 . Montrtal , Pressel ' Universit ~ de Montrtal . 
Mel ' ~' ukI . (1988b ) . Paraphra seet lexique dans la Thtorie Sens-Texte , Cahiers de Lexicologie LII , 550 et LIlI ,  5-53 . 
Mel'c'ukI . & A . Polgu & e ( 1987 ) A Formal Lexiconill the Meaning-Text Theory ( or how to do Lexica with Words )  , Computational Linguistics ,  13 ,  3"4 ,  1987 ,  261-275 . 
Mel'cuk1 . & Zholkovsky , D(1970) . Surl a synthtses6 mmltique , TA . Information a ', 21-85 . 
Nirenbnrg S . & I . Nirenburg (1988) . A Framework for Lexical Selection in Natural Language Generation  , in Proceedings of COLING 88 , Budapest ,  471 "475 . 
Nirenburg S . & V . Raskin (1987) . The Subworld Concept Lexicon and the Lexicon Management System  , Computational
Linguistics , 13, 3"4, 276-289.
Reiter E . B . (1990a ) . Generating Appropriate Natural Language Object Descriptions  , Ph . D . Thesis . , llarvard

Reiter E . B .   ( 1990b ) A New Model for Lexical Choice for OpenClass Words  , in Proceedings of the Fifthhaer natio ~ gd Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , Linden Hall Conference Center , Dawson , Pennsylvania ,  2330 . 
Rosch E . , C . B . Mervis , W .  1) . Wayne , D . M . Jolmson & P . 
Boyes-Braen (1976) . Basic Objects in Natural Categories,
Cogr , ; tive Psychology 8, 382, 439.
Sidner C .  (1983) . Focusing in the Comprehension of Definite Anaphora  , in M . Brady & R . Berwickeds . ,Computational Models of DL~course , Cambridge ( UK . ),
Cambridge University Press , 267-33f).
Tutin A .   ( 1992 ) Etude des anaphores grammaticale set lexicales dane la perspective de lag~t ~ ration automatique darts destextes de procedures  , Ph . D . Thesis , IM partement de linguistique , Universit 6 de Montrtal . 
Wierzbicka A .  (1985) . Lexicography and conceptual analysis , Ann Arbor ( Mich . ), Keroma Publishers in c . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NA meS , 2328 Aou'r 1992769 PRoc . o1: COLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
