An Analysis of Indonesian Language for
Interlingual Machine Translation System
Hammam R . Yusuf *
Computer Science Department
University of Kentucky , Lexington , KY 40506
yu ~ Uf ~ ms.uky.edu

This paper presents BlAS ( Bahasa Indonesia Analyzer System )  , an analysi system for lndonesian language suitable for multilingual machine translation system  . BIAS is developed with a motivation to contribute to ongoing cooperative rsearch project in machine translation between Id onesia nd other Asian coun-tries  . In addition , it may serve to foster NLP research in Indonesia . 
It start with an overview of various methodologies for represen-talion of linguistic knowledge at wlplausible strategies of automatic reasoning for lndonesian language  . We examine these methodoio-gies from the perspective of their relative advantage and their suitability for an interlingual mochine-translation environment  . 
BIAS is a multilevel analyzer which is developed not only to extract the syntactic and semantic structure of sentences but also to provide a unifying method for knowledger as oning  . Each phase of the analyzer is discussed with emphasis on Indonesian morphology and case -grammaticalconstructians  . 
1. Introduction
Bahasa Indonesia ( ln donesian language ) is a national language fortile Republic of Indonesia which imites  27 cultural backgrounds . 
It is widelynsed by more than 100millious speaker but unfortunately , does not gain much attention for its automatic processing by computers  . In 1987 , a cooperativer search in machine trans-lation with Japans parks the naturall nguage processing research in Indonesia  . In support to the ongoing project of Multilingual Machine Translation Sytem for Asian Language organized by Center for International Cooperaliou in Computerization  ( CICC ) -Japan and other Asian cotmtries ( China . Indonesia , Malaysia and Thailand ) , we developed BIAS : an analysis prograni for Indonesian language which output an interlingual representation  . By incorporating interlingual n ' , dysistechnology , we will be able to include BIAS as part of multilanguage translation system in a very effective way  . 
Tiffspaper describes the design consideration f BIAS from the viewpoint of linguistic theories and knowledge representation formalism  , The design is based on an interlingual pproach to machine ! ranslation which accepts input sentences in one language and produces sentences in other languages \[ Figure  1  \] . In particular BIAS is a program that a kes natural language txtms input and produces its tm derlying interlingual representation at a certain level of details that serve as a language -independent representation fr the machine translation environment  . 
a has a Indonesiaj /
Figare 1 . BIAS and lnt cr lingual Approach to MT The approach wt fich being used here is an approximation f basic linguistic theories such as Chomsky's Standard Theory * Supported by the Agency for the Assessment and Application of Tectmohigy  , Jakarta . Indonesia ACTESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt3T 1992 1228 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 . 1992\[Chomsky , 651 , C , xseGrmnmar \ [ Fillmore , 67\] and Definite Clause Gr ; unmar\[Pereira , 80\] . We also incorporates the use of appropriate representation frutalism such as Frames\[ Minsky  , 81\] attd Semantic Network\[Quillian , 68\] for a suitable type of reasoning system . It is noted that even thoughtere are many knowledge representation laguages which are theoretically sufficient to describe any natural language  , they need to be modified in their theory and implementation for a particular language such as Bahasalndonesia  . ' lt existence of varions theories and knowledge representation techniques lead us to consider sever '  , d models of reasoning formalism . This in turn may serve as an indicator to the expressive adequacy of ow  chosen1 representalion . 
The rest of tiffs paper is organized as follows . Section 2 presents fran ~ e work of BIAS fr on the viewpoint of linguistic theories  . We will discuss in detail the language analysis method of BIAS  . \[t will be followed by a discussion on representation formalism and reasoning techniques in Section  3  . The paper ends with a conclusion . 
2. Analysis Method
There are many ways of attacking the problem of natural language processing  . At one end of the spectrum are analyz , ers that read the input sentences , very closely following every twist in syntax , trying to interpret every bit of information contained in the sentence  . In most cases , these analyzers separate the syntactic and semantic parts of the analysis into separate consecutive stages  , paying much more attention to the syntactic part at the expense of semantic\[Gersham  , 82\] . At the other end are the analyzers that skim through the text looking for certain types of i of oruaation and paying attention only to the words and expression relevant to the task \ [ DeJong  , 79\] . This approach is very effective and intuitively corresponds to what peopled owlr deskimming newspaper stories  . However , the danger in t t t is approach lies in the possibilty of misunderstanding wlmt is being stated  . 
BIAS is a multilevel analyzer , similar to the first type describe above , with the ability to perfom ~ reasoning in each level of analysis  . The method used in BIAS is theoretically consistent with the Standard Theory and Case Grarumar as well as nonmonotonic reasoning formalism  . The proces starts with analysis of sound sequences and ends by producing its interling a alre prc ~ ntation  . I-depth discnssioo on each of the analysis phase in BIAS and the selection of appropriate linguistic theories follows  . 
2.1 Morphological Analysis Ph & ~ e
Preliminary analysis of Indonesian words poses an especially diffic~dt problem : the transformation fword category and its meaning as the t'esu It of  , ' fffixation . Although it seems better to segment input sentences beforehand  , it is not natural in the general sense to do this process on the first basis  , We have to combine the processes of phonological nd morphological at valys is nord ~ to extract the root word from an inflected form  . 
The process will involve the following : an inflected word is analyzed to give its root word and affixes  , allowing the system to recognize the altered struct m ' eaud meaning of rite inflected word  . 
This phase uses the lexicon , monphological and phonological knowledge in the form of transformation rules  . 
Further , we observed the fnllowing word formation rules which indicate their characteristics :  ( at A word can be constnlcted using prefix , suffix or confix . 
( b ) A word can be constructed using a repetition of root word as in ' kura-kura '  ( turtle )  , or repeating the word constructed in ( at as in the case of ' berlari-lari ' ( jogging )  . 
Our analysi showed that rite complex types of word formation could lead to some problems while constnlctiog the structure of the lexicon \[ Yosuf  , 88\] . It is evident hatiu the lexicon , a word should be described briefly , st ) that he search can be efficient . 
Hence , the lexicon should contain only it simple form of word which  , in tld scase , is the root form . 
How can we deal with a word with affixation ? In our findings  , the wnrd with affixation could be processed by using the following procedure  . 
Algorithm : Morph O
Input : word
Output : root word , affixation and semantic markers oAs sume that the word is a root word  . 
If this word is in the dictio , utry , check whether it is in its root form or purely repetitive form  . 
-Assume that the word is a word with some prefix.
Check for the following cotulitions : - The root word is repetitive word and tw tanidiom with afftxation  . 
For example : ~?, ?1 uri-lari(jogging).
-  1'he word with affixation and repetition For exanlple :   12?~pukul-ptdculala   ( hit reciprocally ) -A root word with afftxation or idiom with prefix  . 
For exant ple : peker jaalt ( occupation ) ll ?? . tanggung-jawab ( responsible for ) - Idiom with sto " t x or confix . 
For example : 12 ~ mnggung-jawabRa ( responsibility ) Table 2 summarizes the morphology rules which have been formulated in BIAS  . These rules are basic ; othe rules which incorporate complex formation of words  (  , see also \[ Tarigeal , 841) are being left for futher improvement , The general structure for a morphological rule of a given root word is described as follow :  ( \[ Affix\[+\[RootWord+Semantic\] ) -->\[ Word+New Semant lc\]
Examples : ( \[mem+\[pukul+action\] ) --> memukul + active\] ( \[mem-i + I pukul + action \] ) -->\[ memukuli + repetitive \] ( \[mem-kan+Ipukul + action\] ) -->\[ memu kulkan + causative\] ( \[bet-an+\[pukul + repetition \] -->\ [ ber pukul-pukulan + reciprocal action \] AcI  . ' ESDE COL1 NG-92 . NANTES , 2328 AOUI'19921229 PROC . OFCOL 1NG-92 . NAI'ZrES . AUG . 2328, 1992 Table 2 . Indonesian Morphological Construction Root form Prefix Sufix Confix Comptmd Term Semantic pukul  ( hit ) mememukul active bawa ( carry ) didibaw a passive nama ( name ) berber namapoase sive perlu ( need ) me-kan memerluk an active tran . 
baca ( read ) di-k and lbacakan passive pegang ( touch ) terter pegang accident alguna ( use ) ter-k an implicative main ( play ) memperkan purpose daya ( trick ) terper k an occidental
Table 3. Phonological Rules
Prefix Root Inflection
CeNboatgoreng
Imrang tunggus a pucu kurpukul has ut betus aha ruanguangternak 
C = consonant of m and p
N = phonological transformation
The new semantic of formed word is derived from the semantic of root word and affixes  . There are several filters being used for extraction of this semantic  . In the examples , mem-ica use the word pukul which has action as its original semantic to become repetitive in its meaning when combined  . 
In addition to morphological construction as described above  , there are phonological rules which are handled in parallel in the morphological analysis phase  , The phonological rues determine the transformation of phonetic structure of a root word for a given complex word  . We include some xamples to show its construction as in Table  3  . 
2.2 Syntactic Analysis Phase
This phase covers those steps that affect the processing of sentences into structural descriptions or syntactical tree by using a grammatical description of linguistic structure  . The major components are syntactic knowledge ( grammar rules ) and lexicon . There are several linguistic phenonema worth describing for Indonesian language  . For instance , the language structure membuat ( make ) mellg ~ or eng ( fried ) me~gurang ( s ~ b stract ) menunggu ( wait ) meaxapu ( sweep ) mencakur ( shave ) pemukul ( hitter ) peligh as at ( agitator ) bet'usaha ( effort ) be ~ uang ( room ) be ~ ang ( have money ) beternak ( lifestock ) of Bahasa Indonesia has a different structure compared to English and other languages  . One of the most significant difference is that the Indonesian language apply various rules to cozlstruct Adverb Phrase  . Adjective Phrase and Relative

For example , in constructing Adverb Phrase . it is allowed to combine adverb and adjective in addition to adverb and verb  . It is also possible to form Adjective Phrase using adjective followed by noun rather than the default order of not re and adjective  . This notion reslflted from tile categorial m biguity of some words  . 
Examine the following phrases : rumah ( N ) merah ( Adj ) panjang ( Adj ) tangan ( N )   ( house )   ( red )   ( long )   ( hand ) cepat ( Adv ) merah ( Adj ) berjalan ( V ) cepat ( Adv )   ( quickly )   ( red )   ( walk )   ( quickly ) BIAS use a bottom-up technique IM at sumoto . 83\] in the syntactic analysis phase . The grammar rule written in Extrapositioo Grammar \ [ Pereira  . 8 1 \] is translated to a set of Horu clauses whicb ACRESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES . 2328 AOt3"r19921230 PROC . Or COLING-92, NANTES , Al;o .  2328 ,   1992 will parse a sentence according to tile original grammar in bottom up and depth first manner  . 
2 . 3 Semantic Interpretation Phase ' Ihis phasewill consist of the mapping of the structural  ( syntactic ) description of the sentence into an interlingual representation language  . The goal of this phase is to construct a clear e presen-tation of tile exact meaning of a given selulence  ; hence , it is a lan~ua~e-indeo endent rel ) resentation suitable furageneration process uf target languages  . In order to achieve this , we need common sense knowledge , in addition to semantic knowledge . 
In Ballasa Indonesiatile verbal elements of tile sentence are tile major source of the structure : tile main verb in the proposition is the focus around which the other phrase  , or cas ~ , revolve and file auxiliary verb contain much of the information about modality  . 
Hence , the Casegrlu'nmaristile appropriate selectio a tor the semantic analysis part  . 
Case frame are the mech ~ mism for identifying the specific ases allowed for any particular verb  . The case frante fureach verb indicates the relationships which are required in any sentence in which the verb  , appears and those relationship which are optional . 
Let us look at some popular example sentences :
Paluitume mukul pakuitu.
( the hammer ) ( hit ) ( the nail )
Pakuitudi puku lole hpaluitu.
( thenail ) ( wash it ) ( by ) ( the hanuner )
Sese . rangme mukul pakuitu dengan paluit..
(someone )   ( hit )   ( tilenail )   ( with )   ( the hatmner ) The verb , memukul(hit ) ,   , allows three primary cases : agentive , instnmlental , and objective . We have all three cases in the last sentence , but only two in the others . In fact , only one case is required with tiffs verb , 
Pakuitudi pukul.
( tilenail ) ( was hit )
Thus the case franle for the verb memukul , by default :
Imemukul\[O(A ) (1)\]1
Further , some other case frames are also determine fnr words which combine pukul and other affixatioo  , aa in the case of menm kulkan , memukuli , memu kul-mukulkan , etc . 
In addition to the standard cases described by Fillmore and Simmons\[Simruun  , 73\] , we incorporates veraloilier cases found in Indonesian language  . These cases occur as the result of word inflection  . Fur instance the confix meN-kan , with the root wnrd beliere atea wurd , membelikan , which carry the meaning of " being beneficiary of the action "  . Some examptes of these case-stw . cific clul be found in the following sentences : 1 . Benefaetive : Saya II tgmb_elit; , a ~ a dikboneka ( I buyadoll for sister ) 2 . Incidental : Adil ? . ? Rglga ~ ditangga ( Ifelton the stair ) 3 . Cansative : Sayamempert anyakan masalahitu . ( I questioned that problem ) 4 . Intentional : SayaOZgltZlZ?I ? ~ . ~ dia .   ( It ricked him ) The interligual representalion for ( 1 ) is given in Figure 5 . Note that each word is represmned by a concept and its attrthutes  . 
3. Representation and Inference
We have colue to a point od\[sctiss variu Hsty ~s of representation language being used to represent the theories in each phase of tile analysis  . 
Intile morphological ~ malys is phase , it is appropriate ore present tile morphology and phonological rules with definite clauses wl fich have first order logic as its basis  . First order logic provides a clear language to repres ent propositions or facts fr the lexicon and also supports production-like rules for tile transformationf\[+activu \] ~  Figure4  . Example of Interlingual representation Aca't :: t::s El ':  COLING-92  . N^N TES . 23k 28AOt'n "19921 231 PJ to c . ov COLING-92, NAN'rES , AUG . 2328, 1992 Table 5 . Level of Analysis , Representations and Inferences in BIAS Analysis Phase Theory Representation Inference 




Standard Theory
Standard Theory
Extended Standard

Case Grammar
Definite Clause /
First order logic
Definite Clause /
First order logic
Definite Clause
Semantic Network with Slot Filler






Default rules . The syntactic part adapts file Extended Standard theory and hence  , it is favorable to use first order logic to represent its knowledge  . The u ~ of Case Grammar in semantic analysis phase leads us to choose the network-based formalism as the representation  . Sinunons and Hendrix\[Simmons , 7 3 \] have provided a clear language for semantic network based on the Case Grammar  . However , we also incorporate ' slot fillers ' from the frame system\[Minsky  , 81\] as a solution to handle incomplete sentences . 
As the consequences of the selection of the representation method for the linguistic knowledge of Bahasa Indonesia  , BIAS have multiple inference methods incorporate in each level of analysis  . 
In syntactic and semantic analysis phase , defanlt reasoning is performed to solve the problem of incomplete knowledge  . In this case , first order logic must be augmented with defanlt operators in order to penuit non-monotouicity  . \[Reiter , 78\] Because of space limitation , we leave out in . depth discussion on inference techniques ( ee\[Yusuf , 91\]\[Schubert , 79\]) , and present our summary of work in Table 5 . 
4. Conclusion
The use of linguistic theories and appropriate knowledger presentation techniques provide BIAS a new insight in attacking the problem of language analysis for interlingua machine translation system  , especially for Bahasa Indonesia . Many representation formalism and reasoning system have been brought into consideration ot only for a ' pure ' sentence analysis but in order to design an effective and efficient intelligent system capable of capturing and reasoning with linguistic knowledge  . 

Brachman , Ronald J . , On epistemological status of Semantic Network , in Associative Networks : Representation and Use of Knowledge by Computer  , Academic Press , New York ,  1979 . 
Chomsky , Noam , Aspects of the Tneory of Syntax , MIT Press , 
Cambridge , 1965.
DeJong,G . F . , Skimming stories in real time : An experiment ill integrated understanding  ( Computer Science Report No . 150),
Yale University , New Haven , May 1979.
Fillmore , Charles , The Case for Case , Universals in Linguistic Theory , EdEmmon Bach and R . T . Harms , Holt , Rinehart,
Winston , New York , 1-88, 1967.
Gersham , A . V . , A Framework for Conceptual Analyzer in Strategies for Natural Language Processing  , Lawrence
Erlbaum , 1982.
Lockman , Abe and Klappboz , David , The Control of Inferencing in NLU , Computational Linguistic , ed . Cercone , Nick . , Pergamon
Press , Oxford , 1983.
Matsumoto , Y . et . al . , BUP : A Bottom Up Parser Embedded in Prolog , New Generation Computing Vol . 1 No . 2, pp .  145 -158,1983 . 
Minsky , M . , A Framework for Representing IOlowledge , Mind
Design , pp . 95-128, MIT Press , 1981.
Pereira , F and Warren , D . , Defiuite CIause Grammars for Language Analysis - -A Survey of the Formalism and a Comparison with Augmented Transition Networks  , Journal of Artificial Intelligence 13 (1980) pp . 231-278 . 
Pereira , F . , Extraposition Granmlars , American Journal of Corn-putational Linguistics V ol  . 7No . 4(1981) pp . 243-256 Quillian , M . R . , Semantic Memory , Semautic Infornmtion Processing , Ed . Marvin Minsky , MIT Press , Cambridge , 1968 . 
Reiter , R . , On Reasoning by Default , Proc . TINLAP-2 , Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing-2  , University of 111 in ois at Urbana-Champaign ,  210-278 , 1978 . 
Selmbert , Letdmrt K , Randolph G . Goebel attd Nicholas J . Cercone , " The Structure and Organization of a Semantic Network for Corn prehension and Inference "  , Associative Networks ,  121 -175 . 
Academic Press , 1979.
Simmons , Robert F . ,Semantic Network : Their Computation and Use for Understanding English Sentences  , Computer Models of Thought and Language , W . H . Freeman Co . , San Francisco , 1973 . 
Tarigan , S . , Morfologi Bahasa Indonesia , Penerbit Gramedia,
Jakarta-Indonesia , 1984.
Yusuf , Hammam , Indonesian Elec~onic Dictionary , Technical Report , Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology  , Jakarta ,  1988 . 
Yusuf , Hammam , Analyzer for Ballasa Indonesia , Master
Thesis , University of Kentucky , 1991.
ACRESDE COLING-92 . NANTES . 2328 AO~r19921232 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES . AUG .  2328 .  1992
