An Alternative to l ) eep Case for Representing R , elatiom d information
Nigel WARI ) l
University of Tokyo
Abstract
No one has come up with a eompletely satisfactory set of deep ca  . ses relations ( or thematirre hu . ions ) . The underlying reason is that any finite set of case relations C&ll capture only some of the geller a \] iz at k ms desired  , lprol ) ose taste ; u \] a feature Sl ) a C?rel ) resentation of relational in h ) rmation , where timaxes are such things as degree of responsibility  , degree of nctivity , and degree of alreet xuhless The role of a par ticipant in auewmt  ( : all then be described as ap Oiltlint iffs space  , allowing more accurate representation of relational information  . The don , a hL of validity of each relevant linguist ~ ic generalizations corresponds to a prototype -centered region in the space  . This proposal is easy to implement . 
1 . Background ' Fhere are sew ~ ralthings thaia representation of relational inforniation should do  , and ease does them all , but not w' , rywell . 
1.1 Tit ( , . Problo . ms with Case
The continued failure to come up with a satisfactory set of cases is a symptom of the impossibility of fixing a single set of eases that hamall the desired properties  . 
A system of eases should work for the description of more thaua Dw syntactic generalizatious  . Yet , h ) rexaruple , the set of things which can be passive subjects is sot the same rus the set of things that can be direct objects  , and so any definition of patient canae ( : oullt for at most oIle of ) nese two . 
A syst m no feases should reflect similarities of form  . Yet there are many dimensions of similarity , and any set of cases will account for only some . This call be seen by considering the fact that many prepositions  , for examl ) le " with " , hal/e meanings which span several eases ( Tsujii ? ' . Yamanashi 1985) . 
Moreover , similarities of meaning donoial ways linetip with similarities of meaning  . For example , whm ~ a . ssigning a ease to " w ~ nd " in " the wind closed the door "  , syllta ? suggests agent , as does the semantic feature ' no-covert controller '  , but the the selnal \] tic feature ' liot-all illlate ' suggests that wind is an mstru-illellt  . 
For two languages the problems gel , worse ; choosing a set of e a . sesto capture the generalizations of one language tends to obscure the generalizations of another  . To use another old exanq ) le , a definition of agent that works well for English will not suffice to rule out inanimate subjects in Japanese  . 
A representation for relational information should be good not only for capturing similarities  ( generalizations ) but also for precise representation , llere too , l thanks Danaurafsky , atom Edwards , Toshiakillisada , m ~ d
Mitaul ) i a hilleavy lnd untries.
ctLse often comes/il ) short . For example , in both " load the wag ouw zth hay " and " load hayon to the wag on "  , " wagon " is traditioaally * u ~ signed the same ease  , but this obscures the difference that in the first sentence the wagon is more a\[fi  ) cted it ; is more likely to be fully loaded . In general , the goal of precise repre , ' ; entatio it suggest slltally specific cases with llarro will  ( ! anillgs , I ) lllt le goal ( if eapt/lrhtg generalizations
Sllgge SIs broader c~ks e,~.
1 . 2 Tim Stat(~(ff the Art'\[bsmnmm'ize , thei ) roblem with case is not that ' we have ll ' ll ( )ltlltl tile right set of ca . s e8 yet ' bill thai it is impossibh ~ to find a set of ca-ses which does everything  . The goals of representing wu'ious types of similarity conllict with each other  , and these goals conflir . l , with the goal of being able to precisely rep reseilt relat  , i o n a \] in t b r l n a t . ion . Whilether ( ! ill ' ( ! refillem eats which help somewhat ( sill ) cases ~ dlow more precision , and multiple inherit~mce from mq ) ercases increases the Utlluber of generalizations capturable  ) the problems remain .   ( l " or further discussion of past work on i : ase see Ward  ( to ~ q ) pear ) mid the references cited therein . ) Of course it is always possible to Col ) etouud?cdo with a set of cases which satislles only sonic of the desiderata  . For one thing , it is possible make do with limited express iw ! power  , i , ' or example , iii ; I , It y tn ~> chine translation researchers appears ~ ttisfied if their c~se systeln is just detailed enough to account for choices among target language prepc~sitions  . It is also possible to make do with ~ . system of (: ames that misses geners . /izatioils , l ) e siglers of I ilaellile translatiol tsysLeuls , agaiu , lU'eSt lllably luaker ough tradeoffs as to the relative w due of s in q  ) iifying the parser ( by choosillg a set of c ; mcseo\[iv ( lliellt for tile source I~m guage ) or simplifying the generator ( by choosing the eases to suit the ~ argel . hm guage ) . 
Tile probhm is with a system of cases are not al ways identified as such  . No one hame ver written a paper saying ' I can't make case work for my applies Lion ' short coutings cau always be COUlpetl sated Rirby t : on q  ) lie ~ ting the rules that refl ~ r to cases . ' i ' hatis , ally I ) roposal for a set , of c~mes is un\[~dsifiabl(! .   . . but it is possible to do betler . 
2 . Proposal 2 . 1 Par t i c ipatory Prot i les i propose to represent in detail the ' participatory properties ' of objects  . For ex~Lrnl ) hb in the scene involving Jn(l~Ls , Jesus , and a kiting , Judas can be described as actiw bvolitional , very responsible , basically uaafl'ected , a direct-cause , and so () It . I will refer to the set of these properties ~ m the ' participa-  . 
to ryprofile ' of that object . A participatory profile is illplelnet lted its it vector O \]' rallies over '  ( : ; ~ , ~et (-: attlres ' . 
ACRESDECOTING-92 , NANTES , 2328 Aot ~ Jr 19921137 Pitoc . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG . 2328, 1992 kiss
Jud as : agent
Jesus : patient
Figure 1:
A traditional representation kiss
Jud as : active . 7 volitional . 7 responsible . 7 affected- . 2 direct-cause . 7
Jesus : active- . 7 volitional- . 7 responsible - . 2 affected . 5 direct-cause . 2
Figure 2:
A'participatory profile ' representation > , aE2~) " Jotm ! hnkissed , '  , Iohn?stared at Mary . killed ; ' himself Mar; .  / / /' / . / Johne ?, ; goth in lself
John " killed accidentally, . '"'"? John kicked " seduced . ."  .   .   .   .   . ' Y '"
Mur ~, ...'"'"" eaail3.
................)'"" John ?."'" gOl
J ~) hn "'"-, %'..,/ killed.
noticed ',
Mary "" , ; : l " , ? John ~ htt " , '; sneezed , was madei John ?' . to kiss was ' ikilled . ~: theuoni

Figure 3: A slice of case space , chosen to focus ( in causal/inchoative erects For example , Judasa . sakisser may be (- . 2 affected ), (+ . 7 responsible ) , and so or , , as shown in Figure 2 and a . scontra . sted to the traditional representation shown in Figure  1  . 
A participatory profile is a precise description.
To illustrate this with a spatial metaphor , a par , itipatory profile can be identified with a point in an n-dimensional space  , which I will call ' c ~ mespace ' , where the axes are thee a . se features . Figure 3 shows an impressionistic projection of this space onto two dimensions  , populated with sentences about John , positioned appropriately for his role in them . Super imposed on this with curved lines is a suggestion of the way that a traditional ease account might divide up this space  . This illustrates how case allows only a relatively coarse description  , providing only the op-portunil , y to describe a participant's role a . s being in a certain region of the space . 
This proposal Mso makes it easy to explain simi larities  . For e?ample , comparing the roles of " yeasl " in " yeast makes bread r ~ se " and " spoon " ill " eat with a  , spoon " , they are similar in that both are concrete and directly acting  , but different it , that the yea . st is not manipulable , nor is it identifiable as a sep ~- rate entity afterwards  . Profile representations of the roles of yea . stands poor , can show that they are similar on specific stlared dimensions  , while not obscur in K the differences on other dimensions  . Profile representations also make it easy to quantitatiw dy describe similarity on a single dimension  . For example , it is possible to describe John as active in both " John  . ~peculated t ~ i commodities " and in " John watched the ducks "  , but somewhat oless active in the latter ; there is no forced choice between assigning John to a case where he is active and one where im is not  . 
(-' . ~seistraditionally considered to be a cla . ssific ~ Lion of tile semantic relations between predicates and their arguments  , but the proposal replaces it with an account of the roles of participants in events  . In some languages things like . individuation or definit , eness , which would seem to have nothing to do with the verb  , affect choice of ease markers and constructions ( Fillmore 1968 ; floppergz Thompson 1980) . q'hus it seems that meaning relation should relate to the situa  , lion , I lot just to the predicate .   ( Here ' situation ' is meant in a narrow sense ( De Lancey 1991 )  , where " John asked Mar  #to leave " involw~s two situations  . ) 2 . 2 Prof i les and Language Iamguage refers to regions of case space  . ' Fhis is true , in particular , of ' case markers ' , constructions , ai idgrammatical roles . 
Consider for example the N mily of uses of " of " exemplified in "  . lohn died of cancer " . " Of " is used for causes which are direct causes  , invisible , iIn rna-terial , of unknown origin , and at most only slightly con , toned ( Del , ancey 1984) . If direct-cause , visible , and so on are treated a . sease features , this use of " of " can he described as appropriate for participants in a certain region of ease space  . Illgener M , the meanings of ' ease markers ' , that is , words conveying relational information , caa , be identified wit , regions of ease ACRES DECOLING-92 , NANTES . 2328 AO~q'19921138P ~ . OC . OFCOLING-92, N^N TES , AUG .  2328 .   1992 space The tue allings of sonic constructions also can he identified with regions  .   ( ' Construction ' here is meam in the sense of l " ilhnore  , Kay , and (')'(' . on nor (1988) . ) For a given participant , the extent to which its profih ~ leads to selection of function words or tomobilization  ( of constructions ( affecting word order )  , or to bulb , depends entirely on the language . 
Regions in ca . sespace can also he used to describe grammatical roles  . For examl ) le , consider lhese t of things which can he subjects of passiw:seld  ; en(:es . 
Rather than saying tha . t this includes I heme . % l ) atients , and recipients , provided they meel certahl conditions , we can describe this am the set of things which are highly topicalized  , not very active , all dInure or less aft'coted ; this of course describes a region of ( m . sespace . The set of things which ( : ~ m he direct objects is another region , ow ~ rlapping that for t ) assives t ; b-jeets , but also including the region of highly all'cried things even if the y ~ u : e not at all topics  , and exchnling all highly to l ) icalized things , and also mildly topicalized things unless they are highly atfected  . The set of things thai can betnmsive subjects in Japanese is yet  . another region , again overlapping but slightly different . 
' lbsummt wize the ways in which this propos ; d solves the problems raised in Section 1: it allows preelse representation he ca/lse instances are rel  ) resented a . spoints ,   ; rod this does not conflict with the need t ( /capture generalizations , because gener Miz ; tt lonsart : represented as regions ; and it can capture all generalizations because there is no assumption of correspondence bet  , wren the regions required for different generalizations  . 
2 . 3 Exalnl ) les and Details ' . Fo define the regions for various case markers by precisely specifying their boundaries would he onerous at best  . Instead we can define these inlplicit/y by reference to their prototypica\[meanings  . For example , the prototypical use of " of " in " die of cati -cer " carl be described as ~ point in case space  , lty computing the prox in fity of a participator's profiles to such prototypes for various case markers it is possible to determine them  ( xst suitable case marker for tha ~ participant . 
Similarly for constructions ; they are used when a participant's profile is sufficiently close totile construction's prototype  .   ( Polysemous constructions can probably be amdyzed as having several prototypes  . ) For example , one can analyze the Passive Construetion a . s being relevant if a participant expressed in subject position has a profile is ' closer than  1  . 2' to the prototype ( affected +1 . , volitiom : d-1 . , responsihie-1 . ), as shown in Figure 4 . 
Unlike prepositions , constructions ' meanings do not form a partition of case space  ; thus a single point can fall into the regions of several constructions  . It is so n\]et lnles necessary to elll ploy in ure than one construction to adequately specify the profile of a partic-ipml t  . For example , to describe a participant who is active and possibly affected  , but not responsible nor directly affected , the Passive and Causative Construe ' lhet ' ~ asive Coils  ( ruction example : " Ma~ywa ~ , given a for k " (' r ) l ; dd . ioIi(()ri'(deva\[ ; (: e : expression of a participant closer I . halL1 . 2 totile l ) rototype , using the we . ights below .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . S ? t ~ ? t ' YP ( L__ weights affected-tI . 1 volitional ? I .   . 5 respolLsihle-l .   . 5' lheI ) eriphr ~ usti ( : Causative ( kmstruction example : " Johnnla de Mary golo C ' hz cayo " condition for relew tnce : expression of a participant closer than  3  . 5 to the prototype below protolype weights volitional FI  1  . 
resp(msibh~--11.
~ tctive+I1.
affected--\[1.
directi : ; tuse-I\[.
The State Ch~mge Construction ex~mq de : " , lohn died " comment : riw dlothe Passive ( k ) nstruction ; prevellts " . \] ohr ~ irla . s died " coII dil , ion for relevauc v : express loa of a\[ ) articil ) all l closer than 2 . 5 to the prototype below ; also the availability of ast ~ ttechange-verb prototy I  ) e weights ~ f l'e ( : ted\]1 l . 
voliti ( mal-1l .
responsible --1t.
object-of orce 11.
Figure el : ~ olner on strll clir ) ns whose relevi?nce depends on profilestiolls lntl stberise  ( 1 together , a . ~, in a John rll as made lok ~ . ~ slhe . stalur "; each constructio , expressing SOil ! dimensions of the participant's profile  . The ide~t of ; tdditive colltribntiolts ronl several construction scall also be applied Io  , for example , " John wask~s sed " , where " do h ? ~" is a perfl ~ ctly good subject , and also a perfectly good passiw~s~duect . This style of aualysis means factoring out infbrmation  , which of course makes \[' or si IHI ) ~ e ( OllSI rllctio ; ls . 
\[ ise of COll Sl . rt lc tions provides a way to acc ( Hln\[for the'subcaLegorization'properties of w  ~ rbs  . To explain why " John broke the dish " is English but "* lhemagwm ~ vanishedlherabbit " is not  , one can say that the verb % real " can participatem the Lexical Causative  ( ' on struct km but " vanish " can only participate in the Periphra  . stic Causative Construetion . Thus it is not necessary to directly describe the allowable cases of a verb and their mappings to prep  ( ) sitions ~ md grammatical roles ; that information can he factored Oil ( into constr:lctions . That is ~ the case frame ( valence ) of a verb ca1 be explained in terms of the constructions the verb can participate in  . 
(ralnmatical roles cart ~ lso be analyzed in ternLs AC*rES DI  . : COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 Aotrr 19921139 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AU ( .  2328 , 1992 feature prototype it ) cation weights topic +1 . 6 volitional +1 . 4 active+1 . 4 responsible+1 . 2 individuated +1 . 2 partial-cause+1 . laffected-1 . 2 Figure 5: The first constituent of the
Subject-Predicate Construction of prototypes-for example i thaw long been said that the prot  . otypical direct object is probably that of " kill "-- and these prototypes can be mapped into case space  . Proximity to prototypes can then be computed . This allows , for example , the simple rule : ' for subject , select ti repartieipam which is closest in case space to the prototypical subject '  ( to slightly modify a proposal by 1 ) nwty ( 1991 ) ) . Assonic fitctors are more important hanothers , it is appropriate to assign weights to the various case features  , to bias the computation of proximity . For example , the weights for subject shown in Figure 5 account for subject selection ( in the context of the system described in Section  4  )  , explaining : la ) Johnkissed Marylb ) Mary made the boye at a peach lc ) Mary was kissed by John ( if she is the topic in the larger context ) ld ) the wind broke adtshle ) Mary was killed and Mary died This account of subject is more parsimonious than a subject hierarchy  , that is , a list of cases in order of preference for which can become the subject  ( Fillmore 1968 )  , plus rules for overriding it fortire sake of topics  . This description also ohviat , es the need for explicit statements that topicness is more important than agentivity or that volition is more important than activity  ; such facts are simply encoded intire weights . 
In the current implementation of ease space , the range of values for each feature go front -1 to +1  . 
Whereas participants can be located at any point in the space  , it seems appropriate to site prototypes at the corners or edges of the space  . A few more exan-pies of profiles are shown in Figure  4  , arrd many more in Ward ( to appear ) . 
3. Related Work
Although the synthesis is novel , many of the major components of the proposal have been previously proposed  , if in somewhat different guises and for different purposes For exaan ple  , Cruse ( 1973 ) and Delaneey ( 1984 ) studied the components of various meeming relations  , Labov ( 1973 ) and Miikku-tainen and Dyer ( 1991 ) pioneered the use of vector spaces for describing meaning  , Hopper and Thompson ( 1980 ) showed how to relate grammatical reflexes to lists of scalar-valued paxameters  ( features )  , Ilinton ( 1981 ) noted the possibility of using a ' distributed representation froles '  , Tsujii and Yamanashi ( 1985 ) viewed cases in terms of prototypes and their extensions  , Fukuda et al ( 1986 ) and Pederson ( 1991 ) introduced the spatial metaphor for meaning relations  , and Dowty ( 199 t ) explained how to relate grmn mati-ca\[relations top rn to type structured clusters of meaning relations  . 
4 . Implementation 1 have built a parser ( Ward 1992 ) and a gener-alor ( Ward to appear ) which use participatory profiles . This section discusses the generator , not as a presentation of the best or only way to use profiles  , but merely as a demo astration that case profiles are workable  . 
FIG , a ' Flexible Incremental Generator ' , produces English and Japanese sentences starting from a meaning representation  , using spreading activation in a knowledgenet , work . One task of a generator is , given an input including some items with case profiles  , to build a sentence whose syntactic form and function words reflect those e ~ e profiles  . 
In FIG case features are implemented ms nodes in the associative network  . They are linked to constructions and words , with appropriate weights . For example , the node responsible ,   , has a link to the node by , , , representing the word " by " , and this link fi as weight+1 . 
The participatory profiles of concepts in the in pnt are represented by links to nodes for case fi  ~ atures  , appropriately weighted . For example , the node for Mary may have a link with weight . 5 to responsible , to represent a given m put . 
For such an input , when mary ,   , becomes activated , case features will become activated to the de gree appropriate for her profile  . In tnrn by w and other prepositions will receive actiw ~ tion from these case features  . The net effect is that the profile for a participant activates prepositions proportionally to their proximity m case space to that profile  . ( The measure of proximity computed is , to be precise , the dot product of the vector for the participant and the vector for the prototype  . ) The preposition whose pro totype is closest will receive the most activatiou  , midhence appear in the output . Like ease markers , colt-struct knls receive activation from the profiles of participants  , via case features . They thus become mobilized to the extent that there is a participant with a profilemat dring that of the construction  .   ( Some case markers appear before the word they flag  , others after , and so FIG has a distinction between activation fi'oni the profiles of concepts which remain to be expressed and activation from the profile of the concept just expressed  . ) Constituents which involve profiles also are linked to nodes for case features  ; from these activation flows to concepts , and so the concept whose participatory profile is closes to that activated by a constituent will receive the most activation  .   ( Actually the case feature nodes used for activation flow from constituents to concepts are distinct from those used for activation flow fronl concelpts to ca  . semarkers and constructions . 
That is , each case feature is implemented a . sa pair of nodes ; this is for technical reasons . ) There are multi-pie profiles in any nontrivial conceptualization  , and ACRESDE COL!NG-92 , NANTES , 2328 nOLq "1992 1140 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 it wouht seem that cross talk a right be a problem , but this has not been the case in F\[G , primarily hecause generally there is one eolts Lruction an  ( lone ( : once pi with enough actiwt tion to dominate . 
FI ( ' ~ originally expected eep ( : as ( : relations in its in t ) uts , and its grmn rnar and lexicon referred to those cases  . One problem was that , ~s I extended 1 , ' lG's coverage of the two langllages , then nlnher O\[cil~seskept growing and the grammar gotuglier and uglier  . 
Int ) articular , there were lengthening lists of possible cases for constituents  , for example there was at llst of fonr possible cruses tonse for subject  . Switching to proliles solved these problems . Conversion wa . s relatively easy ; other than the new references to profiles , the grammar did not need to be changed . Tim additionaleomi ) utation required is negligible . 
FIG currently uses 10 ( : ~ usefi ~ atures : volitional , responsible , active , aflheted , direet-cause , partial cause , individuated , topic , object of-force , and touched ; these replace the e~Lses agent , instrument , patient , experieneer , cause and percept . At this point the meanings of the cause features deriveless from their flames than from the way they are related to the constructions of J at  ) anese and English . This is he causet be numeric values for the t ) rofiles , although originally chosen according to comlrlon sense arid with reference to the literature  , tlaw ~ had to i ) etuned in the course of making FIG able to generate sentences in both Inn-gnages for a largish mml ber of inputs  . I ascribe no special significance to the particular set of profiles enrrent tyinnse : they are specific to FIG's current gramt nar and implementation details  . 
5. Summary and Hopes
To summarize the advantages of the prof ) osal : Participatory profles are a representation mech~v-nism that allows both precision and generalization-capturing  . Precision is important for being able to tel ) resent accurately the information that people ( : anget from langnage , and it will probably also he useful for artificial intelligence systems in the near fu lure  . Better generalization-capturing allows siml ) leramt better grammars . Tb is is important for linguistics , and also for comtmtational linguistic , where the cash vahle will be in q ) roved manageability and performance for natural anguage systems  . One example is machine translation . If the parser/mMer stander arrives at a narrow enough eaqe profile for a participant  , then it islms sible to directly find the relew mt target language constructions t  ) y corn put mg in which regions the point lies . It shou hl thus he poss lh le to eliminate the need for contraative knowledge relating the regions of the various constrnctions and words of the two languages  . 
Judging from my experience converting FIG to profiles  , these advantages may be easy to achieve in practice  . Of course , to conreut ) with a general theory of relational information will require a great deal more work  , both on the mechanism and on the analysis of language  . 
This f ) rop c , sM is in some ways a logical continuation of Fill rr to re's  ( 19681 research i ) rogram . Fill more wanted to capture linguistic generalizations in terms of meaning  , not syntactic structures , hiWard ( forthcoming ) I suggest hata processing model can dispense with surface syntaxs truetures also  ; doing without csse eliminates yet another type of intermediate structure typically interposed between thought a mlhm guage  , allowing an even more direct account of linguistic generalizations in terms of meaning  . 

Cruse , 11 . A .  (1973) . Sore (: Thoughts on Agentivlty . Journalo \[ Li ): guiMics , 9:I123 . 
Del , ancey , Scott (1984) . Notes ( ) It Agentivity and Causation . Studiesm Lauguagc , 8121:181213 . 
De Laacey , Scott 119911 . ", vent Construal and Casel / . oJe Assignment . In Berkeley Linguistics Society , Pro-ceediugso \] the Seventeenth Annual Meeting . 
/) owty , David R .  (1991) . Thematic ProtoRoles and Argument Selection . Lauguagc , 67:547619 . 
\[" ilhnore , Charles J .  (1968) . The Caselot Case . In E . Bach & It . Harms , editors . Urliv craals in L~nguistic Theory , f)P .  1 88 . Holt . Rinehart , New York . 
Fillmore , Charles J . , Paul Kay , & M . C . O'Connor (1988) . 
i legularity and Miomaticity in Grammatical Constructions : q?he Cruse of Let Aloim  . Lan9ua9c , 64(3) . 
Fukudlt , I(ttlute, . \[ llltY ~ unltguchi , Junichi Tsu . iii , & ~ M~Lsaaki Yamana . ~ hi 11986) . Kakn Kaishakuto Ninchi Kikoo , Sono 2 ( Case Interpretation and Cognitive Structure , Part 2) . In Proceedings 3rd daparlcs eCoguitit wScience Society , p .  66 . 
Hinton , Geoffrey E .  (1981) . \] lnplementing Semantic Networks in Parallel Hardware  . In Geoffrey . E , Hinton & J . A . Anderson , editors , l ) a ) nlle . lModels o\]A,q-~ociatioeMemory , pp .  161-188 . Lawrence Erlbaumt\~sociate ~ . 
lh)l)per , Paul J . & Sandra A . Thompson 11980) . Transitivity in Grammar and Discourse . Language , 56:251299 . 
Lahov , William (197:11 . The Boundaries of Words and their Meanings . In Joshua Fishman , editor , New Waysol Auolyz in 9Variation in English , pp .  340 373 . Georgetown University Press . 
Miikkul ~ tinen , t/isto & Michae IDyer (1991) . Natural Language Processing with Modular PDP Networks and Distributedf  , exicon . Cofnitive Science , 15:343400 . 
Pederson , Eric (19911 . The Ecology of a Semantic Space . 
In Berkeley Linguistics Society , Proceeding so \] the:
Seoenteeulh Annual Meeting.
T ~, ujii , Junichi & Masaaki Yamanashi (19851 . Kakutosono Nintei Kijun ( Ca~es and Criteria for their Identification )  . ' I~chnical Report 52-3 . Information Processing Society of Japan , Natural Language Working
Group , Tokyo.
Ward , Nigd (1992) . Au Evidential Model of Syntax for Understanding . Technical Report 88-3 , Information Processing Society of Japan , Natur M Language
Working Group , Tokyo
Ward , Nigel ( forthcoming ) , A Parallel Approach to Syntaxh ) r Generation . Artificial h~telligencc . 
Ward , Nigel ( to appear) . A Connectionist Language Generator . Ablex . revised and extended version of AF lexil ) le , Parallel Model of Natural Language Generation , PhD . thems and Technical Report UCBC SD91/629 , Contputer Science Division , University of California at Berkeley . 
ACIES DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 Ao ( zr 19921141 PRO : . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
