SYNCtlRONOUSTAGs ANDFRENC ttPRONOMIN ALCLIT ICS 
Anne ABEILLE
Dd partement desciences du langage,
Universit de P~u'is8,
2 medelalibertd , 93526 Saint Denis
abedle@frpSvIl.bimet

Lexicalized Feature-based TAGs have been used for describing various syntactic phenomena cross several languages  , and for writing sizable grammars fer French and English  ( Abeilld 1988 and 199 la , Abeilld et al 1990 ) which have been incorporated into a fully implemented pursing systen l  ( Schabes 1990 )  1 . The main linguistic advantages of such a for lnai is nlare that :- it provides u larger donlain of locality than CFG-based formalism such as HPSG or LFG  , -it allows factoring recursion from tile domain of local dependencies  , - as a consextuence of both above properties , it allows the grammar to be totally lexicalized ( Schabes et al 1988 )  . 
However , a certain number of syntactic phenomena are difficult to represent in this framework  . We focus here on French pronominal citrics which are cases of noncanonical argufnen\[ realization  . We show how they can be naturally handled using the " Synchronous TAG " extension of the formalism as a turther set oi wellformedness conditions on t be language and we extend this treatment outher cases of in is nlatch betv  , ,een syntactic attachment and senlantic role . 
1. Motivation
French pronominal clitics have ' been subject o numerous studies in both the xwetical and computational linguistics  . 
We restrict here our discussion 1o syntactic properties of clitics and thus ignore most of their morphological  , 2 phonological or binding properties , We show that they cannot be handled by existing TAG variants such as FOTAGs or MCTAGs  ( unless major cMnges are made to the existing French TAG grammar  ) but I hut Synchronous TAGs provide a nelegant and uncxpensive solution  . 
1 . 1 . Some linguistic properties of French citrics French pronominal citrics fall into  6 groups : t be nominative ones @' e , or ~ , iL . .), the 1st , 2d person and reflexivc ones ( se . hie . .), the accusative ones ( le , la . .), the dative ones ( lui . leur . . ) plusen and y which each forms a class on its own  . They follow each other in a rigid order : nor a < refl < ace < dat < y < en  , and are subject to numerous corcstrictions3: no identical l . It is also the basis of an interactive NLF ' enviromnent  ( Paroubek et al 1992 )  . See Joshi 1987a and Schabese ta\] . 
1988 f ~) ran introduction to TAGs.
2 . French pronominal clitics are subject to obligatory s and hiphen olnen a such msliaisol I and elision  . 
3 . " I'tmse properties can easily be described with a finite automaton  ; Cf Gross 1989 . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES ,   2328 Ao Or 1992   60 ambiguous forms can cooccur even if they play different  ( and compatible ) syntactic functions : ( I a ) Paul songe c " Marie dunsle jardin .   ( Paul is dreaming about M~u'ie in the garden )   ( lb ) * Paulyy songe ( Paul dreams of her there )   ( 2a ) Paul rempt it unverrede v in ( Paul fills one ghLs s with wine )   ( 2b ) * l ' aalenen remplit un ( Paul fills one with it ) Notstor 2nd person direct object may coc ( : cur with a dative clitic : * Paul me leurprd sente  ( Paul introduces me to them )  . 
Citrics do not have tile same syntactic properties as NPs : they do not co~rdiuate with NPs  , nor take NP modifiers , and are usually assigned a specific category ( Cli 0 . It is commonly agreed upon that French pronominal ctitics  ( plus the negative marker ne ) form a syntactic verbal cluster with the main verb  ( or with the reflected auxiliary 4 if there is one ) of the sentence In standard French , pronominal clitics are in complemenlary distribution with syntactic phrases as complements of various lexical heads  ( V , N , A ) . They may appeart ) naverbal head ( rf which they are not an argument : ( 3 ) Jeanenestaired ( cplt of the past participle )   ( 4 ~ Jeanluiest fiddte ( cplt of the adjective ) They : ire also subject 1o nmnerous lexieal constraints . 
Object cliticization may be ruled out by certain verbs which impose a nonclitic pronominal form :   ( 5a ) Jean ( ressemble+pense ) dPaul ( Jean resembles/thinks about Paul )   ( 5b ) Jeanlui ( ressemble +* pense )  ,  (5?)  . lean ( ?* ressembte+pense ) dlui ( 6a ) Jean ( pense+aline ) que Marieh ~ tira contedes his to ires .   ( Jean thinks/likes it that Marie tells him stories  )   ( 6b )   . leanliepense+*l'aime ) .   ( ruled out with intended mexming ) Clitics en and y may also behave as adverbial modifiers  . 
Several proposals have been made in computational linguistics lk  ) rh and liug these phenomena . Bhs 1988 gave a GPSG treatnmnt of French citric objects , which essentially cnnsiders them as preverbal NPs  ( with as Decial < Clit > feature )  , except for invert ~ subject clilics which he considers verbal suffixes  , lie does not consider adverbial uses nor cases of nonkx:al dependencies or of auxiliary-verb combinations  . Lexical entries for citrics in 4 See for example Grnss 1968  . Kayne 1975 for various argll nlelltst * or a Clilics Verb constittlent in Yrench  . See Abeilld 1992 for arguments against a VP constituent . 
P ~ aoc . oF COL1NG-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 dislocated constructions arc duplicated . Baschung et al 1987 present a UCG treatment with a more restricted coverage which considers objeet citrics as functors taking  ( on their right ) a verb expecting an NP ( or PP ) argument on its right and returning a more saturated verb  . They do not give a uuified treamlent of subject clitics which they consider as standard NPs not " do they handle nonlocal dependencies  . BS set al1989 give a slightly modified version of this treatment allowing for what they cu ! l French " semi-free " word order  . Miller 1991 , using a HPSG-style framework , considers clitics as " phrasal affixes " on VP and uses optiou allcxical rules to update the subcategorization frame of the corresponding verbal entries and foot features to keep track of the presence of a clitic in the tree  . He accnunt slot a lot of nonlocal dependencies ( including causative constructions ) but needs extra constraints oh and lelocality constraints  . He does not talk about inverted clitics nor dislocated constructions  . This treatment is not , tootlr knowledge , implemented in a computational application . 
1 . 2 . Difficulties with existing TAG vari , ' mts We can first put aside " fi'ozen " clitics which are easily handled in Lexicalized TAGs : they do not play any semantic role and " co-head " the elementary trees of their predicate  ( " impersonal " il , sein " middle " constructions antivarious idioms  )  . Clitics with a semantic role ( adverbial modifiers or arguments of a verb , an adjective or a noun ) are more difficult to handle . 
One could think of adding to the existing tree families  ( associated with the predicams ) an elementary tree ( with a substitution node for the citric and an empty argument node  ) for each possible citric ( or clitic combination ) realiz , ation . This would be somewhat uuprincipled and new trees by metarules or lexical rules  ( Vijay-Shanker and Schabes 1992 , Becket 1990) . It would also separate the syntax of adverbial ctitics from that of argume ut alones at td disallow many nonlocal dependencies  . 
One might also considcr cxtensious of TAGs , such as FOTAG or MCTAG variants . In Multicomponent TAGs , used for extunple by Kroch and Joshi 1986 , the elementary units of the grauunar are tree sets  ( notexlh crc with braces ) instead on single trees . Adjunction ( or substitutim t ) thus become simullaneous adjuuction ( or substitution ) of the different members of a treeset into a tree  ( or into the members of another treeset )  . The different members of such a set need not be of the same type  , ~md we could use a set compristhg an auxiliary tree beaded by the clitic and an initial tree headed by tile empty striug for the ct  ) r respondiug argument position :
S./-/V < dot if >= x
NOI'vb ; ? cc:+>NII'!"~/"~VNIvolt\kla < refl >=- / ex  ,  / /
Figure 1.. lean lavol t with MCTAGs
Tile substitutien node corresponding to the NP realization of the ctunplement is thus filled with the empty string when the citric adjoins  , l to wevel ' , this will not work for PP complements , since in this case , the whole PP subtree with the prel ? mition " co-he4ul " woukl have to be " zeroed " when the citric adjoins  , an opcratiou not provided by the forum lism 6 . 
S(l~c e >=-
NO , I . PPj/~ . _" Vt < dat >= + . /,"1!""~" cc >=- ressemble alui Figurc2 . llkx : king Jeanlid ressern ble with MCI'AGs . 
" Free Order " TAGs is a variant analogous to the ID/LP format for GPSG which was first introduced by Joshi  1987b and developed by Becket et al 1991  . Argument clitics would thus N : treated as moved NPs  ( substituted at the same NP nodes ) according to LI'statements such as the following : Nl  ( + Clit ) < V . This representation might heattractive for handling cases of " clitic climbing " er non local dependencies but faces unes capable problems : I It is similarly unable to account for dm argument PP/clitic alternation  , since the nixie to be substituted is an NP , not a PP in the noncitric case . 
-It prevents from having an unified syntactic representation f the different it tles  ( it dcms not make any syntaclic distinction between NP and clitic subjects  ) -It does not regard tittles-verb as a constituent ill die syntax  , and it is difficult to see how corestrictions between citrics could be handled  ( the ~ uuewarning he Mstkr prohibiting adverb insertion between citrics and verb  )  . 
Current TAGs versions thus do not provide a satisfactory account of dielion trltzen prmmminal citics  . We now turn to a u alternate representation which will nut be strictly syntactic but involve the syntactico-scmantic interl  ) ce defined in the Synchronous TAGs fimne work . 
2 . A Synchrnuous 3' At ; , representation 2 . 1 . Synchronous TAGs Synchronous TAGs have been introduced by Shieher and Schabes  1991  ) to characterize correspondences between Tree -Adjoining lauguages  . They can he used for relating two TAGs for two different hutguages for the purpose of machine translation  ( Abeilld et al 1990 )  , or lk ~ r relating a
NI \ e5 . Two different trees would lm needed for Jeanle luid on ne  ( /can gives it to him ) where first clilic = N1 , second clltic = N2 , and for Jean meledonne ( Jean gives it mme ) where first clitic = N2 , secemd clitic-N1 . 
6 . We recall that . due it ) their lack of semantic autonomy , we consider argument marking t ) repc~sitions as co-heads of the elementary tree of their predicate  , contrary to prepnsitions heading adj Lmcts wifich are autonomous heads of their auxiliary tree  . 
ACIES Dr COLING-92 . NArgrl~s , 2328 Ao~r 199261 PRO(: . OFCOL1NG-92, NAN'i I~S , AUG .  23~28 ,   1992 syntactic TAG and a semantic one for the same language  ,   . 7 for the purpose of generation or semantic analysts  . We consider here the latter case and assume that both syntactic and  . semantic TAGs are lexicalized and feature-based 8 . 
In Synchronous TAGs , TAG elementary trees are paired with semantic units expressed in a logical form language which is also a lexicalized TAG  . The correspondences are stated as tree pairings with some of the nodes of the paired trees possibly linked  . The following are examples 9 of such pairings : 5 F \1 I / 11   30an j e ' ~ , '\~/ Figure 3 . Pairing with semantic flees for Jean and NO dorrmr The links between syntactic and semantic nodes mean that an operation at one node in the syntactic tree has an equivalent combination at the linked node in the semantic tree  ( and vice versa )  . More precisely , the semantic interpretation of a sentence is built " synchronously " with its syntactic derivation  , by choosing a pair of elementary trees ( a syntactic one : T1 , a semantic one : L1 ) from the grammar and repeatedly updating it as follows  ( Shieber and Schabes 1990 ) :- choose a link between two nodes nl and n2 in the pair ( T1 , L 1 ) , -choose another pair of trees ( T2 and L2) , the root nodes of which match the respective categories of the two nodes chosen above  , -form a new pair by combining T2 at node nl and L2 at node n2 and remove the link ( if T2 and L2 have links , these are preserved in the resul 0 . 
The definition allows for the operations performed at each node to differ  , one being an adjunction and the other a substitution for example  . It also allows for a node to be linked to several other nodes : in this case  , only the " consumed " link is removed ( the others are preserved and 7 . See Shieber and Schabes 1991 for some arguments for the use of trees instead of flat structures in Logical Form  , and for the use of adjunction as an alternative to substitution in LF  . 
8 . We refer the reader to Schabesctal . 1988 for more details on LexTAGs . Suffice here to say that the TAG elementary trees are systematically associated with lexical " heads " anchoring them in the lexicon  ( and required not to be empty ) and are combined together either by substitution or adjunction  . Feature structures are also associated at the nodes of the elementary trees and constraints on combining trees can be expressed in terms of success or failure of unification  ( Vijay-Shanker and Joshi 1988 )  . Not all featur /: s are shown here . 
9 . The nonterminal names in the semantic TAG are mnemonic for Formula  , Term and Relation . Only the relevant links are shown . 
we adop there the convention that they are " pushed "?  .   . 10 upwards m the case of an adjunct to n ) . 
Since multiple links are allowed , one syntactic node may be linked to . several semantic nodes , and conversely , one semantic node to several syntactic nodes . This allows for the ability of a given syntactic element to play different semantic roles and for differeut syntactic realizations of the same  . semantic role . For example , as explained by Abeill 6 and Schabes 1990 , this formalism naturally accounts for file adverbial status of adjectives inserted into idiomatic expressions : Jean a prisune vraie veste = Jean avratment prisuneveste  ( Jean has really come a cropper )  . We want to show here that , provided it is taken as part of the wellformedness conditions of the grammar  , it also accounts for the properties of French pronominal citrics  . 
2 . 2  . Augmenting TAG wellformedness conditions with synchronicity So far  , well-formed sentences of a TAIL have been defined in the syntax only ? In this respect  , an input sentence is accepted by the TAG parser iff i to beys the following conditions : - it can be derived from an initial tree rooted in S  , -all features unify at each node in the corresponding derived nee  . 
It is however possible to allow for the definition of the wellformed sentences of the language to be given jointly by the syntax and by the semantics  , so that among the ill-formed sentences certain will be accepted by the syntaxbut rejected by the semantic rules if they cannot assign any interpretation to them  . Such semantic filtering is not without history ( Cf Pullum 1984 ) but it seems especially fruitful with the Synchronous TAG formalism because : - the syntax and the semantics use extactly the same formalism  , -the syntactic and semantic derivations are necessarily built up in parallel  . 
The following wellformedness constraint is thus added to the parser : a sentence is acceptable if fit has at least one valid semantic interpretation built " synchronottsly " with it  . By valid semantic interpretation , we mean that :- it can be derived from an initial semantic tree  , -all features unify at each node in the corresponding derived semantic tree  . 
Several linguists have also suggested such semantic filtering for cases usually thought of as more syntactic  ( e . g . Sag and Klein 1982) . The purpose of this paper is to advocate this device in various cases which all involve the syntax-semantic nter face among which French pronominal clitics  ,  2 . 3 . French pronominal elitics with Synchronous TAGs We rely on the existing elementary trees in the grammar to which we add substitution odes for all possible clitics  . Both clitics and corresponding NP , A Por PP nodes are optional in the syntax , their alternate realization is triggered by the 10  . We refer the reader to Shieber and Schabes 1990 for formal aspects of Synchronous TAGs ( which are more powerful than TAGs )  . 
A~s DECOLING-92 . NANTES , 2328 AOt 3X199262 PREC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG . 2328,1992 associated semantic representation . We show how we get the following distribution : ( 7a ) Jeanint ~ resse Marie ( Jean is interesting for
Marie )   ( 7b ) Jean I ' int ~ resse ( 7c ) * Jeanint & esse ( 7d ) * Jeanl'int & esse Marie
SF/r----A\ ( ~ m < ( NO ) ~ V2 ( NI ) ~ ~ V Ii TO 4 , TI~Io ) + i ,   .   .  ,  .   .   , "" ~ VOX intrestl />=< Cl2~ I\"eV/ace >= ? . I . ~/_j / Figure 4 . Elementary tree pairing for NO in tdresser N1 Both NP argmuents of intiresser are linked with the corresponding Terms in the semantic tree  . But the Clitic nodes are also linked to those Temts  . They are thus prevented co ~ cursince only one substitution is allowed for each Term on the semantic side  . Sentence (7b ) is thus derived as follows: . of ; 7---"
I /' II ~ F \] ean ' pro " ~ eregt '
Figure 5 . Synchronous derived trees for Jeanl'int & esse The four sentences  ( Ta ) - ( 7d ) are allowed in the syntax but only , sentences ( 7a ) and ( 7b ) are associated a synchronous interpretation . No interpretation is possible for sentence ( 7c ) because its derived semantic tree is incomplete : dte  T1 is obligatory in the semantics . No interpretation is possible for sentence ( T d ) because whenever the clitic or the NP tree is substituted  , it synchronously fills the T1 term and prevents the other to be substituted . 
A motivation t or treating cases ( 7c ) and ( T d )   ( i . e , cases of argument missing or cooccurrence between clitics and full phrases  ) as " semantically " deviant is that it seems to be always possible to construct a context in which they could be accepted  11  . We thus consider all the argument nodes to be optional and compatible in the syntax  , their realization will be incompatible in the semantics  ( and might be obligatory if the semantic representation specifies o  )  , H and lingelitic corresponding to PPs is now straightforward  , as shown in the following pairing :
SF
Jr----A\(NO ) ~ IV2 ( PP) . .--- . , oI/jdat >= + I6N .  /  . -/ Figure 6 . Elementary tree pairing for NO ressembler ~ Nl Notice  1hat although N ! is the argument of the verb , it is the PP as a whole which as marked as optional  ( and will be prevented to cooccur with a dative clitic  )  . 
The same result could be achieved if one considers the elitics to be adjoined  ( instead of substituted ) on the syntactic side but this will necessitate a richer feature system to checkclitic ordering and compatibility  ( see Abcill6   1991a for a previous accomt t along these lines )  . 
In order to keep the feature system as simple as possible  , we provide in fact nodes for all possil ) leclitic realization ( argumeulal or adverbial ones ) in the corresponding elementary trees . The complete tree for a transitive verb like voir is thus the following  ( with clitic numbering as in section 1 . 1) I2:

Figure 7. Elementary trees for NO voir NI.
We will titus get Jean yenvoit , Ilsevolt etc . . . 
2 . 4 . Ambiguity and haplohtgy Ambiguities are provided by the multiple links coming out of a clitic node : en for example can correspond to an accusative or a genitive complement  , y can I readative complement or a locative adjmtct  . . . If one takes a verb with an optional complement ( such as songer ) and the ambiguous cliticy , sentence ( Sa ) below is parsed as ambiguous whereas only the adverbial reading is selected for y in sentence  ( 8b ) 13:  ( Sa ) Jeanysonge .   ( 1:Jean is dreaming there/2:Jean is dreaming about his )   ( 8b ) Jeany songed sessouc is . ( Jean is dreaming there about his problems ) 11 . In fact (7d ) is OK in spoken French , which can be shown to exhibit " clitic doubling " , and ( 7c ) may be improved as in : ? Si Jeann ' est pas in tdressarac'est parcequ'ilnes alt pasint ~resser  . 
12 . See Miller 1991 for arguments for having the subject clitics separated from the complements ones  ,  13 . Contrary to Miller 1991 , we do not consider that ( 84 ) has a third " haplology " interpretation ( Jean is dreaming there about it )  . nor do sentence such as Jean en remplit . 
( Jean is filling some w if l x it )
ACIESDE COLING-92, NANTES . 2328 Aotlr 199263 PRO(: . Or : COLING-92 . NAN q'r ~ S , AUG . 2328, 1992 ( I ) SFF . . A / r " I ~ I R TO R NO an r vo dream ' / jean ' loc-pro '  ( 2 ) s /' . 2S . ! n(o or 0y , Figure 8 . Two possible derivations for . leany songe Notice that sentences ( lb ) and ( 2b ) above are not generated since there is only one position for y and one for en in the syntax  . 
2 , 5 , Further constraints Clitic insertion is ruled out in extraction contexts :  ( 9 ) Jesaisqui Jean regarde ( I know who Jean is looking at )   ( 9a ) * Jesaisqui Jeanleregarde ( 9b ) C'est Marieque Jean regarde ( It is Marie that
Jean is looking at )   ( 9c ) * C'est Marie que Jean la regarde In these constructions  , which correspond to distiuct elementary syntactic trees  ( in the tree family of their head ) the obligatory syntactic realization of the extracted element naturally prevents the substitution of the corresponding clitic  . 
This representation is also directly suitable for marking various constraints  , e . g . structural ones ( ruling out endirect object for PP complements ) or lexie alones ( verbs which for bid cliticization of their complement such as pen  . wr & N humor aimer que P ) . As for feature quations , certain links are structurally defined as part of the elementary trees reg  , ' u'd less of their lexical head ( and there will be no link between en and the T complemento de in the tree family for verbs with a PP complement  )  , other links are brought by the lexical head and only certain verbs with a PP complement  ( ressembler but not penser ) will define a link between the dative Clitic and their T complement ode  . 
We now show how the representation sketched above naturally extends to some cases of socalled " non local " dependencies and to cases of cooccurrence between the clitic and the corresponding argument  . 
2 . 6 . Locality constraints and nonlocal dependencies . As noted by Shieber and Schabes 1990 , locality constraints are inherent othe formalism of Synchromms TAGs  . Contrary 1o Miller 1991 , who runs the risk of allowing too many nonlocal dependencies with the FFP  , we titus do not need to add specific locality constraints  . 
Notice first that some " nonlocal " dependencies in a PSG are treated locally in a TAG framework  . Examples of these are sentences with raising verbs  ( adjoining to VI ) or att xiliaries ( adjoining to V0 ) following the word order : Jean peutle voir , Jeanl ' avu . Adjoining a raising or an auxiliary verb only update stile links coming out of the Vlor  V0 node and does not interfer with the links of the clitics  . We straightforwardly get : Jean aur ait dtdaim d de Marie = Jeanenaurait dt Faim F  ( Jeanwould have been loved by Marie )  . The agreement equations are the following ( with o-agr for object agreement ) :
S(N0) 11 , t : < agr >= x(NI)~ , < ~ gr >= xV2 b : < agr >= y ( C10~""~vit:<agr >= y<egr >= x ( El ~' ' ~' z ) ~ , -b : < ngr >= w<o-agr >= z V0 t : < agr > = w<o-ogr > zz Figure 9  . Agreement pattern for transitive verbs Cliticization of the complement of an adjective is directly allowed in copular consmtctions : Jeanest fideleg ~ Marie = Jeanluies tfiddle  ( Jean is faithful to Marie )  . 
Coptt lar constructions are ( independently ) treated as extended elementary trees in the TAG grammar  , with the adjective co-heading the elementary tree with the verb and the chic and PP  ( de ) complement odes belonging to the i4same flee . 
However , such cliticization is ruled outlin modifying adjectives  . Sentence ssnch as : J ' airencontrFune fille fid Oled Jean=*Jeluiairen contrdune fille fid Ole  ( I metagirl faithful to Jean ) are not generated since the T node corresponding to the complement of the adjective does not belong to the same semantic tree as that of NO rencontrer  N1 with which the clitic tree must be cmn bined . 
The same " local " treatment holds for cliticization of complements of nouns  . It is allowed in light-verb constrnctions such as : Jean a fair leport rait de Marie = I lena fait leport rait  ( Jean made a picture of Marie )  , which are represented as exl~nded elementary trees with the light verb and the predicate nominal co-heading the slructure  . 
It is rulod out by our treatment when the NP is in a  14  . There are differences in acceptability for cliticization with verbs taking adjectival arguments : Jelui  ( sa is +?* trouve ) Jeanfiddle . ( I know \] find Jean faithful to her ) . The difference is the same for extraction out of tile AP : Aqui  ( sa is +?* trouves ) -tu Jean fidt ? le ? and is a counted for by different syntactic elementary trees  ( an extended one for savoir , one with die AP to be substituted for trouver ) . 
15 . This is obviously too strong a constraint since there are cases where tileclitic corresponds to a complement of a noun at an arbitrary levet of ent bedding  , such as : Lebord de la couverture decelivre est dd chir ~ e = Le bord de la eou verture nest dd chird  ( The ctmler of lhecover of the book is tomout )  . 
A or Es Dr ! COLING-92 , NANTIiS , 2328 AoI%r 199264 PROC . Or : COLING-92, NANTES , AU?I .  2328 , 1992 en , which allows a direct object with a nullhe . ~l-noun : Jean achd te de uxpotato es = . leanenae hdte deux ( Jean boys two apples ) . In such cases , the determiner heads a syntactic N initial tree but its solnantic tree is an att xiliary T tree which adjoins to the T node filled by the clitic  . We also account lot cases where the dative ( humml ) clitic is semantically equivaleot to a lossessive  , a construction typical of nouns of inalienable possession  ( such as t?xly parts ) combined with certain action verbs : Cedocteur seleneles dents de Jean = Cedocteur luisoigne lesdents  ( This doctor treats Je Aufsteeth )  , llere , the clitic lui will paired with an auxiliary T tree  ( as that for possessive determiners ) and its node will be linked wilhtile T node of the direct comlllement  ( for tile verbs allowing this ) : it may thus cooccur with I he NP

For lack of space , we douot develop here Ilclitic climbing " in causative constructions which require either multicomponent trees on the semantic side or lexical rules adding causative double-headed lementary trees to the existing tree families  . 
2 . 7 . Cuoccurcence between clitics and I'11tl phrases Such c ? C corrences are exhibited by inverted context such its : Qui Jean voit-il ? Such inverted clitics are represented ia the syntax as auxiliary trees which trigger an mversiou feature  ( Ahei 1161991a ) and adjoin to the right of tile inflected verbal form  . On the semantic side , they are reprcsented as ambiguous : they are associated witii Terms and may thus alternate with u on inverted clitics or NPs uhj ccts  ( Quivoit-il ? )  , provided the verbal nodes are linked with the subject Tuede  . But they are also associated with auxiliary trecs adjoining a question marking at the top F node  ( and thus allowed to cooccur with NP subjects )  . 
Otlrer cooccurrences are exhibited hyd is located constructious such as:  . lean , Mariel ' avuor Mariel ' avu , Jean ( Jean , Mariesaw ) which tend to gencralize in spoken language . Right dislocation for complement clitics can be accounted lot straightforwardly with the cxisting elementary trees if one allows for an alternative semantic representation of the clitics  , nan~ely an auxiliary emphatics cmantict rec ( adjoining to the Term ? .   . 16 node already filled by tile NP ) insteadel a full rerm:5F ~ o , ~ w ,   ,   . RTO<o 7, 2o . t . XI/,\[~IR'Y ; e ~" . z ~ ll0VOltIDtFIO Figure 10 , Derivation of a right dislocated construction Multiple dislocations are thus allowed : Jele luiaiconfiEl ' argent  , ti Jean ( I gave Jean then loncy ) : is well its " mediaiP'ones: , lean l'ae on fi?l'argent , d Marie . We do not consider here left dislocations which have different  16  , This alternative represenuttion of clitic lronouns as semantically vacuous is similarly used by Grml shaw  1982 for Spanish clitic doubling ( optional feature Pred in the clitic entry )  . 
syntactic properties and for which a purely semantic principle see  , ms neces . ~ary in order to bind the pre~lNP ( Cf Hirschbuhler 1975 , Fr ' ~ lin 1988) . 
3. F . x tensions
We show how tile synchronous ' FAG framework naturally handles other cases of discrepancies between syntactic attachment and semantic role  , for various noncanonical configurations , while keeping the semantic component very simple and strictly coml x sitimal  . 
3 . 1 " Argument - ad juncts " It has often been noted that syntactic adjuncts may behave semantically as  17 arguments . q't ~ ese adjuncts may be in compleme nulry distribution with arguments  , such as possessive determiners and PP ( de ) coulplement . s : lavenue de Jean / savenue ( Jean's coming , his coming ) vs * lavenue /* savenue de . lean ? Syuebronous TAGsuatorally allow to represent such possessives as auxiliary trees m the syntax and as initial trees in tile semantics  . For example , tile above dislrihution with the noun venue is accounted for by linking the attact onentl?th t of the determiner  ( the top N ) and the substitution ode 11' the PP complement tOone and the S~lllle snbstitlltiou node in tile  18 corfespondillg senlantic tree:/I ( ~ P  ~ ) ~" TO ~
Figure 11. Elementary trees for venue
The phrase * lavenue is di ~ llowed because substitution is obligatory at " II  ) and the definite article la is not paired with a Term initial tree  . Other such alternations involve " relational " adjectives such as voyage pr&~Mentiel/voyagedu prdsident and are handleds in filarly  ( with the relational adjective paired with a senumtic term  )  . 
3 . 2 . " F , x tended " adjuncts It has also been noticed that a  ( ljuncts in ay\[lavea Selllantic SCOl ~ well teyood their syntactic attachorent point  . For examlle , raising verbs , negative adverbials , quautifiers alll lave a semantic sential scope a hhugh they attach to verbal rnominal items  . These discrepancies are easily handled with Synchronous TAGs provided correst nnding links are added to the elementary tree pairs  ( e . g . between VI and the Fuode for raising verbs ; CfA be ilt 6199 lb) . 
Convcrsely , we can ball lie cases of I'n arftlW"scol ) ~ 3 snch as extraposed relative clauses which attach to S all hong h they semantically modify an NP : tile syntactic Stree of tile relative chnlse is paired with an aaxiliary T rooted tree in tile scmaulics which adjoinst the Tilode  17  . We leca\[Ilhat in TAGs , there is a structural distinction between modifiers  ( which are adjined ) 1 ti 1 (  . 1 complements ( which are substituted ) . 
18 . For some linguistic argume Pds\[or representing determiners as sylttactic adjull cts  , see for example Abeill 61991 aACII!S\]I!COLIN ( I-92 , NAN " rE8 , 2328 AUI'199265P~(c . FCOLING-92, NAN rI!s,AI:I . 232 g . 1992 corresponding to the modified NP ( provided S nodes are linked with the argument T nodes  )  19 . 
Conclusion
We have shown how some noncanonical arguments can be naturally handled using the formalism of Synchronous TAGs  , provided the syntax-semantic synchronicity is incorporated as a well-formednesss condition in the grammar  . We have applied this treatment to French pronominal clitics and handle the  ; r complementary distribution with complements , without increasing the number of elementary trees in the grammar  . Thanks to the extende domain of locality of TAGs , their locality constraints are handled ( similarly as subjaeency ) without specific stipulations . We also handle cases of nonlocal dependencies , provided one adds alternative semantic representation for ambiguous clitic complements  . The same idea can be extended to other cases of mismatches between syntactic attachment and semantic role  , such as " extended " adverb scoping or exWaposition  . 

A . Abeill 61988 . A lexicalized Tree Adjoining grammar for French , Tech . report , Univ . of Pennsylvania,

A . Abeill 6, K . Bishop , S . Cote , Y . Schabes , 1990 . " A Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammar for English "  , Tech . 
Report , Univ . of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia.
A . Abeill 6, Y . Schabes , 1990 . " Noncompositional discontinuous constituents in TAG "  , Symposium on discontinuous constituency , Tilburg ( forthcoming van Horck , Wiesjma ( eds ) , Mouton de Gruyter) . 
A . Abeill 6, Y . Schabes , A . Joshi , 1990 . " Using Lexicalized TAGs for machine translation  "  , 13th Coling , 

A . Abeill 6, 1991a . Une grammaire lexical is ~ ed ' arbres adjoints pour lefran#a is : application dl ' analyse automatique  , Th ~ se de Doctor at , Universit 6 Paris 7 . 
( forthcoming Editious du CNRS , Paris )
A . Abeill 61991b . " Raising verbs in Tree Adjoining grammar " , 26th Linguistik Kolloquium , Poznan ( Vetalani , Darski ( eds ) , Springer Verlag) . 
A . Abeill 6, 1992 . " Surlanotion de syntagme verbale nfran~ais " , Lingvistic ael nv estigationes , XVI : 2 . 
K . Baschung , G . Bi~s , A . Corluy , T . Guillot in 1987 . 
" Auxiliaries and clitics in French UCG " , 3rd European
ACL , Copenhagen.
T . Becker , 1990."Meta rules lor TAGs ", 1st TAG
Workshop , Sarrebriick.
T . Becker , A . Joshi , O . Rambow 1991 . " Long-distances crambling and Tree Adjoining Grammars "  , 5th
European ACL , Berlin.
G . B~s 1988 . " Clitique set constructions topicalis6es dansune grammaire GPSG du franqais " , Lexique , n ? 6 , 

G . B ~ s , C . Gardent , 1989 . " French Order without order " , 4th European ACL , Manchester . 
J . Grimshaw , 1982 . " On the lexical representation from ance reflexive clitics "  , in Bresnan , The mental representation fgrammatical relations  , MIT Press . 
B . Fradin , 1988 . " Ap proches des constructions it d6tachement : lare prise interne " , Langue franeaise ,  78 . 
M . Gross , 1968 . Syntaxeduverbe , Cantil ~ ne , Paris . 
M . Gross 1989 . " The use of finite automata in the lexical representation fnatura language " in Gross & Perrin  ( eds )  , Electronic dictionaries and automata in Computational Linguistics  , Springer Verlag . 
P . Hirschbuhler , 1975 . " A nontransformational source for lefthand NPs  "  , Linguistic Inquiry ,  4 . 
A . Joshi , 1987a . " An introduction to TAGs " in Manaster Ramer , The Mathematics of language , Benjamins . 
A . Joshi , 1987b . " The relevance of TAG to generation " , in Kempen ( ed ) , Natural Language Generation , 

R . Kayne , 1975. French syntax , MIT Press.
A . Kroch , A . Joshi , 1986 . " Analysing Extrapositionia TAG " , in Huck and Ojeda ( eds ) : Discontinuous Constituents , Syntax and Semantics vol . 20, Academic

P . Miller , 1991 . Clitics and constituents in Phrase structure grammar  , PhD Thesis , Univ . Utrecht . 
( forthcoming Garland , New York )
P . Paroubek , Y . Schabes , A . Joshi , 1992 . " XTAG : a graphical Workbench for developing TAGs "  , 3rd Conf . 
on Applied NL Processing , Trento , Italy.
G . Pullum , 1984 . " Syntactic and Semantic parsability " , l Oth COLING , Stanford . 
I . Sag , E . Klein , 1982 . " The syntax and semantics of English expletive pronoun constructions "  , in Barlow et al . ( eds ) Developments in GPSG , vol . 2, Indiana Ling . 
Club , pp . 92-136.
Y . Schabes , A . Abeill 6, A . Joshi , 1988 . " Parsing strategies with lexicalized grammars : Tree adjoining grammars "  , 12th COUNG , Budapest . 
Y . Schabes , 1990 . Computation alnd Mathematical Properties of Lexicalized Grammars  , PhD Dissertation , 
Univ . of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia.
S . Shieber , Y . Schabes , 1991 . " Generation and Synchronous TAGs " , Computational Intelligence 7: 4 . 
S . Shieber , Y . Schabes , 1990 . " Synchronous Tree Adjoining Grammars " , 13th COL 1NG , Helsinki . 
K . Vijay-Shanker , A . Joshi , 1988 . " A Feature-based Tree Adjoining Grammar " , 12th COUNG , Budapes LK . Vijay-Shanker , Y . Schabes , 1992 . " Structure sharing in TAGs " , 14th COLING , Nantes . 
19 . This case has been handled by " local " MCTAGs ( Kroch and Joshi 1986 ) with " empty " trees for coindexing tile NP and the extraposed relative  . Due to the inherent locality of Synchronous TAGs , the sameffect of clause boundedness a " local " MCTAGs is achieved  . 
ACTESDECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt'rr 199266 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTFs , AUG .  2328, 1992
