Structural Patterns vs . String Palterns for Extracting
Semantic Information from Diction ari ~
SIMONEqI~AMON TEMAGNI
Dipartimento di Linguistiea-Uuiv crsil hdiPiml
Via Santa Maria 36-51600 Pisa Italy
email : GRAMMAR@ICNUCEVM
LUCY VANDER WENDE
Microsoft Corp , Research Division
Redmond , WA 98052
email : LUCYV@MICROSOFT . COM
1. Introduction
A stile research on extracting semantic information from online dictionaries proceeds  , most progress Ir is been made in the area of extracting the genus terms  . Two methods are being used -- pattern matching at the string level and at the structural nalys is level--t~th of which seem to yield equally promising results  . 
Little theoretical work , however , is being doue to determine the set of possible differentiae to be identified  , and therefore also the set of possible , semantic relations that can be extracted from them  . lit fact , Wilks remarks that as far as identifying the differenliae and organizing that information into a list of properties i concerned  , " sucb demands are beyond the abilities of lhe best current extraction techuiqaes "  ( Wilks et al 1989 , p . 227) . However , the current stile of the art in computational linguistics demands that semantic information beyond genus terms be available now  , on a large scale , to push forward the current heories , whetber that is knowledge-based parsing or parsing first with a syntactic omponent  , followed by a semantic component . 
In this paper , we will focus on analyzing the definitions not for the genus terms  , but for the semantic relations that can be extracted from the differentia e  ( Calzolari 1984 )  . 
Although many have accepted the use of syntactic analyses for this purpose for some time now  ( for example Jeosen and Binot 1987 , Klavans 1990 , Ravin 1990 , and Vanderwende 1990 , all of which use the PLNLPF ~ lglish Parser to provide the structural information  )  , many others still do not . We will demonstrate with examples why only patterns based on syntactic information  ( henceforth , structural patterns ) provide reliable semantic relations for the differentiae  . Patterns that match definition text at the string level  ( henceforth , striug patterns ) are conceivable , but cannot capture the variations in the differentiae as easily as structural patterns  . In addition , although it is possible to parse the definition texts using a grammar designed for one dictionary  ( e . g . a grammar of " Longmanese , " see Alshawi 1989) , we have found that a general , broadcoverage grammar of English or of Italian provides a level of analysis that is as good as  , and possibly superior to , a dictionary-specific grammar I . In addition , there is up extra effort required to apply a broadcoverage text parser to the definitions of more than one dictionary  , as we found for the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English  ( henceforth , LDOCE ) and Webster's 7th New Collegiate Dictionary ( henceforth , W7) for English , and for II Nuovo Dizionario Garzanti ( henceforth , Garzanti ) and Italian DMI Database ( henceforth , DMI ) for Italian . 
The result of analyzing the differentiae of the definitions is presented in the form of a semantic frame  ; there is one semantic frame for each word sense of the entry  . The contents of the frame will be any number of semantic relatio as  ( including the genus term ) with , as values , the word(s ) extracted from the definition text . Except for a commitment to the theoretical notion that a word has distinguishables nse  , s , the semantic frames are intended to bet beory -independent  . The semantic frames presented in this paper correspond to a description of the semantic frames produced by the lexicon-producer  ( Wilks , pp . cit . , p . 
217-220 ) and so can be the input to a knowledge-based parser  . Also , these semantic frames represent the appropriate l vel of semantic information that is needed by a semantic omponent that has the task of resolving the ambiguities remaining after a syntactic component has assigned an initial analysis  (  , see Jensen & Binot 1987 , Vanderwende 1990) . More generally , the result of this acquisition process is the construction of a Lexical Knowledge Base to be used as a component for any NLP system  . 
2. Semantic Relations
The semantic relations that are needed to provide a semantically-motivated analysis of the input text have not yet been enumerated by anyone  . It is possible that this is due to tile absence of information on a Large scale that can be used to test any hypothesis of a necessary and sufficient set of semantic relations  . Semantic relations associate a particular word sense with word  ( s ) extracted automatically from the dictionary , and those words may be further specified by additional relations  . The values of the semantic IF or example , the grammar for English was used , without modification , to parse over 4000 noun definitions . With a parser that forces an NP analysis , over 75% of these finitions parsed as full NPs . These are very good results , especially since many of the remaining 25% do not form complete NPs and so were parsed correctly  . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTEs , 2328 ho~r1992546 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AUG .  2328 .   1992 relatious therel0re baven lore ocinte EtIban binary featn res and are llot abstract semantic prilnitives  , bill rather relires enlations of the i inplicit links to other senlauti  ( : fralnes . 
An example of a semautic lelation than cau I ~ ideutilied in the differentiae is LOCATION-OF  . The deliuilion of ' market ' ( LDOCEn . l ) is expressed its follows : " a building , sqn are , liropen place wlle rep cxlple meet to buy and so ilg ~ lds  , esp . tkxld , or sometimes animals . " As we will show later , it is possible from the structural descripti ( ul of this definition to extiac the followiug wilues for the semantic relation I  , OCATION . OF : .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 

LOCATION-OFMEET ( ItAS-SUI1JFXSF'PEOPLE')
IIUY ( IIAS-OBJECT'GOODS . '' t:17) O1) . '' ANIMALS')
SEt , L(HAS-OBJEL . ~ I''GOODS , '' I~'OOD,''ANIMALS') .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Figure 1 . Senuultie franle for 1be definitiou of the noun " niarke (  . " Accm > diug to this semantic fEaine , the vell is " meet , " buy , " and " sell ": ire related as LOCATION-OF to the noun " market  . " AII bough the words extracted from the definitions are not di ~ imbiguated themselves according to I heir senses  , as nnlcbiul brmation as possible is iu Eluded in the semantic fraine as the definition being analyzed provides  , luth is example , the word " nicer " is further specified by a semantic rehition HAS-SUII  . IFMT that has " people " as its value . Also , since the verbs " buy " and " sell " me conjoined  , bxlth verbs have a HAS-OBJECT relation with all the syntactic objt~ts identified in I be analysis  . 
namely " goods ", " food " and " animals."
Semantic infomlalion ~ lf this type is necessary , fin " example , in order to automatically interpret noun conipomlds  . Given the ( partial ) semantic frame above flit " marker ' and given tbat " vegetable " li as a purpose relatiouto " food "  ( infornlation also automatically derived by applying structural patter as  1o the dc finitiml text )  , tileu oun conllxi und " vegetable market " is iuterpreted autonlalically as : " Market is a location for the purlio ~ of buying and/lir selliug vegetables  . "  ( see Vanderwende 1992 ) Examples of other semantic relations that were required to interpret noun compounds are : SUBJE  ( TF-OF , OBJECT-OF , FOOD , MATERIA l: . 
TIME , ttUMAN , IS-FOR . LOCATION-NOUN , MADE-OF , CAUSED-BY , CAUSES , MEASURE , and MEANS . 
3. Strnctaral Patterns
Tile acqaisition of seluautic relalimts Ii Oltlonl in edi/Dliouaries lU  ( x seeds by applying patterns to the sttut : tm~ll description sot the dettrillions und cx an lplc sentencl : s  . The pattetusemb ( ~ly kuowledge of which relati ( nmcet laiulet ' ut fill gelelllellt Saud COllSllq lctio its conveyilltile tit  . lille ) el ( if the dictioimry . Froinslance , the tel ; lieu PURPOSE is coaveyed in Italian by life phrases : " conlo/alloscopedi  , "" alfinedi , "" p::r , "" nsatoper , "" altoa , "" the serve a , " and " utilea " folltlwed by a noun phi ; so it rau inf initival clause . 
In English , this same rebiti ( ulsllip is conveyed by qnitesiiuilar phrases , also followed by an lnml lbr ; is e , luesent pailicil ) le , mit diuitival clause : " l ( ir ( tile ) liUrp ~ lse ( s ) o1 , "" lku , "" used hit , "" i ilteuded for , " au ( I past palticiple followed by " to . " Alterlocating the llat Lelu within the dei initiou  , the Ilue exlractioll process cousisls i u identifying tile values to b cass  ( x 3ialed with tile Seluautic tel ; lion detected . Typically the values ( if tile semantic relali ( iusfire the It ~ lds of the pattern itselt tit " ( if the complenleul ( s ) in letms of slruol nlal patterns , iir the next conteil tword ( s ) intetras ( if string patterns . H(lwever , exlracting eveuh i ( i respccilie informatiou trumttle differentia e , fi ir example that l be verb " nicer " has " t ~tlple " as its subject when it is die I  , OCATION-OF"lnatkol " . also in v ( llv cs the ideulilieatiol l o1 fuuctillual atgnnleutselverbs and ill the ease Il ' nouns  , identilicaliou of adjectives aud " with " cl miplements  . 
A simple ex ; nilple of a sll-uchn all ) atteiuisllleliatiellilllal extracts Iho semantic tel  ; lion PURI~?JSE , fioill the it a Kselldel initi(m text . The pattett l can be palapln a sexl ( in pall ) as : if I hover b " used " is Faist ~ ni ( rc lilied by a PP with the preposili ( )n " for , " thene: ,  . tract file head ( s )   ( if that I't ' and return those ; is the vah \] e of the PURPOSE relatiou . If I he1't > has a verb; . is il she ~< lda\]idanOI \], JE ( . +' i + attribute , llCiUllltilellead ( s )   ( if the OfIJECT as the values el a 11 AS . OIIJECT relation ; and if it has a SUBJECT attribute , returntile head ( s ) tit " the SUBJECT as the w dues of a It AS--SUBJI ~ ( Ti " relation . 
Cunsid or the relevant sectiml of I heparsed ( leliniti ( ul ( if ' collar ' ( LI ) OCE n ,  1): (~  ,  ) @ . o ) (-, . , . ? k s + ~, tl~t ~ good ~; Figure 2 . Parse tree for the delinition ~ lltile nonn " cellar  . " ACEI ~ SrOECOLING-92 . NANTES , 2328AO~t'1992547 Pitt)t; . ot:C3LING92, NANTES . AIJ(i .  23 28 ,   1992 The parse tree shown above 2is but one representation f the structural description of this definition  . Below is an excerpt of the record structure containing the functional information for tree node PPI above:  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
NODE'PPI'
PRMODSPREP 1 " for "
HEADVERB 2 " storing "
PSMODSNOUN 2 " goods "
PRPPREPI " for "
OBJECTNOUN 2 " goods " .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Figure 3 . Functional information for the prepositional phrase in Figure  2  . 
Following tile structural pattern for PURPOSE , we see in Figure 2 that tile VERB 1 , " used " , is postmodified by a PP with the preposition " for " and so the base form of the PP head  , VERB2 (" store ") ,   3 is extracted as the value of the PURPOSE relation associated with " cellar "  . In addition , an OBJECT has also been identified in the structural description  , amely NOUN 2 , and so its head " goods " ( ill this case , tile noun itself ) is the value of the HAS-OBJECT of " store " . The result of this pattern will be the partial semantic frame for " cellar ":  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 

PURPOSE'STORE'(HAS-OBJECT'GOODS') .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Figure 4 . Partial semantic frame for " cellar , "4 . In adequacy of String Patterns Some patterns to identify semantic relations are relatively trivial and can be handled by string patterns  . For example , no matter where the string is found in the definition text  , " for ( the ) purpose ( s ) of " as well as " conlo/allos copodi " always indicates a PURPOSE relationship between the definiendum and the head of the phrase  ( noun or verb ) following " of / di " . Markowitz et al also discuss patterns at the string level  , based on defining formulae , which extract such features as stative or active for adjectives  , or member-set relations for nouns . These are adequate because the patterns described are generally all found at or close to the beginning of tile definition text  . But the most interesting patterns that identify the differentiae and tile  ( possibly embedded ) semantic relations expressed therein rely on 2The parse trees in this paper are altered representations isomorphic to actual machine output which IBMASD has not allowed us to reproduce  . Heads of constituents are directly below their parent node and the node name is in bold  . 
SPPs are analyzed with a preposition premodifier and a nominal as the head  . 
complexs tnzctural iuformation , information which cannot be expressed adequately in string patterns  , The following addition makes the pattern for extracting the PURPOSE relation  , parat thrased in the previou section , more complete : if tile PP with " for " is not a postmodifier of a verb " used "  , then a PURPOSE relation between the definiendum and the head  ( s ) of the PPc , ' m be hypothesized if the nearest noun that the PP postmodifies i the genus term  . 4 Consider the syntactic analysis of the relevant portion of text in the definition of " laboratory  "   ( W7n , l ) shown below in Figure 5 . Since PP2 and PP4 are coordinated , tile structural relation to the rest of the analysis will be tested for titile conjoined constituent  , PP1 . The nearest noun phrase that PP1 postmodifies i NP1  , the head of which , NOUN 1 , is indeed the genus term ( also identified automatically bstructucal patterns applying to this analysis  . ) Thus , part of tile semmltic frame for Sense 1 of " laboratory " will be: .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 

PURPOSE'STUDY ,'' TESTING , '' ANALYSIS ' .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
?( a ?, o)
Figure 5 . Semantic frame for " lalx ) ralor y " and the parse from which it was derived . 
Now consider the syntactic analysis of the relevant portion of text in the definition of " council "  ( LDOCE n ) : " a group of people appointed or elected to make laws  , rules , or decisions , for a town , church , etc . , or to give advice ": 4Currently , for English , an abstract relation 1S-FOR ks extracted which will satisfy any searches for a PURPOSE relation  . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 Ao~r 1992548 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG . 2328,199 2io , ~, da ~* re Figure 6 . " for "- PP that does not create a PURPOSE relationship  . 
Tile nearest noun phra ~ that PPI postmodifies i NPI  , which is a coordimlted construction . None of the heads of NPI , " laws " , " rules " or " decisions " can he identified as the genus term  , and sotile patteru does not succeed in extracting a PURPOSE relation from this definition  . 
In order to write a string pattern that would correctly identify tile semantic relations above  , the pattern would have to identify conjoined heads and apply some measure of distance from the genus while counting conjoined phrases as single units  . In addition , string patterns would also have to skip parentheses  , identify functional arguments , and abstract from the surface realizations of the pattern  , e . g . 
pre - and postmodification ( similar observations are made in Ktavans 1990 )  . Even if the language of dictionary definitions is characterized by its regularity  , variations of the defining formula exist . These restrictions seem to be far too complex at tile string level  , while writing the patteruat the level of syntactic analysis describes the dependency in an iutuitive manner  , namely in terms of heads and modifiers . 
The inadequacy of string patterns in ot only evident when extracting the semantic relations directly related with the definiendum  , but also when extracting those relations that show further specifications  . In particular , the HAS-SUBJECT and HAS-OBJECT relations cannot possibly be extracted reliahly without structural information  . Wider syntactic on text is also required to correctly extracthe semantic feature such as COLOR  , SHAPE , TASTE , and SMELL not only as features of tile definiendum  , but also as further specifications of the words extracted as the vahms of  . semantic relations . 
The structural pattern that extract semantic features such as COLOR and TASTE would seem to be trivial : modifying adjectives or nouns that express these properties  . The attachment of these modifiers , however , can be established only outhe basis of syntactic information  ( and sometimes syntax is not enough )  . And only those modifier should be extracted that relate to the definiendum or those that relate to some other word within the definition which stands in some semantic relation  ( for instance HAS-PART , MADE-O1: . and so forth ) with the definienduul . Intile tatter case t be informatiml extracted still has an indirect link with theie mmaI ~ eing defined  , but it is not expected to be interpreted as a semantic feature of lhed cfiniendum itself  . 
Consider these examples from tile Garzanti dictionary  ( followed hytheir English glosses ) : acagiil : " alh crotropicale daiti'utti saporiti  . "  ( mahog any tree : tropical tree with tasty fruits ) alchechengi : " pianta erbaceal conbacche di color a rancior acchiuse in uu involucre membranace o  , cmmestibile . "  ( winter cherry : herbaceous plant with orange berries  , contained in a membranaceous coveting , edihle ) . 
The TASTE amltile CO l , OR feature should not be extracted as seamntic features of the definic ndum  . In the case of " a cagifi , " this is clear due to the lack of agreement between " albero "  ( tree ) and " sapotiti" ( tasty ) : tile adjective cannot modify the head noun/genus term Ixx : a use they do not agree in nm nber  . " Saporito " , however , is the value of the semantic feature TASTE of " frutto "  ( fruit )  , which is in turn the value of the HAS-PART relation of the definiendum  , also extracted by means of a structural pattern front the dc finition text  . The semantic frame for " a cagiil '" is show u in Figure  7: 

ISAAL BERO tIAS-PARTH ~ UTTO(TAS'I\]~ . SAPOR1TO ) .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Figure 7 . Semantic frame fortile definition of " ac , agifi . " In the case of " alchechengi , " the PP " dicolorarnncio " ( " of orange color " ) does not contribute a COLOR feature to the dcfiniendmn since it cannot mt ~ lifytile head /genus " pianta "  ( " plant " ) given its embedded position with intiles yutactic structure : Figure  8  , Parse tree for the definition of " alchechengi . "Acr Es DECOLING-92, NANTES , 2328 . ~ O1~'1'1992549 Plmc . OFCOLING-92 . NAN r ~; s,AUt ~ .  2328 ,   1992 If we consider the shaictural description of the definition for " alchechengi  , " we can see clearly that the embedding of PP2 within the syntactic structure , followed by another modifier of " bacche , " AJP 1 , makes it impossible for PP2 , " dicolora rancio , " to modify I he head noun " pianta " , and so the semantic fczlture COLOR " anancio " is extracted for " bacche "  , which is in a PARTOF relation with the definiendum  . 
Syntactic information is not alway sufficient for resolving the correct assigmnenl of semanfic fealures  . Consider the DMI definition for " agnolotto " ( a kind of ravioli ) : agnolottn : " involucro dipasta all ' uovo rolon dooret taugolar c  . "  ( ravinli : ronndor rectangular covering of egg pastry  ) The attacimlent of the adjectival phrase " roton dorettangolare " is ambiguous and cmrnot be determined on the hasis of syntactic information  , but only I ) ased ou semantic information ; the correct analysis would reada " round or rectangular covering " and not " around or rectangular egg  . "Despite this syntactic ambiguity , the range in ambiguity for extracting semantic relatim rs and t cature siquite reduced if we start from syntactic structures instead of from simple strings  . 
5 . Why a general text parser is sufficient There are two rea~ns wily a general text parser is essential fo~providing the syntactic analyses  . First , of the four dictionaries that have been explored in this research  , Garzanti and DMI ( for Italian ) and LDOCE and W7 ( for Englisi 0 , only LDOCE attempts tonse a restricted vocabulary in the definition texts  . Therefore , I he scope of the vocabulary is the same as unrestricted text  . Moreover , the language used in dictionaries cannot appropriately be called a specialized language given that it does not operate in a specialized omain  . Second , attire syntactic level , the variety of couslruclions can be compared to thai of textual corpora  . The regularity of the language used within dictionary definitions  , lexically and syntactically constnained , lies in the flequent occurrence of lexieal and syulactic patterns to express particular conceptual categories or semantic relations  . This regularity , which is crucial with respect to the extraction of semantic information  , can be considered almost irrelevant from tire point of view of persing I  ) ecause of the variety of lexical choices and phrasal constnlctions used to express tile patterns  . A parser , therefore , is faced with the , , anne range of p\['oblems in arralyzing ordinary texts as in dictionary dcfinitions and so the use of a gencralp tapose grammar is alundmnental choice in the definition of our research framework  . 
One of the main disadvantages ascril ) ed to using general tent parsers is themobiguity still remaining at the end of the synt : ~ cfic analysis  . It has of icn been observed that de ~ riptions associated with syntactically ambiguous coust fuctions illfi ' ee text can bcdi ~ ambiguated in the context of dictionary definitions  . For example , within our system the default strategy in free text is to attach a prepositional phrase to tile nearest available head and to keep track of the alternative possible attachment sites  . In the context of dictionary definitions , the choice resulting from such a default strategy carl often be overridden on the basis of lexical and/or syntactic onditions which disamhiguale tile potential ambiguity  ; for instance , with regard to the PP attachment case , there is a class of genus terms ( such as " at lo , " act , " effetto . " effect ; " processo , " process ) that , together with given structural conditions , make the attachment decision l ) ossihle . 
Also , while functional assignment may be ambiguous in Italian in some cases  ( Chauod et al 1991 )  . we can assume that construction sued within dictiomuy definitions and examples enlcnces are always unmarked  , and consequently that the ambiguity derived from taking into account also marked orders of sentence constituents  ( uchasSubject-Object-Verb . Object-Verb-Subject and so forth ) is very unlikely to occur in the dictionary text . 
Rather than taking these observations a justification for building a dictionary specific parser  , we use first a broadcoverage parser , followed by a postprocessor which tailors the output of the parser based oil the differences observed between dictionary text and general text  . As it turns out , the size of file postprocessor is negligible compared to the size of the grammar  . This supl ) orts our claim that the variety of syntactic on structions in dictionary text is comparable to that of text m de or p ~  ) ra . If dictionary text were substantially different from general text  , we would have had to write more rtdes in the posl -processor and it would have to be bigger than it in fact is  . Tile structural patterns for the extraction of semantic information aturally operate on the result of the postprocessor  ( see Montemagni 1992 )  . 
Twn kinds of refinements have been devised in order to achieve more appropriater sults with respect to the 
I~m guage used with indiclionaries : ( 1 ) rule out ambiguity in the attachment of modifiers or in the assignment of functional roles which is not applicable in the context of dictionary definitions  ;   ( 2 ) handle parses that are incomplete due to either dictionary specific construction sotoccurring in freetexts  , or , more generally , to gaps in tile lexical or grammatical knowledge of the system  . 
While the first refinement operates on a complete analysis but aims to reduce the high degree of ambiguity typical of freetext by exploiting pcculiarities of dictionary language  . 
the second refinement concerns thcrobustness of the system in the abscnce of a complete parse  . 
For an example of refining the parse in order to reduce the ambiguity  , consider the Garzanti definition ( n , l ) of " comput : ~ ione " ( computation ) defined , as " alto , effel to del computare " ( the actor result of computing )  . The first Acrl ! sDI~CO\[JNG-92 . NANTES , 2328 AO0r 1992550 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NAI CrES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 stnlctural description below shows the NP parse for geueml text  . This default analysi shows PP1 " delcomputare " in be attached to the closest availahle head  , NOUN 2"effetto" , while the alternative attachment site is malked with a question mrk  . The second parse below shows the resolution of the PP attachment ambiguity  ; PPI now modifies tile coordinated nouns NOUNI ~ md  NOUN2  . 
It ~ ont ", , ?& fl ~"----
Figure 9. Resolution of PP attachment ambiguity.
This refinement is made when a prepositional phrase or an infinitival clause postmodifies e  ( ~ ) rdinated bead nouns that are the top nodes of the syntactic analysis  . This is the typicap altenl of the definitions of deverbal nouns  ; the PP indicates which verb the definiendum is derived from  . The lexical and synlactic ouditions which make tim disamhigualion possible  ; tre defined in the l ~ ) sV processor to the general text analysis . 
T be solution to a robust phrasal analysis while parsing dictionary text with a general grammar cau hese cn and faced from two different perspectives  . The first perspective is dictionary specific and de  , ' ds with incomplete pauses due to input which would be considered ungrammatical outsid c of the context of dictionary definitions  . The second pective copes with incomplete knowledge of language use by exploiting the general technique of fitted parsing provided by the system fi  ) rh and ling ill-formed in pnt ( Jensen et al 19831 . 
Dictionary definitions are quite often fl ) rnmlated as condensed fragments of real texts , with elid cd elements which make the definition syntactically ill-formed and interpretable only by reference to a wider context  . This is tim case with noun definitions consisting of a noun phrase pre-modified by a prepositional phrxse  , where the latter specifies the usage domain of the word sense expressed by the former  . The general grammar is unable to produce an NP node covering the whole input string given that the sequence PPNP does not freely occur within ordinary texts  . 
It is the refinement stage that should reshape the analysis and restore it  , as regular input on the basis of Slrecialized diclionaty use  . The aualysis below of the Garz xudide finition 111 , 1 , 2) " nettare " ( nectar) , defined as " nellan litologia classica , labewm & t deglidei " ( in classical mythoh ) gy , the drink of gods ) exenrplifies this kind of lefiuenlen\[ . 
t,ofo , offx , o ~)
J . ~' <-~--.
( . ,, ~, )( ,, u , o ;__:9 (0n ~@ . __@ o , ~ . oo . ~ cla . sstca ", ~ tloiJlid4Ji
A . ~ C - , ; ~?)
Figtue 10. ReI\]nenten l offitted parse into NP .
The filst of tile two llarses alnJ ve has I ~ . .cn generated by the general Erauunar ; the XXXX1 label at the top node shows that the i ) alsc is in complee , q ' he second one has been rebuilt ( hiting the refincn lemstage : the XXXX1 has IK ven replaced hythel ) fol~rlahcl NPI . In this case , knowledge oldicti ( nlary peculiarities resolves the initial partial parse and converts it into a complete and succc  . ssful analysis . 
Not all iu coln plete parses can l ) ~ so easily restructured . 
Some are due to gaps in the system with respect to lexical as well as phlase constrnction knowledge  . Those cases are handled hylacilifies in t be fitting pa~cedure  , provided by the system to cope with umes lricted input  . Wilentheg ~ tlln Uar is unable to produce at coulplete ~ malysis  , then a reasonable at lPt + oximate but incomplete structure is assigned to the input  . 
Suchal OU ~, . hparse Call still be used as input Ibrfltrtheri ) rocessi , ; , ~  ; t ~ t ge s and h ) i ' the extraction procedure itself . By allowing stn ~ cturall ) atterus in apply to incomplete parses as well , the auto , italic extraction ( If semantic iuh ) rmatiou is not threatened . There is , however , a difference in the extraction pa ) cednre applied to complete ( i . e . computed by tbegeuel ~ d grammar or restore during the posl-processing stage  ) and incomplete analyses . While slruct m-alpatlen is are used 1o extract semantic in fonlmtion frmn definitions and example ~ ntences successfully parsed  , partial structural patterns and string palter m ; are combiueu . l when handling incomplete pa~ses . By differentiating the ACI'I!S DECOI~/qG-92 , NAI Vr Es , 2328 Anus 199255 ilqt ?) ?: . ( ) l:COLIN(;-92, NAN-rEs , Au(t .  2328 ,   1992 extraction procedure for the two kinds of results  , the procedure becomes robust and overcomes the variability of parsing performauces  . 
Finally , a brief account of the parsing performance of the Italian grammar for a corpus of  1000 definitions . The general Italian grammar provided complete parses for about  65-70% of lhese definitions . An improvement comprising 1015% of the total was achieve during the refinement stage  . For the unresolved in complete parses , approximately 1520% , a different extraction procedure , based on a combination of partial structural patterns and string patterns as described above  , has been hypolhesized . Even if this procedure is at a nearly development stage  , it is possible to evaluate the first results . Because of the robust strategy , the extraction procedure can be applied to lhe entire corpus of definitions  , without he worry I hat incomplete parses would affect he extraction of semantic information  . Some information is extracted in any ease ; in the worst case the information is not very deep or detailed  ( at least hege nusterm is extracted )  . The results can be differentiated by degree of detail  , but the extraction procedure never fails to produce some results  . 
6. Conclusion
Viewed ideally , the choice between structural patterns and string patterns i obviously in favor of structural patterns  , because they are more suitable for achieving accuracy in the extraction of semantic information from dictionaries  . 
Controversyrises only when considering the reliability of parsing the dictionary definitions themselves  . In this paper , we show the feasibility of applying structural patterns to parse definitions in order to extract semantic information from dictionaries  , with the goal of deriving and making explicit he basic general knowledge implicitly stored in any standard printe dictionary  . Structural patterns , much more than string patterns , provide the rich semantic information that makes the lexicon a relational network expanding in n -dimensions  . Not only semantic features or relations directly related to the definiendum are extracted  , but also further specifications of the words extracted as values of semantic features or relations  . 
We have also described a robust procedure for extracting this semantic information  . The syntactic analysis of the definition text provided by a general text parser is evaluated automatically and  , if necessary , a postprocess applies 1o refine the parse given the context of a dictionary  , The results of the structural patterns are differentiated according to the success of the parse  . In this way , the use of a grammar improves the quality and the reliability of the semantic information extracted  . 

Alshawi , H .  1989 . " Analysing the Dictionary Definitions " in Bnguraev & Briscoc  , eds . , Computational Lexicography for NaturalLanguage Processing  , Longman , London , pp .  153-170 . 
Boguraev , B . , and T . Briscoe , eds .  1989 . Computational Lexicography for Natural Language Processing  , Longman , 

Calzolari , N .  1984 . "Detecting Patterns in a Lexical Data Base " in Proceedings of the lOth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Stanford , CA , pp . 170-173 . 
Chanod , J . P . , B . Harriehausenad S . Montemagni .  1991 . 
" A twostage algorithm to parse multilingual rgument structures " in Proceedings of the International Conference on Current Issues in Computational Linguistics  , University Sains Malaysia , Penang , June 2127 1991 . 
Jensea , K . , and J . -L . Binol .  1987 . " Disambiguating Prepositional Phrase Atlnehments by Using On Line Dictionary Definitions " m Computational Linguistics  13  . 3-4 . 251-60 . 
Jensen , K . , G . E . Heidorn , L . A . Miller , and Y . Ravin .  1983 . 
" Parse Fitting and Prose Fixing " in American Journal of Computational Linguistics  9  . 3-4 . 123 - 6 . 
Klavans , J . , M . Chodorow , and N . Wacholder .  1990 . " From Dictionary to Knowledge Base via Taxonomy " in Electronic Text Research  , University of Waterloo , Centre for the New OED and Text Research , Waterloo , Canada . 
Markowitz , J . , T . Ahlswede and M . Evens .  1986 . 
" Semantically Significant Patterns in Dictionary Definitions " in Proceedings of the  24th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , June 1013 1986 , pp .  112-119 . 
Monlemagni , S .  1992 . " Tailoring a broadcoverage grammar for the analysis of dictionary definitions " to appear in Proceedings of  EURALEX-92  , August 49 , 

Ravin , Y .  1990 . " Disambiguating and Interpreting Verb Definitions " in Proceedings of the  28th Annual ACL Conference , June 69 . Pittsburgh , pp .  260-267 . 
Vanderwende , L .  1990 . " Using an Online Dictionary to Disambiguate Verbal Phrase Attachment " in Proceedings of the  2nd IBM Conference on NLP , March 1315 , La Defense , 

Vanderwende , L .  1992 . " Understanding Noun Compounds Using Semantic Information Extracted from OnLine Dictionaries  . " Dissertationip reparation , Georgetown
University , Washington DC.
Wilks , Y . , D . Fass , C . Guo , J . McDonald , T . Plate , and B . 
Slator .  1989 . "A Tractable Machine Dictionary as a Resource for Computation M Semantics " in Bognraev & Briscoc  , eds . , Computational Lexieography for Natural Lzmguage Processing  , Longman , London , pp .  193-228 . .

For the specific oncerns of the Italian Academy , Vanderwende is responsible for sections 13 and the English part of section 4  , and Montemagni is responsible for the Italian part of section  4 and sections 56  . 
ACRESDECOL 1NG-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt3a "1992552 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
