A Chinese Corpus for Linguistic Research
Chu-Ren Huang
hschuren@twims886. bitnet
Institute of History and Philology
Academia Sinica
Kch-jiann Chen

Institute of lnlormation Science
Academia Sinica
This is a project note on the first stage of the construction of a comprehensive corpus of both Modern and Classical Chinese  . The corpus is built with the dual aim of serving as the central database for Chinese language processing and for supporting iJl ~ lepth linguistic research in Mandarin Chinese  . 
I Background
The project being reported on is a subproject of the ongoing research of the CKIP  ( Chinese Knowledge Information Processing ) Group . This group was founded by Hsieh Ching-chun in 1986 and is currently directed by Keh-jiann Chen and Chu-Ren Huang  ( Chang et al 1989 , Hsieh et al 1989 , Chen et al 1991) . 
The CKIP research is divided into three subprojects according to their goals :  1  ) An Online Lexicon for NLP , 2) A Corpus , and 3) A Parser . The suit-projects are designed to create a self -sufficient and mutual supporting environment for Chinese NLI : The corpus will be the database supporting the electronic lexicon  , while the lexicon will be the basic reterence for automatically tagging the corpus  . Moreover , both the corpus and the lexicon will supporthe parser  . Our parser adopts the unification-based formalism of ICG  ( infor-mation-based Case Grammar , Chen and Huang199)) , which encodes all grammatical information on each lexical entry  . At this point in time , the lexicon consists of a fully automated earlier version with limited grammatical information and an updated version with complete grammatical version for parsing  , q taere are more than 40 thousand entries in the completed electronic dictionary  , which is available online in " lttiwan and allows basic pattern-matching searches  . There is also a PC version with reduced search capacity available from the Industrial ' ~ echnology Research Institute  , the primary funding agency of this pilot dictionary project  . 
The updated version ow contains roughly 30 thousand entries with complete grammatical information and  another60 thousand with basic grammatical categories . 
Manipulation of lexical information such as addition of entries and specification of detailed grammatical information with respect to each attribute is maintained online  ( Jian and Chen 1991 )  . The completed 90 thousand word lexicon will be our core lexicon fl ) rpars-ing . The hierarchical rrangement will enable us to efficiently add new entries and create special lexicons for sub~lo-mains  . 
Many modules of the parser arc now under construction and some of them have been completed  , such as a analyzer-generator fr quantifier -measure com-pouods  ( Mo et al 1901 ) and a lookup segmentation program ( Chen and IAu 1992 )  . Both the compound analyzer-generator and the segmentation program perform well  . The recognition rate f l ) r the segmentation program , excluding proper names and derived words , is 99 . 77% . Since neither proper names nor word breaks are marked in the writing system  , they will have to be dealt with separate modules using both morphological and heuristic information  . The analyzer-gener-at or has the perfect recognition rate of  100% while allowing overgeneration adambiguity , which also often involve proper names and derived words  . 
The corpus portion of the project is mainly funded through a grant from the Chiang Ching-kuo Foundation lot International Scholarly Exchanges to Acade-mia Sinica and the University of London  , and is supported by matching funds from Academia Sinica  . I ~ aul Thompson is the Co-Principle hw estigator attim University of London  . The COBUIt , D project of the University of Birmingham also offers technical consultation  . Of the 12 linguists working full time in the CKIP group , five are assigned to the corpus project in addition to three programmers  . 
II . Sources and Size of the Corpus
A strategical decision was made early in our project to build separate corpora for both classical and modern Chinese  . This is not only because the same lexical computing techniques can be used lor both modern and classical Chinese  ( data are represented as Chinese characters )  , but also because we think it will be interesting to compare the result of an open aud artificially balanced corpus  ( the moder none ) with a completed but randomly balanced corpus ( the classical one )  . In addition , the impact on linguistic research will probably be more immediate and obvious india chronical studies AcrEsDE  COLING-92  . NAN ~ IdS , 2328 AOt ~, r199212 I4PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AUG . 2328,1992 titan in synchronical studies . Hence , tile classical cot'-pus is defined in terms of time  ( roughly all existing text written before 0B . C . ) and the modmn corpus is defined by size ( 7- l ( Imillion words tagged text in two years )  . 
This also sct the direction of future development : he classical corpora will develop clironologically through the time while the modcrn corpora will cxp and both in size and in domain--specific corl ~  ) ra . 
The following texts are acquired ill the first stage : l  ) Modern Chinese A . 10 million characters of texts ( word breaks are m ) t used in Chinese writing systems , but the average word length is a littlenlore than two characters  ) from three months of the l . iberal Thnes , a daily newspaper . B .   10 million characters fi'om the China Tiates group . 
Agreement was reached ha October , 1991 with thcCh in a Times group , one of the twoucws paper giants in ' lhi-wall , to provided aily on-line text to our project . Thus we will have a dependable and unlimited source of data  ( up to one million characters a day )  . The group pu- . 
blishes three newspapers , t lever aln lagazines , and has a separate book-publishing subsidiary . C . Al~mtone million words of data previously input by the CKIP project  . This includes 10 articles front a magazine and explanatkm text ft ~laa dictionary  . D . 30 thoummd words of tran . ~libed spoken text . This section will be input in ltF)2 . 
Newspapers are tilenlainstay of our data source furtheotwious reason that the newspaper texts are online  . But it is also a ( xmvenient text containing many v mieties of writing  , including spoken couver ~ tion ( in ~ terviews ) , commentaries , translations ( foreign dis-patches ) , and all genres of literary styles ( Chinese newspapers arc different from the Westeln ones in having daily literature supple in entaries  , and are the most important venue for literary publications  )  , l lowevev , because of difficul--ticsill converting different charac-tcr-ca~ling and markup systems  , we can only incorporate news from China Tintesto otn corpus of ar  . tither types of texts should be available by fall  1092  . 
2) The Classical Corpns
Roughly three million characters of Chinese written prose have smvived frmn the years before Christ was born  ( i . e . from all tile periods up to the Western Hart Dynasty  )  . A corpus of roughly 1 . 5 million characters of the text is now available in machine readable forms from a previous prolect in Academia Sinica  , the remaining 1 . 5 million characters arc now being keyed in and will be on-line by  mid-1992  . 
111. Functions and Applications
It is out"hmgterm goals for the Corpus to have the automatic dictionary compiling abilities  , fashioned af-tcrCOBUILI ) ( Sinclair 1987 , iN)l ) , adapted for both parsing and hard-copy publishing  . In the flirt stage , however , we concentrate on developing tools for linguistic research  . We will describe the search functions that we have developed so far  . Most of the functions are character-based now and call be upgraded to word-based once we incorporate our tagger and word segmentation a Klule  . 
The search utility in our corpus is basically a KWIC  ( keywtlr d-in~m--text ) search based on Chinese characters . Our search progran lallows the linguists to specify both the size of right-and left-hall O sidecxm texts h  ( lwn as the search resnlt . There is also a randomizer to chm ) seamore manageable size of data if the search result is too big  ( more than a thou-s and citations )  . The ordering of data is done in the traditional way in terms of nutubers of strokes in tile character in the immediate context  . This is not the ideal metht xl but may be the best available before we can deve h  ) pasy stem which is ln ) ttt linguistically and hem-istically more ~ phisticated  . 
A romanizatim lbased articlings ~ ystem would be even less desirable f l  ) r the lack of unif l ~ r m ( and familiar ) romanization system ill ' lli iw an and h ~ r the failure to dis-amhiguiate homonyms  . 
In addition to the basics ( ~ irell procedures , the following customized search commands are added to serve tile need of linguistic research  . 
1 ) #<k w > #: a context where a keyword is both preceded and followed by the mimeword  . 
2 ) AA : le duplicatim l ( one character )  3 ) All All : reduplicatim l ( two characters )  4 ) < k wl >* < k w2 > : crax ~ ; urreuces of two keywords in a ( possibly ) di ~ ontinuous context . 
5 ) < kwl>/I<kw2>:context where a keyword ( k  w2 ) is ' left-disassocia tcd ' fronlanother key word  ( kwl )  , i . e . 
where the sccnnd keyword does not ( recur in the left-context of the first keyword . 
6 ) < kwl>/r<kw2>: context where a keyword ( k  w2 ) is ' right-d is associated ' from another keyword ( kwl )  , i . e . where tile secured keyword does not occur in the right-context of the first keyword  . 
t ; omm and s1 ) -3 ) are helpful tools in studying morphological rules and identifying morphological con-stmctions for Chinese  . Since Chinese writing systems do not include word breaks  , and since no lexicon canever offer a complete list of words  , word segment at km is nontrivial in Chinese Language Processing  ( Chert and Liu 1992 )  . Identifying and util ~ ing morphological information is therefores sential Ix  ) thin lexical computing and in natural anguage processing  . 
ACnT . SDr . COLING-92, NANTES , 2328 Ao(rr 19921215 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NAN-rES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 Command 4 ) is a handy tool to discover cooccurrence restrictions and their semantic on sequences  . 
Commands 5 ) and 6 ) are used to eliminate ambiguity and to cut down the size of search results  . 
It can be noted that since our tagger is not running yet and since the Chinese running text seldom defines a sentence by a period  ( a whole paragraph often contains only one period and many commas  )  , the above commands use number of characters at her than sentence markers to delimit search domains  . 
Concordance programs are also being developed for our project  . The current version runs with our classical corpus  . It is able to show both the text source of each concordance item as well as page numbers from the printed version for easy reference  . This is originally developed on the HP workstation  , the machine we now use , but a version that runs on IBM PC 486 with either SUNUnix or CCL Unix is also available now  . 
Another research tool that we develope deal with frequency counts of characters and words and statistical packages to compare linguistics and other textual features of the corpora  . Like many other modules of our project , this module has been developed and completed m dependently  . It has been tested on the untagged on-line classical Chinese database of the " l ~  , en-ty-five Dynastic Histories ( Hsieh 1991) . This module is ready to be incorporated into the system  . 
IV . Accomplishments and Future Developments In this first stage of the development of a Chinese corpus for NLP and for linguistic research  , we have achieved the primary goals of acquiring the core text data  , and establishing a mutual-supporting environment between the lexical computing research on the corpus and the computational linguistics research on NLE Our systems are developed on HP workstations under Unix  . The system should be portable to any Unix machine with compatible Chinese solution  . For instance , we are porting each of our modules to a IBM PC 486 running Unix for the use of our collaborator in Lon-don  . 
In this preliminary stage , the most encouraging sign is that our human linguists have established productive interaction with the corpus  . Human expertise helped to design search utilities pertinent to linguistic research and corpora provided both a convenient source of linguistic facts and a solid basis for deducing useful generalizations  . With the basic KWIC search utilities , the CKIP project has finished several linguistic studies with the help of the corpus  . Take Mo et al (1991) for exam-pie , the quantifier-measure rule that our analyzer -generator uses is based on generalizations extracted from the corpus  , and the program it set fistested on texts randomly selected from the corpus  . Other linguistic works based on the corpus include Hong  , Huang and Chen ( 1991 ) on morphological rules fl ) r Chinese , and Mo , Huang and Chenon serial verb construction i Chinese  ( 1991 )  . This corpus is currently used by the CKIP project in their ac-counts of A-not-A questions  , of resultative compounding , of nominalization , and of various reduplications . 
Incorporation of an automatic tagger and extraction of grammatical information from the tagged corpora is the most important immediate future goals of this proj-ect  . This , of course , depends crucially on a tagging system with theoretically well-structured attributes  . A database for attribute si being developed with the  1N-FORMIX software . And we will folh ) w the TE l guidelines ( Sperber-McQueenad Burnard 1990 ) whenever possible . Our word segmentation program now doubles as a category-tagger  . But this can only be viewed as a research aid for the linguists to detect categorical mbi-guities and unlisted words  . We also expect heon-gooing linguistic research to identify more search functions and refine the existing utilities  . Direct extraction of dictionaries and grammars hould I  ) cfeasible in five years . 

Research of this project was partially funded by the Chiang Ching-kuo Foundation for International Scholarly Exchanges  . The first author wants to express hisgratitude to the Center for the Study of Language and Information  , Stanford University for thc surpor the received when he visited there  , during which a draft of this note was completed . Responsibility of any errors remain ours alone . 

Chang , LL . and CKIE 1989 . The Categorical Analysis of Mandarin Chinese ( Revised edition , in Chinese ) . 
Taipei : Academia Sinica.
Chen , K . -J . and CKIE 1991 . ' llle Chinese Knowledge and Information Project and Chinese Electronic Dictionary  ( in Chinese )  . Paper presented at the Joint Chi-nese-Japan Symposium on Information Processing  . 

Chen , K . -J . and C . -R . Huang .  1990 . Information-based Case Grammar . COLING90 . Vol . ll .  54-59 . 
Garside , R . , G . Leech , and G . Sampson . Eds .  1987 . 
The Computational Analysis of English . London :

ACHESDE COLING-92 , NANTEs , 2328 AO~'T19921216I ) ROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , Au G . 2328, 1992 Hsieh , C . -C .  1991 . Statistics of the " li~xt of the qwenty-Five Dynastic Histories  . Pal~er presented at ROCL-
INGIV.
Jian , L . -E and K . -\] . Chert .  1990 . The Hierarchical Representation and Management of Lexical Information  . 
Proceedings of the Third R . O . C . Computational Linguistics Conference ( ROCLING III )  . pp .  295-310 . 
Chert , K . -J . and S . -H . Liu .  1992 . Word Identification for Mandarin Chinese Sentences  . " lt ~ be presented at

Hong , W . M . , C . -R . Huang , and K . q . (; hen .  ~991 . The Morphological Rules of Chinese Derived Words .   ~1~ be presented at the 1991 International Conference on " lizaching Chinese as a Second Language  . Dec . 1 ~) l . 

Mo , R . J . , Y . -R . Yang , K . -- J . Chen , and C . -R . Huang . 
1991 . A Analyzer-Generator for Mandarin Chinese Quantifier-Measure Coml ~ unds  . Proceedings of
ROCLINGIV.
Mo , R . J . , C . -R . Huang , and K . -J . Chert .  1991 . Serial Verb Constructions in Mandarin Chinese-- Their Definition and Control Relations  . ' lh he presented at the 1991 International Conference on ' l ~ a ching Chinese as a Second Language  . Dec .  1091 . " laipei . 
Sinclair , J . M . t987 . Ed . L ( ~ kingUp-All account of the COBUILI ) Project in Lexical Computing , London :

Sinclah ', J . M . 199 l . Corpus , Concordance , Coll ~ v ~ a-tion . Oxford : Oxford Unwersity Press . 
Sperberg-McQuecn , C.M . and 1, . Burnard . 1990.
Giudclines for " the Enemy , ling and Interchange of Ma-chine-Readable ' ~: x ts  . ( I'EI1'1) . ACII-ACL-ALI , (' . 
AcrEsDECOLING-92, NANII . ; S , 2328 AO(JT 199212 l7PRO(: . OFCOLING-92, NANTES . At J  .  2328, 1992
