PRI~ ; DICTING NOUN ~ PIIRASE SURFACh ; I ~' ORMSUSINGQ ~ ONTEXTUAL\[NFORMA'PION
Takayuki Y AMAOKA : Hitoshi IIDA ~ and Hidekazu AILITA ~ 
ATR Interpreting Telephony Research Laboratories , Souraku-guu , Kyoto , JAPAN
tM itsubishi Electric Corporation , Amagasaki , tlyogo , JAPAN
Abstract
We propose a context-sensitive method to predict noun phrases ill the next utterance of a telephone inquiry dialogue  . First , information about tile utterance type and the discoursentities of the next utterance is grasp cd using a dialogue interpretation model  . Second , a domain-dependent knowledge base for noun phrase usage is developed  , focusing on the dialogue situations in context . 
Finally , we propose a strategy to make a set of the appropriate expressions in the next utterance  , using the information and the knowledge base . This set of expressions is used to select the correct candidate from tim speech recognition output  . This paper exantines some of the processes creating sets of polite expressions  , deicti6 expressions , and compoundil OUll pllra - ~ es , which ~ treCOlnl UOllill telephone inquiry dialogue  . 
1 Introduction
A high-quality spoken-language processing system must use knowledge of dialogue and spoken -language  . 
Using dialogue knowledge facilitates understanding and predicting utterances in context  . Using spoken-language knowledge , that is knowledge about how tile speaker expresses what he/she wants to say  , makes it possible for the system to recognize and generate the more complex expressions that are nornmlly ased illour daily dialogues  . 
To make language processing in the whole spoken -langnage processing system more efficient  , it . is vital how to selec the correct speech recognition output in the speech-language interface  . The use of discourse-level knowledge is an effective way to do  this\[6\]\[11\]  . 
For example , MINDS\[6\] applied dialogue-level knowledge , particularly for propositional contents , to predict the expected utterance form for the speech recognition  , i lowever , although MINDS showed good re-suits , sever all lroblems remain before it can lie made into a complete spoken-language processing system  :   1  . how to construct he dialogue structure for the given domain  ,  2 . how to treat predictive concepts regarding not only the propositional contents but also the speaker's intention  ,  3 . and , how to etmose a set of surface forms t bat the speaker might utter about the predicted concept  . 
Also , MINDS was concerned with a system to participate in human machine dialogue  . On the other band , we want to monitor a human-human dialogue . 
We proposed a dialogue understanding model\[7\] , and a context-sensitive method to predict abstract information all out both tile intentional and propositional contents of tile next  utterance\[11\]  . These are our answers to the above problems 1 and 2  . 
From tile point of view of human behavior , a potential approacb to selecting the appropriate surfaceer pression forms  ( SEFs ) is using spoken-lauguage knowledge . In general , when we are talking about a concept X , there are many possible surface expres-sious and forms to represent X  . From a psychological ( or psyeholinguistic ) point of view ,   Clark\[3\] pointed out five abstract factors which should be considered ill  , asking what linguistic device should speakers use  ?  . 
These are : knowledge of the listener , the coopeva-live principle , the reality principle , the social context , and the linguistic devices available . In the eomput atioual linguistics area ,   Appelt\[1\] has developed a framework to generate a sentence in a context-sensitive way  , based on speech actt beories . Unfortunately , however , there also remains , a she described ms a future study , the problem of choosing a lexically appropriate SEF from among candidates in a social conlexl  . 
This paper describes a context-sensitive framework for selectiug all SEF for noun-phrases  ( NPs )  . This method is sensitive to botbt be utterance situation and the history of the dialogue  . To do this , first , we analyze the relations between concepts and SEFs  , and between applicable situations and contexts , using a corpus of Japanese inquiry dialogues . Then , we make a domain-dependent kowledge source for NP usage  , and define rules driven by applicable conditions to determine a set of possible SEFs in the knowledge base  . Finally , we give exanaples of the SEI " selection , especially for polite expressions , deictifiex pressions , and compound NPs , which are common in our target domain , and describe a simple experiment to evaluate using the ATR dialogue database  . The result showtll attile method can choose t be contextually correct expression from the speech recognition output candidates  , and can be used in tile generation module of a spoken-language processing system to generate and determine all appropriat expression undertile dialogue situation  . 
Throughout this paper , all examples are in Japanese and written in italic  . English translations follow in parentheses . NP denotes a noun phrase , and SEF denotes a surface expression form . SEFs are enclosed ill double quotation marks and concepts are enclosed in single quotation marks  . 
2 Dialogue In terpretat ion and Pred ic t ing the Next Utterance The next  . utterance call be predicted after understanding the previous utterances  , because predicted information must be affected by tile dialogue struc-AcrEsDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 Aour 19921152 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO . 2328, 1992 lure . This section brielly describestile model for interpreting a  dialogue\[7\] and tileule thod of pre ( lict ng the next utt crance \[ ll\]\[12\] . 
In tilel node l , an utterance is represented , by a predicate form . An typical Japanese sentence , "(;0-juusyoweouegai-shi-masu . " ( May 1 have your address ?) , uttered by these cretariatina inquiry dialogue , is shown below: ( ASK-VALU Euq ( address q )   ( IS ( address q ) ? va \] . )) where constants denotes these cretariat , q the questioner , address tile concel ) t of an a . ddress , and the variable , ? val , is the value for the address of q . 
The dialogue interpretation model h ; us\[our types of plan and can interpret input utterances as the dialogue proceeds  , using au extended plain inference mechanism\[7\] . Thus , a dialogue structure can be constructed . 
lit order to provide contextualie for lnation about discours entities we use typed variable  notation\[2\] to describe a discours entity in a plan schema , l ' ; a ch type in this notation corresponds to a particular concept node ill the domaiu-del  ) eudent NP knowledge base ( described in Section a . 3 ) '\[' he following description is an example of a Domailt Pla ~ J to send something:  ( Domain-Plan : SERD-SOMETHIN ~ ( HEADER ( SEND ? a:person ? r:person?s : object ) )  ( PRECONDITION ( KNON?a?d:destination ) )  ( EFFEECT ( HAS ? r?s ) )  ( CORSTRRINT ( BELD NG ? d?r ) ) ) The state of understanding is managed nsieg two pushdown stacks  . The mlder standing llst stores completed plans as the current understanding state  , and tile goal list maintains in complete plans ~ Ls possibilities and expectations tbrfltture goals  . By rcferring to tile goal list . , the next utl . erance can I ) e predicted on an abstract , level as the dialogue proceeds , using the two generalized rules : e ? imctation mid prefere  . nee\[12\] . 
Predicted utterances are tel ) resented in the slttnc style as in tm t utterances . As a result , , we can predict two types of infornlatiou , one about the COllllltl UiCa-live act , types and the other about discours entities in the propositional contents  ( or in the topic slot , ) ( t\["theilextuttcrarlce , ln for rnatiol labotlta discourse entity lnay appear in the for lu of  ; ill particular expression if it is illa prv vious utterance that can be related to the  . current atterauce . Othe . rwise in for nl ~ ties will be in the tbrm of a type represcuting a particular concept in tile related domain plan  . We call such information conteztual information intile t~sk of selecting ttle constituents of tile next utterance  . 
3 NP Identification Model 3 . 1 Chauge to NP Linguistic Expressions hi general , when we are talking about a concept X , there are many possible surface x pressions and for nlstore present X  . Inllarticular , Japaneseha . s several possible SEFs for a given X , one from ttle Chinese reading and another based on tile original Japanese language  ( e . g . " oka ~ sakf ' and " ates akf ' for ' destination ' in Fig  .  1) . In addition , there are particular phenomena of expression variations depending hi  ) on the particular dialogue . For exmnple , if a speaker is uttering his/her own address for tile concept ' address '  , he/she will use " 3 uusyo"(\[my\]address ) , e . g . " Juusyo-wa Oosaka-sht desu . "( Myaddress is in Osaka ~ city . ) . 
On the other hand , if he/she is uttering tile other par-ticipant's address  , he/she will use " . qo . juusyo"(\[your\]address(polite for nl )), e . g . "Go-juusyo-wo negai-shi-masu . "( Your address , please ? ) These facts leadrl S to ilnplen mltt knowledge SOllrce selfs/Idlvari ~  . 
lions ( we call them changes ) in a computation all ) rc ~ cessilrg systen l . 
Only by liltcriugusing any intrasentential knowledge sources  , several candidates may remain ~ m syntactically and semantically corrects enteuces  . For example , "9 ojuu-shichi'(fifl . y-seven ) sounds like " yo-3uusyo ' , and the sentence " Gojuu-shichi-wo one gai-shi -masu  . "( Fifty-seveu , i ) lea-ne . ) is not only wellformed but also correct in a particular context  . It is possible to select the correct candidate by referring to both the context and the situation of the ongoing dialogue  . Ewmso , to pick the surface form , wenms tkllow wily tile speaker haqused ~ t given expression to represel~t a COII gell t  , If we can determinellow these NPsehallge ,  ~ , lld what effect they bawl then we can choose the speech recognition candidates more accurately  . 
3.2 Analysis of NP Changes
In order to analyze NI'changes in a dialogue we . inspected 50 dialogues in a corpus . As a result of the analysis , NP changes arc categorized into three main classes :  1  ) Change by lexical e . ohesion : ( tiffs class corresponds to reiteration \[5\] )  , 2 Change by dif-fere . nt viewpoints : ( described in detail in the next paragraph )  , and 3) Change by misrecognition . 
There are two aspects of viewpoint , which are the standpoinl of the agent and the node of the concept  . 
in an inquiry dialogue , the standpoints of the agents are . always different . Thus , this class has only two stlb cla~ssl ! s : 2 ( a ) iioint keeping : both agents see thes ; uue t ~ od c of a concept , and this subclass is divided according to the SEI  . ': i . ditferent expression-e . g . " walashf ' and " Yama 0 ka-san " . 
i l . additimt of prefixe . g . " lUUSyO " and "9 o-juusyo " . 
iii . COml ) lexa mixture of 2(a ) i and 2(a ) ii ,  2 ( I ) ) shifting : the viewpoint of one of the agents shifts from thcnode of a conccp to a node of a related concept  , and this is divided into : i . shortening e . g . " Kokusai-kaigf ' ( lnten rational Confer-eue e ) and " kaiq f ' ( tire conference )  . 
it . uniting-e . g . " ryousyuu-syo-to saNka-touroku-syo " ( are ceipt and an application form ) and '"2-syurnt-uosy or ltf' ( two types of forms )  . 
ACRESDECOLlNG-92 , NA ~ rzs , 2328 lot's 1992 1153 PRec . OFCOLING-92, NA~ri~s , Auo .  2328, 1992
Inode I ~- ., v .. ~. ~ . . . . . . . -
Figure h Example of NP knowledge base iii . specification-e . g . " niNzuu " ( nnmber of people ) and " saNka-niNzuu " ( number of participants )  . 
3.3 Domain-dependent Knowledge
Configuration : q -' he domain-dependent kowledge base consists of a network of nodes and links  . Basic nodes are divided into three types : a concept node representing a particular thing or concept retained in human memory  , a lexleal node representing a par-tieular word or phrase used when expressing something  , and a variable node representing a particular value corresponding to a valuable concept  , which can have a specified value . A variable node can be instantiated by executiug t be effect of a complet c d plan  ( usually by GET-VALUE-UNI Till Inleractiou plan\[11\]  )  , so that it can have a particular SEF as the valn c of the node  . For example , " Ya maoka " could be the value of a variable node corresponding to a concept node of ' name ' in a sentence like " My name is Ya maoka "  . 
The following types of links are defined : is a link  , representing a superordinate/subordiuate relation between two concept nodes  , part-of link , representing a whole/part relation between two concept nodes  , causal link , representing a causal relation between two concept nodes  , pragl lnk , representing a pragmatic relation to connect a particular concept node to a lexical node representing the tyllical SEF for the concept  , value link , representing an instance value relation between a particular valuable concept node and a variable node which has been bound to the SEF of its value  , and eqll nk , representing the same meaning between two lexical nodes  . 
Extension of eqlink : In order to make the knowledge base sensitive to the changes considered in Section  3  . 2, tileeqlink is extended . This lets us to add applicable conditions to eq links as subtypes of tile link  . Applicable conditions are defined based ou classes of the categorization i  3  . 2 . For example , if one lexical node is a polite SEF of another , the two lexical nodes can be emmected with a neq -if-polite llnk  , e . g . " juusyo " and " go-juusyo " ( see Fig .  1) . 
4 Selnctlon Strategy
Ill the dialogue , a speaker chooses an expression according to tile situation  , the preceding context , and his/her beliefs . Assuming that tile system has recognized such conditions  , we can efficiently choose the correct speech recognition candidate by searching the SEFs that are appropriate under the conditions  . 
4 . 1 Rules of Applicable Conditions \[ terc , two terms are defined for explanation : seed : if the predicted contextual information is bolm d to a particular SEF  , then the seed of tile contextual information is tileSEI "  , otherwise the seed is the value of the lexieal node linked by tbel  ) ragllnk to the concept node corresponding to the contextual information  , preferable set : a set of SEFs derived from a seed by an applicable rnlc  , whicb then takes first priority for selecting the candidate  . 
The basic rule for making a preferable set is : collect tile SEFs by following the eqlink from the sced  . 
Because in this paper we are focusing on dialogue situations and contcxts ratber than the speaker's beliefs  , we only cover rules regarding changes by different viewpoints  . 
For a predicted contextual information I , considering the dialogue situation sill Class 2 ( a ) : I . if I is in the territory of information of the other agent  , then make a preferable set by following the eq-if -polite link from the seed  , additionally , considering the preceding context : 2 . if \[ has an antecedent which denotes the status of the other agent  , i . e . , there is an instantiated variallle node corresponding to I  , then replace the seed with the antecedent , i . e . , the SEF of I . he variable node , and make a preferables ct by following the eq-if -polltellnk from the seed  . 
Considering the contexts illClass2(b):3 . if 1 is a compound noun ,   ( it's obviously the antecedent ) hen shift the seed to the concept one-level upt and make a prefcrabl c set using the basic rule  ,  4 . if l includes two or more concepts or SEFs and there is a concept node which is the upper node of both of these concepts  , then shift the seed to the upper concept and make a preferable set using the basic rule  2  , I Precisely , shifting a seed to a concept metals an operation to replace the seed with the SI~F of the lexical node followed by the pragllnk from the concept node  . 
In this case an auxilisa'y word is usually added.
AcrEsDECOLING-92 . NA , ' CrE . s , 2328 AOt ~ r19921 I54 P Rec . ot:COLING-92, NANTES . AUG .  2328 . 1992 Indaily dialogue , speakers apply combinations of the above rules and other rules  , but in this study we arc concentrating on simpler cases  . 
4.2 Seleetion Algorithm
Our ultimate goal is to select the correct speech recognition candidate from the predicted contextual information  . An algorithm to do this is roughly defined by following the three steps :  1  . provide contextual information , 2 . make a prefcrable set from i by the rules , 3 . compare speech recognition outputs with 2 , and if all equivalent is found then pick it ms the ai  ) propriate candidate , else go to 2 . 
Steps 1 and 2 above are I ) ack tracking points . For details of Stepl , see\[1I\],\[12\] . l , ' urth cr largescale experiments may detern finc hcuristically how many times Step  2 should be iterated . 
5 Examples and Evaluation hit his section , we examine some polite expressions aud compound NPs that are common in telel  ) holm inquiry dialogues . 
5.1 Polite expressions
An examl ) le of the process for detecting the appropriate SEF given a polite expression  , is shown through the following subdialogue , focusing on discoursen-tities . 
(ul)Q:TouT~oku-youshi-wookutte-ku dasai.
( Pleases endmeare gistration from . )(u2) S : Go-juusyo-wo negai-shi-masu . 
(May \[ haw ~ your address ? )   ( u3 ) Q:Juusyo-wa Osaka . shi .   .   .   .   .   . desu . 
( Myaddress is Osaka-city .   .   .   .   .   .   .   ) where agent Q is the questioner and Sist fie secre-tariat  . 
This example can be recognized in the send -somthing domain plan  ( m Section 2 )  . Firstul is recognized and understood a . san utterance which ill-troduces the domain plan . Then , fi ) r the next utterance by S(u2) , since the system does not hohl the statement that Sknows where to send a form  , e . g . 
the w due of Q's address , an utterance requesting the value of the destination is tirst predicted  , and contextual information about the ' destination ' concept can be provided  ( Step 1 )  . 
Next , due to the constraint in tile plan , Rule 1 is applied to the contextual information . ' fhen , the preferable set of SEFs is derived by the rule ( Step 2 )  . 
Although the tirst Step 3 fails because " go-juusyo " is not the exact polite form of the first seed " okur is a kf '  ( destination )  , the second time it , picks " yo-juusyo " ms the appropriate SEF because one of timlower concepts  , ' address ' , can be the next seed . 
On the other band , when processing 113 , the set of polite tbrms for the ' address ' is not preferred  . 
Table 1: Result of l ) at a ba . ~ e Inspection
CommAct Type ~ SF , FTypeNumber\[ ) FFFR-ACTIONSP--polite 25 normal 4
Hitm ) rmM 22
REQUEST-ACTIONSP normal 2IR polite 4 normal 3
CDNFItlII-AC'I'If in HR polite 3 normal 5 The communicative act type in the first column : is ~- etype of the utterance " to send "  . The speaker in the second coluln n is the speaker of the target SEF  , with SP indicating the speaker in the first CO blnt n  , and HR , hearer . 
Evaluati ( m : We evaluated this tnethod by inspect-lugSEFs for ' destinatiou ' in the ATR diak  ) gue database\[4\] . The target corpus , whose topic is " Confi ~ rence registration " , has 85 conversations , 195 fiutterance units , and 3085 sentences . Moreover , the tar . 
get expressions are restricted to those uttered in a segment of the send-some t  . hing domain plan . The evalua Lion was done in the tollowing way : 1 . H . etrieve sentences which have the verb " okumg ' ( to Selld ) or syllonylll OllSw ~ . rbs a stilell laill verb of the sentelice ( lfll sentences )  . 
Then , output the utterance refit together with the next utterance unit  ( 161 pairs )  . 
2 . Picktimi ) airs in which there is a expression about ' destination '  ( 43 pairs )  . 
Filter by the send-something domain plan , and those pairs that are not recognized are elimi-  . 
nated (32 pairs remain).
3 . Cl~kssify the target expressions ( 68 expressions ) in totile othm " sterritory ( a2polite and 12 nor-real ) and the spe . aker's (24 normal ) . 
The results are shown in the Tal)le 1 . Tiffs in spection shows that ill ( an " target , dOi qlaill , I~lleframe work described m the paper is useful for selecting a surface expression that is appropriate in the dialogue situation  . 
Example ( Vocative ) : Consider the subdialogue that follow stile above subdialogue :  ( u4 ) Q : Namae-wa Suzuki-Mayumi-desu . 
( Myname is Maymni Suzuki . )(u5) ?': ?' uzuki-Mayumi-sama-desa-ae . 
( Ms . Mayumi Suzuki , correct ?)
After recognizing 114 by thesaule interaction plan a . s the first example , a variable node corresponding to Q's name is instantiated and bound bound to " Suzuki Mayumi "  . Then , for the next utterance by S(u5) , we can predict the confirmation utterance including the contextual intbrmation about Q's name as a discourse entity  . Consequently , we can select the SI' ; F " Suzuki - Mayumi-sama " ( polite form ) by the contextual information and the applicable rule  2  . 
ACII~SDE COLING-92 , NAM ' Es , 2328 hotrr 1992 1155 Pace , OFCOLING-92 , NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992 5 . 2 Compomld NPs Compound NPs can roughly be classified into l  ) rol ) er NPs and common NPs . Predicting SEFs from a common NP is usually done by shifting the seed to the upper level  ( by Rule 3 )  . For example ; ( u6) S : 7 burokn . youshi-wao-miehi-des you-ka ? ( Do you have an application form ? )   ( uT ) Q:Mada-dcsu . 
(Not yet .) ( u8) Youshi-wookutte-ku dasai.
( Pleases end meaf or m.)
In this example ,   u6 instantiates the send something domain plan by tile effect  chain\[7\]  . Then , since we know from u 7 that the effect ( the goal of this subdialogue ) is not satisfied , we can predic that the next utterance hyQ ( u8 ) ruay concern introducing the action to send a form  , and it . irmludes contextual information about ' application for m '  . In the knowledge base , ' form ' is tile concept node just above ' application for m '  . Consequently , by applicable ruin 3 , we select " Yoush F ( for n 0 directly . 
On the other l ~ and , predicting SEFst brproper NPs requires another ule to creat  . ethed on lain-dependent knowledge base for shortening  , ller c , we use the dependency relationships within NP\[91 to abbrevi-ate a proper compound NP . For exaln ph ~ , applying this rule to a proper compound NP " Kyoto-Kokusai-Kaigij off'  ( Kyoto International Conference Center )  , we get a preferable set of SEFs in elnding " Kyoio -Kaigijon"  ( Kyoto Conference Center ) and " Kokusai-Katgoou " ( International Conference Center )  , ill addition to the basic upper SEF " l ( aiyzjou" ( confcrence center )  . Consequently , we call select " Kokusai-kaig Oou " in u l0 in the following subdialogue with a take -transportation domain plan  ;   ( u9 ) S : Kyoto-kokn sai-kai yljou-ewa basu-gar ~ you-deki -masu  ( There is a bus that goes to the b:yo to hlternational C  , onferenee Center . )  ( ul0 ) Q : Kokusa ~- ka ~ gUou-madeikur'a-desu-ka ~ ( Ilow much is it to the International
Conference Center ?)
At the moment , we define a short link to connoellexieal nodes created by abbreviation rules to the proper compound NP thai instantiates a variable node  . 
6 Conclusion
This paper has proposed a context-sensitive method of predicting NPs in the next utterance of telephone inquiry dialogues  . Abstract information about the constituents of the next utterance can be predicted based on the dialogue interpreting model  . 
Then , domain-dependent knowledge for NP usage was developed based on an extended NP identification model  . Tile knowledge base is characterized by its ability to derive the set of possible surface expression forms from the predicted contextual infor-n ration  . We define rules for applicable conditions , particularly illpolite Japanese , bmsed on an analysis of NP changes . Finally , using the above two mechanisms a strategy was proposed for selecting tile appropriate surface x pression form representing the predicted concept in a context-sensitive way  . 
In the fllture , we plan to integrate this method with a method of predicting expressions of tilespeaker's intention  , tp form a complete system . It is also vital to make tile method more powerful  , so it can automatically construct he domain -dependent kowl-edge base from thesauri and/or corpora of tile domain  , and call model and recognize various dialogue situations  . 

Ti ~ eauthors wouhllike to thank Dr . Kurematsu , President of ATR h , terpreting Telephony Labs . , and other colleagues for their encouragement and thought-provoking discussio  , , . 
II . efi ~ rnnees\[1\]l ) oug ~ uE . Appelt . Planning English Sentences . 
Studies in Natural Language Processing . Oambridge
University Dress , 1985.
\[2\] Eugene Charniak . Motivation analysis , abductive unification , and nonmonotonic equMity . Artificial
Intelligence , 34:275-295, 1988.
\[3\]ll crbert 11 . Clark and Eve V . Clark . Psychology and Language-Anbltroduction to Psycholinguistics -  , chapter 6 , pages 223-258 . llar court Brace Jo-vanovich , 1977 . 
\[4\] Terumasa Ehara , I < entaro Ogura , and Tsuyoshi Mo-rimoto . ATR dialogue database . In Proceedings of 1CSLP'90 , pages 10931096 , November 1990 . 
\[5\] M . A . K . llalliday and Ruqaiya Ilasan . Cohesion in English , chapter 6, pages 274292 . LONG MAN , 1976 . 
\[6\] Alexander G . llauptmann , Sheryl R . Young , and Wayne II . Ward . Using dialog-level kaowledge sources to improve speech recognition  , in Proceedings of AAA\['88 , pages 729733 ,  1988 . 
\[7\]ttitoshi Iida , Takayski Yamaoka , and Itidekazu Arita . Three typed pragmatics for dialogue structure analysis  . In Proceedings of COLING'90 , pages 370-372 , August 1990 . 
\[8\] Akio Kamio . Proximal and Distal\[nforamtion : A Theory of Territory of ln\]ormation in  En91ish and Japauese . PhD thesis , University of Tsukuba , March 1986 . 
\[9\] Masahiro Miyazaki . Automatic segmentation nlelhod for conq > ound words nsillg seluantic dependency relationships between words  . Journalo Jlnfofmarion Processing Society of Japan  ,  25(6):970-979 ,  1984 . is Japanese . 
Izuru Nogaito and flitoshilida . Noun phra . ue identification in di Mogue and its application . In Proceedings of ~ nd International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of 
Natu , cd Languages , June 1988.
Takayuki Yamaoka and Hitoshilida . A method to predict the next utterance using a four-layered plan recognitioa model  . In Proceedings of ECAI'90 , pages 726731 , Atlgust 1990 . 
Takayuki Yamaoka and liitoshilids . Dialogue ill-terl > retation model and its application to next utter-anne prediction for spoken langm~ge processing  . In Proceedings of Eurospeech'91, September 1991 . 
\[ io\]\[nlit2\]
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NAi'Z ~ S , 2328 Ao~r199211S6PRoc . or : COLING-92, N^N ^ N^N rEs , AO ~ .  2328 .  1992
