AUTOMATICPROOFREADINGOF'FROZENPIIRASESIN GERMAN 
RAI , FKI '; S\['; , FRIE DR1 CHI)UDI)A , MARIANNEKUGI , F , R
TAT riumph-Adler AG
TA Research EF
Ff wther Str .212
11-851 111 Nuremberg8 (1

email : ralf@triumph-adler.de

\[" rozen phrases are introduced as a new level of automatic proofie a diltgin between the stm  , dard level of spelling verification tf list ) lated words and tile levcl of grammar checking . The design and the iulplent atioll of a corresponding proof leading system are described in detail  . 
1 Introduction
European languages contain thousands ( if what Mauriee Gross calls " frozen " or " compound words "  ( Gross ,  1986) . 111 contrast to " free forms " , frozen words - though being separable into several words and suffixes-lack syntactic and /or semantic omtlosition-ality  . This " lack of conlpositionality is apparent fiom lexical restrictions "  ( at night , but : * at day , * at evening , etc . ) as well as " by the impossibility of inserting material that is a pliori plausil ~ lc ?'  ( * atcoming , tlresent , cokt , dark night ) ( Gross ,  1986) . 
Now , these kinds of cooccurrence restrictions ( ltaxris ,   19701 determine not only the concrete lexical composition of an individual conlptlt nld word but also its spelling  . 
Consider , as an example , the Gernlannoun " Bezug " which-like any other nolniill German-starts with a capital letter and occurs as a freeform -- e  . g , in contexts like " mit Bezuganl "- such that its co-  ( ic cn rrent scan w ~ ry freely . There is a single except k/n to this rule , nalnely the phrase " in bczugauff , which is entirely flozen , intile sense that it excludes any variation of its tlarl stit'structure  , and which , by the sanle token , restricts the spelling of the noun to lower case . 
t : or examples like this we introduce the term " frozen phrases " as referring to  ( the subclass of ) those frozen words that are compounds of several words  . As Zimmermanll ( Zimmcrmann , 1987) points out for multL words in general , frozen phrases are clearly ( ~ttt of scope of standard spelling correction systems due totile fact that these systems ctlcck for isolated words Olfly and disregard thc respective contexts  . Yet , as Gross ( Gross , 1986) indicates , at least tile entirely and nearly entirely tl -OZell Rirms can be recognized and compared with the hel  ) of simple string operations . Thus , these kinds of frozellphi % lSCS are accessible t  ( 1 tile lllet\[lOdS of classical autolnatic proof lead illg  . 
Folk ) wing Gross ( Gross , 1986) and
Zimlnermann ( Zimmermanll ,  1987) , we prt/posc to further extend standard spelling correction systems onto the level of frozen phrases by simply lnaking then l capable of treating more than a single word at a time  . 
This implies that we arrive at a context-sensitive system  . 
Focusing ( min dividttal co-occt , rrences ( Harris ,  19701 , the proposed extensk ln will be a conservatiw : one  , illtile sense that it requires just widening the scope of the string matching/comparing operations that classically are used in spelling correction systenls  . No deep and time-cousuming analysis , like palsiil g , is involved . 
Restricting the systenl that way makes our approach different fr  ( nntile one considered in ( bLimon and Herz ,  1991) , where a context sensitive spelling velific at i ( ll is proposed to be done with the help of " local constraints auttn nata  ( I . CAs ) " which process contextual CO ilstraillls on the level of lexical or syntactic categories rather than on the basic level of strings  , hifact , proofreading with LCAs rather anlounts to genuine granlnlarchecking aim as such Imlt mgs to a different and higher level of lmlguage checking  . 
ACRESDE COLING-92, NAN rl . ; S , 2328A (:@ I19921029 I'ROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992   2 Phenomenology The essential feature of the new level of automatic proofreading is that lexicalized cooccurrence restrictions determine the orthography of whole phrases beyond the scope of what can be accepted or rejected on the basis of isolated words alone  . 
For German , these restrictions determine , among other things , whether or not certain forms ( 1 ) begin with an upper or lower case letter ; (2) have to be separated by (2 . 1) blank , (2 . 2) hyphen , (2 . 3) or not at all ; (3) combine with certain other forms ; or even (4) influence punctuation . Examples are : ( t ) lch lau fee is . versus
Ichlaufeauf demEis.
Erdiirfle Bankrottmachen , versus
Erdfirfle bank rotts e&.
(2 . 1) Sick ann nicht Fahrrad fahren , versus (2 . 3) Sick ann nicht radfahren . 
(2 . 1) Eswarbitter kalt . versus (2 . 3) Esware in bitterkalter Tag . 
(2 . 2) Erliebtlch-Romane , versus (2 . 3) Erliebt Romaneinlch forn, . 
(3) Beton blOcke vs . * Beton blocks versus
Hiluserblocks vs . * Hduserbl Ocke ( 4 ) Errauchte ~ ohned aftsic dawm wugte . 
vcrsus * Errauchl cohne~daftsic da VOll wuBle.
3 System Design
Like conventional spelling correction of isolated words  , proofreading of frozen phrases is a lexicon-based process  . 
However , while in conventional spelling correction " referencing a dictionary of correctly spelled words "  ( Frisch and Zamora , 1988) is standard , proofreading of the higher-level orthographic featn resmentioned in  2 above can be done on the basis of a lexicon that encodes the corresponding error patterns directly  . 
Thus , each entry in the system lexicon is modelled as a quintuple < W  , L , R , C , E > specifying an error pattern of a ( multi- ) word W for which a correction C will be proposed accompanied by an explanation E just in case a given match of W against some passage in the text nnders crutiny differs significantly from C and the-possibly empty-left and right contexts L and R of W also match the environment of W's counterpart in the text  . 
Disregarding E for a moment , this is tantal not mt to saying that each such record is interpreted as a string rewriting nile 
W-->C/LR rephtcing W ( e . g . : Bezug ) by C(e . g . : bezug ) in the environment 1_, R ( e . g . : in auf ) . 
The form of these productions can best be characterized with an eye to the Chomsky hierarchy as unrestricted  , since we can have any non-mill number of symbols on the LHS replaced by any number of symbols on the RHS  , possibly by null ( Partee et al ,  1990) . 
With an eye to semi-Thue o1 extended axiomatic systems one could say that a linearly ordered sequence of strings W  , C1 , C2 ,   . . . , Cm is a derivatkm of Cm iff ( 1 ) Wisa ( faulty ) string ( in the text to be corrected ) and ( 2 ) each C if ollows from the immediately preceding string by one of the productions listed in the lexicon  ( Partee et al ,  1990) . 
Thus , theoretically , a single mistake can be corrected by applying a whole sequence of productions  , though in practice the default is clearly that a correction be done in a single derivational step  , at least as long as the system is just operating on strings and not on additional non-terlnimll sylnbols  . 
Occurrences of W , L , and R in a text are recognized by pattern matching techniques  . 
An error pattern Wignores the particnlarly error -prone aspects np per/k  ) wercase and word separator ( secthe examples in 2 above )  . It thus matches both the correct and incorrect spellings with respect to these features  . 
Beside wildcards ff ) r characters , like "*" , a pattern for W , lJ , or R may contain also wildcards for words allowing  , for example , the specification of a maxinml distance of L or R with respect to W  . Since the types of errors discussed here only occur within ACRESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES . 2328 AObq'19921030 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 seuteuces , such a distant match has to be restricted by the sentence boundaries  . Thus , by having the system operates eutence wisc , any left or right context is naturally restricted to be some string within the same sentence as W mr to be at bonn dary of that sentence  ( e . g . : a punctuation mark ) . 
Any left or right context is either a positive or at negative one  , i . e . , its COUlpOneuts are homogeneously either required or forbidden in order for the corresponding rule to fire  . So far it has not been necessary to allow tku ? mixed modes within it left or right context  . 
In case a correction C is proposed to the user , additionally at message will be displayed to him identifying the reason why C is correct rather than W  . l ) epending on the user's knowledge of tile language under investigation  , he can take this either as an opporttulity to learn or rather as a help tier deciding whether to finally acceptor reject the proposal  . 
There are two kinds of explanations , absolute and conditional ones . Whereas absolute rules indicate that the system has necessary and sufficient evidence fi ~ rW's deviance  , there clearly are cases where either W or C could he correct and this question cannot be decided on the basis of the system's lexical in fl  ) rmation alone , hithese cases , a conditiol , al o1 if - then explanatkm is given to the user offering a higher-level deciskm criterion which the system itself is unable to apply  . 
Take , as an example , the sentence
Dieser Fihnhetrifft exit und Jung.
which clearly allows for two readings , oue which renders " Altund Jmlg " as the false spelling of the frozen phrase " all und juug " meaning " everybody "  , and another one which takes " A It und Jung " as the correct freeform that literally designates the old aim the young while excluding the mktdle -aged  . 
Thus , suhstitutahility by " jedennann"(i . e . : " everybody " ) wou M be an adequate decision criterion to convey to the user  . 
In its present design , tile system is based on the simplest possible working hyl ~ othesis  , i . e . 
the assumption that the higher qevel or cognitive errors in a sentence caube corrected independently  . The intuition behind this assumption is that , normally , cognitive ( or orthographical ) errors are by far less frequent hanordinary motoric  ( or typographical ) errors ( for this distinction see Berkel and Smcdt ,  1990) , and that , as a consequence of this , they occur within distinct context such that it is excluded that the correction of one error be conditional upon the correction of another  . 
According to this assumption , each sentence of the lext is processed only once in the fffllowing nmnner : The system reads from a plaintext copy  , T2 , of the original formatted text , TI , processes the errors on T2 one after the other , and finally writes the corresponding corrections to TI  , without also writing them to T2 . 
Now , an abstract counterexample to the working hypothesis can be construed quite easily : Given a sentence containing tile sequence of errors  . . . WlW2 . . . 
and given lcxical rules ( RI ) Wl-o>el ( R2 ) W2-->C2/C1 rewriting ( i , e . correcting ) WI as C1 in any context , and W2 as C2 if preceeded by CI , then , clearly , tile system will correct Wl but will fail to correct  W2  . 
For the system to also correct W2 , it must be able to take its previous output into accot  , nt again . That is , it should not only read from
T2 but also write to it.
tIowever , to allow corrections to be written also to q'2 would mean to stepwise introducet leW contexts on  W2  . As a consequence , tile system wouklhalvetore do the checking of tile whtfle sentence ach time a correction has been made  , t br this correction might well b ca relevant context of some previously cncouute red expression  . 
Thus , giving up the working hypothesis would result in having the system take multiple runs through one and the same sentence instead of a singlertul  , and this , of course , would drastically reduce system performance . 
Fortunately , we have not yet come across any ( signi\[icaut atllountel ) data that would justify such a redesign of the system  . 
AC'I'ES l ) ECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328^o ( rr 19921031 l'Roc , ov COLING-92 , NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 However , since the data captured in the system's lexicon covers at present some  50 % of the relevant phenomena compared to the
Duden ( Berger 1985) , the ultimate complexity of tile system has to be regarded as an open and empirical question  . 
4 Status of Implementation
A first prototype of the system described above has been developed in Cunder UNIX within the ESPRIT  I1 project 2315 " Translator's Workbench " ( TWB ) as one of several orthogonal modules checking basic as well as higher levels  ( like grammar and style ; see ( Thurmair , 1990) and ( Winkelmann , 1990)) of various languages . 
A derived and extended version-covering 3 . 0 00 rewriting rules and some 80 explanations - has been integrated into both a proprietary text processing software under 
DOS and Microsoft's WOP , DFOR
WINDOWS , version 1.1.
This extended version has been combined with a conventional spelling verifier to form a single proofreader for the user  . Internally , however , its hidden submodules are still totally independent from one another and process a sentence one alter the other  . 
Thus , it may happen that the checkers distur beach others results by proposing antagonistic corrections with respecto one and the same expression : Within the correct passage " in bezugauf '  , t brexample , " bezug " will first be regarded as an error by the standard checker which then will propose to rewrite it as " Bezug "  . If the user accepts this proposal he will receive the exactly opposite advice by the frozen phrases checker  . 
On the other hand , checking on different levels could nicely goh and in hand and produce synergetic effects : For  , clearly , any context sensitive checking requires that the contexts themselves be correct antlthus possibly have been corrected in a previous  , possibly contextfree , step . The checking of a single word could in turn profit from contextual knowledge in narrowing down the number of correction alternatives to be proposed for a given error : While there may be some eight or nine plausible candidates as corrections of " Bezjg " when regarded in isolation  , only one candidate , i . e . " bezug " , is left when the context " in auf " is taken into account  . 
The same interdependence sems to exist with respect to higher levels of language checking  . At least it can be argued that a grammar checker will profit from integration with a frozen phrases checker : For nothing but an expert for frozen phrases can  verit3  , the correctness of ( idiomatic ) expressions like " ruhigBlut bewahren " or " auf gutGliick "  , and thus prevent a grammar checker from flagging the missing inflection of the adjective  ( " ruhig " or " gut " ) in attributive position . 
Thus , there is a strong demand for arriving at a holistic solution ff  ) r multileve language checking rather than for just having various level experts particularistically hooked together in series  . This will be the task for the near future . 
5 Conclusion
As concerns the German language , we have shown that there is a well-defined level of automatic proofreading inbetween the classical level of checking isolated words and the more advanced level of grammar checking  . On the basis of work done by Zellig Harris ( Harris , 1970) and Maurice Gross ( Gross ,  1986 ) we have identified this level as that of socalled " frozen phrases "  , and we have proposed and implemented an automatic pm of i ' eading system that covers a significant amount of the frozen phrases of 

We take it that a similar approach is feasible for languages other than German as well  . 
Although in comparison with English,
French , Italian , and Spanish , German seems to be unique as concerns cooccurrence restrictions ff  ) rupper/lower cases t ) ellings in a large number of cases , there are at least , as indicated in ( Gross ,  1986) , the thousands of compounds or frozen words in each of these languages which are clearly within reach f flrtile methods discussed  . In addition , the generalizability of our approach as received some confirmation fiom case studies carried out ff  ) r English and Italian . 
References
Dieter Berger , editor . Richtiges undgutes
Deutsch . WOrter buchders prach lic'hen
Zweifel , ~/? ille . Der Dudenill 10 Bfinden . Das
Standard werk zurdeutschen Sprache,
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NAm xs , 2328 AO~r19921032 PROC . OFCOL1NG-92, NANTES . AUG .  2328 . 1992 vohunc 9 . Bibliogral ) his cheslnstitut,
Mannhcim , Germany , 3rded .\[985.
Brigittevan Berkel and Koeuraadl)e Smedt 19911 . Triph ( nle Analysis : A combined method for the correction of orthographical and typographical errors  , hil'roceedings of the Second Conferetice olt Applied Natural Language Process htg  , pages 77-83 , Austin , 
Texas , February 1988. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Rudolfl , ' risch and Antonio Zamora . Spelling assistance lbr conlpoulld words . IBM Journal q\[Researvh and Development ,  32(2): 195-2110 , 
March 1988.
Maurice Gross . Lexicon Grammar . The
Representation of Compoui Id Words . In
P toceed brl~s ~ ) \[ the Eleventh biternational Conference on Computational Lhtguistics  , pages l ~6 , Boml , Germany , August 1986 . 
International Cominittee on Computatioflal

Zellig S , ltarris , t ' apet : s " in Stnwtural a  #td Tran . sJ brmational 1, htguistics . For nlal Linguistics Series , volume 1 . D . Reidol Publishing Conlpaliy , Dordrccht , Ttic
Netherlands , 1970.
John E . Hopcrofl and Jeffrey D . Ulhnan.
Introduction to Automata Theoo , , l . anguages , and Computation . Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company , Reading,
Massachusetts , 1979.
Barbaratl . Partee , Aliceter Meulzn , and Robert 12 . Wall . Mathematical MeUtods in Linguistics . Studies in l ~ inguistics and Philosophy , volume 311 . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht , The Netherlands 19911 . 
Joseph J . Pollock and Antonio Zatllora.
Autonlatic spelling correction in scic , ntific and scholarly text . Communicatiom " of the
ACM , 27(4):358-368, April 1984.
Mort Pdmon and Jackytterz . The
Recognition Capacity of Local Syntactic
Constraints . In Proceedings ( )\[" the Fifth Conference of the European Chapter of the Association Jor Comlmtational Lhtguistics  , pages 155-1611 , Berlin , Germany , April 1991 . 
Asst)ciation for Computatiolmll.inguistics.
Gerard Salt on .lltttomatie Tertl'rocessb~g.
7 he Tran , ~\[btmation , Amdysis , aml Retrieval of Information by Computer . Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company , Reading,
Massachusetts , 1989.
Gregor Thurmair . Parsing for Grammar and Slylc Checking . Inl ' apers presented to the 7hirteenth International Conference on Computatiom d Lhtguistics  , volume 2 , pages 365-3711 , Helsinki , Finland , August 1990 . 
Hans Karlgren , editor.
Gtinter Winkelmann . Semiautomatic
Interactive Multilingual Style Analysis ( SIMSA) . In Paper ~ presented to the Thirteenth International Conference on Computational Lhtguistics  , volume 1 , pages 7% 81 , ltels in k i , Finland , August 1990 . Hans
Karlgren , editor.
llarald Zimmermann . Textverarbeitungim
Rahulen moderner
B firokonmmnikationstechniken . PIK . t'rax is derlnformations verarbeitung und
Kommunikation 10:384 5, 1987.
Acres DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOtn 19921033I'ROC . OFCOLING-92, NAN-fF . S , AUG .  2328, 1992
