Recognizing Topics through the Use of Interaction Structures 
TAKESHITA , Atsushi
NTI " Human Interface Laboratories
1-2356 Take Yokosuka-Shi Kanagawa 238-03 Japan
Email : take@ntthli.ntt.jp

A crucial problem in topic recognition is how to identify topic continuation  . Domain knowledge is generally indispensable for this  . How ~ ever , knowledge-based approaches are impractical because not all domain knowledge needed for the identification can be prepared in advance  . 
This paper presents a topic recognition model using dialogue interaction structures  . The model can deal with both task-oriented and non-task-oriente dialogues in any language  . Topic continuation is identified without domain knowledge because utterances of relevant opics are indicated by certain interaction structures  . The model avoids the weak point of knowledge -based approaches  . The model is validated by the result of a topic recognition experiment  . 
1 Introduction
An aggregation of sentences having local coherence is called a " discourse segment "  . Such a structure must be recognized to understand discourse including dialogues  . The structure constrains candidates , for example , referents for anaphora resolution and plans for plan recognition  . A topic is a kind of local coherence . Segments can be recognized in both task-oriented and non-task-oriented dialogues because most dialogues have explicit topics  . 
Recognized topics can also be used in a topic -oriented video retrievals npport system  . The system recognizes the topic structures of video sequences such as documentaries  , and shows a topic list . Topic nests are expressed by indentation . Users can survey the contents of a video library , and playback sequences connected to an interesting topic  . 
This paper describes how to recognize topics of both task-oriented and non-task-oriented dialogues without domain knowledge  . First , a basic topic recognition mechanism is discussed . 
Second , identifying topic continuation through the interaction structure is presented  . Finally , coverage of the interaction structure approach is discussed  . 
2 A Topic Recognition Mechanism 2 . 1 What Isa Topic ? Topics are discourse referents hared by dialogue participants  . They are things described by noun phrases and events described by verb phrases  . However , these referents are topic candidates not topics . Those referents recognized as topics by persons must be shared by participants for a while  ; presented as topics again , or referred to by pronouns or zero pronouns . 
A set of utterances having topic coherence is called a " topic segment "  . Topic structures consist of topic segments , topics in the segment and relations between the segments : nests or conjunctions  . Post Office Dialogue in Fig .   1 can be segmented into topic segments as follows :   ( A1 B1 ( A2B2A3B3A-4B4 ) )  ( A -5 )  . 
~ gt~i ~ ( Mail delivery ) is talked about from utterance A1 to B4 , N ~( express ) from A2 to
B4 and so on.
There are various types of relations between topics  . In Post Office Dialogue in Fig . l , the topic " NL ~ ( express ) " in utterance A2 is a subtopic of the topic " J~9~idi  ~  ( mail delivery ) " in A1 because N ~ is a subcategory of J ( mail )  . In another example where a certain person Taro had moved to Kyoto recently  , Kyoto may be a subtopic of Taro . Non-task-oriented dialogues may include various topic relations  . 
ACTE$DECOLING-92 , NAMES , 2328 AOt3"r1992 l064 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328, 1992
A1.~9~d~_ov,~-~L ? cwo'v~?o
I'd like to ask you a question about mail delivery  . 
B1tic , , ~5 ~ o
Yes , six ' .
I want to send a letter by express.
B2Ni$Od<.~-~?
Special delivery ?
A3 ~. Ntc_tJ)\]Ll~-c_.m~\]~~9-/,?
Will the letter reach Kyotoby tomorrow ? I think it will because the next letter collection is at no on  . 
CanI drop the letter into that mail box ?
B4t.t V , o

The next question is about a postaldeposit.
Figure 1: Post Oflice Dialogue
TOPIC > EMPATHY > subject > object > others TOPIC is a noun phrase marked by the postpositional particle " ~  ( wa ) " . In the sentence " ~? . ( Tokyo)t . t ~ e ) ( Japanese ) ~( capital)-t : . 
- ~-( is ) ", ~( qbkyo ) is TOPIC . EMPATHY includes the subject of mental verbs such ast g  . ~: ( yorokobu , beglad ) , the source of ~<( iku , go ) , etc . . These verbs indicate the speaker's perspective . The subject markers include "/ , ~( gay ' , and the object markers " ~( wo ) " . 
These candidates can be used for topic markers . The candidate priority of topics is the same as that of focus  ; if TOPIC exists , it is a topic . 
If TOPIC does not exist but EMPATHY does,
EMPATHY is a topic.
Examples of Japanese clue words indicating a topic changeam shown in Table  2  . Corresponding English clue words are also shown . 
Japanese pronunciation \] English \]- fgg--ec ( mazuda ii chini ) first ? ~?- ( tsugini ) next-~~'~c ~ ( sorekara ) then c7~-e ( to korode ) now This variety of topic relations makes it difticult to identify topic relevance by domain knowledge prepared in advance  . Thus , the weak point should be avoided by a new approach  . 
2.2 Topic Markers and Clue Words
There are many topic marker expressions in Japanese  . For example , expressions in Table 1 indicate topics explicitly . English expressions such as " concerning .   .   . " and " as regards .   .   . " are similar to these expressions . 
Japanes expression pronunciation
TOPIC ~ lg-c(nikanshite)
TOPIC ~ ow-c(nitsuite)
TOPIC ~ v , 5?~t ~ t ( to iunowa)
TOPIC ti(wa ) " TOPIC " means an indicated topic . 
Table 1: topic marker expressions
Focus candidate priority in Japanese has been proposed \] l \]  \[41: 
Table 2: clue words 2.3 A ~ lbpicStack
A stack is used to handle discourse segments in the discourse model by BJ  . Grosz\[2\] . A stack element corresponds to a segment , and is called a " focus space " . Discourse entities such as objects are maintained in focus spaces  . The top stack element holds the most salient entities  . Discourse segment structures are related to the intentional structure  . The " dominance " and " satisfaction precedence " relation between intentions decides pushing and popping of focus spaces  . 
A " topic segment " is a discourse segment of large size  , and " topic stack " is used to handle topics . However , pushing and popping of topics cannot be determined by the intentional structure in or e approach because both topic-oriented and non -topic-oriented dialogues are treated  , and the intentional structure may be ill-formed . 
Instead of the intentional structure , only clue words are allowed to determine the pushing AcrEsDE  COL1NG-92  . NANTES , 2328 Aotrr 1992 1065 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NAN'rE . s , AUG . 2328, 1992 and popping . For example , " ~ ~ g4--~:(first ) " indicates pushing , and "0~: ( next ) " popping . 
To recognize local topic structures , a simple mechanism is used . Each element of a topic stack is treated as a stack called an " inner stack "  . 
Topics are pushed onto the inner stack . If an explicitopic indicated by makers in Table . 1 is recognized , non-explicit topics are popped from the stack . 
3 Identifying Topic Continuation 3 . 1 The Basic Idea Indialogues , topics can be changed naturally at some utterances  , but not at others . For example , topics unfold naturally in the dialogue in Fig .  1 . 
On the other hand , topic expansion is not natural in the dialogue in Fig  .  2 . 
P 1 Will the letter reach Kyotoby tomorrow ? Q1 The next question is about a postaldepos it . 
Figure 2: unnatural topic expansion 3 . 2 Topic Expansion and Speech Acts The unnatural topic expansion in Fig  . 2 is related to speech act purposes called illocutionary points  . Classification of the illocutionary points was proposed by J  . R . S earle\[3\]: The " assertive point " tells how the world is , e . g . to state and to predict . The " commissive point " commits the speaker to doing something  . A promise is an example . The " directive point " tries to have the hearer do things  . Making a request is an example . The " declarative point " changes the world by saying so  , e . g , to declare and to name . 
The " expressive point " expresses the speaker's feeling  , e . g . to apologize . 
A hypothesis i built : ira current utterance follows a directive utterance  , the current opic is relevant to the topic in the directive utterance  . 
This is called " topic forwarding " . The unnatural topic expansion iFig . 2 can be explained by this hypothesis . The topic of utterance Q1 must be relevant o one topic of P1 because the utterance P1 is directive . However , "0, : ~: ( next ) "
Speech Acts \[ Japanese Expressions ask ~- t; . ~; o , ( desuka ) , ~ T~(masuka ) request ~ I ~ J ' ~ , ,  ( it a dake masuka ) confirm ~ ( ne ) Table 3: Examples of Topic-Binding Speech Acts
ISpeech Acts Japanese Expressions in form ~"- , )-~~" ( desuked 0) , ~'- e ? ~: ( desuga ) acknowledge ~ w(hai) , ~ L ( e e ) Table 4: Examples of Topic-Nonbinding Speech Acts indicates a topic change  . This contradiction causes unnatural topic expansion  . 
Utterance pairs such as " requesting - accepting " and " asking-informing " will retain a topic even if the pairs are nested  . For example , in the following ,   R1  -  S2 have the topic of " restaurant " and SI and R2 have the topic of " money for restaurant " . 
R-1 Do you know a good restaurant ?
S1 How much money do you have ?
R2 Mysalary is low.
S2 That reshaurant is cheap and good.
However , pairs are not always so formed . In Post Office Dialogue in Fig . l , utterance A3 performs two speech acts : in forming-if and asking  . Deeper dialogue understanding is needed for correct pair identification  . Therefore , in this work , the pairs are not identified and a directive utterance is regarded as forwarding a topic only to the next utterance  . 
3 . 3 Utterance Types " Topic forwarding " classifies utterances into two types : topic-binding and topic-nonbinding utterances  . Topic-binding utterances have the directive point but topic-nonbinding ones do not  . Topic-binding utterance speech acts include to ask  , to request and to confirm . Topic-nonbinding utterance speech acts include to in form and to acknowledge  . 
In Japanese , the utterance type can be identified by pattern matching with expressions such as those shown in Table  3 and 4  . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOUT 1992 1066 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES . AUO .  2328 .  1992 3 . 4 ~ lbpic Recognition A set of consecutive utterances in which the same topics continue is called a " topic unit "  . 
A topic unit can be identitied by using " topic forwarding " instead of domain knowledge :  1  . The current utterance belongs to the same topic unit astire previous utterance if the previous utterance is topic-binding  , or there is no topic candidate indicated by a topic markerilltile current ntterance  . 
2. Otherwise , a new topic unit is created.
The unit is used to validate candidate of topics and topic changes  , and has no clTect on tile topic and the inner stack  . 
Noun phrases indicated by topic markers arc regarded as topic candidates  , and utterances with clue words are detected as topic change candidates  . Some of them arc recognized as topics . Topic cmldidates are preserved in a " candidate list "  . Recognized topics arc pushed onto the inner stack of the topic stack described in  2  . 3 . Topics can be identitied by using tire topic unit : a  ) A topic candidate indicated by a topic marker such as those listed in Table  1 is ina-mediately recognized as a topic , and pushed onto the inner stack . This is because such markers indicate topics explicitly  . These markers are called " explicit topic markers  "  , and the topics " explicit topics " . 
b ) A topic candidate indicated by other in arkcrs such as "/ A  ( ga ) " and " , ?( we ) " isl/reserved intire candidate list . It is recognized as a topic only when tile candidate continues for n utterances  . If recognized as a topic , it is removed from the candidate list , and pushed onto the inner stack . The optimum value of n is 4 according to the results of a manual topic recognition experiment  . 
c ) lf a new topic unit is generated , the candidate list is reset to an empty list . 
d ) A topic change candidate is recognized as a topic change only when the candidate is in the lirst utterance in a topic unit  . 
Ira topic change is recognized , the candidate list is reset to an empty list and the immr stack is pushed onto or popfmd flom the topic stack according to clue words  . 
This topic recognition algorithm can be used for any language because " topic forwarding " is not language-specific  . Only dictionaries for the topic markers , the clue words and ttle utterance type identification amunique for each language  . 
3.5 All Example of rlbpic Recognition
In utterance Aol in Post Office Dialogue in Fig .  1, "~~? . ~t ~ ( yuubinno haitatsu , mail delivery ) " is identified as a topic candidate by the topic marker " m~v  , c(nitsuite ) " . This candidate is immediately recognized as a topic because of the explicit marker  . Utterance A1 and B1 belong to the same topic trait because BI has no topic candidate  . The system state after processing t1-1 is the following . Each element of the topic stack is a inner stack . The rightmost element of thctopic and the inner stack is the top stack element  . 
CandidaZ ~ l ) is Z =
From utterance A2 to B3 , a topic marker " ~ ( we ) " is detected in A~2 and B3 , and " ~ c(ni ) " in A3 . Therefore , " Ni ~ ( sokutatsu , express ) " in A2 , " gg ( Kyoto ) " in A3 and "~ tfs ( yuubin butsu , mail ) " in B3 are identified as topic candidates . Ftuthermom ,   B3 is detected as a topic change candidate because of the clue word " ? km  ( tsugini , next ) " .   A2 generates a new topic unit because B1 is topic-nonbinding and there is a topic candidate in  A2  . As arc suh of the unit generation , the candidate list is reset . Utterances from 112 to B3 belong to tire second topic unit . This is because there is no topic candidate in B2 , and B2 and A3 are topic-binding . Therefore , the candidate " Ni ~" continues for 4 utterances inti resecond topic unit and is recognized as a topic  . The topic change candidate in B3 is dismissed correctly because it is not in the first utterance in the topic unit  . The system state after processing B3 is : ( ; and idat . cList = ~, N , ~ . 
Utterance A~4 generates a new topic unit and the candidate list is reset to an empty set  . In A-4 ,  "  , ~ x ~ ( posuto , amailbox ) " is detected as a topic candidate . B4 belongs to tire unit . The state of the inner stack does not change . 
ACTESDECOI . JNG-92, NANfES , 2328 AOtn "1992 l067 PRec . OFCOLlNG-92, NAm'~S , AUG .  2328 , 1992 In utterance A-5 , a topic candidate " ~1 ~ . 
( yuubinchokin , a postaldeposit ) " is identified . 
A -5 is detected as a topic change candidate because of the clue word  "0~tc   ( tsugini , next ) " . 
The change candidate is recognized as a topic change correctly because  A-5 is the first utterance of a new topic unit . As a result , the inner stack is popped from the topic stack . The system state after processing A-5 is:
Topic St , ,.~, :\[\[\] J4 Discussion
The results from a topic recognition experiment using  207 utterances taken from dialogue transcripts is shown in Table  5  . Topics recognized by our system are compared with the manually recognized topics  . 
Recognition and dismissal of topic change candidates was peffomaed correctly  . This correctness has the beneficial effect that wrong popping of the topic stack and the reset of the candidate list can be avoided  . 
2 noun phrases were wrongly recognized as topics by the system  . These errors occurred when current topic T1 returned to past topic T2  , and T2 was not described explicitly at that time . Although a topic change has occurred ,   T1 is regarded as a current topic because no topic candidate was presented  . 
3 topics were not recognized as topics but were wrongly dismissed  . This error occurred when the current topic was rephrased  ; " topic forwarding " fails in this case . Synonyms such as a fridge and are frigerator are often used  . 
Topic recognition accuracy is sufficient for a topic-oriented video retrieval support system  . 
The recognition method is effective especially in dialogues with interaction structure such as " asking-asking " and " requesting-asking "  . 
The experimental results show that such structures are included in many dialogues  . Mixed-initiative dialogues may lbrm the structures  . 
To improve topic recognition accuracy , other approaches such as a knowledge-based approach can be added  . For example , a synonym list and a thesaurus would contribute to topic continuation identification  . 
Recognized Dismissed correctly I wrongly correctly I ~ glyct  , ~ . g~s II 210 II 210
Topics I\[explicit 15   3 - - - - other 7   2   5   3 Table 5: The Number of Recognized and Dismissed
Candidates 5 Conclusion
A topic recognition model has been proposed.
The model identifies topic continuation by using dialogue interaction structures instead of domain knowledge  . This is based on the hypothesis that a directive utterance repeats the same topic until the next utterance  . The model has been validated by the results of a topic recognition experiment  . 
References\[1\]S . E . Brennan , M . W . Friedman , and C . J . Pollard . A centering approach to pro-nouns s . In 25th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 155-162 . ACL , 1987 . 
\[2\]B . J . Grosz and C . L . Sidner . Attention , intention and the structure of discourse . Computational Linguistics , 12(3):175-204, 1986 . 
\[3\] J . R . Searle . Expression and Meaning . Cambridge University Press , 1979 . 
\[4\] M . W . Friedman , M . Iida , and S . Cote . Centering in Japanese discourse . In Papers presented to the 13th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  . ACL , 1990 . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt'rr 1992I068 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328, 1992
