Martin KAY , President of the ICCL
Ongoing directions in Computational Linguistics
This is the fifteenth hlternational Confcrenccon
Computational Linguistics.
It is arguably the fifteenth COLING , although we only adopted the name of a Swedish hoboas our nickname after the third meeting  . 
Since tile first n/eeting in 1965 , this is only the third time that we have returned to a couutry where w chad been before  . The first time was in 1984 , when we returned totile United States , arid tile second ill 1988 , when we returned to Hungary . This year we return to France , where tile second conference was held in 1967 . 
For those who , like me , have been associated with these meeting since tile beginning  , it is a privilege and an enormous pleasure to return to France  , and tou conference organized under the auspices of the University of Grenoble  . it is too little recognized how much the field of comlmtational linguistic so west othis country and to that university  . My predecessor , the second chairman of the International Committee on Computational Linguistics  , the late Professor Bernard Vauquois and tile machine translation center that he founded in Greooble  , have done more to shape our field than any other single person or center  . They were the only major academic research group to live through the darkages that followed the ALPAC report and their Ariune system has become ttle model for the great majority of the commercial machine translation systems that have ever been built  . Professor Vauquois , and his students and colleagues have been missionaries for  , antitire less teachers of , computational linguistics for thirty years , establishing new research centers as far away as

For a computational linguist , to come here is , illavery real sense , to colne home . 
In receot years , computational linguistics has been returning to its beginuings in some other ways also  . 
Much of tile driving R ) rcein our field conies lrom tile desire to inake ulranslatiug in a chine  ,   0or just because this wastile first problem that we attacked  , but also because it is a problenl that encompasses ull others -- it is very hard to imagine ally achieveruent that would count as a contribution to computational linguistics without contributing to machine translation  . 
But , while it lost noue of its nlotivating force in the interveoiug years  , machine translation received somewhat less attention because the perception has been that tile need for nlachine trauslatioo was less than had originally been thought  . Now , tile need is though to be greater again , and growing . So , once again , machine translatkm , machine-aided translation , and machine aids for translators are coming to claim more attention  , especially outside the United States . 
Illtile early days of conlpututional linguistics , one of tile great opportunities that cmn puters seemed to offer was that of perftlrmiugn lassive statistical analyses of running text from which it was hoped that much of the hidden structure of language would emerge  . Tile idea IEll into the background because it became clear that  , if such a program could indeed be carried through  , the amouut of data that would have to be considered was still beyond the reach of tile machines and techniques that were then available  . 
he machines are now bigger and faster ; orders of magnitude more data is readily available in machine treatable form  ; and much sharper tools have been developed . Someonentering the field of c0mputational linguistics today will no longer be able to ignores ~ atish cs and corpus-b  , ~scd techniques . 
But , our return to France , MT , and statistics , does not mean that , to quote Yogi Bear , it is just " dejhvuan over again " . Tileold problems remain unsolved , but the relative naivete , of tile fifties and sixties has been replaced by a notion of appropriate tctmology--of  ( be impact that can be made on practical matters without having solved all the problems necessary for complete automation  . 
The TAUM-METEO project in Montreal demonstrated clearly and cleanly that we could do useful things with sublanguages that we could not do with unrestricted languages  . Machine translation systems all overtile world have shown that  , when used appropriately , there is value in initial translations of altogether lower quality that would once have been thought interesting  . 
hlter active methods have shown us how to profit 1'1"0I\]1 tile conlpler nentary skills of p cot ) leantiln achiues , allowing each to supply the deficiencies of the other  . In short , we have learnt to appro ; lch practical problenls with greater humility and greater realism  . 
These are some of tile reasons that makeule especially happy to welcomey on all to to France  , to Nantes , and a week of excitementatile 15th hlternatiooal Coofcrence 00 Computational Linguistics . 
Pale Alto , Friday , 8May 1992
ACTI!SDECOLING-92 , NAh-rEs , 2328 AOt ~ T19924 PRec . OVCOL1NG-92, NAN'n ! S,AUt; .  2328, 1992
