Aspect-Switching and Subordination :
the Role of/t-Clefts in Discourse *
Judy Delin Jon Oberlander
School of Cognitive and Computing Sciences Centre for Cognitive Science and 
University of Sussex
Falmer
Bright on BN 19 QN England
Introduction
In this paper , we explore a proposal , first put forward by Prince\[1978\] , to the effect that it-clefts serve an apparently subordinating function in discourse  . In addition to the cause-and-effect subordination noted by Prince  , our own data reveals that clefts are also involved in temporal subordination  , where the clefted material appears dissociated from the main timeline  . 
Using Schaaud Polanyi's\[1988\] notation , we can draw a local discourse structure that illustrates the general subordination relation involved  . However , this does not coust it ute an explanation of why subordination is effected by it-clefts  . 
In an attempto construct a general explanation for botb sets of cases  , we examine Prince's \[1978\] suggestion that it-clefts serve to markapiece of information as KNOWN FACT  . We propose that tile AS-PECTUALE FFECT of using a cleft both explainst be Known Fact Effect observed by Prince  , and accounts for the various kinds of discourse subordination associated with it-clefts  . 
We then turn our attention to a third set of data : it-clefts that have a contrastiv effect in the discourses in wbicb they appear  , and what goes wrong with those discourses when they are de-elefted  . In some cases , de-clefting causes no ill-effects . In other cases , however , no contrastive relation can be retrieved upon de -clefting and the discourse becomes incoherent  . 
In the final section of the paper , we make some speculative comments on an apparently related phenomenon : the fact that it -clefts canno take it as the clefted constituent  , which we feel is amenable to a discourse -structural explanation  . 
The data for the study were drawn from the Survey of English Usage corpus of spoken English  , tile LOB corpus of written English , and casually-collected data . 
* The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Science and Engineering Research Council through a Postdoctoral Fellowship  , and Project Grant on/Gz 2077 . It ono is supported by the Economic and Social Research Council  . We thank three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments  . Email contact : judy0coga,ntmx . ac . uk Human Communication Research Centre
University of Edinburgh 2 Buccleuch Place Edinburgh Scotland Clefts and Discourse Subordination 
Background , Cause and Effect
To our knowledge , Prince \[1978:902\] was the first to observe that cleft constructions serve a SUBOR-DINATING function in discourse  . She observed that for examples like ( 1 ) the information conveyed is ' background material  .   .   . subordinate in importance to what follows': ( 1 ) It is through the writings of Basil Bernsteiu that many social scientists have become aware of the scientific potential of sociolinguistics  .   .   . Yet their very popularity has often deformed Bern -steiu's arguments  ;   .   .   . he has been made to say that lower class children are linguistically ' deprived '  .   .   . In fact , Bernstein's views are much more complex than that  . First .   .   . 
She notes in particular that the subordination relation involved is often  ( although not always ) one of cause emd effect , where the clefted proposition is often intended to be interpreted as the cause  . She gives the following example : (48a ) Here .   .   . were the ideas which Hitler was later to use .   .   , lf is originality lay in his being the only politician of the Right to apply them to the Ger -m ~ m scene after tile First World War  . It was then that the Nazimovement , alone among the na-tionalist and conservative pa * ties  , gained a great mass following and , having achieved this , won over the support of the Army , the President of the Republic , and .   .   , big business -- three ' long-established institutions ' of great power  . The lessons learned in Vienna proved very usefnl indeed  . 
Prince \[1978:902\] explains the effect of the cleft in her ( 48 a ) as follows : ? . . If the third sentence of (48a ) read Then , the Nazi movement .   .   .   , it would tend to suggest a separate vent , and we would losetile notion that it was all It 's doing a notion conveyed very strongly by timi / ~cleft'subordinating effect  , and underlined ( though still not asserted ) by the last sentence . 
\[Prince 1978:902\]
Prince's suggestion , then , is that clefts can serve as suitable vehicles for deliveriug information that is baek grouud cd to the main flow of the discourse  , or that is contingently related to it , by cause-and-effect . 
ACIESDEC ( IL1NG-92, Nhgll' . ' S , 2328AO~t1992281 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NAI , rrES , AUG .  2328, 1992
Temporal Regression
In addition to the cause-and-effect relations noted by Prince  , our own data reveals a further ' background-ing ' function : the use of clefts for temporal subordination  . In (2) , for example , an // , cleft is being used to introduce background information elaborating on the nature of a protagonist in the discourse  ( Mr . Butler ) . This is done by describing an eventuality that he was involved in at some previous time :  ( 2 )  1 . Mr . Butler , the Home Secretary , decided to meet the challenge of the ' Ban-the -Bomb'demonstrators head-on  . 
2 . Police leave was cancelled 3 . and secret plans were prepared . 
4 . It was Mr . Butler who author is cd action which ended in 3Y , members of the Committee of 100 being imprisoned . 
5 . The Committee's president and his wife were each jailed for a week  . 
The effect of the cleft is to cause the ' background ' information about the anthorisation of action to be interpreted as as occurring prior to the events introduced in lines  13- -the decision , the cancellation of leave , and the preparation of secret plans . 
If we look at a de-clefted version of the same di ~ course  , we can see that the temporally subordinating effect of the cleft is removed  , creating a rather different effect . The result ,  (3) , has the ' authorisation of action ' described in the de-clefted sentence occn rring in simple temporal progression from the ' cancellation of police leave '-- in other words  , after the events introduced in lines 13: (3) 1 . Mr . Butler , the Home Secretary , decided to meet the challenge of the ' Ban-the -Bomb'demonstrators head-on  . 
2 . Police leave was cancelled 3 . and secret plans were prepared . 
4 . Mr . Butler authorised action which ended in 3~ members of the Committee of lO0 being imprisoned . 
5 . The Committee's president and his wife were each jailed for a week  . 
The Known Fact Effect
Example such as (1) ,   ( 48 a ) and ( 2 ) share a property that has been characterised as the KNOWN FACTEF- 
FECT . Prince states:
Their function , or at least one of their functions , is TOMARKAPIECEOFINFOR MATION ASF ACT~known to some people although not yet known to the intended hearer  . Thus they are frequent in historical narrative , or wherever the speaker wishes to indicate thats /he does not wish to take personal responsibility for the truth or originality of the statement being made  . 
\[ Prince 1978:899-900\]
The cleft can introduce ' new ' information to the discourse  , while at the same time signalling that the information is to be treated as if it had been there all along  . A significant feature , then , is that the
S < dominan ~ < subordina ~ ? segment > clefted segment > Figure  1: A discourse parse tree for an it-cleft information must be regarded as not open to conversational negotiation  . Delin \[1991\] proposed that a speaker who uses an it-cleft that conveys new information in the complement is indicating that the information they are communicating did not originate with the speaker  , and that they are therefore not to be held responsible for its truth value  . 
This Known Fact account has an intuitive appeal ; yet it does not constitute a meehanisable explanation of the role of the cleft in discourse  . One possible avenue to such an account would be to exploit Polanyi and Scha's  \[1988\] Linguistic Discourse Model . By adding an appropriate rule to the grammar for discourse constituent units  ( DCDS )  , we could represent the cleft as introducing a DCO to be attached as subordinate to the current node  , deriving a local discourse parse tree such as that in Figure  1  . 
Hence , we can represent the proposition conveyed by the cleft sentence as subordinate to the existing discourse structure  . But mere representation does not make obvious how the syntactic or semantic features of the cleft are supposed to drive the assignment of discourse structure  . Norisit obvious that such a subordination structure supports the Known Fact Effect  . There are plenty of other subordination structures in Polanyi and Scha's framework that don't indicate that a Known Fact reading should be associated with the subordinat elements  . 
The Aspectual Effect of the Cleft What we want at this point is an account which can recruit the syntactic and semantic features of the cleft  , to explain the background and regress data that has been observed  , feed into the discourse parse process , and explain the Known Fact Effect . The basic proposal we explore here is that it is the aspectual effect of the cleft that provides the required explanation  . 
Aspectual Class
Following Vendler\[1967\] , much consideration has been given to the " aspectual types " of utterances of English sentences  ( cf . Hinrichs\[1986\] ; Dowty\[1986\] ; Moens and Steedman \[19871) . An utterance denotes an eventuality of some type  '  , the aspectual type will determine the relation to other eventualities mentioned in a discourse  . Vendter's inventory includes ACTIVITIES ~ ACCOMPLISHMENTS  , ACHEIVE-MENTS and STATES , Bach \[1986\] takes the space of eventualities to include STATES and NON-STATES  ; in turn , states consist of DYNAMIC and STATIC states , Acr ~ DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AnenT1992282 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES . AUG .  2328 ,   1992 while non-states consist of PROCESSES and EVENTS . 
Events are then either PROTRACTED or MOMENTA -NEOUS  ; momentaneous events are either HAPPEN-
INGS or CULMINATIONS.
For current purposes , the relevant distinction is that between states and non-states  ; in particular , between states and events . From Bach\[1986:6\] , paradigmatic cases of verb phrases exlfibiting this distinction include the following : 
States : sit , he drunk , own x , love x
Events : build z , walk to Boston , notice , reach the top The aspectual class of an utterance is typically determined by the aspectual class of the lexical verb  , by other elements within the verb phrase , by temporal adverbials with which the verb phrase cooccurs  , and by the noun phrase itself . Linguistic on text will also influence aspectual class assignment  . For example , a verb normally taken to denote a process , such as (4) , can form part of a verb phrase deuoting a protracted event  , as ill (5) ; and in combination with certain noun phrases , tile same verb phrase cauform part of a sentence  ( 6 ) de ~ oting a habitual state : ( 4 ) ran ( 5 ) ran to the station ( 6 ) trains ran to the station We can now frame the basic proposal we wish to discuss : it-cleft sentences are stative  ; t be presence of the copular in the cleft head ensures this  . We can thus view a cleft as a function taking either non-state-expressions or state-expressions as input  , and returning state-expressions as output .   ( Ta ) and ( 8a ) denote an event and a state respectively ; but both ( Tb ) and (8b ) denote states . 
(7) a . Victoria found the body.
b . It was Victoria who found the hody.
(8) a . Victoria knew the killer's identity.
b . It was Victoria who knew the killer's identity . 
Temporal Overlap
Consider now theories which attemp to derive the temporal structure of discourse from the syntactic structures of a sequence of input sentences  . In the framework of discourse representation theory  , work by Partee\[1984\] , Kamp and Rohrer \[1983\] and Hinrichs \[1986\] has indicated that it is possible to exploit Reichenbach's  \[1947\] notions of speech-time , vent-time , and reference-time to drive a process which will add temporal constraints to a discourse representation structure  ( DRS )  . 1In particular , in past tense narrative , simple event-expressions are taken to locate an event at an event-time corresponding to the existing reference-time  , and , in addition , to update the reference-time to a point ' just after ' that reference-time  . This new time wil ! constitute the reference-time for the location of the next input expression  . By contrast , state-expressions firstly locate the state as overlapping the  1We do not wish to maintain that a reference-time based account is the best that can be provided  . It is , however , a convenient representational tool . 
existing reference-time ; and secondly do not update that reference time . Hence , the next input expression ( denoting event or state ) will be evaluated with respect o the same reference time again  . In this way , DRS construction can encode the relative temporal locations of the various eventualities  . In general , one can say that simple event-expressions ' move a narrative along '  , while simple state-expressions leave it where it is  . More complex expressions , containing temporal adverbials and perfective or progressive aspect  , require some complication in the DRS-construction rules  . Take an example like ( 9 ) :  ( 9 ) Johnmet Mary in town . She had broken her leg , but looked well in spite of it . 
The use of the past perfect can be taken to either introduce a flashback sequence  , with a set of ' secondary reference points ' ( as in Kamp and Rohrer\[1983:260\] )  , or else to turn an event expression into all expression denoting tile consequent state of an earlier occurrence of the contained event  ( adapting the somewhat different analysis in Moens and Steed-mall  \[1987:4\]  )  . Assuming the DRT account of states in general , we would say here that the consequent state ( of Mary having a broken leg ) overlapped with the existing reference time ( associated with the event of John meeting Mary )  ; tile earlier occurrence of an event ( of Mary breaking her leg ) being inferrable from the perfective description of the leg-break age  . 
The DRT notion of temporal overlap is a permissive relation  ; in a case like (10) , we can follow a pair of event-expressions with various state-expressions  , all of which DRT would say denote states which overlap the event already introduced  . 
(10) Someones tole Victoria's car on Friday ; they wreck edit . 
a . She was very attached to it.
b . She was very annoyed.
c . It was unlocked.
In fact , we would want to say that Victoria was attached to the car before  ( and perhaps not after ) it was wrecked ; that s be was annoyed after ( and probably not before ) it was wrecked ; and that its being unlocked fully overlapped the stealing and wrecking  . 
Arguably , we can view the states in ( 10 a-c ) as providing respectively some background , a result and an explanation for the events ill ( 10 )  . 
One approach to representing states is to represent them via intervals of time  , bounded by ( artefac-tual ) begin-events and end-events . Such an approach is adopted , for example , in Kowalski and Sergot's\[1986\] Event Calculus . In discourse , of course , it is not always possible to find explicit reference to anch beginnings and endings  . Whilst not axlvocating such a reductiv c approach to states here  , we note that in some cases , such as the resultant state in ( 10b ) or the perfect state in ( 9 )  , the event which initiated that state may be explicitly mentioned  . In other cases , such as the background in ( 10 a ) and tile explanation in ( 10c )  , the event which lead to the state may be only implicit  .   2 ~Capturing these differences in a DRT-based theory of ACFESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 A or ~'1992283 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
Explaining the Data
Now , consider the use of clefts as state-denoting expressions  . We would suggest hat , in this respect , they be treated like the others we have considered  . 
We can say that clefts will denote states which : 1  . Overlap with the existing reference time 2 . Do not update that reference time 3 . Have been initiated by some event , which may be either explicit or implicit . 
These facts arise directly from the aspectual type of the cleft  ; in turn , they directly account both for Prince's observations  , and our own . Recall examples (1), (48a ) and (2) . In the first ease , the information about Basil Bernstein's influence is presented via a cleft  . Hence , it is presented as a state , overlapping with any previously established time . There is no update to the reference time ; hence the information that follows it temporally overlaps with it as well  . 
What event brought about the influential status of Bernstein's writings is not specified  . Thus , Bern-stein's influence is indeed , as Prince suggests , background to what follows ; this is a ease of background , like (19a ) . 
In Prince's (48a ) , the timing of the Nazi move-ment's gathering of mass support is presented via a cleft identifying it as the time of l litler's application of various ideas  . Hence , the information about the timing is presented via a state -- that of having gathered mass support  . In this case , on the DRT analysis , the state overlaps with a reference-time ' just after ' II itler's application of the ideas  . Again , the state does not itself update the reference time for the next sentence  , so what follows overlaps with the state . What event brought about the state of mass support is clear from the context : it is in fact Hitler's application of the ideas  , mentioned in the previous sentence . Thus , this wmdd be a ease of result , like (10b ) ; Prince's suggestion of a causal relation is entirely compatible with this  . 
Finally , MrButler's authorisation of various actions is presented via a cleft  ( example ( 2 ) ) . Hence , we have a state of MrButler ~ of having authorised action -- and this state overlaps the reference-time established by the previous sentence  . The state does not update the reference-time , and sotile subsequent sentence overlaps with this state  . Here , the event which brought about the state of Mr Butlerfit clearly his authorisation of action  . It must have initiated the state , so it lies before tile current refer-enee time ; but we cannototally order it with respect to the reference-times from the previou sentences of the discourse  . This explains why there is a feeling of " temporal regression ' and the associated removal from the main timeline  ; further world knowledge would be required to find the actual relative Inca-tree of MrButler's action  . 
The reason de-elefting seenm to disrupt the meaning of the discourse lies in the fact that it can  , as here , convert a state-expression back into an event -expression  . This then gives the impression that discourse would  , of course , require additional theoretical apparatus ; cf . Lascarides and Asher\[1991\] . 
the speaker-writer is introduciug a new event into the discourse and updating it in the relevant ways  ; whereas in the clefted versions , any events introduced by the state itself are either implicit  , or identifiable in the previous context . Safe de-clefting must therefore involve the preservation of the stative aspect of the relevant cleft sentence  ; replacement with a perfect de-clefted sentence should normally suffice  . 
Note that where the de-clefted sentence is already stative  , de-clefting should not disrupt the coherence of the narrative so severely  . 
Explaining the Known Fact Effect We have indicated that the discourse subordination effect of clefts can be traced to their aspectual class  . 
This suggests that we can correlate the syntactic construction with a semantic feature  , and that this feature could therefore be recruited by a discourse parsing mechanism  , such as the Linguistic Discourse Model proposed by Seha and Polanyi  \[1988\]  . 
As we noted earlier , Prince \[1978\] proposed that what the various clefts had in common was that they marked a piece of information as fact  , known to some people , but not necessarily to the hearer . By indicating that they do not accept responsibility for the truth of the statement  , the speaker at once denies that they are the ' informational origin '  , and makes it clear that the validity of the statement is non-negotiable  . 
We would like to suggest hat the aspectual effect of the cleft can explain the Known Fact Effect  , in the following way . On one interpretation of Grice's \[1975:46\] Maxim of Quality , we can say that a considerate speaker's explicit commitments must bc supported by adequate vidence  , but that their implicit implicatures need not be , so long as the speaker does not actually believe the implicatures to be false  . In the discourses we have discussed , each piece of information the speaker wishes to convey can be transmitted via either an event -expression rast ate-expression  . When the speaker uses an event expression , they are explicitly introducing a new referential element o the discourse : an event  . Let us say that speakers are ' responsible ' for explicit introductions only  . Now , when a speaker uses a state expression , they do two things : they explicitly introduce a state to the discourse  , and they also implicitly refer to two further events  ; the beginning and ending of that state . But the speaker is not responsible for those events  , because they have chosen to use a construction which leaves the events merely inferrable  , or loeatable in tile previous discourse context . 
Lascarides and Oberlander \[1992\] sugges that if there is no ' explicit ' indication of where a state starts--viatile mention of causes or the use of temporal adverbials -- then the start of the state is assumed to be irrelevaut  . Here we may gloss ' irrelevant ' as : unknown , unknowable or simply to be taken for granted . Thus , conversely , if the speaker deems the start of tile state to be irrelevant o the discourse in this sense  , then they can use a simple state-expregsion . This makes a cleft a natural choice for a speaker who wishes simply to assert that an eventuality is current at the  reference4ime   , without ACRESDE COLING-92 . NANTES . 2328 ^ Oral "1992 284 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES . AUG . 2328,1992 indicating anything further about it . So clefts can deliver information which might otherwise have been stated earlier without disrupting the flow of the discourse  ( of . Polanyi's\[1986:85-87\]' true starts') ; and they call also deliver information without generating responsibility for an initiating event whose location may be unknown  , unknowable or simply to be taken for granted . The former type might be assimilated to what Prince  \[1978\] hastermed STIU , ; SSED-FOCU Sibclefts , and the latter to her INFOItMAT , VE-
PRB SUP POSITION clefts.
Clefts and Contrast
The observation that the cleft initiates a subordinate discourse segment also provides us with a potential explanation for a further set of data  , namely those clefts which play a eontrastive role in discourse  . 3 Contrast ( cf . Lyons\[1977\] , Werth\[1984\] for a discussion ) can be described as relationship of opposition or comparison between two  ( or more ) discourse le-ments that operates on the basis of so ine predicate : For example  , in tile following case a contrast holds between the clef the adelement heangel and a preceding element  , Boaz , with respecto the predicate use this form of greeting :  ( 11 ) To this the reply is given that from the verse dealing with Boaz there is no proof of divine at l -proval  , only that Boaz used this form of greeting . 
But in tile second verse it is the angel that uses this form of greeting and hence there is evidence of divine approval  . 
It is important onote that the contrastive relationshipt  , as two distinct components : the two ( or more ) coutrastive lements themselves , and the semantic content relating those elements , thereby allowing the contrast otake place . In (11) , for example , the relating semantic ontent is easy to find , since it is explicitly stated twice illaway that allows the commonality between the contrast -supporting predicates to be retrieved in unediately  ( used this form of greeting .   .   . uses this form of greetiug ) . In other cases , however , the relating semantic ontent is not so simple : understanding the contrast between doubling the selling space to  700 square feet and the new fixturcs and fittings in ( 12 )  , for example , requires a contrastive relation to be constructed out of the nonidentical content of the predicates be the greatest e ~: pcnse and be costly :  ( 12 ) Doubling the selling space to 700 square feet was not to be tile greatest expense . It was the new fixtures and fittings ~ of ill ~ his space that would be costly  . 
A similar effect can be observed in (13) , in which a contrastakes place between tilecleft head element the lady who obliges and the antecedentaaice  3As noted above , while we would hesitate to make a complete assimilation between the two classes  , contrastive clefts seem to fall into the class that P  . rince\[1978\] terms STRESSED-FOOUS it-clefts . 
4The notion that relations of contrast and other kinds of coherence are supported hy inferrable SEAL  , S(cf . 
tlitschberg\[1985\] , Ward\[1985\] ) wmdd also heauseful one for this analysis . 
old-fashioned house maid in tile following advice to visitors to grand homes :  ( 13 ) Quite a few of you have asked about tipping , and these days problems can arise . A nice old-fashioned house maid , labelled by cap and a pron , is easy enough ; when you leave you will give hery our little present as a thank you for looking after you  . It is the ' lady who obliges ' thai can confound you  ; on that point , tile simples tway is to quietly consult your hostess  . 
The contrast here operates on the basis of reader perceiving the relationship between the two predicates easy enough and can confoundy on  . The in-ferrable predicate for the contrast is therefore something like ease of tipping  , and the actual predicates that appear serve to range the two elements -- the house maid and the lady who oblige ~- at opposite ends of a scale of ease and difficulty :  ( 14 ) Quite a few of you have asked about tipping , and these days problems can arise . A nice old-fashioned house maid , labelled by cap and a pron , is easy enough ; when y on leave you will give hery our little prczent as a thank you for looking after you  . The " lady who obliges ' can confound you ; on that point , the simplest way is to quietly consult your hoste . 'm . 
We would suggest hat it is in these more difficult cases  , where the contrast-supporting semantic relation is less obvious  , or where the contrastive antecedent is less accessible in some other way  ( for example , in terms of its embeddedness within the structure of the discourse  ) that the cleft comes into its own . Evidence for this comes from the fact that de -clefting in the simpler cases such as  ( 15 ) does not cause loss of coherence : ( 15 ) To this the reply is given that from the verse dealing with l loaz there is no proof of divine approval  , only that Boaz used this form of greeting . 
But in tile second verse the angel uses this form of greeting and hence there is evidence of divine approval  . 
In other eases , however , de-clefting has more disruptive effects . While contrast is successfully established by the cleftill  ( 12 )  , tile de-cleft version , shown in (16) , is much less acceptable: ( 16 ) ? Doubling tile selling space to 700 square feet was not to be the greatest expense . Theuew fiz-tu , es and fittings to \] ill this space would be costly  . 
What is happening in the de-clefted cases ill order to disrupt the retrieval of the relationship along which the contrastakes place ? In our discussion of subordination a bow ~  . , we observed that de-clefting gives the impression that the speaker-writer is introducing a new event into the discourse  , while in the clefted versions , any events introduced by the state itself are either implicit  , or identifiable in the previous context . In the same way , in the contrast cases , the loss of the cleft causes the content of the de-cleft to be interpreted as a new and distinct the-matte development  . In this way , the de-clefted information fails to identify with information already in AcrEsDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 23-28/t OOT 1992 285 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES . AUG .  2328 . 1992 the previous context . Because of this , the identification of the contrastive antecedent , and the semantic information linking it to the current proposition  , are not retrieved . In situations where this relationship is not made clear by means other than the cleft  ( and it can be effected by intonation , or through the availability of an obvious and immediately-preceding antecedent--we do not suggest hatclefts are unique in their contrasting function  ) the reader's default will be to introduce a new eventuality into the discourse  , probably ( in the absence of other signals ) as a coordination in the discourse structure . In this way , the information upon which the contrast depends - -that the proposition is to be seen as an elaboration on existing content--is not preserved  . 
Comments and Conclusions
In this paper , we have tried to show that various apparently unrelated aspects of it-cleft function - -subordination  , the Known Fact Effect , and the facts surrounding contrast -- can be explained in terms of the fact that i ~- clefts perform a ' stativizing ' function  . 
It is as well at this point , however , to sound a cau-tionary note . We have not yet examined in full thoee cases where de-elefting leaves a state-expression  . The prediction is that these cases should not seem as bad as when de-clefting reveals an event -expression  , but we have not yet tested the prediction . 
A related issue which ought to be amenable to a pragmatic explanation is the unacceptability of it asclefted  constituent3 R-clefts ( and wh-clefts , for that matter ) cannot take it asclefted constituent : ( 17 ) * It is it that John has decided he wants . 
The alternative forms with this and that , however , are acceptable: ( 18 ) It is this/that hat John has decided he wants . 
The restriction on if cannot be accounted for by a simple restriction on pronouns incleft head position  , as personal pronouns can appear , s An obvious , but incorrect , explanation would be that it is the unstressed variant of that  ( cf . for example Declerck\[1988:14\] , following Kuroda\[1968\]) , and so cannot appear in the cleft's'stressed' position  . However , we know that it-clefts regularly appear with no stress on the head constituent  ( cf . Delin\[1989\] for an analysis ) ; it also appears that it is in any case stressable  , as the following ( attested ) data shows : ( 19 ) S:Judy , is there any more soap ? J : If yonlook in the basket there's that purple one S : I thought you we redrying some out on the SB all  ( p . c . ) has pointed out that it is not acceptable as complement of a copular sentence whose subject is it in any case : e  . g . * it's it vs . that's it . 
SBall\[1991\] and p . c . , in her study of the development of the it-cleft from Old English to Late Modern English  , finds no occurrences of it in focus position either in the modern-day it-cleft or in any of its ancestors  . This is in spite of the fact that the paradigm of personal pronouns in focus position can be considered complete around the  15th century , with objective case pronouns ( e . g . it was me ) appearing in the 16th ( Ball\[1991:274\] )  . 
window . What happened to IT ?
J : That's it
S : Oh , so it is
A second plausible explanation may be that it , unique among the pronouns , has no cuntrastive reading ( el . Werth\[1984:134\]) . A contrastive function , however , does not appear to he obligatory for il-clefts anyway  , as Declerck\[1988\] among others points out . /t-clefts are frequently found with old , non-?ontrastive , anaphoric information in the clefted cou-stituent  :   ( 20 ) A : Joe Wright you mean
B : Yes yes
A : I thought it was old JoeWright who'd walked in at FIRST and Prince's  \[1978:898\] written example : ( 21 ) It was also during these centuries that a vast internal migration  .   .   , from the south northwards took place , a process no less momentous than the Amhara expansions outhwards during the last part of the  19th century A possible explanation for it-lessness in it-clefts may be found in work by Linde  \[1979\]  , who relates the alternation of it and thai to the ' in focus'status of the referent in relation to the structure of the discourse  . Inherstudy of subjects ' descriptions of their apartments  , henotes that it is preferred for ' reference within the discourse node in focus '  , which L in detakes to be a continuation of a segment of discourse describing the same room in the apartment  . That is used for reference within the discourse node in focus only when there is some contrast to a preceding node  ; most of the time , that is used for transitions between nodes . That is , when a room is being described , a second room may be described as leading off lhat  . That therefore tends to mark progressions from one node to the next  . Can we there for expect the it-lessness of it -clefts to relate to their position in the discourse structure ? That is  , do it-clefts appear only in these node-transition situations  , and not in the positions of same node reference ? We would expect that an exploration of the lack of it inclefts along these lines might be fruitful  . 
References
Bach , E . \[1986\] The algebra of events . Linguistics and
Philosophy , 9, 5-16.
Ball , Catherine N . \[1991\] The Historical Development of thelt . Clett . PhD Dissertation , Department of Linguistics , University of Pennsylvania . 
Declerck , R . \[1988\] Studieson : Copular Sentences , Cle\]ts , and Pseudo . Clefts . Volume 5 , Series C Linguistics , Leaven University Press/Forts Publications . 
Delin , J . \[1989\] Cle  #Constructions in Discourse . PhD Thesis No .  34 , Centre for Cognitive Science , University of Edinburgh . 
Delin , J . \[1991\]Presupposition,/t-Clefts , and Discourse . 
Proceedings of the ESPRIT Workshop on Discourse Coherence  , University of Edinburgh , April . 
Dowry , D .   \[1986\] The effects of aspectual class on the temporal structure of discourse : semantics or prag-mattes ? Linguistics and Philosophy  ,  9 ,  37-61 . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 Aotrr 1992286 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO . 2328, 1992 Grice , 1I . P . \[1975\] Logic and Conversation . In Cole , P . 
and Morgan , J . L . ( eds . ) Syntax and Semantics , Volume 3: Speech Acts , pp 41-58 . New York : Academic

llinric bs , E .   \[1986\] Temporal anaphora ill discourses of English . Linguistics and Philosophy , 9, 63-82 . 
Hirschberg , J . \[1985\]A Theory of Scalarhnplicature . 
PhD Dissertation , University of Pennsylwtnia.
Kamp , H . and Rohrer , C . \[1983\] Tense in texts . In Bauerle , R . , Schwarze , C . and van Stechow , A . ( eds . ) Meaning , Use and Interpretation of Language , pp 250-269 . Berlin : de Gruyter . 
Kowalski , R . and Sergot , M . \[1986\]A logic-based calculus of events . New Generation Gomputia 9, 4, 67-95 . 
Kuroda , SY .   \[1968\] English relativization and certain related problems  . Language , 44, pp 244-2(16 . 
Lascarides , A . and Asher , N .   \[1991\] Discourse relations and common sense entailment . DYAU ^ Deliverable 2 . 5b , University of Edinburgh . 
La-scarides , A . and Oberlander , J .   \[1992\] Temporal Coherence and Defeasible Knowledge . Theoretical Linguistics , 18 . 
Linde , C .   \[1979\] Focus of attention ad the c boice of pro-nouns in discourse  . Syntax and Semantics Volume 12: Discourse and Syntax . London : Academic Press . 
Lyons , J . \[1977\] Semantics . Cambridge : Cambridge
University Press.
Moens , M . and Steedman , M . \[1987\] Temporal Ontology in Natural Language . In Proceedings of the ~ Sth Annual Meeting of the Association  . for Computational Linguistics , Stauford , Ca . , 69 July ~1987, ppl-7 . 
Partee , B . 1t . \[1984\] Nominal and temporal anaphora . 
Linguistics and Philosophy , 7, 243-286.
Polanyi , L .   \[1986\] The linguistic discourse model : towards a formal theory of discourse structure  , nBN Report No . 6409, Cambridge , MA . November 1986 . 
Prince , E . F .   \[1978\] A comparison of it-clefts and WH-clefts in discourse  . Language , 54, pp 883-908 . 
Reichenbach , It . \[1947\]Element so \] Symbolic Logic . 
London : Macmillan.
Scha , R . and Polanyi , L .   \[1988\] An augmented contextfree grammar for discourse . In Proceedings COLING-88 , Budapest , Hungary , 2227 August ,  1988 , pp 573-577 . 
Vendler , Z . \[1967\] Verbs and Times . In Linguistics and Philosophy , Z . Vendler , pp 97-121 . Ithaca , NY : Cornell
University Press.
Ward , G .   \[1985\] The Semantics and Pragmatics of Preposing . PhD Dissertation , University of Pennsylvania . 
Werth , P . \[1984\] Focus , Coherence , and Emphasis . London : Croom Helm . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt3"r1992287 PROC . OF COLING-92, N^N TrS , AUG .  2328, 1992
