AUTOMATICDICTIONARY ORGANIZATION INNLPSYSTEMS FOR 
ORIENTALL ANGUAGES
V . Andrezen , L . Kogan , W . Kwitakowski , R . Minvaleev , R . Piotrowski,
V . Shumovsky , E . Tioun , Yu . Tovmaeh
\[lept . of Applied Linguist cs
Hertzen Pedagogical University
48, Moika , 191186
St.-Petersburg , USSR

This paper presents a description of automatic d ictionaries  ( ADs ) and dictionary entry ( DE ) schemes for NLP systems dealing with Oriental languages  . The uniformity of the
A Dorganization and of the DE pattern does not prevent the system from taking into account the structural differences of isolating  ( analytical )  , aggluti-nating and internal-flection languages  . 
The " Speech Statistics " ( SpSt ) project team has been designing a linguistic automaton aimed at NL processing in a variety of forms  . 
In addition to Germanic and
Romance languages the system under development is to handle text processing of a number of 
Oriental languages . The strategy adopted by th ~ SpSt ~ roup is characterized by a lexicalized approach : the NLP algoritnns for any language are entirely AD dependent  , i . e . , a large lexicon database has been provided , its entries being loaded with information in c luding not only lexical  , but also morphological , syntactic and semantic data . This information concentrated in dictionary entries  ( DEs ) is essential for both source text analysis and target  ( Russian ) text generation . 
The DE structure is largely determined by the typological features of the source language  . 
The SpSt group has hither to had to deal w . ith European languages and it was for these languages  ( inflective and inflective-analytical ) that the prototype entry schemes were elaborated and adopted  . No doubt , the typological characteristics of
Oriental languages required certain modific at ions to be made % othe basic scheme  . Hence in the present paper each of the language types is given consideration  . Agglutinating languages proved to be the most suitable to process according to the SpSt strategy  . But an isolating language will be the first to be proposed for discussion  . 
I . The AD organization for a ~ isolating language : Chinese 
For the purposes of NLP it is plausible to assume written 
Chinese as exclusively isolating language where affixation is virtually nonexistent  . The few inflective wordforms are entered into the lexicon as unanalizable lexical items  , whereas multiple grammar formants are treated as free structural elements  . High degree of lexical ambiguity making syntact ic disambiguation a must  , and the fact that word boundaries are not expl icitly AcrEsDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AO13T1992505 Paoc . OFCOLING . 92, NANTES , AUC .  2328 ,   1992 marked in the text are well-known problems with Chinese text analysis  . ( Actually , in the
MULTIS project elaborated by the
SpSt group Chinese characters are transformed into  4-digit strings in conformity with Chinese
Standard Telegraph Code).
Thus grammatical and logico-semantic relations in the text are expressed by word order  , structural words and semantic valencies . In addition to their role of the labels for syntactic units  ( predicate , direct and indirect objects , etc . ) the structural words funct ion as del imitators s ingl ing out wordforms and phrases  . A separate sub-lexicon for structural words is accordingly provided within the whole lexicon database of Chinese as source language  . The file of notional words comprises lexical items of various lengths ranging from one -character items to eight-character ones  , no differentiation being made among one-stem words  , composite words and phrases . A distinct version of the DE scheme is assigned to each of the two classes of lexical items : notional words  ( N /
W ) and structural words ( S/W).
The DE scheme for N/W includes , along with syntactic and semantic , the following data : i ) Part-of-~pcech assignment ; 2) Information on the lexical ambiguity . Thus , by way of example , the one-stem word sudan'sultan ' and composite beida ' Beijing University ' are coded 
N00 , where N denotes noun , while qianding ' to sign a treaty'is coded 0S0 where S denotes verb/noun lexicuiam biguity ( to be eventually disambiguated by syntactic means  )  . 
As to the DE schemes for
S/Ws , each of these should include positional characteristics of the lexieal item and provide information on the way the given particle affects formation of the Russian equivalent  . E . g . , in the grammatical coding of the verbal aspect S /Wle and nominal S/Ws de and bathe following points are marked : i  ) part-of-speech dependence ;  2 ) position ( pro-or post-position with respect to the
N/W ); 3) Russian matching ; .
4) syntactic function.
The information placed in a DE may be used in t ranslating sentences as illustrated below : 
Sudanbaheyu eqi-~sding
The sultan the peace treaty signed
In carrying out the lexico-syntactical analysis of this sentence two word groups are del imitated : nominal group baheyue and verbal group quandingle  . In the ba-DE there are data to define baasaS/W in preposition to a direct object which is equivalent to a Russian noun in the Accusative Case  . In the le-OE there are data to define leasa verbal index in a post-position to a verbal predicate and indicating the completion of an action  , equivalent to a Russian verb in the Past Tense , Perfective .   ( For the sake of simplicity the polyvalent and polysemantic nature of these particles is ignored in this example  )  . 
2 . The AD organization for an agglutinating language : Turkish 
The agglutinative word-formation technique is characterized by ordered additiun of affixes to the stem to preOuce formant strings of various lengths  . An outstanding feature of agglutinating languages is that these word-forms are not reproduced ready made in speech but are constructed by the speaker actually ' adhoc ' according to definite rules  . Each of the limited set of affixes imparts ' a semantic quant ' or ACRESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 Aou'r1992$06 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 represents a grammatical category , i < . g .   , see the following patterns where t , hestem ' SU\] . tan ' and some of it . ~ derivatives u , reprison Led : sultansultan ' sultan lar'sultans'sultanlariniz'OUrsu \]  . tans ' sultanlariniz dan ' from our sul tans ' 
Word-formation in Turkish is carried out in accordance with either of the two proto types : nominal or verbal  . Of one nominal stem it is theoretically possible bode rive an infinite number of word-forms  ( actually , though , only some 200 as registered in the corpora ) . As to the verbal paradigms , of each stem it is potentially possible to form more than Iithous and word -: forms  . 
Clearly , Turkish lexicon database , wou Jd include , besides stems , sub-lexicons of postpositive affixes . Along with the stems of which both nouns and verbs may be derived there are those a  . ~ ; sis'ned to only one definitt ~ part of speech c lass  ( e . 
g . gel'c~me ') , also unproductive lexemes such as ve ' and ' zaten ' generally '  . 
Each DE contains coded
Jnformation indicating : i ) the lexeme's part of speech class and type of lexical ambiguity  ( e . g . , for the stem insan ' man ' it is noun/ad jec t iveambig ' uity  , that is , NA ); 2) the lexeme's semantic class ( e . g .   , for the stem in san'man'there is an indicat i on that it belongs to 
Subject ( S ) semantic class , and , c . on sequenbly , may function as the subject of a sentence ;  3 ) Russian equivalent ( the address of the " machine " stem with necessary lexico-grammatical informat ion  )   . 
Turkish affixes are structured so as to form four connect  . edgraphs constructed to the rules of the grammar of orders  . Graph 1 presents simple noun morphology;
Graph 2 , finite verb form morphology ; Graph 3 , non-finite verb forms ; Graph 4 , flomina \] prudicabc; . The words ~ em is assigned go the graph root whi leaffixes  ( their al\] . omorph variants ) are assigned to graph nodes , each node corresponding to definit ~ grammar rank  . 
Recogni Lion and lexico-morphologicaiana lysis of tile Turkish text word is accompl is hed as ? ol\]  . ows : i . Stem recognition and affixes delimit at i on by meal ~ so : k ' the AI  ) search ~ if this results : in the recognit ion of the input text word  , the task Js fulfilled , and the target word equivalent , is passed I ; o the output unit ( e . g . , the text word ' An Rara ') .  2 . If no recognition is acknowledged , tile system goes on with iexico-morpholog ical analysis  , it is performed by consecut : ivesuper posit ion of affixes on the end segments of the str ing  ,  1 , be affixes being fed by access to an appropr iategraph  . The opt : ration is accomplished by mask match ing method proceeding : Irom right to left  , from junior order to senior order affixe ~ i . All possible affixes having been identi fied  , J . he initial part of the text , word that remains is treated as the hypothet Jo stem and is eventually searched in the AD  . The search may result in differenl ; situations . 3  . 
If the hypothetie stem is identified as one of A \]  ) stems and its part of speech assignment coinc ides with that of affixes  , then the task is considered to be fulfil led  . E . g . , in ana lys ing the text word tu tanak la r in in the noun stem tut  . an ak ' protocol ' is revealed : it is a joined by nominal affix uslar in in  . 
The target equivalent with its g'rammatical characteristics is passed to the syntactic module  . 
4 . in case of failure ( that is , when the stem is not found ) the string is recovered in its original form  ( identified affixes are ' glued ' back )   , and the AcrEs DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AO?n "1992507 PROC . Of ; COLING-92, NAN'rI~S , Auo . 2328,1992 analysis restarts with access to
Graph 2 on the assumption that the input text word is af in ite verb form  , etc . This sequential access to graphs does not take place at random but has been programmed according to the frequency data received by a preliminary quantitative analysis of some text corpora  . 
3 . The AD organization for internal-flection languages : 
Arabic and Hebrew.
The word morphology of Arabic and Hebrew is not only characterized by internalflection but also by a rather wide use of agglutinative formants and external flection  . Taking into account these features of the Semit ic wordform structure three different approaches to AD design seem plausible  . 
i . Representation of lexicon items by wordforms l is ted in alphabetical order  ; in this case the following Hebrew words would have three independent DEs :  1 ~ f ~ SiLTWoN suit . an6 ~@ SiLTW oNJiM sultans S~LT ~ Ne; . sultans ~( status construct us ) 2 . An alphabetical arrangement of machine stems as has been made for European languages  ; in this case the above Hebrew word forms may be reduced to only one item  . 
3 . Designing the source lexicon as a lexicon of roots  ; all above-mentioned Hebrew wordforms would then be representated by the root ~  . ~ . ~
SLTN supplemented with lists of internal and external affixes  . 
Since word-formation and word-building in Semitic languages are practically limitless the option of the first or second approaches would cause a dimension crisis with respect to the lexicon size : the AD would surpass the crit ical storage capacity while the dictionary search would be strongly impeded  . 
With root-based AD organization the root-orig inated word-form development process follows the order : " root-derivation-internalflect i on types rules of combination with definite external affixes "  . Unfortunately , this kind of AD organization requires , for the purposes of the text-word lexico -grammatical analysis  , a multiple access to the hard disk , and this would again cause a dimension crisis , now with respect to the system operating speed . 
To relieve the dimension crisis a tradeoff may be suggested : combined root-based and alphabetic approach to construction  , operation and maintenance of the AD . With this approach five lists ( sublexicons ) of linguistic units are distinguished . 
i . List of roots actually in use ( some 500 for Hebrew , 200 for

2 . List of internal flections ( some 800 for Hebrew , 900 for

3 . Alphabetic list of words with regular word- formation  ( nouns , adjectives , also basic forms of verbs ); 4 . List of words of Semitic origin with irrigular word-formation and borrowed words  ( i . e . , those where tr i l i teral scheme is not observed  )  . E . g . ,  , /) t '' day ' ,   , _O ' ~ days ( this is one of the " few Hebrew nouns where the internal flection is changed with word -formation  )   . 
~ f ~' to telegraph ' ( a borrowed word , not subject to conjugation rules ) . 
~' to take ' root
I~4 , ) , two root letters are omitted l--Arabic : ' father '  ,  . .~ C_~% - Gen i t ive ) j~Accusat ive
Nominative .. ( an anomaly in declension).
ACRESDECOTING-92, NAN'rE . S , 2328 AO~r1992508 Pgoc . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992 /  . ~9' not to be ' , a verb havl nf ~ only Perfect forms . 
5. List of external affixes.
< prefixes , suff\]xes , eircumfixes ) . These are compiled having in view their a bi ii Ly to form combinations  . Lists I and 2 be in ~ o\]\]a\]imi % ed lengthar ~ included in zc ~ the  1%AM : this a \] iowa for the possibility % o analyze the text word without accessing the hard dish  . '\]' herest . 
of the lists arm entered into the disk database . A ceesing to bh ~ . s ~ lists is to take place after the primary root-affix ~ dentifica-tionoT the text word has been done  . 
Stems of other lists may be assigned var ious entries  . 
Irregular word-forms are specified as paradigms where each word-form is supplied with the % arge  . t language equivalent . 
kecognition and \] exico-morpho-logical analysis of the Semitic text words goes on by the following steps : 
I . The root is singled out and recognized accord ing to List I  . 
The operation performed is in fact a combinator ial-probabilis-tic analysis of possible consonant combinations within the input text word  . The operation is based on the actual consonants being used exclusively in root  , s ( so-called root consonants \] or in both roots and affixes  ( structural consonants )   . 
2 . Internalf \] . ection types ( derivations ) and their versions are identified with the models included in List  2  . 
3 . The roots recognized are reduced to . lexicon forms as in
List 3: this allows one to get the target language equivalent of the item  . The final synthesis of the target text word is performed on the basis of the information of the internal and external fleetions of the given source text word  . The external flections are determined by the types and versions of the internal fleetion : singling out an internal f\]ection automatically identilies the correspond in ~ external  . Ohm with one of the
II ~ c ~ dt ~. i . ~<, in List 5.
if the syst t ~ . m fails to r~=," . t , 6 nize the : given text word , which may be caused by their regular word- formation  , this word is translated with the aid of L is t  4  . Besides , theie xico-morpho1o ~< i ~ . t ~ lanalysis cevtainly makes use of the dic tionary of phrases though its structure is not  , considered in this paper . 
Conclusion
As is evident , the very notion of the text word , which is so essential in designing automat ic dictionaries  , is quite distinct in each of the Orienta l languages and fundamentally different f rom what we are used-to treat as at < ~  , xt word in indo-European languages , inflecting or inflecting analytical . If an
Oriental language AD is to be
Jnte ~ rated into a multimodular
NLP system ( such as MULTISe\] . aborated by tht = GpSL group \] and the system has to retain its basic structure  , this project requires development of var ious forms of sub-/exicon databases  . 
As we have seen the most complicated struc ture of Arabic and Hebrew text word required e laboration of four versions of DE while the d ifferentiation of notional and st ructural words in Chinese required two vers ions  . An agglutinative word structure model such as in Turkish  , though the most suitable for the SpZt grammar , required a tree-structured database and special procedures of access  . 
A CaESDE COLING-92 . NANTES , 2328AO6"r1992509PRO(\] . O~COL1 NG-92 . NANT es , AUO .  2328, 1992
