CONVERTING LARGEON-LINE VALENCYDICTIONARIES
FORNLPA PPLICATIONS :
FROMPROTON DESCRIPTIONS TO METAL FRAMES
GEERTADRIAENS\[1,2\]GERTDEBRAEKELEER\[1\]
\[1\] Siemens-Nix dorf Software Center Liege
Rue Des Fories 2, 40 20 Liege , Belgium
\ [2\] Leuven University Center for Computational Linguistics Maria-Theresias traat  21   3000 Leuven , Belgium geert@et . kuleuven . acbe 0 . Abstract In this paper , we report on a largescale conversion experiment with online valency dictionaries  . A linguistically motivated valency dictionary in Prolog is converted into a valency dictionary for a largescale machine translation system  . Several aspects of the two dictionaries and their backgro and projects are discussed  , as well as the way their representations are mapped  . "/' he results of the conversion are looked at from an economic perspective  ( fast coding for NLP )  , and also from a computational-lexicographic perspective  ( requirements for conversions and for standardization of lexicon information  )  . 
1. Introduction
One of the major bottlenecks for largescale NLP applications such as the METAL ? MT system  1 is the acquisition of their lexicons 2  . Whereas the development and finetuning of the grammars of such systems reaches its saturation point after a few years of R&D  , the extension of their lexicons is a constant and ever growing concern  . In order to speed up the lexical acquisition process  , coding tools are developed to increase the human lexicographer's productivity and existing electronic dictionaries are looked for that can be converted and integrated with the particular NLP application at hand  . 
In this paper we report on a large-seale conversion effort with an eye to enhancing the METAL verb dictionaries with several thousands of entries  . While the system is capable of defaulting the necessary morphological information for verbs on the basis of their surface appearance  ( cp . Adriaens & Lemmens 1990) , it cannot automatically create the complex syntactic-semantic valency information  , i . e . the quantitative and qualitative characterization f the arguments of a verb  . Still , this information is of crucial importance for the system to parse and translate correctly  . Valency characterizations can be used to discriminate different readings of a sentence during analysis  ( cp . e . g . the different usages of hail : it is hailing , she hailed curses at me , he hailed me from the window , the people hailed himking ) . 
Moreover , they are often useful for disambiguating purposes with an eye to translation : for Dutch  , for 1M et al ? is a Siemens-Nix dor f ( SNI ) product . The University of Leuvenco-develops the Dutch - French  , French-Dutch and French-English language pairs with SNI  . 
2Cp . Walker , Zampolli & Calzolari forthcoming,
Boguraev & Briscoe 1989, Zemik 1989.
instance , to reach for something is a usage that needs a differen translation from mreach somebody something  ( pakken versus over handigen )  .   ( For a detaile discussion of the importance of valency for NLP and MT in particular  , we refer to Gebraers 1991 . ) To recognize the need for detailed valency descriptions in NLP application sionething  , to acquire the misless self-evident . In a system like METAL , the valency feature on verbs represents the most complex and hard-to-code element in its lexical representations  . Hence , to automate and speedup the acquisition process , we used electronic valency dictionaries for Dutch and French as coded by the PROTON project  ( seev and enEynde et at . 
1988 , Eggermont & van den Eynde 1990 , Eggermont et at . forthcoming ) as our starting point . The conversion was a nontrivial exercise in computational lexicography for several reasons  . First , the PROTON databases are mainly descriptive and exhaustive in nature  ; they were not conceived with particular NLP applications in mind  . 
METAL , on the other hand , seeks parsimony for efficient computational treatment within a machine translation application  . More in particular , PROTON codes one entry per valency frame of a verb  , whereas METAL merges valency patterns into " superframes "  , storing these only once for each verb . Second , their representation formalism is based on a particular distributional linguistic approach  ( the Pronominal Approach , see 2 . 2 ) not completely alient othe METAL representation , but not straightforwardly convertible either . And third , the PROTON databases take the form of Prolog clauses  , whereas METAL uses Lisplists . 
Beside the purely practical goal of fast lexicon extension  , there are a few interesting questions to be asked that may be relevant beyond that goal : - Is such a conversion worth the eflort of defining a " water proof " mapping between the source and target formalisms  , and of developing the programs to do the mapping ? In other words  , could we trot simply have coded the several thousand verbs by hand instead of spending months on the conversion ?- To what extent are these conversion experiments ueful for an attempt at defining a theory-neutral standard for the representation of valency information in verb dictionaries for NLP applications ? Or  , less ambitiously , can we come up with a set of requirements for convertibility of lexieal resources ?  2  . Verbal valency descriptions 2 . 1 General considerations ACRES DECOL 1NG-92 , NANTES , 2328 A Olrr 19921 l82 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTtT , S , AUG .  2328 , 1992 lulinguistic ternls , veibal valeucy can be characterized as lexically controlled structural potential of a verb  ; in artificial intelligence terms , one would say that file verb has a frame structure with different roles lols to be  . filled by constituents in the sent cnce . Since the verb is often the nucleus of infornmtion aromd which the different sential elemeuts are orgtulized  , it is in L portant for an NLP system to contain this valency infomation  . What then are file aspects of representation cue has to take lute account  , illllarticular with an eye to NLP applications ? The first problem to be solved is what falls within file scope of the verb's valeucy  ( i . e . I he number and kind of valency-bound elements ) and what falls outside of it ( i . e . 
the free at l juncts of the sent cnce ) . An answer to this question leads to a quantitative classification  ( if verbs as n m no valent ( only one wllency element )  , bivalent ( two ) etc , and a qualitative classification of verbs as intransitive  ( subject , noot ~ ject ) , Ir ~ msitive ( subject and object ) , etc . Next , one bitestile problem of the distinction I ) etweeu obligatoly and optiomdvalency-bound elements  ( a distinction that is of particular importance to a role assignment algorithm  )  . And finally , one must name , categorize and sulx ; a tegorize these elements , defining legal filler slot a certain slot . If a verb has several valencies ( corresponding to different syntactic/semantic readings  )   , an additiunal representational matter to be handled  ( at a higher level of lexicou organization ) is the way 1o store the different valencies . Are patterns stored ~ parately with a repetition of the verb for each pattern ? Can patterns be collap ~ d and stored just once with the verb ? Decisions on these matters influence the database organization and consultation for NLP applications  . In the next two subsections , we will show how the two formalisms between which the conversion was made try to provide answers to tile relu'e~ntation questions folmulated here  , ill particular lot large ~ ts of French and Dutch verbs  . 
2.2 PROTON 2.2.1 The PROTON project
The Proton ( Prologenta alon derzoek , Prolog and linguistic research ) project started in 1986 with a scue of its major ohjectives die COll Strnction of online valency dictionaries to r \[  ; reach and Dutch . The starting poiut was not a particular NLP application  , but rather a linguistic concern for de ~ riptive correctness and completmless  . 
Still , computational concerns were I ) resent right fronithe start , which led to the choiccofl ' rolog as the declarative language for storing and processing the verbs  ( with processing ranging from sinlple retrieval of specific subsets of verbs to NLP applications in computer-aid cd language learning and parsing  )  . Paper dictionaries , Ix ) th gener ' , d ( Le Petit Robert for French , Van Dale Basis woorden boek to tDutch ) and valency dictionaries ( Bus ~& Dubost 1983 for French ) were used as background material . For the actual coding of the verbs , a particular distributional framework Ibrmed the basis  , viz . the Pronominal Approach 3 . Although there are many interesting sides to this approach  ( e . g . the exact methodology followed to determine reading  3 See Blanche-Benveniste et al1984 or Eggeimont et al 1990 for full accounts of the Ih-onomiual Apltroach . 
distinct in ns in verbs ) , we a ~ emainly interested here in tile actual output of the lexicographic work  , both quantitatively and for representatinn issues  . A . sfar as nunlbers are concerned , the cmrent status of the valency dictionaries of Dutch and French is the following  . The Dutch valency dictionary contains about 4500 verbs ; since each syntaelic/~mautic reading is coded separately  , there are actually about 6300 valency l latterns coded . For French the two figures are 4 ( X ) 0 and 85004 . ( Note , in the passing that the frame/verb ratio is 1 . 3 fi~r Dutch and 2 . 1 for French . ) A rough estimate of the effort spent in doing this codiug is  2 man-years I or French , 1man-year " for Dutch . Tile diflerence is mainly due to the fact that French was file first lauguage Proton started out with  ; by the time Dutch was handled , coding experience mid c ( xling Iools were available . 
2 . 2 . 2 The I ' ROTON valency representat ion Proton database entries arc l'ro log facts  , consisting of a three-place v ln'edicate ; the three arguments are an identification mlml ~ cr  , the verb's iufinitive , and a list structure containing the informatinn related to one valency realization  . Due to space limitations , we have 1o ~ cferto De Braekeleer 1991 t brafor nlal account of this list structure ; to rexmnples , we relier file reader tnSK X ~ tiOll 4 , For clarity'sake , we informally give the meaning of imlx ) rtaut abbrevia teglnt ~ tions : pO relates to the notion of subject  , pl Io that el direct object , p2 to indirect object , p3 to a slx ~ cific prepositional object with de ( related to Frenchen )  , p prep to other prepositional objects , ploc/pmanner/ptemp/pqt 1o adverbial of Iocation/manner/time/quantitiy respectively  . 
higenelal , it cuabe said that Proton valency entries arc dense in inltrmatioo  , hut ( in the other hand souie what loosely structured . We will see below that NLP applicat kulsike Metal have a more rigid structure that is not so dense in information  . For a conversion experiment this difference is both an advantage midadis advantage : the advantage is that one can go from structures that conlain more than one needs  ; ritedi~ldvantage is that the determination f what maps to what is not straightfi ~ rwzu'd  . 
2 ~3 METAL 2.3.1. The METAl , system
In contrast to Proton , M et al is a specific N l . l ' application , viz . a machine translation system , Its German-English , English German , German-Spanisll , Dutch-French and French-Dutch systems arc conlmercially available  ; French-English , German-Danish , English Spanish , Spanish-English and Russian ~ German are under development  . Full descriptions of the system can be found elsewhere  5  . A brief account of 4 In the course of 1991 the Frencll valency database will be ctJ mn rercially available in electronic h~r~t  ( Eggermont et al forthcoming )  . 
5 See Bennett & Slocum 1988 , Th tumair 1989 , Adriaens & Caeye ~ s199 ( If c~r general overviews ; a general des~Tiption of the lexicont brmat call Ire found in Adriaens & l-emmens  1990  . 
Ac-rl is DECOLING-92 , N^N r~s , 2328 AO(Yf 1992 l1g3Pace . OFCOLING-92, NAN rI ! S,AUG .  2328 ,   1992 valency in Metal can be found in Gebrners 1988  ; an indepth study of valency and machine translation bringing together work in the Prot on and Metal projects is the topic of Gebrners  1991  . Here , we will just give a general idea of the place of valency information in the Metal system and of how this information is used in the translation process  . Valency patterns are stored as a feature-value pair on verbs in the monolingual dictionaries  , in such a way that all patterns are coded only once with the verb  ; reading distinctions can give rise to different valency patterns  , but even then they are all stored together with the verb  . During analysis by an augmented contextfree grammar  ( handled by a chart parser )  , rules at sentence level call a procedure for role assignment to the constituents of the sentence  . This process is an intricate combination of general pattern matching algorithms and linguistically defined procedures  ( triggered by the valency information ) for determining the best fitting valency pattern . In fact , the role assignment process can be said to consist of a grammar within the grammar  , and a parser within the parser ; it takes up a substantial proportion of the total time spent on sentence analysis  . During transfer , valency information is again used ( in the transfer dictionary ) to disambiguate among different verb readings . For mapping into the target language , there are two approaches within Metal that have implications for the amount of valency-related information in the transfer dictionary  . One approach tries to build a minimal hypothetical target language frame on the basis of the source role assignments and some crucial mapping information  ( e . g . for to like -> plaire , the subject is mapped into an indirect object , and the direct object becomes the subject : 1 like you->Tume plais )  . It then searches the monolingual target dictionary for a valency pattern that fits best with its hypothesis  . The other approach tries to build the target frame without using the target dictionary at all : on the basis of the source role assignments and mapping information in the transfer dictionary  , it builds the valency information for the target ( see Gebruers 1991 for a detailed comparison of these approaches , with their advantages and disadvantages ) . In short , valency plays an important role in all phases of the translation process  6  , involving complicated grammar and coding work . We conclude this brief sketch of valency in M et al by adding some figures of the size of the monolingual dictionaries  . At the time of the conversion ( March 1990) , Metal contained 1600 Dutch verbs with 2050 valency patterns ( a frame/verb ratio of 1 . 3 ) and 1055 French verbs with 1600 patterns ( a frame/verb ratio of 1 . 5) . Let us add right a way that partly thanks to the conversion effort we were able to increase these figures drastically in a short period of time  ( see section 4 )  . Currently , there are 3000 Dutch verbs with 3700 valency patterns ( frame/verbatio=1 . 2 ) and 2130 French verbs with 2850 valency patterns ( frame/verb ratio = 1 . 3) . In general , all other monolingual dictionaries of the commercially available systems  ( i . e . English , Spanish and German ) also contain over 2000 verbs ( 2500 , 2300 and 4000 respectively ) . 
6 See Gebmers 1991 ,   206-221 for an overview of valency treatment in other MT systems  ( TAUM , SUSY , GETA-
ARIANE , VAPRE , EUROTRA).
2.3.2 The METAL valency representation
In METAL , valency is coded as one of the featare-value pairs on the lexicon entries for verbs  ( along with other information about morphology , syntax and semantics ) . 
Since the system is written in L is p , its elements how the typical Lisplist structure . As for Proton , we have to refer to DeBraekeleer 1991 for a full formal account of the METAL valency format  ; examples can be found in section 4 . The meaning of some important abbreviations is the following : $ SUBJ stands for subject  , SDOBJ for direct object , $10 BJ for indirect object , $ ADV for adverbial complement , $ POBJ for prepositional object , $ SCOMP for subject complement , and $ OCOMP for object complement . N 1 , NO , IMPS and ADJ indicate nominal , sentential , impersonal and adjectival subeategorizations re pectively  . Adverbial complements are further divided into LOC  ( ative )  , MAN ( ner) , MOV ( ement) , R(a)NG(e) , T ( e)MP ( oral ) and MEA ( sure) . 
Further subeategorization information is rendered as feature-value pairs  , e . g .   ( TYPEP1 ) roughly corresponds to + human role fillers . Metal further uses the " OPT " atom in its valency patterns to indicate the optional valency -bound elements  . Obligatory elements come first , those following the " OPT " atom are optional . Finally , the valency pattern contains General Frame Tests ( after the " GFT ' atom )  . These test same xecuted before the role assigning mechanism tries to find fillers  ; they concern features that if present at the clause level should have specific values : the auxiliary  ( values are H/Z , hebben/zijn for Dutch ; AlEavoir Mtre for French ) and the sentence's voice ( VC ; A/P , active ~ passive ) . It is interesting to note how in an application like Metal this kind of information  ( also present in the Proton descriptions ) receives a special status with an eye to an efficient role assignment algorithm : if a valency pattern can be found not to apply because some restriction at the clause level is not satisfied  , the pattern is discarded and no computation is wasted on checking the potential role fillers  . 
3 . Mapping PROTON to METAL it was already noted in 2 . 2 . 2 that the different origin of the two formalisms accounts for certain differences between them  . Proton codes in an application-neutral fashion , exhaustively ( aiming at descriptive adequacy ) , on a one-entry one-pattern basis , and in a relatively free format . Metal codes with an eye to a specific application  ( MT )  , pragmatically ( what do we need for the application to run ? )  , on a one-entry all-patterns basis ( even collapsing some patterns in a superframe )  , and in a relatively rigid formate as il y digestible by software and lingware  . Since the goal of the conversion was to derive the informationeeded in M et al  , af ' wst step was to link all the Metal specifications to the corresponding Protonones  . Given the detailed nature of the Prot on valency schemes  , there were very few gaps in this mapping . One is worth mentioning , though . Proton does not goas far as Metal in the subcategorization f the adverbial complements  ( Metal's $ ADVs )  ; range and movement complements are not treated in a consistent way  . Below , we show part of the resulting mapping table ( not all subeategorization details are shown ; see DeBraekeleer 1991 ,  61-62) . It organizes the valency information from the Metal point of view : the relevant items are AC'I ' ESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOt ~' r1992l184 PROC , OFCOLING-92 , NANTEs , AUO .  2328 , 1992 optionality , naming of roles , categorization , subcategorization and general frame ~ sts . 
Proton Dutch Frot on French
OPT\[\[I . . . \]\[\[ l . . . l$SUBJt ~) !30$1X ) BJ plpl$1OBJp2p2('qui")
SPOBJp prep p2Cy ") , p3 , pprep $ SCOMP ( these two must be derived from $ OCOMP several elements combined  ) $ ADV advtype ~ vtype cf . type cf . FCP/\[CP p(p0,\['t'l)p(pO . \[ qlT ) related . ~ paradigms



AI ) J subcateeorizations
ADX rI'YPE:LOC



RNG , MOV
TYPE ; P1
PO~eneral frame tests :
VC : A

AUX Dutch Z

French A
E"wie " " war " plocp temp pqttn nanner " qui" " que "  , " quoi " related par , p(reform , \[' pass iff itre'l ) related_par , absence of above p(m fonn , \[' zijn+vd . ',  . . . \]) p(refonn,\['perfectumh cbben ', . . . \]) auxiliary(\['avoir'l ) auxiliary(\['b . tre'\]) 4 . Aspects of the conversion software Ideally , the conversion should be a fully automatic process that t ' alces the Proton database as input and delivers a Metal monolingual verb lexicon  . Given that the Proton database also contains a field with several translations for each verb reading  , we could even envisage creating transfer entries for the verbs as well  . 
Yet , there are several reasons why we could only act fieve a semiautomatic conversion  . As to the automatic generation of transfer entries  , this idea had to be abandoned altogether , because it was too hard to pinpoint the distinctive information among the different patterns and translate that into contextual tests and actions in the Metal transfer dictionaries  . Still , the translation field was preserved in the conversion output  , so that lexicographers coding the transfer entries a keady lindt tte translations online  . As to the fully automatic generation of a monolingual lexicon  , several problems could not be overcome . First , we " already noted in the previou section that not all information eeded for Metal was present in the Proton database  ; this implies that manual checks for completeness of the frames had to be made in any case  . 
Second ( and most important ) , we could find no satisfactory algorithmic solution to the problem of mapping rite one-entry one-valency-pattern organization of Proton into file one-entry all-patterns organization of M et al  . Note that this is m ) t a simple matter of collecting all the separately coded valency patterns for the same verb  , antistoring them once as a long list with file verbill the target database  . For one thing , M et al does not ne . ed all possible valency patterns for its purpose of machine translation  ; the amomtt of patterns is kept as small as possible for efficient storage and computation rea~ns  . Moreover , the patterns that remain are merged into " superpatterns " or " sn per frames " as much as possible  ; where relevant for translation , the transfer dictionaries take them apart again . The way Mehd lexicographers decide on disting nislting valency patterns  ( verb readings ) monolingua Uy proved hard to trmls late into a fool proof algorithm  ; there are attile most some intuitions , heuristics or rules of thumb . Hence , it was decided to convert on a per pattern basis , and leave the merging of patterns to rile human lexiGographer  . 
The conversion software itself is written in Common Lisp  ( about 1000 lines of code )  . It works in two phases . 
First , the Protun Prolog clau ~ spass through a finite -state transducer interpretiug them as plain character strings  . The output of this pass is " lispified Prolog ": Prolog chmses are turned into l  . is plists . At the same time , the necessary conversions at the characterlevel arc taken care of : characters that would have a special meaning to the " Lispreader " software  ( such as a comma or a backquole ) are neutralized , and the extended ASCII-character sequences for aecentezl characters are turned into M et al's  ISO-8859-1 characters . The ~ cond pass parses the lists and converts them into structures whose most important field is the Metal frame  . Additional software takes care of putting the Metal frames in their canonical order  ( i . e . a subject is coded before an object , etc . ) , and provides tools fi ) r lexicographers to manipulate the conversion outpnt  . As an illustration , we give one simple example of what the input and the outpot of the conversion look like : v  ( 24720 , ' ddgager ' , \[ ex('r:ddgager qqnd'une charge') , Ir(\['ontslaan(van ) ' , ' on the ffen(van)'\]) , p(pO , \[je , nous , on , qui , elle , il , ils , 'cclui-ci' , ' ceux-i'\]) , p(pl . \[te , vous , ' ser ~ . ',' l'unl'autre','serdfl . ' , qui , la , le , les , ' enQ ' , 'celui-ci' , ' cenx-ci'\]) , p(p3 , \[ en , ' en~de inf )' , quoi , ' celui-ci ' , 'ceux-ci' , ' qa ' , ' ~ a(deh ~0'\]) , p(reform , \[' pass if bare '\]) , pivot(pl , pO , de in f , p3) l ) . 

Example: ( r : d ~ gager q qnd ' une charge ) Transfer : ( outsaan ( van ) omheffen ( van ) )
Proton : ( ( reform passif bare )   ( p3enen ( de in f ) quoicelui-cie en x-ci cat qa ( de in f ) )  ( plteve usser & : . Funl ' auneser 6fl . quila lelesen Qcelui-ciceux-ci )   ( pOjeuous on quielteilil scelui-ciceux ~ ci ) )  ( ($ SUBJ N1 ( TYPEPI ) )  ( $ DOBJNI ( TYPEP1 )   ( PRNRFX ) )  ( $ POBJNI ( PREP de ) NO ( ICP de )   ( PIV $ DOBJ ) ) )  5 . Discussion of results Using the conversion software  , the complete Proton database ( at that time , i . e . March 1990 , consisting of 85130 valency structures for French and 600  ( I for Dutch ) ACTESlYECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AO~rr 1992 1185 PRec . OFCOL1NG-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 was processed into a database with Metal valency patterns that could form the basis of manual coding  . In the first place , checks were run to compare the results of the conversion with the frames already coded in the dictionary  . This already led to an improvement of the existing database  . In the second place , additional verb coding is now being done on the basis of the conversion output  , and not from scratch ( i . e . from paper dictionaries ) . 
The total effort spent on developing the software ( including the preliminary study p has ~ constructing the mapping table  ) was about four man-months . When we compared the time needed to code M et al valency frames starting from scratch  ( the way the first 1000 verbs were added to the system ) with the time needed to code frames starting from the output of the conversion  , we found that on the whole , and subtracting the conversion development effort  , coding productivity is speeded up by a factor of 2 . In other words , the practical goal of fast extension of the verb dictionaries was certainly reached  . 
As to the more general questions of requirements for convertibility of lexical resources or standardization f lexical information  , a few remarks are in place . First , in our case the input lexical resource was in a fairly easily convertible format  , viz . Prolog clauses . Even so , since it was the fu's t time the Proton databases were used outside of the project  , several ambiguities and inconsistencies were found that needed correction before the conversion could take place  . A basic requirement for convertibility then seems to be a rigid description of the syntax and semantics of the database entries  ; before the resource is made available to the outside world  , it should be checked thoroughly against is own specifications  ( parsers can be generated automatically on the basis of a BNF-like syntax  )  . More ambitiously , if the formats of valency information in different applications were known  , the resource could be made available along with converters or converter specifications  . As to the long term goal of standardization , we are planning to use the experiences gathered from the conversion  ( along with knowledge about other formalisms , like that used in EUROTRA or in the databases of the Nijmegen Centre for Lexical Information CELEX  ) to study the requirements for a theory-neutraln d application-neutral standard for valency representation  . Since valency is not restricted to verbs , but also concerns adjectives and nouns , the standard could eventry to be category -neulxal as well  . 
Although the Proton-Metal conversion proved a successful experiment in computational lexicography  , many linguistic and computational issues concerning valency and its processing have not been touched upon here and certainly need further esearch  . To name but a few : nominal and adjectival valency  , a fool proof methodology for making and/or merging reading distinctions  , valency and idiomatic expressions , the interactions of the different types of valency information in an NLP application  , and the link with more semantically oriented approaches to valency  . On the basis of the availability of large amounts of valency data  , and the experience with different formalisms , we hope to be able to tackle some of these issues in the future  . 

Adriaens , G . & H . Caeyers ( 1990 ) p-"Het automatisch-vertaal systcem METAL:van onder zoek to tcommer cie el produkt " in Ing ~ nieur & lndustrie  , Dec 1990 ,  281-288 . 
Adriaens , G . & M . Lemmens ( 1990 ) - - The self-extending lexicon : offline and online defaulting of lexical information in the METAL translation system  . 
In Proceedings of the 13th COLING , Vol 3, 305-307 . 
Bennett , S . & J . Slocum ( 1988 ) -The LRC Machine Translation System . In J . Slocum ( ed ) Machine Translation Systems Studies in Natural Language Processing  . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 111-140 . 
Blanche-Benvenist et al . (1984) -- Pronomet Syntaxe , I ' approche pronominal ets on application aufran ~a is  . Paris : Selaf . 
Boguraev , B . & E . Briscoe ( eds )   ( 1989 ) -- Computational lexicography for natural language processing  . London : Longman . 
Busse , W . & J . P . Dubost (1983) -- Franz 0 sisches Verb lexicon . Die Konstruktion der Verbenim Franz 0sischen . Stuttgart : Ernest Klett . 
DeBraekeleer , G . (1991 ) -- Deconversievan PROTON valentie structuren naar METAL frames : conversie of  ( contr ) aversie . University of Leuven Master's Thesis in Computational Linguistics  . 
Eggermont C ., E . Broeders & K . vanden
Eynde ( forthcoming ) -- Dictionnaire automatis6 desvalences desverbes fran~ais . University of Leuven . 
Eggermont , C . & K . van den Eynde ( 1990 ) -A pronominal basis for computer-assisted ranslation : the Proton project  . In Thelen , Lewandowska & Thomaszczyk ( eds ) , Translation and meaning I . 
Maastrieht : Euroterm , 114.
Gebruers , R .   ( 1988 ) -- Valency and MT : recent developments in the METAL system  . In Proceedings of the 2nd ACL , Austin , 168-175 . 
Gehruers , R .   ( 1991 ) -- Onvalency and transfer-based machine translation  . An inquiry into the language-technological applicability of theoretical valency concepts  . University of Leuven PhD Thesis . 
Thurmair , G . (1990) -- Aufgabentyp Linguistik : Projekt METAL . In D . Nebendahl ( ed) , Experten systeme Teil 2: Erfahrungenaus der Praxis . Siemens AG,

van den Eynde , K . et al ( 1988 ) -- The pronominal approach in NLP : A pronominal feature analysis of coordination i French  . In Computers and Translation 3, 177-213 . 
Walker , D . , A . Zampolli & N . Calzolari ( eds )   ( forthcoming ) --Automating the Lexicon : Research and Practice in a Multilingual Environment  . Oxford : Oxford
University Press.
Zernik , U . (1989) -- Paradigms in lexieal acquisition . 
In Proceedings of the first international lexical acquisition workshop  , Detroit ( Zerniked . ) . 
ACRESDECOLING-92, NANTES . 2328 AOt ) r1992l ! 86 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328, 1992
