Recent Model-Based and Model-Related Stud ies of a Large Scale 
Lexical Resource\[Roget's Thesaurusl
Sally Yeates Sedelow
Professor , Computer Science,
University of Arkansas ( UA ) / Little Rock ; Adjunct Professor , Electronics and Instrumentation , 
UA/Graduate Institute of Technology

Walter A . Sedelow , Jr.
Professor , Computer Science , University of
Arkansas ( UA ) / Little Rock;
Adjunct Professor , Electronics and Instrumentation , UA/Graduate Institute of Technology ; Adjunct
Professor , UA/College of Medicine
USA ( This research & supported by Grant * lRI-9114068 from The National Science

In an era when knowledge , if notking , is certainly an equal partner with the methodologies directed toward such eminently desirable goals as computer-based common sense reasoning and understanding qn-general  , large scale resource such as Roget's ~ self -evidently amnecessary to advanced knowledge -based computational systems  . 
In contrast to such efforts as Lenat's to recreate encyclopedic resources to fit currently popular cognitive and computational models  , our research emphasis has been upon models and programs which neatly finessere-creation by making explicit and accessible such resources as people already process effectively and use effeclively  . Other major research sites and groups now sham this orientation  , and we expect that our research team's recent work with various aspects of our model will be of particular interest to them  . Specifically , we wish to report here on three different interpretations of a component of our topological model  ( Bryan ,  1973 ,  1974) , applied to its instamiation , ~International ~ llll ~ , 3rd edition (1962) . 
The model , itself , has been described extensively elsewhere ( e . g . , Sedelow and Sedeiow , 1986, 1987) . For this discussion , we need definitions of an Entry , Word , and Category , as well as of a Type 10 Chain . In the model , a thesaurus , T , is a triple < E , W , C > where t ) E is a non-null , finite set ; ti ) W and C are non-nuU collections of subsets of E ; iii ) distinct elements of Wam disjoint , and distinct elements of C are disjoint ; iv ) given any e ~ E , eew for some wEW and e ~ ; C for some cEC ; v ) given we W and ceC , w^c~1 . 
Elements of E are called F, . a_tfl_e& , elements of Wam called ~ KO  ~ , and elements of C are called F ,  . 8 lR , go . II~ . 
( Bryan ,  1973 ) ' Navigation ' within the thesaurus can take two basic routes :  1  . it can depend upon the explicit hierarchy , comprising seven to nine levels ( depending upon how finegrained the distinctions are  )  ;  2 . it can move cross-hierarchieally from one category to others  . Within the second type of navigation , those cross-hierarchical ' hops ' of grealest interest to us are enabled by the multiple occurrence  ( multilocality property ) of given " words " ( strings with identical spelling , wld ch do not necessarily have the same meaning ) . 
The model defines the cross-hierarchical form of navigation in terms of Chains  , as well as , within Chain types , Stars and Neighborhoods . 
Chains range from Type 1 , file least restricted , to Type 10 , tile most restricted . They consist of entries , each of which represents he intersection of a Word and a Category  . As might be expected , a Type 1Chain consists of any group of entries . At the other end of the restriction scale is the Type  10 Chain , which must be beth word-s~ong and category-strong . 
Categories are said to be ~ connected if they have at least two words in common  , and words am strongly connected if they have at least two categories in common  . Intuitively , one sees that the convergence of words and categories In the Thesaurus represents a selection of art appropriate semantic subspace  ( meaning ) within a larger semantic space representing multiple meanings  ( ambiguities )  . We have spoken and written ACRESDE COLING-92 . NA meS . 2328 Atilt 19921223 PRt . ): . OFCOLING-92 . NAMES . AUG .  2328 .   1992 elsewhere about the application of this model to a number of natural language computational tasks  , all of which confirmed our ( originally weak ) belief that the ~ is a quite good model of ' normal ' word association patterns in English  ( Brady ,  1988 , 1991; Patrick , 1985; S . Sedeiow , 1985; Sedelow and Sedelow , In Press ; W . Sedelow , 1988; Warfel , 1 . 972) . 
It is , nonethe tess , desirable to study the impact of various interpretations of the model upon the model's representational strengths  ( and weaknesses )  ; that is the focus of this presentation . 
Victor Jacuzzi , our graduate student , has just completed a comparison of two approaches to Type  10 Chain semantic decomposition f the ~ . 
Both approaches iolatequartets of words ( slxing quartets ) which represents rong connections between categories and words  ; ( in these interpretations of the Bryan model , categories are taken to be the groupings of words in the ~ bounded by semicolons  , the lowest level of grouping in the explicit hierarchy  )  , For example , in the T-Graph in Figure 1 , Entries 1 ,  2 ,  6 , and 4 form a quartet in which Categories 2 and 5 have two Words , W ~ and W2 , in common and Words W ~ and W 2 have Categories C 2 and C 5 in common . 
C1 c2 c3 c4 c5 wt
E1 E2
W2J ,
E~E4E~IE 6

W4
W ~ z ,
Figure 1.
In the earlier study ( Talburt and Mooney ,  1989 , now validated by Jacuzzi ,  1991) , if any enlry forming the quartet functioned as an entry in a ~ CgJKI  ( or third , etc . ) quartet , then the second quartet became a part of the Type  10 component identified by the first quart et , etc . Much of the time , this approach adequately discriminates among homographs  , as well as discriminating among word senses ( and parts ol speech within senses )  . For example , examination of Jacuzzi's recent validation of the Talburt-Mooney results  ( Jacuzzi's validation utilized an independently developed algorithm  ) shows the following a propos " nosy " and related words : one component consists of " nosy  , "" prying , " and " snoopy , " all adjectives at the intersection of the meanings Intrusion  ( #237 in the gJlg ii Fdl hierarchy ) and Curiosity ( #526 )  ; another component consists of the words " nosy , "" odorous , "" smelling , "" smeU some , "" smellful , " smelly , " and " whlffy " all adjectives at the intersection of the meanings Od or  ( #434 ) and Malodor ( #436 )  . Clearly , the homograph " nosy " is separated out into distinct meanings by the algorithm  . Now , to explore the second semantic subspace a little further  , we find that the noun , " odorousness " ( see the adjective " odorous " above ) is grouped with the norm " smelliness " ( again , see above ) in another intersection of Odor ( #434 ) and Malodor ( #436 )  . But yet another grouping , using Odor (#434) as a departure point , links the adjective " od or if erous " with the adjective " redolent  , " supplying an intersection with Fragrance (#435) . Hence , the contrasting , more pleasant sense related to " od or " is also singled out by the algorithm  . 
Many analogous groupings could be cited as exemplifications of the utility of this approach for appropriate word sense identification  . Nonetheless , when looking for the output of the validation program  , it is impossible to ignore a reason for our desire to have such a validation : one enormous component comprising  22  , 431 entries . Although a tracing of the links among rite quartets pulling all these entries together would doubtless show an associatively plausible link between each component  , the sum total of these components ranges unacceptably across too many domains  ; obviously , discrimination of any useful sort , not to mention fine granularity discrimination , is hardly the apposite term for a group of this size  . 
Faced with this anomaly , Jacuzzi then proposed a restriction on the Talburt-Mooney quartet approach : henceforth  , at least two words or at least categories In the original quartet must appear in the second quartet in order for the second to be included in a component with the first  . The implementation f this algorithm produced markedly different results  . In both cases , as would be expected , the number of individual quartets was the same : 59  , 541 . From this number , the original algorithm yielded 5 , 960 components , whereas the Jacuzzi algorithm produced 10 , 341 components . In ACRESDE COLING-92, NAN qT . .S , 2328 Ao(~"r 1992 I 2 2 4 Fade . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUC, .  2328 , 1992 the original algorithm , the seven largest components were , in ascending order : 120 entries ,  134 ,  143 ,  200 ,  210 ,  229 , and 22 , 431 . By comparison , the Jacuzzi algorithm produced the following : 282  ,  388 ,  427 ,  469 ,  491 , 705 , and 1490 . 
hlspection shows that the set of the largest Jacuzzi components  ( ' all of those just listed plus others ) represent ' break outs ' from the 22 , 4 31 entry component produced by the original algorithm  . 
Jacuzzi's largest component ( 1490 entries ) has as its largest group words encapsulating intersections of hostility  , irritation , disasters , turmoil ( including noise ) , and physicai competition ( as in " bout ") . 
Smaller sets including terms having to do with , for example , direction ( aim , ambit , circle , etc . ) seem puzzling at first ; but in this case , for example , the word " course " tiesto " flood " which intersects with the disaster terms  . Another small set including words having to do with " manner " and " mode " ties to words intersecting with the sense " irritation  . " Hence this largest Jacuzzi component is clearly explicable  , although a further estriction , either on the algoritlm Lor on the component produced  , might seem desirable for adequate selection of certain semantic subspaces  . 
(It should be noted here that although the has performed remarkably well on a range of tasks and data types  , we certainly don't claim that It is ' perfect . ' Investigations such as tiffs point the way to possible modifications  ; but , given the quality of much of the output based solely on the model and algorithms interpreting it  , we strongly feel that modifications should be made with caution  . Even as it stands , the ~ provides a very good foundation on which to build  . ) To take another example from the ' break-out ' of the  22  , 431 entry component , he Jacuzzi output gave the following group : Geist  , bosom , breast , bottom of the heart , cockles of the heart , heart , I ~ eart'score , in most heart , heart of hearts , in most soul , mind , secret recesses of the heart , soul , spirit . This grouping seems internally consistent , a resulty pical of the smaller groups as well as of  , some of the largest in this restricted algorithm 's output  ; ( for example , the Jacuzzi component with 388 entries was consistently concerned with these use carried by words such as " abhor rent  , "" abominable , "" atrocious , " etc . ) Having looked attile high end of the scale , what about groupings with small ~ mmbers of entries ? First  , we should note the comparative lmmbers : for four -entry components  , the Jacuzzi algorithm produced 6584 components , compared with 3372 in his validation of the other algorithm ; for fix-entry components , the comparison is 1789 to 925 ; for eight-entry components , 700 to 342; for nine-entry components , 47 to 163; for ten-entry components , 350 to 171 , and for eleven-entry components , 35 to 92 . Our primary concern here is whether the further restriction hurts us all in the sense that the semantic subspaces so identified are too small to be useful for information retrieval  , concept extraction , etc . 
Although a final answer awaits renewed efforts at applications  , prelind nary inspection suggests that although a four-entry component won't lead us beyond two closely-related terms  ( remember that repeated " words " within repeated " categories "\ [ semicolon groups \] form the strong ties giving us the Type  10 definition )  , at least we certainly won't beled as tray . Some examples : a breast-along side ; a brade-rub off ; Gaucho-va quero ; Fritz-Jerry ; Zero hour-H-hour ; heaven-providence ; Hephaestus-Vul can ; abandon-abandonment ( intersection of Freedom and Vice )  ; abandonment-renunciation ( intersection of Subnlission and Relinquishment )  ; abandon-quit ( intersection of Departure , Abandonment , and

Referring back to Figure 1 , it can be observed that entry E7(W4 , C2) does not torm part of a quartet , and thus would not be picked up by either algorithm  . But given the interpretation of C 2 as a semicolon group and given the fact that the semicolon group level provides in the explicit hierarchy the most closely related grouping of words semantically  , it may well be desirable to include entry E7 in the component . Bryan's model provides for such inclusion at the Type  9 Chain level ( connections must be ~ word-strong or category -strong  ) and we plan to invead gate the decomposition of the ~ using that point of departure  . We also have begun work wtth lattice representations  , in cooperation with Professor Dr . 
Rudolph Wille and his colleagues attim Technische Hochschule  , Dmnstadt , but that exploration is too preliminary to report on here  . 
Another of our graduate students , John Old , has used the concept of " l~ype 10 chains in a way of examining , among other properties , the cross-referencing system in the ~ . That is , first using output produced by the earlier of the two ACTF~DECOLING  . 92, NANTES , 2328 AOL'r 19921225 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES . AUG .  2328 ,   1992 different ' quartet ' approaches for the word " lead  , " he has then turned to eross-referencing to provide semantic maps showing cormcctodness  ( and lack of cormeetedness ) among various senses of the word . 
His comparison of Type I0 output , cross-referencing information , and the index in the printed ~ aurns with reference to meanings of " lead " is documented in Old  ( 1991a )  . 
More recently , Old ( 1991b ) has compared " over " ( i ) as defined associationally in the ~ ,   ( ii ) as defined through " definitions " in the ~ , and ( iii ) tlu:ough " Cognitive Topology and Lexical Networks " by Brngman and Lakoff  ( 1988 )  . His approach to the analysis of " over " in the ~ was first to identify all semicolon groups in which " over " occurs  . This process resulted in twenty-two senses ( nodes in the network he constructed )  . Links between the nodes were words repeated in two or more of the semicolon groups containing " over "  . Hence , in his example , the word " on " in the groups " over , on , on top of , " and " over , on , upon " would form the link between the groups ( Old , 1991b ) . When he turned to the OED definitions , the number of definition sharing at least two words resulted in more than a thousand links  ; for the puqx ~ es of graphic representation lie restricted the algorithm  , requiring that three or more words be shared for links among nodes to occur  . Asto Brugman and Lakoff , he worked with the networks as provided in their report  ( 1988 )  . 
Old's determination of the central senses in the two lexlcal treatments of " over " is in fact much more complicated than indicated by this brief sketch  . 
The results , though , were reassuring in that they showed significant correlations among the three works while  , at the same lime , there were significant distinctions . Brugman and Lakoff identify the central sense of " over " as the combination of the " elements above and across "  ( 1988 )  . Interestingly enough , Old's data extraction method for the OED resulted in a central sense of " from side to side  ; across to . " Old notes that the OED's " across to "" closely matches Brugman and Lakoffs choice of a central sense of  9_V   . ? , ? and is also the sense of the " across " containing semicolon group in the ~ a  . gziallla ~" (1991b ) . As that observation implies , the Thesaurus network includes the " across " and " above " interpretations  ; but , contrasfively , the central sense in the Thesaurusi " add it tonality  , " closely followed by " excess-related . " For some applications , it may not much matter which senses of a given word are ' central '  ; rather , it is important to be able to place a word in an appropriate semantic space or subspace and then perhaps to see what specific ties it has to other subspaces  . It is important , though , to see how interpretations of a model differentially partition semantic space -- important so as to heighten the realization that disappointments with a largescale resource are not necessarily due to shortcomings of the resource but rather of the model or of the interpretations/implementations of the model  . Too many glib assertions were made earlier about the inadequacy of the ~ as well as about other large-scale resources  . The experience of human users certainly would lead one to suppose that such cnlturally -validated largescale resources must " be doing something right  . " Our own computational research experience with the ~!?  , , S . alK ~ , as well as the computational experience of others with dictionaries of various sorts  , leads us to believe that we are finding ways to model and then refine our models of such resource so as to make them of far greater utility to knowledge-based computer systems  . 
This emphasis we are bespeaking on a ' differential diagnosis ' as to alternative algorithms i in keeping with the generalization of the methodology so successfully employed in AI vision research by the late David Marc : clearly establishing the basic transfer function and then comparing algorithms for accomplishing it  , before any programming is undertaken . That methodology also comports well with the widely employed approach utilized and advocated by Wayne Wymore  ( 1977 ) for interdisciplinary efforts directed at solving large systems-analytic problems  . 

Brady , John . 1988. " ICSS 0nterlingual
Communication Support System ) and a
Wtttgensteinlan Language Game , " Proceedings , European Studies Conference , University of
Nebraska/Omaha , pp2 0.27.
Brady , John . 1991. " Towards Automatic
Categorization of Concordances Using \] gg . g ? ~ International \] Jafz ~? l : ~, " Proceed in ~, s . Third Annual Midwest Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science Society Conference  , ed . Gamble and Ball , Washington University , St . Louis , pp .  93-97 . 
Acres DECOLING-92~NANTEs , 2328 ^ ot ~ r19921226 Paoc . OFCOLING-92, N . ~ r , rrEs , AUG .  2328 . 1992 Brugman , Claudia , and George Lakoff .  1988 . 
" Cognitive Topology and Lexical Networks , " in Small , Cottrell , and Tanenbous , eds . , LeMc ~
E , esigallli.~, Palo Alto:Morgan
Kaulinann , pp . 477-508.
Bryan , Robert .  1973 . " Abstract Thesauri and Graph Theory Applications in Thesaurus Research  , " in S . 
Sedelow , et al , ~~~,/9_22:19 . ~, pp .  45-89 . Lawrence : University of Kansas Departments of Computer Science and of 

Bryan , Robert . 1974. " Modelling in Thesaurus
Research , " in S . Sedelow , et al,
L , Bllgllig ~~19_Z3.: .12.7 ~, pp . 44-59.
Lawrence : University of Kansas Departments of
Computer Science and of Linguistics.
Jacuzzi , Victor A .  1991 . " Modeling Semantic Association Using the Hierarchical Structure of Roget's International Thesaurus  , " Oral Presentation , Dictionary Society of North America Biennial Meeting  , University of Missouri , Columbia , 
Missouri , August , 1991.
Man ', David . 1982. Y_iflg ~, W.H . Freeman.
Old , John , 1991a . " Analysis of Polysemy and Homography of the Word " lead " in Roget's International Thesaurus  , " Proceedinus . Third Midwest Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science Society Conference  , d . Gamble and Ball,
Washington University , pp . 98-102.
Old , John . 1991b . " Image Schemas and Lexicons : A Comparison between Two Lexical Networks  , " Oral Presentation , Dictionary Society of North America Biennial Meeting  , University of Missouri , Columbia , 
Missouri , August , 1991.
Patrick , Archibald .  1985 . An F31 p_lg_talJ ~ of an ~ Instantiation . M . S . Thesis , Computer Science Department , University of

\] L0 gg ~ International ~ ag , sali ~ , 3rd ed ,  1962 , New
York : Thomas Y . Crowell.
Sexlelow , Sally Yeates .  1985 . " Computational lJterary Thematic Analysis : The Possibility of a General Solution  , " Proceedings ,   48th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information 
Science , Vol . 22, pp . 359-362.
Sedelow , Sally Yeates and Walter A . Sedelow , Jr . 
1986 . " Thesaural Knowledge Representation , " Proceedines . Advances in Lexicology , UWC entre for the New Oxford English Dictionary : Waterloo  , 
Canada , pp . 3143.
Sedelow , Sally Yeates and Walter A , Sedelow , Jr .   ( In Press ) " A Topologic Model of the English Semantic Code and Its Role in Automatic Disambiguation for Discourse Analysis  , " in Hockey and Ire , eds . , Proceedings ,   10th International Conference on Computers and the Humanities  , Oxford University
Press , Oxford , England.
Sedelow , Walter A . , Jr . and Sally Yeates Sedelow . 
1987 . "SemanticSpace , " ~ and ~ I all ~ l ~ . 9 . 1 !, 2, pp .  231-242 . 
Sedelow , Walter A . , Jr .  1988 . " Knowledge Retrieval tlom Domain-Transcendent Expert Systems : I  . Some Concepts from Cognitive Robotics , " proceedings ,   51st Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information Science  ,  1988 , Vol . 25, pp .  205-208 . 
Talburt , John R . and Donna M . Mooney .  1989 . " The Decomposition of Roget's International Thesaurus into  Type-10 Semantically Strong Components , " Proceedings . 1989 ACM South Regional Conference,
Tulsa , Oklahoma , pp /.78-83.
Warfel , Sam .  1972 . " The Value of a Thesaurus for Prefix Identification  , " in S . Sedelow , et al,
Amamat ~~ Anakvm , 127a :_19_72, pp.
31-49. University of Kans as Departments of
Computer Science and of Linguistics.
Wymore , A . Wayne .  1977 . Malhg , lllat E ~ ~ of Engineering " ~; lYA gln . e , l ~ . Melbourne,
Fla . : Krieger.
ACRESDE COLING-92 . NANTES , 2328 nOt ~' r1992 I227 PRoc . oF COLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328, 1992
