Generation of Informative Texts with Style
Stephan M . Kerpedjiev
Institute of Mathematics
Acad . G . Bonchev St ., BI.8
1113 Sofia , Bulgaria
Abstract : An approach to the computational treatment of style is presented in the case of generation of informative texts  . We regard the style mestly a same , as of controlled selection of alternatives faced at each level of text generation  . 
The generation technique , as well as the style specification , are considered at four levels -- content production  , discourse generation , surface structure development , and lexicai choice . 
A style is specified by the frequency of occurrence of certain features examined through observation of particular texts  . 
The algorithm for text generation ensures efficient reatment of the style requirements  . 
1 Introduction
The manner of presentation , i . e . the repeating pattern of expression produced by a given subject or illa certain community  , is known as style . Thus each newspaper renders the weather information in n specific style by adopting n particular scheme of presentation  . We assume that a text generator , like humans , should has its own style . Furthermore , we regard the style as a means to control the selection of particular constructs among the great variety provided by the language  . In this paper , we study what defines a style and how a system could produce texts with style  . 
The problem is tackled in the framework of text generation created by some of the pioneering works in the field  \[9  , 10\] . According to this framework , the process of generation is considered at four levels : content production  , discourse planning , surface structure generation and lexical choice . We trace out the features that characterize the texts generated from a given content portion in the case of informative texts  ( introduced in section 2 ) and show how they can be treated eomputationally . For illustration of our considerations we make use of the class of weather reports -- informative texts about which a good deal of material has been collected  , mostly through MF , -TEOVIS -- an experimental system for handling multimodal weather eports  . 
The development of the METEOVIS project began with the transformation of weather forecasts from text to map  \[5\]  . Then we studied the conversion of weather forecast texts into texts with another discourse structure or in another language  \[6\]  . This year , the system was redesigned so that multimodal weather products could be generated from dntasets  \[7\]  . The domain specific knowledge was isolated in knowledge bases  ( terminological , rhetorical and grammatical ) , and the processing modules were made independent from the subject domain as much as possible  . At this point we became aware that additional information was necessary to produce high quality texts  . Thus we came to the notion of style which was later on generalized to the ease of informative texts  . 
2 Informative texts
The considerations in this paper refer to a particular category of texts which  1 call informative texts . Exam-pies , in addition to the weather eports , a rewarcom-munique , summaries on the ecological situation over a given region  , etc . An informative text describes a phenomenon or a situation  , either observed or predicted . It consists of assertions , each one relating an event , observation or prediction to a given location and time period  . 
Informative texts differ from descriptive texts ( studied in\[113\] ) in that they are not intended to create permanent longterm memory traces about certain conceptual structures  ; instead , they draw a mental picture of a particular situation  . Informative texts differ also from instructional ( operative ) texts in that they are not associated with particular actions on the part of the reader  ( a lot of studies on instructional texts have been carried out  , consider e . g .  \[8\]) . Informative texts are a type of objective narrative texts well-classified by their sub-jeet domains  ( e . g . weather , ecology ) and inheriting from those domains properly devised models  . 
The source information for the generation of an informative text is a dataset produced by an application program or collected by humans  . The dataset encodes the situation comprehensively according to a certain model created to support he research and practical work in the corresponding field  . Usually , that model defines the parameters , both quantitative and qualitative , that characterize the phenomena concerned , as well as some relations between parameters . 
Since each assertion specifies the value of a parameter referred to a particular location and time period  , territory aud time models are employed as well . They define the granularity of the territory and the time axis  , and certain relations between time periods or regions  ( e . g . inclusion , partial order , neighbourhood , paths of regions ) . Depending on the size of grain , either temporal or spatial , the assertions are characterized with a certain degree of imprecision which  , if greater than a given threshold , has to be explicitly stated in order to prevent herenders from getting mislead  . 
The predictive character of some informative texts requires that the assertions are marked with the probability of their occurrence  . Similarly to imprecision , this information , called certainty , is necessary for the creation of a proper picture of the situation being presented  . 
Acr ~ DECOL1 NG-92 . NANT ~, 2328 ^ ot ~"1992 if l24Puoc . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES . Ago .  2328 ,   1992   3 Style of informative texts The concept of style is fundamental in this work  . In the light of NL generation systems , the style is a means of adapting the system to a particular manner of text formulation  , thus making possible the expression of the same content portion as different exts  , according to the available styles . 
In \[2\] an approach totim computational treatment of style is suggested in the case of machine translation  . 
The internal stylistics of the source language is used to determine the specilic goals of style such as clarity or concreteness  ; then the comparative stylistics fortile two languages i employed to infertile corresponding style goals of the target text  ; antifinally , the internal stylistics of the target language says how to construc the target text so that the inferred goals be acbieved  . The relationship between stylistic and syntactic features is expressed through stylistic grammars  . 
Our approach to using style features in text generation is similar to tile approach in  \[9\]  . Both allow adopting one or another generation alternative on the basis of certain stylistic rules  . Unlike our approach , however , their rules define the preferences explicitly ( we use features distributions ) and concern only the surface structure development  ( we cover all levels of text generation )  . 
" lb provide an evidence for the existence of styles in informative texts  , we observed a number of weather forecasts published in different newspapers in three languages --- Bulgarian  , English and R . ussian . Samples of such texts are given below ( the translations from Bulgarian and Russian into English preserve the features of the original texts as much as possible  ) : q b day it will be cloudy . In many portions it will drizzle , turning into snow over the regions higher than 500 m above these a level . . . 
Outlook for Friday : The rain will stop and it will clear gradually  . 
Trud ( translated from Bulgarian ) ltaln in southeast England will so on clear anti with the rest of s on the rn and central England and Wales the day will be mainly dry  . flower et , further rain is likely in southern most counties by midnight  . . . It will feel cool everywhere in the strong winds which will reach gale force in the seuth-east  . 
~17te Times
Much of Britain will be dry with sunny spells but southwest England  , the Channel Islands and north and westScotland will be nmstly cloudy with show-cryr~n  . . . Reasonably warm in sunnier parts of the West , but cool , especially on the east coast . 

In Moscow , warm weather will remain with occasion alrain . Temperatures in the night from 0 to -5
Centigrade , in the day about 0.
In Lening rad , occasion alrain , temperatures in the night from -3 to +2 Centigrade , in the day0-4 . 
In Irkutsk region , snow , snowstorm , temperature ~ in the day from -8 to -13 Centigrade . Towards the weekend the temperatures will fall by  4  -  6 degrees . 
lzvestia ( translated frontRussian )
The Bulgarian weather forecasts are usually organized in two paragraphs corresponding to the first and the second day of the forecast  . The sentences most often are simple . Complex and compound sentences occur rarely but in various types : complex sentences with a main and a relative clause connected by the adverbial phrases ' where ' and ' when '  ; compound sentences with coordinating co , unctions of addition ' and ' , cooccurrence ' with ' , or contrast ' but ' . The use of impersonal verbs (' it will be ' , ' it will rain ' ) is typical whereas verbles sentences are rather an exclusion than a norm  . 
Ill English forecasts , impersonal verb phrases are rarely used ; instead , the formal subject of the sentences most often is the region or the weather element  , and less frequently -- the time period . Compound sentences are used intensively for assertions with opposite weather values connected by tile coordinating conjunction for contrast ' but '  ( cf . the forecast from Ob server ) . 
In \] zvesfia , because of the large area of this country , tile text is alm cetalays structured by regions and all the weather information about a given region is rendered in one long compound sentence tile constituents of which a relaconic  , verbless clauses divided by commas . Complex sentences rarely occur . 
The features of the observed weather forecast texts allow us to summarize the basic properties that characterize a style : w the extent to which details are provided  ; * text organization ( by regions , time periods , etc . ) ; o the prevalentypes of sentences according to \[1\]   ( simple , complex , compound ); , tile prevalent length of sentences ( short , medium , long ); , the most typical patterns of surface structures ;   , the lexical entries preferred in the expression of the assertion selements  . 
Sittce style features are regarded as typical , prevalent , preferred , they should be defined through the frequencies of their occurrence rather than as obligatory characteristics  . 
4 Text generation
Ill this section we concisely introduce the principles and techniques of text generation employed in METEOVIS and  , as I believe , relevant o other kinds of informative texts . Along with this , we show how one or another alternative is selected on the basis of certain stylistic rules  . 
4.1 Content production
The content production ( CP ) component generates the set of assertions from a dataset using domain-specific techniques  . In METEOVIS , we employed weather verification techniques that match the generated set of assertions with the dataset and evaluate the precision of the set as a whole  . 
Although CP is not responsible for the logical consistency of tile set of assertions  , it is guaranteed that there are no serious contradictions  . An example of a weakly inconsistent set of two assertions is given below : Acrl  . ' . sDl ~ COLING-92 , NANTEs , 2328 AOt ~ r19921025 PROC . O1:COLING-92, N^I~q'ES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 < clouda = broken , ragion = Bul , tia e = today > < clouds = claar , og:Lon=\]Ig_Bul , tilau = no on > This type of inconsistency , easily resolved by the readers , is inevitable because of the roughness of the territory and time models  . If we required that the generated set of assertions be absolutely uncontradictory  , we might loose completeness ( ome territories or time periods remain uncovered ) or conciseness . 
A style feature at the CP level is the extent to which details are provided -- from summary information only to the finest detail  . It is specified by any of the terms summary , normal or detailed . In the case of summary information one assertion is extracted for each weather attribute  . A detailed style requires that the set of assertions giving the highest precision rate is extracted  , without any restrictions on the number of assertions  . 
The extraction of normal information is limited to no more than  ( 1+ d ) /2 assertions giving the highest precision rate , where d is the number of assertions that would be extracted if the style were detailed  . 
4.2 Discourse generation
The assertions generated can immediately be transformed into simple NL sentences  , but the text obtained most probably will be awkward  , unorganized and inefll-cient . In order to be coherent , a text has to be organized according to rhetorical schemas that take into account semantic relations between entities presented iu the text  \[3  , 10\] . Thus the user will perceive the information with minimal cognitive f for t  . 
For the generation of discourse structures , we employs even rhetorical schemas based on certain semantic re-latious  \[7\]: Parameter progression . An assertion about a given parameter cannot interpose a sequence of assertions concerning another parameter  . 
From a summary to details . An assertion with a region and a time period containing the regiou and the time period of another assertion is conveyed before the second assertion  . 
Temporal progression . The assertions are ordered by the successive time intervals they pertain to  . 
Spatial progression . The assertions are arranged in such a way that their regions  , if taken in this order , make a path defined in the territory model . 
Coupling related values . Assertions with cooccurring values are rendered in a group  . 
Contrast . Two assertions with opposite values are conveyed together to contrast with each other  . 
Value progression . The assertions about a given parameter with an ordered domain are conveyed in successive groups relating to the particular values  . 
For each rhetorical schema there is a rule which decides whether the schema is applicable to a given set of assertions  , and if it is , structures the set accordingly . 
This is a hierarchical topdown proces starting from the original set of assertions and resulting in a complete discourse structure of the text represented as a tree  . The terminals correspond to the assertions and each node represent she discourse relation existing between its successors  ; hence the root represent she discourse structure at the highest level  . We also regard the nodes as chunks of assertions that have to be rendered in a group  . 
The following properties a y how the discourse structure influences the surface structure : P roperty  1  . Each sentence presents all assertions of a given chunk  . 
Property 2 . The order of tile sentences follows the left-to -right order of the chunks of the discourse tree  . 
Property 3 . For each type of discourse structure ( temporal progression , related values , etc . ) , there are sentence grammars each of which can convert the corresponding set of assertions into a sentence surface structure  . 
A style at the discourse level specifies the rhetorical schemas applicable at each level of discourse generation  . 
For example , the following specification
IsPSt-Progr(W-BuI , C-Bul , E-Bul ) l1:s pat_progr(N_Bul , S_Bul ) temp_progr(day_l , day _?) 2: relate 3: par-progr(clouds , precip , wind , temp ) 4: any implies that at the highest level , one of the two spatial progressions ( by the paths West , Central and East Bulgaria or North and South Bulgaria  ) or the temporal progression by the two days of the forecast  , should be applied , depending on the set of assertions . Thus if it is better stratified by the time periods day_land  day_2 than by the two paths of regions , then the temporal progression will be applied , else--one of the two spatial progressions . At the second level , all assertions with related values will be coupled into indivisible chunks  . 
At the next level , parameter progression should be employed to further break down the chunks obtained as a result of the previous divisions  . Finally , for each terminal chunk the schema that best applies to it will be used to complete the corresponding subtree  . 
4  . 3 Sur face s t ructure deve lopment One of the major problems in the creation of informative texts is how to avoid text monotony  . Perhaps it is the poorly designed surface structure that most of all contributes to the monotony of a text  . The ever repeating santo sentence pattern makes the text artificial  , awkward and boring for the reader . Adversely , a text with diverse surface structure , expressive function words , alternating short and lout sentences helps the reader perceive the important elements quickly  , extract and memorize the facts , and enjoy the proper pace of reading . 
Partially the surface structure of a sentence is predetermined by the current discourse unit through the correspondence discourse structure - --  , possible grammars introduced in Property 3 , section 4 . 2 . The main vehicle for the selection of one or another syntactic structure from the great variety offered by the grammar is the focussing medlanism  . The idea is that a sentence should ACRESDE COLING-92  , NAN'n~s . 2328 AO~"1992I026 PROC . Or : COLING-92 . NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 begin with some concepts or objects already introduced  ( topic ) and end with new information about them ( focus )  \[3 , 4 , 10\] . 
tlere we put forward a treatment of the focussing mechanism applicable to the generation of informative texts  . According to the particular discourse structure , one of the assertion elements -- parameter , time period or region -- should be the topic of the current sentence  . For example , in a spatial progression , it is the path of regions that is the common element of the assertions unified in the chunk and this path is represented in the separate assertions by their regions  . Therefore , it is natural to construct the corresponding sentences with the regions being their topics  . This decision puts additional constraints on the possible grammars converting the chunk contents into a text surface structure  . 
Even though the discourse structure and the focussing mechanism restricto a large extent the po~ible surface structures provided by the grammar  , still more than one alternatives may exist . At this point the style decides which alternative is most suitable as a surface structure of the current chunk  . For example , a discourse structure of type contrast is a very appealing precondition for the creation of a compound sentence iu which the constituent clauses  ( correspmlding to the assertions linked by the contrast relation  ) are connected by the conjunction ' but ' . However , the creation of two simple sentences without any function words is acceptable as well  . It is just a question of style to make oue or another decision - whether a simple or a compound sentence is preferred at this point  , if some of the potential surface structures have priority over the others  , which function word is preferred to lead a sentence or to connect wo clauses  , etc . 
The style features at surface level supported by the system are sentence type  , sentence length and syntactic roles of the assertions elements  . These features characterize the style with different levels of detail  . Thus a specification of the sentence type or length provides less detail than a specification of the syntactic roles  . 
Sentence type is specified by the frequencies of the simple  , compound and complex sentences . For example , the statement : simple : 0 . 5\] sentence_type=compound : 0 . 3 complex : 0 . 2 is understood as an instruction for minimizing the function : r : V ~  . = 0 . 5) ~+( Y = 0 . 3) ~+ ( z -0 . 2) ~ where x , y , and z are the portions of the simple , compound anticomplex sentences , respectively , in the actually generated text . As a result , about half of the sentences in the final form should be simple  , 3/10--compound , and 1/5--complex . 
Sentence length is treated in a similar manner by specifying the frequencies of the short  , medimn at td long sentences . A sentence is considered short , if it contains at most 4 entities ( parameter values , regions or time periods ) ; medium -- between 5 and 8 entities ; mid long -- more than 8 entities . 
Syntactic roles are specified by enumerating the allowed sentence patterns together with their relative frequencies as follows : syntactic_roles  =   g2  :  f2 g . : I . 
where ft , h, .   .   .   , f , are the relative frequencies for the grammar sgl , g ' ~ ,  . . . , g ,, respectively . This specification makes the system minimize the function : r = ~-- fl  )  ~+ ( x2-f2 )  2+ . . . +( zn-fn ) 2 where xI , x ~, . . . , ~ , are the portions of sentences actually generated by means of grammam gl  , g  ~ ,   . --, gn . 
Only one of the feature sentence_type , sentence_length and syntactic_roles should be specified  , for there are certain co-relations between them mad the specifications of two features may contradict each other  . 
The following algorithm for surface structure generation makes use of Properties  1  , 2 and 3 of the discourse tree ( ef . section 4 . 2) , the focussing mechanism and the style requirements  . 
The process begins with counting all grammars that implement the chunks of the discourse tree as sentences  , using the correspondence discourse stricture ~ possible grammars  . Those grammars form the current stock of candidates which in the process of generation of the surface structure is updated as specified in stelm  5 and 6 below . The generation proceeds in a loop as follows . 
1 . For each chunk on the path from the root to the leftmosterminal  , the grammars candidates to implemen the chunk are considered  . 
2 . Those grammars that do not satisfy the focussing condition are left out of consideration  . 
3 . The final selection is performed taking into account the style specification  . Suppose that the style specifies n sentence type * with frequency rates f t  , f2 ,   . . . , f , and the portions of these sentence types in the current stock are el  , s2 ,  . . . , sn , resp . Then the system ~ lects from the remaining candidates the grammar of type k satisfying the conditions : fk-sk = max  ( ft--Sl . . . . . f . -- an ), f ~> O , sk > O . 
The heuristics behind this rule is " select the grammar that best compromises the frequency rate specified by the style and the deficiency rate in the current stock "  . 
4 . The set of assertions constituting the corresponding chunk is converted into the surface structure of a sentence through the selected grammar  . 
5 . The discourse tree is pruned by removing the subtree rooting at the chunk that was converted into a surface structure and the grammars corresponding to this subtree are deducted from the current stock  . 
6 . The portion of grammar candidates deducted from the current stock is subtracted from the frequency rate f + of the selected sentence grammar  , and the portions st , s  ~ ,   . . . , snace recalculated . 
A cids DECOLING-92, NAN tl ~ S . 2328A ?) ~ rf19921027 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AUG .  2328 .  1992 7 . Steps 16 are repeated until the discourse tree is exhausted  . 
The selection of a surface structure as described above avoids the combinatorial explosion expected uring the examination of the minimizing conditions  . This efficiency is achieved at the expense of a looser treatment of those conditions  . Thus the techniquensures an actual distribution of the surface features that is sufficiently close but not necessary the closes to the distribution specified  . The only drawback of the algorithm is observed when short texts are generated  . Then the surface structures with low frequency rates either tend to appear at the end of the text or are not generated at all  . 
4.4 Lexical choice
The last step in text generation is the linearization of the surface structure into a string  . METEOVIS makes use of a phrasa lexicon to replace the terminals of the surface structure tree with entries from the lexicon using the terminal's type and value as a key  . The freedom given to the generator at this level of processing allows it to choose from two or more synonyms for the same entity  . 
For example , the following strncture adv_region --~ prep ( ' in ' ) reg_mod ( much ) prep ( ' of ' ) noun ( Bul ) can be linearized as ' in many portions of the country '  , ' in much of Bulgaria ' , etc . The style may give preference to one of these expressions specifying the frequency of each member of the synonymous groups reg_mod  ( much ) and noun ( Bul )  . 
Similarly to the selection of sentence grammars , the lexieal choice between synonyms is made on the basis of a distribution specified by the style  . Thus the statement \[ much : 0 . 5\] tea_rood(much ) = many portions : 0 . 25 many parts : 0 . 2 5 specifies a distribution of the elements of the synonymous group representing the entity region modifier according to which then mdifier ' much ' will occur twice as frequently as any of the other two modifiers  . Such kind of style specification can be made for each synonymous group  . The default is even distribution . 
5 Conclusion
The problem of text generation with style has been described in the case of informative texts  . We stepped on tile platform of the experimental METEOVIS system designed to handle multimedia weather information  . In order to get efficient control over the generated texts  , we employed the concept of style , examined the features that make up a style , and adapted the technique of text generation to take into account hose features  . This new opportunity makes po~ible the controlled generation of various texts from the same dataset  . 
Style specification is feasible at the four levels of text generation -- content production  , discourse generation , surface structure development , and lexical choice . It drives the system to select from the many alternatives offered by the rhetorical knowledge  , grammar and lexicon those providing text features ufficiently close to the specified ones  . The algorithm for text generation provides efficient reatment of the style requirements  . 
Acknowkedgement : This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Education under grant  I23/91 and by the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences under grant  1001003  . 
References\[1\]L . G . Alexander . Longman English Grammar . 
Longman , 1988.
\[2\]C . DiMareo and G . Hirst . Stylistic Grammars in Language Translation . In : Proc . COLING88, Vol . 1,
Budapest , 1988, 148-153.
\[3\]N . E . Enkvist . Introduction : Coherence , Composition and Text linguistics . In : Coherence and Composition : A Symposium , ed . N . E . Enkvist , Abo
Academy , 1985, 11-26.
\[4\]E . Hnji ~ ov A . Focussing - a Meeting Point of Linguistics and Artificial Intelligence  . In : Artificial Intelligence 11: Methodology , Systems , Apphcations , eds . 
Ph . Jorrand and V . Sgurev , North-Holland , 1987, 311-321 . 
\[5\]S . Kerpedjiev . Transformation of Weather Fore-casts from Textual to Cartographic Form  . Computer Physics Communications . , 61(1990), 246-256 . 
\[6\] S . Kerpedjiev , V . Noncheva . Intelligent II andling of Weather Forecasts . In : Proc . COLING90, vol .  3,
Helsinki , 1990, 379-381.
\[7\] S . Kerpedjiev . Automatic Generation of Multimodal Weather Reports from Datasets  . In : Proc . 
3rd Conf . on Applied Natural Language Processing,
Trento , 1992, 4855.
\[8\]K . Linden et at . Using Systems Networks to Build Rhetorical Structures  . In : Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence ,  587 ,  1992 ,  183-198 . 
\[9\] D . McDonald and J . Pustejovsky . A Computational Theory of Prose Style for Natural Language Generation  . In : Proc . ~nd Conf . of the European Chapter of ACL , Geneva ,  1985 ,  185-193 . 
\[10\]K . R . Me Keown . Text Generation . Cambridge University Press , 1985 . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NA~q'ES , 2328 hot ~'; 1992 1028 PRO(: . OFCOLING-92, NaN'rl~s,AUG .  2328 .  1992
