HIGH-PROBABILITY SYNTACTICLINKS
Leonid Mitjushin
Institute for Problems of Information Transmission
Russian Academy of Sciences
19 Ermolovoy Street , 101447 GSP-4 , Moscow , Russia
1 Introduction
In this paper we consider syntactic relations between words of a sentence that can be strongly predicted by local mechanisms  . For instance , if a sentence contains a pair of words . . . red block . . . .
then the reader immediately makes a conjecture that red is an adjective modifier for the noun block  . The same is true for semantically abnormal pairs such as  . . . green ideas .   .   .   . 
Other examples of strong prediction are provided by pairs  . . . authors describe .   .   .   . 
. . . p rob lem i s .   .   .   , for which a " subject-verb " relation takes place with high probability  . 
In most cases , such simple hypotheses prove to be correct . However , sometimes they lead to errors , as for the pair problem is in the sentence ( I ) The solution of this problem is very simp le  . 
In this example , however , by the moment the word is has been read , the word problem is already engaged in other strongly predicted constructions  , namely the prepositional phrase of " this prob lemand even the whole noun phrase the solution of this problem  . A conflict arises , and plausibility of the new hypothesis becomes much lower  . 
Such syntactic relations may concern not only adjacent words  . For instance , in (1) it is for the pair solution . . . is that the " subject-verb " relation will be conjectured  . 
In this paper , slrong prediction of syntactic relations is modeled within the framework of dependency syntax  ( see Mel'~uk 1974 ,  1988) . According to this theory ,   ( surface ) syntactic structure of a sentence is an oriented tree whose nodes are the words of the sentence  ( more precisely , their lexico-morphological interpretations ) . The arcs of the tree represent syntactic links between words and are labeled by names of syntactic relations  . The result of strong prediction is a partial parse of the sentence  , in which high-prob-ability syntactic links are established  . 
In our opinion , dependency structures are better adapted to partial parsing than constituent structures  . The reason is that the dependency structure of a segment is the same both when the segment is considered as isolated and when it is considered as a part of some sentence  ( by " segment " we understand any sequence of words  )  . Generally , this is not true for constituent structures . For instance , the segmentls awaman has the dependency structure *  ( 2 ) l-compl pred\[det1
I~SOWO~man both as a complete sentence and as a part of the sentence Isa waman with at e lescope  . The fact that the latter sentence is ambiguous does not hamper anything  , as both its structures contain subtree ( 2 )   ( and differ only in arcs that go into the word with  ) :  ( 3 ) l-comp\[preppred\[del\]attrl , detl
I~sawa ~ man ~ wi~na ~ telescope.
(4) nov pred
I ~ sawl-compl\[~_prepd?t\]dnt\[a~man with a ~ telescope  . 
On the other hand , the constituent structure of the segment Isawa man is not fully inherited in the constituent structures of the longer sentence  . In our opinion , this comparison demonstrates that , in a certain sense , dependency structures reflect the incremental nature of sentence comprehension from left to right better than constituent sructures do  . 
In this paper we describe a bottom-up , left-to-right algorithm of partial parsing that establishes high-probability syntactic links  . It is implemented on a VAX 11/750 computer as a subsystem of a multipur-pose linguistic processor developed in the Laboratory of Computational Linguistics of the Institute for Problems of Information Transmission  , the Russian Academy of Sciences ( Apresjan et al 1992 )  . The partial parser is employed as a preprocessing unit before the operation of the main filter-type parser  . It can also be used for automatic ndexing and lemmatization  . 
The algorithm is language-independent : all lan -guage-specific nformation is recorded in the dic -tionaries and the rules that establish l inks  . 
* Full names of English syntactic relation S that appear in example = are : predicative  , determinative , lsl completive , prepositional , t-tributive , adverbial . The number of relations used Incomplete models of English and Ru~tan syntax varies from  40 to 55   ( Mel'~uk 1974 ; Mel ' ~ . uk and Pertsov 1987; Apresjan et al1989, 1992) . 
AcrEsDECOLING-92 , NANT ~ , 2328 A Ot JT 1992930 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AUG .  2328 .   1992 Experiments with Russian sentences have given promising results : on average  , the algorithm estab-lishes 70  -  80 ~ o of syntactic links of a sentence ; processing speed ( exclusive of morphological analysis ) is about 10 words per CPU second . The error rate is less than 1% ( stablestimates have not been obtained yet )  . 
2 Bottom-up Parsing
The processing of a sentence begins with morphological analysis  . As a result , each word is given a set of its possible lexico -morphological interpretations  , henceforth called " homonyms " . A homonym is a list that includes a lexeme ident ifier  , a part-of-speech marker , and morphological features of the wordform . 
For instance , the morphological module of the ETAP-2 system ( Apresjan et al 1989 ) will give for the word sawt be following three homonyms : SEE  , V , pt(-past tense ); SAW l , V , mf(-main form ); SAW2 , 
N , sg.
All morphological data are concentrated in a special morphological dictionary  . The key role in parsing proper is played by a combinatorial  ( syntactic ) dictionary that contains versatile information on syntactic properties of lexemcs  , i . e . on their ability to participate in various syntactic onstructions  ( for detail see Mel'~uk19"/4 , 1988; Apresjan et al 1989 ,  1992) . 
The general scheme of parsing is as follows . After the morphological nalys is , for each word there appears one or more homonyms . By " fragment " we shall understand a set of homonyms occupying one or more successive posit ions in the sentence  ( one homonym in each position ) plus a tree of syntactic links defined on these homonyms as nodes  . For instance , an isolated homonym is a trivial fragment ; he whole dependency tree of a sentence is also a fragment  . It should be noted that in trees ( 2 )  -  ( 4 ) each word is represented by a certain homonym ( for example , saw is represented by SEE , V , pt ) . 
Lejkina and Tsejtin ( 1975 ) described a bottom-up process for constructing dependency trees  . It is based on the operation of adjunction . This operation is applied to two adjacent fragments and consists in establishing a link  , marked by a certain syntactic relation , from a certain node of one fragment to the root of the other  . The result of adjunction is a new fragment on the union of segments occupied by the initial fragments  . 
This action is similar to generation of a new constituent from two adjacent constituents  . However , unlike constituents , fragments at the moment of adjunction may be " incomplete "  , i . e . they need not contain all the nodes that will be director indirect dependents of their roots in the structure of the sentence  . These nodes may be added to them later ( also by the operation of adjunction )  . 
Mitjushin ( 1985 ) described the class of trees that can be constructed from isolated homonyms by repeated adjunction  , i . e . that can be built by the bot-tom-up process . Consider a tree with an ordered set of nodes . Let a " tangle " be a quadruple of nodes ( a , b , c , d ) with the following properties : 1) a < b < c < d ;  2 ) a and c are linked by an arc ( in any direction )  ;  3 ) b and d are linked by an arc ( in any direction )  ;  4 ) the path between a and d contains neither bn or c  ( here , orientation of arcs is ignored , so the path always exists ) . 
The following criterion is true : a tree can be constructed from its nodes by repeated adjunction if and only if it contains not angles  . 
The simplest tangle looks as follows : abcd ( direction of the arcs does not matter ; there can be other nodes between a , b , c , and d ) . According to the criterion , a tree that contain such a subtree cannot be built by the bottom-up rocess  . 
The class of trees obtainable by adjunction is much wider than the class of socalled projective trees  ( on projectivity see , for example , Gladkij 1985; Mel't~uk 1988) . For the model of Russian syntax presented by Mel' ~ uk  ( 1974 ) and Apresjan et al ( 1992 )  , this class includes all syntactic structures permissible in scientific  , technical , and business texts ( however , it is not so for spoken language and poetry ) . We suppose all the structures considered below to belong to this class  . 
3 Rules
In our system , in contrast othose based on forulal grammars , the rules are not a tool for the exhaustive description of the set of correct syntactic structures  . 
We suppose that the correspondence btween sentences and their syntactic structures i defined by some other means  . The task of the parsing algorithm and the rules it employs is to build  , for a given sentence , some set of its syntactic structures or their fragments  , without losing the semantically correct ones . 
The concrete function of the rules is to check whether the given case of adjunction is feasible and  , if so , to perform the operation of adjunctio a . Some additional operations can also be performed  . The rules have access to any information about the structure of fragments to be adjoined and the homonyms they contain  ( their lexeme names , morphological features , and syntactic propertie stated in the combinatorial dictionary  )  . The rules may also use data on punctuation and limited data on homonyms not belonging to the given two fragments  ; they have no access to information about fragments built by the algorithm earlier  . 
While formally the rules could be strongly context -sensitive within the limits of two given fragments  , in most cases they only use information on nodes X and Y  ( those to be linked ) and their nearest syntactic Context . In fact , the rules currently emloyed do not ACTESDE COLING-92  , NANTES . 2328 Am~'r1992931 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 .   1992 consider nodes for which distance from X or Y exceeds  3   ( where distance is the number of links in the path connecting two nodes in the dependency tree of a fragment  )  . 
A rule is a program written in the form of a transi-liongraph  , with an elementary predicate or operation associated with each arc  . The rule interpreter performs ordered search to find a path along " true " arcs that starts at a fixed entry node and ends at one of fixed exit nodes  . Noback tracking is used : if forward motion from some node proves to be impossible  , interpretation is terminated . The fact that backtracking is not necessary has been discovered empirically  ; it is connected with the nature of syntactic events con-sidered by the rules  . On the other hand , when desirable , an explicit return may be made to a point passed earlier  , with simple measures taken against infinite cycling  . 
Each rule contains at least one operation L INK  ( X , Y , R ) that establishes a link marked by a certain syntactic relation R between the given node X of one fragment and the root Y of the other  ( that is , performs the adjunction ) . The corpus of rules covers only those situations for which the probability that the established links are correct is estimated as close to  1  . For instance , the rules do not establish links like alter and ad~vin structures  ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) because altach-ment of prepositional postmodifiers iknown as a " classical " case of structural ambiguity  . 
It should be noted that the probability close to 1 characterizes here not individua links ( it would be too strong a demand ) but all complex of links established for the given words  . This can be illustrated by the segment 1 saw , for which two fragments will be built with different homonyms for the word saw : pred pred 
I~--SEEV . pt,I~SAWIV , mf.
Both these alternatives are syntactically correct . At the same time , they are mutually exclusive , and it is only their disjunction that has probability close to  1  . 
This ambiguity is also inherited by larger fragments  . 
( As a result , the sentence 1 sawaman with a telescope has four different parses  , two of which are semantically abnormal . ) Thus , high probability is a " roller-five " and not an " individual " property of links  . 
Rigorous definitions can be found in the paper by
Miljushin (1988).
4 The Parsing Algorithm
The simplest method of bottom-u parsing is to consider all opportunities for adjunction  , starting from adjacent one-element fragments . We employ a faster algorithm , in which certain heuristics are used to reduce search  ( Mitjushin 1988 )  . 
The algorithm builds a growing sequence A of fragments  . At any moment of time A contains some homonyms of the sentence and certain fragments const ructed of these homonyms  . The algorithm moves from the beginning of the sequence A to its end and tries to perform adjunction between the current fragment FEA and the fragments that appear in A earlier than F  . New fragments are added to the end of the sequence  . 
The fragment cmtsidered at the given moment is called active  . All fragments of A ( including isolated homonyms ) become active successively , without leaps or returns . 
While the algorithm moves along the sequence A , tile sequence grows longer because of the addition of newly built fragments  . Nevertheless , a moment will necessarily come when the active fragment is the last in A and further motion is impossible  . In this case , the next homonym of the sentence is added to the sequence  ; it becomes active and the work is continued . 
When a new dead lock arises , another homonym is added , and so on . If in such a situation it turns out that all homonyms of the sentence are exhausted  , then the work is finished . 
Homonyms are added to the sequence in the order they are arranged in the sentence from left to right  ( which is essential )  , and those occupying the same position are added in an arbitrary order  ( in this case , the order has no influence m ~ the results ) . At the initial moment A contains a single element  , namely one of the homonyms occupying the leftmost position of the sentence  , and it is declared active . 
For each active fragment F lhe algorithm selects in A its left neighbors  , i . e . fragments thai are adjacent to F on its left . A preference relation is defined between tile neighbors of F : fragments of greatter length are preferred  , and lhose of equal length are considered equivalent  . 
For the given F , the algorithm considers its left neighbors E in order of their preference  , and for each E tries to adjoin it to F . If for some E adjunclion is successful , subsequent search is limited to the neighbors of Fequivalent to E  ; less preferred fragments are not considered . 
An attempto adjoin E to F is made as follows.
IJnks are considered that connect a certain node X of fragment E with the rightmost node Y of fragment F  . 
A preference relation is defined between the links : those of greater length are less prefen'ed  , and those of equal length are equivalent . In other words , more preferred are links X---Y and X ~ Y with nodes X that are nearer to the Jight end of E  ; links with the same X are equivalent . 
For the given E and F , nodes X ~ E are considered from right to left ( i . e . in order of the preference of links between X and Y  )  , and for each X the rules applicable to these X and Y are activated  . The list of such rules is determined by parts of speech of X and Y  , and by possible direction of fhelink . If during interpretation of a rule an operation L INK  ( X , Y ,   . ) or LINK(Y , X, . ) is performed then a new fragment is built which is the ~' esult of joining X and Y with the given link  . It is placed at the end of tile sequence A . 
After flint , for these E and F the search is limited to the l inks equivalent othe established one  ; less preferred links are not considered . 
When the sequence A is built , its subset C of maximal fragments if or med . A fragment is called maximal if its segment is not a proper part of the segment of any other fragment belonging to A  . The set C is the final result of partial parsing . Below , when speaking ACTESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AO(ZI'1992932 PROC . OI'COLING92, NANIKS . AUG .  2328 . 1992 about fragments built by the algoritln n , we shallal . -ways mean exactly timset C . 
The first experiments with this algorithm have shown t it bit  , tits on tec ; . tses , the preferences at td restrictions adopted arc too strong and pvt meaw ay semantically correct parses  . To int provetire situation , special operations were defined that made it possible to cancel  ( from insidelh crule ) priority of longer neighbors or shorter links , and also to make the algm'ithm cmrsider not only the rightmost node of tire right fragment  . ( ) wing to them , the search can be made exhaustive in all cases when the rule " considers it desirable "  . In tile real process of pursing , these operations are fired not too often , sotile main part of search remains limited . 
5 Experim cns
At present , after preliminary debugging and tuning of tile rules  , we have begun to carry out regahn ' experi ~ merits with it homogeneous flow of Russian texts  . The experiments make use of a Coluputer-olicnted conl-binatorial dictionary of Russian compiled by a group of linguists underttleguidance of Ju  . D . Apresjan ( see Apresjan et al 1992) . It contains over '10 , 000 entries , mainly general scicn lific vcx zabulary and terms horn computer science and e\]tx : trical engineering  . 
The number of rules in lhcsystem is now about 100 . Total number of arcs in their transition graphs is about  2  , 000 . 
As a source of texts , we have taken several issues of the journal Computer Science Abstracts  ( Referativn yjz hurnal Vyehislitel'nyje Nauki , in Russian ) . Senten-ces are chosen at raod om . Sentences with formulas , occasional abbreviations , and non-Cyrillic words are excluded . Words absent in the dictionaries ( aboul 8% of all word occureuces in these texts ) are replaced by " dummy " words that have syntactic properties most probable for the given category  . At present , about 300 sentences have been processed . 
On the average , fraginr : nts produced by partial parsing include 3  -  4 words . It is not infrequent that they have 8  -  10 or store words , or present complete structures of sentences . On the other hand , a substantial parl of fragments are isolated homonyms  . 
For instance , subordinate conjunctions remain isolated in most eases because  , as a rule , their links wilh other words are not considered having high probability  . 
Frequently enough morphoh ~ gieal , lexical , and structural ambiguity results ill building 2  -  4 different fragments on tile same segnlell t , Sometimes their number is 8-12 and more , but such cases are relatively rare . The record is now equal to 72 fragments on a segment of 9 words . For such cases , packing techniques can be developed similar to those described by Tomita  ( 1987 )  . Another possible method is to employnt nnelical estimates of syntactic preference  ( set , for example , Tsejtin 1975; Kulagiua 1987 , 1990; Tsujii et al 1988) . 
On the avecage , then mubcrofestablished links is 70  -  80 % of the total n unlber of syntactic links in tile sentence  . These figm'es include links present both in the fragmenls built  ;   trl0 ill tile semantically COlr ? ctstruct m ' e of the sentence  ; " extra " links that arise due to ambiguity of fragments are not included  . 
Sometimes the fragments overlap , that is , their segments intersect . It happens approximately in one tenth of sentences  . As a rule , in such cases the correct resnlt is a combination of one of the overlapping fragments with its " truncated " competitor  . 
A fragment is called correct for a given sentence if it is a subtree of the semantically correct dependency trek of this sentence  ( or of one of such trees , in the rare cases of real semantic ambiguity like  ( 3 )  -  ( 4 ) ) . 
A h'agment is called feasible if it is a subtree of some dependency tree of some sentence of the given language  . The algmSth makes an error in the following lwo cases :  ( a ) if a non-feasible fragment is built ;   ( b ) if all fragments built on some segment are feasible but none is correct  .   ( Here we do not take into account semantically abnormal sentences or the possibility of overlapping  ; these situations would require more accurate definitions  . ) hiroost cases , all error means that some link of a fragment is established erroneously  , while all the others arc correct . Ttre experiments have shown that tile frequency of errors for the algorithm described is fairly snmll  . Fortile lasl 100 sentences , 12 errors were nm de ( 9 of the first type and 3 of the second )  , which is less than 1% of the total number of links es lablished in correct fragments  . A stable estimate is not yet obtained because at this stage of experiments tuning of tire rules is emllinued  , and the error fre-queocy decreases steadily . 
Errors of tire first type are caused by in accuracy of the lexicographic descriplious and imperfection of the rules  . In the presence of adequate lexicographie information  , these errors in principle are avoidable , as the rules may fully control internal properties of the fragments being created  . 
The second type of error is intrinsic to our approach  . The rules employed are local in two respects : they take no  ( or almost no ) account of the context outside the fragments being adjoined  , and they take no account of a very large part of syntax that concerns less probable links  . The first restrictiou means that fragments may appear which are grammatically feasible but do not agree with the context  . The second one implies that wc do not intend to obtain complete structures of sentences  , and therefore shall no \[ be able to reject a fragment for the reason that it is not engaged in any complete structure  . 
In general , it is not at all snrprising that a certain part of syntactic links can be reliably revealed by local mc chanisrns  . Any flow of texts in any language must contain chains of words the parse of which weakly depends on the context  ( " weakly " can be understood here in the statistical sense : the share of those occurences for which tile parse differs from the most probable one is small  )  . The possibility of examining fragments in any detail permits to avoid situation siu which the risk of creating a non-feasible fragment is too large  . 
A more surprising fact is that the number of reliab-lyestablished links is rather high ~ about  75  % . For the most part , these are links typical of the basic , most frequent syntactic onstructions such as " adjec-ACIESDI  , ;COLlN(l-92 , NANIV ; S , 2328 AOt-ll 1992933 l'ao C . OVCOLING-92 , NAhqES , AUG ,  2328 , 1992 tire+noun " , " preposition + noun " , " numeral+noun " , " adverb+verb " , and also a large group of links connecting predicate words with their arguments  . As regards the last type , preference for the predicate-ar-gument interpretation fword combinations was or lon noted in the literature  ( this preference is a particular case of the Most Restrictive Context Principle proposed by Hobhs and Bear  ( 1990 ) ) . 
Observations show that the number of established high-probability links noticeably depends on the type of text  . The general trend is as follows : the more " formal " the text is  , the more links are established . From this point of view , the language of scientific abstracts suits the given approach quite well  . 
As regards comparative frequency of high-prob -ability links in different languages  , it would be natural to expect these links to be more typical of languages with rich morphology than of analytical ones  ( such as English )  . Nevertheless , preliminary experiments have shown no substantial difference in this respect between English and Russian scientific texts  . 
We suppose that in case of high-probability links , the efficiency of local approach is additionally augmente due to factors " of the second order " concerning general mechanisms of text comprehension adgeneration  . This opinion is based on the following assumptions  . If someone reading a text sees that a high -probability link is possible between certain words and this link is compatible with the previous part of the text  , then he makes a conjecture that this link is correct  ; such conjecture is abandoned only if some counter -evidence is obtained  . When people genera texts , they take into account this property of the comprehension mechanism and tend not to disap -point expectations of the readers  . In other words , they are careful not to create high-probability links that would prove to be incorrect  . This can be regarded as an instance of cooperation i language performance  ( cf . the Cooperative Principle in pragmatics formulated by Grice  ( 1975 ) ) . 

Apresjan , Ju . D . , I . M . Boguslavskij , L . L . Iomdin , A . V . Lazurskij , N . V . Pertsov , V . Z . Sannikov , and L . L . Tsinman .  1989 . Lingvisticheskoje Obespe-chenije Sistemy ETAP-2 . Nauka , Moscow . (' The linguistics of the ETAP-2 system ' , in Russian ) A presjan , Ju . D . , I . M . Boguslavskij , L . L . Iomdin , A . V . Lazurskij , LG . Mitjushin , V . Z . Sannikov , and L . LTs in man . 1992 ( forthcoming ) . Lingvisticheskij Protsessor dlja Slozhnykh Informatsionnykh Sis-tern  . Nauka , Moscow .   ( ' A linguistic processor for complex information systems '  , in Russian ) Gladkij , A . V .  1985 . Sintaksicheskije Struktury Estestvennogo Yazykav Avtomatizi rovannykh Sis-te makh Obshchenija  . Nauka , Moscow .   ( ' Syntactic structures of natural language in automatic dialogue systems '  , in Russian ) Grice , H . P .  1975 . Logic and Conversation . In P . Cole , J . L . Morgan , editors . Syntax and Semantics , Vol . 
3, Academic Press , New York , pp . 41-58.
Hobbs, . LR . and J . Bear .  1990 . Two Principles of Parse Preference . In Proceedings of COLING90,
Vol . 3, Helsinki , pp . 162-167.
Kulagina , O . S .  1987 . ObAvtomatic heskoms in tak-sicheskom Analize Russkikh Tekstov  . Preprint No . 
205, Institute for Applied Mathematics , Moscow.
(' On automatic parsing of Russian texts ' , in Russian ) Kulagina , O . S .  1990 . O Sintaksicheskom Analizena Osnove Predpochtenij  . Preprint No . 3, Institute for Applied Mathematics , Moscow . (' On preference-based parsing ' , in Russian ) Lejkina , B . M . and G . S . Tsejtin .  1975 . Sintaksiches-kaja Model's Dopush chenijem Ogranichennoj Ne projectivnosti  . In Meztulunarodnyj Seminarpo Mashinnomu Perevodu  , Moscow , pp .  72 - 74 .   ( ' A syntactic model allowing limited nonprojectivity '  , in Russian ) Mel'~uk , I . A .  1974 . Opyt Teorii Lingvisticheskikh Modelej " Smysl , ,* Tekst " . Nauka , Moscow . 
(' Toward a theory of Meaning ~-- , Text linguistic models ' , in Russian ) Mel'tfuk , I . A .  1988 . Dependency Syntax : Theory and Practice . State University of New York Press , Albany . 
Mel'~uk , I . A . and N . V . Pertsov .  1987 . Surface Syntax of English . " A Formal Model within the Meaning---Text Framework  . John Benjamins , Amsterdam . 
Mitjushin , L . G .  1985 . Dlina Sintaksicheskikh Svjazeji Induklivnyje Struktury  . In Semiotikai Infor-matika , No . 26, Moscow , pp .  34 - 51 .   ( ' Length of syntactic links and the class of inductive structures '  , in Russian ) Mitjushin , LG .  1988 . O Vysokoverojatnykh Sintak-sicheskikh Svjazjakh . In Problemy Razrabotki Formal'noj Modeli Jazyka ( series " Vo prosy Kibernetiki " , No . 137), Moscow , pp .  145 - 174 . 
( ' On high-probability sntactic links ' , in Russian ) Tomita , M .  1987 . An Efficient Augmented-Context-Free Parsing Algorithm  . Computational Linguistics , Vol . 13, No . 1-2, pp .  31 - 46 . 
Tsejtin , G . S .  1975 . Metody Sintaksicheskogo Analiza , Ispol'zu jush chije Predpo chtenije Jazykovykh Konstruktsij : Modelii Eksperimenty  . 
In Mezhdunarodnyj Seminarpo Mashinnomu
Perevodu , Moscow , pp .  131 - 133 .   ( ' Parsing methods based on preference of the language constructions : models and experiments  '  , in Russian ) Tsujii , J . , Y . Muto , Y . Ikeda , and M . Nagao .  1988 . 
How to GetPreferred Readings in Natural Language Analysis  . In Proceedings of COLING-88,
Vol . 2, Budapest , pp . 683-687.
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328^OI~T1992934 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328, 1992
