THEASSIGNMENT OF GRAM MATICAL RELATIONS
INNATURALL ANGUAGE PROCESSING
Leonardo Lesmo , Vincenzo Lombardo
Dipartimento di Infom ~ atica - Universila ' di Tofino 
C . ~ Svizzera 185-10149 To rino-ITALY
email : esmo , vincenzo@di.unito.it
1. Introduction
One of the main goals of an interpreter is to map the syntactic descriptions found in the sentence into the correct roles that the elements  ( described by the nominals ) play in the situation at hand ( described by the verb )  . For instance , we must be able to state that in 1 ) The cat ate the mouse the cat is the " eater " and themouse is the " eatenthing "  . Of course , if we only talk about roles and situations we miss some significant generalizations  . In 2) The boyd rank the water , if we say that the boy is the " drinker " and the water is the " drunkthing "  , we disregard the evident similarity of the roles of " eater " and " drinker " in the two situations  . The notion of deep case arises as the common ground underlying a number of " apparently " different roles  . Upon this notion some frameworks , that stand at the core of semantic representation and natural language processing  , are built ( see\[Fillmore 68\] , \[Bruce 75\] and I Somers 871) . 
The hard task is to devise a mapping between the surface descriptions and these deep cases  . The complexity of some syntactic phenomena , like passivization , subject and object raising , long distance dependencies , has led many researchers to pose an intermediate level between the linear string of words and the case system  . The concept involved is that of " grammatical relation "  , such as " subject " , " direct object " , " indirect object " . It is claimed , for example , that " passivizatiou " is universally ( crosslinguistically ) explained if one says that the " object " of an active sentence becomes the " subject " in the passive form  , rather than by saying that the NP in the VP is moved to replace the NP in S  ( that is a direct mapping )  . 
In the latter case it is implici that the partict dar language under examination has a Subject-Verb-Object structure  ( SVO )  , as it usually happens in configurational languages such as 
English . In the example 3a ) Lohannovistogliamici di Piero ( Him & tveseen the friends of Piero ) 3b ) E'statovistodagliamicidi Piero ( ( He ) has been seen by l'i ero's friends ) the passive form does not obey tile law of direct mapping  . The example is , however , easily accounted fbr by the relational theories . The passivization rule induces only changes of function : the SUBJ becomes the BY-complement and the OBJ becomes the SUBJ  . 
The importance of grammatical relations , taken as primitives for a universal grammar , is stated by a number of formalisms often collected under the label of Relational Grammar  . The problem is to map the surface constituents into their correct roles  . With languages as Italian , which stands in the middle between configuration alnd freely ordered languages \ [ Stock  891 some flexibility is required to accomplish t is task  . One possibility is to adopt 11 neutral syntactic structure , open to several alternatives in the interpretation process  . 
The head & modifier approach seems to feature this kind of neutrality  , and has effectively been used for dealing with free word order languages  , like the Slavonic languages \[ Sgall et al . 861 and Finnish\[Jappinen et al86\] . 
The dependency formalism we have adopted is presented in \[ Lesmo  , Lombardo91\] . An example is reported in fig . l , and concerns the sentence : 4 ) Lara gazza ebela vora alguar daroba fupersu as a daun cliente a comprare unaenciclopedia  ( The girl who works at the ward robe was persuaded by a customer to buy an encyclopedia  )  . 
The daughter nodes that stand on the left of their head precede it in the linear order of the sentence  , while daughter nodes on the right follow it . The arcs that link the nodes in the dependency tree are of three types : arcs of structural and logical dependency  ( D&S arcs , represented by bold arrows in the figure ) , arcs of only structural dependency ( STR arcs , simple arrows in the figure ) , and arcs of only logical dependency ( DEP arcs , dashed arrows in the figure ) . D&S arcs link two words that stand in a " both structural nd logical " relation  . 
STR and DEP split these two functions of arc : an STR individuatcs a purely superficial AcrEsDE  COLING-92  . NAN'~S , 2328^o~r 1992 1090 PROC . or : COLING-92, NANTF . S . AUG . 2328, 1992k A
PEFISUADERE at
RAG~2 ~ A
LAVORARE ~, CLIENTECOMPRb ~ E\,ook . / ~ \ . et~', . ' OEld % L ~ . ," %% . 
CI-EAENCICLOPEDIA
GtJ,N:I\[I~V ~ UNA


Fig . 1-An example of dependency tree . Because of space constraints , the figure already includes the grammatical relations that will be described below  . The bold labels ( e . g . 
agt , pat ) refer to deep cases . The labels immediately below them refer to the initial stratum of grammatical relations  . The lowest labels are the last stratum ( surface relations )  . SUB-Goal stands for a GOAL relation expressed via a subordinate sentence  . 
Cho-1 is a chomeur ( see text ) , expressed in Itatian via a BY ( DA ) complement . 
attachment , DEP represents a deep dependency between two words that are structurally independent  . DEP arcs enable us to represent long distance dependencies  , the sharing of dependent odes ( i . e . multiple heads , see fig .  1 ) and to represent coordinative and comparative constructions without violating the adjacency principle\[Hudson  84\]  , that applies only to STR and D&S arcs l . An arc involving dependency ( of DEP or D&S type ) is labelled with the grammatical relation that exists between the two nodes that it links  ( the arrangement in strata is explained below )  . 
The goal of this paper is to show that the formalism of Relational Grammar can be integrated in a useful way in a gcneral NL interpreter  , in particular if the surface stntctures are represented via the dependency formalism  . 
The paper examines the problems associated with the use of RG in an interpretive  ( as opposed to generative ) framework , where the phase of surface relation hypothesization is critical  . The partial configurationality of Italian can be exploited as heuristic information aiding the interpreter in selecting the preferable initial  1 The adjacency principle intuitively states that a word B  , that stands between the words A and C in the sentence  , results in the santoposition if we project Ihe related node  . ~ in the dependency tree onto a line . 
hypothesis . Ontile contrary , the RG rules governing then lappiug between strataairuat confirming the hypotheses : they are applied on the basis of the lexical and morphological infonnatioo associated with tile verb  , where the lexicon providest be first stratum and possible constraints on ndeap plicability  . 
2 . The assignment of grammatical relations We start this section by providing a short overview of the main ideas of RG  . Such ideas are shared by many for nlalisms , bttt we . will mostly refer to the work described in \[ Perlnlutter  83\] and \[ l ) erhuutter , Rosen 841 , where it can be tound a comparison with other
RG fonnalisms.
Grammatical relations are arranged in a hierarchy and are usually referred to by numbers :  1  , which is the highest , corresponds to SUBJECT , 2 to DIRECTOBJEC ~ I' , 3 to INDIRECTOBJECT . The key principle of RG is the promotion of relations to higher levels in the hierarchy  . The passive Cml be described as a promotion of 2 to 1   ( i . e . DIR-OBJ to SUBJ) , leaving the previous 1 element " unemployed " . 
The relation " uu employed " , which is technically indicated by the corresponding French word AcrEs DE  COLING-92  , NANTES . 2328 AO(n "1992 l091I)~OC . OFCOLING-92, NAN'rES , AUG .  23 28 .  1992  ( a )   ( b ) give Mary the book John give Mary the book John Fig  . 2 - The Relational Networks associated with the sentences " John was given the book by Mary "  ( a ) and " The book was given to John by Mary " ( b )  . 
chomeur , is assigned to an element that cannot be involved in any other promotion  . Consider 5a ) Mary gave the book to John , where Mary is the 1-element , he book is the 2-element and John is the 3-element   . If we apply the rule for passivization described above  , the book must be promoted to the 1 relation , Mary becomes a chomeur , while John is still the 3 element . The chomeur-1 element , i . e . achomeur elemen that results from the " unemploying " of al-element  , assumes the surface form of a by-complement in English  , thus yielding 5b ) The book was given to John by
Mary where Mary cannot be involved in any other promotion  , because of its chomeur condition . A similar rule applies to double-accusative constructions  , as shown in fig . 2a . 
At the same level of promotional rules we can posit the lexical rules  , that account for the determination of grammatical relations within subordinate untensed sentences  , as in 4) . Such information is stored within the lexical entry of the verb that governs the subordinate clause  . 
For example , to promise forces the SUBJ of the subordinate clause to be the SUBJ element of the governing clause  , as we can see in 6 ) Mary promised John to write himaletter , where the SUBJ of write is Mary , the same of promise . On the contrary , to persuade forces the SUBJ of the subordinate to be the OBJ element of the governing clause  , as in 4) . 
It must be noted that the lexical rules are related to the assignment of relations in the initial stratum  , even if they are subsequently changed by promotional rules  . For example , in 7 ) The girl was persuaded by a customer to buy an encyclopedia  , the girl is the element which is still shared by the two clauses  , even if it is the SUBJ now . 
The semantic interpretation process takes advantage of the functional analysis  , i . e . the analysis in terms of grammatical functions : relational structures are easily mapped onto logical representations  , because of the resemblance between a Relational Network and a Predicate-Argument sructure : the initial stratum states which are the grammatical relations  ( actually the elements at the sentence level ) that act as arguments of the predicate identified by P  . 
From a computational point of view , syntactic and semantic lues must be taken into account  , in order to map the grammatical relations onto the surface descriptions  . The mapping is carried out incrementally , i . e . as soon as the nominal head of the complement is parsed : it is highly language-dependent  , and considers features like inflectionality , configurationality and deep underlying structures  . The mapping must also take into account he changes on the surface form that are induced by the rules on grammatical relations  , discussed informally above 2 . 
Unfortunately the mapping raises some difficulties  . The bias of the rules at the RG level is of a generative kind  . Rules start from the initial stratum , the one which is closer to the deep cases ( arguments of the predicate )  , to produce the final stratum of the surface arrangement  ; on the contrary , in an interpreter of language , the task is to trace what rules have been actually applied  ( and in what order ) to the initial stratum ( and the subsequent strata ) in order to achieve the surface realization of the grammatical relations  . Useful heuristics are devised to identify the surface clues that evidence tile application of a particular nile  . For example , a passivization is accompanied by a passive form of the verb  . 
Starting from the surface descriptions , the 2Of course , the application of such rules involves also changes in focus  . Two expressions that result to be derivable from each other  ( 3a and 3b )  . according to phenomena that are explained in terms of grammatical relations  , are therefore not strictly equivalent , even if both of them involve the same roles to be played by the individuals in the ground sentence  ( or , better , in the sentence that has been claimed to be ground  )  . 
A cids DECOLING-92, NANTES . 2328 AO~r19921092 PRec . OFCOLING-92 . N^r,n'I ~ S . Auo .  2328 ,   1992 interpreter is not always able to uniquely determine the assignment of grammatical relations on the basis of syntactic features  . 
Consider 8a ) Giovanniil vino Io habevuto ( John the wine\[it\]has drunk ) 8b ) IIvino Giovanni Iohabevuto ( The wine John \[ it \] has drunk ) Only semantics allows ahearer to realize that in both cases the " drinker " is John and not the wine  . Hence a flexible interaction between syntactic and semantic information  ( selectioual restrictions ) must be devised . 
Since in our system the analysis is incremental , in the sense that parsing and interpretation are synchronous processes  , as soon as the dependency tree is extended with a head of a substructure the semantic interpreter is triggered to interpreti : in the case of verbs  , all the complements that precede the verb are interpreted when the verb is found  , while each complement that follows the verb is interpreted as soon as it is attached to it  . 
The association of the grammatical relations with the descriptions in the sentence is accomplished by the rules at the relational level  ( GR rules )  , which are divided into three groups : the first of them deals with the initial proposal of relations based on syntactic features  ( Proposal Rules-PR )  , the second concerns the movement across the strata  ( Stratal Rules ~ SR )  , and the third , of a lexical kind ( then Lexical Rules-LR ) , accounts for the sharing of relations in unte used subordinate clauses  , as in 4 . The verbal lexical entry contains , among other information , its initial stratum of grammatical relations . Once the verb has been found , the GR rules are triggered iu order to find out the roles that are played by the elements that precede the verb in the input sentence  ( incremental interpretation )  . It is the actual input that determines which of the three groups must be applied  . For example , if we have a single active sentence ( without subordinate embedded clauses or passive forms  )  , the Proposal Rules are triggered . SR and LR rules are activated only in presence of special features : a passive form  ( was eaten )  , for instance , activates the Passivization rule ( belonging to SR )  , if we have the pair < SUBJ , OBJ > in the current stratum , while lexical rules are associated with verbs that govern subordinate clauses  ( e . g . to persuade ) . The result of the application of one or more rules is the final stratum  , against which the assignment of relations guessed by the PR group is nmtched  . 
In the PR , the first feature that is taken into account is the syntactic form of the participants  . 
SUBJ and DIR-OBJ require that the corresponding nominals are not preceded by a preposition  , and prououns be inflected appropriately . For example , in 3a the pronoun I0 features an accusative case , thus a DIR-OBJ . 
If two nominal descriptions are not inflected and , hence , they cannot be associated with a particular elation via this marking  , as in 9 ) 11 gattomangio ' iitopo ( The cat ate then ~ ) use )  , the position of the nominals can be useful , since , in a partially configuratioual language such as Italian  , grammatical relations are usually connected with the canonical positions of the SVO order : with a transitive verb  , the SUBJ precedes the verb and OBJ follows it ; witlliutransitive verbs , the position of the nominal without a preposition does not affect the grammatical relation assigned to  , since it will be surely the SUBJ wherever it is . If the order too does not give an unambiguous assignment of grammatical relations  , the last resources are the number agreement for the SUBJ relation and the semantic check  . In situation such as 10 ) Leragazze Giorgiole haviste ( The girls Giorgio\[them\]has seen ) even if the nominal descriptions staud on the same side of a transitive verb  , the latter agrees only with Giorgio in number . On the contrary , only semantics can solve a situation as 8 ; moreover , the semantic heck can also reject an assignment made on the basis of the syntactic features that we have described  . Consider , for example , the sentence 11 ) Unsnssocalcio'ilvitello ( A rock kicked the calf ) Even if the order rules assign ans as so the SUBJ relation and ilvitello the OBJ  , such an assignment is rejected on the semantic ground  . 
Notwithstanding a system that works correctly cannot be based only on semantics  , since a sentence like il sounds really strange to a native speaker  , if we are not in a particular focussing situation . 
3. An example
In figure 1 , we can find the result of the interpretation f sentence  4  . When the analysis arrives at lavor a , in the relative sentence , its initial stratum < SUBJ > is retrieved from the lexicon  . Since eh e ( who ) is a nominal without a prepositional marker , it ( or better the element refel Ted to ) is the SUBJ of lavor a , as stated by the Proposal Rules . Lavora has also an adjunct , alguardaroba ( at the ward robe ) , a non-teml relation of type LOC . The structure for the nominal description la ragazzache lavora alguar daroba has already been built  , ACTESDECOLING-92 , NAr CrES . 2328 Aot ~ q1992l093 PROC . Ot:COLING-92 . NAN'IF . S . At ?; .   23k28   1992 when the input word is the verb persuader e . 
Its lexieal entry provides the parser with an initial stratum of grammatical relations that consists of : a SUBJ  , an OBJ and a subordinate sential Goal ( SUB-Goal )  3 , i . e . a persuader , a persuadee and the persuasion . This basic assignment can be related to the deep cases of AGT  , PAT and GOAL respectively . Moreover , a lexical rule is contained in the lexical entry : The SUBJ of the subordinate untensed clause governed by persuadere is the OBJ element of the governing clau  . ~e . 
Since the verb is in the passive form and the current stratum features a SUBJ and an OBJ relations  , the Passivization rule in the SR group is tr iggered  , in order to find the actual arrangement of relations in the input sentence  . 
The new stratum is < SUBJ , Cho-I , SUB-
Goal > , against which the proposals made by the PR group are matched  . Since the nominal description already found is not inflected and is not marked by a preposition  , the positional rules suggest that , since it precedes the verb and agrees with it , a possible assignment of relation is SUBJ . The semantic check , which is activated on t be basic relation ( i . e . OBJ ) validate such an assignment , because a girl that works at the ward robe may happen to be persuaded  . The analysis proceeds to the next nominal description  , with the set of relations ( Cho-1 , SUB-Goal ) not assigned yet . Dauneliente ( by a customer ) has exactly the form of a Cho-1 in Italian . The Proposal Rules , whose hypothesis i confirmed by the semantic check  , are sufficient odeal with this situation . 
When we find the verb comprare ( buy ) , the PR group assigns to such a description the SUB-Goal relation and consequently the lexical rule associated with persuade reassigns the SUBJ relation of the initial stratum of comprare to la ragazzathe  . . . . The initial stratum of comprare features also an OBJ relation  , that will be assigned to eneiclopedia , when it is found . 
The completeness of the set of found grammatical relations is checked when the node corresponding to the verb is " closed "  , i . e . when it cannot have further modifiers . 
4. Conclusions
The paper illustrates how RG can be used to map in a principled way surface dependency relations into thematic roles  . 
3'/' he Goal relation , such as Instrument or Location , is a non-term relation and participates only to special kinds of promotional rules  ( see\[Perl mutter 83\] for details )  . 
The main feature of the approach is the strict cooperation among different knowledge sources  ( lexicon , RG rules and semantics ) in carrying out the task : this cooperation is made necessary by the partial configurationality of Italian  , where the ordering of constituents can only be considered as the basis for plausible suggestions  , but not as the source of stricts constraints . The adoption of an unmarked input ( an unlabelle dependency tree ) makes available a flexible starting point that leaves the RG module the task of making the required inferences  . 
The ideas expressed herein are implemented in the GULL system  ( see\[Lesmo , To rasso 83 , 85 al for the syntactic part \[ Di Eugenio , Lesmo871 for the basic ideas about semantics ) : both levels of grammars are represented via condition-action rules  . The system is implemented in Common Lisp and runs on 
SUN workstations.
References\[Bruce 75\] Bruce B . , Case Systems for Natural Language , Artificial Intelligence 6 ,  1975 , pp ,  327-360 . 
IDi Eugenio , Lesmo87\] B . Di Eugenio , L . Lesmo , Representation ad Interpretation fDeterminers in Natural Language  , Proc . 10th1JCAI , Milano , Italy , 1987, pp . 648-654 . 
I Fillmore 68\] Fillmore C . , The case for case , in " Universal in Linguistic Theory " , ( Bach and Harmseds . ), Holt , Rinehart and Winston , 1968 . 
\[l-tuds on 84\] Huds on R ., Word Grammar , Basil
Blackwell , Oxford , 1984.
\[ Jappinen et al 861 Jappinen H . , Lehtola A . , Valkonen K . , Functional Structures for parsing dependency constraints  , Proc . COLlNG86, Bonn , Germany , 1986, pp . 461-463 . 
\[Lesmo , Torasso83\] Lesmo L . , Torasso P . , A Flexible Natural Language Parser based on a two-level Representation fSyntax  , Proceedings of the 1st Con-li~rence ACL Europe , Pi  ~ , Italy ,  1983 , pp . 114-121 . 
\[Lesmo , Torasso85a \] Lesmo L . , Torasso P . , Analysis of Conjunctions ina Rule-Based Parser , Proceedings ACL 85 , Chicago , USA ,  1985 , pp . 180-187 . 
\[Lesmo , Lombardo91\]Lesmo L . , Lombardo V . , A Dependency Syntax for the Surface Structure of Sentences  , Pro , : . of WOCFAI , Paris , July 1991 . 
\ [ Perl mutter 83\] Perl mutter D . M . ( ed . ), Studies in Rel-ational Grammar 1, Univ . of Chicago Press , 1983 . 
\ [ Perlmuner , Rosen84\]PerlmutterD . M . , Rosen C . G . , ( eds . ), Studies in Relational Grammar2, The Univ . 
of Chicago Press , 1984.
\[ Sgall et al86\]Sg all P . , Haijcova E . , Panevova J . ,  7"he Meaning of the Sentence in its Semantic and Pragmatic Aspects  , D . Reidel Publ . Co . , 1986 . 
\[Shiners87\] Somers H . L . , Valency and Case in Comp-utational Linguistics , Edinburgh Univ . Press , 1987 . 
\[Stock89\]StockO . , Parsing with Flexibility , Dynamic Strategies , and Idioms in Mind , Computational
Linguistics 15, 1989, pp.l-18.
ACl'l~ . SDECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 Aot ; r19921094 PRoc . OFCOL1NG-92, NANTES , A UcI .  2328, 1992
