Accenting and Deaccenting :
a Declarative Approach
Arthur Dirksen
Institute for Perception lesearch/IPO
1' . O . Box 513,5600 MBE ind hoven , The Netherlands
E-m~il:dirksenQheiipo5. bitnet
1 Introduction
One of the problems that must be addressed by a text-to-speech system is the derivation of pitch accent  , marking the distinction between " given " and " new " information in an utterance  . This paper discusses a language-independent approach to this problem  , which is based on focus-accent theory ( e . g . Ladd 1978 , Gussenhoven 1984 , t3aartt987) , and implemented in my program PRos-a . This program has been developed as part of the
ESPRIT-project POLY GLOT , and provides an integrated environment for modelling the syntax-to-prosody interface of a multilingual text-to-speech system  . 
The program operates in the following manner . First , the input text is parsed using a variation of contextfree phrase-structure rules  , attgmented with information about " argument " structure of phrases  . Next , the syntactic representation is mapped onto a metrical tree  . The metrical tree is then used to derive locations for pitch accents  , as well as phonological and intonational phrase boundaries  . 
in this approach , differences between lawguages are modelled entirely by the syntactic rules  . Also , the system is strictly declaratiw : , in the sense that once a piece of information is added by a rule  , it is never removed . In this respect , our approach differs radically from systems which make use of derivational rules  ( e . g . Quend & Kager 1992) . Such systems tend to become extremely complex , hard to verify and almost impossible to maintain or extend  ( Quenb & Dirksen 1990 , Dirksen & Quen 6 in press ) . By contrast , in PROS-3 there is a conspicuous relation between theory and implementation  , attd the program can be extended in a number of ways  ) Below ,   1 will focus on two major rules from focus-accent theory : Default Accent and l/  . hythn~icDe accenting . The tirst rule is used to model deaccenting of " given " information  , e . g . the pronouns it , her and cs in the English , l ) ut ch and German sentences of (1) , (2) and (3) , respectively . 
(1 ) a I should have read a BOOKb I should have READ it  ( 2 ) aikhadeen BOEK moeten 1 . ezen bikh adhermoeten LEZEN ( 3 ) aich hattee in BUCII lesen sollen bich hattees LESEN sollen The second rule is used to provide rtlythmi-cal alternations between accented and deae-cented material in certain well-defined contexts  , as is illustrated by the sentences of (4) . 
(4  ) ashe is a NICEGIRL 1One extension we ` are currently considering is the ` addition of some kind of discourse model  ( ` along the lines of Hirschberg 1990 ) to more adequately model the " given new " distinction  . Also , some prelim in , ary work tt , as been done on phonological p , arsing ( e . g . 
Coleman 1990 , 1991; see , also his paper in this volume ) to derive word stress ` and temporal structure of words  . 
ACTESDECOLING-92, NA1 VH~S . 2328 AOUr 1992865I'ROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AU6 . 23-28 ,   1992 bshe is REALLYNICE cshe is a REALLY nice GIRL d she is REALLY a NICEGIRL This paper is organized as follows  . Section 2 briefly introduces focus-accent theory and how it may be implemented  . Next , sections 3 and 4 discuss Default Accent and Rhythmic Deaccenting , respectively . In section 5, we make some concluding remarks . 
2 From Focus to Accent
In focus-accent heory , metrical trees are used to represent relative prominence of nodes with respect opit ch accent  . Whether a given node is accented or not is accounted for in terms of the focus/non-focus distinction  . 
For example , a pitch accent on book in the phrase read a book may be accounted for by assuming the metrical structure  ( 5 )  . 
(s)+F/\ws/\wsread a book
In (5) , the entire phrase is marked+F ( ocus ) , iodicating that it is to be interpreted as a " new " or otherwise important addition to the discourse  . The relation between the focus-marker and a pitch accent on book is mediated by the labels w  ( eak ) and s ( trong )  , and formally accounted for by the following recursiv crule:  2 
Accent Rule
For each node X , X is accented if a . X is marked+F , or b . X is strong , and the node immediately dominating X is accented  . 
2 By convention , only weak or root nodes are marked+F , thus indicating the upper bound of what is sometimes called the " focusset "  . 
Baart ( 1987 ) assumes that the metrical a-beling of a structure is determined by syn-tactic/thematic properties of phrases such as specification and complementation  . More generally , we assume that " arguments " which are not de accented are strong  . For example , in ( i ) the NP a book is an argument of the verb read . Also , a determiner takes a noun as an argument . In a PROS-3 grammar , one must make this explicit by writing rules such as those in  ( 6 )  . 
(6 ) aVP -> ( V/NP )   ( English ) bVP -> ( NP\V )   ( Dutch/German ) cNP -> ( Det/N ) in such rules ,   ( X/Y ) or ( Y\X ) serves to indicate that Y is an argument of X . If we ignored eacccenting , argument structure directly determines the geometrical properties of the metrical tree  , and we may read ( X/Y ) or ( Y\X ) as weak-stron . q or strong-weak , respectively . 3 Also , a PROS-3 grammar must indicate which nodes are eligible for focus  ( normally , all major phrasal categories ) . If a node is eligible for focus , it must either be accented or deaccented . Words which are typically deac-cented are specified as such in a lexicon  . 
In our implementation , a binary-branching metrical tree is used as the central data structure  , and the relation between focus and accent is defined by using sharing variables  , which may be cmneinstantiated to a value " true "   ( := accented ) or " false " ( =& accented )   , or remain unspecified (= not accented ) . The following definitions are used to implement accenting :  4 accented ( X )  :-
X : accent === true.
3Even though metrical t rees are strictly binary -branching  , nnflti-branehing are accommodated by allowing rules such as S ~  ( NP/ ( Infl/VP ) ) . 
4The notation has been borrowed from Gazdar & Mellish  1989  ; '=--=' is the unification operator , and Node : Attr indicates a path in a graph ( or a fieldiua record )  . We assume negation by failure as in standard
Prolog implementations.
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328^ol~r 1992866 PRec . oF COLING-92 . NANTES , AUG . 2328, 1992 strong(X , Y ): -"
X : accent === Y : accent.
de accented(X ) i-not accented(X).
focus(X ):- accented(X ); de accented(X).
The statement accented ( X ) may be used to assign accent to a node , or to verify that the node is acccented . The state-rnent strong ( X , Y ) , which reads " the strong node of X is Y " implements condition b of the AccentRule above by unifying the values for accent of X and Y  . The statement deaccented ( X ) succeeds if tile value for accent of X is instant iated to " false "  , and fails otherwise , so it may be used as a test . Simi . 
larly , the statement not deaccented ( X ) may be used to test whether it might be possible to assign accent to X  , but will not instantiate any values . Finally , the statement : focus ( X ) is used to assign accent o those nodes marked by the grammar writer as " eligible for focus "  , unless they have been deacccented . 
3 Default Accent
Consider again the sentences in (1) , (2) and (3) , and observe that when the NP the book is replaced by the pronoun it  , pitch accent appears to " shift " from the NP to the most deeply embedded verb  , read , of which it is an argument . Any differences between English , Dutch and German seem to be strictly a matter of syntax  . Assuming appropriate phrase-structureules , such as (6) a and b , this is reflected in the corresponding metrical tree  . The metrical structure of the verb phrase of (1) a , is a strictly right-branching structure which is uniformly labeled as weak-strong  . The metrical trees corresponding to the verb phrases of  ( 2 ) a and ( 3 ) a , shown in (7) and (8) , a ~ eles ~ uniform . 
(7) /\ sw
I\I\
I4Sl ~ S . . . conboek moeten lezen (8)/\ s
I\I\
WSSW . . . ein Buchlesen sollen
In order to account for the b-sentences of (1) , (2) and (3) , in which a ( deaccented ) pronoun replaces NP , it seems that all that is needed is a reversal of the weak-strong labeling of the VP-node  . To this end , Baart (1987) assumes the following rule:
DEFAULTACCENT aI \=> I\
WSSW
ABABb/\=>/\
SWWS
BABA
Condition : Bis de accented
In PROS-3 , this rule is implemented as a filter , called STP , wt fich takes as input a syntactic structure assigned by the parser  , and produces as output a metrical tree . A typical invocation might be:
VP->(V/NP ) => Prosody , focus(VP).
Using the definitions of section 2 , STP is defined by the following set of rules : ~ ~' l ' a kenote that we are rather frivolous in using the slash-notation to encode both argument structure and metrical structure  , though , of course , the two are distinct . That is , the metrical tree does not replace argument structure  , but is merely its realization in the domain of sentence prosody  . 
AcrEsDECOLING-92 , NAlVl'l!s , 2328 AO\[~-r 1992867 PRec . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
STPz->(x/Y ) => z->(x\Y):-de accented(Y) , strong ( Z , X ) . 
bZ->(X/Y ) => Z->(X/Y ) :- not deaccen % ed(Y) , strong ( Z , Y ) . 
cZ->(Y\X ) => Z->(Y/X ):-de accented(Y) , strong ( Z , X ) . 
Z->(Y\X ) => Z->(YkX):-not de accented(Y) , strong ( Z , Y ) . 
Cases a and c implement Default Accent , whereas b and d represent the " normal " case . 
4 Rhythmic Deaccenting
Rhythmic factors provide a second source of deaccenting phenomena  . They apply to structures such as (9) , representing (4) c from section 1 , and (10) , representing the Dutch sentence " erisop VEEL plaatsen REGEN voor speld "  ( there is in MANY places RAIN predicted )  , meaning : it has been predicted that it will rain in many places  . 
(9 ) /\ ws/\wsreally nice girl ( 10 ) /\ ws/\ws/\wsopreel plaats enregen Although the pitch accent patterns implied by these structures are wellformed  , there is a strong preference for deace enting nice in  ( 9 ) and plaatsen in ( 10 )  . In order to account for these phenomena , we assume the following optional rule ( adapted from Baart 1987 ) :
RHYTHMRULE/\=>I\wsws
I\I\(ws)(ws)/\/1
WSSW
ABC hBC
In this rule , brackets indicate a substructure which may repeated zero or more times  . 
A further equirement is that nodes A , B and
C are not deaccented.
The Rhythm Rule differs from Default Accent in that it is not a local rule : its structural change  , tile weak-strong reversal of A and B , is dependent ell the presence of a node C whose weak sister-node dominates A and B in a rather complex manner  . One way to implement such context-sensitive rules in a declarative framework  , is to use feature percolation . Space does not permit us to work out the implementation in full detail  ( there are also some additional requirements obe met  )  , but the following should give the reader some idea  . 
First , we add a new case to the STP-filter above , implementing the structural change of the Rhythm Rule  , and marking the resulting structure with a feature annotation idicating that the Rhythm Rulehas " applied ": 
Z->(X/Y ) => Z->(X\Y ) :- not deaccented(X) , not deacccented ( Y ) , strong ( Z , X ) , 
Z : rhytlm_rule === true.
Next , we make sure that this feature is percolated upwards in weak-strong configurations  , and blocked wherever necessary in order to filter out overgeneration  . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt3T 1992868 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 5 Conclusion As emphasized above ,   PROS-3 is a language-independent system for deriving sentence prosody in a text-to-speech system  . This is true , of course , only to the extent hat focus-accent heory and its major rules are universals of linguistic theory  . Clearly , the proof of the pudding is in the eating . At IPO , PROS-3 is currently being evaluated for I ) ut ch , using a grammar of about 125 rules ai , da lexicon of some 80 , 0 00 wordforms derived from the CELEX lexical database  . Also , we are working on grammars and lexicons of comparable size and scope for English and German  , and PROS-3 is used in the POLYGLOT-project for several F , uropean languages . 
Although preliminary results are encouraging , there are also problems which need mention . First , tim focus/non-focus distinction is modelled by rather crude heuristics  ( i . e . taking each major phrase as a candidate for focus  , deae eenting of pronouns etc . 
by lexical specification ) . It would be nice if something more flexible and " discourse-aware " could be built in  . Second , we have deliberately kept the PROS-3 grammar formalism rather simple ( Mlowing only atomic syntactic categories )  , so we could guarantee fairly efficient processing  , t lowever , simple contextfree rules do not disambiguate very well  . Third , simple rules cannot fully take into account verb subcategorization  . As a result , it is sometimes impossible to make the distinction between arguments and non-arguments  , which is crucial to the metrical rules . So , what we need to do , is find an optimal compromise between sophistication of syntactic analysis and efficiency of processing  . We think that PROS-3 is the right tool to do this . 
6 Bibliography
Baart , J . L . G .  (1987) , Focus , syntax and accent placement , Diss . University of Leiden . 
Coleman , J . S .  (1990) , Unification Phonology : another look at " synthesis-by-rule "  . COL-
ING90, Vol . 3, 79-84. ACL.
(1991) , Prosodic structure , parameter-setting and ID/LP grammar . S . Bird ( ed . ), Declarative Perspectives on Phonology . Edimburgh Working Papers in Cognitive Science,
Vol . 7, 65-78.
Dirksen , A . & H . Quen ~( in press ) , Prosodic analysis : the next generation . V . J . van Heuven & L . Pols ( eds . ) , Analysis and synthesis of speech : strategic research towards high-quality text-to-speech generation  . Mouton de
Gruyter , Berlin.
Gazdar , G . & C . Mellish (1989) , Natural language processing in prolog : an introduction to computational linguistics  . Addison-Wesley,

Gussenhoven , C .  (1984) , On the grammar and semantzcs of sentence accents . For is Pnbl . , 1) or drecht . 
Hirschberg , J .  (1990) , Accent and discourse context : assigning pitch accent in synthetic speech  , in Proceedings of the IEEE ,  73-11 ,  1589-1601 . 
Ladd , D . R . (1978), The structure of intonational meaning . Indiana University press,

Quen ~, H . & A . Dirksen (1990) , A comparison of natural , theoretical and automatically derived accentuations of Dutch texts  . G . Bailly C . Benoit ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the ESCA workshop on speech synthesis  , Autrans ,  137-140 . 
Quend , H . & R . Kager (1992) , The derivation of prosody for text-to-speech from prosodic sentence structure  . Computer , speech and language ,  6 , 77-98 ACRES DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOVr 1992869 PROC . OFCOLING-92, N_wrEs , Auo .  2328, 1992
