GENERATING COHERENT ARGUMENT ATIVE PARAGRAPHS
Michael Elhadad
Department of Computer Science
450 Computer Science Building
Colmnbia University
New York , N.Y . 10027
ELHADAD@CS . COLUMBIA . EDU

We address the problem of generating a coherent paragraph presenting arguments for a conclusion in a text generation system  . Existing text planning techniques are not appropriate lorth is task for two main reasons : they do not explain how arguments can be linked together in a linear presentation rder and they do not explain how the rhetorical function of a proposition affects its wording  . 
We present a mechanism to generate argumentative paragraphs where argumentative relations constrainot only the rhetorical structure of the paragraph  , but also the surface form of each proposition . In our approach , a text planne relies on a set of specific argumentative relations to extract information from the knowledge base  , to map it to scalar and context dependent evaluations and to organize it into chains of arguments  . The same information used for planning is also used by the surface realization component to perform lexical choice at all the levels of the clause  ( connectives , main verb , adverbial adjuncts , adjectives and determiners ) . The mechanism is implemented in the ADVISOR I1 system using ~ F , an extended functional unification formalism . 
INTRODUCTION : MOTIVATION
Ceaa in types of questions require in response a statement of a conclusion and arguments o support i  . In our domain , a question-answeting system offering advice to students selecting classes to plan their schedule  ( McKeown ,  1988) , should-questions , e . g . , should I take AI ?, fall into this class . The example shown in Figure I , extracted from a corpus of naturally occurring advising sessions that we have collected  , illustrates this point . 
The task we consider is that of generating similar argumentative paragraphs presenting an evaluation of a course and its supporting arguments  . To produce such paragraphs , a generation system must determine which argument so include in the paragraph  , owto organize them in a structured Imm graph , and how to phrase ach piece of the argument . For example in Figure 1 , the advisor selects the argument chain that AI provides preparation for all followup courses in the field  , that the more the student is interested in AI the more he should take these follow up courses and therefore  , the more reason he has to take AI . This sequence of argaments forms the structure of the answer  . 
In terms of wording , note that the conclusion that is
QS hould I take AI this semester ?
A ~ you want to take courses like
Natural Language Processing or
Expert S~stems or Vision next semester , it's very advisab ~ you take AI now because that ' sgoing to ~ you alo  ;  . 
So ~ you are interested in the whole field at all , 
I would advise you strong ~ to take AI now.
Figure 1: An argumentative paragraph supported affects the choice of expressions at many levels  . We have marked in italics words that are selected in part because of the argumentative function of the proposition i which they appear  . For example , saying it is very advisable as opposed to it is OK  , deciding to add strongly and selecting a lot instead of somewhat are all decisions motivated by the advisor's goal of convincing the student to take AI  . 
In previous work in text generation , rhetorical schemas ( McKeown ,  1985 ) and RST ( rhetorical struc-lure theory )   ( Mann & Thompson ,  1987 ) have been proposed as operational techniques to produce coherent paragraphs  . We have found , however , that these techniques , in their current forms , are not appropriate oad-dress the task of generating argumentative paragraphs for two main reasons : first  , RST relations are too genetic to perform argument selection and construct coherent argument chains  ; second , rhetorical relations in both theories do not influence directly linguistic realization and therefore cannot determine wording decisions of the type illustrated in Figure  1  . 
We present in this paper a mechanism for planning and realizing argumentative t  , aragraphs which addresses these two shortcomings . In our approach , specific argument a tiverlations guide both content planning and iexieal choice within the clause  . Content planning is performed using two levels of argumentative relations-evaluation functions and top oi  ( Anscombre & Ducrot ,  1983 ) to derive content from the underlying knowledge base and organize it into coherent argumentative chains  . 
Surface realization takes advantage of the output of the paragraph stracturer to perform lexical choice at all levels of the clause  . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 hol\]'r 1992638 PRoc . OFCOLING-92, NAm'ES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 In the rest of the paper , we first review previous work in paragraph planning  , explaining why existing techaiques cannot be used directly in the case of argumentative paragraphs  . We then present our approach , describing file content planner and the surface realization component  . 
PREVIOUSWORK : SCHEMAS ANDRSF
In previous work in text generation , two methods have emerged to generate coherent paragraph-long texts : rhetorical schemas and RST  ( for Rhetorical Structure

Schemas ( McKeown ,  1985 ) encode conventional patterns of text Stl UCture . A schema is associated with a communicative goal and describes how this goal is conventionally satisfied  . For example , the constituency schema is used to describe the parts of an object  , and the processchema ( Paris , 1987) is nsed to describe a complex process . A schema describes a sequence of rhetorical predicates where each predicate is either a primitive communicative function  , which can be full'died by a single proposition , or rectursively another schema . 
For example the primitive predicate attributive attributes a property to an object  . Each predicate is assigned a semantics in terms of a query to a knowledge base  , therefore when the schema is traversed , prepositions are retrieved from the knowledge base as predicates are instantiated  . The output of a schema traversal is therefore a sequence of propositions labeled by the name of the rhetorical predicate they instantiate  . 
While schemas label each proposition as the instantiation of a predicate  , RST attempts to label the relation between propositions  . RST ( Mann & Thompson ,  1987 ) wast-u's t introduced as a descriptive theory aiming a tenmnerating possible rhetod cal relations between discourse segments  . RST relations include elaboration , anti-thesis , evidence and solutionhood . A relation connects two text spans , which can be either single propositions or recursively embedded rhetorical relations  . One urgument of the relation is marked as its " nucleus ' " while the others are the " satellites " and are all optional  . 
RST was made operationals a technique for planning the structure of paragraphs in  ( Hovy , 1988a ) and ( Moore & Paris ,  1989) . The idea is to attach a com-manicative intent with each RST relation and to view the combining of relations into paragraphs as a planning process  , decomposing a high-level intention into lower -level goals that eventually can be mapped to single propositions  . The communicative goals associated with the leaves of the structure are then used to retrieve the content of each proposition fi'om an underlying knowledge base  . By making the intentional structure of a paragraph explicit  , this work follows the discourse structure theory advanced in  ( Grosz & Sidner ,  1986) . 
Note also that , since in RST with planning , the structure of paragraphs idynamically derived  , it is possible to view schemas as the compilation of RST configurations with some information abswacted out  , as pointed out in ( Mann ,  1987) . 
We found that schemas and RST were not appropriate for planning and generating argumentative paragraphs because argument selection cannot be easily performed  . Among the types of relations enumerated in RST , only two would apply to the analysis of argumentative paragraphs : evidence and thesis -antithesis  . If these relations were to be composed into a paragraph structure  , they would yield a chain of undistinguished evidence links  . To determine which propositions can serve as arguments and how to order them  , one needs to specify precisely how arguments in the domain combine and relate to a conclusion  . An RST type of approaclican not be used alone to plan the content of an argumentative paragraph  . Schema suffer from the same limitation . 
In place of a generic relation like evidence , we use specific argumentative relations called top oi  ( Anscombre & Ducrot ,  1983) , e . g . , the more a class is difficult , the less a student wants to take it , to perform content selection . The mechanism is detai Ued later in the paper . 
Rhetorical Relations and Lexical Choice While rhettwical schemas or RST have been used to determine the content of the paragraph and the ordering of the ~ opositions  , they have not been used to determine the surface form of the clause  . We have found , however , that in argumentative paragraphs , the rhetorical function of a proposition affects its wording at many levels  . Consider the following utterances , extracted from our corpus : ( 1 ) It requires quite a lot of prograrmning ( 2 ) It does involve some programming , but nothing outrageous . 
Our contention is that either ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) can be generated from the same content as input , but that the difference between the two forms is determined by the argumentative function of the clause :  ( 1 ) supports the conclusion that a course should not be taken because it requires a lot of programming  , which is time consuming and therefore makes the course difficult  . In contrast ,   ( 2 ) supports the conclusion that the level of programming should not affect he decision whether to take the course  . 
The amount of programming involved in a course can be quantified by considering how many programming assignments are required and the number of programming projects  . The question is then , given this information , how to describe this information to a student : what level constitutes some programming  , quite a lot of programming or a not outrageous amount of programming ? Our position is that the mapping from the objective information that a course requires two programming assignments to an evaluation that it requires some programming is only partially determined by the content  . 
It is also and overall a rhetorical decision . It is because we want to suppea certain conclusion that we view and Act  , s DECOLING-92 . NAI'CfES . 2328 AOI\]T 1992639 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AUO .  2328 .   1992 evaluate an objective quantity as a lot or some . 
In addition , by looking back at examples (1) and (2) , we find that this rhetorical decision also affects the choice of the main verb : the course requires programming when the evaluation of the course is negative  , while it involves programming when the evaluation is positive  . In ( Hovy , 1988b ) , similar issues of lexical choice were also addressed  , but different mechanisms were used to perform lexical choice and paragraph organization  . 
This is an instance of the general problem of expres-sibility discussed in  ( Meteer ,  1990 ) : RST and schemas in their current form do not bridge the gap between rhetorical relations and surface realization  , and as a consequence , surface realization cannot a kead vantage of the paragraph organization to make decisions  . 
In earlier work , we have studied the problem of generating certain connectives like but  , although , because or since ( Elhadad & McKeown , 1990) and of generating adjectives ( Elhadad ,  1991) . In both cases , we have found that argumentative features play an important role in the selection of appropriate wording  . The impor-tampoint , is that the same argumentative features could be used to constrain both the choice of connectives between the clause and the choice of adjectives within the clause  . The particular argumentative features we use are inspired from work by  ( Anscombre & Ducrot ,  1983) , ( Bruxelles et al1989) and ( Broxdles & Raccah ,  1991) . 
In this paper , we show how these argumentative features can be generated by a paragraph structurer  , and therefore serve as a bridge between the rhetorical function of a clause and its surface realization  . 
OURAPPROACH
In order to explain how lexical choice within the clause can he affected by the r betorical function of a proposition  , we must design a text planner that annotates the propositions with information about their argumentative function  . In the ADVI SOR system , the following activities are performed to produce the answer to a should-type question :  1  . An expert-system determines whether tile course should be taken  . 
2 . An evaluation system maps observations about he course from the knowledge base into evaluations that are scalar and context-dependen L  3  . The evaluation system finks these evaluations into argument chains using argumentative relations called to poi  . To poir elations are stored within the propositions as a separate fatt me  . 
4 . A paragraph stmcturer selects and organizes argumentative chains into an argumentative strategy  . 
5 . A surface realization component maps the argumentative strategy into a paragraph  , relying on a grammar which is sensitive to the argument a tiven formation stored in the propositions  . 
An hnportam feature of this approach is that the mapping between information i the knowledge base and the content of the propositions is performed in two stages by two types of argumentative relations : evaluation functions and to poi  . We distinguish between evaluation , which is the leap from the observation of an objective fact in the knowledge base to a context -dependent scalar evaluation  , and argument at iverla-tions , which only operate on scalar evaluations , and not on knowledge base facts . In contrast , most other text planner simply organize propositions directly retrieved from the knowledge base  . 
Another important feature is that we do not use generic rhetorical relations like " anti-thesis " or " evidence " but instead specific argumentative relations called to poi  . Because to poi a regra dual inference rules , our content planner performs a task similar to generating explanations for a rule-based expert system  ( McKeown & Swartout ,  1987) . But in addition to determining content , to poi are also used to influence wording : they are added as annotations to the propositions generated by the text planner and are used by the suiface realization component oper form lexical choice  . 
In the following sections , we detail how content planning is performed and how the grammar takes advantage of the argumentative information placed in its input o perform lexical choice  . 
CONTENT PLANNING
Our system determines which content can be used to generate an answer in two stages using In'st evaluation functions then to poi  . 
Evaluation Functions
Evaluation functions are used to map from observations of facts in the knowledge base to context ~ dependent evaluations  . They are domain specific and rely on the presence of a user model  . An evaluation is the rating of a knowledge base entity on a scale  . In the ADVISOR domain we have identified the relevant scales by examining a corpus of transcripts of advising sessions  . We looked at all the adjectives modifying a class in these transcripts and classified them into semantic categories  . The following classes were thns identified ( details on this analysis are provided in ( Elhadad ,  1991 ) ): * Goodness ? Importance ? Level ? Difficulty ? Workload ACRESDE  COLING-92  . NANTES , 2328 AOt \] T1992640 PRO(: . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 ? Domain : programming and mathematical Note that all of these categories are scalar and therefore define a set of dimensions along which a class can he evaluated  . The task of the evaluation component is to rank a course on relevant scales  . In the current implementation , r'mking is binary so a course can be in three possible states with respect to each scale : not ranked  ( the scale is not , active in the current context ) ,  +  ( the course is high on the scale ) or - ( the course is low on the scale )  . In the current slate of the program , there is no distiaction between degrees ( interesting vs . very interesting ) . 
Rmlking is accomplished by using simple rules which determine under which conditiolts objective facts store diu the knowledge b  , a see an become convincing evidence for an evaluation  . Figure 2 shows three evaluation rules used in the current system  . 
If then
I\[then
If then
U(user.progra~ning.--)&
K(cla ~ s.progra ~ ing-hw > O)
E(clase . programmilig +)
U(user.programliling.*)a
K(e\[ass.progranuning hw:-0)
E(cI as s , programming -)
U(user.progran~ing.?)&
K ( elass . programming-hw > 3)
E ( elass . programming +)
Figure 2: Sampl evaluation rules
U(user . programming - ) checks if in the current slate of the user model the system has evidence that the user dislikes programming  . 
K(class . programming-hw > 0 ) is a query to the knowledge base to determine whether the class has some programming assigmenls  . An assertiou of the form E(class . programaning +) is a . positive valuation of the course Oiltile programming scale  . If none of the rules shown in Figure 2 are activated , the programming scale will remain on-activated . 
If the first rule is activated , n proposition attributing a number of programming assignments to the class is added to the paragraph being planned  . In addition , this content is annotated by an evaluation on the programming scale  . Tile output of the evaluation system is therefore a set of propositions annotated by evaluations along each of the activated scales  . 
Argumentative Relations : Topoi
Once the course has been evaluated on the activated scales  , the evaluation system considers relations between the scales  . We use the notion of topoi as defined in ( Anscombre & Ducrot , 1983) to describe such relations . 
To poi a regradual inference rules of the form " the more/less X is P  , the more/less Y is Q . " Figure 3 shows sample to poiused in the ADVI SOR system . 
workload +/ difficulty . ; work load ~ / t ime - requ i red d i f f i cu l t y  . I/workload + ? difficulty 4 /time required dif\[iculty- , / take progralltmin9 /time-lequired+interest+/take + importai ~ ceh/take + Figure  3: Sample to poinsed in ADVISORT opoip lay the role of dletoric M relations ill RST by explaining the relation between two propositions illit paragraph  . But they are different ill that theym cvery specific relations  , as opposed to generic relations like " anti -thesis " or " evidence "  . They can therefore he used to determine the content of the answer and the order in which arguments should be presented  . 
But the most in ~ pomant feature of topoi for our puroposes is that they can he related to lexical choice illanatural way  . In ( Bruxelles et al 1989) , ' rod(Bruxelles & Raccah ,  1991 ) it is suggested that lexical items can be defined htp  , ' wt by their argumentative potential . For example , it is part of the definition of the verb " to reo quire " as used in our domain  , that its subject is evaluated oil the scale of difficulty  . This argumentative connotation explains tile contrast between  ( 3 ) and ( 4 )  , illa context where both are addressed to a student who enjoys progr  , unming : (3) ? At least Al requires prograrmning , so it's easy . 
(4) At least AI involves programming , so it's easy . 
The same scales are u~d both into poit axiill our lexieal description  . They therefore serve ` as a bridge between the rhetode alstructure of tile p ~ wa graph and lex - iced choice  . 
AGRAM MARSENSITIVE TO
ARGUMENTATIVE CONSTRAINTS
The output of the evaluation system is a list of chains of acceptable argamentative drivations upporting tile conclusion that a course should be taken or Blot  . Each proposition in the chain is annotated by a featore A OlbrArgumentative Orientation which indicates how it relates to the surrounding propositions  . Figure 4 shows a sample proposition using the notation of fmmtional descriptions  ( FDs ) used in fimc fioual unification grammars . 
This input represent she proposition that AI covers  ( among others ) a set of topics in the area of theory ( namely , logic ) , and the AO feature indicates that this proposition is used as an argument for the conclusion that AI is a difficult course  , by virtue of the topostheoretical +/ diff icult +  ( the conclusinn AcrEsDECOLING-92 , NAN n . .'S , 2328 ^ our 1992 6 4 1 Paoc . o1: COLING-92 , NAm-es , AUCL 2328 ,  1992  ( cat lex-verb )   ( alt verbal-lexicon : index concept ) concept c-contain )   ( alt contain-lex ( : bk-class ao )   (   ; ; Verbs argumentatively marked \[ ( AO )   ( scales-difficulty l ( carrier c-class )   ( carrier participants carrier ) )  ( orientation + )   ( ao-conveyed lex-verb ) ) ) participants carrier c-class )   ( lex ( ( ralt ( " require " " demand ' ) ) ) ) )   ; ; Neutral verbs ( ( lex ( ( ralt ( ' contain "" involve ' ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) << other concepts>> ) ) ) 
Figure 5: Fragment of the grammar ( ( cat relation )   ( name topics-of )   ( roles ( ( class ( ( cat class )   ( name AI ) )  ( topics ( I cat set ( kind ( ( cat topic ) ) )   ( cardinality I ( Intenslon ( ( cat relation )   ( name area-of )   ( argument ( ^ roles topic )   ( roles I ( top lc ( ( cat topic ) ) )   ( area ( ( name theory ) ) ) )  ( extension ( ( cat listl ( elements ~ ( ( ( name logic ) ) ) ) ) ) )   ( AO ( scope\[ ( cat clause )   ( type attributive )   ( participants
I ( carrier roles class ) l attribute ( ( cat scale ) ) ) ) )   ( scale ( ( name theoretical ) )  ( orientation + )   ( focus ^ scope participants carrier )   ( scalar ^ scope participants attribute ( conclusion ( + difficult ( AI ) ) ) ) ) )
Figure 4: Input to the grammar part of the topos is shown in abbreviation  )  . Details on the role of each fields in the AO feature and on the representation of quantification are provided in  ( EI-hadad ,  1992) . 
Because of this AO specification , the grammar will choose appropriately realization  ( 5 ) instead of ( 6 ) :  ( 5 ) AI requires a lot of programming ( 6 ) AI involve some programming . 
The realization component is implemented in FUF , all extended functional unification grammar formalism which we have implemented  ( Elhadad ,  1990 , Elhadad ,  1992) . In the grammar we use , lexical choice and syntactic realization at e interleaved  . For example , the choice of the verb is handled by the altemation shown in Figure  5  . In this Figme , the notational t indicates a disjunction between alternatives  ; ralt indicates a random alternation , and is used to indicate that he grammar does not account for the difference between the alternatives  ; the curly braces notation in pairs of the form (   ( go ) value ) indicates that the go feature is not embedded in the lexical verb constituent unified with the grammar but rather is a toplevel feature within the clause  . 
The fragment shown in Figure 5 specifies how the grammar can map from an input concepte-contain to a verb expressing this relation  . The grammar for this relation contains two branches : in the first branch  , the verbs " require " and " demand " are described as being argumentatively marked on the scale of difficulty  . They can therefore be selected to project an evaluation on their subject  . Note that the choice between " require " and " demand " is arbitrary  , as indicated by the ralt con-strnct-it is not explained by the grammar  . The second branch describes the verbs " contain " and " involve " as neutral verbs  , that 60 not add any connotation . 
When there is an argumentative connotation , the grammar specifies which participant in the clause is affected by the argumentative evaluation  ( for both verbs in the example , the subject of the verb is the entity that carries the evaluation  )  . Similar lexical descriptions for adjectives are described in  ( Elhadad ,  1991) . 
The part of the grammar generating the syntactic structure of the clause is inspired both by systemic grammars  (   ( Halliday , 1985) and especially ( Fawcett , 1987)) ACRES DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 A OtT 1992642 P Rec . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2 . 3-28 ,   1992 \ [ or the semantic features of the input and by HPSG  ( Pollard & Sag , 1987) for the overall flow of control . It has been extended to account for the flow of argumentative information from lexical items to constituents and to the clause  . For example , inserting an adjective argumen-tatively marked as the describer of a noun group creates an argument a tive orientation feature at the level of the noun group which is then percolated to the clause in which the noun group is a participant  . 
Finally , the clause grammar has been extended with a clause complex constituent which determines connective selection and clause combining  ( an extension of ( McKeown & Elhadad ,  1991)) . A clause complex is represented as an FD with features directive and subordinate  ( a notion similar to the RST distinction between ucleus and satellite  )  . As discussed in ( Ethadad & McKeown ,  1990) , there are many different connec-lives expressing argumentative rlations  . For example all of the following connectives can be used to express an evidence relation : because  , since , therefore , so , as a consequence , then . The choice offered to the analyst is then : ( i ) to ignore the differences between such close counectives  ;   ( ii ) to define a single rhetorical relation for each connective or  ( iii ) to determine the choice of connective on other factors than the rhetorical relation alone  . 
We adop this later approach , and conclude that the output of the pat'agmph structurer must not determine the connectives  , as is generally done by schema or RSTb used planners  . Instead we take advantage of how our text planner labels each proposition with information about its rhetorical function to determine which connective is most  , appropriate in combination with the other pragmatic factors discussed in  ( Elliadad & McKeown ,  1990) . In this paper , we have also explained how the argumentative features needed to select connectives are broduced by the content planner  . 
User Profile:
Programming +

Year Soph
Interests AI , NLP
Cb . ss profile(AI):
Progranm ~ ing Assignments 3
Paper AssigIlments 1
Projects 0
Topics : Logic\[Math\],NLP\[AI\]
Should I take AI ?
AI can be difficult , because it requires a lot of work and it is pretty mathematical  , but it is an interesting course , because it covca's many nip topics . 
and it offer slots of programming hws.
Figure 6: An argumentative paragraph
Implementation
The content planner is fully implemented . In the surface realization component , he clause grammar is fully implemented with account fi  ) rargumentative lea-tares in adjectives , verbs and adverbial adjuncts . A ' large portion of the grammar covers the determiner sequence and how the choice of determiners like " many "  , " most " , " few " etc . has an influence outile argunlea-tative orientation of the close  . The grammar for connectives is separately implemented but not yet merged with the rest of the grammar  . 
Tile grammar is quite large : the current version includes  580 disjunctions ; it covers simple and complex clauses , interrogation , egation , a complex tense system , relative clauses , control and raising , coordination with some forms of ellipsis . We have extended FUF by adding sophisticated conlrol devices  ( Elhadad & Robin ,  1992) , making it possible to ha * vile sucl , -large grammars . In particular , we are able to deal with tile non-kw ~ al constraints across constituent boundaries i  , nposed by argumentative rlations in an efficient way  . 
Figure 6 shows the type of paragraphs obtained when all the pieces of the surface realization component are put together  . 

We have described a model for planning argumen -tafive paragraphs which can perform content selection and which allows the surface realization component to adapt lexical choice within each clause to the rhetorical function of file clause  . The model relies on the fact that the same argumentative relations which can he used as specific rhetorical relations also participate in the lexicld description of verbs  , adjectives , adverbs and determiners . 
Oar model " also distinguishes between two types of argumentative relations : evaluative functions and top oi  . 
Evaluatiun function retch information from the knowledge base and make its calar and context -dependent  , while to poi are purely rhetorical relations that links cMar propositions together according to the argument a tive goal of the speaker  . This twostage content retrieval mechanism is in coatrast to most existing planners which assemble facts directly retrieved from the knowledge base  , and do not mms fonn them according to the pragmatic on text  ( goals of the speaker a * al user model )  . The mec " lmnism is implemented using the FUF text generation system  . 
Some of the open questions we face are : * Deciding whether to use a connective or not  . 
? Deciding whether propositions can be left implicit and still be recoverable  . 
. Combining several independent argumentative chains and deciding how to order the arguments in the combined structure  . 
-Acquiring the argumentative lexical descrip-Acr ~ DE  COLING-92  . NANTES , 2328AOtT 1992643l'koc . OFCOL1NG-92, NAN rI~s,AUG .  2328 ,   1992 tions we need on a largescale ? Scaling up the text planning mechanism to generates veral paragraphs  . 
In particular , when several independent argumentative chains upport the same conclusion  , argumentative relations alone cannot determine in which order they must be organized  . We are currently investigating whether argumentative strategies similar to RST schemas can be combined with our technique  . We are also evaluating bow other discourse aspects like topic progression can help in the planning of the paragraph  . 
Acknowledgments . This work was supported by DARPA under contract N00039-84-C-0165  , by NSF Grant IRT-84-51438 and by ONR Grant N00014-89-J-1782  . I want to thank Kathy McKeown , Jacques Robin and Frank Z . Smadja for helping mewrite this paper and Chaya Ochs for helping with the corpus analysis and the implementation of evaluation functions  . 

Anscombre , J . C . and O . , Ducrot .  (1983) . Philosoplu ' et langage . L ' argumentation dans lalangue . 
Bruxelles : Pierre Mardaga.
Bruxelles , S . and Raccah P . Y .  (1991) . Argumentation et Semantique : lparti-prisdu lexique  . In Acresdu Colloque ' Enonciation et parti-pris  '  . Forthcoming . 
Bruxelles , S . , Careaguo , D . and Founder , C .  (1989) . 
Versane construction automatiqueds to poi a partirdu lexique  . CCAI-Journal for the integrated study of Artificial Intelligence cognitive science and applied epistemology  ,  6(4) ,  309-328 . 
Elhadad , M .  (1990) . Types in Functional Unification Grammars . Proceedings of 28th Meeting of the
ACL ( ACL'90). Pittsburgh.
Ethadad , M .  (1991) . Generating Adjectives to Express the Speaker's Argumentative Intent  . Proceedings of 9th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence ( AAAI91 )  . Anaheim . 
Elhadad , Michael .  (1992) . Using Argumentation to Control Lexical Choice : a Functional Unification-based approach  . Doctoral dissertation , Columbia

Elhadad , M . and K , R . McKeown , (1990) . Generating
Connectives . Proceedings of COLING'90 ( Volume 3) . Helsinki , Finland . 
Elhadad , M . & Robin , J .  (1992) . Controlling Content Realization with Functional Unification Grammars  . In R . Dale , E . Hovy , D . Roesner and O . Stock(Fxl . ) , Aspects of Automated Natural Language Generation . Springer Verlag . 
Fawcett , R . P .  (1987) . The semantics of clause and verb for relational processes in English  . In Halliday , M . A . K . & Fawcett , R . P . ( T_,d . ), New developments in systemic linguistics . London and New York:
Frances Pinter.
Gmsz , B . and Sidaer , C .  (1986) . Attentions , intentions , and the structure of discourse . Computational
Linguistics , 12(3), 175-204.
Halliday , M . A . K .  (1985) . An Introduction to Functional Grammar . London : Edward Arnold . 
Hovy , E . H . ( June 1988) . Planning Coherent Multisen-tential Text . Proceedings of the 26th ACL
Conference . Buffalo : ACL.
Hovy , E . H .  (1988) , Generating natural language under pragmatic constraints  . Hillsdale , N . J . : L . Erlbanm Associates . Based on the author's thesis ( doctoral--Yale University ,  1987) . 
Mann , W . C .  (1987) . Text generation : the problem of text structure ( Tech . Rep . ISI/RR-87-181) . 
Marina del Rey , CA:ISI.
Mann , W . C . and S . A . Thompson .  (1987) . Rhetorical Structure Theory : Description and Construction f Text Structures  . In Gerard Kempen ( Ed . ), Natural Language Generation . Martinus Nijhoff , McKeown , K . 1L (1985) . Text Generation : Using Discourse Strategies and Focus Constraints to Generate Natural Language Text  , Studies in Natural Language Processing . Cambridge,
England : Cambridge University Press.
McKeown , K . R .  (1988) . Generating Goal Oriented Explanations . International Journal of Expert
Systems , 1(4). 377-395.
McKeown , K . and M . Ethadad .  (1991) . A Contrastive Evaluation of Functional Unification Glammar for Surface Language Generators : A Case Study in Choice of Connectives  . In Cecile L . Pads , William R . Swartout and William C . Mann ( Eds . ) , Natural Language Generation i Artificial Intelligence and Computational Linguistics  . Kluwer
Academic Pubfishers.
McKeown , K . R . & Swart out W . R .  (1987) . Language generation adexplanation . The Annual Review of
Computer Science , (2), pp . 401--449.
Meteer , M . W .  (1990) . The generation gap : the problem of expressibility in text planning  . Doctoral dissertation , University of Massaebns sets at Ahmerst . 
Also available as BBN technical repoRNo .7347.
Moore , I . D . and C . L . Paris . ( June 1989) . Planning Text for Advisory Dialogues . Proceeding 27th ACL . 
Vancouver , BC:ACL.
Pads , C . L .  (1987) . The Use of Explicit User models in Text Generation : Tailoring to a User's level of expertise  . Doctoral dissertation , Columbia

Pollard , C . and I . A . Sag .  (1987) . CSLI Lecture Notes . 
Vol ,   13: Information-based Syntax and Semantics-Volume 1  . Chicago , I1: University of Chicago

ACIES DECOLING-92 . NANTES . 2328 AOI\]T1992644 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 .  1992
