Interaction between Structural Changes in Machine Translation 
Satoshi KINOSHITA
Research and Development Center
Toshiba Corporation
Komukai-Toshiba-cho1, Saiwai-ku,
Kawasaki , 210 Japan
John I'HILLIPS Jun-ichi TSUJIIC entreh ) rComt ) utational Linguistics

P.O . Box 88, Manchester,
M601 QD , U.K.
Abstract
This paper discusses coml ) lex structural changes during transfer within a non-destructive transfer framework  . Though the description of each individual structural change is not difficult  , special provision must be made when they are combined  , because interaction between them sometimes causes unexpected problems  . Transfer of coordinate structures is also discussed a  . q this sometimes necessitates a structural change and interacts with other structural changes in a problematic way  . 
1 Introduction
Several focal issues have emerged in machine trans lation  ( MT ) research as the result of recent intensive studies in the field  . That is , ? Declarative Frameworks for expressing Bilingual
Knowledge ? Integration of Knowledgebased Processing and Contextual Processing with the Translation process ? Effective Exploitation of Domain / ' l~xtType-Specificity  ( or Sublauguageness ) in MT and Discovery Processes for such Specifieities Though new frameworks of MT such as Statistics-based MT  ( SBMT )  , F , xample-bascd MT(F , BMT ) , Analogy-based MT ( ABMT ) , Knowledgebased MT ( KBMT ) etc . look radically difihrent from conventional liuguisties-based MT  ( LIIMT ) anchas Transfer-based MT , they address role or two of the above focal issues and ignore the  rest\[7\]\[10\]  . In particular , the new paradigms of MT tend to ignor et . he first issueie . declarative representation f bilingual knowledge and the complexities involved in the process of combining units of bi-liagual knowledge  . 
It is our contention that any MT system , whichever paradigm it belongs to , has to store a set of translation-equivalent u its for a pair of languages and combine these to produce larger units of translation  . In EBMT , for example , a set of translation examples has to be stored and several of them have to be combined properly to produce translation  . Because of the declarative nature of translation exam-pies  , EBMT inevitably encounters the same complex-itics of combining translation units in declarative representation o  . ~I , BMT does . 
tLescarch in LBMT\[1\]\[2\]\[3\]\[ll\]\[12\]\[13\] has revealed that dittieulties in tim declarative representation of bilingual knowledge stem mainly from the treatment of idiosyncratic structural changes caused by lexieal items  , and interactions of such idiosyncratic structural changes when they coexist in single sentences  . 
These type of structural changes also cause problems when they are combined with general or ordinary linguistic phenomena soe has coordination  . A formal framework to cope with these matters is essential in other a Pl  ) roaches , uch as EBMT , as in LBMT , if the translation is produced in a compositional way  . 
In this paper , we discuss problems caused by such interaction , and give solutions in our logic-based transfer framework\[8\]  . Our transfer model views the transfer process as deduction  ; it produces the target linguistic description without changing the source description  . This giw : saclear contras to the conventional tree-traasducer model  , which gradually tranS-forms the source description  , and is therefore hard to control . 
Because of the logic oriented nature of our framework  , it can also be extended easily to cope with the other local issue of MT such as the integration of knowledge-based processing with  translation\[4\]  . 
2 Formalism
We use a simple formalism , representing a sentence as a network of semantic dependencies  . The basic units of the form Mismare indices , proper lies , and re-Ist wn a . A logical form consists of an unorderednet of Ierms  ; each term is either a property predicated of an it ~ dex  , or ~ t relation between two indices . The written notation depicts properties and relations as unary and binary functors  , respectively , and indices as the iL " arguments , i . e . within brackets . A logical form representing ' John saw Mary ' might be e : john  ( j ) & see ( el & mary ( n0& tense ( e , past ) & subj(e , j ) & obj(e , m ) This representation is implified particularly in that Act xs DE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 Ao~r 1992679I'~oc . ov COLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 the man who Mary saw:x:man ( x ) & mary ( m ) & see ( el & t .   .   .   .   . ( e , past ) & subj(e , m ) & obj(e , x ) the man who saw Mary : x : man ( x ) & n rary ( m ) & see ( el & tense ( e , past ) & subj(e , x ) & obj(e , m ) Imanaged to painlmy house quickly : m : me ( me ) & manage ( m ) & tense ( m , past ) & subj(m , me ) & obj(m , p ) & paint(p ) & obj(p , h ) & of ( h , me ) & house(h ) & qniek(q ) & subj(q , p ) Mary looked at the brightly painted house : l : mary  ( m ) & look ( l ) & tense ( l , past ) & subj(l , m ) & at ( l , h ) & bright(b ) & subj(b , p ) & paint(p ) & obj(p , h ) & house ( h ) Mary's house was painted : p:mary ( m ) & of ( h , rn ) & house(h ) & paint(p ) & tense(p , past ) & obj(p , h)
Figure 1: Examples of Logical Forms the relation tense here stands for what should be a complex representation f tense  , aspect , and aktion-sart , related anaphorieally to the preceding discourse . 
It can be seen that the representationic ludes the names of the concepts  , both objects and events , which are mentioned in the sentence , aud the semantic relationships between them . Each of the three indices , j , mande , is a unique label given to a node in the dependency network  . The indices also serve as discourse referents when the logical form is incorporated into a discourse representation  . The root node of the network is specified at the beginning of the representation  , intiffs ease e , the node representing the seeing event . In terms of discourse representation theory , eistim discourse referent of which the logical form is a description  . As long as the root node of the network is specified  , it is possible to convert a logical form mechanistically into a structured representation such as a dependency graph or a feature structure such as tense : past subject : \[ predicate : john\]object:\[predicate:mary\]Some other examples of logical forms are shown in figure  1  . The particular characteristics of the formalism- -the types of relations and predicates used and the manner of their use--are justified  elsewhere\[9\]  . We only state here that t be for rualism can treat the phenomena which are treated by traditional formalisms  , along with additional phenomena relating to discourse structure and lexical semantics  . 
3 Transfer
We follow the standardivision of a machine translation system into stages of analysis  , transfer , and generation . The parts of the system include algorithms for analysis  , transfer , and generation , descriptions of the strneture of individual anguages  ( used by the analysis and generation algorithm . s ) , and descriptions of equivalence relationships between pairs of languages  ( used by the transfer algorithm )  . It is a requirement for the transfer description that it should state all and only the equivalence relationships between expressions of a pair of languages  . It should contain no generalinguistic information  , el-tile runiversal or specific to any single language : these types of information belong ill the formalism and content  , respectively , of the descriptions of individual languages . In fact most of our transfer descriptions consist of direct equivalences between predicates or groups of predicates of the language pair  . 
A transfer rule shows a particular translation equivalence between two languages  . It consists of three parts : a pair of logical forms  , one for each language , representing tile equivalence , and a third logical form giving the conditions under which the equivalence is applicable  . We call these the equiva ~ leneepair and the condition respectively  . Two logical forms form an equivalence pair if the natural language expressions they represent have overlapping denotations  ( using'denotation ' in a very broad sense to encompass not only the referential possibilities of nouns but the possibility in general of applying a predicate to a particular index  )  . The rule can therefore be used for translating in either direction : the two logical forcers of the eqnivale neep air are always translationally equivalent if the condition is satisfied  . The logical forms of the equivalence pair will be indistinguishable from logical forms of the respective languages  , using the same predicates and relations . The logical forms of the condition use meta -predieates which allow reference to to the logical form of the current local translation unit  ( sentence or clause ) and to the linguistic context . In practice , most transferules have no condition ; they consist just of an eqnivale neep air . Some examples of rules follow:
English Japanese Explanation table ( X ) teeburu ( X ) table = tee burupaper ( P ) ronb , m ( p ) paper = ronbun paper ( P ) s in bmt ( P ) paper=s in bunsubj ( E , X ) ga(E , X ) subject marker obj(E , X ) wo(E , X ) object marker hypothetical ( El , like ( El-tai(F ) , omou(E ) would like iff inLeft(obj(E , F ) ) ~ tal omou The following is the basic definition of transfer between two texts  ( sentences , clauses , or whatever ) : A source logical form and a target logical form are correctly transferred if tile terms of each can be divided into nonoverlapping subsets such that the source subsets can be placed into one-to -one correspondence with the target subsets by each corresponding pair being ' unified ' with the two halves of the equivalence pair AcqEsDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOt ~ T1992680 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NAI~rEs , AUG .  2328 , 1992 of a transferule , and if the accumulated conditions of the transfer ules used are satisfied  . 
' Unification ' in this definition is rattmr similar to graph unilication  . 
q ~ ansfer rules specifying larger sets of terms can be used to state trauslational equivalences for idioms and fixed expressions  . Simple idioms present no particular problem . One translation of the English idiom to kick the bucket into Japanese is sinu'die '  , and this can be represented by the transferule kick  ( K ) $ z . obj(K , n ) & the-bucket(B ) ~ sinu(K ) Fixed expressions , appropriate only to a specific context , may require conditions which refer to the discourse representation  . 
4' Complex ' transfer 4 . 1 Types of complex transfer Lindop & Tsujii ( 1991 ) list and discuss a variety of examples that are alwaYs problematic for machine translation systems  . We suggest hat what makes these examples difficult is that different dependency structures are associated with otherwise synonymous lexical items  . We break the problem down into four subparts . 
i ) Argument-switching as in the translation of the 

DerWagengef'~lltmir--I like the car
The carple a senme gefallen ( E ) & nor a ( O ) & dat ( S ) like ( E ) & subj ( S ) & obj ( O ) In argument-switching , the relations between the lexical item and its dependents are not translated standardly  . Although the German nominative normally corresponds to an English subjcct  , it must in this example be translated as a dative . 
it ) II ead-switching as hit he translat lolt of Ger-nlant laas sehwimmt gem--John likes swinm fing 
Johns winm ~ ladly like ( L ) & obj(L , S)geru(L ) & subj(L , S ) iy shift(L , S ) The Germau sentence is a description of a situation to do with swimming  ; the English is a description of a situation to do with liking  . The shift predicate is explained below . 
iii ) Decomposition as in the translation of the

John-gajisatusita- . -John committed suicide jisatu_suru ( E ) commit ( E ) & suicide ( S ) & obj ( E , S ) llere the single Japanese word jisatus nrnistra ~l~-lated as the English phrase to commit suicide  . Some types of decomposition can give rise to special problems when the rearc modifiers or dependents involved  . 
These are discussed in detail by Tsujii et al ( 1992 )  , Shortage of space amltile variety and complexity of examples prevents their discussion here  . 
iv ) ttaistng as in the translation of the Welsh
Fed digwyd drod Si6nyma happells be ~ loln here
John happens to he here digwyd d(E1) ~ subj(E1 , E2) & subj(E2 , X ) . -+ happen ( E1) , ~ subj(E1 , X ) & obj(E1 , E2) In the English , the subject of happen is John , but in the Welsh , the subject of digwy dd ( ' happen ' ) is the situation of John's being here . 
The predicate shift is introduced to define a translation equivalence where certain dependencies are differently arranged in the target language  , as compared to the source language . It can be understood in terms of semantic type -shifting -- the types are differently distributed in the source - and target-language logical forms  . Shifl(H , E ) means that in any instance of subj(H , X ) or l '( X , tt )   ( where V stands t brauy rela ~ tion ) in the logical form representing the English text  , the H corresponds to an E in the logical form representing the other language  . The following example shows how the example under  ( it ) above would work in practice . 
lch welt \] Hans schwimmt gern-iknow John likes swmuningie h  ( i ) me ( i ) -- ~ en ( wiknow ( w ) sut , j(w , i ) subj(w , i ) oh j(w , s ) obj(w , s)'
Hans(j ) John(j ) sehwimmen(s ) swim(s)s . bj(sj ) suhj(iQ)gern(g ) like(g ) subj(g , s ) obj(g , s ) shift(s , g)me(i)know(w ) subj(w , i ) obj(w , g)
John(j ) swim(s)'subj(gd)like(g ) obj(g , s ) The columns of the tables howtile German source logical form  , the English logical form as it would be without shift  , and tile actual English target logical form . The horizontal divisions of the table represent the fields of operation of separate transfer ules  . 
4  . 2 In teract ion between types o f com-p lex t rans fer When several of these syntactic hanges are combined in one example  , the logical form resulting from transfer is incoherent  . The following examples are types on which most , if not all , existing machine translation Acq~s DECOLING-92 , NAN-I~S , 2328 Aour 199268 IPROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 . 1992 systems will fail , as will the mechanism proposed here so far . 
English-Welsh ; raising with argument-switching :
John happens to likeswimming fed digwyddfodyn ddagan John no fio happens benice by Johnswim  ( swimraing-bein~-nice-in-dohn's-opinion ccurs ) Dutch-English ; verb-head-switching twice:
Janzwemtgrnagtoevallig
John Bwimsgladly happeningly
John happens to like swimming ( also ' John likes happening to swim ~ There are two separate causes of difficulty in these examples  . Firstly , the long-distance movement caused by raising canses problems in the transfer of structures which have been the target of raising  . The simplest way to getrmm d the problem is to require syntactically-deleted arguments obe marked explicitly on all the verbs of w bich they are logical arguments  , treating the phenomenon syntactically as an example of lexieally-triggered extraction  , on a par with the extractions of syntactic objects in a man I know and an easy manto please  . Transferules which introduce raising predicates will then have to bring in the new subject explicitly  . For instance , the rule for happen and digwyd d , ( iv ) in ?4 . 1 , will be rewritten as digwyd d(E1) & subj(E1 , E2) happen(E1) & subj(E1 , X ) & obj(E1 , E2) iff subj(E2 , X ) The second point is that the shift predicate must be defined in such a way that it can cope with recursive changes in the dependency structure brought about by the occurrence of several interdependent head-switching translations  . It seems that shift can be made to do this simply by having e  . g . shifl(H , E ) affect all instances of snbj(tl , X ) or P ( X , H ) ( including shifl(X , H ) ) not transferred by the transfer ule which introduced the shift  ( ll , E ) . 
Together , these two stipulations enable the transfer of examples involving head-switching  , argument-switching , raising , and most types of decomposition . 
5 Transfer of Coordinate
Structures 5 . 1 Problems in transfer of coordinate s t ructures Coordination often reqnires exceptional treatment in parsing and generation of natural anguage  . Transfer is no exception . Transferring a coordinated structure sometimes produces a miserable result due to the accompanying combination of structural changes or the fact that coordinated linguistic objects require different target words for a shared source word  . However , few attempts have been reported to formalize this problem  . 
We here divide the problem into two categories : t ? Divergence in semantic on straints ? Combination of complex transfers The first type of problem occurs when semantic features of the coordinated source words require a source word to be translated into two different arget words  . 
A typical example can be seen in translation of the following English sentence into Japanese  . 
(la ) Site wears a bat and shoes.
(lb ) kanojo-ga boushi-wokaburi , kutsu-wo she-suhjlmt-ohj wearshoe-obj haku . 

As is understood from its translation , " wear " is translated " kaburu " or " haku " in Japanese  , depending on whether its object is something worn on the head or on the foot  ( or leg )  . This means that , in this example , coordination of objects in English should be altered to that of verb phrases in Japanese  . 
This type of knowledge for lexical choice is very common in a transfer or bilingual dictionary  , and plays an essential role in lexical transfer of most current transfer-based MT systems  . The problem is that ueither a transfer program or a transfer-rule writer expects such a nawkward problem caused by coordination  . To translate " wear " iuto " kaburu " in the above example  , n rule writer may usually write the following rule in our notation S : wear  ( X ) ~kaburu ( X ) if fobj ( X , Y ) &HAT ( Y ) But the condition part of this rule is implicitly expected to be interpreted as follows  . 
wear(X ) ~ kaburn(X ) iff VY obj(X , Y)& ; HAT ( Y ) The precise definition may change depending on how the coordinate structure is represented  . But the 1 There is eamther type of problem wl fich is baaed on the syntactic differences between coordination construct lominsource arid target languages  . For example ,   "2 or 3 potuld ~" in English should be trmmlated "2pondo ka 3 pondo ' ( 2 pound Jor 3 pounds in JaF . mlese and " dwy buntncnclair " ( 2 pounds or 3 ) in Welsh .   ( The Welsh expression is used only for a sum of money  . 
Another exists for weight . ) This type of problem tlaould alto be solved in transfer  , but we do not mention it here . 
2 In this section , we colts idertanslation whose source and target logical forms are on the left and right sides of at rant fer rule  . For the sake of simplicity , trmasfer rules hereafter are described as unidirection alones  . 
AC'TES DECOLING-92 . NAN qT ~ . 2328 Ao~r 1992682 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES . AUG .  2328 .   1992 point is that " wear " may be trmmlated " kaburn " only if all the objects have a feature of being a " HAT "  . 
A simple transfer algoritln n , for example , may choose the target word when it finds the first applicable transfer rule for a source word : this algorithm may produce " boushi-tokutsu-wo kaburu " for the sentence  ( la )  , which memm that tile semantic relation between " wear " and " shoes " is ignored  . There may be another type of transfer algorithm which simply fails be eanse it cannot provide two dilfcren target words to one identical source word  . 
The second type of the problem occurs when one of the coordinated objects triggers a complex transfer which is described in  ?3  . This type of problem can bcseen in the following translation  . 
lie connnitted nmr der then suicide.
kare-gas atsujin-wook as lfi,j is atsu-shita.
he ~ subjmurder-obj conmlit commit-edsuicide This problem is more complicated than the previous one because complext i ' ansfer  , in this example " many-to-one transfer " , causes a structural change . Our simple transfer algorithm mention e < l in tile previousec-tion may produce a disastrous result for this type of translation  . 
There are several possible solntions to this problem  . 
The simple . stone is that a transfer : rule writer writes all the transferules which explicitly describe every possible substructure with coordination  . This is of course unrealistic . 
Another solution is to make a transfer program which modifies the transferes ult dyuanfically when  , t brexample , a source word is given two differeutar : get words  . But such a dynamic modilication of tile result during transfer is against our policy of logic : based transfer  , because this means gradual transformation of the sources true turc and therefore transfer cannot be formalized as logical inference  . 
5 . 2' lY ansfer with Coordinate Expan-sioll 5 . 2 . 1 C~xwdlnate Expans ion tiereafter we concentrate on a case where coordinated objects of a verb cause the problem  , though there is apparently an example where other eases such a  . ~" snbj " cause the same problem . 
The basic reqnirement in logic-based transfer is that coordination of objects should he reorganized to that of verb phrases or sentences  , which is not supposed to cause problems in transfer  . We call this reorganization " coordinate xpansion "  . 
The following is a part of logical form for ( ta ) , which involves a coordinate structure . 
wear(w)&obj(w , o)&coord(o , ol ) & hat(ol ) & coord(o , o2)&shoe(o2)
Input Logical Form

Expansi .   .   .   .   . \[ Expandruleu \] , ' runsler+-\[Transferules\]g

Output Logical Form t , ' igure 2: Transfer with Coordinate Expansion In this form , o is a linguistic object , and a predicate coord represents a relation between the linguistic object and its coustituents  . The following is ar~ult of expansion . 
coord(w , w1)&we;tr(w1)&obj(wl , nl ) $ zhat(ol ) & coord(w , w2)&wear(w2)&obj(w2 , o2 ) &shoe ( o2 ) The most naive and simplest strategy usiug this expansion is to expand cvery coordination within a sentence and rel  ) reseuti in sent cn ce coordination before transfer . This transfere sult will be reorganized again into an appropriate representation f coordination in tim target language  . But this solution seems inefficient from the computatioual point of view be oettase cases where xpansion is uecessary are rare  . 
Unnecessary expansion and reorganization of coordinate structures should be avoided  . 
The strategy wc propose xecutes coordination expansion only if it is  necessary\[5\]  . Figure 2 shows a general view of our modified approach to transfer  . 
Transfer is divided into three phases ; in the first phase , logical forms are expanded if expand rnles ( explained below ) findtim necessity of coordinate xpan-sion . This process continues as long as the necessity remains  . In tile second phase , transfer described in previous sections is executed  . Fiually , in the third phase , coor dilm tion is reorganized if the target language has a more appropriate structure for coordination than tile second phase result  . ( Consider the translation of ( lb ) . Without reorganizing eo ordina ~ ti(m , the transfere sult will contain two " wear " s . ) Tile following is all expand rule which detects the necessity of expansion concerned with translation of " wearing a bat "  . 
wear(X)&obj(X , Y)&coord(Y , Y1) & llAT(Y1) & coord(Y , Y2) & Yle Y2&~HAT(Y2) --- expand(Y , X ) httile rule , e ~: p and ( Y , X ) means that coordination of the level Y should be expanded to that of X  . This rule suggests that coordinate xpansion is necessary AClESDE  COLING-92  , NAI , CrEs , 2328 AoI~r1992683 PROC . OFCOLING-92 , NANTES , AtnL 2328 ,   1992 if the object of " wear " is a coordinate structure  , and one constituent is a HAT while another isn't . 
We assume that expand rules are produced automatically from transferules before the actual transfer operation  . The simplest way of extracting such a rule refers only one transferule at one time  . This means that the necessity of expansion can be detected not by creating expand rules but by referring transfer rules in actual transfer phase  . But the former approach seems essential if we wish to optimize expansion detection  . 
5.2.3 Discussion
Our coordinate x pansion detection works even if a coordinate structure has more than two constituents  . 
What w c have to consider is an appropriat expan -sion algorithm  . For example , in translating (4a ) , an appropriat expansion should keep coordination of " shoes " and " stockings "  , as shown in (4b ) , he-cause both satisfy a semantic on straint on which the system chooses " haku " as the translation of " wear "  . 
Otherwise reorganizing a coordination i the generation phase is inevitable  . 
5.2.2 Other examples
Expand rules from a transferule which involves a structural change are little different informs to the previous ease  . The following area transferule for translating " commitsuicide " into Japanese and its expand rule  . 
commit(X ) & obj(X,Y ) & suicide(Y)--~jisatsu . .suru(X ) commit(X)&obj(X , Y)&coord(Y , Y1) & suicide(Y1) & coord(Y , Y2) & Yl#Y2&-- , suicide(Y2) expand(Y , X ) Another example is the translation of the English " HUMAN have ADJNOUN " construction into Japanese  . The sentence ( 2E ) is translated ( 2J ) using the rule ( 3 )  . 
(2E ) She has beautifule yes.
(2J ) kanojo-nome-gautsukushii.
a ho-poase ye-aubj beautiful (3) have(H ) & subj(H , S)aobj(H , X)&mod(X , U ) poss(X , S)&subj(M , X ) iff It UMAN(S ) & PART_OF . BODY(X ) (4a ) She wears a hat , stockings and shoes . 
(4b ) She wears a hat and wears stockings and shoes . 
Reorganization of a coordination i the target language does not only occur as outlined in the above case  . Since the coordinate xpansion is completely separate from the actual transfer process  , transfer rules which do not cause problems might be used  . 
There is still a problem to be solved with regard totile transfer of coordination with " expansion  "  ; expansion is not always straightforward . There is often a ease where coordinate x pansion is impossible without deep understanding of the sentences  , or it is impossible in that it may change their semantic structures  . For example , the sentence ( 5b ) cannot be the expansion of ( 5a ) though it seem so at first glance . 
(5a ) Is a wagroup of men and women.
(5b ) Isawa group of men and Isawa group of women . 
The apparent disadvantage of our approach with " expand rules " is that a large number of expansion rules might be created  . Though it provides an efficient way of detecting the necessity of expansion  , it consumes a lot of memory , which will raise an implementation problem . 
This case is more complicated than the previous ones because the transferule refers to two semantic features  . Therefore we will get two expand rules , one of which is the following rule . 
have(X)&subj(X , Y)&coord(Y , Y 1 ) & HUMAN(Y1) & coord(Y , Y2) & YI#Y2&- , HUMAN(Y2) & obj(X , Z ) & rood(Z , _) & PART-OF-BODY(Z ) expand(Y , X ) In addition , we need another expand rule which checks another type of coordinate construction  . This rule will apply when the system translates " she has long hair and beautifule yes "  . 
have(X ) & suhj(X , S ) & HUMAN(S ) & obj(X , Y ) 8*- , mod(Y , _) g ~ coord(Y , Yl ) & rood(Y1 , _) &
PART_OF_BODY(Y1)---+ expand(Y , X ) 6 Conclusion and future work In this paper , we showed how complex structural changes in transfer are treated within our logic-based transfer mode\[  , in which the target linguistic description is obtained from tile source description in a non -destructive manner  . These type of structural changes cause a problem when they cooccur and their transfer rules are interacted  . We also discussed a problem in transferring coordinate structures and presented an extended transfer model with coordinate xpansion  . 
Some of our solutions to these problems are rather simple and need further investigation when we apply our framework to a practical system  . We also have to evaluate our framework by examining a wider range of translation problems  . 
One of our current concerns is to implement our transfer model in a parallel processing framework  . 
Our current algorithm for transfer and its implementation have a procedural aspect of operation  . That ACRES DECOLJNG-92 . NANTES , 2328 Ao~r 1992684 Pgoc . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 is , the sense of " logic " in the name of our model llas not been fully achieved  . We think that the search for parallel implementation will lead to " logic-based transfer " in the true sense  . 
References\[1\]H . AIshawi , D . Carter and M . Rayner : ' q Yansla-tion by Qua . st Logical Form Transfer ', in Proc . 
of 29th ACL Conference , Berkeley , 1991.
\[2\]C . Copel and , J . Durand , S . Krauwer and B . Maegaard : ' The Eurotra Linguistic Specification  '  , in Studies in Machine Translation and Natural Language Processing Vol  .  1 , Office for Official Publication of the European Commmli-ties  , 1991\[3\]l . Kaplan,K . Netter, . l . We de kind and A . Zaenan : ' Translations by Structural Correspondences '  , in Proc . of 4th European ACL Conference , Manchester ,  1989 . 
\[4\] S . Kinoshit and J . Tsujii:'l ~ a mework for Incorporating Knowledge into Machine Translation '  , in Proc . of International Workshop on Fundamental Research for the Future Generation of Natural Language Processing  , Kyoto ,  1991 . 
\[5\]S . Kinoshita : Transfer of Coordinate Structures,
CCL/UMIST Report 91/13, 1991.
\[6\] J . Lindop and J . Tsujii : Complez 7~'aasfer in MT : A Survey of Examples , CCL/UMIST Report 91/5 ,  1991 . 
\[7\] S . Nirenburg : Machine Translation , Cambridge
University Press , 1987.
\[8\] J . D . Phillips , K . Yoshimura , K . Dohsaka and J . 
Tsujii : ' Linguistic Context for Machine Translation '  , in Proc . of SICONLP'90, Seoul , 1990 . 
\[9\] J . D . Phillips : An Architecture for Machine 7~nslation , CCL/UMISTi~port 92/7 ,  1992 . 
\[10\]S . Sato and M . Nagao:'Memory-based Translation ', in Proe . of COLING90, llels in k i , 1990 . 
\[11\]J . Tsujii and K . Fujita : ' Lexical Transfer based on Bilingual Signs : Towards interaction during transfer '  , in Proc . of 5th European ACL Conference , Berlin , 1991 . 
\[12\]G . van Noord , J . Dorrepaal et al'The MiMo2 Research System ' , in Proc . of the 3rd International Conference on Theoretical and Methodologicalssues in Machine Translation  , Austin ,  1990 . 
\[13\]If . Watanabe : ' A Model of a Transfer Process Using Combinations of Transfer Rules '  , in Proc . 
of PRICAI '90, 1990.
ACTESOECOLING-92 , NANT , ~ S , 2328 AO(3T 1992685 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES . AUO .  2328 .  1992
