Antonio ZAM POLLI , Chairman of the Programme Committee
The scientific programme of COLING-92
In my capacity as Chairman of the Scientific Programme 
Committee of COLING-92, I wish to express my
gratitude to all my colleagues who have conributed to the reading and selection of about  420 paper submitted for COLING-92  . The work of the Programme Committee has been organized at two levels  . In consultation with the members of the Intermltional Committee on Computational Linguistics  , I have identified nine major areas of interest , and fro " each area I have appointed a coordinator  . Each of the nine coordinators , whieb together formed the Programme Committee , has setup a subcommittee , selecting a number of reviewers . 
The task of the coordinator was to distribute t be papers to the reviewers  , to collect and summarize their evaluations , and to express an overall recommendation : to accept a paper as topical  , to accep the paper as a project note , or to reject the paper . I have always followed the recommendations of the coordinators  . The tew papers which , in each area , were classified as " uncertain " , i . e . left without a specific recommendation , were ranked in descending order of acceptability by the coordinator  . In these cases , I have used the following criteria for acceptance : i  ) within each area , the ranking of the coordinator has been respected  , ii ) across areas , preference has been given to papers accompanied by a demonstration  , and to topics less represented in the overall programme  . 
1 also wish to express my appreciation tomy colleagues NCalzolari  , A . Capelli , P . Orsolini , and S . Rossi of the Istituto di Linguistica Computazionate of the CNR of P is a for their generous support in the task of classifying and distributing the papers  , collecting the judgements , and setting file final programme . 
My deepest gratitude must go to Ch . Boitet and F . Peccond for their contribution to the work of the Programme Committee  , and fortile enthusiasm and the energy they have given in organizing the Conlerence  .   1 can fully appreciate he quantity of work required lot file organizatit m of a COLING Conference  , since I have already been involved in the organization of the Conference twice before : in  1978   ( Bergen ) as Chairman of the Progr ; nnmeCOlnlnittee , and in 1973 ( Pisa ) as local organizer . 
Recollecting these two COLING Conlk ~' rences , two ctmsiderations regarding developments in our field come to mind  . In my Introduction totile proceedings of COLING-73   ( A . Zampolli , N . Calzolari , eds . , Computational nd Mathematical Linguistics , Firenze ,  1977 , 4 vohunes ) , I advocated the complementarity between tile then dominant " puristic " approach to computational linguistics  ( represented , for example , in the Foreword of tlans Karlgren to the same Proceedings  )  , focusing oil computation and on file derivation of results according to rules  , and a more " pragmatic " approach , focusing on practical , applicable results and on the ability to process large collections of real linguistic data  . 
In particular , I stressed tile need to promote corpus-based studies  , statistical methods , robust morphosyntactic tuggers and parsers , adequate large machine dictionaries , cooperation with descriptive linguists , lexicographers , humanists using computers , etc . Today , particularly due to the pressing requests of the " language industry " sector for robust NLP components capable of dealing with real language uses  , tile process of convergence between the two approaches is underway  , and can be recognized as a major feature characterizing the present stage of development  . 
Programmes and actions promoted by the major international ndnational Funding Agencies have been of paramount importance in shaping the evolution of our field in this direction  . The Commission of the European Communities began to promote largescale activities in natural language processing more or less around the time of the BergenCOLING Conference in  1978  . I still rm nember the endless conversations and discussions taking place during the Conference cruise along the magnificent Norwegian fj ords  , stimulated by the rnmours that the Commission intended to launch programmes in machine translation and documentation  . 
The role and influence of the Funding Agencies has  , since then , dramatically increased . Furtbermore , to respond to the pressing needs of our multilingual society in producing  , distributing , accessing , and retrieving inlormation encoded in natural anguage  , international cooperation is crucial . Specifically , common policies , adequate linguistic infrastructures , standards for resources and product development must be established if we want an effective language technology and a real language industry  . 
For these reasons , we felt it was appropriate o organize , for the first time wth in COLING , a panel of tile representatives from European ( CEC , EUREKA ) , American ( DARPA , NSF ) and Japanese Funding Agencies to discuss needs , priorities , policies , and perspectives , and to setup a session dedicated to the presentation f representative largescale  , publicly funded projects . The global amount of resonrces made available to natural language processing activities and the awareness of the stategic relevance of possible industrial applications has increased in the last few years  . 
We have arrived at a very crucial stage : interest in our fiekland the anticipation of wdid results are great  . We must carefully evaluate hestate-of-the-art in relatioa to the various tasks and applications  , identify priorities in research and development , and seriously promote the integration of various approaches  . We hope that this COLING will provide a significant contribution towards these goals  . 
Pisa , Mayllth , 1992.
A ~: n'gs DECOLING-92 . Nnh'rlis , 2328 AoL'r 19926 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NAN'IES , AUG .  2328, 1992
Relecteurs Reviewers
Committeela ( phonology , morphology , syntax )


Hans Uszkoreit , Univ . of Saarbriicken


Anne Abcilld , Univ . Paris "/
Bran Buguraev , 1BM Yorktown Heights
Steven Bird , Univ . of Ediilburgh
Gosse Boulna , Univ . Groningen
Bob Carpenter , Carnegy Mellon Univ.
Larlri Carlson , Univ . of Helsinki
Martin Emele , Univ . Stuttgart
Alex Franz , CMU , Pittsburgh
Sebastian Millies , Univ . Saarbrucken
David Milward , Univ . Edinburgh
Klaus Netter , DFK\[Saarbrucken
Kurel Oliva , Univ . Saarbrucken
Steve Puhnan , SRI Cambridge
Michael Rosner , IDSIA Lugano
Hzu'ald Trost , Univ . Wien
Gertjan van Noord , Univ . Grouingen
Nino Varile , CEC Luxelnburg
Meg With gott , XEROXPAP , C
Henk Zeevat , Univ . of Amsterdam
Committeelb ( semantics & pragmatics)


Evallajicova , Charles Univ . ( Prague)


Diane Litman , Columbia University ( NY )
Bonnie Lynn Webber , University of Pennsylvania Wolfgang Wahlsler , DFKI ( S~mr bruecken)
Jens Erik Fen~lad , University of Oslo
Pctr Sgall , Charles University ( Prague)
Comnlitteel c(dialogue and discourse)


Candy Siduer , Carol ) ridge Resem'ch Lab ( DEC)


Dough Ls Appelt , SRl-lnternational
Jim Barnett , MCC
Mario Bnrillo , IRIT/CNRS
Susan Brennau , Univ of New Yorkat Stony Brook
Sandee Carberty , Univ of Delaware
Robert Dale , Univ . of Edinburgh
Brad Goodman , Milre Corp.
Julia Hirschberg , AT&T Bell Labs
Graeme Hirst , Univ of Toronto
Dianetlorton , Univ of Toronto
Edi\[ovy , 1S1 ( Univ . of S . Cal)lnderjcct Mani , MCC
Megumi Kaliicyaula , SRl-lnternational
Alex Lascarides , Univ . of Edinburgh
Diane Litman , Columbia Univ.
Susann Luperfoy , Milre Corp.
Kathy McCoy , Univ . of Delaware
Johanna Moore , Univ . of Pitlsburgh
Jon Oberlander , Univ . of Edinburgh
Cecile Paris , ISI ( Univ . of S . Cal )\ [ lecky Passoneau , Columbia Univ . 
Ehnd Reiter , Univ of Edinburgh
Elaine Rich , MCC
Gregory W~u'd , Northwestern Univ.
Bonnie Webber , Univ of Pennsylvania
Ursula Wok , Trenton State College
ACIICSD l::COLING 92 , NAhqI ~ S , 2328 Aoi-rl 19927 Pi ~ oc: , OFCOIAN ;-92 , NAN rrs . AUG .  2328, 1992
Committee2 ( computational methods )
Coordinator/Coordinateur
Mark Liberman , Univ of Pennsylvania
Reviewers/Lecteurs
Robert C . Berwick , MITAI Laboratory
Michael Brant , Johns Hopkins University
Peter F . Brown , IBM-'I '. J . Watson
Ken Church , Bell Laboratories
Ralph Grishman , New York University
Per-Kristian Halvorsen , Xerox PARC
Paul S . Jacobs , General Electric Corp . R&D Aravind Joshi , University of Pennsylvania Judith Klavans , IBMT . J . Watson Research Mitch Marcus , University of Pennsylvania Sergei Nirenburg , C~mgie Mellon University James Pastejovsky , Brandeis University Michael D . Riley , AT&T Bell Laboratories Yves Schabes , University of Pennsylvania Richard Sproat , AT&T Bell Laboratories Mark Steedman , University of Pennsylvania
Committee 3 ( Tools)
Coordinator/Coordinateur
Martin Kay , Xerox Parc
Reviewers/Lecteurs
John Maxwell , Xerox PARC
Hadar Shemtov , Stanford University
Committee 4 ( Large-Scale resources)
Coordinator/Coordinateur
DonWalker , AT&T Bell Labs
Reviewers/Lecteurs
Thomas Ahlswede , Central Michigan University Hiyan Alshawi , SRI International Cambridge
Shinya Amano , Toshiba R&D Center
Bran Boguraev , IBMT . J . Watson Resezu ' ch Center Mario Borillo , IRIT Univ crsite Paul Sahutic rEdward J . Briscoe , Cambridge University Roy J . Byrd , IBMTJ Watson Research Center
Nicoletta Calzolari , ILC(Pisa )
A.W . Cater , University College Dublin
Yaacov Choueka , Bar-Ilan University
Kenneth W . Church , AT&T Bell LaN ) ratories Martha W . Evens , llinois Institute of Technology William A . Gale , AT&T Bell Laboratories
Gerald Gazdar , University of Sussex
Cheng-Ming Guo , University College Dublin Louise Gutbrie , New Mexico State University
Karin Haenelt , GMD ( Darmstadt)
Eva Hajicova , Charles Univ . ( Prague)
Ulrich Held , Universitaet Suttgart
Peter Hellwig , Universila et Heidelberg
Donakl M . Hindle , Greenwich ( NJ )
Nancy M . Ida , Vassar College
Robert J . P . Ingria , BBN Systems & Technologies Paul S . Jacobs , General Electric Corporate R&D
Karen Jansen , Microsoft corp.
Judith Klavans , IBMTJ Watson Research Center
Karen Kukich , Bellcore
Thomas Landauer , Bellcore
Winfried Lenders , Universitact Bonn
Willy Martin , Free University Amsterdam
John McNaught , UMIST ( Manchester)
Willem Meijs , Amsterdam University
Alan K . Melby , BYU ( Prow ~, UT)
Makoto Nagao , Kyoto University
Mary S . Neff , IBM TJ Watson Research Center Sergei Nirenburg , Carnegie Mellon University James Pustejovsky , Brandeis University Graeme D . Ritchie , University of Edinburgh Salim Roukos , IBM TJ Watson Research Center
Graham Russell , ISSCO ( Geneva)
Michael Sherwood-Smith , University College Dublin
Stuart M . Shicber , Harvard University
Frank A . Smadja , Columbia University
Richard Sproat , AT&T Bell Laboratories
Hiroyuki Suzuki , Matsushita ( Tokyo Laboratory ) Hideki'Farina , NHKSo . & Techn . Research Labs
SyLmTutiya , Chiba University
Paola Velardi , Univ crsitadi Ancona
Jeau Veronis , Vassar College
Pick Vosscn , Amsterdam
Bonnie Lym ~ Wehtx ~ r , University of Pennsylvania Yorick A . Wilks , New Mexico State University Sho Yoshida , Kyushu Institute of Technology
Annie Zacnen , Xerox PARC ( Palo Alto)
Uri Zernik , GE-CRD
AcrEsDECOLING-92 , NA /' CrES , 2328 Ao(rr 19928 PROC . oi:COLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
Committee 5



Makoto Nagao , Kyoto University


Winfield Scott Bennett , LRC ( Siemens , Austin)
Louis Des Tombe , R1 LS ( Utrecht)
Bonnie J . Dorr , University of Mary hmd
Arnold Douglas , University of Essex
Ralph Grishman , New York University
Kooiti Ilashida , ICOT
Hitoshi Iida , ATR Inteq ) reting Telephony Pierrels a bell c , CCRIT/CWARC ( Montreal ) Yaso hiro Kamgiri , NqTBasic Research Labs Richard Kittredge , University of Montreal Kiyoshi Kogare , NTT Basic Research Labs
Yuji Matsumoto , Kyoto University
Michael McCord , IBMT . J . Watson Reserach Center Jtm-ichi Nakamura , Kyushu Institute of Technology Sergei Nirenburg , Carnegie Mellon University Yoshihiko Nitla , Ilitachi Basic Research Labs Naoyoki Okada , Kyushuinstitute of Technology
Elaine Rich , MCC
Christian Rohrer , Ulfiversita et Suttgart
Satoshi Sato , Kyoto University
Robert F . Simmmons , University of Texas at Austin Harry L . Somers , CCL ( UMIST , Manchester ) Hozumi Tanaka , Tokyo Institute of Technology Masaru Tomita , Carnegie Mellon University Junichi Tstljii , CCL ( UMIST . Manchester ) Peter Wallis , CITRI ( Carlton , Australia )
Susan Warwick , ISSCO ( Geneva)
Committee 6 ( NLP & hypermedia )


Stephen G . Pulman , SRI Cambridge


Iliyan Alshawi , SRI Canlbridge
Arnold Smith , SRI Cambridge
Ted Briscoe , Cambridge University
Manny P , ayner , SRI Cambridge
Karen Sparck Jones , Cambridge University
Steve Young . Cambridge University
Nick Youd , Logica Cambridge
Ewan Kiein , Edinburgh University (' ~ raeme Ritchie , Edinburgh University
Chris Mellish , Edinburgh University
I , ou is a Sadler , Essex University
Commitlee 7 ( generic questions in language industry ) 


Antoine Ogonowski . GSI-Edi


Jean FAP , GUES , IBM France
Corinne FOURNIER , DASS AUL TA VIATION
Kenii IIANATAKA , ARISGmbH
Ralph KESE , TP , IUMPH ADLFR
Joseph PENT\[tEROUI ) AKIS , ECS ( Provo)
Ac'rl~s DECOLING-92, NA . VI'ES , 2328 AOt ~ JT 19929 PROC . O1: COLING-92, NANIES , AUG .  2328, 1992
