Genus Disambiguation : A Study in Weighted Pre ference * 
Rebecca Bruce and Louise Guthrie
Compnting Research Laboratoly
Box 30001
New Mexico State University
Los Cruces , NM88003-0001

The atttolnatic oustmction of all ISA taxonomy of noun senses from a machine readable dictionary  ( MRD ) has long been sought , but achieved with only limited success . The task requires the solution to two problems : 1  ) To define an algorithm to automatically identify the genres or hypemym of a noun definition  , and 2 ) to define an algorithm for lexical disambiguation of the genus term  . In the last ~ ew years , effective methods for solving the first problem have been developed  , but the problem of creating an algorithm for lexical disambiguation of the genus terms is one that has proven to be very difficult  . In COL1NG   90 we described our it utial work on the automatic rea-tion of a taxonomy of noun senses from Longman's Dictiorlary of Contemporary English  ( LDOCE )  . The algorithm for lexical disambiguation of the genu stem l was accurate about  80% of the time aid made use of the semantic ategories  , the subject a realuark-ings and the frequency of use uffonnatiou in LDOCE  . 
In this paper we report a series of experim cuts which weight the three factors in various ways  , and describe our improvements to the algorithm ( to about 90% accnracy )  . 
1. Introduction
Much of tile previous research on the construction of networks of ganns terms front MRD's  ( Amsler and White 1979 ; Chodorow et al 1985 ; Nakanmra and Nagao 1988 ; Vossen 1990 ) rexluired human intervention 1o distinguish fire sanses . 
Recantly , several researchers ( Veronis and Ide 1990 ; Klavans et . al 1990 ; Copestake 1990 ; Vossen 1991 ) have suggested techniques for art tomatic disambiguation of these taxonomies based on neural net techniques  , word overlap , or bilingual dictionaries . The * ThiBr ~ trchw ~ ilupported by NSF Grant No  . IRI-8811108 . 
techniques we have used to construct a network of rial to senses autoluatically from tile Longman Dictionary of Coutenlporaly Falglish  ( LDOCE ) differs nbst~mtialiyt + romany of\[l'tose methods  . 
In ( Guthrie et al 1990) , we suggested and algorithm for disanlbiguating the gentls terms of nout ~ definitmns in LDOCE  . The procedure wensed was based on the assumption that the semantic relationship between the head word and its genus should be reflected m their  1  , 1 X ) CE semantic categories . In other words , the semantic ategory of timgenus word should be identical to  , or an ancestor of , the semantic category of the head word ( an ancestor is a superordinate term intire hierarchy ots emaltic codes  )  . 
tJs thg at and onts a Inpl c of 520 noun word sanse from
I , DOCE , we tested this assmnption.
The semanticategories used ( themate thirty-four in all ) we redetined by tile LlYOCE lexicographers , who placed sixteen of ttle basic categories in a hierarchy  . The notion of a " more general semantic categoly " was somewhat subjective  , as is illustrated in tile next section . 
The disaut biguation algorithm presented th ( Guthrie et at .  1990 ) utilized three factors in deter-mmmg the correct g cnns sense  . The algorithm is stated as follows : ? Choose tile genns sense with tile sames enlall tiC category as the head word  ( or closest more gan-eral category if this is not possible  )  . 
+ In the case of a tie , chons casense with has the sanle pragn latic ( ? le " In case there is still a tie , , or no germs sense meeting tim above criteria , choose the most fle-quently used sense : l : of the gemls word  . 
: cInlh ~ 2nd edition of LDOCE , rio:publida or sst ? , t ~ fl tat the ot'd~l " ill which word ~ lBe8 meliate ~ l correspond n to am fieatuency with which each ~ nnei + u ~ e  . d(ie . the tir+t ~ naeli ~? dintile most conmmnly u~d , ate . ) . W ~ have obnel vad ACRES DECOL 1NG-92 , NAND ~ S , 2328 AO~r19921187 PROC . OFCOL1NG-92, NAN rES , AUG .  23 28 ,   1992 The algorithm was successful abont 80% of the time . 
In an effort to improve the disambiguation algorithm  , we condncted a series of experiments designed to identify more completely the contribution of each factor consider hithe algorithm  . Since we considered three factors in determining the correct genus sense  ( the semantic ode relationship , the pragmatic code relationship , and the frequency information ) , we designed experiments of irst test each factor separately  , and then again in combination , weighting each input according to its individual predictive value  . Below we describe those experiments , beginning with the formulation of each factor , and und hig with the assignment of weights to the contribution of each input in file final disambiguation algorithm  . 
2. Sense Selection Based on LDOCE Semantic

This section describes our investigation of the use of semantic ategory information for disambigua-lion  , and outlines the problems in using that type of information  . The basic hierarchical strlm tum of the semantic odes provided by LDOCE is depicted in Figure  1  . In addition to the codes positioned in that tree structure  , seventeen other codes , which we refer to as " composite " are defined as follows: 
E = solid or liquid
U = collective and animal or human
O = animal or human ( sext m specified )
K = male ( ammal or human)
R = female ( animal or human)
V = plant or animal ( not human)
W = abstract and inanimate
Y = abstract oranimate
X = not concrete or animal ( abstractor htunan ) Z = unmarked ( no semantic restriction )   1 = human and solid 2 = abstract and solid 3 = " it " as subject or object 4 = physical quantities 5 = organic materials 6 = liquid and abstract 7 = g as and liquid To evaluate our assumption that the semantic category of the genus word is the same or more gen-that the listing order of senses in the letedition of LDOCE is similm " to that of the  2rid   , tnd have found empirical evidence in tim work of Guo  ( 1 9891 mad this Itudy to show that ? simi-htr connection botw tam the ord * r in which word ~ n ~ J rolisted And the  , fr ~ luoney with which they armu Jcd ( in LDOCE ) holds for the liteditionu well . 
era ) than the semantic ategory of the head word , it was necessary to define what we meant by " more general " for the composite categories  . We did this by incorporating the composite codes into the hierarchical structure display in Figure  1  , and defining a semantic distance between word senses based on the placement of their respective codes in the hierarchy  . 
It was obvious from the start that the addition of these cedeste the tree depicted in Figure  1 would create a tangled hierarchy . The problem was to decide where these codes should be placed in the trees tnlctnre in order to preserve inheritance  . For exmn-pie , shenld " E " ( the codefor " solid or liquid " ) be placed above or below " solid " and " liquid " , and would a similar placement hold for code 7 , which reads " g as AND liquid " ( as opposed to " liquid OR solid " ) ?
TC ( abstract )   ( coacrete ) \] Q ( inanimate )   ( animate ) 
SLGPAH ( mtid )   ( liquid )   ( gas )   ( plant )   ( animal )   ( l~umanl
JNBDMF ( movable t not movable ( animal ( animal ( humnn ( buntnnsolid ) u  ~ l ) \[ emale ) male ) male female ) 
Figure 1:
Basic Hierarchy of LDOCE Semantic Codes
To answer such questions , two types of studies were conducted . The first was an indepth look at the words marked with composite codes  ( nouns marked to identify a semantic ategory and adjectives and verbs marked as to their selection restrictions  )  . The second was a survey of the genus senses for head words with composite semantic odes  . As might be expected , there were inconsistencies in the assignment of nouns categories  . For example , within the " liquid " categories , we observed that nouns which represent both liquids and solids can be found in both categories L and E  , mad abstractions of liquids can be found in categories L  ,  6 , and 7 . This is not surprising , as it is difficult to create distinct categories for overlapping concepts  . 
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTEs , 2328 A Ot ; l "19921 !88 PROC . OI:COLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 Our proposed placement of composite codes within the hierarchy structure provided by LDOCE is presented in Figure  2  . In constructing Figure 2 , we attempted to create a hierardly which would reflect not only the data gathered on the properties of words assigned to each category  , but also the most frequently occurring superset for each composite code  , based ontire results of tile second study . 
Z ( no semantic rlnltriction)/2
T,W,X,Y~2,4,6,7C(abstract ) ( concrete)
LWQ , Y , S ( inanimate ) ( animate)
S , E , 1 , 2 , 5L , E , ~ , 7G , 7P , VA , O , VIt , O , X , l ( Iolid )   ( liquid )   ( gas )   ( plant )   ( animal )   ( human ) 
JNF , ,R D , KM , KF , R ( movable ( m~movable ( msmull ( aalmal ( human ( humans alkl ) solid ) femnle ) male ) auk ) female ) 
Figure 2:
Revised Hierarchy of LDOCE Semantic Codes Based on this study of the semantic odes used in LDOCE  , three in lplelnentations of a partial genus sense selection algorittun  ( partial be can seat this time we are only conside hng the contribution made by the semantic ode comparison to sense selection  ) were found to be possible . They are as follows : I . Selection of the genus sense with a minimum semantic distance fiom the head word sense  , where semantic distance is measured by the placement of the respective codes in the hierarchy presented in Figure  2  .   ( This formulation of a genus sense selection criteria is the basis of the algorithm reported in Guthrie et al  1990  . ) 2 . Choose the genus sense with a semantic ode belonging to firest one codeset as fire code of the head word  , where the codesets are the nodes of the tree structure presented in Figure  2  . 
3 . Select the genus sea \] se with a semantic ode identical to the head word  . 
3. Sense Selection Based on LDOCE Pragmatic

Tile pragmatic codes in LDOCE are another set of terms organized into a hierarchy  , although the hierarchy provided by LDOCE is quite fi at  . As stated earlier , these terms are used to classify words by subject area  . The LDOCE pragmaticoding system divides all possible subjects into  124 major categories , ranging frmnaer on autics , aerospace , and agriculture , to winter . sports , and zoology . The hierarchy is only two layers deep , and the 124 majol categories have equal a a ~ dun related status . 
Slator ( 1988 ) m \] plemented a scheme which impose deeper structure onto the LDOCE pragmatic code hierarchy  . He restructured the LDOCE pragmatic code hierarchy by making Communication  , Economics , Entertainment , Household , Politics , Science , and Transportation flm damental categories , and grouping all other pragmatic codes under those headings  . His restructuring of tile code hierarchy revealed that words classified under Bot any have pragmatic connectious to words classified as Plant-Names  , as well as connections with other words classified under 

We investigated four implementations of a germs sea ~ se selection algoritt un based on pragmatic codes  . The first implementation utilized the hierarchy developed by Slator  . In that schelne , file pragmatic cedes were arranged in a tree structure in which each node of the tree is a single pragmatice  ( xle . 
In addition , pragmatic codesets were defined direedy from Slator's hierarchy by creating seven large groups cort ~  . .sponding to the seven subtrees of tile top level of the hierarchy  . Each of the seve~lcode sets contained all codes descendant from tire correspending toplevel node  . Within this construction , lack of common set ment hership is a strong indication of disjoint subject areas  . 
In summa \ [ y , we proposed four approaches to genus sense selection based on praglnatic codes :  1  . Choose the ganus sense with minimmn pragmatic distance from the head word sense  , where pragmatic distance is measured by the placement of the respective codes in the hierarchy implenlented by Slator  . 
2 . Select the genus sense with a pragmatic ode belonging to the sane code set as the code of the head word  . Seven codesets were con-stmcted corresponding to the seven major divios in us of Slator's baerarc by  . 
3 . Rule out all head word/genus sense combina ~ tions with pragmatic odes that are not in the same code set  . 
AclT , : sDECOL 1NG-92 , NANTES , 2328 AO~I 19921189 Paoc . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AUo .  2328 .  1992 4 . Select the genns sense with a pragmatic ode identical to the head word  . 
4 . Results of the Experimentation All tests of the proposed sense selectien  6riteria we remn on the same random sample of 520 definitions . Table I provides a summary of the relevant test results  . Although each selection mechanism was evaluated separately  , because of the largen mnber of word senses having either redundaut code markings  , or no markings at all ( particularly with pragmatic odes )  , it was necessary to introduce a default or " tie breaking " mechanism for all selection criteria other than usage frequency  . Usage fie-quency was established as the default selection mechanism for all tests  . When no sense selection ( or nonnique sense selection ) could be made based on the criteria beiug tested , the sense selection was based on usage fi ' equency  ( i e . , of the competing senses , the sense cccurrmg first in the listing order was selected  )  . 
The variation in performance between all approaches developed for genus sense selection was relatively small-no more than  8%  . Both the best mad the worst performance of a single sense selection parameter was achieved using pragmatic code relationships  . The best performance ( 80% success rate ) resulted from requiring identical code markings for head word and genus senses  . The worst disambiguation performance was the resnlt of sense selection based on common pragmatic codeset membership  . 
The variation in disambiguation performance was small in the experiments which used only the semantic code information  . The maximum success rate of 77% resulted fi'om stipulating common codeset membership  , while the minimmn success rate was 75% for identical code designation . 
Some of the test results were uI~expected : for instance  , we did not expect selectien of the first sense listed to yield a  76% success rate . Net did we expect sense selection based on a subset/superset relationship between codes to be as unsuccessful as it was  , yielding no more than a 78% success rate for both pragmatic and semantic odes . 
Although the experiment showed that a direct in atch of pragmatic codes was the most success fifl single selectiou mechanism  , the result is somewhat misleading . Because many words have no pragmatic cede , the defanlt rule was applied often , resulting in the selection of the most frequently used sense  , l-lav-ing said that , it remains true that the tests show pragmatic code information to be the best predictor of the correct genus sense  , when it is present . 
SUMMARY OF DIS AMBIGUATION EXPERIMENTS
GENUSSENSESELECTION TESTRESULTS
MECHANISM ~, i ? ii
Se . le ~ on b4u ~ of tt ~ a'mntic codes: , ~ rupcrt ~ trd ~ on thip , iml : ~ , emeaated with code hiex ~ chy 75% corn ~ common code~t membership 77% cc~mctid catiod coded csignt don 75% 
Sclc ~ ic 4 abatedo ~ Ft , agmatic code a : ootra ' no a code set memb enhip 72% correct q , ,a~ , ,d ) tx~rrmm , ncodeletmembenthip 72% eotre ~( exdu Iive ) ,   , idledtxl dede Aignalioft 80% correct
Seie . oi on bated on Usage frequency:
Weighted .   3 pammem rS ~ teetion Algorithm common:mnumdce od c tO  . -weight1 id , mtieal p . m graatic code-weight I 80% u ~ frotu ~ cy-tie breakere on ma , ma*umatntic codev . ~- weight 1 ideatiettIntgautticode-we/S/at 2   80% correct usage frequency-ti~b~tkerram . male ~ hierarchy-weight 1 I2 .   .   .   . 
potg nutttecode hic nm~hy-weight 2   79% correctu ~ frequoacy-~~er , mmmatic codetet-weight 1 idmt tieal pragmatice od c-w~ght 2   90% cotretamttgcft'equea ~- tiehi~k ~ b~u~l-ca ~ ~ xcttai ~ s  . ind t ~ led Table 1: Suatmary of Disambiguation Experiments Table 1 also displays file results of tests performed using all three factors in combination  . These experiments were conducted to determine the optimum weight to assign each of the three factors when considering their ctanulative predictive capability  . The selection of weights was based on the performance of each factor individually  . Again , the variation in performance across all tests of different weighings was small  ( less than 1% )  . The highest success rate was achieved when pragmatic code information received tile greatest weight  . 
As a result of these tests , our disambiguation algorithm was forumlated as follows : ? Choese the most frequently used genus sense unless an altemate sense choice is indicated by a strong relationship between head word and genus codes  , either semantic or pragmatic . 
* If the sense selection based on semantic odes differs from that inferred by the pragmatic ACYES DE  COLING-92  , NAN qES , 2328 AOt ~ , r1992i190I)ROC . OFCOLING-92 , NANTES , AUtL2328 , 1992 codes , basefiles eine selection on tile prag-nlatic cedes  . 
? Select among conlpeting germs senses with identical code markings by choosing the most frequently used sense  . 
Bya " strong relationship " in the case of semantic odes  , wenleanmenlbership in files ai uecode set . This is not surprising due to the limited scope of the codesets  , and the in hel~nt overlap of the composite codes . Strong relationship for pragmatic codes means an exactulatch  . 
5. The Final Disambiguation Algurlthm
Review of tile output data from e , ach disaarbi-guation trial using tile tilrec parmncter algorithm revealed that tile majority of the failures were on a very small number of frequently occurring germs words  . Often , the pragmatic and senaintic classifications of these word senses were either deficient  ( lacking in code information )  , or redrmdant ( more than one word sense having the Sanlenmrk - ings  )  . Such situations frequently arise with very abstract words  ( e . g . pat , quality , piece , a ridntmaber ) where fllere arenn nlerous word seaises , and most ( if not all ) senses have identical semmltic odes mid no pragmatic codes  . 
The filial modific ahon to onrgent tsense selection algorithm was introduced to solve this problenl : the correct sense selections folwords with errors in their code information  , as well ascertain very general words are preselected  , and assumed to be constant . 
Fewer than ten words required haild coding of the correct sense and ahno at all were abstract words such as part or quality  . While it is tlue that tile majority of these words are " disturbed heads "  ( Gnthrie et al 1990 )  , and will , in the fnture , not seive as geims terms but rather as identifiers of alternate link types  , we still require that they be sense disambignated to serve as relation descriptors  . This fiiml modification to the sense selection algorithmm cleased pelfol-malice by  10%  , resulting in success rate of 90% . 
6, References
Amsler , Robert A ., and Jotm S . White (1979).
Developme Jtt of a Computational Methodology for Deriving Natural Lairguage Semailtic Structures via Analysis of Maehine-leadable Dictionaries  . Technical Report MCS77-01315,

Copestake A .  (1990) . An approach to building the hierarchical element of a lexical knowledge base from an m chine readable dictionary  , Proceedings of the First International Workshop on htheritance in Natural Language Processing  , Tilburg , The Nethell and s , pp .  19-29 . 
Clnxiurow , Martin S . , Roy J . Byrd , and George E . 
lteid or n (1983) . Extracting Semantic Hierar'-cities fiurna Large On Line Dichonary  . 
Prot:eedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the
ACL , Chicago , IL , USA , pp . 299-304.
Gno , Cheng-Ming (1989) . Constructing a Machine Tractable Dictionary From Longman Dictionary of Contemporary Farglish  , Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Science , MCCS-89-156 . Computing Research Laboratory , New
Mexico State University.
Gutinie , Louise , Brian Slator , Yorick Wilks , and Rebecca Bluce (1990) . Is the recontent ill Emptyt leads ? Proceedings of the  13th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING90 )  , Helsil ~ i , Finland ,  3 , pp . 138-143 . 
Klavails , J . , Chodorow , M . , Wacholder , N .  (1990) . 
From Dictionary to Knowledge Base Via Taxonomy . Proc . of tile 6th Conference UWC enter for ttw . New OED , Waterloo , pp .  110-132 . 
Nakanlura , Jnn-ichi , and Makoto Nagao (1988).
Extraction of Semantic hfformation fronlan OJdinary English Dictionary and its Evaluation  . 
Proceedings of the 12th International Confer-enee on Computational ldnguistics  ( COIJNG-88 )  , Budapest , Hungary , pp . 459-464 . 
Slator , Brian M (1988) . Constructing Contextually Organized Lexical Semailtic Knowledge-bases  . 
Proceedings of the Third Annam Rocky Mountain CorCercnce on Artificial Intelligence  ( RMCAI-88 )  , De , nvel , CO , pp .  142-148 . 
lde , N . N . and J Veronis (1990) . Very Large Neural Networks for Word Sense Disambignation  . 
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
ECAI'90, Stockhohn.
Vossen , P . (199 l ) . Polysemy and Vagueness of Meailing l ) eseiiptions in the Longman Diction-aiy of Contemporary English  . In J . Svart vikmid 11 . Wekkel(eds . ), 7bpics in English ldnguisties . Mouton de Gluyter . 
Acql~s DFCOLING-92 , NAN'I'ES , 2328 A Ot ; r1992119 lPROC . OFCOLING-92, NAN q'ES , AUG .  2328, 1992
