Parameterization of the Interlingua in Machine Translation 
Bonnie Dorr *
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
A.V . Williams Building , Room 3157
University of Maryland
College Park , MD 20742
e-mail:bonnie@umiacs.umd.edu
Abstract
The task of designing an interlingual machine translation system is difficult  , first because the designer must haven knowledge of the principles underlying cross~linguistic distinctions for the languages under consideration  , and second because the designer must then be able to incorporate this knowledg effectively into the system  . This paper provides a catalog of several types of distinctions among Spanish  , English , and German , and describes a parametric approach that characterizes these distinctions  , both at the syntactic level and at the lexical -semantic level  . The approach described here is implemented in a system called UNITRAN  , a machine translation system that translates English  , Spanish , and
German bidirectionally.
1 Introduction
What makes the task of designing an interlingual machine translation system difficult is the requirement hat the translator process many types of language-specific phenomena while still maintaining language-independent information about the source and target languages  . Given that these two types of knowledge ( language . specific and language-independent ) are required to fulfill the translation task , one approach to designing a machine translation system is to provide a common language  . 
independent representation tii at acts as a pivot between the source and target languages  , and to provide a parameterized mapping between this form and the input and output of each language  . This is the approach taken in UNITRAN , a machine translation system that translates English  , Spanish , * This paper describes research done at the University of Maryland Institute for Advanced Computer Studies and at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Labo ~ ratory  . Useful guidance and commentary during the research and preparation of this document were provided by Bob Berwick  , Gary Coen , Bruce Dawson , Klau-dis Dussa-Zieger , Terry Gaasterland , Ken Hale , Mike Kashk et , Jorge Lobo , Panla Merlo , James Pustejovsky , Jeff Siskind , Clare Vess , Amy Weinberg , and Patrick


Figure 1: Overall Design of the UNTRAN System and German bidirectionally  . The pivot form that is used in this system is a lexical conceptual structure  ( henceforth , LCS ) ( see Jackendoff (1983 ,  1990) , Hale & Laughren (1983) , Hale & Keyser (1986a , 1986b ) , and Levin & Rappaport (1986)) , which is a form that underlies the source-and target-language sentences  . 
The pivot approach to translation is called in -t cv liugual because it relies on an underlying form derived from universal principles that hold across all languages  . Within this framework , distinctions between languages are accounted for by settings of parameters associated with the universal principles  . 
For example , there is a universal principle that requires there to be a conceptual subject for each predicate of a sentence  . Whether or not the couceptual subject is syntactically realized is determined by a parameter associated with this principle : the null subject parameter  . This parameter is set to yes for Spanish ( also , Italian , Hebrew , etc . ) but no for English and German ( also French , Warlpiri , etc . ) . The setting of the null subject parameter accounts for the possibility of a missing subject in Spanish and the incorrectness of a missing subject in English and German  ( except for the imperative form )  . 
This paper argues that , not only should the syntactic component of a machine translation system be parameterized  , but other components of a machine translation system would also benefit from the parameterization approach  . In particular , the lexical-semantic omponent must be constructed in such a way as to allow principles of the lexicon to be parameterized  . Thus , UNITRAN uses two levels of processing , syntactic and lexical-semantie , both of which operate on the basis of language -independent ACRESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOt ~ r1992624 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328 ,   1992 knowledge that is parameterized to encode lauguage ~ specific information  ( see figure 1 )  . 
Within the syntactic level , the language-independent and language-speeilic information are supplied  , respectively , by the principles and pa-rmnetets of government -binding theory  ( henceforth , GB ) ( see Chomaky (1981 ,  1982)) . Within the lexical-semantie level , the language-independent and language-specific information are supplied by a set of general LCS mappings and the associated parameters for each language  , respectively . Tim interface between the syntactic and semantic levels allows the source-language structure to be mapped systematically to the conceptual form  , and it allows the target danguage structure to be realized systematically from lexical items derived from the conceptual form  . This work represents a shift away from coln-plex , language-specific syutactic translation without entirely abandoning syntax  . Furthermore , the work moves toward a model that employs a well -defined lexieal conceptual representation without requiring a " deep " semantic on ceptualizatiou  . 
Consider the following example : ( 1 )   ( i ) Istabbed Jnhn ( ii ) Yole dipufiala dasa Juan ' I gave knife-wounds to John ' This example illustrates a type of distiuctiou  ( henceforth called divergence as presented in Dorr  ( 1990a ) ) that arises in machine translation : the source -language predicate  , stab , is , napped to more than one target-language word , darpuiial a dasa . This divergence type is lezical in that there is a word selection variation between the source language and the target language  . Such divergeuees are accounted for by lexical -semantie parameterization  , as we will see in section 3 . 
The following section of this paper will provide a catalog of syntactic divergences between the source and target languages  . The set of parameters that are used to account for these divergences will be described  . In the third section , we will exanfine the divergences that occur at tire lexical-semantielevel  , and we will see how the parametric approach accounts for these divergences as well  . Finally , we will turu to the evaluation and coverage of tile system  . 
2 Toward a Catalog of Syntactic
Divergences
Figure 2 shows a diagram of the UNITItAN syntactic processing component  . The parser of this component provides a source -language syntactic structure to the lexical -semantic processor  , and , after lexical-semantic processing is completed , the generator of this component provides a target -language syntactic structure  . Both the parser and generator of this component have access to the syntactic principles of GB theory  . These principles , which act as constraints ( i . e . , filters ) on the syntactic structures pro-Figure 2: Design of the Syntactic Processing Component duced hy the parser and the generator  , operate on timbasis of parameter settings that supply certain lauguage-specific iulbrmation  ; this is where syntactic divergences are factored out from the lexical-semantic representation  . 
The Gll principles and parameters are organized into modules wht me constraints are applied in the following order :  ( 1 ) X , (2) Boundiug , (3) Case , (4) ' i Yace , (5) I linding , and (6) 0 . A detailed descriwtiou of these modules is provided in Dorr  ( 1987 )  . 
We will look t , riefiy at a number of these , /hens-ing on how syntactic divergences are accounted for by this approach  . Figure 3 smmnarizes the syntactic divergences that are revealed by the parametric variations presented here  . l2 . 1 Principles and Parameters of the X

The X " constraiut module of the syntactic omponent provides the phrase-structure representation fsen-te nees  . In particular , the fundamental principle of the X module is that each phrase of a sentence has a mazimal projection  , X-MAX , lorahead of category X ( see tigure 4) . ~In addition to the head X , a phrasal projection potentially contaius atellites  c~1  , a  ~ , ill , f12 ,  71 , and 72 , where cqatt d ~2 are any nuln-ber of maximally adjoined adjuncts positioned ac-curding to the adjuaclion parameter  , fllaud f12 are arguments ( ubjects aud objects ) ordered according to the constituent order parameter  , and 71 and 72 are any number of minimally adjoined adjuncts p ~ sitioued according to the adjunctiou parameter  .   3 t The syntactic divergences are enumerated with r ~spect to the relevant p as a metera and modules of the syntactic omponent  . The figure illustrates the effect of syntactic parameter settings on tile constituent sructure for each language  . ( In this figure , E stands for English , G for German , S for Spanish , and I for Icelandic . ) aThe possibilities for the category X are : ( V ) erb , ( N ) ou a , ( A ) djective , ( P ) reptmition , ( C ) omplementizer , and (1) affection . ' t'ite Complementizer corresponds to relative pronoun such as that in the matt that I saw  . 
The Intlection M category corresponds to modal such as would in  1 would eat c t t k e . 
3This is a revised version of the " X-Theory presented in Chomsky  ( 1981 )  . Ti readjunction par ~ ueter will not be discussed here  , but see Dorr (1987) for details . 
A CrEs DECOTING-92 , NANTES , 2328^O ~"199262 SPaoc . OFCOL1NG-92, NANYV . S , AUO .  2328 ,   1992 Syntactic Divergence Examples Parameter GB Module
E , S : V precc d ? ~ object constituent X
G:V followe object order
E : P stranding allowed proper Gov ~ t
S , G : NoP stranding allowed governors
E , G : Fronted question word bounding Bounding beyondingle sentence nodes level not allowed 
S : Fronted quenion word beyond single sentence level allowed 
E , G : Pnot ? ~ quired before type of verbal object an aoci-governmentated with elitic 
S : prequired before verbal object a ~ aociated with elitic E  , G : Subject required in ms-null nub-trlx claule ject 
S : Subject not required in matrix clau ~
E , S , G : Anaphor ( e . g . , him . governing Binding self ) must have an-category tecedent inside near-et a dominating clauBe 
Anuphor ( e , g ., siq)
I : may have antecedent outside nearest dominating clause 
E : No empty pleonastics NDP0 allowed
S : Emptyple on aatical-lowed
G : Emptyple on a stics in embedded claunes only Figure  3: Summary of Syntactic Divergences
X-MAX./!\.

Figure 4: Phrase Structure Representation Given this general i phrase-structure presentation  , we can now " fit " this template onto the phrase structure of each language by providing the appropriate settings for the parameters of the X module  . 
For example , the constituent order parameter characterizes the word order distinctions among English  , Spanish and German . Unlike English and Spanish , German is assumed to be a subject-object-verb language that adherest ot im verb-second requirement in matrix clauses  ( see Safir ( 1985 ) ) . Thus , for the sentence 1 have seen him , we have the following con-trusting argument structures :  ( 2 )   ( i ) I have seen him ( ii ) Yo hevisto adl ' I have seen ( to him ) '  ( iii ) Ich habei hnge sehen ' I have him seen ' The X module builds the phrase-structure from the general scheme of figure  4 and the parameter settings described above . The principles and parameters of the remaining modules are then applied as constraints to the phrase-structure presentation  . 
We will no we x am in each of the remaining modules in turn  . 
2.2 Principles and Parameters of the
Government Module
Government Theory is a central notion to the Case and Trace modules  . A familiar example of the government principle in English is that a verb governs its object  .   4 We will examine the effect of this module in sections  2  . 4 and 2 . 5 . 
2.3 Principles and Parameters of the
Bounding Module
The Bounding module is concerned with the distance between pairs of coreferring elements  ( e . g . , trace-antecedent pairs ) . The fundamental principle of the bounding module is that the distance between coreferring elements is not allowed to be more than one bounding node apart  , where the choice of bounding nodes is allowed to vary across languages  . 
The bounding nodes parameter setting accounts for a syntactic divergence between Spanish and English  ( and German ) :  ( 3 )   ( i ) * Wholdid you wonder whether tiwent to school ? ~   ( ii ) LQui6n , creestfique tirue alaesenela ? The reason ( 3 ) 0 ) is ruled out is that the word who has moved beyond two bounding nodes  . It turns out that the corresponding Spanish sentence  ( 3 ) ( ii ) is wellformed since the choice of bounding nodes is different and only one bounding node is crossed  . 
2,4 Principles and Paranaeters of the Case
Module
The Case module is in charge of ensuring that all noun phrases are properly assigned abstract case  ( e . g . , nominative , objective , etc . ) . The Case Filter rules out any sentence that contains a non-case-marked noun phrase  . 
The notion of government is relevant o case assignment since an element assigns case only if it is a governing case-assigner  . Tile setting of the type of government parameter for English  , Spanish , and German characterizes the following divergences :  ( 4 )   ( i ) Isaw Guile ? I saw to Guile ( ii ) * Lovi Guille
Lovia Guiles ( iii ) lchsah Guile?lch sahzn Guille 4See Dorr ( 1987 ) for a more formal definition of the government principle  . 
sit who is spoken emphatically , this sentence can almost be understood as an echo question corresponding to the statement I wondered whether John went to school  . 
AcrEsDECOLING-92 , NANteS , 2328^O ~"1992626 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992 2 . 5 Principles and Parameters of the Trace
Module
After case has been assigned , the Trace module applies the empty category principle  ( ECP ) which checks for proper government of empty elements  . 
The ECP is parameterized by means of the null subject parameter  . As discussed in section 1 , the null subject parameter accounts for the null subject distinction between Spanish  , on the one hand , and F , n-glish and German on the other : ( 5 )   ( i ) Voviellibro
Viellibro ( ii ) I saw the book * Saw the book ( iii ) Ich salt das Buch * Sahd as Buch Art additional parameter that is relevant o the Trace module is the proper governors parameter  . The choice of proper governor accounts for preposition-stranding distinctions in the three languages :  ( t ; )  ( i ) \[ mM x x What store \] i did John go to ti ? r ( f i ) *\[ N . IdaXCu ~ I tienda \] irue Juanati ? ( iii ) *\[ mMAX Welchem Geseha . ft\]igeht Johannzuti?2 . 6 Principles and Parameters of the
Binding Module
The Binding module is tire final module applied before thematic roles are assigned  . This module is concerned with the coreference relations among noun phrases  , and it is dependent on the governing category parameter  , which specifies that a governing category for a syntactic on stituent is  ( roughly ) the nearest dominating clause that has a subject . This parameter happens to have the same setting for English  , Spanish , and German , but see Dorr ( 1987 ) for a description of other settings of this parameter  ( e . g . , for Icelandic ) based on work by Wexler & Manzini ( 1986 )  ,  2 . 7 Principles and Parameters of the 0
Module
The 0 module provides the interface between the syntactic omponent and the lexical-aemantic component  . In particular , the assignment of the malic roles ( henceforth 0-roles ) after parsing leads into the construction of the interlingual form  . 
The fundamental principle of the 0 module is the O-Criterion which states that a lexical head muste As noted in Jaeggli  ( 1981 )  , animate objects ( e . g . , Guille ) are a ~ ociated with a clitic pronoun ( e . 9 . , Io ) only in certain dialects such as that of the River Plate area of South America  . 
7The t ~ constituent is a trace that corresponds to the noun phrase that has been moved to the front of the sentence  . 
2 ~ L./__\
Figure , 5: Design of the Lexieal-Semantic Compo ~
Ilent assign 0-roles in uunique one-to-one correspondence with the argument position specified in th clexical entry for the head  . One of the parameters ax~oci-ated with the 0 \[ nodule is the unto-drop paradigm ( NDP ) parameter ( based on work by Safir ( 1985 ) ) . 
This parameter accounts for the distinction between English  , on the one hand , and Spanish and German , on the other hand , with respect o the subject of an embedded clause :   ( 7 )   ( i ) * 1 know that was dancing ( ii ) Yosd que hah faun halle'1 know that ( there ) was a dance ' ( iii ) Ich we ill , daft get an zt wurde ' I know that ( there ) wa~dancing'Ones all 0-roles are assigned , the lexical-semantic component of the translator composes the interlingual representation for the source and target language  . The next section will describe the lexical -semantic omponent  , and it will show how this com ~ l ) onent accounts for a number of divergences outside of the reahn of syntax  . 
3 Toward a Catalog of
Lexica I-Semantic Divergences
Figure 5 shows a diagram of the UNITRAN lexical-semantic processing component  . A detailed description of the lexical conccplual structure  ( LCS ) which serves as the interlingua is not given here  , but see Dorr (1990b ) for further discussion , s 81 n general , the LCS representation follows the format proposed by Jackeudoff  ( 1983 ,  1990 ) which views semautic representation as a subset of conceptual structure  . Jackeudoff's approach includes such notious as Event and State  , which are specialized into primitives such as (30 , STAY , BE~GO-EXT , aud ORIENT . As an example of how the primitive GO is used to represent sentence semantics  , consider the following sentence : ( s )   ( i ) The ball rolled toward Beth . 
( ii )\] EventGO(\[Thing BALI . l , \[ PithTO(lPolitioaAT(\[Thl as BALI , l , \[Thin ~ BI~TII\] ) I ) \] ) I This representation illustrate ~ one dimension ( i . e . , the spatial dimension ) of J~vck end off's representation . Another dimension is the causal dimension , which includes ACTESDECOLING-92 . NANTES , 2328 AOt'n'1992627 l'e,OC . OVCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
Diuergence Examples \[( Parameter)
E : enter : John entered Structural the house (*)
S:entrar : Juanentr 6enlac Ma
G : ( hine in ) treten : J ~ harmt ratin a Haushine in
E : like : I like Mary Thematic
S:gustar : Megusts (: INT , : EXT)

G : 9e fallen : Mariege fKIItmir
E : be : I am hungry Categorial
S:tener : Yotengo (: CAT ) hambre
G ; hubert : lch habe

E : like : 1 like eating Demotional
S:gustar : Megusta (: DEMOTE ) comer
G:gem:Ich~gem
E : usually : John usu-Promotional ally goea home  ( : PROMOTE ) 
S:soler : Juanaueleirac Ma
G:gew Jhnlich : Johannge htge wShn lichnach Hauae
E : stab:Istabbed John Conflatio aal
S : dar:Yoledi ( : CONFLATED ) pufial adaaa Juan
G:erJtechen : lcher-atach Johann
Linking rule l\]inking rule

Linking rule
Linking rule
Linking rule
Figure 6: Summary of Lexical-Semantie Divergences What is important to recognize about tiffs pro-ceasing component is that  , just as the syntactic component relies on parameterization to account for source-to-target divergences  , o does the lexical-semantic omponent . The parameterization f this component is specified by means of language-specific lexical override markers associated with the LCS mapping betweeu the syntactic structure and the interlingua  . 
We will look briefly at the principles and parameters of the lexical-semantic component  , focusing on how a number of divergences are accounted for by this approach  . Figure 6 summarizes the lexical-semantic divergences that are revealed by the parametric variations presented here  . 9 the primitives CAUSE and LET . A third dimension is introduced through the notion of field  . This dimension extends the semantic overage of spatially oriented primitives to other domains uchas Possssional  , Temporal , Identificational , Circumstantial , and Existeutial . 
9The divergences are enumerated with respect to the relevant principles and parameters of the lexical-semantic omponent  . In contras to the summary of syntactic divergences in figure  3  , which enumerates the effect of syntactic pixameter settings on constituent structure  , the list of divergences presented here is specified in terms of the effect of LCS parameter settings on the realization of specific lexical items  . 
X-MAX X~o IX-MAX a2/\i . Syntactic specifier (/ ghCB10D2)
Ol , ogical subject ( fil L ) 2 . Syntactic omplements ( ) illO~2-P ~)
OLogical arguments ( B~UB~-fl~.)
S . Syntactic adjuncts ( al Oa2o " rlO "/2 ) OLogical Modifiers ( a ~ U a ~ U ~ i u 7~ )  4 . Syn~tichead(X )
OLogical head(XI)
Figure 7: LCSLinking Rule Between the Syntactic
Structure and the Interlinguayutactic'atcgory ~ VZNT 











INTENSIFIERADV
PURPOSE ADV
Figure 8: C , S~Correspondence Between LCS Type and Syntactic Category  3  . 1 Principles and Parameters of the
Lexical-Semantic Component
The algorithm for mapping between the syntactic structure and the interlingua relies on the output of #- role assigmnent  ( in the analysis direction ) and feeds into 0-role assignment ( in the synthesis direction )  . Tile 0-roles represent positions in the LCS representations of lexical entries associated with the input words  . Thus , the construction of the interlin-gun is essentially a unification process that is guided by the pointers left behind by  0-role assignment . 
The mapping , or linking rule between the syntactic positions and the positions of the LCS representation is shown in figure  7  . In terms of 0-role assignment , hephrasal head X assigns #- roles corresponding to positions in the LCS associated with Xj  . For example , the syntactic subject Bk is assigned the logical subject position f l ~ in the LCS  . Once all these roles have been assigned , the interlingual representation is composed simply by reenrsively filling the arguments of tile predicate into their assigned 
LCS positions.
ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 A OtYr 1992628 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO .  2328 , 1992 Ill addition totile LCS linking rule , there is another general rule associated with tile lexical = semantic omponent : the canonical syntacliere pre-schist \] on  ( CSW ,  . ) function . This fm tc tion associates an LCS type ( e . g . , TIIIIII3) with a syntactic ategory ( e . g . , N-MAX ) ( see figure 8) . 
The LCSLinking rule and the CS~function are the two fundmnental principles of the lexical = semantic omponent  . In order to account for lexical-semantic divergenc ~  , these principles nmst be pa-rameter \] zeal . In general , translation divergences occur when there is all exception to one  ( or both ) of these principles in one language , but not in the other . Titus , the lexical entries have bccn constructed to support parametric variation that accounts for such exceptions  . The parameters are used in lexical entries as overrides for tile LCS linking rule and  ( JS~function . We will now examin examples of how each parameter is used  . 
3.1.1% ' Parameter
The '*' parameter refers to an LG'S position that is syntactically realizable in the surfitce sentence  . This parameter accounts for sSructural divergence  :   ( 9 )   ( i ) John entered the house ( ii ) Juanentr 6enlacasa ' John entered ( into ) the house ' Here , the Spanish sentence diverges structurally from the English sentence since the noun phrase  ( the house ) is realized as a prepositional phrase ( enlacuss )  . In order to account for this divergence , the lexicon use stile * marker ill the LCS representation associated with the lexical entries for enter and en-trn r  . This marker specifies timp brasal level at whict l an argument will be projected : in tile Spanish lexical entry  , the marker is associated with all LCS position that is realized at a syntactically higher phrasal level than that of tile English lexical entry  . 
3.1.2: INT and : EXT Parameters
The : INT and : EXT paraineters allow tile I , CS linking rule to be overridden by associating a logical subject with a syntactic omplement aud a logical argument with a syntactic subject  . At ) o ~ i bl c effect of using these parameter settings is that there is a subject-object reversal during translation  . Such a reversal is called a thematic divergcuee :   ( 10 )   ( i ) Ilike Mary ( ii ) Megnats Maria ' Mary pleases me'tlere , the subject of the source-languages ntence , I , is translated into all object position , and the object of the source-language sentence Maria is translated into a subject position  . Ill order to accouut for this divergence , the lexicon uses the : INT and : EXT markers in the LCS representation associated with the lexieal entries for gustar  . The English lexieal entry does not contain the sc marker since tile LCS linking rule does not need to be overridden in this case  . 
3.1.3: CAT Parameter
The: ( ~ A Tlllarker provides a syntactic category for all LCS argument  . Recall that the CS'K function maps all LCS type to a syntactic ategory  ( see figure 8 )  . When this mapping is to b cover ridden by a lexicaI entry  , the language-specific marker : CAT is used , This parameter accounts for categorial divergence  :   ( 11 )   ( i ) 1 am hungry ( ii ) ich hahe Hunger ' l have hsnger ~ llere , not only a ret l~e predicates be and hubert lexically distinct  , but the arguments of these two predicates are categorially divergent : ill English  , the ur-gmnent is all adjectival phrase , and , ill German , the argument is a noun phrms e . ? ~' bc:CAT marker is used in the Gernmn definition to force the PROP-EWFYal'glnln~nttO be realized as a norm rather than an adjective  . Thus , the ( 2S ~ function is overridden daring realization of tile word Hunger in this exam-pie  . 
3 . 1  . 4: DEMOTE and : PROMOTE~lar~tln ( ~ t\[JrsThe:I ) EMOTE and : PROMOTE markers , like the : INT and : EXT markers , allow the LCS linking rule to be overridden by iL ~sociating a logical head with a syntactic adjunct or complement  . The sella-t'ameters account , respectively , for demoiioual divergence : ( 12 )   ( i ) 1 like to eat ( ii ) l chease gem ' I eat likingly ' and promotional divergence :  ( 13 )   ( i ) John usually goes home ( ii ) Juans selcira I : zLs a ~ Johlt telt ds to go home ' in the first case  , thc English main verb like corresponds to tile adjunct geru in German  , and the embedded verb eat corresponds to the main verbessen in German  . Ill the second case , tile English adjunct usually corresponds to the main verb soler in Spanish  . ' Fhese " head switching " divergences are acconnno dated analogously : the :\]  ) EMOTE marker is used in the lexical entry totger ~ t and the : PRO-MO'l'l  , ; ~ . vker is used in the lexical entry for soler . 
3.1.5: C . ONF LATED Parameter
The sixth LCS parameteristile : GONI " LATED marker  . This marker is used t br indicating that a particular argument need not be realized in tile surhtcc representation  . This parameter accounts for couflational divergence aa in the sentence Istabbed John  ( see ( 1 ) from section 1 )  . In this example , the AcrEs DECOL1 NG=92 , NANTES , 2328 A ?) t ~ l1992629I)ROC . OVCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
Ulasso ? Verb
Position ~ ngeoo.,t lo ~"--
I ~ irected Motion " Mo'tion with Manner

Phy $ icM State
Ch ' anseot Phy * ical
State/brient at long xittence



Perteption and

Menial Proceu


Contact/Elect
Lextcal Prsmt ~ es 9TAY . TEMP , STAY-LOC , BF . Tg MP,
DE . LOC ~ Q-LOC , GO-TEMP
GO-LOC , Go . PaSS


EE-IDENT , STAY-IDENT

O~IENT-LOC . . .
EE-\],~XIST , GO . EXIST , STAY-EXIST
BE . CIRC , GO-CIRC , STAY-ClUe-G"c~-EXT-IDENT , OO-EX ~ ,  - -

ORIENT-CIRC , ORIENT-TEMP
B~POS9, STAY-POSS--7~E:IDENT
HEAP~-P~RC , SEE-PERC
B~-PEn . C,GO . PERC


Figure 9: Coverage of Lexica I-Semantic Primitives argument that is incorporated in the English sentence is the\[  IIIFE-I/0tlND argument since the verb stab does not realize this argument  ; by contrast , the Spanish construction darpn ~ ialad as a explicitly realizes this argument as the word pnCLaladas  . Thns , the : CONFLATED marker is associated with the I ~ Ii IFE-WOUI ~ argument in the case of stab  , but not in the ease of dar . 
4 Evaluation and Coverage
One of the main criteria used for evaluation of the parameterization framework described herc is the ease with which lexieal entries may be automatically acquired from online resources  . While testing the framework against this metric , a number of results have been obtained , including the discovery of a fundamental relationship between the lexical-semantie primit ives and aspectnal information  . This relation-stlip is crucial for demonstrating the snceess of the parameterization approach with respect to lexical acquisition  . Details about the lexical acquisition model and results are presented in Dart  ( 1992 )  . 
We have already examined the syntactic and lexieal -semantic coverage of the system  ( see figures 3 and 6 above )  . The linguistic coverage of the lexicon is summarized in figure  9  . 
5 Conclusion
The translation model described here is built on the basis of a parametric approach  ; thus , it is easy to change from one language to another  ( by set-ting syntactic and lexical switches for each language  ) without having to write a whole new processor for each language  . This is an advance over other machine translat ion systems that require at least one  language-8pecific processing module for each source-language /targeto language pair  . 
The approach is interlingual : an underlying language-independent form of the source language is derived  , and any of the three target languages , Spanish , English , or German , can be produced from this form . Perhaps the most important advance of UNI-TRAN is the mapping between the lexical-semantie level and the syntactic level  . In particular , tile 8ys ~tern has been shown to select and realize the appropriate target-language words  , despite the potential for syntactic and lexical divergences  . The key to being able to provide a systematic mapping between languages is modularity : because the system has been partitioned into two different processing levels  , there is a dee oupling of the syntactic and lexical o semantic decisions that are made during the translation process  . Titus , syntactic and LCS parameter settings may be specified for each language without hindering the processing that produces  , and generates from , the interlingual form . 
6 References
Chomeky , Noam A . (1981) Lectures an Government and Binding , Forts Publieations ~ Dordrecht . 
Choranky , Noam A .   ( 1982 ) ~ Some Concepts and Consequences of the Theory of Government and Binding  , "MIT PresLD or r , Bonnie J .   ( 1987 ) " UNITRAN : A Principle-Ba~dApp ~ ach to Machine Translation  , " AI Technical Report 1000 , MM ter of Science thesis , Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science  , Mauachusetts Institute of Technology . 
Dorr , Bonnie J .   ( 1990a ) " Solving Thematic Divergences in Machine Tranalation p " Proceedings of the  ?8th Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Uni-verlity of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA ,  127-134 . 
Dart , Bonnie J .   ( 1990b ) " A Croda-Linguistic Approach to Machine Translation  , " Proceeding so \] the Third International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Ma  . 
chine Translation of Natural Languages , Linguistics Research Center , The Univerlity of Texai , Austin , TX ,  13-32 . 
Dorr , Bonnie J .   ( 1992 ) " A Parameterized Approach to \] ntegrat-in K Aspect with Lexical-Semantics for Mwehine Translation  , " Proceedings of the 3Oth Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , University of Delaware , 
Newark , DE.
Hale , Kenneth and M . Laughren ( 1983 ) " Warlpiri Lexicon Project : Warlpiri Diction ~ , ryEntries , " Mm~achusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA , Warlpiri Lexicon Project . 
Hale , Kennetb and Jay Keyaer ( 1986 a ) " Some q Y ansitivity Alternations in English , " Center for Cognitive Science , MEte . 
sachuaetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA , Lexicon
Project Working Papers #7.
Hale , Kenneth and J . Keyler (1986b ) " A View from the Middle , " Center for Cognitive Science , Ma~achuaetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA , Lexicon Project Working Paper n#1 0 . 
Jackendoff , Ray S . (1983) Semantics and Cognition , MIT Pre ~ a ~
Cambridge , MA.
Jackendoff , Ray S . (1990) Semantic Structures , MIT prea a ~ Cambridge , MA . 
Jaeggli , Osv~ldoA dolfo (1981) Topics in tlomanee Syntax , Forts Publications , Dordrecht , Holland/Cinnamina on , USA . 
Levis , Beth and Malka Rappaport ( 1986 ) " The Forn\]ation of Adjectival Passives , " Linguistic Inquiry 17 ,  623-662 . 
S ~ flr , Ken (1985) " Missing Subjects in German , " in Studies in German Grammar , Toman , Jindlfich ( ed . ) , Foria Publications , Dordrecht , Holland/Cinnaminnon , USA ,  19::1-229 . 
Wexler , Kenneth and M . Rite Manzini (1986) " Parameters and l . earnability in Binding Theory , " pr~ented att be Go#nitiue Science Seminar , MIT , September , Cambridge , MA . 
Zubiaarreta , Maria Luis ~ ( 1987 ) Leveb of Representation i the Lexicon and in the Syntax ~ Foris Publications  , Dordrecht , Hol-land/Cinnaminmon , USA . 
Acr~ . s DECOLING-92 , NAbr rES , 2328 AO~-~'1992630 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
