TYPOLOGYSTUDYOFFRENCHTECHNICALTEXTS,
WITHAVIEWTODE VELOPING AMACHINE
TRANS LATION SYSTEM

B ' VITAL ( SITE group)
35 rue J . Chanrion-38000 Grenoble-FRANCE
tel:+33765 10496
email : BRoudaud@site-maisons-alfort.fr

Within the industrial context of the information society  , technical translation represents a considerable commercials take  . In the light of this , machine translation is considered as being an application of paramount importance  . It is for this reason that the activities of B ' VITAL have always centered around the processing of technical texts  . 
The following article gives an account of the various tasks carried o at over the last few years on corpus analysis  . We have drawn conclusions as to the validity of the notion of text typologies  , applied in particular to technical matter , with a view to developing a machine translation system  . The study was conducted using a fair amount of French documents and has led us to observe in particular  , that a same typology may be identified in texts originating from varying fields  . 

The technical iterature of a nuclear plant represents about  150   000 pages ( figure quoted by EDF , France , in 1990) . About 20   000 pages make up the maintenance literature of a an aircraft  , of which 5   000 are subject to revision every three months on average  . 
In France , the cost per page for a translation varies from 250 to 400 francs for a translation from French to one of the other European languages  ( according to Bossard Consultants )  , which amounts to 6 million francs for the maintenance literature of an aircraft  . 
If a machine translation system is able to reduce considerably the time spent per page by translators  , even if the result is not perfect , it will signify again with respect to delivery times and costs  . 
To avoid problems concerning nonstandardised terminology  , we have endeavoured to stick to the terms familiar to traditional grammar  , even though they may not always be appropriate . 
I wiah to thank my colleagues , D . Baehut , O . Gamrat and
M.C . C . Puerta , for their help.
1-DEFINITION OFTHE
CORPUSSTUDY
According to our method , based on GETA's works ( Grenoble ) , if the MT system comes across a nonhandled phenomenon  , the sentence is not rejected and translation is carried through using those parts of the sentence which have been successfully analysed  ( CL\[1\]&\[2\] )  . Within the framework of an industrial application in which the ratio of development costs to gain in quality is preponderant  , r are phenomena may thus be handled in a very simplified way  , or even not handled at all . 
Midway between controlled syntax systems and systems ' which translate very thing '  , our approach to MT favours the development of systems adapted  , aposteriori , to the texts to be translated . This theory goes by the assumption that it is possible to define and then recognise the typology of texts  , specifying in particular their form , the linguistic phenomena present or absent and the general vocabulary used  ( excluding terminology )  . 
The study , which was strongly influenced by the MT application  , began in 1984 , during the French Projet National de Traduction Automatique  ( PNTAO )  , with an intensive research phase . It is still currently in progress although only sporadically  , with the study of new texts . 
The first study aimed at proving that it was possible to define a typology for the given corpus  . Its result was the definition of an initial typology  ( less restrictive than the METEO typology for instance  , see\[6\]) , which was further efined ( though no tradically changed ) during the years which followed . The definition of file typology retained consisted of a list of the phenomena handled  , in other words , a list of the static grammar charts ( Cf .  \[2\] & \[3\] ) which are part of the linguistic specifications of the system  . We will not give a full formal explanation of the defined typology  , however , we will view it from a more informal point of view  . 
The whole corpus was made up of documents in French provided by different fh'ms  ( Sonovision , SITE , A6 rospatiale , EDF , Rh6ne Poulenc , Syseca . . . ) . It consists mainly of a eronautical documents ( maintenance documents , job cards . . . ) , data processing texts ( extracts from reference documents or from user guides  , or ACRESDE COLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AO~T 1992I284 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 , 1992 softwar error messages ) , minutes of meetings , extracts from workschedules or from technico -commercial documents  . 
The aeronautical documents which make up the greater part of the corpus  ( about 50% )  , maintenance manuals and job cards , were initially chosen as the basic corpus for the PN'f AO for  , several reasons : they were available ill machine readable form  , at Souovisiou ( which later became the SITE group )  , they corresponded to a consklerable commercial need  , they concerned a sector of strong export activity  , they were representative of a large number of technologies  ( mechanics , data processing , fluid mechanics , trength of materials , etc . ) . 
It is for these reasons that they coustitute even today  , an important source of enrichment for the corpus . 
The initial corpus was made up of about 400 pages taken from maintenance and service guides of Marcel Dassault aircraft  . Part of the texts , provided with the English translation , were made up of job cards . I~t ch job card indicates how to go about a specific servicing operation  . They contain general recommea & ltions and precise instructions : 
NOTA :
L ' aviondolt ~ trearn arr ~ I or squelavlt essed u ventrisque de d~passerbOnoeuds  . 
Pour lesvent stresviolents , iest pr  #f  #rable demettre I ' avion sous abrL
A-Preparation dutravaila . Proc~dcrau campement de I'avion(voir02 . 1I ) . 
B-Execution del'operatlon 0 IDeposer " lesportes 1905  ,  1907 ,   4106   02 Visser une attached ' a marrage surchaquer rure The other texts were ~ rvi cenotes describing an apparatus or a mechanism  , how it functions and the servicing procedures to be followed  . The following is an illustration of this second type of text : section  I0 ~UTILISA\]ION 1 I-Description-Fonctionnement
I ; . I-G ~ n ~ ralltes
Ler accord auto-obturable d ' un ) quipement mtacanlque apour but d ' as surerle raccordementraplded'unegent  ) ration l~ydl ' aullque ~ unbancdetestetpermet laml seen fonct londes d if  f6rents organes de celteg ~ n ~ ratlonhy drauliques aris perted e 
Ii quidee\[sansen treed ' air.
Leraccord auto-obturable serteg alement au remplls sage et aud ~ gazage des circuits  , 
The study enabled us top in point tile characteristic of these two types of texts  , It turned out that their typology was identical . The main difference is at form level : the first type of text contains enumerated instructions  , generally described using short phrases without fnll stops and which do not exist in the second type of text  . 
' the purpose for extending the study was to iuvestigate the possible existing differences amongst various types of documents in various fields  . It turned out that most of the literature iulended for technicians 
COlXes pouds to the original typology.
Amongst the other corpora studied ( about 800 pages form various fields , e . g . electrical installation manuals , computer manuals and advetlisiug , software manuals and advertising , aeronautical texts , description of composite materials , maintenance documentation for mechanical installations  , etc . ) , we have classified the texts into two groups : texts pertinen to the initial corpus  , in other words those texts whose typology was identical or closely re~sembled that of the first corpus  , non-pertinent texts containing new phenomena . 
3 11is econd type of text will probably require a sub -categorisatiou into other typologies  ( a task not as yet carried out )  . 
Typology is field independent . We have received extracts tio maer on autical documents  , provided by Adrospatiale . Some of these text stall into the non-pertinent category  , while others fall intorite pertinent category . Furthermore , it was found that texts originating h'om different fields  ( data processing or electrical engineering , for example ) fell into the typology . 
Amongst the non-pertinent texts we found mainly texts which require rewriting rather than Ixanslatinn  , lot instance user manuals ( at least those intended for nonspecialists )  , scientific articles , advertising and legal texts . Such texts are obviously less adapted to MT . We al~found minutes of meetings and client service reports  , whose syntax is often very f ,  . mciful . 
As far as quantity goes , the volume of technical taatter is much greater than that of advertising and legal matter  ( Cf . Van Dijk consultancy figures) , Maintenance and service guides , intended for specialists , and referetlce guides represent a much greater volume than that of user guides  , intended for non-specialists ( which are less hoxnogeno as typologically speaking )  . 
2-RESULTOF THE CORPUS

The study laid rile emphasis on the problems directly related to tn  , mslation , in particular with respect to accuracy , The subsection swl fich follow illustrate tile defined typology mid instance the linguistic phenomena not encountered in the socalled pertinent texts studied  . 
Several points must be underlined :
ACRESDI!COLING-92 , NAN ' lJ ~ S , 2328 AOl~q'1992l285PREC . OFCOL1NG-92, NAN rES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992   1- any phenomenon classed as being absent may nevertheless be marginally present in a text  ;   2- the corpu study showed that few of the phenomena absent from the initial study were later added  . 
2.1. FREQUENT PHENOMENA
It is not possible to listfully all the phenomena encountered  . We will however endeavour to give the main features of the typology of the text studied  , giving the most unusual or significant examples ( from the pertinent corpus )  . The following hence plays more of an illustrative role than a descriptive role  . 
Punctuation 1-Commas
Generally speaking , puntuation is used somewhat irregularly . There are few commas , and they do not always appear where they would normally be expected  . Consequently , it appears pointless to use them for linguistic purposes  , for example , in the determining of the limit of a coordination . 
2-Full stops
As previously mentioned , the jobcards come in the form of enumerated operations  . Each operation is described by one or more small paragraphs containing sentences  , As a rule , there are no full stops indicating the end of a paragraph :  01 Ouvrir losver rl Tres
NOTA :
L'lnspection extdrleure deI'avions'ef fectue parlepilot @  accompagn6 dume canicien . Ell@@stexT cut ~ edarts lesens desaiguilles d'unemontre  , en partant de lagauche du poste avant 02   Contr61er que . . . 

Every possible type of enumexation can be found . In each case , processing is delicate :
S'assurer que : l'assiette de I'a vionreste volsine delaligne devol-la manoeuvrenepr ~sente pas de danger 
NOTA : . . . lemTcaniciendoit:s'assurer del'absence de fultes d'hulle  . . . 
inspecterlerev ~ tement : sur les@l~ment senst ratifi ~ list  , scl-apres , s ' assurer de I'd tat de la peinture et de 1'absence d'entalie oubles sure-karmans voilure - fuselage intradosetar MTre-saumons voilure 
Infinitive clauses
They are veay frequent in the texts , especially as operations to be carried out are described using the infinitive form  ( and not using the imperative form : faitesce ci , or personal form : vous faitesceci) . They appear as the main clause of a sentence , as an object or as an adverbial :
A presavow solgneu sement ass@ch6 les partie externes dur accord , soumettrece lul-claune pression internede 0 , 6 barpendant 5 minutes . . . 
. . .it est prdfTrable de mettre l ' avion sous abris . 
Nepastendreexag ~ rementles cordes.
A glrsurlaval vepourla faire reculer.
Infimtive chuses introduced by file preposition d , with a passive adjectival value are frequently encountered  . They bear a certain modality : fixer un obturate ursurl abused'en tree du circuit d'air iLEe  , LFI92 ~( to be cooled ) ? . . I leffet i~t_gJ2Le,13 . ~  ( to be obtained ) Les coupures defrettes nesont pas ~ . 
Dren dreen consideration
Finally , the various infinitive clauses can be inter -coordinated or coordinated with differentypes of clauses  ( object e * adverbial causes )  . Coordinations ( apart from enumerations ) are generally limited to two or three clauses . 
Conjugated verbal clauses
We class a conjugated verbal clause as being any clause governed by a conjugated verb  . The clauses encountered may appear either as a main  ( or independen0 clause or a subordinate clause ( object or adverbial )  . All the common types of clauses can be found ( personal , impersonal , active , passive . . . ) . Coordinations ( enumerations aside ) are generally limited to two or three clauses . Examples of characteristic sentences : Pourles vent stresviolents  , i lest prdferable demettrel ' a vion sous abri . 
S 1 leliqul depolluants ' in flltred ansla zone sltu@eent relajante de laroue et letalon  , ilf autimperative mentd@monterlepneupour le nettoyer  . 
Amongst the remarkable clauses , we encountered several examples of inverted subjects  ( which could pass as a stylistic turn unlikely to be found in a technical  tex0  . For example : Au cadre 19 setrouve unbo~tieretanche . . . 
Relative clauses
Very few are encountered in the texts ( on average 1 relative clause very 2 pages )  , most of them are introduced by the relative pronoun q ta  ( for more than 95% of the text studied )  . Here are a few examples : II est ba ~ dsurla conductibili  t6 thermique . . , et sur le mode de circulation adopt@qul permettent un  6change   . . . entreles deux circuits d ' airquila traverse . 
AC'lXSDECOLING-92 . NANTES . 2328 AOt ~ q'19921286 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES . AUG .  2328, 1992 , . . el les poss~dent chacune un anneau travers lequel passe la sangle de rappel  ,  . .
Noun phrases
We class noun phrases as being all groups with a nominal value whether or not they are introduced by a proposition  . It is likely that all the possible types of noun phrases exist in the corpus  . We observed with interest that in some cases , the groups were quite often barely " grmnmatically acceptable  . The principle of juxtaposing nouns in French is a r are phenomena  . All the same , juxtaposition is quite a generalised pratice in the texts studied  ( this is probably the case for a lot of technical texts  )  . The following juxtapositions are normally accepted : 
I'antenne I ~ ACAN
I'ensembler accord-bouch on unsyst~mede type ba ~ onnette Whereas the following are less acceptable grammatically speaking : 
I'ensemble de hissage avion
Iongueur partie \] Isse
I'axeavlon
The following complex examples in uslrate the degree of complexity noun phrases may attain  ( the part of the sentence which is not the noun phrase is bracketed  )  :  ( 11 proc~de ) delate chnique des refroid is seurs 9 surfaces second alres , appel ~ , s retroid is seurs a lame set intercalaire sou refroid is seurs compacts qui convlent particuli ~  , rement bten augazayant unmauva is coefficient d'e changethermique  . 
Verb nominalisation ( verbiaction noun derivation ) is also frequently used : . . . effectuer unev ~ rifl cation dutarage . . . 
( rather than v  #rifierle for age), . , proc~der~lad~pose despanneaux . . . 
Faire uneverification dure glage ...
These structures are built using a small number of French verbs  ( loire , effectuer ,  . . . ) , and they are used with all nominalisations of verbs of action  . 
Idiomatic expressions
We class idiomatic expressions as being variable or non-variable x pressions  , which require identification within a text in order to ensure correct translation  . Idiomatic expressions exist in all the syntactic ategories  . Nominal idiomatic expressions are probably the most frequent  , particularly in specialised terminology ( more than 80 % of the tem is are nominal idiomatic expressions , in a eronaalical termiuology ) . 
Without going into further detail , it can be said that they are all present in the corpus  . However , only a relatively small number of verbal expressions can be found  ( in comparison with the potential wealth of the French language  ) and there has been no example of a transformation of these expressions  ( for example les mesures quidoivent ~ treprises ) in the corpus . They are generally made up using a limited number of verbs  ( prendre , tenir , mettre . . . ) :
Maln ten lren place l'em base ...
Cettepression deremplls sage tlent compted'une pertede charge  . . . 
. . . mettre les commandes du r~gulateur oxyg~ ) nesurON . , , We must bear in mind that expressions of the effectuer-plus-a-nominalised-verb type do not belong to the specific idiomatic expression class  , and are considered as being a commonly accepted Wansformation  . 
2.2. RAREORNONEXISTENT

The following is a list of significant examples of linguistic phenomenar rely or never encountered  , it is not an exhaustive list . 
Interrogative clauses
No direct nor indirect interrogatives were encountered in any of the texts  . 
Imperative clauses
No imperatives ( imperative mood ) were encountered in the pertinent corpus , they are replaced by infinitive clauses ( such is the case for most service or maintenance notes in French  ) : proc~derau campement de I'avlonne pastendre exag ~ rementles cordes Amongs the non-pertinent texts  , messages for users of a data processing system , user guides or training guides may contain imperatives or  ( sometimes ) interrogatives . 
Direct speech
No examples of direct speech were encotmtered.
Comparative phrases with a congmrative rference Comparative phrases containing a comparative reference were extremely rare in the corpus studied  . 
Only one example was encountered :
Lab~che ~ eauest plus volumine use que lacuved ' ) vaporation , composeed ' ~ lementenal liagele , ger , soudes . 
Concessive clauses
No concessive clauses were encountered.
Clausal subjects
No examples of personal clauses with a syntactic role of subject were encountered  . It is hence possible to find: . . . 11est recomm and L~denepas Inverserlapalette . . . 
but not:
Inverserlapaletten'est pas recommand 6...
Human personal pronouns
ACTESDECOLING-92, NANTES . 2328 AOt ~ q "19921287 PROC . OFCOL1NG-92, NAN'I\]~S . AUG .  2328 , 1992 Although not totally absent , personal pronouns are rare in technical texts ( one per page on average )  . 
None of the personal pronouns encountered referred to a human  ( in fact , humans are rarely referred to in the texts ) in the pextinent corpus . 
This information mean that for the French-English system  , personal pronouns would always be " it " ( or " they " ) as it is not necessary to search for the refcmmce . 
Rhetorical figures
Rhetorical figures are rare and correspond to established usages  . 
Only one metaphor was encountered in the texts : . . les commandes chemlnent sur le cot ~ drol l sous leplancher passager  . .
The problem is solved " at dictionary level , given that a cable can cheminer ( make its way ) . 
The metonyms encountered appear to be accepted metonyms which are transposable into the target language  . Thus , in the above example , the term commandes which represents he cable or cables which propagate the controls  , is literally translated into English , without shocking the technicians of the field . 
Anaphorarer are , and as with personal pronouns , if encountered could be handled in a simplified way  . 
Finally , with regard to the aspectual phenomena , in French , syntactically speaking , there is very little aspectual indication . English , which was our target language very often uses the progressive form  . We therefore paid particular attention to the reconstitution of the progressive form  . After having carried out a comparative study of the texts  , we were able to draw the conclusion that the progressive form was virtually nonexisent in the translated texts  . 
5-CONCLUSION
The corpus tudy has enabled us to draw several conclusions  . Firstly , it has enabled the definition of a text typology which is pertinen to a considerable volume of texts of different origins and different technical fields  ( although this excludes in particular computer user guides and documents for the general public  )  . 
The definition of this typology has enabled us to draw up accurate linguistic specifications  , implifying and sometimes ignoring the handling of certain linguistic phenomena  . The specifications were then used to develop an FAT system  ( based on GETA's system , ARIANE ) , whose grammars are less complex , and hence easier to maintain . The quality of translation , tested on a important number of a eronautical texts  ( maintenance guides ) and on several specimens of pertinent texts , have proved the validity of this approach : revision times varied from  20 to 30 minutes per page ( average translation times in SITE is about 1 page per hour )  . 
The study of texts of different ypologies has enabled as to pinpoin the limits of a minimal language  , used in all types of texts , and hence the indispensable kernel of any new typology  . 
From an economic point of view , the texts targeted by the typology described here represent a considerable amount of the documents obe translated  . 
BIBLIOGRAPHY\[1\]BACHUT,D . , & al . , " Industrialisation d'un syst~me de TAO fran~ais -anglais pour la documentation technique "  , G6 nie Linguistique 91 , 
Versailles , 1991.
\[2\]BOITET , Ch . , & al . , "  ARIANE-78: an integrated environment for automated translation and human revision "  , COLING ~82 , Prague ,  1982 . 
\[3\]B or I'ET , Ch . , " The French National Mr-Project : Technical organization and translation results of CALLIOPE -AERO "  , IBM Conf . on Translqtion
Mechanization , Copenhagtm , 1986.
\[4\]BOITET , Ch . , " Current Machine Translation systems developed with GETA's methodology and software tools "  , ASLIB , London ,  1986 . 
\[5\]BOITET , Ch . , " Current state and future outlook of the research at GETA "  , MTSummit , Hakone ,  1987 . 
\[6\]CHANDIOUX , J . , " METEO : un syst~me op6rationoel pour lat raduction des bulletins mtt torologiques destints augr and public "  , Meta21 ,  1976 . 
\[7\] CHAPPUY , S . , " Formalisation de la description des niveaux d ' interprttation des langues naturelles "  , Th ~ se3ecy cle informatique , 
Grenoble , 1983.
\[8\]HUTCHINS , W.J .," MACHINE
TRANSLATION : past , present , future ",
Chichester , Ell is Horwood series in Computer and their applications  ,  1986 . 
K1TTREDGE , R . , & LEHRBERGER , J . , " Sublanguages : tudy of language in restricted semantic domains "  , Berlin , de Gruyter ,  1982 . 
VAUQUOIS , B . , & CHAPPUY , S . , " Static grammars : a formalism for the description of linguistic models "  , International Conference on Theoretical nd Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Language  , Colgate
University , 1985.

Atn'ES DECOLING-92 . NAh'rEs , 2328AOm "1992 1288 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
