O . Introduction
This article describes a project whose aim is to specify 
tools to be integrated in an environment for lexical 
analyses . As a result , a prototype of a work bench can be
created which provides a user with several modules possessing different functions  , in order to approach a text from different viewpoints  . 
The prototype has been implemented on Macintosh.
Every module can be used autonomously ; once integrated in the environment they realize a sort of network of tools interacting with one another  . 
Let us take a look at the single components of the system  . 
Firstly , the user has a this disposal tools for the processing of a text in order to obtain indexes  , concordances , lmnmatizations and various types of statistic analyses  . 
The prototype also supplies the representational tools for structuring knowledge  . 
A module containing an ontological reference scheme may be used to show a network of relationships between concepts or to suggest the description of single concepts  . 
The user is also given a further possibility : access  , starting from any node in the ontological network  , to a lexical archive indicating all the terms that describe a specific onceptual field  , with their relative definitions . 
In this way , the system helps in the interactive treatment of texts and nmkes it possible to mmly ze and to organize various types of information about a text  . 
The frontend and certain modules have becu implemented by using HyperCardTM  . This has certain cousequences on the interface to the global system  , and on the structure add function of any single component  . 
In a hypermedia framework , a text is no more a sequence of words or sentences  , as phenomenologically it appears to a user , but it is a virtnal network of the associations implicit in it  . 
In this way , the substance of a text coincides with the set of its possible readings : its informative content is a magma of fragments whose sense is recreated in the path of each reading  . 
From a theoretical viewpoint , a hypertext denotes a nonlinear writing whose structure is a set of nodes liuk ~ l by arcs  . Nodes contain informative contents , while arcs represent he possible associations between different informative contents  , in accordance with the logic of the hypertext i self  . 
To sum up , the organization of the diflerent knowledge sources within the system facilitates the behaviour of a human operator working on a text from different viewpoints by using the computational metaphor of 
ANINTEGRATEDEN VIRON MENT
FORLEXICAL ANALYSESI
C . CALIGAI~IS , A . CAPPELLI , M . N . CATARSI , L . MORE'Iq'Ilstituto di Linguistica Computazionale -CNR 
Pisa , It aly hypertexts as a means of presentation of data : he can consult a library of electronic books  , generate and consult lexical archives and indexes of frequencies  , and contextualize words representing the knowledge of a text  , while using knowledge sources of differentypes as a control and a guide  . The global , architecture of the system is shown in figure 1 . 
Ontok ~ llc.~lBodu ~
Figure 11. Lexical Treatment of Texts
The user has a this disposal certain tools by which he can build and consult several sources  , each of which constitutes a sub-enviromnent wih its own specific tools  . 
In particuht r , a library offers a set of texts to be treated by using a set of lexicographic tools  (  . . Elaborazione l,,essicale
Testi ) ( Moretti , 1991).
1 This work was partially supported by Progetto Finalizza to Sistemiln formaticie Calcolo Parallel of 

Ac'rEs DECOLING-92 . NAI ', rrES , 2328 AOI~'i " 199293 SI ) ROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 The environment ' text ' is composed of electronic books  , and it allows the user to perform all classical operations of text processing with the text ' on line '  . In particular , concordances can be obtained by choosing the length of the context  , lists of frequencies or variants can be shown , and lemmatization can be performed interactively busing the lexical archive as a guide  . 
Hypermedia technology makes it possible to approach the text in several ways  , since the fragments of a text can be linked in accordance to a possible reading criterion  . 
In this sense , it is possible to match different critical editions or to follow the text in accordance with linguistic stylistic facts  . 
2. Knowledge Representation Language
The knowledge representation language is a member of the family of hybrid systems  , and is made up of a terminological component and an assertion alone  , although certain characteristics make it more similar to classical KL-One  ( Cappelli et al , 1983; Bracbman &
Scbmoltze , 1985; Nebel , 1989).
The terminological part may be used for the definition of generic on cepts  , representing classes of objects , while the assertional part is used for the definition of individual concepts  , representing single objects . 
The structures of the terminological part serve to specify the properties of the generic oncept that we are defining  . 
The principle of inheritance applies among the concepts of the network  . The subconcept inherits the properties of the superconcept  , even if these are not expressly declared . 
Furthermore it is possible to indicate , by means of other generic on cepts , the relationships that exist between the properties of the generic concep that we are defining : these relationships are known as structural descriptions  . 
The syntax of the terminology is shown in the following < terminology > : := < generic declarations >  ; < role declarations > ; < para individual declarations > ; < generic declarations > : := ( < generic dentifier >= < generic > ) * < role declarations > : := ( < role identifier >= < role > ) * < para individual declarations > : := ( < para individual identifier >= < pam individual > ) * < generic > : := < generic dentifier > I thing I ( primC < index > ) I ( and < generic > < generic > ) I ( or < generic > < generic > ) l ( all < role > < generic > ) I ( at least < number > < role > ) l ( at most < number > < role > )   ( sd < para individual > < generic > ) < role > : := < role identifier > I ( primR < generic > < name > ) < para individual > : := < para individual identifier > I  ( para individual < generic > < name >+ ) < generic dentifier > : := string a dicaratter i < role identifier > : := string a diear atter i < para individual identifier > : := string adi caratteri<name > : := string a dica ratteri The structures of the assertional part serve to define individual concepts by specifying the values assumed by the properties of the corresponding generic oncept  . 
The language is based on an intensional semantics , formally specified in Mazzer anghi (1991) , and its constructors are interpreted on a universe of structured objects  . In other words , the denotation of a generic concept is represented by its properties  . 
It is thus suitable to account for complex processes involving properties of objects which are specific to the linguistic analysis of a text and  , in particular , to the structuring of lexical knowledge . 
The expressive power of the language has been further increased in order to account for other conceptual facts  , such as recursive definitions ( father ~ mother ) or definitions expressed by procedures ( length , addition , subtraction ) ( Mazzeranghi ,  1991) . 
As an example , the partial definition of the concept football -team is shown in the following : football-team =  ( and team ( all member football-player )   ( at least 11 mert d ) er ) ) that is to say , a football-team is a type of team whose members are football-players who are at least l  1  . The denotation of football-team is the following :
Ifootba ! l-te cun = max max nU
PROD(tI(\[T1\]rain5, . . . ,t n(\[T r , \] nun ~)'/ Zt~t/0_f_c(\[P\]11)) where:
PROD denotes the Cartesian product , max\[An\]min ~ denotes the lists of elements belonging to A  , whose length is between rain and max ( if max = nil then there is no upper bound to the length of the lists  )  , m _ . ~ . .~ , which is the name of the role member , acts as a type constructor , tl ,  . . . , tn are the names of the properties inherited by team  , TI ,  . . . ,Tn are the value-restrictions of the properties inherited by team  , minl , maxl ,  . . . ,minn , maxnre the number-restrictions f the properties inherited by team  , P is the denotation of football-player . 
The denotation of football-team is graphically represented in figure  2   ( where circles represent denotations of generic concepts and squares represent denotations of roles  )  . 
The language can be used to interrogate he ontological module  , which can give information about both the syntax and the semantics of the definition of a concept  , which in turn can be translerred into the body of a programme specified in terms of the language itself  . 
3. Ontological module
The ontological module serves to guide the user in the acquisition and structuring of knowledge by suggesting AcrEsDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOC'r1992936 DROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  23~28 ,   1992 hypotheses about the descriptiouol coucepls and thci ~ possible relatiouships  . 
TI(minl , maxl ) lm ~ Ru Lr , p "'" team\]II\[football-"~y , --' ~ J-ac>a /
Tn(minn , naaxn)
Figure 2
At present , it contaius a collectionel two hundred concepts organised into the form of a scmiulticuetwnrk  , with which it is possible to classify a vast portion of reality  . 
This leads to a laxonouly which serves its an ontological reference guide  , snggesting the map of possible relationships between concepts untl the most plausible elements of their structure  . 
3.1. Ontological Theories
Many theories have been proposed about ontological descriptions of coucepts  ( Smith & Medin ,  1981) . 
In the classical model , concepts arc described hyusing necessary and s afficient conditions  . \[ uother models , proposed by psychologists , descriptive lement surc partition edrote properties and dimensions  , the for nl cr being labels assmning binary lrulh values  , while the latter only numerical values . In certain cases , descriptive elements arc related to their definien dumontile bils is of probabilistic parameters or fuzzy logic  . 
A taxonomy of part-whole relations has also been proposed  ( Winston et al , 1987; Fredcrking & Gehrkc ,  1988 ) where properties arc classified into six types ( component ~ integral object , member ~ collection , portion ~ mass , tuff/object , f bature/activity , place/area ) and deductions can he performed according to certain principles which govern the relation between the definiendum and its descriptive parts  , such as , \[ or iustauce , transitivity . 
Outologists have propost xlg lobal models outile basis of types of concepts and of their properties  . The world is then partitioned lute substances aud accidents and ce~tam classical notions are dcfiued  , snchasgenu . ~, eidos , etc(Simons , 1983) . 
KCmer ( 1970 ) defines a categorial framework as a whole where epistemological  , logical and ontological aspect sure intert winexl . 
Keil ( 1989 ) introduces a division rote three general types of concepts : natural  , nominal and art ~ fact , and describes criteria for their individuation and description  . 
Knowledgebased systems using large kuowlcdg cbases organized on the basis of ontological principles have been prnt ~ Jse  . d in Artificial Intelligence ( Nirenburg & Moltarch , 1987; Lena (& Gnha , 1990; Onyshkevych & Nireubarg , 1991) Briefly , efiints have been devote xl to finding out criteria for structur inp the world by individuatiug both general tylms of coucepts iull  ) osiug goueral constraints oil subtypes and types of properties which are i  ) ertiue ut to specific types of conceilts . In i ) articular , tile logic has been investigated which goverlls I he relationship between a definiemlnm and its definiens  , even it so tar results are far from b ciug definiliv c  . 
3, 2. Ontological classtfic at  #m
To be cpist cmologically adequate , an ontology must include i ) a taxonomy of concepts wilhlheil descriptions , it ) classification and in divklualion t ~ riuciples associated to concepts  . 
L2, I , Taxonomy
Aslcgards the coustruction ( if 1he taxonomy , certlliu optious have been adopted , with the aimel accomtting for aspect seltile inucrilaturcel cr  ) u cepts and g tlalaute eing a consistent method of acquisition of knowledge and  , consequently , a plausible level of iuterential powcl . 
At the toll of tile taxonoln y , as " pule ontological " summa genera , the distinction into : natural ( apple , lion ) , nominal ( mayor ) , al ~ dartifilct kimls(cat , chair ) has been dfawu . 
Nalural kinds are those existing in nature aud arc descd bexl by natural sciences  ; lhey " tele , to classes of lhiugs that occurm the world iud cpendeillly of hnnlau activities "  ( Kcil ,  1989 1) . 25) . Artifacts arc elements ii ~ tentionally bt lilt to Ilerfo Hn a specific lmlction  . Nonlinal kiuds are inereabstl ' act cnlities which collsis to fit descliptiou  ( mayor ) which can bc applied loinst unccs belonging to diflk ~ rcnlkinds  . 
This distinction between tm to hlgical kinds is relevant ill order to slrncture \[ be universeiu \[ o chunks of knowledge whichure homogeneous from all inlereutial pniut of view  . 
l , et us illl fo ( ltlce all exual pleill order to clarify the structure  ( f l the h i , Ill . 
The nominal kind " lllayor " can be applied loa person who is a human being-a natural kind  , and it denotes a temporary status of such a human beiug  . To be no longer an layor dogs not inlply the negation of the existence of till individual  , while toue gal clhe essence as a hull laubeing does  . "\]' his classific atilm obviously has effects on the outological existence of objects  ( Wiggins , 1980; Keil ,  1989) . From the point elview of the topological Skructurel  ( lieIIl ~ lp , this\[ ) hellolnel n ) ll creates a complex chunk of knowledge , its shown in figure 3 . 
Onlyu correct disposition o\[the concepts involved guarantees the right instamiation of individuals  , thus allew mgtrae in tetcuces . 
3 . 2 . 2 Descriptions of concepts hidescribing a cnnccl : , t , Cell 2 tiuill helenlluoper ties are expressed . To be something means sharing certaiu types of descriptive parts with a set of other concepls  . The description of a single concept has to express the in ' opel  ( its outhe basis of which it caubed if l creutiated and indlviduat cxl  . 
A ClT ~ roe COLING-92 , NAbrITS , 2328 ^ ot'rr 1992937 Pt~oc . o1: COLING92, NA Nrlis , AUG .  2328 , 1992 In the ontological map , certain types of properties are associated with a concept which  , as a whole , constitutes a guiding reference scheme for the description of all its dependent subconcepts  . 
Figure 3
As an example , the concept " container " is associated to a set containing the following types of properties : content  , stuff , shape , function , and component . 
It is worth noting that these last are ~ of properties to which specific values can be associated in the description of each single subconcept or individual  . 
On the basis of these types , a set of constraints can be specified , such as , for instance : the property ' Stuff ' follows the part-whole taxonomic model as shown in Winston et al  ( 1987 ) and Frederking & Gerhke ,  (1988) ; the property ' Content ' is organized on the basis of the " place/area " model  , where the following transitivity principle is valid : if in  ( x , y ) ~ in(z , x ) then in(z , y ) ; ' Shape ' in certain cases refers to the shape of one of the components of a container  , which may coincide with the shape of the whole ; ' Component ' also follows the part-whole model ; ' Contextual use ' is to be intended as a social and not a functional use  , the latter being the specific use of containing something  . 
To sum up , every type of property is interpreted through a specific set of rules  . In this way , a sort of infinite lattice structure is realized where different axiomatic systems of knowledge coexist  ( see figure 4 )  , each of which has its own interpreter and interacts with the others  ( Woods ,  1990) . 
3.2.3. lndividuation principles
The map has been created by using the knowledge representation language previously described  , which supports classification adindividuation principles  . 
The calculus of the properties of a concept makes it possible to build concepts using constructs  , uchas ; for instance , and , or , not , applied to roles of concepts , or to compare concepts , or to classify concepts on the basis of their whole structures  . 
Furthermore , the knowledge representation language has acquired more " ontological " adequacy by the insertions of global ontological rules concerning the number of properties a concept can possess  , uchas for instance : - if two concepts each have only one property and the properties belong to the  . same type , then the properties cannot have the same value ; -no value can appear more than once in the description of a concept  , etc . .
These rules act as integrity constraints in the creation of 
Phy~cal  ~ Events
Liv~g Things Functional ~ Artifacts
Sentient Beings Nonsentient Beings
IPart-Whole


I stuff
IC ? mwn~tlI
Isha ~ II
Figure 4 concepts and control both the syntax and the semantics of the knowledge base beeing created  . In other words , the result has been achieved of specifying a sort of " style checker " guiding in the manipulation f knowledge  . 
Furthermore , procedures of any kind can be associated to concepts for their interpretation  ( I hooks )  . 
In this way the knowledge representation system realizes de facto an object-oriented system  . 
In our system it is possible to specify an assertional AC'rESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOt3"r1992938 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 language which makes it possible to introduce an individual concept into a programming language  , like any other data type . For instance , an individual concept is passed to a function as al  ) a rameter ; once verified that this individual is an instance of a generic oncept  , or of one of its sube on cepts , he fimction will be executed . 
4. Lexical archive
The lexie alarchive contains a set of lemmas to which with the following information is associated : i  ) a set of forms with morphological categories ; ii ) etimology ; iii ) phonological transcription ; iv ) definitions in form of text . 
Every type of information can be usex l for retrieving data inside the lexical archive  . In order to retrieve conceptual knowledge , which can be extracted from definitions , many possibilities are given . By applying the ELT tools , which make it possible to contextualize l ? ~ r tions of texts  , the visualisation of the definition of a word can be obtained  , or the immediate superordinates of the word , or the entire conceptual hierarchy implicit in the whole archive can be retrieved  , or parts of definitions in order 1o find out differences or commonalities can be compared  . 
4.1. Linking ontology and lexical items
Concepts in the ontology are linked to lexicul terms of the lexical archive and  , vice versa , from any lexical entry in the archive , the ontological module can be accessed . This is done by using a set of entry points which correspond to specific elements in a definition  . 
Certain concepts of the ontological network arc associated with a list of operators which map the concept in significant words inside definitions  . As an example , the concept of " human being " can be mapped onto the operators ' person '  , ' who'which realize the concept of " human being " in the lexical archive  . Accessing the lexical archive starting from the ontological module  , lexical tools are triggered which make use of the list of the operators as searching criteria  . In this way the explicit organization of knowledge of the ontological module is virtually linked to the organization which is implicit in the lexical archive  . 
5. Conclusions
To sum up , we may say that we are trying to create an environment composed of various tools  , integrated together , which allows the treatment of a text , and to facilitate the construction and the use of knowledge bases  , created from the text itself , for a human operator . 
The construction of each single module and its integration within the global system has been carried out taking into accotmt the philosophy of knowlcxlge-bascxl systems and hypertex Ls  . 
The latter represent a good tool lot the presentation of data  , thus allowing ' personal ' readings of them : once they arc integrated with knowledge-based tools  , the global expressive power of the system substantially increases  , since data can be abstractly manipulat c ~ l . 
Knowledge representation tools make it possible to build specific theories of the world  ; by using these tools with the control of an ontological reference schema  , any user can realize his own theory of the world in a continuous comparison with a ' standard ' organization of knowledge  . 
The specific theory is then able to increase the modalities of searching through dau ~ sto ~  ,  . d in different modules , since it acts as an intelligent interface to data  . For instance , it can be used as a filter in searching in the lexical archive  , thus overcoming the low degree of expressiveness of its stored information  . In this way , a more flexible interaction with any module can be obtained  . 

Brachman R . J . , Schmolze J . G . , An overview of file KL-ONE Knowledge Representation System  , Cognitive
Science 9 (1985).
Cappelli A . , Moretti L . , Vinchesi C . , KL-Conc : a Language for Interacting with a SI -Nets  , in Proceedings of the 8th-lJC Al Conference , Los Altos : Kaufmann ,  1983 . 
Frederking R . E . , Gehrke M . , Resolving Anaphoric References in a DRT-based Dialogue System  , in H . Trostted . ) , 40 sterreichische Artificial-Intelligence-Tagung , 
Springer , 1988, 94-103.
Keil F . C . , Semantic and conceptual development , Cambridge ( Ma . ): Harvard University Press , 1979 . 
Keil F . C . , Concepts , Kinds , and Cognitive Development , Cambridge : MIT Press ,  1989 . 
K Orner S . , Categorial FrameworL ~ , Oxford : Blackwell , Knowledge-Based Systems , Representation ad Inference in the Cyc Project , Reading ( Ma . ) : Addison-Wesley , 1990 . 
Mazzeranghi D . , Una Semantica lntensionale per un Linguaggio di Rappresentazione della Conoscenza  , ILC-KRS-1991-3 , P is a : I st . di Linguistica Computazionale , 1991 . 
Moretti L . , Text Processing in un Ambiente lpertestuale , in Attidel Corso Seminariale " Nuove Tecnologie Beni Culturali " acura dell'Aecademia di Studi Mediter rane id 
Agrigento , 199 l.
Nebel B . , Reasoning and Revision in Ilybrid Representation Syster ~ z ~  , Berlin ,  1990 . 
Nirenburg S . , Monarch I . , The role of Ontology in Concept Acquisition for Knowledge-Based Systems  , Carnegie-Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA ,  1987 . 
Onyshkevych13 . A . , Nirenburg S . , Lexicon , Ontology and Text Meaning , in J . Pustejovsky & S . Bergler ( eds . ), Lexical Semantics and Knowledge Representation,
Berkeley ( Ca .), 1991.
Simons P . , A Lesniewskian l , anguage for the Nominalistic Theory of Substance and Accident  , lbpoi2 (1983) ,  99-109 . 
Smith E . E . , Modin D . L . , Categories and Concepts , Cambridge ( Mr . ): Harvard Univ . Press , 1981 . 
Wiggins D . , Sameness and Substance , Oxford : Basil
Blackwell , 1980.
Winston M . E . , Chaff in R . , Hernnann D . , A Taxonomy of Part-Whole Relations , Cognitive Science 11 (1987) ,  417-444 . 
Woods W . A . , Understunding Subsumption and Taxonomy : A Framework for Progress  , TR-19-90 , Harvard Univ . Center for Research in Computing Technology , Aiken Computation Laboratory , Cambridge ( Ma . ), 1990 . 
AC'rES DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AoL'r1992939 PaOC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
