SHAKE-AND-BAKE TRANS LATION
P . Whitelock
Sharp Laboratories of Europe Ltd.
Oxford Science Park
Oxford , U.K.
pete@uk.ac.ox.prg
1. Introduction
In this paper , I describe a view of Machine Translation ( MT ) that promises radical new solutions to some of the problems of structural approaches such as transfer and interlingua  . The new approach is based on a lexicalist view of grammar in which lexical items are multidimensional signs  . Translation equivalence is defined between bags ( multisets ) of lexical items . 
Source language analysis determines the bags on one side of the equivalence  , and Shake-and-Bake generation combines the corresponding TL signs freely according to the grammar of the target language  . The sharing of variables between the logical forms of the signs in the two languages realises the necessary semantic on straints  . It is easy to formulate statements of equivalence between expressions having widely divergent syntactic or logical structures  , and apply this knowledge decidably for translation in either direction  . 
2. Structure-Based MT
Perhaps the fundamental question in MT system design is the form in which information about the source text is passed to generation  . Such information must include anything relevant for translation  , but must be expressed in a form that generation can be guaranteed to make sense of  . The answer therefore has important implications for the extent to which the grammars of the languages in the system need be specifically tuned to one another  . The ideal is a completely modular approach , with no influence of one monolingual grammar on another-modularity ensures that a system can be easily extended to new languages and language pairs  . A satisfactory answer should also provide for reversibility  , so that a single modular description of a language may be exploited by both parsing and generation algorithms  . 
The standard assumption is that all textual information is organised into a sequence of one or more linguistic or logical structures  . Transfer-based MT ( e . g . Vauquois and Boitet (1985) , Nagao et al (1985) , Alshawi et al (1991) , A Uegranza et al .   ( 1991 ) presupposes a language-pair specific module that transforms a structure which is the output of analysis into one that is the input to generation  . An interlingual approach ( e . g . 
Uchida and Sugiyama (1980) , Lytinen and Shank (1982) , R6sner (1986) , Nirenburg et al ( 1991 ) ) is characterised by the assumption that the output of analysis and the input to generation are isomorphic structures  . 
The notion of a structure which carries all the information pertinent to translation is common to both transfer and interlingual approaches  . In the case of transfer , this is normally a syntactic dependency structure nriched with various other relevant information  . Since the syntactic structures of translational ly equivalent expressions  ( TLEs ) may differ in many ways , transfer comprises a complex set of operations intended to transform source into target structures  . 
If generation is to be under the control of the same grammatical knowledge as analysis  , then the output of transfer from L to L ' must correspond to a possible output from the analysis of some expression in L '  . Unfortunately , the only way of achieving this is by careful handcrafting of the transfer grammars  . Furthermore , since the invocation of transfer operations is controlled by the structure of the source text  , it is problematic to state structural transformations in a declarative  , bidirectional manner . 
The interlingual approach is seen by its advocates as the solution to this sort of problem  . 
An appropriate system of semantic representation is specified  , with the assumption that TLEs will map to identical expressions of such a system  . But as Ramsay (1991) points out , only a fraction of the possible sentences of a semantic representation language will correspond directly to natural language x pressions  . There is ample evidence that the expressions of different natural languages may map to different subsets of the representation language  . In particular , TLEs may be associated with distinct semantic representations  ( cf . the subset problem of Landsbergen , 1987) . At minimum , equivalent words may have overlapping or properly subsuming senses rather than identical senses  ( see e . gTsujii and Fujita (1991)) , but more radical , structural differences are common place . Even if TLEs map to logically equivalent expressions  , the AcI~DECOLING-92 . NANTES . 2328 AoI~rr 1992784 PRec . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES . AUG .  23 . 28 .   1992 inference needed to compute one from the other is clearly undecidable in the general case for logics rich enough to represent linguistic meaning  ( Shieber ,  1988) , and intractable even in the simplest cases , with associativity and commutativity of conjunction  ( Calder et al 1989 )  . 
Heuristics to guide such inference can only be specific to the languages in the system  , since it is these which determine the logical forms that actually occur  . In this way , the functions of transfer merely devolve to analysis and generation  , making the content of each grammar dependent on that of the other languages in the system  . This weakens the standard argument for the interlingual approach  , i . e . that the addition of new languages if a cilitated by the absence of components specific to language pairs  . 
In any approach to translation , it is necessary to state heuristic information concerning the differences in structure between TLEs  . In transfer systems this is done explicitly , in interlingual systems it is implicit . I have suggested that in interlingual systems the need for such information has an adverse effect on the independence of different grammars  . In multilingual transfer systems , the need for minimal transfer ( as advocated within Eurotra ( e . g . Allegranza et al ,  1991 ) ) also entails that the form of the monolingual components is sensitive to the particular languages in the system  ( cf . the notion of ' eur oversar in Eurotra ) . Soneither structure-based approach leads to a system in which the knowledge pertinent to the different languages i clearly modularised  . The transfer approach is preferable in this respect  , but it suffers from the difficulty of formulating declarative statements of complex equivalences  , such as those discussed by Kaplan et al (1989) , Odijk (1989) , Sadler et al (1989 ,  1990) , Sadler and Thompson (1991) . In ~4 below we will look at how such examples are treated in the Shake-and-Bake approach  . 
3. Shake-and-Bake Translation
The research described in this paper is an application to translation of a more general constraint-based view of language and language processing  ( e . g . Fenstad et al (1985), Pereira (1987), etc . ) . In such a view , linguistic structure is determined by the accumulation of constraints or descriptions  , leading to compact and declarative grammars . In Shake-and-Bake MT , we take advantage of the partiality inherent in such constraints by radically underspecifying the information about the source text's structure that is passed to generation  . 
A precursor to this view can be identified in an approach to MT described by Landsbergen  ( 1987 )  . 
He suggested that the bilingual knowledge needed to compute TLEs should be stated as correspondances between grammars rather than between languages  ( that is , the inputs/outputs of grammars ) . Translation equivalence is stated between the meaningfuleements of two granmmrs-in Landsbergen's Montagovian framework  , between lexical entries and between grammar rules  . TLEs can be derived from equivalent lexical entries by applying equivalent rules in the same way  . 
Rosetta's linguistic basis in Montague grammar , with its stipulated pairings of syntactic and semantic rules  , requires TLEs to have isomorphic derivations . For this reason , Rosetta is essentially an interlingual system , and the need for the monolingual grammars to be attuned to each other  ( as acknowledged by Landsbergen ) has adverseffects on modularity . 
Suppose , however , that the only meaningful elements of a grammar are its lexical items  . In fact , much recent linguistic work assumes exactly this conception of a grammar-see e  . gUszkoreit (1986) , Karttunen (1989) , Pollard and Sag (1987) , Zeevat et al (1987) , Baschung et al (1987) , Gunji (1987) , Whitelock (1991b ) . in these frameworks , lexical entries are signs , that is , they simultaneously classify an expression in multiple dimensions  ( orthographic , syntactic , semantic , etc . ) , Signs are recursively combined by simple rules which do not themselves introduc elements of meaning  , but merely equate appropriate variables in the logical forms of the combining signs  . 
Therefore in such a grammar , the derivable logical forms in a language are constructed entirely from templates introduced by lexical items  . We can represent sentence meaning as a combination of word meanings and a set of equational constraints on LF variables as determined by derivation  . Now if we apply L and s bergen's methodology within this framework  , knowledge of bilingual equivalence may be reduced to statements of equivalence between lexical items and their associated meanings  . Such equivalences may be many to many , e . g . pay , attention , to ~ faire , attention , a , and may include multiple instances of the same lexical item  , e . g . as , asmaussi , que1 . In the general case , therefore , equivalences are stated 1 The bilingua lexicon is also many-to-many in another sense  . A single lexical item in L may appear in many different equivalences with signs in L '  , and each of the latter may appear in further equivalences with signs in L  . 
Acq~s DECOLING-92 . NANTES . 2328 AO~q "1992785 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NAbrrES , AUG . 2328,1992 between bags of lexical signs . The representation of a sentence is a bag of ( extensions of ) lexical items , called its base . Two bases are equivalent if they are the union of equivalent bags  . Two expressions are translation equivalents if they have derivations whose bases are equivalent bags and which obey the same constraints on LF variables  . There is no isomorphism requirement on TLEs-the grammars of the two languages have been effectively deeoupled  . 
(1 ) shows a Prolog definition of a simple translation algorithm based on these principles  ( I is the path constructor for feature structures , and <=> is graph unification ( with path evaluation ) ) . 
( i ) translate ( Text , Translation ) :-
Source Signlorth <=> Text , parse ( Source Sign , SLBag ) , 
Source Signlsem <=> Sem , skole mise(Sem ) , equivalence ( SLBag , TLBag ) , generate ( TLBag , Target Sign ) , Target Sign\]orth <=> Translation . 
translate can be glossed as follows : find the sign in SL whose orthography is the source string Text  , i . e . parse it to Source Sign , recording in SLBag the basic expressions ( iexical entries ) used in the parse . Find the value of semantics in Source Sign and Skolemise the variables  . The elements of SLBag will be extended by their participation in the analysis stage  . Alternative extensions may give rise to alternative equivalences  . Compute the equivalent bag of TL expressions . Generate any Target Sign that can be built from TLBag-its orthography is a possible 
Translation of Text.
The sharing of those constraints which equate LF variables is realised by Prolog sharing between the variables in Sere and the items in SLBag and TLBag  . The Skolemisation step which replaces each distinct variable by a unique constant ensures that variables not equated in the course of analysis are prevented from being incorrectly equated during generation  . Its ordering before bilingual lookup realises the restriction that a lexical entry is only applicable when its source language constraints strictly subsume those established by parsing  . 
A simple backtracking Shake-and-Bake generation algorithm is given in  ( 2 )  . The bag is represented as a Prologlist . 
(2) generate ( Bag , T Sign ) :- shake and bake(\[\] , T Sign , Bag ,  \[ \] )  . 
% termination shake and bake(\[Sign\] , Sign ,  \[\] , \[ l ) . 
% shifts hake and bake(P0 , Sign , \[ Next\]Bag0\] , Bag ) :- push(Next , P0 , P ) , shake and bake(P , Sign , Bag 0 , Bag ) . 
% reduces hake and bake(P0 , Sign , Bag 0 , Bag ) :- pop(First , P0 , PI ) , delete ( Second , P1 , P2) , unordered_rule(Mom , First , Second ) , push(Mom , P2 , P ) , shake and bake(P , Sign , Bag 0 , Bag ) . 
shake_and bake is a slight but significant variation on a shift-reduce parser for binary grammars  . In shift-reduce parsing , an element is repeatedly taken from the front of the input  , looked up in the lexicon , and the result pushed onto a stack . The top two stack elements may be combined according to the grammar  , the result pushed back on the stack , and the procedure called recursively . When the input has been consumed and the stack contains a single element  , the parse terminates successfully . 
In shake_and_bake generation the role of the input string is played by the bag of target language signs  . Unlike in parsing , the order of items in the bagisim material . Any two signs may be combined , with the combination determining the order of their orthographies in the result  . A minimal complete algorithm requires random access to the erst while stack for one of the arguments to a reduction  . This data structure is represented by the variables of the form  P0  , P1 , P . 
The second element is not popped from the data structure  , but nondeterministically deleted from it . Of course , such a move renders the algorithm intractable . Shift-reduce can complete a wellformed symbol table or chart in polynomial time for contextfree grammars  , but Shake-and-Bake is exponential even with a chart  . I will mention ways of addressing this computational drawback below  . Before this , however , I will try to show that an MT system organised in this way makes it considerably easier to correctly state constraints on translation equivalence when TLEs have divergent structures  . Furthermore , such statements of equivalence may be exploited in either direction  . 
4. Translation Equivalence in
Shake-and-Bake MT 1 will use the PATR-II notation for equations ( Shieber 1986 )  , representing constraints on the elements of an equivalence rather than the categories in a gramma rule  . The substantive theory could be any of the lexicalist grammars ACTESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOU'I"1992786 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUO . 2328,1992 mentioned above . I assume a morpheme-based lexicon in which each lexical entry  ( i . e . 
morpheme ) has a feature cite whose value uniquely picks out that entry  . This feature is used to distinguish words spoiled the same but with different syntax or semantics  , in addition , where the orthographic form of a grammatical morpheme  ( such as past tense ) is determined on a language internal basis ( e . g . by conjugation type of a verb ) , all allomorphs will receive the same value of cite  . In this way , the notion of equivalence may be extended to equivalence between closed-class grammatical morphemes  . 
(3 ) shows a basic one-to-onequivalence between the English verb stem love and the 
French aimer.
(3 ) XEmXF < XE cite >= lovev < XF cite > ~ aimer<XE semindex >= < XF semindex > < X Esem expindex >=< xFs em expindex > < XE semobj index >= < XF semobj index > I assume an event based semantics with a neo-Davidsonian treatment of thematic relations  ( see e . g . Parsons (1980, 1991), Hobbs (1986), Dowty (1988)) . The two monolingual signs presupposed by ( 3 ) each introduce three LF variables , corresponding to the loving state itself ( index )  , the lover ( expindex ) and the loved one ( obj index )  .   ( 3 ) states the simple pairwise quivalence between these  . Despite the identical paths on both sides of the last two equations  , the correctness of the method does not rely on thematic identity of equivalent roles  . It may apply equally to grammars where thematic relations are verb-specific  ( e . g . love_argl , love arg2, aimer argle tc . ) and hence language-specific ( sidestepping consistency problems in the monolingual assignment of thematic relations  )  . 
Furthermore , ven with a substantive theory of thematic relations applied consistently to two grammars  , the thematic entailments of equivalent argument places may not be identical  . Space precludes discussion of our treatment for such cases  , which is based on the use of sorted LF variables as described in Moens et al  ( 1989 )  . 
Assuming equivalences such as ( 4 ) for proper names , translation between ( 5a ) and ( Sb ) will be mediated by the equivalence between bags shown in  ( 6 )  , in which signs are abbreviated by their citation values  . 
(4 ) XE-=XF < XE cite >= Mary < XF cite >= Marie < XE semindex >= < XF semindex >  ( Sa ) Mary loves Frances ( 5b ) Marieaime Fran Goise ( 6 )   ( Mary , Frances , lover , presFran Goise , pres , aimer , Marie
Generation will produce ( 5a ) a stile translation of ( 5b )  , and vice versa , not because that was the structure of the SL text  , but because it is the only way of putting together the TL signs in  ( 6 ) that is compatible with the TL grammar and the variable bindings established by parsing  . 
This strategy extends straightforwardly to the ' argument switching ' cases of translation equivalence exemplified in  ( 7a and To )  . 
(7a ) Mary likes Frances ( 7b ) Fran Goise plait ~ Marie The equivalence between like and plaire  ; 1 is given in (8) . 
(8 ) XE ~ XF & XF ' < XE cite > ~ like v < XF cite>-plaire<XF'cite >= ~_I < XE semindex >= < X Faem index > < XE sem exp index > < XF semexp index > < XE semobj index >=< xFsemobj index > < XE sem pindex >= < XF ' aem index >  1 have assumed that the path < XF sereobj > picks out the semantic object of the liking state  , which is the semantics of plaire's syntactic subject  , but as in the previous example , alternative monolingual assumptions could have been made with little import  . 
One point to note here is the treatment of the preposition ~  . We merely state that one lexical entry in English corresponds to two in French  . The appropriate preposition (< cite >= LI ) , is an element with ' identity semantics ' ( Calder et al 1989 )  , so its index is equated in the monolingual lexicon with that of its syntactic object  . It is also necessary to equate this index with the experiencer of like and plaire as in the final equation  . Then the strict subsumption interpretation of bilingualook up will guarantee that the elements on the French side are not just unrelated elements of a larger phrase  . 
A~E . SDECOL 1NG-92 . NANTES . 2328 AOt ~ Z "1992787 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES . AUG .  2328 ,   1992 Examples of the argument-switching kind are standard in the transfer approach as illustrations of what it does best  . Since a typical transfer MT system will process a functional structure by recursive descent  , cases where the translation of arguments depends on the translation of heads are straightforward  . However , a major source of problems for such transfer schemes are the socalled head-switching cases  , in which the syntactic head-dependent structure in the translation equivalents is reversed  ( see refs . in ?2) . Such a case is illustrated for English/Dutch in ( 10 )  . The just/venir decase in English/French is similar  . 
(10 a ) Janzwemtgraag ( 10b ) John enjoys swimming Once again , the Shake-and-Bake generation strategy will correctly compute such TLEs from statements of equivalence between simplex expressions  , including that given in (11) . The full bags are given in (12) . 
( ii ) XE&XE , EXN < XE cite > - enjoy < XE ' cite > - prespart < XN cite >= graag < XE semindex >=< XN semindex > < XE semexp index >= < X Nsem expindex > < xEsemobj index >-< XN semobj index > < XE  , semindex >-< XN semindex > (12) jan , pres , zwemen , graagmjohn , pres , enjoy , prespart , swim The fact that equivalentense morphemes ( pres ) occur on nonequivalent stems ( enjoy/zwem + ) follows immediately from the mechanics of generation  . Whitelock ( 1991a ) includes further discussion of these and other examples  , which include a further head switching case in English/French/Iapanese equivalence  ( 13a , b , c ) , and an example of distinct but equivalent logical forms in English/Japanese  ( 14a , b )   ( 13 a ) John runs up the street ( 13 b ) Jean montelar ueen courant ( 13 c ) Zy on wa hasite to or i wo no boru John TOP run n ing street ACC goes up  ( 14 a )   ( p -> q ) Maria eats only fish ( 14 b )   ( ~ q ->- p ) Maria was a kanashi katabe-na-i
Maria TOP fish ? eat-NEG-PRES 5 . Conclusions and Further Research Asmall trilingual  ( English/French/Japanese ) system based on the above ideas has been implemented and is currently under development  . 
Beaven ( 1991 ) describes a similar implementation of an English /Spanish system  . The modularity of the monolingual grammars remains uncom-promised even if TLEs have radically different syntactic and/or logical structures  , since all contrastive knowledge is clearly Iocalised in the bilingual lexicon  . Although this paper has only touched on the question of complex equivalences  , it is clear from our intial implementations that the declarative description of these is massively simplified by the adoption of a Shake-and-Bake approach  . The bilingual lexicographer is not required to specify equivalences between abstract structures at a single  ( hybrid ) level of representation , as in a transfer system . Instead , equivalence is stated between bags of multidimensional lexical signs  . Constraints on any dimension of such signs may be included  ( cf . Tsujii ,   1986 for the necessity of such multidimensional constraints  )  . We believe that the concrete nature of such a task offers interesting possibilities for the automated acquisition of bilingual correspondences from aligned corpora  . We therefore also see Shake-and-Bake as a first step in the integration of tradition all inguistic  ( rationalist ) and novel statistical ( empiricist ) approaches to MT ( e . g . Brown et al (1990)) . 
Since Shake-and-Bake generation is an NP-complete problem  ( see Brew , this conference ) , there is no tractable general algorithm . In order to improve average case performance , we need to be able to impose further structure on the bag which forms the input to generation  . For example , the syntactic structure of the source text might be called upon to provide heuristic control information for generation  . The resulting system would be similar in character to a transfer organisation  , but avoiding the ' procedural seduction ' of Kaplan  ( 1987 )  , that is , the temptation to allow or require a grammar writer to state detailed control information  . While it seems that such a possibility would enable a grammar to be applied more efficiently  , Kaplan argues that a computer is almost always better qualified to carry out the task of optimising the procedural interpretation of a large coverage grammar  . In the current context , the procedural seduction is that the bilingual grammar writer is the one best qualified to define the structural ' changes ' contingent on the definition of particular ACRESDE  COLING-92  , NANTES , 2328 AOI~I"1992788 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG . 2328,1992 lexical equivalences . One approach to the efficiency problem will therefore address the automatic determination of useful control information from the derivation of the source bag and the exploitation of this in generation  . Brew ( this conference ) presents an alternative approach which extends van Benthem's Count Invariant for Categorial Grammars  ( see e . g . Moortgat , (1988)) to constraint grammars . In this way , fruitless branches of the search space may be pruned early  , thus improving efficiency of generation using monolingual TL information  . 
In the discussion so far , it has been assumed that the only functions of syntax in parsing have been a  ) to extend the lexical signs and thereby constrain the applicable quivalences  , and bl to determine the bindings of LF variables and thus provide the semantic constraints that are the invariants for translation  . We have not considered a class of invariants that may be grouped under the heading of discourse structure  . 
In fact , logically equivalent discourse variants are typically associated with nonequivalent bags  ; for example , the passive morpheme may be present in one but not another  ; word order features may also be constrained in a bilingual equivalence  . So such invariants can be captured . 
On the other hand , a more elegant treatment might involve a computat ion of a set of interlingual discourse constraints on derivations to be used in generation in the same way as the semantic on straints on LF variables  . Clearly such an approach would be very similar to an interlingual system  , but without the adverse consequences for grammatical modularity characteristic of such systems  . 

The ideas and algorithms presented here were developed jointly with Mike Reape  . John Beaven and Evelynvande Veenin Edinburgh elped by exploring them in their PhD and MSc theses respectively  . Sharp Laboratories of Europe gave me the opportunity to continue working on them  , and 1 would like to acknowledge the help of all my colleagues there  , especially ian Johnson , Chris Brew , Olivier Laurens and Tosh Nomura . 

Allegranza , V . , P . Bennett , J . Durand , F . van Eynde , L . Humphries , P . Schmidt and E . Steiner ( 1991 ) " Linguistics for Machine Translation : The Eurotra Linguistic Specifications "  . Studies in MT and NLP , CEC . 
Alshawi , H . rD . M . Carter , B . Gambaeck and M . 
Rayner ( 1991 ) " Interactive Translation using Quasi-Logical Forms "  , Proceedings of the 29th
ACL , Berkely.
Baschung , K . , G . Bes , A , Corluy and T . Guillotin ( 1987 ) " Auxiliaries and Clitics in French UCG Grammar " , Proceedings of the Third European
ACL , Copenhagen.
Beaven , J . L .   ( 1991 ) Lexicalist Unification-Based Machine Translation , PhD Thesis , submitted to Dept . of Artificial Intelligence , Univ . of

Brew , C . H .   ( 1992 ) " Letting the cat out of the bag : Generation for Shake-and-Bake MT "  , this conference . 
Brown , P . , J . Cocke , S . della Pietra , V . J . della Pietra , F . Jelinek , J . D . Lafferty , R . L . Mercer and P . 
S . Rooss in ( 1990 ) " A Statistical Approach to Machine Translation " , CL vol . 16, no 2 . 
Calder , J . , M . Reape & H . Zeevat ( 1989 l " An Algorithm for Generation in UCG " , Proceedings of the Fourth European ACL , Manchester . 
Dowty ~ D .   ( 1989 ) " On the Semantic Content of the Notion ' Thematic-Role '"  , in G . Chierchia , B . 
Partee and R . Turner ( eds . ) Property Theory , Type Theory and Natural Language Semantics , 
Dordrecht , Reidel.
Fenstad , J . E . , P . K . Halvorsen , T . Langholm and J . 
van Bentham (1985) Equations , Schemat and Situations : A Framework for Linguistic Semantics  . 
CSLI-85-29, Stanford.
Gunji , T . (1987) Japanese Phrase Structure
Grammar , Reidel , Dordrecht.
Hobbs , J . (1986) " Ontological Promiscuity ",
Proceedings of the 25th ACL.
Kaplan , R . M .   ( 1987 ) " Three Seductions in Computational Psychol inguistics "  , in P . J . 
Whitelock , M . M . Wood , H . Somers , P . Bennett , R . 
Johnson ( eds .) Linguistic Theory and Computer
Applications : Academic Press.
Kaplan , R.M ., K . Netter , J . We de kind and A.
Zaenen ( 1989 ) " Translation by Structural Correspondances " , Proceedings of the Fourth
European ACL , Manchester.
Karttunen , Lauri (1989) ' ~ Radical Lexicalism " , in M . R . Baltin and A . S . Kroch ( eds . ) , Alternative Conceptions of Phrase Structure , Chicago . 
Landsbergen , J .   ( 1987 ) " Montagne Grammar and Machine Translation " , in P . J . Whitelock , M . M . 
Wood , H . Somers , P . Bem~ett , R . Johnson ( eds . ) Linguistic Theory and Computer Applications : ACrEs DE  COL1NG-92  . NANTES , 2328 AOt ~ T1992789 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . NANTES , AUtL 2328 .  1992
Academic Press.
Lytinen , S and R . Shank (1982) " Representation and Translation " . TR324, Dept . of Computer
Science , Yale University.
Moens , M . , I . Calder , E . Klein , M . Reape and H . 
Zeevat ( 1989 ) " Expressing Generalisations in Unification -Based Grammar Formalisms "  , Proceedings of the Fourth European ACL , 

Moortgat , M .   ( 1988 ) Categorial Investigations : Logical and Linguistic Aspects of the Lambek 
Calculus . Foris , Dordrecht.
Nagao , M . J . Tsujii and J . Nakamura ( 1985 ) ' q'he Japanese Government Project for Machine Translation "  , Computational Linguistics , vol . 11#23 Odijk , J .   ( 1989 ) '" I'he Organisation of the Rosetta Grammars " , Proceedings of the 4th European ACL , 

Parsons , T .   ( 1980 ) " Modifiers and Quantifiers in Natural Language " , Canadian Journal of
Philosophy , supp . vol . VI.
Parsons , T . (1991) Events in the Semantics of
English , MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass.
Pereira , F . C . N .   ( 1987 ) " Grammars and Logics of Partial Information " , in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Logic Programming , 
Melbourne , Australia.
Pollard , C and 1 . Sag ( 1987 ) Information-based Syntax and Semantics : Vol 1: Fundamentals , CSLI
Lecture Notes 13.
Pollard , C and L Sag ( forthcoming ) Information-based Syntax and Semantics : Vol 2 , CSLI . 
Ramsay , A ( 1991 ) "A common framework for analysis and generation  "  , in Proceedings of the 5th European ACL , Berlin . 
R~sner , D . (1986) " When Mariko talks to
Siegfried : Experiences from a Japanese/German MT project "  . Proceedings of the 11th International Conference in Computational Linguistics  ( COLING )  , Bonn . 
Sadler , L . , I . Crookston and A . Way (1989) " Co-description , projection and ' difficult ' translation " , Working Papers in Language Processing #8 , Dept . 
of Language and Linguistics , University of Essex.
Sadler , L . , I . Crookston , D . Arnold and A . Way (1990) " LFG and Translation " , in Third International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in MT  , Linguistics Research
Centre , Austin , Texas.
Sadler , L and H . S . Thompson ( 1991 ) " Structural Non-Correspondance in Translation " , in Proceedings of the 5th European ACL , Berlin . 
Sheiber , S.M . (1986) An Introduction to
Unification-Based Approaches to Grammar,
University of Chicago Press.
Shieber , S . M .   ( 1988 ) A Uniform Architecture for Parsing and Generation  "  , Proceedings of the 12th International Conference in Computational
Linguistics ( COLING ), Budapest.
Tsujti , J .   ( 1986 ) " Future Directions of Machine Translation " , Proceedings of the 11th International Conference in Computational
Linguistics ( COLING ), Bonn.
Tsujii , J and K . Fujita ( 1991 ) " Lexieal Transfer based on Bilingual Signs " , Proceedings of the 5th
European ACL , Berlin , April 1991.
Ushida , H and K . Sugiyama ( 1980 ) " A Machine Translation system from Japanese into English based on Conceptual Structure "  . Proceedings of the 8th International Conference in Computational
Linguistics ( COLING ), Tokyo.
Uszkoreit , Hans (1986) " Categorial Unification Grammars " , Proceedings of the 11th International Conference in Computational Linguistics  ( COLING )  , Bonn . 
van de Veen , E . (1990) Parsing Free Word Order Languages , MSc Thesis , Dept . of Artificial Intelligence , University of Edinburgh . 
Vauquois , B . and Ch . Boitet ( 1985 ) "Automated Translation at Grenoble Universi ty "  , Computational Linguistics , vol .  11 #1 . 
Whitelock , P . (1991a ) " Shake-and-Bake
Translation ". in Proceedings of the Workshop on
Constraint Propagation and Linguistic
Description . ed . C.J . Rupp , M . Rosner and R.
Johnson , IDSIA , Lugano.
Whitelock , P .   ( 1991b ) A Lexicalist Unification Grammar of Japanese . PhD Thesis , submitted to Dept . of Language and Linguistics , UMIST . 
Zeevat , H . , E . Klein and J . Calder ( 1987 ) " An Introduction to Unification Calegorial Grammar "  , in N . J . Haddock , E . Klein and G . Morrill ( eds . ) Edinburgh Working Papers in Cognitive Science , vol . 1: Categorial Grammar , Unification Grammar and Parsing . Centre for Cog . Science , Edinburgh . 
Ac'u~s DECOLING-92 . NANT1 ~ S . 2328 hotrr 1992 790 PROC . or : COLING-92 . NANTES . AUG .  2328 .  1992
SHAKE-AND-BAKE TRANS LATION
P . Whitelock
Sharp Laboratories of Europe Ltd.
Oxford Science Park
Oxford , U.K.


Danscet article , jed&'risune conception de la Traduction Automatique quiapporte deg'solutions nouvelles et radicales ~ tque a uns desprobl ~ mes rencontres parles approches ttucturales relies queles modules A transfer to u ~ thangue pivot  . Cettenouve Ueap prechest bas6e surtree conception lexicaliste de la gramma ireo ~lesunit ~ lexicales on tdessignes multi -dimensionnels  . 
La relation detraduction est d~qnie commeune & tuivalence ntredes " bags "  ( multi-ensembles ) d ' unit ~ lexicales . L'analyse de la Langue Sourced ~ ermine lea " bags " d ' un  c6t ~ del ' & tuivalence et la g6n6ration parl ' algorithme Shake and Bake combine librement leasignes correspondant senfonction de ha grammaire de la Langue Cible  . Le partage des variables entre hafor me logique dessigneadansles deuxhangue a fournitle a contraintes  , ~mantiques nd , ceasaires . II eat facile de for muer des d , quivalence a entredes expression say ant des structure syntaxique aoulogiques largement divergent eset d ' utili serces connaissances de mani ~ redacidable pour ~ fectuer destraduction dans l'une oul ' autre direction  . 
A cla~s DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 Ao(rr 1992791l'~oc . OFCOL1NG-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
