Cooperation between Transfer and Analysis
in Example-Based Framework
Osamu FURUSE and Hitoshi IIDA
ATR Interpreting Telephony Research Laboratories
22 , Hikaridai , Seikacho , Sorakugun , Kyoto 619-02 , Japan
e-mail : furuseiida % atr-la . atr . co . jp@uunet . uu . net

Transfer-Driven Machine Translation ( TDMT ) is presented as a method which drives the translation processes according to the nature of the input  . In TDMT , transfer knowledge is the central knowledge of translation  , and various kind saml levels of knowledge are cooperatively applied to input sentences  . TDMT effectively utilizes an example-based framework for transfer and analysis knowledge  . A consistent framework of examples makes the cooperation between transfer and analysis effective  , and efficient ranslation is achieved . The TDMT prototype system , which translates Japanese spoken dialogs into English  , has shown great promise . 
1 Introduction
Many applications dealing with spoken-language , such as automatic telephone interpreting system , need efficient and robust processing . The system must be capable of handling many idiomatic expressions and spoken-language -specific expressions which deviate from conventional grammar  . 
Also , spoken-hm guage has both easy and difficult expressions to translate  . In human translation when translating an easy sentence  , tile translated result is produced quickly using only surface-level knowledge  . 
When translating a complex sentence , a more elaborate process is performed , using syntactic , semantic , and contextual knowledge . Thus , many strategies and various levels of knowledge are used to effectively translate spoken -language  . 
This paper proposes a method called Transfer -Driven Machine Translation  ( TDMT )  , which carries out efficient translation processing by driving the necessary translation processes according to the nature of the input sentence  . An example-based framework can achieve quick processing and consistently describe knowledge  . The integration of transfer and analysis in an example-based framework is i  ) roposed as a method for achieving TDMT . In this method , transfer and analysis proceed autonomously and cooperatively  . Also , a well-balanced load on each process can be achieved by employing this integrated processing mechanism  . 
Sectiou 2 explains the idea of TDMT . Section 3 explains distance calculation and transfer in an example-based framework  . Section 4 explains analysis in an example-based framework . Section 5 reports on the TDMT prototype system , and Section 6 reports on tile experimental results . 
The explanations in the following sections use
Japanese-to-English translation.
2 Transfer-Driven Machine Translation
TD/vlT performs efficient and robust spoken -language translation using various kinds of strategies to be able to treat diverse input  . Its characteristics are explained in the following subsections  . 
2 . 1 Transfer-centered cooperation mechanism Translation is essentially converting a source language x pression i to a target language x pression  . 
In TDMT , transfer knowledge consists of various levels of bilingual information  . It is the primary knowledge used to solve translation problems  . The transfer module retrieves the necess ~ u-y transfer knowledge ranging from global unit like sentence structures to local unit like words  . The retrieval and application of transfer knowledge are flexibly controlle depending on the knowledge necessary to translate the input  . Basically , translation is performed by using transfer knowledge  . A transfer module utilizes analysis knowledge ( syntactic/szmantic infonnation ) which helps to apply transfer L , ~ owledge to some part of the input . And generation and context knowledge are utilized for producing correct translatiou result  . In other words , TDMT prodaces translation results by utilizing these dift'cK  , ~ ut kinds of knowledge cooperatively and by centering on transfer  , and achieves efficien translation according to the nature of the input  . 
ACTESDECOL 1NG-92 , NAN'rES , 2328 ^ otrr 1992645 l'~oc , oF COLING-92 , N^r crl~s , AU  .  2328, 1992 2 . 2 Utilization of example-based framework Transfer knowledge is the basic data which is used for totally controlling the translation process  . 
Most of the transfer knowledge in TDMT is described by the example-based framework  . An example-based framework is useful for cortsistenfly describing transfer knowledge  . The essence of the example-based framework is the distance calculation  . This framework achieves the best match based on the distance between the input and provided examples  , and selects the most plausible target expression from many candidates  . The distance is calculated quickly because of its simple mechanism  . Through providing examples , various kinds and levels of knowledge can be described in the example-based franlework  . 
2.3 Multi-level knowledge
TDMT provides multilevel transfer knowledge , which correspoods to each translation strategy . In the transfer knowledge of the TDMT prototype system  , there is string- , pattern - and grammar-level knowledge . 
TDMT achieves efficien translation by utilizing multilevel knowledg effectively according to the nature of input  . 
Some conventional machine translation systems also provide multiple levels of transfer knowledge for idioms  , syntax , semantics , and so on , and try to apply these levels of that knowledge in a fixed order to cover diverse input \ [ Ikehara et al  .  87\] . However , this method proceeds with the analysi slot deciding which level of knowledge should be applied for any given input sentence in a fixed order  , placing heavy load on the analysis module . Also , the knowledge description is ratber more complicated than that of the example-based framework  . Therefore , the lrauslation of a simple sentence is not always quick because the system tries to cover all translation strategies  . 
3 Example-based Transfer
TDMT utilizes distance calculation to determine the most plausible target expression and structure in transfer  . 
3.1 Word distance
We adop the distance calculation method of Example -Based Machine Translation  ( EBMT ) \[Sumit and lida91\] . The distance between words is defined as the closeness of semantic attributes in a thesaurus  . Words have certain thesaurus codes , which correspond to particular semantic attributes  . The distance between the semantic attributes is determined according to the relationship of their positions in the hierarchy of the thesaurus  , and varies between 0 and 1 ( Fig .  1) . The distance between semantic attributes A and B is expressed as d  ( A , B ) . Provided that the words X and Y have the semantic attribute A and B  , respectively , the distance between X and Y , d(X , Y ) , is equal to d(A , B ) . 
d(A,D ~
Figure 1 Distance between thesaurus codes The hierarchy of the thesaurus that we use is in accordance with the thesaurus of everyday Japanese\[Ohno and Hamanishi  84\]  , and consists of four layers . 
when two values can be abstracted in the kth layer from the bottom  , the distance k/3(0-<k_<3) is assigned . The value 0 means that two codes belong to exactly the same category  , and 1 means that they are unrelated . The attributes " writing " and " book " are abstracted by the immediate upper attribute " document " and the distance is given as  1/3  . Thus , the word " ronbun technical pper " which has thesaurus code " writing "  , and " yokoushuu proceedings " which has the thesaurus code " book "  , are assigned a distance of 1/3 . 
3.2 Description of Transfer Knowledge
Transfer knowledge describes the correspondence between source language x pressions  ( SE ) and target language x pressions ( TE ) in certain meaningful units , preserving the translational equivalence \ [ Tsujii and Fujila  91\]  . The condition under which a TE is chosen as a translation result of an SE is associated with the TE  . Transfer knowledge in an example-based framework is described as follows: 
SE => TEl(Ell , E12, ...),
TEn(Enl , En2 , ...)
Each TE has several examples as conditions . E ij means the j th example of TE i . The input is the SE's environment , and the most appropriate TE is selected according to the calculate distance between the input and the examples  . The input and examples comprise a set of words . 
Let us suppose that an input I and each example Eij consist of telements as follows : Au~sDE  COIANG-92  , NANTES , 2328 ^ otn "1992646 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
I : ( I1, ..., It)
Eij = ( Eijl , ..., Eijt)
Then the distance between I and Eij is calculated as follows : d  ( I , Eij ) = d((I1 ,  . . . , It ), ( Eijl, . . . ,Eijt )) t = Z d ( Ik , Eijk ) * Wkk = l The attribute weight Wk expresses fire importance of the kth element in the translation  1  . The distance from the input is calculated for all examples  . Then the example whose distance to the input is least  , is detected and the TE which has the example is selected  . When Eij is close , stoI , TE l is selected as file most plausible TE . 
The enrichment of examples increases the accuracy of determining the TE because conditions become more detailed  . Further , even if there is only one TE , but there is no example close to the input , the application of the tc , ms fer knowledge is rejected . 
3 . 3 Wide application of distance calculation Distance calculation is usexl to deternfine which TE has the example that is clo~st to the input  , ' rod can be used in various abstract level expressions tlepending on how the input words are provided  . 
Various levels of knowledge can be provided by the wide application of distance calculation  . TDMT achieves efficient translation by utilizing multilevel knowledge effectively  . 
In the transfer knowledge of IheTDMT prototype system  , the string- , pattern - and grammar-level knowledge , the latter two of which can be described easily in an example-based framework  , are now adopted . 
String-level knowledge is the most concrete , while grammar-level knowledge is fire most abstract  . 
3.3.1 String-level transfer knowledge
Since this kind of knowledge has a condition outside the SE  , the cooperation with such as context module is sometimes necessary  . 
In some cases rite conditions can bed cseribed by the examples of the most closely related word in which the 
SE is used , as follows : so chira => this((des'ube2) . . . ), you ( ( okur usend ) . .), it (( mira  see ) . . . )  1 Wk is given for each lk by TE's distribution that sematic attribute of Ikbrings\[Sumita and lida  91\]  . 
2  w l'""Wn  is the list of corresponding English words  . 
Applying this knowledge , " you " is selected as the word correspondiag to the " scehira " in " sochirani particle tsutaeru " because of the small distauee between " tsutaeruc onvey " and " okums end "  . 
3 . 3  . 2 Pattern-level transfer knowledge Pattermlevel transler knowledge has variables  . The binding words of the variables are regarded as input  . 
For example , " Xoo-negaishimasu " X particle will-ask-for has a variable  . Suppose that it is translated into two kinds of English expressions in the examplely clow: 
Xoo-negaishimasu => may 1 speak to X '3 please give me X ' ( ( jimukyokuoffice )  ,   . . . ), (( hangou ( number), . . . ) In the translation of " Xoo-negaishimasu " , the TE is detennined by the calculation below : if M in  ( d ( ( X )  , ( jimukyoku )) ,  . . . .) < Min ( d((X ), ( bangou )), . . . . ) then tile TE is " may I speak to X ' else the TE is " pl-ease give meX'"Tire following two sentences have the pattern " Xoo-negaishimasu " :   ( 1 ) " jinjika person nelsctionoo-negaishimasu . "(2) " daime it it leoo-negaishim as u . " The first sentence select , ; " may I speak to X ' " because ( jinjika ) is close to ( jimukyoku )  . The second sentence selects " please give meX ' "   , because ( tlaimei ) is close to ( bangou ) . Thus , we get the following translations : ( 1' ) " may I speak to the l ) ersnnuel section . "(2') " please give me file title , "3 . 3  . 3 Gramntar - level t ransfer knowledge Grammar -level transfer knowledge is expressed in terms of grammatical categories  . The examples consist of sets of words which are concrete instances of each category  . The following transfer knowledge involves sets of three common ouns  ( CNs ) :  3A ' is the transferred expression of AACRESDE COLING-92  , NANITS , 2328 AO~t1992647 t'ROC . OFCOL1 NGO2 . NANTES , AU6 . 23-28, 1992
CNICN 2CN 3=>
CN3' of CNI'(("kaigi , kaisai , kikan conferelt ce , opening , time ") ,  . . . ),
CN2'CN3' for CNI'(("sanka , moushikomi , youshi participation , application , form ") ,  . . . ) , This transfer knowledge allows the following translations  . 
kenkyukai kai saikikan workshop , opening , time ) o > file time of the workshop happ youmoshikomi youship resentation  , application , form -> the application form for presentation The above translations select "  CN3' of CNI '" and " CN2'   CN3' for CNI '" as the most plausible TEs , as the result of distance calculations . 
3.4 Disambiguation by total distance
When there are several ways to apply transfer knowledge to the input sentence  , structural mbiguity may occur . In such cases , the most appropriate structure is selected on the basis of total distance  . The leastotal distance implies that the chosen structure is the most suitable input structure  . For example , when the pattern " X no Y " is applied to the sentence " kaigino tourokuhino waribiki conference  , particle , registration , fee , tk article , discount " , there are twopps sible structures : ( 1 ) kaigino ( tourokuhino waribiki )   ( 2 )   ( kaiginotourokuhi ) nowaribiki The pattern " X no Y " has various TEs  , such as in the following X no Y => Y ' of X ' ( Ell , El2 ,   .   .   .  ) ,
Y ' for X'(E21, E22 , ...),
Y ' at X'(E3I , E32 ....),
X ' Y ' ( Eel , E42 . . .),
The respective TE tree representations constracted from structures  ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) are shown in Figs . 2 and 3 . 
The structure of ( 1 ) transfers to " Y ' of X '" with the distance value of  0  . 50 and " Y ' of X '" with the distance value of 0 . 17 , and generates ( 1' ) with a total distance value of 0 . 67 . In structure (2) , "Y ' of X '" with the distance value of 0 . 17 and " Y ' for X '" with the distance value of 0 . 17 , generates (2') with a total distance value of 0 . 34 . The lattere sult is selected because it has the least otal distance va ~ ue  . 
(1' ) " discount of the regiswation fee of the conference "  ( 2' ) " discount of registration fee for the conference " discount of registration fee of the conference  ( total distance -0 . 67)
Y ' of X'(distanee ~0.50) t-
X ' the conLrence IY ' of X'(distance = 0.17)
X ' Y '
II registration feed is count
Figure 2 Translation of " kaigino ( tourokuhino waribiki ) " discount of registration fee for the conference ( total distance -0 . 34)
Y ' of X'(distancn = O .17)
X ' Y'I discount
Y ' for X'(distance ~ O . 17)
W ?'
II the conference registration fee
Figure 3 Translation of " ( kaiginotourokuhi ) nowaribiki " 4 Example-based Analysis For some structurally complex sentences  , translations cannot be performed by applying only transfer knowledge  . In such cases , analysis knowledge is also required . The analysis module applies analysis knowledge and supplies the resulting information to the transfer module  , which then applies transfer knowledge on the basis of that information  . When no analysis knowledge is necessary for translation  , the application of only transfer knowledge produces the translation result  . The analysis described in this paper is not the understanding of structure and meaning on the basis of a parsing of the input sentence according to grammar rules  , but rather the extraction of the information AC q ' ESDE  COLING-92  , NAN fES . 2328 AOfrr 1992648 PROC . OFCOLING-92 . N ^ . , wrEs , AUG .  2328 ,   1992 required to apply transfer knowledge and to produce the correct ranslation from the input sentence  . 
4.1 Description of analysis knowledge
Analysis knowledge is described by examples in the same way as transfer knowledge  , as follows:
SE => Revised SEl(Ell , El2 . . . ),
Revised SEn(Enl , En 2...)
Although the form of knowledge description is virtually the same  , transfer knowledge descriptions map onto TEs , whereas analysis knowledge descriptions map onto revised SEs  . 
4.2 Cooperation mechanism
The transfer and analysis processes operate autonomously but cooperatively to produce the translation result shown in Figure  4  . 
Analysis application of analysis kn0wlege
Input f Transfer \]\ [ application of information transfer  1  . knowlege 1 output Figure 4 Relation between transfer and analysis At present  , we are providing analysis knowledge for normalization\[Nagao  84\] and for structuring with TDMT . In the following sections we will explain the cooperation mechanism between transfer and analysis based on these two kinds of analysis knowledge  . 
4 . 2 . 1 Analysis knowledge for normalization Normalization is putting together minor colloquial expressions into standard expressions It leads to robust translation and efficient knowledge storage  . Analysis knowledge for normalization is utilized to recover the ellipsis of function words such as particles  , and to normalize some variant forms such as sentence-final forms into normal forms  . Such knowledge helps the application of transfer knowledge to the input sentence  . 
The sentence " Watakushi wa Suzuki desu I , particle , Suzuki , complementizer " is uans lated into " 1 am Suzuki " by applying transfer knowledge such as the following : 
X waY desu => X'beY'
However , in spoken Japanese , particles are frequently omitted . The sentence " Watakushi Suzu kidesu " is natural spoken-Japanese  . It is normalized to " Wataknshiwa Suzuki desu " , which has the omitted particle " wa " recovered , hyapplying the following analysis knowledge :
Pronoun Proper Noun = >
Pronounwa Proper Noun ( a set of examples ) The analysis module sends the information about tile application of the analysis knowledge to the transfer module  . The transfer module receives the information and applies the transfer knowledge to produce the 
English sentence " I am Su zuki "
By examples , tbiskind of analysis knowledge cau also classify the particles to be recovered as shown below : 
CNV erb = >
CNo Verb (( hotem hotel , yo yaku-snra reserve\]) ,   ,  . .),
CNniVerb((kaigi confemnce , sanka-surui ) articipate ) ,  . . . ) , This analysis knowledge allows the recovery of various particle such as  , " hoteruyoyaku-suru "-> " hoternoyoyaku-suru "" kaigisanka-suru "->" kaiginisanka-suru " Analysis knowledge for nomlalalization also has the advantage of making filescale of knowledge more economical nd the translation processing more robust  . 
4 . 2 . 2 Analysis knowledge for structur ing Structuring is recognition of structure components of by insertion of a marker in order to apply transfer knowledge to each structure component  . Analysis knowledge for structuring is applied to detect special linguistic phenomena such as adnominal expressions  , wh-expressions , and di ~ ontinuities , so as to assign a structure to the SE . 
Adnominal expressions appear with high frequency in Japanese  , corresponding to various English expressions such as relative clauses  , infinitives , pronouns , gerunds , and subordinate clauses . They can be detected by means of inflectional forms  . Three components of adnominal expressions must be considered in the translation process : the modification relationship  , the modifier , and AcrEs DECOLING-92 , NANTES . 2328 ho ( rr 1992649 PROC . OFCOLING-92, NANTes , Ate . 2328, 1992 the modified . Analysis information for structuring is used to insert a marker at the boundary between the modifier and the modified  . The following analysis knowledge can be constructed  . 
Adnominal-inflection CN =>
Adnominal-inflection Adnominal-marker CN ( a set of examples ) This knowledge identifies adnominal relationships and separates the modifier from the modified so that ransfer knowledge can be applied  . When the transfer module receives the information about the application of this analysis knowledge  , it applies the transfer knowledge needed to translate a ch component of the expression : the adnominal relationship  , the modifier , and the modified . The scope of the modifier and the modified is determined by the total distance of each structure in which transfer knowledge is applied  . 
The following transfer knowledge about the adnominal relation determines the English expression by distance calculation with examples before and after the marker as follows: 
XA dnominal-mark Y =>
Y ' that X'((ikugo , basubas), . . . ), Y ' when X '( ( deru Iaueod ,  hiday), . . . ) , For example , analysis knowledge is applied to " Kyotoekieiku basu Kyoto station particle gobus "  , and the revised SE " Kyotoekieiku Adnominal -marker basu " is produced  . Then , by the application of the above transfer knowledge about the adnominal relation and the following transfer knowledge about the modifier and modified  , the translation result " the bust hat goes to the
Kyoto station " is produced.
X e Y => Y ' to X ',
Kyotoeki => Kyotostation , iku => go , basu => bus 5 TDMT Prototype System A prototype Japanese to English system constructed too confirm the feasibility and effectiveness of TDMT is running on a Genera  8  . 1LISP machine\[Furuse and lida 92\] . 
Due to the restriction of the sequential mechanism  , a method for driving the necessary process at the required time has not been completely achieved  . However , the following control mechanism is used to obtain the most efficient processing possible  . 
? As much as possible , translation is attempted by first applying only transfer knowledge  ; when this fails , the system tries to apply analysis knowledge . 
? Transfer knowledge is applied at the most concrete level as possible  , that is , in the order of string , pattern , and grammar level . 
In order to achieve flexible processing which exchanges necessary translation if ormation  , a parallel implementation is under study based on the results from the prototype system  . 
The knowledge base has been built from statistical investigation f the bilingual corpus  , whose domain is inquiries concerning international conference registration  . The corpus has syntactic or respondences between Japanese and English  . We have established transfer and analysis knowledge as follows : ? string-level transfer knowledge  ( about 500 items ) ? pattern-level transfer knowledge ( about 300 items ) ? grammar-leveluans fer knowledge ( about 20 items ) ? analysis knowledge ( about 50 items )   6 Evaluation We have evaluated the TDMT prototype system  , with the model conversations about conference registration consisting of  10 dialogs and 225 sentences . The model conversations cover basic expressions . Table 1 shows the kinds of knowledge that were required to translate the model conversations  . 
Table 1 Knowledge Necessary to Translate
Model Conversation ( total number of sentences -225 ) sentences rate string only 7332 . 4% pattern and string only 90 40 . 0% grammar-level 2 19 . 3% transfer knowledge needed analysis knowledge needed  41   18  . 2% At present , the prototype system can produce output quickly by the example-basod framework  . 
200 of the sentences are correct , providing a success rate of 88 . 9% . The coverage by string - and paa em-level knowledge is wider than expected  . 
Table 2 shows the main causes of incorrect sentences . 
ACT ~ DECOLING-92 , NANTES , 2328 AOt ~ r1992650 PROC . OFCOL 1NG-92 . NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
Table 2 Causes of Incorrect Sentences ( total number of incorrect sentences -25 ) octurrence ~ ( 1 ) inability to get such TEs 9 as elided objects ( 2 ) selection of incorrect TEs8 ( 3 ) error in adverb position 4 ( 4 ) incorrect declension 1 ( 5 ) incorrect tense 1 ( 6 ) etc 2 The second factor shows that an elaboration of distance calculation and an enrichment of examples are needed  . The first , third , and fourth factors are caused by the shortage of generation knowledge  . The fifth factor is caused by the shortage of analysis knowledge  . These facts show that the cooperative control that flexibly communicates various kinds of knowledge including context mid generation knowledge  , and various kinds of framework such as a rule -based and a statistical framework are useful to improve the translation performance  . 
7 Related Research
The example-based approach was advocated by Nagao \[ Nagao  84\]  . The essence of this approach is ( a ) retrieval of similar examples from a bilingual database and  ( b ) applying the examples to translate the input . Other research as emerged following this line , including EBMT\[Sumit and Iida91\] , MBT\[Sate and Nagao90\] , and ABMT\[Sadler89\] . EBMT uses phrase examples and will be integrated with conventional rule-based machine translation  . MBT and ABMT use example dependency trees of examples and translate the whole sentence by matching expressions and by a left-to-right search of maximal matching  . TDMT utilizes an example-based framework for various process as the method of selecting the most suitable TE  , and combines multilevel transfer knowledge . On the other lmnd , MBT and ABMT utilize uni-level knowledge only h ~ r transfer  . 
8 Concluding Remarks
TDMT ( Transfer-Driven Machine Translation ) has been proposed . The prototype TDMT system which translates Japanese to English spoken dialogs  , has been constructed with an example-based framework  . The consistent description by example smoothes the cooperation between transfer and analysis  , have shown the high feasibility . Important future work will include the achievement of flexible translation which effectively control the translation process  . Also important is the implementation fTDMT in distributed cooperative processing by a parallel computer and incorporating various kinds of processing such as rule-based and statistical framework into the cooperation mechanism  . 
Acknowledgements 1 would like to thank the members of the ATR Interpreting Telephony Research Laboratories for their comments on various parts of this research  . Special thanks are due to Dr . Kohei Habara , the chairman of the board of ATR Interpreting Telephony Research Laboratories  . Dr . Akira Kurematsu , the president of ATR Interpreting Telephony Research Laboratories  , for their support of this research . 
References\[Furuse and lida92\]Furuse,O . , and Iida , H . : An Example-based Method for Transfer-driven Machine Translation  , Prec . of the Fourth International Conference on Theoretical nd Methodological Issues in 
Machine Translation , (1992).
\[Ikehara et al87\]lkehara , S . , Miyazaki , M . , Shirai , S . , and Hayashi , Y : Speaker's Recognition and Multi-level -Translating Method Based on It  , Trans . IPSJ apan Vol . 28 No . 12 . , IPSJ , pp . 1269-1279, (1987), ( in

\[ Nagao84\] Nagao , M . : A framework of a mechanical translation between Japanese and English by analogy principle  , in Artificial and Human Intelligence , ed . 
Elithorn , A . and Bmrerji , R . . North-Holland , pp . 173-180, (1984) . 
\[ Ohnomidltamanishi 841 Ohno , S . and Hamanishi M . 
: Ruigo-Shin-Jiten , Kadokawa ,  (1984) , ( in Japanese) . 
\[ Sadler89\] Sadler , V . : Working with Analogical
Semantics , Foris Publications (1989).
\[ Sato and Nagao90\] Sato , S . and Nagao M . : Toward MemoryBased Translation , Proc . of Coling '90, (1990) . 
\[Smnit and lida 911 Sumita , E . , and Iida , 1t . : Experiments and Prospects of Example-based Machine Translation  , Proc . of the 291h Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ,  (1991) . 
\[ Tsujii and Fujita 91\] Tsujii , J . and Fnjita , K . : l , exical Transfer based on Bi ~ Lingual Signs- Towards Interaction during Transfer  , : Proc . of the 5th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ,  (1991) . 
ACRESDECOL 1NG-92, NANTES . 2328 Ao(rr 199265 lPROC . OFCOLING-92 . NA ~' rEs , AUO .  2328 .  1992
