Franqo is PECCOUD , Chairnaan of the Organizing Committee
Bienvenue " a COLING-92!
Welcome to COLING-92!
1992 estune an ndtchami ~ repourl ' Europe , dunsune
conjoncture sociologique ett chno logiquequia
beuu coup dvolu 6 depu is deuxuns.
Dupoint devtte sociologique , unnouve aupaliera 6t6 franchidansl ' in tdg ration del ' Europe , alors qu ' ailleurs on assiste ~ lla r6surgence desnutionalismts . Alu conscience depluse uplus nettetiela dimensicm mondialt des grands ddf is posds'a  l'humanit6 s ' oppose une relent6 deplus enplusaigue de reconstruireles identit6s nationales . Or , commeI ' asibitn(litHag~gt , " leslangue sentles drupeaux ( losident itds nationales " . 
Nosorientations scientifiquts nei ) tuven tpus ignorerce context e . I i rant que no stravaux prenneut plus encompte la  diversit6 ties langueset apporteut dessolutions concretes aux probl ~:: mesdela communication muhilingue  . 
Or , celaneser a possible qut si Its choix stratd giques quiser on teffectuds par Its rtsponsablts public set industriel svent dansce sins  . Ctst pour quoin ous Its avons mvitds~t participer ~ plusieur stables rondes  , Dupoint devue technologiq ttc , on assist tdepuispeu ? . ~ . 
l'dmergenced unmltidedia , considdrd parl'iudustrie infornlatique Coulme riflevoie pronaette use pour reluncers u croissance  . 
Or , lemultimed iafer acroit reles be so in sen produits compos ant tslz mgugi ~ res  . Celauc cdld rerale passage del ' informatique linguistiqut dulaboratoire vtrsItstcteur iudustritl  . 
iId t vitnt donc deplust np hts important de fairt coun a\[trt  , dediffuseretd ' industrialiserles rdalisations quipouv tlltrend redes services coucre Ls  . 
C'est pour qooiit comit6 deprogrammetle comit6 d ' organisation de COLING-92 on ten courage its notes de projetave c demonstration et propos daux industriels de participtr hune exposition parall bleau colloqut  . 
Grenoble , It 5mai 1992.
1992 is a crucial year for Europe , in a sociological and technological conjuncture which has considerably evolved since two years  . 
Front the sociological point of view , a new level has been reached in the integration of Europe  , us we assist to the resurgence of nationalisms in other parts  . The sharper and sharper conscience of the mondial dimension of the challenges fuced by mank in dis to be constrasted with a stronger and  , stronger will to reconstruct national identities . But , as llagdge has so well put it , "' languages are the flags of the national identites '  . 
Our scientific orientations cannot ignore this context  . 
Our work must take more into account the diversity of languages and contribute concrete solutions to the problems of multilingual communication  . 
But this will be possible only if the strategic hoices which will be made by public and industria leaders go in this direction  , This is why we have invited them to participate in several panels  . 
From the technological point of view , we have recently begun to see multimedia emerge , and be considered by the computer industry as a promising direction for restarting its growth  . 
But multimedia will increase the need for products with language-oriented components  . This will accelerate the passage of computer linguistics from the laboratories to the industrial sector  . 
llence , it is becoming more and more important opromote , diffuse and industrialize the realizations which can offer concrete services  . 
This is why the Programme Committee and the Organizing Committee of  COLlNG-92 have encouraged project notes wilh demonslrations and proposed to industrials to participate in an exhibition parallel to the Conference  . 
Grenoble , May5th , 1992.
AcrEsl ) liCOLING-92 , NAN'rI!s , 2328 AOt/l "19925 PROC . O1: COLING92, NANTES , AUG .  2328, 1992
