AHYBRID APPROACH TO THE AUTOMATICPLANNING
OFTEXTUALSTRUCTURES
Gang Zhu and Nigel Shadbolt
A . I . Group , Psychologyl ) epartment , Nottingham University , Nottingham , U . K . 
1. Introduction
Over the last decade , the research goals in natural language generation have shifred fi'om the generation of isolated sentences to the production of coherent multi -sentence paragraphs  . Two major aspects of the generation process have been focused on : deciding ' whato say '  ( the strategic level ) and deciding ' how to say it ' ( the tactical evel )  . 
In 1985 , McKeown designed one of the first systems to produce paragraphs using socalled schemata to describe conventional text structures in terms of patterns  . Schemata are used to determine the content and order of the clauses in paragraphs  ( McKeown ,  1985) . However , these structures have a major limitation ( Moore and Paris ,  1988 ) : schemata do not contain a description of tim intentional and rhetorical role that each part of the paragraph plays with respect othe whole paragraph  . 
In 1988 , How first employed RST ( Pdmtorical Structure Theory ) relations , which state the relationships between individual elements of a text  , to control the construction of texts ( How ,  1988) . In developing this RST-based method , HoW has discovered that RST relations are a powerful tool for planning pa  , 'agraphs . 
They support reasoning about he intentions of writers and readers in a very natural way  . Planning with rhetorical relations affords more flexibility than schcnmta  . 
This method of planning paragraphs builds a tree structure that represents the internal organisation and rhetorical dependencies between clauses in a text  . P , nt there is a cost : it is more difficult to assemble an RST paragraph tree from a set of independent relations than it is to instantiate and traverse a schema  ( Hovy ,  1991 ) . 
In 1992, Hovy et . al . described a new text planner ( HoWet . al . , 1992 ) that identifies the distinct types of knowledge necessary to generate coherent discourse in a text generation system  . These knowledge resources are integrated under a planning process that draws from appropriate resources whatever knowledge is needed to construct a text  . Though Itovy et . al . do not claim to have identified all the knowledge sources required to produce coherent discourse  , their planner sets at rend for applying multi -knowledge resources for more complete and flexible phmning of text  . 
So far , planning techniques have developed from the direct application of schemata toward the wider implementation fmulti-knowledger sources and diversel  ) hmning architectures ( McKeown , 1985; Paris , 1987; How , 1988; Moore , 1989; McKeown et al . , 1990; Suthers , 1991; Hovy et . al . , 1992) . When these planning mechanisms are implemented in a working system  , efficiency is still an important factor in developing a workable model  . One of the problems in generation is that of designing a phmning architecture that can achieve a good balance between the efficiency of the schema-based approach and the l qex-ibility  o1' the RST-based one . This paper present such a hybrid architecture . 
2. Allybrid Approach
Both schema-based and RST-based planning pa , ' a digms have advantages and disadvantages . A hybrid of the two approaches that preserves their best aspects -- the efficiency of tile schema-based paradigm and the flexibility of the RST-based one--would clearly be usefnl  . What are the possibilities for such a hybrid approach ? Though the two paradigms seem very different  , tile fact is that a close relationship exists between them  . Schemat are nothing other than stereotypically occurring collections of phms  , whereas the plans and their plan elements are simply the elementary building blocks of schemata  ( Mann ,  1987) . Schcrnata can be viewed as the result of a process where the plans for all of the steps in the process have been compiled into a single structure  ( Moore and Swartout ,  1991 ) . Schemata can be used for plmming relatively invariant aspects of text content and structure  . RST-based plans can cope with less predicable and more volatile  . Both planning paradigms can be inlplement cd if they are properly represenled and manipulated in a hybrid architecture  . 
Two features are of importance in this hybrid appro ' ~ ch:  ( t ) different planning mechanisms are required to deal with different extual phenomena and  ( 2 ) explicit use of multi-knowledger sources indispensable to the sen~echanisms  . 
In knowledge resources , there are two types of presc , ' iptive knowledge : domain-dependent and the domain-independent knowledge  . Both domain-de-
Nuclear Satellil cs : llab c . ration 13 . The Five Sttu " stipport package , 14 . costing 35% of I helicorice fee15 . ( with ailiiliinltiln of J2500), 16 . also hlclt ldeS free , aUt Olllalict lp grades 17 . ( i . e . Ill ; Ij or releases)
I 8 . to the products 19 . thai you have registered , 20 . prel\~rential rles for adding extra copies of those or <' lilyol\]ler products and Illel/l -Imrships of the new I+l > AUsergl ' ou I  )  21 . I~olhst tp pott packages include discounts on m~y training or ctm sultancy  22+ or dere during the support periud . 
Fig .   1: A sample RST " uialysi spendent and domain -independent knowledge resources will consist of intentional and rhetorical operators with associated hierarchical networks  . 
In the hybrid planning rnechanisniad vocated here , topdown hierarchical expansion is used a stile basic planning meclmriism  . It retrieves a sll/tl chi . t'or-mation as possible from relew mt knowledge rc sources  . 
In general it does this in a donmin-dcpendent-to -domain-independent order  . This order rel+lecls the idea that an efl'icient planuing mechanism should seek to exploit  , whenever possible , stereotypical domain-dependent knowledge resources  . This topdown planning mechanism is combined with other heuristic meehanist n such as at l atlgmetlted transitiot/network traversal  , constructive critics and focus modul 0 s . This approach makes use of different knowledge rcs Oill+eOs and planriing mechanisms and is capable of handling a number of different extual p benomeria  . 
3. A Prototype
A prototypelias been designed to dell lOll-strate tiffs hybrid approach to die problem of phlnning textual structures  . We will first describe how the text data were collected and analysed  . Based on this data , we will then discuss the kuowledge resources lhat were identified as important as well as how they are  , ' e presented . lqnally we indicnte how the i + lulmitlg mechanisn is a reiml:  , lenu:nted . 
3.1. Testl ) at a
The test data are a selection of l : inglish sah : s letters  . These letters are rehltively formalised , in that some paragral ) hs are fixed while others are more w tried as to whether they appear mid where they appear  . The letters were written for a restricted readership on a specific subject "" in a mely  , certain comptt + to t " software products . 
The textual analysis has bcen carried out according to RST  , although several modifications have had to be made  . An exatnple o1' part of a RST analysis is given hiFig .  1 . 
Although RST provides a framework for describing rhetorical relations ali \] Ollg parts of a text  , it lacks ; ill explicit representation of the coummnicative intentions und crly hlg the generation of cohol + Oilt Iil tllti sententia I text  . In order to COll strtlct a hybridised processor for various knowledge bases and plann hig ilioclial liSlils  , we call not implelnell tRST dh'ectly with its rhctoric ' alrotations  , but l lave to develop addition alh lcntional rol ; itions . RST has to be supplen lonted with a richer hl toulional context  . 
3 . 2 . l(nowled t4 eI ~ , esources " Foplanotlrs ; tles letters , we need to develop distinctive domain-dcl ) endent and domain-independ-ent knowledge reseurces and thoh " associated proeoss hlgn lcchanisms in a plaunhlg system  . 
l: ; l cllle sourccre preseuts both domaiu+de-pendeltt hl for nr  , ttion : . uMdon lahl-hl depond out hl for-tllaliOll , tlierarchical/et works describe relations liil+s LII/1OII   , ~ r , the (: Ollt Olltso fot lr knowledge resources . 
In this section , we present timma in knowl-ed ~ oi ' ost ) tll ' CCS that we haves t ) far Menii fiod , namely : intentional operators , rlietorical operators , and ilet-works over the ln . 
3 . 2 . 1 . lntention : d Operators h + llClltiOl1 ~ tlol ) (21"~Itt ) l + S~+ll+eOl'g ~ I lllscd ; + trOLllld timintentions of the writer , and tlmir decorn positions are used to select t ' elevant rhetorical operators or approl-J rhite speech acts as defirted by Allen  ( 1987 )  . 
An hlentioruil operator is represented using the for-real theory of t'ational interaction developed by Coben  ,  1 , cvesque , and Perraut (1985) . Each operator has a goal , prerequisites , consh ' airlts , ubgoals , and a type . 
The goal will be brought a botlt by a , i application ot ' the Ol ~ JC rtltor . The stl bgo: . ll Smt lst be achieved for stibse-quent application el ' the operator  . The prerequisites are conditions which must be . salisfied , and coust r ; ihlts are Collditions which Call be ignored if there is rio other intention : ll operator which has the desired goal  . The tylx ; in eacli operator is either domain-dependent or
Z75 domain-independent . The criteria for the division between the domain -dependeut and the domain-inde-pendent operators i based on the stereotypic patterns of our analysed texts  . For example , Fig .   2 represents a domain-dependent itentional operator  , P e , ' suade . In our system , this operator may be instantiated as an attempt by an agent X to persuade a client Y to take an Action such as buying the agent's Products  . This is achieved by making the client aware of the products and increasing his desire to take the action of buying the product  . The prerequisites indicate that both the agent X and the client Y mutually believe that Information is about Products  , the agent believes hfformation , and the client does not know it . These prerequisites nmst be satisfied within the existing knowledge resources before the intentional operator can be applied  . 
The constraints , in this case that the client Y is not competent to fulfil Action  , need to be satisfied at this stage of processing . When the constraints happened not to be satisfied within the existing knowledge resources  , the constraints are then set as a new subgoal for later expansion  . 
GOAL : persuade(X , Y Action)
PREREQUISITES : bmb(X , Y , is ( Information , Products )) bel(X , hfformation ) , not ( know(Y , hfformation )) CONSTRAINTS : not(competent(Y , Action )) SUBGOALS : bmb(X , Y , and ( bel(Y , l ~ roducts ) , increase_desire(Y , Action ))
TYPE : domain-independent
Fig . 2: An intentional operator : Persuade 3 . 2 . 2 . Rhetorical Operators Rhetorical operators are associated with intentional operators  . This association reflects the fact that there are certain rhetorical means of achieving particular intentional goals  . P , hetorical operators consist of seven components : Prerequisites  , Constraints , Effects , Nuclear , Satellite , Order and Type . As wfl hour intentional operators the prerequisites must always be satisfied  . Constraints may be ignored but if they are processed they have the same potent k das constraints in intentional operators -- they may become new goals for the system  . Rhetorical operators as expected to have clear effects on intended recipients  . Our rhetorical operators also possess the important constituents of a nuclear and satellite  . They concern how the goals expressed in the calling intentional operators are to be achieved -- the actions to be carried out  . There are two types of rhetorical operators -- domain-dependent addomain-independent : Domain -independent rhetorical operators are general rhetorical operators applicable across a wide range of types of texts  . There are about hirty of them described to date ( Mann and Thompson 1987 )  . Planning with these operators affords more flexibility than schemata  , because individual operators typically control ess of a paragraph than schemata do  ; Domain-dependent rhetorical operators are derived fi'om our RST analysis of our task-oriented data  . l-laving analysed our sales letters we have klentified those rhetorical operators that seem particular to such computer product sales texts  . Often they arc rather schematic in that one can expect certain material to be expressed in partic nlarways at certain parts in the text  . 
3 . 2 . 3 . Intentional and Rhetorical Networks The intentional network is a hierarchical structure that embodies a preferred control structure for the use of onr intentional operators  . The intentional network can be used forgiving possible development of conmmnicative goal  ( s ) with heuristic ordering for an efl'icient schema -based approach  . 
The rhetorical network is derived fi'om several main sources : the relations defined in RST  ( Mann and Thompson 1989 )  , which were extended in Hovy's taxonomization l ' relations  ( Hovy et . al .  1992) , and others as determined by our sldes-letter domain  . This , hetorical network operates together with the other knowledge resources  , by posting the hierarchical patterns of intentional operator  ( s )  , selecting relew mt speech act(s ) , or specifying aspects of g , ' ammatical realisation . 
3.3.l'lanning Mecllan is nls
A text phnum r , in the form of a heuristic planning process adopted from the layered architecture JAM  ( Carletta 1992 ) and a topdown hierarchical expansion system based on NOAH  ( Sacerdoti 1977 )  , has been il nl~lcment cd top hm cohel'ent paragraphs which achieve a goal  . The goal is configured with initial stales designed to affect a reader in a specified way  . 
During tile main planning process , topdown hierarchical phnming takes place . This occurs when intentional operators are expanded into a network of subgoal  ( s )  , or rhetorical operators are expanded into a network of a clions  . Planning is also involved when unsatisfied constraints become new subgoals  . There may be several alternative expansions to be explored  . 
At this point , the organisation of the plan expressed by one or more structure trees may have to be criticised to account for interactions between parts of what were previously unanalysed subgoals and actions  . If there existag , ' oup of structure trees , these trees have to be focused through selective heuristics  . 

InlOU ~/ o . r\[Intlial . ~ jc , a , (bmb(agec , t , client , ? on vince cl(dietd , intonnation ( lpactelt ~ ba ~ ) ) ) ~ \]  ( k ) a Iillall intentional operator ~ citer , t , in ll la L goal ( . . . ))-~ Ti/~nd~tLf  ~ ; tm tiuelil ~ ndle ~ LP ~\] st lasi'le:~ Constraint a ~ a subg c  , aly ~ Decomposition 1 Flrl-'--"~_~clericop crto'\[bmb ( agent , client , and ( bel(Client , information) , increase dedre ) )\] r - -~- - - - -7 \[ Preser'tati?nal sequene eI-~jbmb ( egent client and ( exped ( a ? 1entaelion ) e0 e , - , t(elie , ' lt , achon )))\]~~~ .  _ "-  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ~ " - - ' "  . . . . . . .  '  . . . . . . ' - ' ~ ' ~ ~/  121 , .   ,   , _II/bmb(agent client and ( present believe)) .   .   .   .  ~ 3 , 1-38 Nucleus Nucleus 133j Nucleus Salellite 125
Satellite ~ ~ 133 121
IVD\]\]VA\]\]ONE l&43 LEf . . . EI . .J T FVESEI,KA'IIONf , LSEQUENCE Fig .   3: A simplified to l >- I cv cl planning process for we alternative lxtua\[structures These heu  , ' is tics prefer structures with less subgoals remaining or lower cost estimates in the knowledge hierarchical networks  . We call these critic processes heuristic ordering mechanisms  . 
For example , Fig .   3 shows a simplified toplevel planning process for two alternative txtual structures  . The initial goal is that the writer or agent wishes to convince the client about information concerning on LPA database products  . The two alternative structures of Fig .   3 represent two different plans that our system can generate so as to achieve the initial goal  . The two plans vary in terms of whether the text is lengthy and persuasive  , lse short and informative . The persuasive , lengthy setting results in a nolm rator being selected to increase the client's desire to buy tile products  . But a constraint of the original persuade operato , ' is expanded . 
The operator attempts to increase the client's ability to take advantage of his strengthened desire to buy the products  . This will result in text lmt attempts o produce a means of cnablement to increase the ability to satisfy the desire  . Motivation and Enablemcnt are used to produce a partial textual structure on the left side of Fig  . 3 . Otherwise , when an Infornmtive mode and a Short time setting are required  , the system selects an intentional operator with a rhetorical operator to fulfilits initial goal as shown on the right side of Fig  .  3 . This is a simplific d presentation f in forming material about the prodttcts  . 
The output for the hybrid phmner is a single structure tree  , with speech acts associated with each of the terminal nodes  . The termiual nodes specify propositions discharging those speech acts  . This in lbr , nation is chosens t ) that , with minor supplementation , it is sufficient ospecify sentences to be generated by a functional grall llllar  ( see Fig .  4 ) During the process of developing the hybrid phuining protolype  , we have found that it possesses the following adwl niage  . I leuristic strategies can be imple-lnlbml ( Volitional Result ) ~lntentional/Volitional Result operators / 2 Inform ( Elaboration ) I ! I // . .-- . ElIboition Rhetorical 3hfform(l~labc , r ; llion ) opora\[ors " 4"" xx\]i " ~ F , \] aboration 45:2 . \[ IIl Ibml ) ( agcnt , clienl , and ( agent is pleased , present ( agent , agent is plc as cd ))) l , * I , PA is pleased 3 . \[\[\[\[ l' , In b(agcnl , clicnt , and(anncmlmc(agcrd , wir@ . : , wseries ) bcl(clicnt , window_scrics ))) I , *\[ Oallll Otll Ceilslies , , ,  ~ , Villdn , ,vs series ,  4 . \[ l\[\[bmb(agent , client , and ( in formol ) jecl(agcnt , lnach in ?386/486) , hal(client , machine 386/486))) 1 , * arnnge of software tools for 386 : rod 486 machines 5  . 
\[I;inb(agcnl , clierd , ai~d(in/iwrn_attribute(agcnl , windows_3 in chanced j'n ~ le ) , bcl(clicrd , windows 3 in enhanccd_mc , dc )))\] llllll , * running ' Windows 3 . 0 in Enh'lnced Mode . 
Fig .   4: A smnplc partial OUtlmtreece dure and multi -knowledger sources can be employed selectively at each level of abstraction  . Its topdown hierarchical expansion process provides an efficient nonlinear planning mechanism  . Its heuristic strategy flexibly chooses not to expend all of the effort needed to employ various resources unless it is absolutely necessary  . 
4. Conclusion
This paper has presented a hybrid approach to the planning of textual struct m'es  . It is based on the idea that a variety of explicit knowledge resources and planning mechanisms are needed for an efficient but flexible text planner  . By describing a hybrid planning prototype , it identifies various knowledge resources required in the domain of business letters  . It suggests associated planning techniques for manipulating intentional and rhetorical information  . Since tile research is still in progress , this paper cannot claim to have identified all the necessary knowledge resources and requisite planning mechanisms  . Consequently , certain problems , such as how to evaluate wnious planning critics in detail  , remain unsolved . The next stage of the research is to capture richer knowledge in the domain and further developtile critic modules and their controlling mechanisms  . Nevertheless we feel that the system as it stands represents a linguistically motivated and coherent computation a lrchitecture for the generation of text  . The generated text is , moreover , hetorically compelling given the intention ' fl goals of the originator  . 

Allen , J .  1987 . Natural Language Understanding , The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company , Inc . .
Carletta , J .  1992 . Risk-taking and Recovery in Task-OH-ented Dialogue  , PhD thesis , University of Edintmrgh Cohen , P . R . and Levesque , H .  1985 . Speech " lets and nationality , hz Proceedings of tile 23rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  . 
Hovy , E . H .  1988 . Planning coherent multisentent in ltext . 
hiProceedings of the twenty-sixth Annual Meetingo \[' lhe Association for Computational I  . inguistics , State University of New York , Buffalo , New York . 
HoW , E . H .  1990 . Unsolved issues in paragraph phuming . 
hiR . Dale , C . Mollish and M . Zock Eds . , Current Research in Natural Language Generation . Academic Press Limited , London . 
Hovy , E . H .  1991 . Approach totile planning of coherent text . htC . L . Paris , W . R . Swart out and W . C . Mann Eds . , Natural Language Generation in Artificial Intelligence and Computational Linguistics  . Kluwer Academic Publishers , USA . 
Hovy , E . , Lavld , J . , Maier , E . , Mittal , V . and Paris , C .  1992 . 
Employing knowledger sources in a new text planner architecture  . In R . Dale , F, . llovy , D . Rosner and O . Stock Eds . , Aspects of Autmnated Natural Language Generation . 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Mann , W . C .  1987 . Text Generation : the Problem of Text Smlcture . Technical Report No . RS-87-181 , ugc/in\[brma-lionScienceInstitute , Marina DelRey , CA . 
Mann , W . C . , Matthiessen , C . and Thompson , S . A .  1989 . 
P , hetorica I Structure Theory for text analysis , USC/lnforma-lion Sciences Institute , Technical Report ISI/RR-89-242 . 
McKeown , K . R .  1985 . Text Generation : Using Discourse StJwtegies and Focus Constraint xo Generate Natur_al Lzm-guage Text  . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England . 
McKeown , K . R ; Elhadad , M . ; Fukmnoto , Y . ; Lira , J . ; Immbardi , C . ; Robin , J . and Smaadja , F .  1990 . Natural language generation iCOMET . In R . Dale ; c . Mellish and M . Zock Eds . , Current Research in Natural Ixmguage Generation . Academic Press Limited , London Moore , J . I ) .  1989 . A reactive approach to explanation i expert ancl advice giving systems  . PhD . dissertation , University of California , Los Angeles , CA . 
I Vloore , J . D . and Paris , C . I_1988 . Constructing coherent text using rhetorical relations  . In Proceedings of tile National Conference oil Artificial Intelligence  , Moston , MA . 
Saeerdoti , ED .  1977 . A Structure Ibr Plans and Behaviours . 
New York : Northlloll and,
Suthers , D . S .  1991 . A task-appropriate hybrid architecture for explanation  . Comput : ttional Intelligence , 7(4) . 

