Countability and Number
in Japanese to English Machine Translation
Francis Bond , Kentaro Ogura , Satoru Ikehara
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
1-2356 Take , Yokos Uka-shi , K ~ nagawa-ken , JAPAN 238-03
bond , ogura , ike hara@nttkb.ntt.jp

This paper presents a heuristic method that uses information in the Japanese text along with knowledge of English countability and number stored in transfer dictionaries to determine the countability and number of En-glish  . noun phrases . Incorporating this method into the machine translation system ALTJ/E  , helped tOraise the percentage of noun phrases generated with correct use of articles and number from  65% to 73%  . 
1 Introduction
Correctly determining number is a difficult problem when translating from Japanese to English  . This is because in Japanese , noun phrases are not normally marked with respect to number  . Japanese nouns have no equivalent to the English singular and plural forms and verbs do not inflect to agree with the number of the subject  ( Kuno 1973 )  . In addition , there is no grammatical marking of countability , tIn order to generate English correctly , it is necessary to know whether a given noun phrase is countable or uncountable and  , if countable , whether it is singular or plural . 
Deciding this is a problem even for humans translating from Japanese to English  , but they have their own knowledge of both languages t Japanese does not have obligatory plural morphemes  . Plurality can be marked but only rarely is , for example by adding a suffix such as tachi " and others "  ( this can normally only be used with people or mfimals  )  . 
tO draw on . A machine translation system needs to have this knowledge codilied in some way  . As generating articles and number is only important when the rest of the sentence has been correctly generated  , them has not been a lot of research devoted to it  . Recently , Murata and Nagao ( 1993 ) have proposed a method of determining the referentiality property and number of nouns in Japanese sentences for machine translation into English  , buttim research has not yet been extended to include the actual English generation  . 
This paper describes a method that extracts information relevant to countability and number from the Japanese text and combines it with knowledge about countability and number in English  . First countability in English is discussed at the noun phrase and then the noun level  . As a noun phrase's countability in English is affected by its referential property  ( generic , referential or a scriptive ) we present a method of determining the referential use of Japanese noun phrases  . Next the process of actually determining noun phrase countability and number is described  . This is followed by some examples of sentences translated by the proposed method and a discussion of the results  . 
The processing described in this paper has been implemented in NTI " Communication Science Laboratories'experimental machine translation system ALTJ/E  ( \[kehara et al 1991 )  . Along with new processing for the generation of articles  , wifich is not discussed in detail in this paper , it improved the percent-detemfiners and number flom  65% to 73%  . 
2 Countability 2 . 1 Noun Phrase Countab i l i ty We adopt the definition of countability in English given in Allan  ( 1980:541-3 )  . A countable noun phrase is defined as follows : I If the head constituent of an NP falls within the scope of a denumerator it is countable  . 
IIIf the head constituent of an NP is plural it is countable  . 
Where " the phrase ' fiflls with intile scope\[ or domain \] of a denumerator ' means ' is de -numerated ' by it  ; i . et im NP reference is quan-tiffed by the denumerator as a number of discretentities  . " Not all nouns in English can become the head of a countable noun phrase  . In particular , noun phrases whose heads fall within the scope of a denumerator  ( ' denumerated ' noun phrases ) must be headed by a noun that has both singular and plural forms  . Nouns that do not have both forms , like equipment or scissors , require a classifier to be used . The classifier becomes the head of a countable noun phrase with the original noun attached as the complement of a prepositional phrase headed by of  . . a pair of scissors , a piece oJ " equipment . 
Whether a noun can be used to head a countable noun plu ' as e or not depends both on how it is interpreted  , and on its inherent countability preference . Noun countability preferences are discussed ill the next section  . 
2 . 2 Noun Countab i l i ty P re ferences A noun's countability preference determines how it will behave in different environments  . 
We classify nouns into seven countability preferences  , live major and two minor , as described below . 
The two most basic types are ' fully cotmt-able ' and ' uncountable '  . Fully countable nouns , such as knife have both singular and plural forms  , and cannot be used with deter-miuers such as mttclt  . 2 Uncotmtable nouns , such as Jiirniture , have no plural form , and can be used with much . 
Between these two extremes there are a vast number of nouns  , such as cake , that can be used in both countable and uncountable noun phrases  . They have both singular and plural forms , and can also be used with much . 
Whether such nouns will be used countably or uncountably depends on whether their referent is being thought of as made up of discrete units or not  . As it is not always possible to explicitly determine this when translating from Japanese to English  , we divide these nouns into two g , ' oups : ' strongly countable ' , those that are more often used to refer to discrete entities  , such as cake , and ' weakly countable ' , those that are more often used to refer to unbounded referents  , such as beer . 
The last major type of countability preference is ' phlraliatanta ': nouns that only have a phn ' al form  , such as scissors . They can neither be denumerated nor modilied by much  . We further subdivide pluraliatanta into two types  , those that can use the classifier pair to be de ~ numerated  , such as a pair of scissors and those that can't , such as clothes . ' pair ' pluraliatanta have a singular lorm when used as modifiers  ( as ciss or movement )  . Pluraliatant a such as clothes , use the plural form even as modifiers ( a clotheshors e )  , and need a countable word of similar meaning to be substituted when they are denumerated : a garment  , a suit .   .   .   .   . 
The two minor types are subsets of flflly countable and uncountable nouns respectively  . Unless explicitly indicated , they will be treated the same as their supersets . ' Collective ' nouns share all the properties of fully countable nouns  , in addition they can have singular or plural verb agreement with the singular form of tile noun : The government has/trove decided  . ' Semi-countable ' nouns share the properties of uncountable nouns  , except that they can be modiffe directly by a las ; for example a knowledgel of . lapanese\] . 
I2 The determiners much , ' little , a little , less and over much , can all be used for this test
Noun Countability Default Default
English Japanese Preference Number Classifier-~i fehouch ounoodlesmen group murecake ke-kibeer bi-ru furniture kagu knowledge chishikiscissors hasamiclo the sifuku 
FULLY COUNTABLF ~ SINGULAR--
FULLY COUNTABLE PLURAL-- ( COLLECTIVE ) SINGULAR--
STRONGLY COUNTA BLESING ULAR--
WEAKLY COUNTA BLESING ULAR--
UNCOUNTABLESING UI , AR piece ( SEMI-COUN q < ABLE ) SINGULAR piece
PLURALIATANT UMPLURAL pair
PLURALIATAN TUMPLURAL--
Examples of the information about countability and number stored in the Japanese to English noun transfer dictionary are given in table  1  . The information about noun countability preferences cannot Joe found in standard dictionaries and must Ix : entered by an English native speaker  . Some tests to help determine a given noun's countability preferences are described in Bond and Ogura  ( 1993 )  , which discusses the use of noun countability preferences in Japanese to English machine translation  . 
3 Determination of NP Referentiality
The first stage in generating the countability and number of a translated English noun phrase is to determine its referentiality  . 
We distinguish three kinds of referentiality : ' generic '  , referential ' and ' a scriptive ' . 
We call noun phrases used to make general statements about a class generic  ; for example Mammoths are extinct . The way generic noun phrases are expressed in English is described in Section  3  . 1 . Referential noun phrases are ones that refer to some specific referent  ; for example Two dogs chase . a cat . Their number and countability are ideally determined by the properties of the referent  . A scriptive noun phrases are used to ascribe a property to something  ; for example Ilathi is an elephant . They normally have the same number and countability as the noun phrase whose property they are describing  . 


if restrictively modilied then ' referential'my book  , the man who came to dinner if subject of extinct , evolve . . . ' generic '
Mammoths are extinct if the semantic ategory of the subject of a copula is a daughter of the semanticate-gory of the object hen'generic ' 
Mammoths are animals at , Jbr .   .   . then 4 . if modified hyaimed'generic '' A magazine for women  5  . if object of like .   . , then'generic '
I like cake 6 . if complement of a copula then ' a scriptive '
N77' is a telephone company 7 . if appositive then ' ascriptive '
NT /, a telephone company ...
8. default ' referential '
Figure 1: Determination fNP refemntiality The process of determining the referentiality of a noun phrase is shown in Figure  1  . 
The tests are processed in the order shown.
As far as possible , simple criteria that can be implemented using the dictionary have been chosen  . For example , Test 4" if a NP is mod-ilied by aimed at , for .   . , then it is ' generic'"is"forNPI" . The transfer dictionary includes the information that in this case  , NPI should be generic . 
" li~sts 2   a3 show two more heuristic methods for determining whether a noun phrase has generic reference  . In Test 2 , if the predicate is marked in the dictionary as one that only applies to classes as a whole  , such as evolve or be extinct , then the sentence is taken to be generic . In " lest3 , AUI ' , I/I , :' s semantic hierarchy is used to test whether a sentence is generic or not  . For example in Mamnloths are animals , mammot has the semantic a tegory ANIMAL so the sentence is judged to be stating a fact true of all mann noths and is thus generic  . 
3.1 Genericiioun phrases
A generic noun phrase ( with a countable head noun ) can generally be expressed in three ways ( Huddleston 1984 )  . We call these GEN'a' , where the noun phrase is indefinite : A mammoth is a mammal  ; GEN ' the ' , where the noun phrase is definite : The mammot h is a mammal  ; and GEN ~/5 , where there is no article : Mammoths are mammals . Uncountable nouns and pluraliatant a can only he expressed by GEN </ ~  ( eg : Furniture is expensive )  . They cannot take GEN'a' because they cannot be moditied by a  . They do not take GEN'the ' , because then the noun phrase woukl normally be interpreted as having detinite reference  . 
Nouns that can be either countable or uncountable also only take GEN  (  , : Cake is delicious/Cakes are delicious . These combinations are shown in Table 2 , noun phrases that cannot be used to show generic reference are marked *  . 
Table 2: Genericness and Countahility
Countable it mammofll \]' the ' the mammoth
I ...4'./,, mmott,
Noun Countability Preference
Both Uncounlable * a cake * the cake cake/cakes* a furniture * the furniture furniture The use all three kinds of generic noun phrases is not acceptable in some cofl texts  , for example * a mammo the volved . Sometimes a noun phrase can be ambiguous , for example 1 like the elel ~ hant , where the speaker could like a particular elephant  , or all elephants . 
Because the use of GEN ( ~ is acceptable in all Contexts , AI , T-J/E generates all generic noun phrases as such , that is as bare noun phrases . The number of the noun phrase is then determined by the countability preference of the noun phrase heading it  . Fully countable nouns and pluraliatant a will be plural  , all others are singular . 
4 Determination of NP
Countability and Number
The following discussion deals only with referential and a scriptive noun phrases as generic noun phrases were discussed in Section  3  . 1 , The delinilious of noun phrase countability given in Section  2  , while useful for analyzing English , are not suf\[icient for translating fl'om Japanese to English  . This is he cause in many cases it is impossible to tell fl ' om the Japanese for mor syntactic shape whether a translated noun phrase will fall within the scope of a denumerator not  . Japanese has no equivalent to a/an and does not distinguish between countable and uncountable quantifiers such as many/much and little/J'ew  . Therefore to detern fine countability and generate number we need to use a combination of iuformatiou from the Japanese original sentence  , and de-\['aultitfl Brmation from the Japanese to English Iransfer dictionary  . As much as possible , detailed intbrmation is entered in the lransier dictionaries to allow the translation process itself to be made simple  . 
The process of determining a noun phrase's countability and ntnnl  ) er is shown in Figure 2 . 
The process is carried out during the transfer stage so information is available from both the  . lapanese original and the selected English translation  . 
To make the task of determining countabil ~ ity and number simpler  , ' we deline combinations of dil'fereut countabilities for nouns with 
Noun Type
Fully Countable
Strongly Countable
Weakly Countable

Pluralia Tantum

Singulart Plurala dog two clogs a cake a beer a piece of information a pair of scissors two cakes two beers two pieces of information two pairs of scissors 

Cotmtable Uncountable dogs cakes beer information scissors  ( logs cake beer informations cissors1 . 




if the Japanese is explicitly plural then countable and plural determine according to determiner one dog  , all dogs determine according to classifier a slice of cake  , a pile of cakes determine according to complement schools all over the country a seriptive NPs match their subjects 
A computer is a piece of equipment 6 . determine according to verb
I gather flowers7 . use default value ( a ) uncountable , weakly countable become : uncountable and singular  ( b ) pluraliatant a become : countable and plural ( c ) countable and strongly countable become : countable and singular or plural according to the dictionary default Figure  2: Determination of English noun phrase
Countability midNumber different countability preferences that we can use in the dictionaries  . The effects of the four most common types on the five major noun countability preferences are shown in Table  3  . 
Noun phrases modifled by Japanese/English pairs that are translated as denumerators we call denumerated  . For example a noun modified by onoon o-no " each " is denumerated-singular  , while one modilied byryouhou-no " both " is denumerated-plural  . Uncountable and pluraliatantum nouns in denumerated environments are translated as the prepositional complement of a classifier  . A default classilier is stored stored in the dictionary for uncountable nouns and pluralia tanta  . A scriptive noun phrases whose subject is countable will also be denumerated  . 
The two ' mass '3 environments shown in Table 3 are used to show the countability of nouns that can be either countable or uncountable  . 
Weakly countable nouns will only be countable if used with a denumerator  . Strongly countable nouns will be countable and plural in such mass-countable n vironments as tim object of collect  ( vt ) : I collect cakes , and uncountable and singular in mass- uncountable enviromnenl such as I ate too much cake  . 
In fact , both I collect cake and Iate too many cakes are possible  . As Japanese does not distinguish between the two the system must make the best choice it can  , in the same way a human translator would have to . The rules have been implemented to generate the translation that has the widest application  , for example generating Iale too much cake , which is true whether the speaker only ate part or all  3We called the senvironments ' mass ' because they both can be used to show a mass or unbounded interpretation  . 
36 of one cake or if theyate many cakes , rather than Iate too many cakes which is only true if the speakerate many cakes  , Sometimes the choice of the English translation of a modifier will depend on the countability of the noun phrase  . For example , kazukazu-no and takusan-no can all be translated as " many "  . kazukazu-no implies that it's modificant is made up of discrete entities  , so the noun phrase it modifies should be translated as denumerated-plural  , takusan-no does not carry this nuances oA LT-J/E will translate a noun phrase modified by it as mass-uncountable  , and takusan-no as many il ' the head is countable and much otherwise  . 
Rules that translate the nouns with different noun countability preferences into other combinations of countable and uncountable are also possible  . For example , sometimes even fully countable nouns can be used iraun countable noun phrases  . If an elephant is referred to not as an individual elephant but its a source of meat  , t benit will be expressed in an uncountable noun phrase : I aleas lice q felephant  . To generate this the following rule is used : " nouns quantilied with the classilier kire " slice " will be generated a stile prepositional complement of slice  , they will be singular with no , article unless they are pluraliatant a , when they will be plural with no article " . 
Note that countable in definite singular noun phrases without a determiner will have a/an generated  . Countable in delinite plural noun phrases and uncountable noun phrases may have some generated  ; a full discussion of this is outside the scope of this article  . 
5 Experimental Results
Tiffs processing described above has been implemented in ALT-J/E  . It was tested , together with new processing to generate articles  , on a specially constructed set of test sentences , and on a collection of newspaper articles . The results are summarized in Table 4 . 
In the newspaper articles tested , there were an average of 7 . 0 noun phrases in each sentence . For a sentence to be judged as correct % ble 4: Correct Generation of Articles and

Test Sentences \[ ~ ewspal ) er Articles
NPs\[Sentences-Vl ; qPs Sentences ~7I--90 o/'o 173% 12~y~_46?/ , , 165% 5% all the uoun phrases nmst be correct . The introduction of the proposed method improved the percentage of correct sentences from  5% to 12%  . 
Some examples of translations before and after tile introduction of the new processing are given below  . The translations before the proposed processing was implemented are marked  O1  . D , the translations produced by AI ; I'-J/I , ; using the proposed t ) rocessing are marked NEW . 
(1 ) taite i-noko domo-haotot m-ni most child adult llill ' U become 
OI . D : " Most children become an adult "
NEW : " Most children become adults "
In (1) , the noun phrase beaded by ot on a " adult " is judged to be prescriptive  , as it is tile complement of tile copt flar narlt " become "  . 
Therefore the proposed method translates it with the same number as the subject  . 
(2) manmo.~u-haze tume tu-shit a mammot hdied-out
OLI ) : " A mammoth died out "
NEW : " Man amoths died out " zetumettt " die out " , is entered in the lexicon as a verb whose subject must be generic  . 
manmosu " mammoth " is fully countable so the gene , ic noun phrase is translated as a bare plural . 
(3) to lil 3-chou , ha . ~ a mil-chou , to fu = 3 , scissors 1 , i houchou2-chou ~ E aruk nife2 is
OLD : " There are 3 piece to fu , 1s cissors , and 2k nives "
NEW : " There are 3 pieces of to fu ,   1 pair of scissors and 2 knives " The old version recognizes that a denumer-ated noun phrase headed by  , an uncountable noun to furequires a classifier but does not generate the correct structure neither does it generate a classifier for the pluraliatant as cis-sors  . The version using the proposed method does . 
(4) sore hadouguda that equipment is
OLD : " That is equipment "
NEW : " That is a piece of equipment "
As the subject of the copula that is countable it 's complement is judged to be denumerated by the proposed method  . As the complement is headed by an uncountable noun it must be embedded in the prepositional complement of a classifier  . 
There are three main problem still remaining . The first is that currently the rules for determining the noun phrase referentiality are insufficiently fine  . We estimate that if referentiality could be determined  100% correctly then the percentage of noun phrases with correctly generated articles and number could be improved to  96% in the test set we studied . The remaining 4% require knowledge from outside the sentence being translated  . 
The biggest problem is noun phrases requiring world knowledge that cannot be expressed as a dictionary default  . These noun phrases cannot be generated correctly by the purely heuristic methods proposed here  . The last problem is noun phrases whose countability and number can be deduced flom information in other sentences  . We would like to extend our method to use this information in the future  . 
6 Conclusion
The quality of the English in a Japanese to English Machine Translation system can be improved by the method proposed in this paper  . This method uses the information available in the original Japanese sentence along with information about English countability at both the noun phrase and noun level that can be stored in Japanese to English transfer dictionaries  . Incorporating this method into the machine translation system ALT-J/E helped to improve the percentage of noun phrases with correctly generated articles and n m n ber from  65% to 73%  . 

Allan , K . (1980). Nouns and countability.
Language 56.5 41-67.
Bond , F . , and K . Ogura .  (1993) . Determination of whether an English noun phrase is Countable or not using  6 levels of lexical countability ( in Japanese )  . In 46th Transactions of the Information Processing Society of Japan  ,  3:107-108 . 
Huddleston , R . (1984). Introduction to the
Grammar of English . Cambridge textbooks in linguistics . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
lkehara , S . , S . Shirai , A . Yokoo , and 1 t . Nakaiwa .  (1991) . Toward an MT System without Pre-Editing-Effects of 
New Methods in ALT-J/E- . In Proceedings o/'MT'Summit III , 101-106 . 
Kuno , S . (1973). The Structure of the
Japanese Language . Cambrige , Massachusetts , and London , England : MIT

Murata , M . , and M . Nagao .  (1993) . Determbnation of referential property and number of nouus in Japanese sentences for machine translation i to English  . In 7'hefifth international confef'ence on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine  7  ) ' anslation ,  218-25 . 
