LEXICAL KNOWLED GEREPRESENTATIONIN ANINTELLIGENT DICTION ARY HELP SYSTEM 
E . Agirre , X . Arregi , X . Artola , A . Diaz de Ilarraza , K . Sarasola
Informatika Fakultatca ( Univ . of the Basque Country )
P . K .  649 , 20080 DONOSTIA ( Basque Country-Spain ) Email : jiparzux@si . ehu . es
1 INTRODUCTION.
IDItS ( Intelligent Dictionary lielp System ) is conceived as a monolingual ( explanatory ) dictionary system for hum , ' muse ( Artola & Evrard ,  92) . The fact that it is intended for people instead of automatic processing distiuguishes it from other systems dealing with semantic knowledge acquisition from conventional dictiouaries  , ql~e system provides various access possibilities to the data  , allowing to deduce implicit knowledge from the explicit dictionary information  . IDIIS deals with reasoning mechanisms analogous to those used by humans when they consult a dictionary  . User level functionality of the system has been defined  , ' rod is partially hnplement cd . 
q'he starting point of IDIIS is a Dictionary Database  ( DDB ) built from an ordinary French dictionary . 
Meaning definitions have been analysed using linguistic information from the DDB itself and interpreted to be structured  , as a Dictionary Knowledge Base ( DKB ) . As a result of the parsing , different lexical-semantic relations between word senses are established by means of semantic rules  ( attached to the patterns )  ; this rules are used for the initial construction of the DKB  . 
This paper describes tile knowledger cprcs entatiou model adopted in IDIIS to represent he lexical knowledge acquired from the source dictionary  . Once the acquisition process has been performed and the I  ) KB built , some enrichment processes have becnexecuted on the I  ) KB in order to enhance its knowledge about the words in the language  . Besides , the dynamic exploitatiou of this knowledge is made possible by means of specially conceived eduction mechanisms  . Both the enrichment processes and the dynamic deduction mechanisms are based on the exploitation of the properties of the lexical semantic relations represented in the DKB  . 
In the following section an overview of II ) IIS is given . Section 3 briefly presents the process of construction of the DKB  . The knowledge representation model and the enrichmeut mechanisms are fully described in sections  4 and 5  . Section 6 describes some inferential aspects of the system . 
Finally , in section 7 , some figures about he size of tile prototype built are presented  . 
2 TIIEIDIISDICTIONARY SYSTEM.
IDIIS is a dictionary help systemiute uded to assist a human user in hulguage comprehension r production tasks  . The system provides a set of functions that have been inspired by the different reasoning processes a human user performs when consulting a conventional dictionary  , such as definition queries , search of alternative definitions , differences , relations and analogies between concepts , thesaurus-like word search , verification of concept properties and interconceptual reationships  , etc . ( Arregie tat . , 91) . 
II ) IIS can bc seen as a repository of dictionary knowledge apt to be accessed and exploited in several ways  . The system has been implemented on a symbolic architecture machiue using KEE knowledge engineering environment  . 
Two plmscs are distinguished in the construction of tile DKB  . Firstly , information contain cd in the DDB is used to produce an initi  , -dDKB . General information about the cntries obtained from the DDB  ( POS , usage , examples , etc . ) is conventionally represented -- attribute-value pairs in thcframe structure -- while the semantic omponent of the dictionary  , i . e . the definitions cntenees , has been analysed and represented as an interrelated set of concepts  . In this stage the relations established between concepts could still be  , in some cases , of lexical-syntactic nature . In a sccond phase , the semantic knowledge acquisition process is complcted using for that the relations established in the initial DKB  . The purpose of this phase is to perform lcxical and syntactical disambiguation  , showing that semantic knowledge about hierarchical relations between concepts c  , ' ulbe determinant for this . 
3 BUILDING TIlEDICTION ARYK NOWLED GE

' File starting point of this system is a small monoliugual French dictionary  ( Le Plus Petit Larousse , Paris : Librairie Larousse , 1980) consisting of nearly 23 , 000 senses related to almost 16 , 000 entries . The dictionary was recorded in a relational database : the Dictionary Database  ( DDB )  . This DDB is the basis of every empirical study that has been developed in order to design the final model proposed for representation ad intelligent exploitation of the dictionary  . 
The definition sentences have been analysed in the process of transformation ft be data contained in the DDB to produce the DKB  . The analysis mechanism used is based on hierarchies of phrasal patterns  ( Alshawi ,  89) . The semantic structure associated to each analysis pattern is expressed by means of a Semantic Structure Construction Rule  ( SSCR )  . The based on these SSCR's ( Artola , 93) . 
The intcrconcelm ml lexical-semantic relations delccl cdli'om I he analysis of the source dictionary are classified into paradigmatic and synlagmatic  . . . Mnong the paradigmatic r clalions , the followiug have bccn found : sylu ) uy ~ nyau ( lantonymy , laxonomic relalions as hyperuymy/hyponymy -- obtained from definitions of type " g cnt  , set differen lia "-- , aud taxonymy itself ( expressed by nl caus of specific relator such as sorted eaadespbce de  )  , mcronymy , and others as gradation ( for adjectives and verbs )  , equiwd cnce ( between adjectives and past pmticiplc )  , factitive and r cllexivc ( for verbs ) , lack and reference ( to the previou sense ) . 
Whereas among the synlagmalic relations , i . e . those thai relate concepls belonging to different POS's  , derivation is the most important , I ) ut also relationships bctweell concepts without auy morphological relation its case relations  , attributivc ( for verbs ) , lack and couforlllily have Ix3eild clccle(l , The hierarchies created have already been used to parse all I he noun  , verb , and adjective definitions in the \]) l ) B . The hierarchy devoted to aualyze nount it ' , ftuitions is formed with 65 l ) attcrns ,   49 differ cut patlerns have been dcfiued loanalyze verb delinilion  , % aud 45 for a (\[ jectives . Although it is a partial parsing procedure , 57 . 76% of nound cf initious , 79 . 8% o1 verbs and 69 . 04% of those corresponding to a ( ! jeclivcs have been Iotally " caught " it , Ihisal ) plication , llowcver , wilh this technique of partial parsing , the parse is considered successful when all initial phrase slructure is recognized  , which iu general contains I hegCll US or Sul ) erordinat coFI he de linc d sense . This is not solbr I hccase oF l cx ioographic mela-langtlage conslructiol ! s  ( specific relators )  , whose corresponding semantic structure is built in a specific way and which deserve also spccilic patterns in the hierarchk : s  . 
4Ili,~PRI,;NTATI\[ONOFTIlEI)ICTIONARY
KN(IWLI , ; I ) (; E:TIlEI)KB .
As we have just seen , the knowledge reprcs cntadou scheme chosen for the I  ) KB of IDIIS is composcd of three clemenls , each of the tn structured as a dilTerent knowledge base :  KI3-TIII~SAURUS is the reprcsentatio , lel the diclionary as a semautic network of frames  , where each li'alner cprc senls a Olle-word collcepl  ( wordseuse ) or a phrasal concept . Phrasal concepts rc present phrase structures associated to the occurrence of concepts in meaning definilions  . 
Frames . . . . . or trails --- are interrelated by slots rcpreseutiug lexical-seman licr clati  ( ms such as synonymy , taxonomic relations ( hypcrnymy , hyponymy , and taxonymy ilselD , mert my mic relations ( parl-of , cl('menl-of , sc to of , member-oD , specific rclalions rcali : ; cd by nle all S of ll le la- . 
linguistic relators , casuals , elc . Olhcr : ; lois collai uphrasal , in et a dinguislic , and general itf formali(m . 
KB-I ) ICTIONARY allows access from the diclion m-yword levello the conesponding concept level in Ihc DK Bo Ih fils in I his kuow ledge  1  ) a serc p , ' esem I heelltries ( words ) offlu:dictionmy and are directly linked to their corresponding senses in 
KB-TIIES AURUS.
* KB-STRUCTURES contains recta-knowledge about concepts and relalions in KB-DICTIONARY aud KB- ' IIIESAURUS : all the different structures in tim DKB arc defined here specifying the corresponding slots aud describing the slots by means of facets I hat specify their value ranges  , in herilaucc modes , etc . Units in KB-TIIES AURUS aud KB-I ) ICTIONARY m'e subclasses or instances of classes defined in KB-STRUCI'URES  . 
Fig .   1 gives a parlial view of tim three knowlcdgebases which form the DKB with their correspondent units and Ih cirinter/in lra relationships  . 
Intim KB-TIIES AURUS , some of the links representing lexicat-semmltic relations are created when buildiug I he initial version of the knowledge base  , while others are deduced later by means of specially conceive deduction mechauisms  . 
When a dictionary entry likespatule II : aerie decuiller plate  ( a kind of flat Sl ) Oon ) is treated , new concept unils arc created in KB-TIII' ; SAURUS ( aud subsidiarily iu KB-DICTIONAR . Y ) and linked to olhers previously included in il . l ) uc to the ellct : l of these links new wfluc slot some l  ) roperlies arc propagaled flmmg h the resulliug taxonomy  . 
~--KB'S'f RUCTURI ~' SLKII . STRUC ( IIRE-~4 .   .   .   . i . ~-  . . . . . . . CtINC , , 21"ft/~ . x  ~ . . . . . . N \[ . . . . ---" f J " \ " -~ - . \ Ra : e~u~scJ ~ . sIz " ~ . \ AMBGIJOUS-!I!NIIRIILS . '// ITYlq ~: UONCEIZFSDF . FINFI'IONS\]Fig .  1 . -Thel)ictionary Kliowlcdge Base . 
' ~ SUB(2I , ASS link---MI : . MP , I ' ; R-OF liuk ( instance )   ( 1 ) Taxollomic Relalion : IIY PERNYM/tYI'ONYM ( 2 ) Specili ? ( mela qln gulsll c ) relaiknl : SORTP ;  . DE/SO rfI';-DF , INV ( K\[ND-OlqKINI ) -OF+IN V )   ( 3 ) CARACfERISTIQUI ~ , /CARA(YEERISTI(2UI#INV(PROI)I/RTY/PROPI; . RTY+IN V ) relafiou ( 4 ) MOTS-FNTRIiE/SENS ( I'2 NTRY--WORD/WORD . SENSE ) r clatiol x Intile example , although it is not explicit in fl~c definition , spatuh , is " akin do F ' ustensilem ~ d so it will inherit  , ; ome of its characteristics ( depending upox ~ theiu heritance role of each attribnte  )  . Fig .   1 lose shows the types of couecpts used : spatule 1   1 and cuiller lI areu oun definitions and considered subclasses of ENTITII'~S while plat I  1   ( an adjective ) is a sulx : lass of QUALITIF . S . The phrasal concept unit representing the noun phrase cuiller plate is treated as al  , yponym of its nucl car conc cpt(cuil & r11) . 
4.1 KII-STiUCTURES : the recta-knowledge.
This knowledge base reflects the hierarchical orgauisation of tile knowledge included in the I  ) KB . 
We will focus on the LKB-STRUCTURES class which defines the data types used in KB-DICTIONARY and KB-TIIES AURUS  , and that organises the units belonging to these knowledge bases in loat axonomy  . 
Slots defined in KB-STRUCTURI' ; Shave associa tcd aspects such as the value class , the inheritance role detcrmiuing how values in children's slots me calctt lated  , and soou . Each lcxical-scmantic relation--xeprcs ( -ntcd by an attribute or slot--has its own inheritance role  . For instance , the inheritance role of the CARACTI ~ . RISTIQIJL : relations lates that every concept inherits the union of the valucs of the hypenlyms lottlt at relation  , whilc the roled clincdfi ) rIhcSYNONYMES relation in hibits value inheritance from a concept oils hylx myms  . 
The subclasses defined under LKB-STI ( UCTURFS are the following : oENTRII ~ , S , that groups dictionary entries belonging to KB -DIC ~ I'IONARY  ; I ) ElqNITIONS , that groups word senses classified according to their lOS  ; oREFI ~ ; RI~: ; NCI~ ; S , concepts created in KB-TIIES AURUS due to their occuncnce in definitions of other concepts  ( " definition lcss " )  ; ? CONCE VFS , that groups , under a conceptual point of view , word senses aud other conceptual ut fits of

The classification of conceptual units under this last class is as follows : ? TYPE-CONCEPTS correspond to Quillian's  ( 1968 ) " type nodes " ; this class is , in fact , like a supcr class under which every concept of KB-TIII2SAURUS is placed . It is fi~rth cr subdivided in the classes ENTITII '?  . S , ACTIONS/F . VF . NTS , Q\[JALITIES and STAq'ES , that classify different types of concepts . 
? PIIRASAL-CONCEPTS is a class that includes concepts similar to Quilliau's " tokens "  . -- occurrences of type concepts in the delinitio , is cnlc nccs-- . Phrasal concepts , ' u ' e the representation of phrases tn ~ ctures which are composed by several concepts with semantic ontent  . A phrasal couccpt is always built as a subclass of the class which  , c presents its head ( then ouu of a noun phrase , the verb of a verb phrase , and so on ) , and integrated in the conceptual taxonomy . Phrasal concepts are classified into NOMINALS , VERBALS , 
A1)JFL ; TIVALS , ~ mdAI ) VERBIALS.
For iustance , ' I plaute I1#31 is a phrasal concept ( see Fig .  2) , subclass of the type concept I plaute I11 , and represent she noun phrase " une planted 'ornement"  . 
? Finally , the concepts that , after the analysis phase , are not yet completely disambiguated ( lexical ambignity )   , are placed under the class AMBIGUOUS-CONCEI rFS , which is further subdivided into the subclasses I IOMOGRAPIIE  ( e . g . If a cult 6? ?1) , SENSE(IpanserI?1) , and COMPLEX ( I douner I 5/61) , in order to distinguish them according to the level of ambiguity they present  . 
The links between units iu KB-TIII \] SAURUS and KB -DICTIONARY are implemented by means of slots tagged with then  , ' une of the link they represent . These slots are defined in the different classes of KB- 

The representation model used in the system is made up of two levels : ? Definitory level  , where the surface representation f the definit ion of each sense is made  . 
Morphosyntactic features like verb mode , dine , determination , etc . arc represented by means of faeets attached to the attributes  . The defiuitory level is implemented using representation alttributes  . 
Examples of this kiud of attributes are : DEF -SORTI:D  , 1) t ' . "F-QUI , CARACTERISTIQUE and

o Relational level , that rell ccts the relational view of the lexicon . It supports the deductive behaviour of the system and is made up by means of relational attributes  , that may event u , 'dly contain deduced knowledge . These attributes , defined in the class TYPE-CONCE PTS , are the implementation f thei uter conceptual relations : ANTONYMES  , AGENT , CARACTI ~ . RISTIQUE , SORTI: . -I)E , CE-QUI , etc . 
4.2 KB-I ) ICT1ONARY : from words to CO liCepl , ', ;.
This knowledge base represent she links between each dictionary entry and its senses  ( see link 4 in Fig .  1) . 
4.3 KB-TIIES AURUS : the concept network.
KB-TIIESAUI~ , US stores the concept network that is implemented as a network of frames  . Each node ill the net is afnune that rc present . sa conceptual unit : one word concepts and phrasal concepts  . 
The ~ cs interconnect lie concepts and represent lexical-semantic relations  ; they are implemented by means of frame slots containing pointers to other concepts  . II yp cruym and hyponym relations have been made explicit  , making up a concept axotlonty . These taxonomic relations have bccn implemented using the environment hierarchical relationship  , in order to get inheritance automatically . 
Let us show an example . The representatiouf the followiug dclinition g dranium I  1: uneplanted ' or nement TIII' ; SAURUS : IlloOIkO which coircs pot lds to Ihc dcfiuicn dum and Ihc phrasal COlk CCpt which rcpresculs Ih cnO kltk phrase of timd clinition  . Morcovcr , the II nils which rcprcsen ! plante and or nent are lobe created also  ( if they have not been previously cr catcd because their occuk lence ill another definiii ou  )  . 
l , ctus suppose that three new trails arc created : Ig dranium I  11  , Iplam c111131 midlon mnmnt 111 . 
Altdbute silktile units may contain laccts ( attribules for the all ribtllcs ) used in the dcfinitory level to record aspects liked ctcrmination  , genre and so on , but also to establish the relations b clw ccn delinitory allrihules with their corresponding r clalitmal  , el to specify the certainly that the value in a rcprcs cntational thibut chastobe " promoted " It  ) a concsponding r clational ( scch clow like case of like slol I ) F , in I plan lcI 11131) . 
Following is given I he CO ml X ) sition of timliam cs of dmsc three unils at I hc dc finilory level of rcprcsent at km  ( slot save in small capitals whereas lacct id cnificrs are illitalics  ) :
Ig franium I 11
MEMBIr . R . OF:NOMS(;I)OUI'F , - ( TNfEGORII*~L:NOMCIASSI?-AITRIII\[H':INI"O- ( il' ; NERAId'~TI:XTF , -I)I':FIN1TION : " llII , Jt ~ hmtcd ' or ncmcnt " CIASSI'LA'I'IRIIIU 1 ; " INFO ( ; I , ~VERALI:
I ) I ; . F-CI , ASSIQUF , : I plant cI1 #31
C'IA.%'EA1TRIBUI':DEFINITOIRI'S
DI ; fFRMINAIION : UNt ; k ' NRE : F
I~EIA'ITONN1"IS-CORRI(SI'ONDANI"S:DI';FINIq'AR
Iplantei1#31b ; IJBCI , ASS . OF:Iplant cl11
MISMIIIIGOF : NOMINAI , ES
TI(XTI ;,:"\[:.\] all tl3d'Olllclnell1"
CIASSI'~ATI'RlflUT:INI"O-(;I,?N liRALIi
I ) P2 I or nement IIt
CIASSF~-AT fRIItIH ? SYNI ) I(13b'(FIQUI : ; ' ~" RI'3A11ONNEL % CORRESPONDANI'S : Oh'It ; INK . POSSI !' S,Yl ;, UR ,, MAIIERI'; . OIU liCflF011 . 11, ~ c7"11,':0,9 lovnemen lI 11
MI"MIW , R.OF:RI".F liRI!NCFS
Before showing I here presentation f these units at the r clalion a level  , it has It ) be said that after the inil k dI ) KB has been built some deductive procedures have been cxc cutcd : e  . g . dcduclion of inverse relationships , taxonomy formation , etc . It is to say that in l ; ig .  2 , where the rehktional view is presented , Ihc relations deduced by Ihesc procedures arc also r c p r c s c n t c d  . 
The coaccptual units in TIIF , SAUI ( U Sampl acc dilkt WO layeks ( see Fig . 2), rccallillg tile two plalles of Quillian . The upper layer coffesponds to tylv concepts whereas ill the lower phrasal concepts are placed  . 
Every phrasal concept i , , ; phlccd in he taxonomy directly depending from its nuclear concept  , as a hyl~my mofit . 
It is in lcrcs lingonolic cit ) tile ligurc the relation of conceptual equiva lence established between  Ig6ranium I 11 and I planl c 1   11131   ( link labelled ( 3 ) ) . 
These units represent , in fact , Ihcsame concept because I plant cl 11131 , standing IOf " title planted ' or nement " , is lhcdclinition of Ig & anium I11 . 
f-(1)'l ' axolm role r?lado.:
Fig .  2 . Relational view of Ihc concept Iv 6 rauium 111 ( in the TIIILS AURUS net )  . 
The lianlc of Ig6ranium   1 II at the relational level of representation lakes the hkllowing aspect  , once the relational atlxibules have been ( partially ) CO mlfletcd :
Ig6ra , dum 111
SUn(:I,ASS . Ot ; : F,N'I1TF,S,I planteI11
MEMBER . OF:NOMS(;Rokaq~4~ATI:GORII'~I,:NOM
CIASSI' . ATI'RIIIUT"INI , ' O-UI:WEI~I3:'I'I~X'I'I'~I)I'~\] , INIII()N : " Ulle planted ' or nelnent "
CIASSF.-AYTRIBUI~INFO-GENERAIJ g
DEF-CI . ASSIQUE : fl , lante Il #31
CIA&TE-ATTRIBIH9ItI(I'TNIJ'OIRI " ~"
DKIT qI?MINA'I7ON:UN
GENR t '; : I "
IIE IATION NI'~I . % CORRIL~I'ONDANI ; ~: DI?FINI-I~AR
DEHNIopAR : IphmteI1#31
CIASSF.oA'ITRIB(/I:"RI';IAITONNEIS "
INVEI?SkL % CORRI(SI'ONDANIS : DI'Lt ; INI'l ION-DE t ) BJI ;  . CIIF : Iornement III
C'IAGYE-AITRIBI/I':RI'~IATIONNI'~LY
INVFRSI~%UORRFSI'ONDANTS:0IUECTIF41NV
Let us show now another exmn lfl ? . It is the case of two definitions stated by means of two difR : rekktst crcotylmdl bmull acbelonging to lhele xicographic mcta-hm guage  . Mauy verbs in the LPPI , a red clined by means of a formula beginning with " rendre " and many not ms with one beginning with " qui "  . The dcliailions selected for this example correspond to the Chilies publier I  1 a mlajusteur I 1  , which are represcuted al II , c definilory level using the mela- . 
language attributes I ) EILIH; , NDRI and 1 ) EF-QU Ircsw ctively : publier 1   1: reml republic a justeur I 1: quia juste despi ~ ces de radial The tranm con ' csponding to I publier I  11 is rite following:
I publler 111
MFMBFR . OF : VERBI ~ , S(iI , ~ OUPI-CATI'X ; O1Ul';\[ , : VI ; , RItF , 
CIASSI?-AITRIBU'f:INI.'O-GF . NERAIZ
TI';XTF,q)EIqNITR ) N : " ren(h'epublic "
CIASSI';-AITIClBUI';INI"O-GbXVERAId*;
DEF-I)I'~NI ) RFZ Ilmblic III
CIASSI'LAITRIBUf:DEI,'INII"OIR'I~';
REI AIT ON NI ( IS-CORRIL~I'ONDANI " S : Rlh VDRE where it can be sceuth at no phrasal conceptix involved because the link  0  ) EF-RF . NI)IU' ; ) is estal ) lished directly between I publiel I11 and / ; 47 I public I 11 . I lowev cr , in the case of the definition of a justeur 11 , two phrasal concepts are created : tim attribute DEF-QUI points to the phrasal concept la juster I  1  #  1 I , representing " a juster despi ?: cesdem dtal " , and this phrasal concept , in turn , has a syntagmatic attribute ( OBJE'I ) pointing to a nominal I hat represents " pieced e md tal "  , l ~ etus show the frames involved in this last case : la Justettr\[II 
MEMIn.iR.OF:NOMS
GROUPE-CATI~AJORIEL:NOM
CIASSE-AITRIBUT : INFO-GENERALE
TEXTE-DEIqNITION : " quia juste despib . cesder adial "
CIASSF-ATI'RIBfZY : INFO-GF A VERALE
DEF-QUI : h juster Il#II
CIASSF-A?TRIBIZf:DEFINITOIRF ~
MODE : 11'41)
ASI'FCI':NI'
TFAtPS : I'RI'~"
I'ERSONNE : 3
RHATIONNEIS'-CORRI-~'PONDAP\[?S:QUI
In luster I if l l
SUBCLASS . OF:\[njust cr1II
MEMB F.R . OF : VI ". RBALES
TEXTE ; " a juster despisces de radial "
CIASSI:~A1TRIB07:. tNI,'O-G~ERAIJS
OUJE-r:IpR~,ceI1#21
CIASSE~A~\[TRIBU?:SYNFAGMATIQUI'~7
DIQ'ERMINATION : UN
NOMBRE : PI.
RELAllONNEL ~'. CORRI:SI'ONDANT&TIIEME
Ilri~ce 11#21
SUBCLASS . OF : Ipi~ce III
MEMItER . OF : NOMINALES
TEXTE : " piecetic mdtal "
CIASSE-ATI'RIBUI ~: INFO-GI'h VERAIE
DE : Imdtal IIt
CIASS'E-A11'RIBIfK:SYNI"AGMA'ITQUI,L7
REIATIONNEL , ';; o CORRESPONDANFS : ORIGINE , POS , e , lfSSE(IR , 
MATIERE , OBJI'JCTIF
MATIFRE : 0.9
Frequently , phrased concel ) tS represent " mllab cllcd " concepts , i . e . , they iudeed represent concepts that do not have a significant in the language  . For instance , there is not , at least in French , a verbal concept meaning ' a juster despi ~ ces de radial ' nor an ouu meaning ' piecederadial '  . I Iowev cr , t iffs is not the c~L ~ , coftim phrasal concepts that are linked to type concepts by means of the relation I  ) EFINI-PAI~ , /DEFIN rrlON-I)F . , because there , the phrasal concept is , in fact , another rcprc semation fIhc concept bcing defincd  ( see above time xample of the definition of g dranium I i  )  . In the representation model proposcd in this work  , phrasal concepts denote concepts that are typically cx pressed in a periphrastic way and that do not have necess mily any corresponding entry in the dictionary  1  . 
Another in tcrcsting lmint related to the creation of the sc phrasal couccpts is the maintenance of direct links b c l w c ?  , ua concept and ~ dltile occn rrences of tiffs concept in the definition sentences of other e o n c c p t s  . It 1"n its coohlb cvery interesting also , in tile opinion of tile authors , in a multilingual environment : it isl~ssible that  , in a uother language , tire concept equivalen to that which has beer ~ represented by tire phra  . ~alconceptIpit ~ ceI1#21 Ira . ,; ils own sigltificant , a word that denotes it , In this case , the phrasal concept based representation may be useful to represent he exluivalence btween both concepts  . 
gives , in fact , a virtual set of usage examples that may be useful for different functions of the final system  . 
5 ENRICIlMENT PROCFS SESPER FOR MED
ONTHEDKB.
In this section tim cn richment processes accomplished on the DKB are explained  . Two phases are dislinguished : ( a ) the enrichment obtained during the construction of the initial DKB  , and ( b ) , where different tasks concerning mainly tim exploitation of the properties of synonymy and taxonymy have been performed  . 
5 . 1 Enrichment obtained during the construction of the initial I  ) KB . 
KB-TIIES AURUS itself , represented -- as a network --- at the relational level  , can be considered an enrichment of the definitory level be can se  , while the DKB was built , tim following processes have been performed : . Values coming from file definiiory k ; vel have been promotcd to the relational level . 
? Values coming from then nit which represents the tiefiniens havt : been transferred to the corresponding definiendum unit  . 
The maint cn an cc of the relations in both directions has been antomalically guamnt ccd  . 
?" Ille concepts included in REFERENCES have becn directly related to other concepts  . 
The taxonomy of coneepls has bccn made explicit , thus obtaining wduciuh critanee . 
5 . 2 Second phase in tile enrichment of the DKB , Several processes have tmeu carried out in order to infer new facts to be asserted in tile DKB  2  . " lheen richment obtained in this phase concerns tim two foll t  ) wing aspects : o Exploitation of the properties of the synonylny  ( symmetric and transitive )  . 
* Enlargement of the concept taxonomy based on synonymy  . 
Another aspect that has been considered to be exploit exl in this phase is that of disambiguation  , qheuse of the lexical-sentantic knowledge about hierarchical relations contained in the DKB can be detcnninant in order to reduce timlevel of lexical and syntactical ambiguity  3  . lleuristics based on the taxonomic and synonymic knowledge obtained previously have been considered in tiffs phase  . Some of them have been designed , implemented and cwlluat cd in a sample of the DKB . 
2 By tnear~s of rules fired following a forward chaining strategy  . 
3 Lexical ambiguity comes from tile definitions themselves  ; yntactical ambiguity is due lroinly to the an adysis process  , 
DEDUCTION OFKNOWLEI)GE.
I ) ynalnie acquisition of knowlcdg cdeals with the knowledge not explicitly represented ill the  1  ) KB aqd captured by means of especially conceived mechanisms which  , arca elivaled when thc system is to answer a question posed by the user  ( Arregi et al ,  91) . 
Th clollowing , aspect , , ; ' u'e considered : ? Inheritance ( concept taxouomy )  . 
Composition o1 lexic~d relations.
Links bct weeu concepts and relations : users are allowed to use actual concepts to denote relationships  ( and not only primitive r clatious )  . 
. Anlbiguity ill file DKB : trealnlent of reraaining imccrlainty  . 
In the following , some aspects couccnliug to I hese coudpoint will be discuss c d  . 
luIDIIS , I he relationships at noug the diff crenl lcxical -semautic relations can be easily expressed in a declarative way  . It is tileway of expressing these , elationships that is cMledIhc composition of lexical relations  . From an operative poiat of view , this mechanism permits the dyuamic exploitation - -under Ih cuser's requests --- nf Ihetnop crties of I he lexical relations in a direct maturer  . It is , in fact , a way of acquiring iml ) licit knowledge Ii ' om II , cDKB . 
The declarative aspect of them c chanism is based on the definilion of triples : each llil  ) le expresses a relationship among difli ' . reutlcxical-scmanlic relations . 
These Iriples have thr , form ( RlR2R3) , where Ri represcnls a lexical rehdiou 4 . The opelalive eflgct of these declarations is Ihedynal niccrealiou of Irausitivity rules based on the triples stated  . Thel , cueral for nl of these rules is filelbllowing : i fXRlY and YI  ( 2 Z then X R3 Z Wheathe value ( s ) of the attribute R3 are asked , a reading demon ( attached to the attribute ) creates the rule aqdtires the reasoning l ) rocess with a backward-chaitling strategy . The deduced lhcts , if ; lily , will not be asserted in lint : I ) KB , but in a telnpora \ [ y context . 
l " or instance , tile prol ) lenl of Irausitivily in mcronymic relations ( Cruse , 86; Winston et al ,  87 ) can be easily expressed by slating the triple ( PART ll ' ; ~I)F , PARTIE-I ) FPARTIE-I )\[!) but not slating , furitl slat ~ ce , ( I'AR'IIE-I)I'; MI~MBRIM)P;PARTII;iq)I';) , lhllscxprcssiug that the Irml silivity in tile se colld case is not true  . Examples of uther triples that have been staled in tilt  ; syslen lare : ? ( \] t ) lll billatiol l ( )1" l / l e ronyn l i c aud ln ) ll-lucrolly llic relalio as: ( PARTIF , -) I '; L(X2ATII ; I . .OCATII ;) ( I . OCATIFIIY PEI(ONY MEIX ~ K ; ATIF ) ( MEMBRE-I ) EI1YPEF , ONY MI'2 MEMBI~d';-I ) I';)4 Thercsull of timhau , silivity iule that will IrecJe~tcd witib c the dcductim telvalues lilttile  . R3 attlibute . . " llle Iriple . '; arct , lore dill a facet of It 3 . 
? Combinatioll of relations derived front the delinilion metaol anguage :  ( CARA ( TI'I' ; RISTIQUEQItI-AI'OSSESSION )   ( OBJEC'IIFCE-QUIOBJECTIF ) Explicit rules of lexical composition cau Ix ~ i l s c  ( l when the general form of the triplcs is not valid  . These rules are uscxl following the same re ` asoning strategy  . 
Following is givcn the ruled crived tYom the last Iriple and one in sl  ; mee of it . By means of this rule instance , the lact that tile purpose of ag dranium is the action of orner is deduced from the delinitions of g dranium and orttemet t t : if XOBJFC rIFY and  ; ; ; the objective of X is Y ( entity ) YCE-QUIZ ;  , ;; Y " est cequi " Z(action ) then Xou Jt . : c-rll ~ Z ; ; ; the objective of X is Z ( action ) If Ig & an ium 1IIoBnKYI'FI or nement III and
Ionlcment IIICF . - QU Iorner III then Ig draniun l III OltJF . Orllz Iorner III 7 TIlEI'ROTOTYPEOFIDIIS : SIZEOFTIIE

Following some ligures are given in order to show the size of t imprototype obtained alter the initial conshuction of the DKB  . Thisl ) rotn type contains a u imporlant subset of the source diction my  . 
KIM ) ICr IO NN AIRI ~ contains 2400 entries , each oner cprcs entiug one word . KB-TIIES AURUS comains 6130 conceptual units ; 1738 units of these arc phrasal concepts , in this Kilt there arc 1255 mn big ~ lous conc cpls . Once the initial coastmction phase was finished ,   19691 relatiou alarcs -- intercouceptual r clalionships --- had been established  . 
After Iheenrichmentllroccsses , the mnn bcr of relational links have been incremented up to  2180  )   ( 10 . 7%) . it has been estimated that , using the mechanism of lexical composition , the number in tcr conceptual relations could reach an incremcnt of betwccn  5 and 10%   5  . 
8 CONCLIISION So
A frame-based kuowlcd gere presentation model has been described ? This model has been m  ; edin an Intelligent Dictionaryllell l System to represent the lexical knowledge acquired automatically I'r onla conventional dielion m-y  . 
The character is a donf the different iuterconcepm~d lcxical-semantic relations is tile basi slot the prolx ~ stxl model and it has be cuestablished as a result of tim analysis process c  , ' micd out on dictionary delinit kms . 
Sew a Memichm cnt pmta~sscs have bccnp crlbnned on the DKB~--after tile initiM consh'uction---in order to add new l~lct  , ' ; to it ; these processes are bascxl on the exploitatiou of the properties of lexical--scmanfic relalious  . Moreover , a mechanism li ) r acquiring ~--4n a@namic way--knowlcdg cnot explicitly reprc ~ etttcd  3 Considering o , lyfl , ~seto ! ripk ~ . .~ dcdarcd tmtil no,v . 
549 in lit (: DKB is proposed . ' lhis mechanism is based on the composi \[ iont ) llcxicai relations . 
I ~ I ~; ICEREN(~,ES,
Alshaw LIio (1989) . Al ~ aly si~g dictionary deih fition smB . Boguraev , T . Briscoeeds . , pp .  153- . 169 ~ Computation all , e?icography for Natnral Language
Processing . New Yolk : I , ongman.
Amsler , R . Ao (1981) oA . Ta?onomy fur English Nouns and Verbs , Plot . 19th Annual Meeting A(_Z , pp .  133-1:38 . 
Arango Gaviria , G .  (15)83) . Une approche pour a momer lepw cessus & compr dhen siota eld'utilisa * iot  , dusens desmo ~ senlanga genagurel . These tie3 ~ me cycle(P ~ n is VI) . Pnblica / ious du Gtou~tic Rcz : hcr ( : hc ( liat ~ de Fr~m ~ ois Pic ~ ud . 
ArrcgiX ?, X . A~tola , A . Diaztielkura ~ a , F . Evrard , Ko Sarasola (1991) . Apm ximaci 6n funcit malaI ) IAC : l ) iccionark ) inteligen ( ~: deayu daalacemprcnsi6tL
Pro < SEPLN , 11, pp . 127 = 138 o
A ~: to la X . , Iv . Evrard .   ( 1992 ) ol ) ictiommire intelligen ! d ' aide hla compr 6hension , A clasI1/CongresoInt . 
EURALEX'90 ( Benalm , / tdena ), pp ~ 45-57 . Barcekma:
Biblograph ?
Artola Xo ( 1993 ) o " il IZTSUA : l Iiz tegi-sistemaur Drt . lca ( lime ~ dunarensorkuntzaeta eraikuntza/Conccption d ' unsyst ~  , meintelligent d ' aide dictionnarial c(SIAl )) "
Ph.D . Thesis . UPV-I ?, tlU.
Boguraev B . , T . Briscoeeds .  (1989) . Conqmtational Lexicography for Natural Language Processing  . New
Yolk : 1. ongman.
Byrd R . J . , N . Calzolari , M . S . Chodomw, . I . L . Klavmls , M . S . Nell , O , A . Rizk (1987) . Tools and Mclhods for Computation all . exicography , Computational
Linguistics 13, 34, pp . 219-240.
Calzolmi , N .  (1984) . Machine-readable diction ~ u'ics , lexical databases and the lcxical system , Prec . 
COLING ( SUmdford Univ .), p . 460.
Calzolari N . , E . Picchi (1988) . Acquisition of semantic inlbn nation lioman online dictionary  , Prec . COLING ( Budapest ), pp .  8792 . 
Cht xlorow M . S . , R . J . Byrd (1985) . Exuacting semantic hierarchies from a large online dictionary  , Prec . ACL , pp .  299-304 . 
Chouraqui E . , E . Godbert (1989) , Rcprd senalion ties descriptions dd fit lies dans un  r6scau   s6mantique   , Actes 7&he Congr~s Reconna is sance des Forme set Intelligence Artificielle  ( AFCET-INRIA , Paris ) , pp . 

Copestake , A .  (1990) . An approach to building tile hierarclfical element of a lexical knowledge base from a machine-readable diction m'y  , paper ead at First Int . 
Workshop on Inheritance in NLP ( Tilburg).
CrnseD . A . (1986). Lexical Semantics . Cambridge :
Cmnbridge University Press.
wm denllurk I . , W . Meijs . The dictionary as a coqms : analyzing i . DOCE's definition-language , Corpus
Linguistics II , pp . 9% 125.
l . it kowsky K . C . (1978) o Models of . tim semantic structure of dictionarics , " American Journalo \ [ Computational Linguistics , ME 81 , ppo25-74 . 
Ma~kowi ~ zJ . 0T?Ahlswcdc , M . Evens ( 1986 ) oScmaniea Hy significant pat ~ cn~am dictionary delinitious  , Proco 24th Annual Meeting ACL ( New
York ), pp . 112d19?
Pazienza M . T . , 1' . Velardi ( 1987 ) oA structured representation u\[word . senses for semantic analysis , l ) rec , grd Europe . an Cotgerence ACI , ( Copenhagt ~ en ), pp . 2/t 9- . 257 . 
Quillian M . R , (1968) . Semanlie Memory in M . Minskyed . , pp . 227-270, Semam'ic Information Processing . 
Cmxlbrklge0 Vlas&):MIT Press ?
Tsurumamll ?, T?llitaka , S . Yoshida (1986) . An attempt to au/omatic thesatm~s conslraelion froln an ordinary japanese language dicthmary  , Prec . COLING ( Bonn ), pp . 445+447 + Vossen P . , W . Meijs , M . den Breeder ( 1989 ) +M can in ) + m~d structure in diclion a ~ y deiinltions in B . Boguracv , T . Briscoceds . , pp .  171 . -192, Computational Lexicography . lbr Natural Language Processing ? New
York : l.,ongmm ~ .
Wilks Y . , 1) . Fass , G . ( ihcng . - Ming , J?E . Mcl ) on ald , T?Plate , B . MoSlator (1990) . Providing Machine Tractablel ) ictionary Tools , Machine 2) anslalion , no . 
5, pp . 99. I 54 o
Wioston M . E ?, R . Chaffin , D . Ilemmnm (198'1) . A Taxonomy of Pmt-Whoh ~ Relations , Cognitive
Science , no . 12, pp . 417 o444,
