ROBUST METHOD OF PRONOUN RESOLUTION
USING FULL-TEXTINF ORMATION
Tetsuya Nasukawa
IBM Research , Tokyo Research Laboratory
1623-14 , Shimotsuruma , Yamato-shi , Kanagawa-ken2 42 , Japan
Abstract
A consistent text contains rich inforlnation for resolving mn biguities within its sentences  . Even simple syntactic information such as word occurrence and collocation patterns  , which can be extra ( : tedfi'om the text without deep discourse analysis  , lint ) roves the accuracy of sentence analysis . Pronoml resolution is a typical proceeding that utilizes this information  . 
Through the use of this inforlnation , along with information on the syntactic position of each candidate  ,  93 . 8% of pronoun references were resolved correctly in an experiment on computer mammls  . 
1 Introduction
Resolving t > ronoun reference is a diifieult task that requires consideration of both linguistic and cognitive aspects of a language  . As a linguistic phenomenon , the use of pronouns is treated a . s a coreferential prohlem in which both the antecedent and the pronoun corefer to some object  . From this point of view , finding the object that is coreferred to by a pronoun is the main problem in t  ) ronoun resolution , and much research as been devoted to focusing on or inferring the referent object by considering the grammatical and semantic roles of each entity in the sentences \[ Sidner  , 1983; Brennan , 1987; Kameyama ,  1993\] . This task is especially difficult when the referent object is not explicitly stated in a text  , and common sense and deep inference are required in order to figure out the object  , s Ls in the classic problems descrit ) ed by Charniak\[Charniak ,  1973\] . 
Since this approach of considering the grammatical and semantic roles of each entity depends heavily on accurate syntactic an Mysisavd semantic analysis  , it is not yet applicable to practic M systems . 
However , if we do not aim for perfect analysis , a simple syntactic-based heuristic rule for s -electing a correct antecedent from several candidate noun phra ~ sesi  ) erforms quite well , especiMly in technical document such as computer manual-s  , in which we can usuMly expect an explMt antecedent within the same sentence or in a previous sentence  . In this domain , a correctant e ( : edent can be selected in a hnost 90% of all causes without any world knowledge other than simple semantic constraints \[ Hobbs  , 1978; Walker , 1989; Lappin ,  1990\] . 
Moreover , several heuristic rules can be combined to improve the accuracy of the analysis \[ Rich  ,  1988;
Carboi , ell , 1988\].
This approach of resolving pronoun reference by applying simple heuristic rules see insto bead e  . quate for a practical naturM language processing system  , yet in order to achieve a success ratio of over 90%  , some kind of knowledge processing is required , such as the use of world knowledge or deep inference mechanisms for constructing and referring to a discourse structure  . While the advantage of knowledge processing is widely recognized  , this approach presupposes a large quantity of knowledge resources  , and leads to a knowledge acquisition bottleneck . In order to solve this problem , wmous studies have been done on methods of using online text databa ~ ses with less human intervention for word sense disambiguation at td structural disambiguation \[ Jensen  , 1987; Nagao , 1990; Uramoto , 1991; Hindle ,  1993\] . These methods can be applied to knowledge processing in pronoun resohltion  ; however , no research as yet re-ve Med sutficient world knowledge to cover general  1  ) roblems . In other words , methods of using world knowledge have not reached a level sufficiently mature for them to be used in broadcoverage systems  . 
This paper prol ) oses a simple and robust approach that utilizes inte  . r-sentential information , extracted from a source text by means of a simple algorithm  , to improve the accuracy of pronoun resolution . For example ,   ( : olloeation patterns within a text offer information that e or rcsl  ) onds to ease frames in world knowledge , and word frequency also gives information reh!wmt to the tot  ) it or focus of the subjects . 
Thus , instead of using outside knowledge resources , such information serves as world knowledge appropriate to the narrow domain of the source text  . The effectiveness of each type of information extracted from a source text is evaluated in the light of the results of experiments on comlmter lnanuals  . 
In the next section , we introduce three effective factors in the selection of an antecedent from candidate noun phra  . ses . Then , in the third section , we in the fourth section , we evaluate the effectiveness of this approach on the basis of the results of an experiment  . 
2 Three fac tors for eva luat ing sa l ience in candidates In our approach  , pronoun resolution basically consist-s of collecting candidate noun phrases and selecting the most preferable candidate as the antecedent of a pronoun by applying several rules to filter out inappropriate candidates and to attach preferences to appropriate candidates  . Rules are divided into two types . One type represents grammatical constraints that must be satisfied  , such as number and gender agreement . Since rules of this type can filter out i -nappropriate candidates  , we apply them at an early stage of pronoun resolution  . The remaining rules constitute the other type , which attaches a preference to each candidate noun phrase  . After inappropriate candidates have been filtered out by the former rules  , the latter rules determine the most appropriate candidate by measuring the sMience of each remaining candidate noun phrase  . Thus , the latter rules are important for selecting the exact antecedent from the remaining candidates and for improving the accuracy of pronoun resolution  . 
In this section ~ we describe three effective factors that utilize fulltext information for measuring the salience of each candidate noun phrase  . The reasons for their effectiveness are that they cover many aspects of linguistic phenomen and that their interpretation is simple enough to be used in a practical system  . 
2 . 1 Collocation patterns within a source text In previous approaches  , semantic constraints have been among the most basic factors for filtering out candidates that would be inappropriate as modifier-s of the modifiee of a pronoun  . However , in order to apply semantic on straints with broad coverage  , a large amount of knowledge is required . For example , in processing a sample sentence provided by Hobbs \[ Hobbs  ,  1978\] , The castle in Camelot remained the residence o / the kinguntil  536 when he moved it to London , the following knowledge must be supplied in order to filter out the candidates  536  , castle , and Camelot , and leave the correct antecedent , residence : ? Dates cannot move . 
? Places cannot l ~ love.
? Large fixed objects cannot move.
In order to apply this knowledge , we also prcsul ) pose a correct analysis that categorizes each nmm phrase as a date  , place , large fixed object , and so on . Since many of the words in these noun phrases have word sense ambiguities  , it is not practical to presuppose the correct application of such knowledge  . As sem-bling a large body of knowledge poses another major problem  . 
instead of such worhl knowledge , collocation patterns ( namely , modifiee-modifier relationships ) extracted from a discourse can be applied . Since word sense is usually unified within a discourse  , and most words with the same lemma are frequently repeated \[ Gale  , 1992; Nasukawa ,  1993\] , the collocation patterns in the same discourse provide valuable data for determining whether a candidate can modify the modifiee of Ct pronoun  . For example , if the sentence
He moved his residence is found in the discourse , this information indicates that the word residence can be the object of the verb move  . Thus ~ the inh ) rmation works as a selectional constraint that the candidate can be an argument of a predicate that dominates the pronoun  . 
Moreover , since statements tend to be repeated in a discourse  , the existence of an identical collocation pattern in a discourse may support selection of the candidate as the antecedent  . In this sense , the preference for an identic M collocation pattern also reflects case role persistence preference and syntactic  parM1elism preference , prolmsed by Carbonell and Brown\[Carbonell ,  1988\] . The case role persistence rule prefers a candidate noun phrase that filled an i-dentical case role in an earlier sentence  . For example , after the sentence
Mary gave an apple to Susan,
Susan is referred to by her in
John also gave her an apple , while Mary is referred to by she in
She also gave John an apple.
The syntactic 1 ) a rM1elism rule prefers a candidate noun phrase that preserves its surface syntactic role from the first of two or more coordinate clauses  . For example , insan , but she had paired her with Nancy last time , shere f l , ' rs to leader , and her refers to Mary , whereas in The girls coutleader paired Mary with Susan  , but she had paired Nancy with her last time , she refers go leader , ait (\[ her refers to , S'usan . By referring to the i ( lentic M collocation Ii atterns , we ( : ~ ut resolve all the pronouns in the above examples  ( : or-rectly . 
Since the id cntitication of modifier-modifieer lations h i i  ) s is a basic feature of syntactic analysis , a procedure for identifying identical collocation patterns is not a hard task  , as long as M1 of the sentences are parsed by a single system and share a single l ' or m ~ fl-ism for expressing modifier-modiii eerlationships  . 
2 . 2 l~'equency of repetition in preceding sentences A characteristic of the i  ) ronoln imflization on whi ( : h the centering a pln ' oach\[Sidner , 1983; Ilr ( , mlan , 1987; Kameyama , 1993\] isl) ; Lsed is that an object in focus is likely to hc pronomimtlized  . If this characteristic is expanded to all definite anaphor as  , which include detinite noun phrases as well as pronouns  , a candidate noun phrase that is in focusinay be repeated as a definite noun phrase before it is pronomiilalized  . Thus , the frequen ( : y in 1 ) receding sentences of a nouu i ) hrase with the same lemma ~ s ~ t candidate noun l ) hr~use ( : a a be an index for the preference with whi ( : hit is selected as the antecedent . The 1) roees s for a . ssigning this 1 ) ref-erence consists of a simple string match that cheeks words with the same lcmma in preceding sentences  . 
In addition , when the source text is marked up with SGML or others u  ( -htags , the roles of some phrase such as titles mid heading scall he easily re  ( > ognized , and words with such roles tend to represent the topics of the sentences fifth  ) wing them . Thus ,  ~ ( \[-ditional preference can be assigned by checking the tags of each word  . 
2.3 Syntactic position
As shown by tIobtis\[ltobl ) s ,  1978\] , a heuristic t'ule favoring subjects over objects l  ) er for lns remarkably well in English text . By traversing th ( ' surface parse tree of a sentence , a1 ) referen ( : evMue can be provided for each candidate noun phrase according to its syntactic position  . This factor has mt advantage over other f a ( > tors shown in 1 ) reviou subsections in the sense that it : assigns a definite ranking for e a  ( : h candidate noun I ) hrase , since e a ( : ho ( :eul ) ies a syntactic position in a text . Thus , this factor l ) rovides a default value for the l ) reference of e a (  ; h ( : an ( lidate it OUltt ) hrase when no oth ( 'rfactor provides wfi id information , and it is ad ( ' ( luat ( ~ for ar ( It ) ust approach since it is basically assigned t ) y traversing tho surface l ) arse trees of a sent . enee . 
3 Implementation
In this sect ; ion , we describe the actual imple-lnelltation of ( ; hel ) rottoUll resohltiott procedllreillml Fmglish-to -Japanese  . machine translation system,
Shalt2\[Takeda , 1992\].
The procedure consists of two steps : 1 . Extraction of ca . ndidat(:s for an mltec(,dent2 . Selecti(m of I ; he correct antece(tent fl'om the candidates . 
\[11 or ( lett (/ achievet tigh (! rac ( ; llracy it ll ) rolloull res-olution with robust lirocessing , our straeegy consists of 1 . Extending a list of ( ' andidate noun ptm~scsotht~tit does no Lex ( : lude a correct antecedent 2 . \] leferring t ( ) all information in the source text that can be syntactically extracted without referring to outside knowledge resources  , in or de , r to sele(:t the corre (' . tante(:e(lent . 
3 . 1 Extraction of candidates ' fo ensure that the correct antecedent is in  ( : luded in a list of candidate noun t ) hrases , candidates are ex-tra ( : ted from exa ( : tly two sentences with lninimum til-tering . First , the system cheeks whether any noun tihrases earlier in the same sentence satisfy the num--ber and gender constraints  . It then checks the t ) reced-ing sentences in order of proximity until candidates have bctllYOlllI  ( \[ ill exactly two sentell ( :es . 
l ) uring the extraction of the candidates , the system filters out noun phrases that do not satisfy the numl  ) er and gender constrmnts , and M so direct modifiees of the pronoun and its arguments  , so that a noll-re I lexive 1 ) rOllOllltall ( tits anl ; eced ( mtnlay not occur in I : he same siml ) lex sentence , as would be the case if data were the antecedent of it in the following sentenc  ( ~ ; The device that writes onto a magnetic di . sk and reads data from it is called a disk drive . 
1159 3.2 Selection of an antecedent
In our implementation , the preference values provided by the algorithms described in the following paragraphs are combined into a single value  , and the candidate noun phrase with the largest preference value is selected as the antecedent  . 
Preference according to the existence of identical collocation patterns in the text As a preference value that indicates the satisfaction of selectional constraints and repetition of an identical statement  , we assigned a constant value 3 for a candidate that has an identical collocation pattern with the modifiee of a pronoun within the source text  . Furthermore , in order to extend the use of collocation patterns as knowledge on seleetional constraints  , an online synonym dictionary \[3\] is referred to , and thus a collocation pattern with a synonym can support candidates other than exactly identical collocation patterns  . 
Preference according to the frequency of rep-et ition in preceding sentences In order to provide a larger preference value for closer and more frequent occurrences of a lemma  , the preference value is given by the total score calculated according to the following formula  , for each appearance of a noun phrase with the same lemma astim candidate noun phrase that is found within the ten preceding sentences : Preference according to syntactic position Among the candidate noun phrases  , a candidate in a closer sentence , or the one neares the beginning of the same sentence is preferred  . Besides the left-to-right order within a sentence  , a negative preference value is given fortile distance  ( number of sentences ) from the sentence that contains the pronoun to the sentence that contains the candidate  . While the order of preference of candidates that is obtained in this manner is similar to that given by the naive algorithm proposed by Hobbs\[ Hobbs  ,  1978\] , our algorithm is much simpler , and does not even require the results of syntactic analysis  . 
3.3 Example
Figure 1 gives an example of system output that contains data on the preference of each candidate antecedent for a pronoun in a sample text extracted f  , ' om the second chapter of a computer manual \[2\] in the mam , er described in the previous paragraphs . 
In this figure , the number in brackets before each sentence indicates the sentence number in the text  . 
As shown by these numbers , the output consists of eleven consecutive sentences  , front the 104th to the 114th in the second chapter of the manu M . * The order of candidates following the message Candidates for the referent of  CFRAME106579   ( " it " ) are : reflect stile order of preference values obtained by referring to the positimt of each candidate  . As shown in this list , key is the most preferable candidate from the viewpoint of syntactic position  . In this candidate list , CFR hME wu wo indicates an instance of each content word in the dis  ( : ourse . Information on the position and ontile whole sentence can be extracted from each of these CF l t  . AMEs . A number in a rrow-head brackets next to CFRAME u ~ uu  ~ u  , such as < ll3 > , indicates the number of the sentence in which it occurs  . A number in parentheses , such as 0 . 48571432 inkey (0 . 48871432) , indicates the preference value obtained by referring to the frequency of repetition  . 2 Thus , from the viewpoint of the number of repetitions , cursor is the most preferable candidate for the aI  , tecedent . At the bottmn of this figure , information on modifier-modifieer lationships that support candidates is shown  . In this case , there is a collocation pattern such that cursor modifies the verb reaches  , which is the modifiee of tile pronoun it ; tiros , this information prefers cursor for the antecedent of it  . 
Finally , after combination of all the preferences , cursor is selected as the most preferable antecedent of it  . 
4 Results
We . examined 112 third-person pronouns in 1904 consecutive sentences fl ' omeight chapters of two different computer manuals  . One \[1\] is a typical computer manual for computer experts such as programmers and system operators  , and the other \[2\] is a primer for novice users of a computer . 
In this experiment , we excluded instances in which it pronmninalizes a sentence  , as in do it , those in which it refers to a syntactically recoverable that-clmlse or to-infinitive clause  , and those in which ~ In the sentences contained in Figure  1  , the underlining and tile change of font for the target pronoun it were done by tile att thor  . 
2Noun phrases with the same lemma referred to in the preceding sentences are indicated by underlines  . 
1160  ( 104 )   ( 105 )   ( lO6 )   ( lO ~ )   ( 108 )   ( 109 )   ( 11 o )   ( 111 )   ( 112 )   ( 11a ) 

All four of the cursor movement keys are typematic  ; they keet ) repeating as long~s they are held down . 
The Cursor Upkey moves the cnrs or upone line.
Like the other cn rs or movement keys , this key moves the cursor one line or many lines depending on how long you hold down the key  . 
The Cursor Right key moves the cursor to the right . 
Hoht the key down.
When the cursor reaches the right end of the line , it goes off the screen and reap pears on the left side  , one line b do w the line it was on . 
If the cursor is on the bottom line of the screen and is run  M1 the way to the right , it goes off the screen and reappears in the upper left corner  . 
The Cursor Left keymow's the cursor one position to the left  . 
1 told this key down.
When it reaches the left end of tile line , it goes off the screen and reap pears on tile rigtlt  , one line above the line it was on . 
Candidates for the referent of CFRAME IO 6579 ( " it " ) are : CFRAMEI06573<113> . . . . key (0 . 48571432) CFK AMEI06564 < I12> . . . . Cursor Left key (0) CFKAME106565<l l i > .   .   .   . cursor (1 . 4337664)
CFKAME 106568 < l12 > .   .   .   . left ( 0 ) >> With DIANA <<>> To support CFRAM ElO 6565 ( cursor ) < < i with SAME-ATTACHMENT-CAND-MODIFIEE in : " When the cursor reaches the right end of the line  , it goes off the screen and reap pears on the left side  , one line below the line it was on . "( reaches < CFR hME 106454> in SENTENCEIO 6453 < No . IIO >) Fig . 1:Saml ) led a tah ) r resolving the first pronoun it in sentence 114 it occurs in a time or weather construction . When an identical pronoun is included in the candidate list  , the system assmnes that these pronoun sharetile same antecedent  . For example , we assumed that M1 the instances of it in When it reaches the left end of the line  , it goes off the screen and reap pears on the right  , one line above the line it was on have the same antecedent  . 
As a result of our strategy of enlarging the scope for selection of cmtdidates  , tile average nu in ber of candidate noun phrases was  4  . 1 . 
Our algorithm chose a correct antecedent in 105 ( : a . ses , giving a success ratio of 93 . 8% . In 28 of those 112 cases , there was among the candidates an identical t ) ronoun that ; referred to the same anteceden-t ; thus , in 84 cases , antecedents were selected by e-valuating the syntactic position  , frequency of repetition , and collocation pattern of each candidate noun phrase  . 
As shown in Table 1 , without any information on repetition or collocation patterns  , the success rate of selection based only on syntactic position was  82  . 7% , while tile success rate for selection based only on frequency of repetition was  60  . 7% . This result indicates that pronomin Mized noun phrases were actually repeated more than twice with intenconsecutive sentences in over  60% of the cases . Thus , preference according to the frequency of repetition contributed to the selection of the correct antecedent  . In 16 of the 22 cases in which this information preferred a wrong candidate noun phrase  , the preference value was overridden by the negative preference value caused by a syntactic position far from tile sentence of the pronoun  , or by a larger preference assigned to some other candidate with an identic M collocation pattern  . 
Identical collocation patterns were found within the same chapter in  22 of 84 cases in which the preference value wasev ' , duated in selecting all anteceden-t . Although this is only 26 . 2% of the cases , collocation preference ( lid not support anywrong candidates . Moreover , in 50 . 0% of the 22 cases , another preference value , either syntactic position or repetition , supported a wrong candidate . Therefore , preference according to collocation pattern contributed to the selection of the correct antecedent  . 
Table 2 shows the distances and directions of sell-
Number of c , ~ses in which tile correct antecedent was selected
Number of cases in which the wrong antecedent was selected 
Nulnber of cases without any valid information
Syntactic 691 50 position (82.1%) (17.9%)
Frequency of 512211 repetition (60 . 7%) (26 . 2%) (13 . 1%)
Existence of 22062s in filar collocation (26 . 2%) (0%) (73 . 8% ) Table 2: Distribution of information relative to a sentence that contains information for modification preference 


Distance ( number of sentences)
Number of occurrences
Distance ( number of sentences)
Number of occurreuces 10&-4   5 -LI 4  -  2   1-51   10 I i11   116-20   21   1211 I 0  \[  2   0 tences in which a collocation pattern supporting a candidate noun phrase to modify the modifiee of tile pronoun was found  . The results indicate that such information was extracted from a relatively small area of a text  . In addition , relative collocation patterns were extracted from both previous and following sentences  . 
Out of the 37 cases in which the identical collocation patterns were found  , synonym relations were used in seven cases (18 . 9%) . 
5 Conclusion
We have proposed a robust method of pronoun res -olutim L that refers to information withintile source text in order to determine the preference value of each noun phrase that is a candidate for selection as the antecedent of a pronoun  . This approach is practical in terms of the amount of knowledge it presupposes and the amount of computation it requires  , since it basically relies only on the surface information in a text  , and is fl'eefi'om the knowledge acquisition bottleneck  . 
In experiments on computer manuals , we achieved a success rate of 93 . 8% . A remarkable ~ uspect of this result is that we achieved it without referring to any outside knowledge resource except for the synonym relations in an online synonym dictionary  . By combining heuristic rules to utilize w trious information extracted from  M1 the sentences in the source text , high accuracy can be achieved in pronoun resolution for a practical natur M language processing system  . 
Tiltad vantages of this approach are that a simple algorithm can extract information on syntactic position  , repetition , and collocation patter vs hy referring to morphological informatiml within a source text  , and that it does roteven assume a correct syntactic analysis or depend ov the formalism of syntactic parse trees  , since it does not rely on any grammatical information except for modifier-nmdifiec relationship-s  . This at ) proach is especially effective in technical document such as computer manuMs or patent doe -uments in which words are use  , d consistently in order to avoid ambiguity , and in which identical collocation patterns are frequently repeated in detailed descriptions of target objects or procedures  . 

I would like to thank Michael McDonald for invaluable hell  ) in proofreading this paper . I would also like to thank Taiji roTsutsumi , Masayuki Morohashi , Koichi Takeda , tIiroshi Maruyama , Hiroshi Nomiya-ma , Hideo Watanabe , Shiho Ogino , Naohiko Uramo-to , and the anonymous reviewers for their commeuts and suggestions  . 
References\[Brennan , 1987\] Brennan , S . E . , M . W . Friedman , and C . J . Pollard (1987) . A Centering Approach to Pronomls . /: n Proceedings of ACL-8Z
I'/62\[Carbonell , 1988\] Carbonell , J . G . , and l . I . . D . 
Brown(1(,)88). Anaphora Resolution : A
Multi-StrategyAt ) proach . in Proceedings of

\[Charniak , 1973\] Char , dak , E .  (1973) . .lack and Janet in Search of a Theory of Knowledge  . / n
Proceedings of IJCAI-72.
\[GMe , 1992\]Gale , W . A . , K . W . Church , a . ltdD . 
Yarowsky (1992) . One SensePerl ) is course . /n Proceedings of the 4th DARPA 5'pecch and Natural Language Workshop \[ Hindle , 1993\] Hindle , D . , ~ md M . Rooth (1993) . 
Strnctural Ambiguity and Lexieal Relations.
Computational Linguistics , Vol . 19, No . 1.
\[ nobbs , 1978\]Ilobbs , J . R .  (1978) . Resolving Pronounl /, eferenees . Lingua , 4~'\[ Jensen , 1987\] Jensen , K . , and J . -I , . Binot (1987) . 
Disambiguating Prel ) osition a JP hrase Attach-.
ments by Using ( ) n-Line Dietioimry 1) ei initions.
Computational Linguistics , Vol . 13, No . 2-4.
\[ Lal ) pin , 1990\] Lapi ) in , S . , and M . McCord (1990) . 
Anaphorall ~ esolution in Sh)t Grammar . Computational Linguistics , Vol . 16, No .  4 . 
\[Kameyama , 1993\] Kameyama , M . , R . Passonneau , and M . I ) oesio (1993) . Temporal Centering . In
Proceedings of ACL-93.
\[Nagao , 199 ( I\]Nagao , K .  (1990) . Del ) endency Amalyzer : A Knowle ( lge-ba . sed A1) proaehtoStructural Disambiguation . \[ n Procecding . sof

\[Nasuk ~ wa , 1993\]iasukawa , T .  (1993) . l ) is course Constraint in Computer Manuals . In Proceedings of TM\[-93 . 
\[Rich , 1988\] Rich , E . A . and S . Lul ) er Foy (1988) . An Archite eturc for AnaI ) ttora Resolution . In Proceedings of ANLP-88 . 
\[ Sidner , 1983\] Sidner , C . L .  (1983) . Focusing in the Coinprehension of Definite Anaphora  . In Computational Models of Discourse , M . Brady and R . Bcrwick , cds . , Cambridge , Mass . : MIT

\['\[' ~ keda , 1992\]Ta . keda , K . , N . Uramoto , T . Nwsukawa , and T . Tsutsmni (1992) .   Shalt2 -a Syimuetric Machine Translation System with Conceptual Transfer  . In Proceedings of

\[Uramoto , 1991\]Uramoto , N . ( J991) . Lexical and Structural Disambiguation Lrsing all Example-Base  . /n Proceedings of the 2nd Japan-Australia Joint Symposium on Natural Language Processing  . 
\[ Walker , 1989\] Walker , M .  (1989) . Evaluating Discourse Processing Algorithms . In Proceedings of
ACL-89.
\ [1\] " IBMSA Abnage Plus Object Distribution Manager MVS/ESA High-Speed Capture Subsystem Guide Version  2 Release 1  . 1 , " IBM Cor-1 ,   ( 1991 ) \[2\]" IBM Application System/400 New User's
Guide Version 2, " IBM Corp . (1992)\[3\]" The New Collins Thesaurus , " Collins Publishers , Glasgow (1 . 984)
