EXTENDING DRTWITH AFOCUS ING MECHANIS MFOR PRONOMINA l  . ANAPHORAAND
ELLIPSISRESOLUTION
Jos 6 Abraqos , Jos 6 Gabriel Lopes-(jea , gpl ) @ fct . unl . pt
CRIA/UNINOVA , Faculdade de Ci6n ciase Tccnologia , 2825 Monteda Capafica , Portugal

Cormack ( 1992 ) proposed a framework for pronominal naphora resolution  . Her proposal integrates focusing theory ( Sidner et al ) and DRT ( Kamp and Reyle )  . We analyzed this methodology and adjusted it to the processing of Portuguese texts  . The scope of the framework was widened to cover sentences containing restrictive relative clauses and subject ellipsis  . Tests were conceived and applied to probe the adequacy of proposed modifications when dealing with processing of current texts  . 
1. INTRODUCTION
Pronominal anaphora resolution , as part o1' a more general process of anaphora resolution , is a determinant step in constructing a semantic representation fatext  . 
Although " general cognitive processes DO play a role in establishing anaphoric dependencies  (  . . . ) "( Kempson , 1990p . 14) , inference is , in computational terms , a very expensive process , both for the amount of processing involved and for the extension of the knowledge bases required  . Therefore , any system aiming at efficiency in anaphora resolution should minimize the role of inference  . 
As far as DRT is concerned , the construction rule for pronouns lates that the referent introduced by the pronoun should be bound to a suitable referent  , chosen among those that are accessible ( Kamp and Reyle , 1993 p . 122) . The accessibility is based on semantic constraints and is expressed by the structure of DRS representing the text  . However the suitability of referents is ill -defined  . 
Another perspective for anaphora resolution is founded on the principle of relevance  , i . e . on " the presumption that every utterance is selected to convey the intended interpretation while imposing to the hearer the least amount of processing effort in constructing that interpretation "  ( Kempson 1990p . 17) . Focusing/centering theories ( Grosz ; Sidner ; Brenn , ' m , Friedman and Pollard et al ) can be considered as having this perspective . They try to keep track of the focus of attention along the text and bind pronouns preferentially to focused entities  . The choice of antecedents is based on pragmatic constraints  , which put an ordering on preferences between , antecedent czmdidates . 
Cormack proposes the integration of focusing and DRT  ,  "( . . . ) adding semantic onstraints to a model of attention in discourse "  ( Cormack , 1992 p . 5) . This integration compensates for two shortcomings of DRT : it considers too many possibilities for anaphoric binding and doesn't provide an ordering between antecedent candidates  . From the focusing point of view , the addition of semantic constraints , provided by DRT , to the pragmatic ordering further estricts the determination f possible antecedents  . 
We analyzed Cormack's proposal , and found out that it was lacking some features that we consider more adequate  , as it will be shown in the next few sections . 
Therefore we adapted it , and applied the modified version to the processing of texts written in Portuguese  . The scope of d~oscmc thods was widened to cover sentences containing restrictive relative clauses and subject ellipsis  . 
Tests were conceived and applied to probe the adequacy of proposed modifications when dealing with processing of current texts  . 
2 . SIMPLESENTENCES 2 . 1 . Alterations to DRT Cor , nack defends that pronouns of the current sentence can only have access to two groups of referents : focused referents and those unfocused ones that were introduced by the preceding sentence  . Referents not fitting any of these two groups can be forgotten  . Let us look at an example ( Connack , 1992p . 350): ( la ) John took apar the chest0fdrawers . 
( lb ) it was full of clothespegs.
The DRS representing the first sentence will be ( foct , sed referents are shown on the left , unfocused ones on the right ): 5> I < . jc >
John 0) chest of drawers ( c)

The second sentence introduces another DRS . Anaphors are resolved with referents of previous DRS  , I <> l<j c > < c > I < P > John ( j ) ' clothes_pegs ( P ) chest of d rawers ( c ) \[full of ( c , P ) took_apart(i , c ) , and then previous DRS can be " R~rgotten ": clothes_pegs  ( P ) t ' nll of ( c , P ) Referent John , who was introduced by ( la ) , was only available for anaphore solution in ( lb )  . Since it was never focused , it is " forgotten " . This means that it is no longer included in the referents of the DRS representing the text after processing of the second sentence  , becoming unavailable as antecedent candidate for pronouns in following sentences  . This claim may seem a little strange if we look at  ( lc ) as an acceptable third scntenee : ( lc ) liedidn't liked mircol or . 
Two other aspects of Cormack's representation led us to prefer to keep to the original DRT formalism  . First , Cormack's representation is too conditioned by pronominal anaphora resolution  . Referents that become unavailable for pronominal reference  , and are therefore " forgotten " , may still be cospecified hyde finite descriptions  . Eliminating them from t be representation would be a limit to the possibilities of expanding the system in the fltture  . Second , " forgetting " conditions introduced by previous sentences leads to a situation where the DRS representing I he text at a given moment will contain little information about the text  , and no information at all about some of the " surviving " referents ? For instance  , looking at the last DRS presented , we no longer know what entity introduced referent cl  . 
2.2. Focusing algorithms
Most focusing theorieskeel ) referents that can be relevant in future anaphora resolution in focus stores  . 
Sidner considers two groups of focus stores , which in a very short and simplistic way can be described as : those related to agent tAG  ) role : actor locus ( AF ) -AG of current sentence or previous
AF , if current sentence has no AG ; potential actor focus list ( PAFL ) -other animate referents of current sentence ; actor focus stack ( AFS ) - previous AFs ; those related to other thematic roles : discourse focus  ( DF ) -? DF of previou sentence , if referred with a pronoun in current mntence ; ? referent of the highest ranking pronoun 2 in current mntence ; ? theme , in discourse initial sentences ; 1We can , of course , overcome this limitation by creating a text knowledge base where all the restrictions upon referents are present  . 
2 sue ( Sidner .  1979) , ( Cormack ,  1992 ) for details about his ranking potential discourse locus list  ( PDFL ) -referents of current sentence excluding DF ; discourse focus stack ( DFS ) - previous DFs . 
In determining the antecedent of a pronoun , algorithms go through some preliminary considerations  ( such as recency rule ) and a basic ordering of focus stores . 
AF-DF distinction
Although taking Sidner's algorithms as a starting point  , Cormack renounces the distinction between actor focus and discourse focus  , in the final part of her work . 
The algorithms become more simple but they loose in discriminatory power  . This is particularly more significant in a language like Portuguese  , where nominals can only be masculine or feminine ( not neuter ) ? In a text like ( 2a ) OJo fioes creveum livro . 
John wrote a book . ( AF = John , DF = a book ) (2b ) A Marial ets-() . 
Mary read it.
eliminating the distinction between AF and DF would lead to Jodo  ( lohn ) being proposed as preferred antecedent of the masculine pronouno  ( it )  . Rejecting this binding would require an appeal to inference  , wlfich is something that we want to minimize . Keeping AF-DF distinction will also be significant in dealing with another phenomenon very common in Portuguese : subject  ( SU ) ellipsis . 
Recency rule " if the pronoun under consideration occurs in the subjcct position  , and there is an alternate focus list noun phrase which occurs as the last constituent in the previous sentence  , test that alternate focus list phrase for co-st ) ecification before testing the current focus .  ( . . . ) "( Sidner , 1979 p . 144) . 
Sidner admits that " the recency rule makes focussing seem somewhat ad hoc "  ( ibid . ) , Carter states that " its inclusion in SPAR led to considerable in accuracy "  ( Cartes "1987 p . 114 ) and Cormack decides to ignore it too ( Cormack , 1992 p . 54) , t to wever , it seems that , in Portuguese , this rule should be considered for pronouns in AG position :  ( 3a ) A Mariai deuumlivma Anaj . 
Maryi gave Annjabook.
If tile agent of the ncxt sentence is Mary there are two ix  ) ssit ) ilities of pronominalization : the prontmnel a ( she ) or the null pronoun ( ~  ( SU ellipsis )  . This last option will be l ) mferrexl : ( 3b ) ~i comprara-onumleil fio . 
? i had bought it at an auction ? possibility of pronominalization will be the cxplicit pronoun ela  ( she ) :  ( 3b ' ) Elaj Icu-o . 
Shej read it.
So th c speaker will tend to use a null pronoun in AG position to eospccify the agcnt of the previousent cncc  , reserving the explicit pronoun a use that conforms with th crecency rule  . 
Intrasentential anaphora
Carter inserts intrasentential candidates ( ISC ) between current feel and potential oci , in the basic ordering . 
Cormack distinguishes between focused ISC and remainder of lSC  . In our implementation this distinction seemed unnecessary and we decided to insert ISCalter potential foci  , in th c basic ordering . A special casc of ISC is the reflexiv cpmn ( mnse ( himself/herse!f/itself/themselves )  . We always bind it to the agent of the scntcnce . 
(4) Ocameloid citou-seina rcia.
The camelilaid ( its e!fi ) down on the sand.
Intrasentential catapbora
In our implementation , syntatic parsing is done according to grammar ( lev clopment formalisms hased on barricrs , movcment and binding ( Lopcs 1991) . It is an cx tension of th c extra position grammar formalism  ( Pereira 1981 ) and allows for movement of constituents of a scntencc in arc strict cd are a delimited by harricrs  . 
The resulting synUltict rcc will always show the in tcrnal arguments of the verb on it's right  , no matter what positions they had in the original sentence  . For instance , the syntatic trecfor (5) Nearher , the blond girls awaman . 
will be:

NP VP
NPPP lheblond girls awaman near her
The anaphora resolution process works on the restdts of the syntatic parser  , so this kind of cataphora will be trc~lted as intrasentential anaphora  . 
Subject ellipsis
As mentioned above , this is a very common phcnomcnon in Portugncs e language  . Null pronomlin AG position seems to behave differently from on cinnon-AG position  . In thcfirst case it cospecifies AF or a combination of foci including AF :  ( 6a ) A Mariaid ccidiu of crcccraquele perfume hArm . 
Mary idecided to offer Ann that perfume . AF = Mary (6b ) ~ i gost a vamuitodole . 
( biliked it very much.
A null pronoun in non-AO position cospccifics DF or a combination of foci including DF :  ( 7a ) O Joaopo isouoli vroisobrcopiano . 
John put the booki on the piano . DF = the book (7b ) ( Diemgran deepes a do . 
~ i was big and heavy.
Ratification procedure
Both Sidner and Cormackleave all verifications of syntactic agreement and consistency with world knowlextge to a ratification procedure  , to be appliex lafter completion of focusing process  . Efficiency can be improved if inexpensive number and gcnder agreement and reflexivity verific at k  ) nsarc included in the focusing proccss . Thus , scvcralinad cqrmte candidates can be ruled out without a call to the ratification procedure  . 
3. SENTENCE SCONTAINING
RESTRICTIVE RELATIVE CLAUSES
Going beyond simple sent cnces , we widcncd thc scope of the prescntcd methods to includ csent cn ccs with restrictive relative clauses  ( for short , we ' ll just use the form relative clauses in the remainder of this paper  )  . 
Rules for focus movement and refcrcnts accessibility were formulated and tests werc d c signet l to probe their adcq t  , acy . In this sect i ( m we refer to the results of a qucstionnairc answered by  40 collcge students . 
Focus movement (8a ) OJoaoleu unllivroi.
John read a booki . DF = a book ( 8b ) Ohomemj queoics creveumor reu . 
The manj who wrote itidied.
(8c ) Oser udi to scnalte ceram-no ivj ? muito.
Erudite people praised him ~ itivj ? much.
According to focusing rules , tile pronoun in (8c ) cospecifies DF of (8b ) . fflnXmouns in relative clauses were able to influence focus then  ( 81 ) ) would confirm a book as DF and this would be the antecedent of the pronoun in  ( 8c )  . That doesn't sccm to be the case . The intuitively preferred antecedent is them an . Examples like this show that pronouns occurring within relative clauses dofft seem to inlluence focus movement  . This colmlusion was confirmed by 83% of the answers to the alx ) vementioned questionnaire . 
Access of following sentences to relative clause referents Referents introduced  1  ) y the relative clause arc acccs siblchutar cnot preferred to main clauser cfcrcnts  . 
The qucstionnairc prcs cnted the text : chamou a polfcia  . Ele . . . 
The man whoma thiefs tole the watch from calh : d the police  , lie . . . 
5 8% of the continuations proposed bind the pronoun to the main clause referent theman while only  28% indicate binding with file relative clause referent a thief  . 
Access of the relative clause to main clause referents  ( 10 ) O Joao deuumliv roiat ) a hmoqn coime recia . 
John gave a book i to the student who deserved it i . 
Pronouns in the relative clause can cospecify both main clause referents or focus stores  . The first situation seems to be preferred except , perhaps , for pronouns in AG position , that show a weak preference ( suplx ) rted by 61% of the answers ) for cospecification with AF or a member of PAFL . 
Access of the main clause to relative clause referents  ( 11 ) Ohomem quees creveum livroideu-oi a Maria . 
The man who wrote a booki gave it ito Mary.
Pronouns in the main clause , occunil Lg after the relative clause , can cospecify it's r clerents , lake Cormack , we conskler access to focus storcs to be more likely  , lint this preference was not confirmed by the results of the questionnaire  ( 60% of the answers were against )  . 
Access of relative clause to relative clause ( 12 ) Ohomemqttea Mariai viues crevenum livro title ai imprcs sionou  . 
The man who was seen by Maryi wrote a book that impressed heri  . 
Pronouns in the second relative clause can cospccify referents of the first one  . t to wever , it seems that main clause referent should be prelerrt x las antecedents  . The example used to test this preference was not very clear and so we've got  63% of negative answers . 
Transitive access to a main clause ( 13 ) A Mariaic as ouc or no client eqlce conl prou 0 livro que elaie ~ reven . 
Mary imarried the client who bought the book that sheiwrote  . 
Pronouns in , ' 1 nested relative clause cnt cospccify main clause referents  . Preference seems to be given to an tcccx lent candidates of the main clause over those el : the nesting relative chmse  , but this hypothesis was not testex l . 
Transitive access to a relative clause ( 14 ) O cliente que comprou ( ) livro que a emprcgada i escrcveu casou corn ela i  . 
The client who bought the book that was written by the employe ei married heri  . 
Pronouns in the main clause can cospccify nested relative clntnse referents  . Candidate nnteccx lents occurring in the nesting relative clause seem to be preferred though  . This preference is supported by 75% of the answers . 
Ordering autecedent candidates
We can summarize this analysis in the following rule slot predicting antecedents  . These rules were implemented without significant changes to the algorithm establish cdl br simple sentences  . 
Relative clause pronotms :
AG position :: main clause AG not null : Ab ' , PAFL , main clause refs . , remainder of focus stores non-AG position : main clause refs  . , lbcus stores , Main clause pronouns : Prcc ( xling a relative clause : focus store s\[q ) llowing al+clative clause : idem excluding stacks  , relative clause rel ~ . , slacks Folk ) wing sentence pronouns-main clause refs . , relative clause refs . , slacks Nested relative clauses : They have transitive access to main clause refs  . Main clause pronouns prefer nesting clause refs . to nested clause ones . 
Relative clauses as conditionals
Both Kamp (1993p . 81) and Cormack (1992p . 347 ) propose a " flat " treatment of relative clauses . Both it's referents ( with the possible exception of proper names ) and conditions are introduced in current DRS . 
(15) Jone sowns a book which Smith a dores.
( Kamp and Reyle , 1993p . 78-83) xyz
Jones(x)\[xx)k(y)
Smith(z ) zador csy
X !) ~' I ) Sy (16) Aman who owns a donkey pays.
( Cormack , 1992p . 347) <> I < tn , d>mau(m ) donkey(dr
Illowns dmpays
According to Marcus (19791) . 289 ) the interpretation conveyed hy this kind of representation wouldn't be namely those whose verb is in subjunctive mood  . 
(17) Umagricult or queten haumburr () bate-lhe.
A farmer who ( subjunctive of ~ ) a donkey beats it . 
This kind of sentences i associated to non -factual  , hypothetical presuppositions and is semantically equivalento an implication relation between two clauses :  ( 17' ) Seumagricult orternumburroent fiobate-lhe . 
If a farmer owns a donkey then he beats it.
So , our implementation represents his kind of sentences as conditionals : \[ xy donkey  ( y ) owns ( x , y)zw = 7> Z = Xw = ybeats(z , w ) Our rules for anaphora resolution will then be applied as usual  , taking in consideration both focusing and semantic  ( DRT-detennined ) acessihility constraints . 
4. TESTING
Tests were conceived with the only purpose of probing the adequacy of proposed modifications  . One of the tests , the questionnaire , has already been in entioned . 
It consisted of two parts . In the first one there were short texts ( 24 sentences ) where some referents were introduced . The last sentence was always incomplete and contained a pronoun  . The continuation proposed by the student was supposed to show which cospecification he had chosen  . Since the evaluation of this part might be influenced by intuition  , it was committed to 3 independent evaluators , who were found to agree on 80% of the answers . The second part consisted of texts of the same kind  , but where all sentences were co , nplete . The student was asked to identify explicitly the cospecification of a pronoun introduced by the last sentence  . The results concerning relative clauses were presented in last section  . Recency rule and rules for subject ellipsis were confirmed respectively by  77% and 85% of the answers . 
The two other tests consisted of applying the rules for relative clauses to all anaphome found in current texts  , and whose antecedent or anapho , " were introduced by a relative clause . "Fhe first target ext was a novel by a famous Portuguese writer of lheend of last century  , Eqade Queiroz (19(/0) . The news of a Portuguese news agency ( Lusa ,  1993 ) provided 637k bytes of fresh ( June 93 ) raw material for the last test . The rules performed correctly in respectively 96% and 92% of the cases . 
5. CONCLUSION
We developed and implemented a mechanism\['or pronominal naphora resolution  , integrating focusing and DRT , and adjusted to Portuguese language processing . 
Modifications to other authors proposals included recovering AF-DF distinction and recency rule  , handling intrasentential naphora , cataphora , subject ellipsis , restrictive relative clauses and , in particular , 
I hose containing subjunctives.
Focusing mechanisms enabled the reduction and ordering of the set of possible antecedents for each anaphor  . Final ratification or rejection of each suggested cospecification would require the use of world knowledge and reasoning  . That was beyond the aim of this work . 
The analysis made for restrictive relative clauses should be extended to other constructions of subordination and coordination  , in order to establish more general rules . We believe that many questions raised here might be relevant o processing of other romance languages  . 

Brennan , S . , M . Friedman and C . Pollard (1987) . A centering approach to pronouns . In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of ACL , Sumford University , 
California , p . 155-162.
Carter , D .  (1987) . Interpreting anaphors in natural language texts , E . HorwoodLimitedEd . , Chichester,

Cormack , S . (1992). Focus and Discourse
Representation Theory , Ph . D . Thesis , University of

Grosz , B . and C . Sidner (1986) . Attention , intensions , and the structure of discourse . Computational
Linguistics , 12(3), p . 175-204.
Kamp , H . and U . Reyle (1993) . From discourse to lo~lic,
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Kempson , R .  (1990) . Anaphora : a unitary account . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Anaphora , O fir , 
Portugal , p . 136.
Lopes , J .  (1991) . Movement , barriers and binding formalism for logic Grammars development : parsers  , Master Course Lectures on NLP , Universidade Novadel , is boa ( manuscript ) . 
l , usa (1993) . Files containing news of Lusa news agency , liom the 41h to the 1lth June 93 . 
Mateus , M . et al (1989) . Gramdtica da Lingual ' or tugues a . Camiuho Ed . , 3rd ed . , IAsboa , Portugal . 
Pcreira , F . (198I ) . Extrapositiou Grammars . American , lournal of Computational Linguistics ,  7(4) , p . 

Queiroz , E .  (1900) . Ailustrecasa de Ramires , Livros do
Brasil Ed ., Lisbon , Portugal.
Sidncr , C .  (1979) . Towards a computational theory of definite anaphora comprehension in english discourse  , MIT Artificial Intelligence Latx ) ratory . 
Siduer , C .  (1986) . Focusing in the comprehension f definite anaphora  . In Readings in Natural Language Processing , Morgan Kaufmann Ed . , p .  363-394 . 

