MULTEXT : Multilingual Text Tools and Corpora
Nancy Ide and Jean V6ronis
LABORATOIRE PAROLEET LANGAGE
CNRS & Universit de Provence
29, Avenue Robert Schuman
13621 Aix-en-Provence Cedex1 ( France)
email : ide@fraixll . univ-aix . fr , veronis@fraixll . univ-aix . frAb stract , MULTEXT ( Multilingual Text " Fools and Corpora ) is the largest project funded in the Commission of European Communities Linguistic Research and Engineering Program  . The project will contribute to the development of generally usable software tools to manipulate and analyse text corpora and to create multilingual text corpora with structural and linguistic markup  . It will attempto establish conventions for the encoding of such corpora  , building on and contributing to the preliminary recommendations of the relevant international and European standardization iitiatives  . 
MULTEXT will also work towards establishing a set of guidelines for text software development  , which will be widely published in order to enable future development by others  . All tools and data developed within the project will be made freely and publicly available  . 
Keywords . multilingual corpora , text markup , text software , corpus annotation . 
1. Introduction
Text-oriented methods and software tools have come to be of primary interest to the NLP community  . However , existing tools for natural anguage processing ( NLP ) and machine translation ( MT ) corpus-based research are typically embedded in large  , non-adaptable systems which are fundamentally incompatible  . Little effort has been made to develop software standards  , and software reusability is virtually nonexistent  . As a result , there is a serious lack of generally usable tools to manipulate and analyze text corpora that arc widely available for research  , especially for multilingualal ) plications . 
At the same time , the availability of data is hampered by a lack of well-established standards for encoding corpora  . Although the Text Encoding Initiativ c ( TEI ) has provided guidelines for text encoding \[ Sper94\]  , they arcs of arlargely untested on real-scale data  , especially multilingual data . Further , the TEl Guidelines offer a broad range of text encoding solution serving aw ~ riety of disciplines and applications  , and are not intended to provide specific guidance for the purposes of NLP and 
MT corpus-based research.
MIJL TEXT ( Multilingual Text Tools and Corpora ) ix a recently initiated largescale project funded undertim Commission of European Communities Linguistic Research and Engineering Program  , which is intended to address these problems . The project will contribute to the development of generally usable software tools to nmnipulate and analyse text corpora and to create multilingual text corpora with structural and linguistic mark t  , p . It will attempto establish conventions for the encoding of such corpora  , building on and contributing to the preliminary recommendations of the relevant international and European standardization iitiatives  . 
MULTEXT will also work towards establishing a set of guidelines for text software development  , which will be wklely published in order to enable future development by others  . The project consortimn , consisting of eight academic and research institutions and six major European industrial partners  , is committed to make its results , namely corpus , related tools , specifications and accompanying documentation , freely and publicly available . 
2. Project Overview
At the outset of the project , the consortimn will undertake to analyse , test and extend the SGML-based recommendations of the TE lonreal-size data  , and gradually devch ) pencoding convention specifically suited to nmlti -lingual corpora and the needs of NLP and MT corpus-based researc b  . To manipulate large quantities of such texts , the partners will , in collaboration with the recently established Text Software Initiative  ( TS\[ )  , develop conventions fo , " toolco , ~struction and use tbem to build ar:mge of highly language-independent  , atomic and cxtensible software tools . 
These specifications will be the basis for thc development of two major software resources  , namely ( a ) tools for the linguistic annotation of texts ( e . g . 
segmenters , morphological analysers , part of speech disambiguators , aligners , prosody taggers and postediting tools ) , and ( b ) tools for the exploitation of annotated texts ( e . g . tools for indexing , search and retrieval , statistics ) . This software will be implemented under UNIX , while its specific properties should facilitate portability to other systems  . Moreover , it will be integrated by means of a common user interface into a text corpus manipulation system expected to provide the basic functionality needed in academic or industrial corpus research  . For the overall software design as well as the development of specific components  , MULTEXT will capitalise on the experience and , possibly , preliminary results achieved in the ALEP project . 
By using the emerging software tools , the consortium plans to produce a substantial multilingual corpus  , including parallel texts and spoken data , in six EC Dutch ) . The entire corpus will be marked for gross logical and structural features  ; a subset of the corpus will be marked and hand -validated for sentence and subsentence features  , part of speech , alignment of parallel texts , and speech prosody . All markup will have to comply to the TEI-based corpus encoding conventions established within the project  . Timcorl ) us will also serve as a tcst bed for the project ools and a resource for future tool development and evaluation  . 
An application programming iuterfime will facilitate the coupling of the progressively refined software and data components with several existing langt  , age application systems or prototypes . In particular , the industrial partner sphm to develop extraction software f l  ) r lexieal and terminological infornmtion to complement and improve their Terminology Management  , Information R . etrieval or Machine Translation systems . Some eff cwt will also be devoted to a prototypical api  ) lication for testing and comparing successive versions of a Machine 
Translation system.
3 . Background and approach 3 . 1 . Software Standard MULTEXT is strongly committed to " software reusability "  , to avoid the re-inventing of tim wheel and development of largely incompatible and non -ext cnsihle software that is characteristic of much language-analytic research in the past three decades  . Therefore , the project will establish a software standard for the development of its tools  . This will enable these tools to be universally used and extended hyothers  . 
We outline here the principles ( borrowed from\[IdeV93a\] ) nnderlying the MULTEXT approach to software design  , which enable flexibility , extendability , and reusability . 
? Principle 1: lxm guage independence
The first goal is to extend existing mctlmds to otlm r European languages  . So far , these methods have been applied almost exclusively to English  . Therefore , the methods will be adapted to produce language -independent tools  , by using an engine-based approach where all hm guage dependent materials arc provided as data  . Thus , extension of the tools to cover additional languages will in most cases involve only providing the appropriate tables and rules  . 
? Principle 2: Atomicity
Existing text analytic software often comprises large  , integrated systems that are nearly impossible to adaptor extend  . MULTEXT will produce a set of small tools ( often on the order of a few lines of code , with the absolute minimum of t'unctionality ) that researchers can use alone or combine to create larger  , more complex programs , thereby implementing a " softwarel . cgo " approach . In this way , increasingly complex program bundles can be developed without the overhead of large system design  , and with ease of modification since any program can be de-bundled into its constituent programs  , each consisting of small , easily understandable piece of code . MULTEXT will bundle its tools in a comprehensive corpus-handling system  , as welt as demonstrate heir use in several high -level applications  , thus showing different ways in which tim " Legos " can be recombined in specific applications  . 
? Princil/e3: Operatot Z~'treamp proach
MUI . ' I'EXT will adopt the operator/stream a pl ) roach to scfftware design , which has had widespread implementation and use and is generally accepted in research and industry  . In particular , it has been used increasingly in computational linguistics applications  ( see , for instance , \[ I , ibe92\]) . The operator/stream approach as served as the basis for the UNIX operating system  , which as a result provides are adymade platform for its implementation  . 
In the operator/stream approach , data flows in unidirectional " slreams " between functions  . Each of these functions is an " operator " that translbrms the data as it passes by  . Since everything is understood in terms of what goes in and what comes out  , the emphasis is on what needs to be done rather than how it is done  . "Fhis enables a focus on overall algorithms rather titan implementation details  . Component functions are independent , and at no point are compiled together in a single program  . This is a key point , since it means that each operator can be implem cnted in a different language  , developed by different people , tested independently , etc . In addition , new functions can be phlgged into the stream as necded  , and allft , nctions are completely reusable in other contexts . 
? Princil ~ le 4:\[ hrique & ttatype
Commtmication between programs will be bylneaus Of flat  , \] roman readable streams and files , apart from well-defined , encapsuhlted binary formats for cases such as speech signal  , images , or indexes . The only data type is the rel'tn'e the stving . There is some overhead in this; . Ipproilch , since conversion froul string to , s ' t y , nulnb crandback is required I ( )r numbers that are to be manipulated arithmetically  , buttim speed and storage capacities of present -day machines virtu : ally eliminate this concern  . More importantly , the use of string data only enables an easy test -modify-test cycle  , since the input and out i ) ut of any step can be examined and manii ) ulated using all-purpose tools freely awtilable on most machines  , such as text editors , search software , sorting utilities , etc . Fi , ially , colnplex data typestic programs to specific Iz mguages that implement hose types  . The use of a unique data type eliminates this dependency  . 
Af e , ' dure of lilts strategy which is of major importance is that any system can accept flat files  . Therefore , data is portable between different systems . In addition , it is lllUCheasier\[Oport software from system to system  , since tim software accepts lhesame kind of input data  . 
l : ( ) r example , a program in C is likely to work on any system with no or very minor modification  . 
589 ? Principle 5: Internal standard fi~rmats ( ISFs ) To write the compatible set of tools we describe , it is essential that all programs communicate effectively  . This demands that internal standard formats ( ISFs ) for data be developed , to serve as specifications for program development  . I is essential that these formats are public , so that any program written anywhere by anyone can use thmn  . 
ISFs , like the functions that process them , are very simple and straightforward . Many ISFs will be needed to accomodate different possible " interpretations " of the data  , and their development will demand careful consideration of text types  , their structures and properties . Therefore , ISF development should build upon the TErswork on text structures and categories and ensure compatibility with it  . Note that because ISFs represent only partially the information in an encoded text  ( that is , whatever is required for certain operations ) , they do not replace a TEI/SGML encoding of data , which represents all the information in an encoded text and can be used for interchange  . Transduction programs to import TEI-e on formant texts into one or more internal standard formats  , and vice versa , will be essential . 
3.2. Tools
All MULTEXT tools will be developed according to the principles outlined above  . The project will use only wellknown , state-of-the-art methods into ol development , in order to ensure the project's feasibility ( e . g . , \[ Chur88\] , \[Cutt92\] , [Gale9l\] , \[ Hirst 93\] , [ Hirst 91\]) . The project will use these methods to produce a set of tools that is freely available  , coherent , extensible , and language independent . The tools will be implemented under UNIX , but will be developed according to principles that will facilitate portability to other systems  . 
The high-level tools produced by the project fall in two general categories of corpus-handling fimetions that are basic across applications  ( these functions apl ) ly to monolingual texts , multilingual parallel texts , and speech ) : ? Corpus annotation tools : ? segment cr:marks sentences  , quotations , words , abbreviations , names , terms , etc . ; ? morphological nalyser : provides possible lemmas  , morpholgical features , and parts of speech ; ? part of speech disambiguator : disambiguates part of speech where alternatives xist  ; ? aligner : provides alignments of passages among parallel texts  ; ? prosody tagger : derives automatic modelling of  F0 curve and symbolic coding of intonation from the speech signal  ; ? postediting tools : assist in handvalidation of automatically annotated corpora  . 
? Corpus exploitation tools : ? indexing tools: construct indexes for fast access to data  ; ? search and retrieval tools : browsing , concordancing , retrieval of collocations , etc . , based on a given word , words , pattern , syntactic ategory , etc . ; ? statistical and quantitative tools : generate lists and statistics -- basic statistics for words  , collocates ( pattern or part of speech ) such as frequency , mutual information , etc . Also word lists , lists by syntactic ategory , etc . 
To provide support for these tools , several other general utilities will be required , such as general data manipulation tools , UNIX shell tool , etc . In addition , the tools will be integrated by means of a common user interface into a general-l  ) urpose corpus manipulation system suitable for NLP and MT research  . 
3.3. Markup Standard
One of the goals of MULTEXT is to develop standards for encoding text corpora  . 
We distinguish four levels of document markup : ? Level O  . Document-wide markup : ? bibliographic description of the document  , etc . 
? character sets and entities ? description of encoding conventions ? Level  1  . Gross structural markup : ? structural units or text  , such as volume , chapter , etc . , down to the level of paragraph ? footnotes , titles , headings , tables , figures , etc . 
, Level 2 . Markup for sub-paragraph structures : ? sentences  , quotations ? words ? abbreviations , names , dates , terms , cited words , etc . 
? Level 3 . Markup for linguistic annotation : ? nmr phological information ? syntactic information --e  . g . , part of speech ? alignment of parallel texts ? prosody Level  0 provides glohal information about the text , its content , and its encoding . Level 1 includes universal text elements down to the level c  , f paragraph , which is the smallest unit that can be identified language-independently  .   1 evel 2 explictly marks sub-paragraph structures which are usually signalled  ( sometimes ambiguously ) by typography in the text and which are language dependent  . Level 3 enriches the text with the results of some linguistic attalyses  . 
The TEI guidelines \[ Sper94\] provide the basis for MUI:FEXT corpus markup for levels  0   ( the TEI header )  , 1 and 2 as well as many elements of level 3 . However , the TEl standard will need careful examination and adaptation \ [  IdeV93b  \]:  ( 1 ) the TEI sclteme is intended to be maximally applicable to a variety of encoding purposes and applications  . Therefore it in many cases specifie several encoding options for the same phenomena  , nd provkles options and elements without the specific needs of corpus markup in mind  . 
(2) the TEl scheme is not complete ; many areas are yet to head dressed . For example , no TEI encoding scheme iF0 modelling , synlbolie coding , etc . ), exists . 
(3) the ' l'l Z . l scheme is largely untested on corpora , especially multilingual corpora . Therefore , use of tile TEI scheme for corpus eucoding will a hnost certainly require modification and extension  . For instance , TEl mechanisms for aligmnent will require exteusion and/or modification to handle lnulti -lingual text alignment and aligmnent of different levels of speech representation  ( signal , orthographictra , lscriptiou , i ~ honelnic transcription , prosody ) . 
(4 ) the TEl scheme specifically does not aiul to provide recomnlendillions for certain content -related leinents  . 
For example , while the ' tEl provk less everal means to mark POS  , it is not with intile scope of the TEl to provide a standardized set of POS category  #lanles  . 
hlstead , it provides a flexible in cehanism that can aecomodate any set of actual taguames  . Similarly , tile TEI does not provide guidelines for uames which might  , for example , be used as identifiers for texts , text categories , etc . 
MULTEXT will use tile TEl scheme as the basis for the developmeut of a " H'\]l-confornlant Corptts Em : oditlg Stylei CES  ) that is optimally suited to NI , I'research and can therefore serve its a widely accepted TEl-based style to tEur opean corpus work  . 
3.4. Corpus
Tilegoal of MUI . TEXT is not to duplicate the various large mull i -lingual data gathering initiatives by collecting raw data  . The intent of the p , oject is to provide a vahlable resource that is not provided elsewhere  , in tile form of a high quality multilingual corpus for six European languages  , annotated for basics truetllral features as well assub-l  ) aragraphs e , ~meiltalioii , POS , and alignment ill parallel texts . 
The priinary goal of tile MULTEXT corpus is to in ovide  ;  . ill example and test bed for: ( 1 ) multilingual tools ( especially cnginedmsed tools , aligunlent software , and nlulti-lingual exlr ; iction tools ) ; and ( 2 ) nlark tlp across a large variety of languages ( h / clt ldirl ~ . ; TEl text markup and the NERC panoeurolman part -of-speech tagset \[  Mona92\]  )  . 
MUI . TEXT has a secondary but in lportarl tgt ) alto provide a corF , us of value for geueralinguistic analytic purposes  , a , ld will aim to serve this goal to the extent possible without compromising or coniplicating the primary goal  . 
The corpus will aim for three parts , each comprising six languages ( English , French , Gernlan , Italian , Spanish , 
I ) utch ): (1) a comparable corpus , consisting of 2M words per language , composed of coral ) arabic types of texts fronltwo or three different domains  . Ten percent of the corpus for each language will benlark c daudh and validated ti  ) lsul ) -lmragraph segmentatiou and POS . 
(2) a parallel CO  #TJ Its , composed of fully paral I cl text , ; across the six languages and incltiding 2M words per language . Ilalf of the corpus for each hmguage will be marked and hand-villid at cd for sentence alignmeut  . Ten percent of tile corpus for each lang tiag c will be marked and hand-wilidated for sub -paragraph scglnentation illl d 

(3) a Sill all speech co #7 ~ ltS , consistiug of additiollal niarkup to hetised in conjunction wilh tile F ~ UROM-I speech database  . There is iu oveinenl towards lheintegration of NI . I ' and Slmeeh(see , for ox anlple , II . SNI \]' I') ; MUI/I'IiXT will explore the possilfilities for such iutegraiion by attenipting to harmonize tools and llleihods froill both <' u'ei is  . MUI . TEXT will pay speeiit l attention to pheil on leua ill theiutor seetion ill ' the two doulilius  , in particilh lr prosody , whose supra-segulental nattlrein vites researc \] l iuto the coinplex relatioi ~ ships it holds with nlor phology all d syntax  . 
To serve its goals , MIJIM'I'\]XT will aim to construct its CoipUS accoltlill g to the  17111owing principles : ? lJritle ip\[eI . " Cotls is tetl cyThes all iCsix languages will be represented in equalilll lot ints in all paris of tim corpus  . Simihuly , equal anlouilis of the same typos of texts will tm provided for each language  . 
? l ' rineiple 2: ?1 riely r clther than r ? 7 ) resemativeness The MULTF , XT corpus is small-scale compared to national efforts aimed at providing balanced  , representative corpora ill as it lgle language . The project does not therefore aim at representativeness or balance in constructing its corpus  . Instead , tile MUI , TEXT corpus will contain a variety of texls of different types and front different dolllail as  , generally following ( where a pllroflriate ) know I1 criteria I'r Olll corpt ls\]hl gilistics . 
" I'rim:iple 3 . " l lighquailO , oJ ' , lark up Ill I heslate of the ilrl , autoiil'llicuiarkup of segnl cntation , POS , iuld aliglllle i it is aboul 90 . .96% COH'OCi for Inglish ( and French in tile case of the tlansard )  , lu order to provide a reference corpus for ft lrth or testing of inethodologies and tools  , MI ; II . 'I't~ , XT will hand-validate a portionill'its corptlS tolllake it virtually error-free  . 
? Prineilde 4" Reuse of avaihth h , & mr
MULTEXT is not committed to the goal of collecting data  , but rather to enhancing with structural and linguistic annotation data which ulay bc available from other sources  . The imtiect the refl ) rcaims to use existing , clean dala to the exleilt possible , in order to avoid the overhead of tile acquisition process  . 
l ' ril wl'l de 5: Com , lil , lemtoStW ldwds MUI , TEXT will use , build upon , and contribute to standards for text markup , in chiding those of the Tlilas neither of these schemes have been widely tested  , the MULTEXT corpus will provide both a test bed and a basis for their evaluation and modification or extension  . 
4. Exploitation and Future Prospects
It is expected that the availability of basic multilingual tools and data will improve and extend R&D across a wide range of disciplines  , including not only the various areas of NLP ( language understanding and generation , translation , etc . ) , but also fields such as speech technology , language learning , lexicography and lexicology , literary and linguistic omputing , information retrieval , etc . By feeding the results into several commercial pplications systems/prototypes  , the project is expected to show the potential of state-of-the-art methods in corpus linguistics for improving industrially relevant language systems and services  . 
References\[ldeV93 a\]Ide,N . , Veronis , J .  (1993) . What next alter the Text Encoding Initiative ? The need for text software  . 
ACtl Newsletter , Winter 1993, 112.
\[Libe 92\] Liberman , M . , Marcus , M .  (1992) . Tutorial on Text Corpora , Association for Computational
Linguistics Annual Conference.
\[ Mona 92\] Monachini , M . , Ostling , A .  (1992) . Towards a Minimal Standard for Morphosyntactic Corpus Annotation  , Report of the Network of European
Reference Corpora , Work package 8.2.
\[Chur88\]Church , K . W .  (1988) . A stochastic parts program and noun phrase parser for unrestricted texts  . In Proceedings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  . Austin , Texas , 136143 . 
\[Cutt92\]Cutting,D . , Kupiec , J . , Pedersen , J . , Sibun , P .  (1992) . A Practical Part of Speech Tagger , Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , Trento ,  133-140 . 
\[Gale 91\]Gale , W . , Church , K . W .  (1991) . A Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora  , Proceedings of the ACL Conference , Berkeley ,  177-184 . 
\[ Hirst 93\] Hirst , D . , Espesser , R .   ( 1993 ) Automatic modelling of fundamental frequency . Travaux del'Institut de Phonetiqued'Aix ,  15 ,  71-85 . 
\[Hirst91\]Hirst,D . , Nicolas , P . , Espesser , R .   ( 199 l ) Coding the F0 of a continuous text in French : an Experimental Approach  .   12eme Congres International des Sciences Phonetiques , Aix-en-Provence ,  5 , 234-237 . 
\[IdeV93b\]Ide,N . , Vdronis , J .  (1993) . Background and context for the development of a Corpus Encoding 
Standard , EAGLES Working Paper , 30p.
\[Sper94\] Sperberg-McQueen , C . M . , Burnard , L . 
(1994 ) Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange  , Text Encoding Initiative , Chicago and
Oxford ( in press).
Appendix-Descriptive overview
MULTEXT ( Multilingual Text Tools and Corpora)

Dr . Jean Vdronis
Laboratoire Parole et Langage
CNRS & Universit de Provence 29 , Avenue Robert Schuman
F -13621 Aix-en-Provence Cedex 1 tel: +33   42   95   20   73 fax: +33   42   59   50   96 email : vcronis@fraixll . univ-aix,fr
Start DateJan . 1994
Duration 26 months
Resources 238.5 person-months
Estimated total cost 3.21 0.000 ECU
Partners Country
CNRSFR
EUROL ANG-SITEFR
INCYTAES
Digital Equipment B . V . NL
CAP debis System haus KSP DE
University of P is a ( ILC/CNR ) IT
University of Edinburgh ( HCRCfl ~ TG ) UK
ISSCOCII
Associated Partners Country
Siemens Nix dorf Informations system eAGDE
Universitaet Muenster DE
Rank Xerox Research Center I:1 ~
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona ES
Universit at Cen(ra\[tiellareelona(FBG)ES
Universiteit Utrecht NL
