AMETHODOLOGY FOR AUTOMATICTER MRECOGNITION
Sophia Ananladou
Department of Computing ~ Manchester Metropolitan University 
John Dalton Building , Chester Street , Manchester , UK , M15GD
1 INTRODUCTION
The topic of automatic term recognition ( ATR ) is of great interest especially with the growth of NLP systems  , which are passing from the development stage to the application stage  . The application of NLP technology involves customlsing systems towards specific needs  , particularly in specialise do-mains ( sublanguages ) which form the main target of the technology ~ There is thus an urgent need for high quality  , largescale collections of terminologies ( with associated linguistic information ) for use in NLP system dictionaries . 
The existence of coherently built terminologies leads to better performance for many interesting applications : translation  , technical writing ( in the mother tongue or in a foreign language )  , multilingual ( multimedial ) document production , classifying , indexing , archiving and retrieving docmnents ( monolingual and multilingual )  , extracting , reorganizing and reformulating knowledge represented in textual form  ( Iteid , U . and McNaught 1991) . 
Given the amount of specialised texts that need to be processed in efforts to discover  ( potential ) terms , keep track of the life cycle of terms , etc . , it is of interest o consider the design of ( semi ) automatic aids . A term recognition tool would be a great aid to special exicographers  . It is only a naid ~ however , if it incorporates linguistic and terminological knowledge such that it makes largely accurate proposals  . 
It is with the design of such a tool that we have been particularly concerned and we report below on various aspects with which we have had success  . We do not claim to have solved the term recognition problem  . As we shall see , there are many different kinds of term formations each of which calls for different techniques and different knowledge : our work has concentrated on a subset of these  . 
2 TERMS
The main characteristic of terms is that they are monoreferential to a very great degree : a term typically refers to a specific concept in a particular subject field  . Subject field knowledge is conveyed via naturally occurring sublanguages which demonstrater strictions on the lexical  , syntactic and semantic levels . Each sublanguage has its own set of concepts and a terminologist will structure these into a system organised according to relationships holding between concepts  ( generic , partitive , causal , etc . ) . Terms are therefore the linguistic realisation of the concepts of special communication and are organised into systems of terms which ideally reflect the associated conceptual system  . 
Terms differ from general language words primarily by their nature of reference  . Nevertheless , it is not always an easy task to divide terms from words  . The terminologist is often faced with cases where synonymy  , homonymy or polysemy could be said to be playing a role  . Also , the same wordform can refer to different concepts in different sublanguages  , and be used differently in general language . 
In elaborating a terminology , we typically employ texts and a set of tools ( e . g . KWIC , inverse KWIC , etc . ) which will facilitate the tasks of identifying which words  , phrases , acronyms , etc . , of the corpus are functioning as terms with respect othe conceptual system of the subject field and of relating them appropriately via relationships and definitions  . 
One important aspect in terminology is the creation of new terms  ( term formation ) in response to a new concept-this may be by , say , an engineer ( monolingually ) or a translator ( where a target equivalent is missing )  . 
Term formation follows certain guidelines ( procedures ) which vary in sophistication depending on the subject domain  . Some domain show evidence of mandatory adherence to strict term formation  . Others may permit wide choice within recognized limits  . 
We view term formation in our research from an analytical viewpoint  , i . e . we investigate the linguistic form of known terms in order to identify productive means of forming terms  , which is necessary in order to be able to recognize new terms ~  3 A MET HODO LOGY FOR AUTO-
MATICTER MRECOGNITION
We investigated the relevance of other disciplines to automatic term recognition  , such as Information Science-especially techniques of automatic indexing  . We concluded that nonlinguistic based techniques ( statisticalnd probability based ones )  , while ~034 providing gross means of characterizing texts and measuring the beilaviour and content-bearing potential of words  , are not refined enough for our purposes . 
In Terminology we are interested as much in wordforms occurring with high frequency as in rare ones or those of the middle frequencies  . We are interested in all units that may be acting as terms in a collection of texts  . I Iowever , we do not deny the usefll l role of such techniques  . They have their place in that they may usefully complement oher techniques  . 
We chose to concentrate on potential contributions of Linguistics  , especially from lexical morphology , and were interested in developing methodologies for term recognition that apply theoretically motivated ideas about term formation  . Theoretical Linguistics deals exclusively with general language word structure  . We designed an integrated model of word and term structure based on the results of an analysis of Immunology terms in the sublanguage of Medicine  ( for English ) and on models to he found in the literature on general language  ( Se\]kirk , 1982; Mohanan ,  1986) . 
Medical terminology relies heavily on Greek ( mainly ) and Latinneo classical elements for the creation of terms such as ' erythroeyte ' and ' angioneu -rotie '  . In the literature of theoretical Linguistics there are no satisfactory accounts of the neoclassical vocabulary and no formal motivated classification of neoclassical wordforms exists  . In Terminology , most accounts of term structure remain at an unformalised descriptive level and this is particularly true for discussions of neoclassical vocabularies  . 
The reason for this overallack of formal description of neoclassical elements appears to be due to their occupying a peripheral or ambiguous place in most analyses of word and term formation in English  . We found this to be unsatisfactory for the following reason : it is anomalous to conceive of English word formation as being somehow separated from term formation  , especially as terms constitute the majority of English words  . Therefore , we strove to set up an integrated model of word and term structure which would  , importantly , account adequately for the neoclassical component . 
The word structure of English can be said to comprise  3 category types , i . e . Word , Root and Affix ( Selkirk , 1982) 1 However , there is great confusion in the literature as to the morphological status of Greek and Latin neoclassical forms  , i . e . whether they are roots , affixes or even both . Models which describe them as affixes allow the generation of forms such as * af-ffx+afix  . Many models , including the unformalised ones of conventional dictionaries  , charaeterise neoclassical elements vaguely as ' combining elements '  ,   1Selkirk is cited here only as a reference point : we shal l develop our own model as shall be seen  . 
which suggest some kind of extra-morphologic M status  ( or waste baskets at us )  . Such forms thus apparently defy attempts to provide an integrated account in terms of the accepted morphological categories  . 
In our approach , we introduced a fourth category type comb , to help handle the neoclassical word-stock of English  . This does not , in itself , resolve the problem of how to ( sub ) classify neoclassical elements : we will address this aspect below in detail  . 
Firstly , though , we discuss our concomitant adoption of a level ordered approach to the morphological analysis of English words and terms  . 
Level ordering places strong constraints on the cooccurrence or order of classes of affix and hence is a powerful mechanism in helping to identify whether a word form is wellformed or not  , whether a wordform may be segmented in a particular way or not  , etc . 
Numerous models incorporating level ordering have been proposed in morphology and morphophonology  . 
There is debate on how many levels should be iden -tiffed and what the relationships between levels are  . 
Level ordering has its critics also . We do not enter into these bates here , however we have found , in experiments over the years , that level ordering is of great use in a computational morphology environment  , as has been recently also suggested by ( Sproat , 1992) who , like us , has also found that there is again in grouping rules according to Level  . 
There is nevertheless broad agreement that , in English , Level 1 and Level 2 are affixational levels dealing with latinate morphology  ( Class I affixation ) and native morphology ( Class II affixation )  , respectively . Level 1 feeds Level 2 , therefore native affixation mus the attached outside latinate morphology  . 
There is less agreement about the relationship between Class II affixation and native compounding and whether one needs to identify a separate native compounding level  . For various reasons we do not have space to go into here  , we choose to recognize a distinct native compounding Level  3  . Moreover , we importantly recognize a Level 0 , which is reserved for nonnative ( i . e . neoclassical ) compounding . In other words , compounding purely involving neoclassical elements must be completed before affixation takes place  . 
Thus , the four distinct levels of our model are : 1 . Nonnative compounding ( neoclassical compounding )  2 . Class I affixation 3 . Class II affixation 4 . Native compounding Each level has two characteristics : it is cyclic and optional  . Cyclicity accounts for recursive structures , i . e . we might find forms such as the following : where Level  1 rules apply twice before Level 2 ones . 
To apply our model , we used the Edinburgh Cambridge Morphological Analyser and Dictionary System  ( Ritchie , et al 1992) , a component of the lgatu-ral Language Toolkit developed for the UK Alvey IT Programme  . This offers a Koskeniemmi-type analyser ( here restricted to handling morphographemicpt , enomena ) and a general purpose unification based analyser which allows the morphologist to express her knowledge via feature bundles of attribute-value pairs in a context-flee grammar framework  . 
Our model is instantiated in our computational wordform grammar as follows  . The analysistrategy used by the wordform grammar parser is that of a bottom up chart parser  . Each rule in our grammar is marked for level or levels  . Lexical entries are also marked for level . Thus , a Class I suffix like ' ous ' as in ' glorious ' is marked for Level  1  . Monomorphemic non-affix native lexical entries are also marked by default for Level  1  . Thus , if we have the wordform ' glorious ' , then , in a computational environment , string segmentation , morphographemic rule application and dictionary lookup will yield : glory  ( (cat noun ) (level l . ) ) and ous ( ( cat suffix ) (leve \] 1 ) ) These two representations are added to the data structure  ( a chart )  . Rules with Level 1 as their domain may now apply , as the basic condition for their activation is present in the chart  . They will match with these representations and yield : glory + ous  ( ( cat adjective ) (level 1 ) ) which is still a Level 1 object . This is added to the chart and no further rules apply  . This representation may now be generated as a word of English  . As Levels are optional , in this case the rules associated with higher Levels do not apply  . If we take an nn-derived monomorphemie native wordform  , this can be seen conceptually as passing through Levels  13  , with vacuous rule application . All such wordforms are marked as Level 1 in the dictionary , thus will not be considered , as is correct , by Level 0 rules . The fact that an object is marked for some Level does not block it at that Level : it merely indicates that this is the first Level at which rules may apply-recall that we do not know  , in bottom-up analysis , wbetbere . g . we are dealing with an underived form , until we have finished the analysis , thus we must allow for underived forms to potentially combine with affixes or participate in compounding  . 
Besides the use of four levels in our morphological analysis  , we additionally introduced a diacritic feature which explicitly marks degrees of boundness for neoclassical roots  . Analysis of a corpus of Im-munology texts , by various ( semi-)automatic methods , produced classifications of neoclassical elements  2I ~II correspond to Class I afflxation and Class II affixation  , respectively . 
into roots and affixes . Neoclassical roots make up our new category comb and display three degrees of boundness : totally free  ( e . g . cyst ), partially bound ( e . g . myel-or-myel ) and totally bound ( e . g . ten ) a , Totally bound forms cannot appear on their own and cannot appear in compound final root position without being suffixed  . Partially bound forms cannot appear on their own , but can stand in compound final root position without suffixation  . Totally freeforms can appear in any position , suffixed or not , and can stand on their own . All neoclassical roots are marked in the dictionary with level information level  0 and a value for the boundness feature 4  . Those neoclassi-cal elements that we have classed as affixes a redealt with largely at Level  1~ In addition to level ordering and boundness information  , other characteristics of our implementation are the use of morphosyntactic head  , feature value percolation and rela ~ ivised head ( DiSciullo and Williams ,  1987) . The important issue for us was to determine whether a wordform is a general anguage word or a potential tenn  . In our system , we demon-strafed how this could be achieved for affixed forms  , neoclassical compounds and certain types of native compound  . We labelled certain suffixes as typically term forming suffixes on the basis of a sublanguage corpus analysis  , attaching the feature value ( word type term ) to their dictionary entry ( each affix has its own lexical entry )  . We can then ensure that a suffix with this feature percolates its value to the mother node  . We used only two word type values in our system : term and word  . Besides employing the notions of head and per co lation from Lexicalist Morphology  , we also used the notion of relativized head . 
This refinement of the notion of head helped us percolate the relevant information in cases where the morpheme bearing t be label  ( word type term ) was not in syntactic head position according to the Right-band Itead Rule  . 
Our word fonngrammar rules generate the following word and term forms involving sufllxation  ( note : prefixation is similar to suffixation thus is not shown  ) : term -4 word+term_suffix term--~term--term_suffix word  -4 word--word suffix term . -* term -- word_suffix , Compounding operates in a similar fashion : term - ~ term + word term -+ term-I-term term -- ~ word-F term word-~word-F word  . 
Our use of a unification based word grammar 3 We could have worked with three types of comb , however we prefer our current solution as it appears more flexible and expressive to us  . 
4 We only use two wlues for bound , however bonndnessi interpreted by a combination of bound and level values to give us our  3way distinction . 
1 036 then allowed features associated with known terminological elements to be attached to overall wordforms  , thus characterising them as potential terms for later assessment by the terminologist  . The notion of ~ ermino Iogical head of a wordform is important in this respect : this refers to the element of a complex wordform which confers termhood on the whole word form  , which may not be the same as the morphosyntactic head  . 
As yet , we are only capable of determining terminological status for an ml known word  , or wordform containing an unknown morpheme , if it contains a known terminologic aleement ( revealed by prior colpus analysis and coded appropriately intile dictionary  )  . For known morphemes there is no problem . 
By using notions of Level Ordering , we can fltr ther-more impose strong constraints on the form a word  ( or term ) may take . Thus , we can filter and reject as nonwords or nonterms wordforms where all analysis without Level Ordering might postulate a valid word fonn of English  . 
We provide an an Mysis of a potential term in the following  . 
Pmalre presentation leukaemia analysis : 1 ( ( ( bound - ) compound - )   ( level 1 )   ( word type term )   ( category noun ) ) \]" This is the final representation which postulates that the word ' leukaemia ' is a noun  , term , Level 1 , noncompound lexical unit . 

Trule name ( ( ( compound - )   ( word type term )   ( bound - )   ( level 0 )   ( category comb ) ) representation of lexical entry a data
ENTRY ( leuk ( ( category conrb )   ( level O )   ( bound - )   ( wor & ypeterm )   ( compound - ) )  ) 1 lexical entry a ( ( ( word type term )   ( hound- )   ( tieq- )   ( level l )   ( makes noun )   ( suffixes comb )   ( category suffix ) ) I representation of lexical entry b data
ENTRY ( qaemia ( ( category suillx )   ( suffixes ( noun verb adjective adverb comb ) ) ( tie I )   ( bo , md- )   ( level 1 )   ( word type term )   ( makes noun ) )  ) ) ) \[ lexieal entry b
Relevant rule ( L0-to-Ll . -by-n-or-adj-suffixing ( ( category monn-or-adj )   ( word type term )   ( level 1 )   ( compound - )   ( bound 4 ) q " ( ( category n-v-adj-~dv-comh ) (lovel O ) (bound '9 )  , (( category . ~ umx ) (sumxes _n-v-adj-adv-comb ) (makes nonn-or-adj )   ( level l ) ) ) We have simplified tl , is example somewhat \ ~ rexposition : in tile Ed Cam system  , a dictionary end . 
try contains fields other than the two shown here ( the orthographic form followed by associated morphosyntactic information  )  . Underline denotes a feature variahle , whose name indicates the set of possible values taken by the feature  . All Level 0 object , s1 , aveterminological status in our corpus thus we may safely mark word type directly on the mother  . The feature suffixes is used as a subcategorisation frame whose value must unify with that of the affixed object  . The feature makes indicates what category the affix turns the object it attaches to into  . Tlm value of this feature is the one that is percolated  , via uniG cation of variable values , to the mother node , to give it its category specification . Subcategorisation admakes information is stored in the morphosyntaxt leld of an afflx's lexical entry  . Our suffixing rules are basic Mly all of this form with variants to take care of suffixation at different Levels  . There are several rules that take care of mapping between Levels  0 and I as in the above example . With prefixes , which are typically not category changing , we have a three-way unification . The use of the eompomM feature is used at two levels  , the neoclassical level and the native level . Compounds are assigned one syntactic parse only , a left branching one , to avoid problems with overgeneration ~ A toplevel filter takes care of allowing only word ~forms that are potential terms to be passed out as re-suits :  ( ( category _any-cat ) (bound - )   ( level_1-2-o>3 )   ( word type term ) ) . Note that no Level 0 objects can he so output a . nd that each object must be unbound , have a major lexical category ( not suffix , prefix or comb ) and t)e of word type term . 
4 CONCLUI ) ING REMARKS
We lave implemented a computational morphological grammar and lexicon that instanl  ; i a testile above mentioned 4 level ordered morphology of English cal ) at 31e of handling both neoclassica . 1 con > pmmding and other complex and simple wordforms matheoretic Mlys~tis factory manner  , and fllrther-more demonstrating that application of theoretic Mlymotivated lingnistic knowledge nhances term recognition  . The identification of this new level is an orig -in M contribution to morphological theory and  , for the first time , allows neoclassical elements to be integrated in a theoretically satisfactory and elegant way in a model of term and word structure  . 
Term formation is only one of tile factors involved in term recognition  . Our research has focussed on ' ~ It should he noticed that  ( compound t ) is serving two purposes in this analysis : a ) as a strategic value I : opr event multiple syntactic analyses of a compound and b  ) to mark an object , as a compounded form . Several features of our grammar are inspired by the simple grammar provided with the EdCam system  , however well ave substantially altered and added to ghi-~featn reset and rule set  . 
1 037 morphosyntactie aspects of term formation in so far as these appear to be more tractable than others  , which we have also identified in the course of our research  . 
Our work has focussed recently on the development of tools for sublanguage linguistic analysis to aid the process of word classification : e  . g . to effect inversion of KWIC indexes and to apply techniques of gradual approximation to discover semantic ollo-cations between words  ( Sekine et . al , 1992a , 1992b ) . 
Future work will further investigate the application of such tools to automatic term recognition and will examine how techniques and research results from the various fields given above in section  3 can be applied to other aspects of term formation and thus term recognition  . 
5 REFERENCES
DiSciullo , A . M . , and Williams , E . (1987) . On the Definition of Word . Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 14,
The MIT Press , Cambridge , Ma.
Heid , U . , and McNaught , J .  (1991) .   EUROTRA-7 Study : Feasibility and Project Definition Study on the Reusability of Lexical and Terminological Resources in Computerised Applications  . Final Report . 
Submitted to DGXIII-B , CEC , Luxembourg.
Mohanan , K.P ., (1986). The Theory of Lexical
Phonology . Reidel , Dordrecht.
Ritchie , G . D . , Russell , G . J . , Black , A . W . and Pulman , S . G .  (1992) . Computational Morphology . The
MIT Press , Cambridge , Ma.
Sekine , S . , Carroll , J . J . , Ananiadou , S . , and Tsujii , J .   ( 1992a ) Automatic Learning for Semantic Collocation . Proceedings of Third Conference on Applied
NLP , Trento , Italy , pp . 104-110.
Sekine S . , Ananiadou , S . , Carroll , J . J . and Tsujii , J . 
(1992b ) . Linguistic Knowledge Generator . Proceedings of l Sth Coling , vol . If , pp . 560-566 . 
Selkirk , E . , (1982) . The Syntax of Words . Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 7, MIT Press . Ca . Mass . 
Sproat , R ., (1992). Morphology and Computation.
The MIT Press , Cambridge , Ma.

