WORDSENSE AMBIGUATION : CLUSTERING RELATEDSENSES
William B . Dolan
Microsoft Research
bill dol@microsoft.corn

This paper describes a heuristic approach to automatically identifying which senses of a machine-readable dictionary  ( MRD ) head word are semantically related versus those which correspond to fundamentally different senses of the word  . The inclusion of this information in a lexical database profoundly alters the nature of sense disambiguation : the appropriate " sense " of a polysemous word may now correspond to some set of related senses  . Our technique offers benefits both for online semantic processing and for the challenging task of mapping word senses across multiple MRDs in creating a merged lexical database  . 
1. Introduction
The problem of word sense disambiguation is one which has received increased attention in recent work on Natural Language Processing  ( NLP ) and hfformation Retrieval ( IR )  . Given an occurrence of a polysemous word in running text  , the task as it is generally formulated involves examining a set of senses  , defined by a MRD or hand-constructed lexicon , and examining contextual cues to discover which of these is the intended one  . This paper considers a problem with the standard approach to handling polysemy  , arguing that in many cases this kind of " forced -choice " approach to disambiguation leads to arbitrary decisions which have negative consequences for NLP systems  . In particular , we show that a great deal of potentially useful information about a word's meaning may be missed if the task involves isolating a single " correct " sense  . 
We describe an approach to the construction of an MRD-derived lexical database that helps over come some of these difficulties  . 
We begin by reviewing two difficulties with this approach  , then go onto suggest our approach to solving these difficulties in creating a large MRD -derived lexical database  . Our method might be termed " ambiguation " , because it involves blurring the boundaries between closely related word senses  . 
Alter describing the algorithm which accomplishes this task  , we go on to briefly discuss its results . 
Finally , we describe the implications of this work has for the task of merging multiple  . 
The arbitrm ' in ess of sense divisions
The division of word meanings into distinct dictionary senses and entries is frequently arbitrary  ( Atkins and Levin , 1988; Atkins ,  1991) , as a comparison of any two dictionaries quickly makes clear  . For example , consider the verb " mo(u ) lt " , whose single sense in the American Heritage Dictionary  , Third Edition ( AHD3 ) corresponds to two senses in Longman's Dictionary of 
Contemporary English ( LDOCE):2
AHD3 ! y:part:ora ! lofa coator ...
covering ; sucli : as feathers ; cuticle or skin '
LDOCE ( 1 )  " ( of a biid ) to ! 0 se or thro TM off ( tleat berS ) at these as oii when new feathers grow ' . i (2) of an anima ! ; eS plad 6g or cat ) to lose or throw0 ff ( hair or fur ) The arbitrary nature of such divisions is componnded by the fact that dictionaries typically provide no information about how the different senses of a polysemous head word might be related  . 
Examination of dictionary entries shows that these interrelationships are ol  ) en highly complex , encompassing senses which differ only in some slight shade of meaning  , those which are historically but not synchronically related  , those which are linked through some more or less opaque process of metaphor or metonymy  , and finally , those which appear to be completely unrelated . 
A typical case is the entry liar the noun " crank  "  , which includes one " apparatus " sense ( 1 ) and two " person " senses ( 2 ) and ( 3 )  . Nothing in this entry indicates that ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) are more closely related to one another than either is to  ( 1 )  . 
I 1 would like to extend my thanks to Robert Dale and Lisa Braden-ltarder  , as well as then a embers of the Microsoft NLP group : George Heidorn  , Karen Jensen , Joseph Pentheroudakis , Diana Peterson , Steve Richardson , and Lucy Vanderwende . 
2All examples are fi'omLDOCE , except as noted.
712  ( ! ) " an apparatusfl ~ rc ranging movement in a straight line into circular n loven mnt  . . . "(2,)"a person with . ,stnmge , odd , or peculiar ideas " ( 3 ) " a nasty bad 4 empered person , Usi ! ! gMRI ) s for Se+nsel ) is at n biguation Atkins ( 1991 ) argues that dictionary-derived lexical databases will be capable of supporting high-quality NI+P only if they contain highly detailed taxonomic description sol'the interrelationships among word senses  . The serchttionships are often systematic ( see Atkins ,  1991) , and it is possible to imagine strategies to t autonmtically or at least semi-iUltomatically identi  ( ying them . One such proposal is due to Chodorow (199t)) , who notes 10 recnrring types of inter-sense relationships in Webster's  7th   , in chlding PROCESS/RESUI+T , FOOI)/PI+ANT , and CONTAINEP , /VOI+UME , and suggests that seine instances of these relationships might be autolnatically identified  . Ideally , such strategy mighl allow the autolnated construction of lexical databases which explicitly characterize how individual senses of a head word are rehttcd  , with the seil+terr clationships described by a fixed  , general set of semantic is ssociations which hold between words throughout the lexicon  . 
In practice , however , attempts It ) antomatically identil ? systematic polysemy in MRDs will capture only as ln all subset of the clsses in which word senses overlap semantically  . ( ) f len , distinctions among a word's senses are so fine or so idiosyncratic that they silnply ca ! mot bc characterized in a general way  . For instance , while the two LI ) OCF , senses of " moult " arc closely related , the film distinction they reflect between " bird " lind " animal " behavior is not one which recurs systematically thronghont the English lexicon  . 
In short , the task of identil + ying and at laching a mealfing full a bel to each of tim links alnong related words senses in a largo lexical database is a daunting one  , and one that will ultinultely require it great deal of hand-coding  , l ) erhap slot these tease l/S , we know of no large scale attempts to autolnatically create labeled links amongserlses of polysemous words  . 
Moreover , it is not clear that is ttaching aln can il ~ gful label Io the rehstions tfil ~ between two semantically rclated senses of a word will necessarily aid in perforlning NI+P tasks  . Krovetz and Croft ( 1992 ) snggest jnst the opposile , claim il ~ g that in lnany cases , dictionary elltries for polyselnons words encode film-grain semantic distinctions that arc unlikely to be of practical valn c for specific is pl  ) tications + Our expcrience suggests as ilnilar conclusion  . Consider , for instance , tile following pair of sense slortile tloun " stalk ":  ( 1 ) " them , ,ain upright part of a plant ( not a tree )" .   ( Ex : a beans taik )   ( 2 ) ' along narrow part of a plant suppor , tingone or \[ inore leaves , fruit S , or flowers ; stem The differences between these two senses are subtle enough that for many tasks  , including sense disambiguationi running text , the two are likely to be indistinguishable from one another  . In a sentence like " Tiles talks remained in the farmer's field long after summer "  , lor instance , the choice of some particular sense of " stalk " as the " correct " one will be essentially arbitrary  . 
S~nsc\] ) jsambkguatiQ!~ve!'susl!fformationlmssSense disambiguation algorithms arc l ~ equently faced with mnltiple " conect " choices  , a siluation which increases their odds of choosing a reasonable sense  , hut which also has bidden negative consequences for selnanlic processing  . First of all , the task of discrimilmting between two or more extremely similar senses can waste processing resonrces while providing no obvious benefit  . 
t lowever , there are more problematic effects nf combining a lexicon which makes unnecessarily fine distinctions between word senses with a disambignation algorithm which sets up the iSltiI ' icial task of choosing a single " correct " sense Ibra word  . 
The probleln is that this strategy means thal the in nonnt of senlantic inflmnation retrieved los ' a word will always beliln ited to just that which is available in some individual sense  , and valuable background inlormation about a word 's meaningnlay be ignored  . 
In the cltse of " stalk " , for instance , choosing the first sense will mean losing the fitct that " s talks " are " steins "  , that theylue " mmow " , lind that they " support leaves , fruits , or flowers " . Choosing the second sense , on the other band , will mean losing tim fact that stalks arc upright  , that one example of as talk is a " beans talk " , and that the main up right part of a " tree " cannot be called a " stalk "  . 
lhunan dictionary users never encounter this proble in  . The reason is that instead of treating the entry tota word like " stalk " its apailel ' entirely discl'ele senses  , a hulnan looking this word np wouM typically arrive at nlore abstract notion of its meaning  , one which encompasses in fol+l natiol ~ flom both senses  , llow call were fommlate tile problemot : sense disaln bigualion its a computational context so that Selnantic processing can do a better job of nlinficking the hunlan user ? Our solution involves encoding in our  13  ) OCE-derived Icxical database in forlnatiol ~ is bout how a word's senses overlap semantically  . 
2 . Mentifying Semantically Similar Senses The relna huler of tile paper describes a heuristic-based algnrithln which antomatically determines which senses of a given IJ  ) OCE head word are to represent fundamentally different senses of the word  . While no attempt is made to explicitly ident if ? the nature of these links  , our program has the advantage of generality : no hand-coding is required  , and the techniques we describe can thus be applied  ( with some modification ) to online dictionaries other than LDOCE . This work has an important effect on the formulation of the sense disambiguation task : by encodiug information of this kind in on rLDOCE -derived lexical database  , we can now permit the sense disambiguation component of our system to return a merged representation of the semantic information contained in multiple senses of a word like " stalk "  . Making available more background information about a word's meaning increases the likelihood of correctly interpreting sentences which contain this word  . 
Our method involves pertbrming an exhaustive set of pairwise comparisons of the different senses of a polysemons word with one another  , with the aim of discovering which pairs show a higher degree of semantic similarity  . Comparisons are not limited by part of speech ; for example , noun and verb senses are compared to one another . A variety of types ( ff in Rnmation about a sense's meaning are exploited by this comparison step  , including : ? LDOCE Syntactic Subcategorization Codes  , , LI ) OCE Box codes The program uses a taxonomic lassification of these codes based on Bruce and Guthrie  ( 1992 ) to allow partial matches between senses with nonidentical but related Box codes  . In addition , certain Box codes pecifications ( e . g . , Iplant \] ) match against sets of keywords in definition strings  ( e . g . , plant , soil . 
? LDOCE Domain Codes
A taxonomi classification of the 124 Domain codes like that in Slator ( 1988 ) is used to identify cases in which two senses have similar but nonidentical codes  . As with the Box codes , certain Domain specifications ( e . g . , BB , " baseball "\] ) match against sets of keywords in definition strings  ( e . g . , baseball , ball , sports) . 
? Features Abstracted from LDOCE Definitious : A number of binary features  , inch , ding\[locative\]and\[human\]have been automatically assigned to LDOCE senses  , based on syntactic and lexical properties of their definitions  . Matches between these features increase the likelihood that two senses are semantically related  . 
? Semantic Relations
The most important source of evidence about the interrelationships among senses has been automatically derived fi'omLDOCE definition sentences  . The program consults a lexical database which contains approximately  150  , 000 semantic associations between word senses , the result of autonmtically parsing the definition text of each noun and verb sense in LDOCE and then applying a set of heuristic rules which antomatically attempto identify any systematic semantic relationships holding between a head word and the  ( baseforms of ) words used to define it ( Jensen & Binot ,  1987;
Montemagni and Vanderwende , 1992).
Approximately 25 types of semantic relations are currently identified  , including Hypernym ( genusterm ) , Location , Manner , Purpose , ttas Part , Typical Subject , and Possessor . Finally , each of . 
these links is automatically sense-disambiguated.
The resulting associations are modeled as labeled edges in a directed cyclic graph whose nodes correspond to individual word senses  ( Dolan et al 1993 ; Pentheroudakis and Vanderwende ,  1993) . 
Matching two senses involves comparing anyw dues which have been identified for each of the semantic relation types  . One of the most important comparisons is of Hypernyms  , which have been identified l br the wtst majority of noun and verb senses  . An exact Hypernym match generally signals a close semantic relationship between two senses  , as in the following senses of the noun " cat ": (  !  ) with S0 f ( fur and sharp teeih and \] claws ( naiis )  , 0 ftenkept as a pet , i " :\[ rel!t!ed to this , \[: suChas:theli0nor:tiger ,   .   . \] Comparisons are not limited to Hypernyms , of course : in comparing two senses , the program attempts to identify shared values to teach of the different semantic attributes present in a word's lexical representation  . For instance , in each of the following verb senses of " crawl " , the word " slowly " has been automatically identified as the value of a 
Manner attribute.
( I ) " to mgves ! o Wly with e body c!0se   t0 tlie\[groundorfloor 0r   0n tlieh and s and k nee S " I ( 2 ) " tOg Overy Siowly " I Each time an identical value is found for a given semantic attribute  , the algorithm increments the correlation score for that pair of senses  . If no exact match is found , the program checks whether the values for this attribute in the two senses have a hypemymor hyponym in common  . The following senses of the noun " insect " , lbrexample , are linked through the Ilypernyms " creature " . ' md"animal ": ( 1 ) " a small Creature with no bones and : a hard outer covering  . . . " \[  ( 2 ) " avery S in all animal that creeps along the\[ groundl such as a spider or worm "\[ According to the network implicit in LDOCE  , " creat m'e " is a hyponym of " animal " , while " animal " is a hyponym of " creature " . ( For discussion of this
Calzolari , 1977?)
In addition to such straightlorward comparisons , a number of " scrambled " coln parisons are attempted  . 
For instance , any value for the lngredient Of attribute is automatically compared to tile I typernym w flue  ( s ) lk ) reach other senses . This comparison reflect stile fact that maBy nouns are both then alne for a substance and to r something which is made li'om that substance  . An exanrple of this is the noun " coffee ": in one sense  , " coffee " is hlgredientOf of a " drink " , while in another sense it has been klentified as a Hypernym of the noun " drink "  . 
( !  ) ' a brown p0wder made by crushing coffee beans , ~\] used foim ak ! gdrmks:\] ( 2 )  !' ( a cupful of ) a hotbr0wn drittkmade , by adding \]\ [ hotwateram !/ or , milk to this powder '\[3 . DiscAIssion and Ewthtation The sense clustering progral n was run overtile set of  33  , 0 (10 single word noun defintions and 12 , 000 single word verb definitions in I , DOCE (45 , 000 total ) in a process that took approximately 20 hours on a 486/50 I ' C . Given a set of senses to tapoly semous word such as " crank "  , tile result of the exhaustive pairwise comparisons performed by the program is a  ( synnnetrical ) matrix of correlation scores : ~~ II~0v ( ! b ) zd . 2,, 3v(1a ; ~"-~( lb ) IV 5" ~ . .  .   .   .   . 
~ I\]4135..
.3/3_z2
Since our conlparison are heuristic in nature , the relative rankings of the pairwise comparisons for a polysemous word's senses are the relevant measnre of semantic similarity  , rather than any absolute threshold . In the case of " crank " ,   ( 2 1ustel'ing has correctly indicated a high correlation between the tWO " hulnail " senses of the II  ( )l . in " ci'ank " , antia high correlation between the two verbal subsenses and the " apparatus " noun sense  . Mo , e over , tire two " hnman " noun senses are not semantically correlated with any oftile three " apparattls " enses  . 
Negative scores are also common , reflecting certain kinds of incompatibilities between senses  ( e . g . , one sense is \[+ animate \] while the other is \ [- animate \]  )  . As a rule of thumb , however , it is much easier to identify commonalties between senses than to identify definite mismatches  . 
Zero Derivation
One of the most useful products of clustering is the identification of many cases of zero-derived norm/verb pairs  . For instance , tile comparison of tile various senses of the word " cook " shows the verb sense " to prepare  ( to ed ) for eating . . . " to be highly correlated with the noun sense " a person who prepares and cooks a ~ od "  . This kind of cross . -classification , which dictionaries generally fail to provk te , has interesting implications to tnormalizing tilt semantics of superficially very different sentences  . For example , a concept which is expressed verbally in one sentence can now be related to the same general concept expressed nominally in an of lmr  , even if LDOCE does not explicitly link the definitions ff  ) r the two parts of speech .   ( Pentheroudakis & Vanderwende ( 1993 ) describe a general approach to identifying semanlic links among l nor phologically-rehited words  . )

Interestingly , the tact that many conventional metaphors tire lexicalized in diclionary definitions can lead to difficulties with our strategy of comt  , aring different definitions to one another .   3 Consider the l bllowing senses of the noun " nmuth  ":   ( i ) " theo Pening on the face through which an 1 an imalor hm nan being may take food:: . "/"" r(2) an opemng , entrance , or way out . . . . . . ( Ex :" " mouttt of a cave ") , In considering these two senses , Clustering returned a correlation score ? ff 26 , snggesting a reasonably close semantic relationship between them  . l~:mmone perspective this is simply wrong : a lnunan or an ilnal " month " is fundamentally different from a cave " mouth "  , and we wotfld like our MRD-derived lexicon to indicatc this fact  . Once the obvious metaphoricals sociation between these two senses of " mouth " is noted  , however , the reason fortile clustering program's result becomes clear : both senses are defined as kinds of " npenings "  . The caselor treating the two senses as semantically similar is strengthened by other evidence : one sense of " entrance "  ( which is the tly pernym of the second sense ) has " opening " as its own Hypernym : " a gate , door , or other opening by which one enters " . 
Such metaphorical associations between word senses add a considerable degree of complexity to disambiguation and other kinds of reasoning processes that operate by identifying semantic relationships between different words  . More work aimed at identifying tire systematic natnre of such  3 This same problem crops up in any task which involves comparing different words/senses  , including disambiguation frunning text ? confusions of the kind described above can be automatically resolved  . 
4. Conclusions and Future Work
Interestingly , the machinery used to identify common semantic threads among a polysemous word's senses was originally constructed with another purpose in mind--namely  , disambiguating LDOCE genus terms . As it turned out , exactly the same set of tests used to compare a word sense to the set of possible senses of its Hypernym proved use fid in comparing the different senses of a single word  . 
While the current instantiation of the Clustering program relies partially on information which is idiosyncratic to LDOCE  ( e . g . , Domain codes ) , most of the information it uses for inter-sense comparisons has been extracted from the text of their definitions  . 
For this reason , the techniques we have described here are can be readily applied to other MRDs  . 
In addition , we plan to experiment with augmenting the results of out'sense clustering with statistics derived from running a sense disambiguation program over a large fiee-text corpus  . In particular , we are interested in discovering whether the " hard cases " encountered by this sense disambiguation program  ( i . e . , those cases in which the program consistently has difficulty in choosing among two or more competing senses  ) correlate with cases of significant semantic overlap among senses  , if this hypothesis iborne out , then information about which senses are difficult to distinguish inflee text can be used to help uses tablish the taxonomic relationships among the different senses of a polysemous word  . 
Finally , the work we have described here has important implications for the task of merging multiple MRDs into a single lexical database  . This task is greatly complicated by arbitrary sense divisions encountered in different dictionaries  ( see Atkins and Levin , 1988; Byrd ,  1989) . Consider the verb " mo ( u ) lt " again : since the single AHD3 sense for this word subsumes both LDOCE senses , no obvious mapping strategy is available . Should the AHD3 sense be mapped into just one of the LDOCE senses ? Each of them ? Or should the  AHD3 sense be left separate , resulting in a merged lexical eutry with three separate entries ? As more sources of in for  , nation about word meanings arc folded in , this last strategy can only increase the complexity of semantic processing  , since it will become more and more difficult to detern rine which of an ever-larger set of semantically-related senses is the appropriate one in a given context  , Clustering offers a simple way to begin to approach this problem  . By pooling and clustering senses for words fi'om both LDOCE and  AHD3  , we can provide a rough indication of the semantic iuterconnections between the two entries  . 
As our techniques for automatically extracting semantic information from the text of definition and example sentences gradually improve  , we expect our ability to automatically identify semantic overlaps and differences to improve as well  . 
5. References
Atkins , Beryl ( 1991 ) " Building a Lexicon : the contribution of lexicography "  , International
Journal of Lexicography 3: 167-204.
Atkins , B . and B . Levin (1988) " Admitting Impediments " , Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Conference of the UWC entre for the New OED  , 

Bruce , R . and L . Guthrie (1992) " Genus
Disambiguation : a Study in Weighted Preference " , In hvceedings of COLING92 , pp . 1187-I191 . 
Byrd , R .   ( 1989 ) " Discovering Relationships among Word Senses " , Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Conference of the UWC entre for the New OED  , 
Waterloo , Canada.
Calzolari , N .   ( 1977 ) An Empirical Approach to Circularity in Dictionary Definitions "  , in Cahiers de Lexicologie 3l : 118-128 . 
Chodorow , M .   ( 1990 ) " Making Sense of Word Senses : detecting and analyzing systematic polysemy in noun definitions  "  , CUNY , unpublished ms . 
Dolan , W . , I , . Vauderwende , and S . Richardson (1993) . " Automatically Derived Structured Knowledge Bases from Online Dictionaries "  , Proceedings of the First ConJerence of the Pacific Association for Computational Linguistics  , April 2124 , Simon Fraser University , Vancouver , 

Jensen , K . and J . -L . Binot (1987) . " Disambiguating prepositional phrase attachments by using online dictionary definitions "  . Computational Linguistics 13:34, pp .  251-260 . 
Krovetz , R . and B . Croft (1992) . " l , exical Ambiguity and Information Retrieval " , ACM Transactions on InJormation Systems ,  10: 2 , pp .  115-141 . 
Montemagne , S . and L . Vanderwende (1992).
" Structural patterns vs . string patterns \[ brextracting semantic iniormation from dictionaries  . " In Proceedings of COLING92, pp . 

Pentheroudakis , J . and L . Vanderwende ( 1993 ) " Automatically Identifying Morphological Relations in Machine Readable Dictionaries "  , in Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Conf . of the UWC entre for the New OED and Text Research  , 
Oxford , England . pp . 114-131.
Slator , B . (1988) " Constructing Contextually Organized I , exical Semantic Knowledge-Bases " , Proceeding xo /" the Third Annual Rocky Mountain Cor ~' erence on Arto Cicial hztelligence  ( RMCAI-88 )  , Denver , CO , pp .  142-148 . 

