A PARSER COPING WITH SELF-REP AIREDJ APANESE
UTTERANCES ANDL ARGE CORPUS-BASE DEV ALUATION
Yuji Sagawa Noboru Ohnishi Noboru Sugie
Dept . of Information Engineering , Nagoya University , Japan

Self-repair ( Levelt 1988 ) is a repair of utterance by speaker him/herself . At ruman speaker makes self-repairs very frequently in spontaneouspeed t  .   ( Blackmer and Mitton 1991 ) reported that self-repairs are made once every 4 . 8 seconds in dialogues taken fi'om radio talk shows  . 
Self-repair is one ldnd of " permissible ill -formedness "  , that is a human listener can feel ill-formedness in it huthe/she is able to recognize its intended meaning  . Thus your partner does not need to interrupt dialogue  . 
I tow do you feel if your partner interrupts dialogue very  5 seconds to ask " What do you mean ? " or so ? You will give up dialogue or choose means of writing  . Speaking without self-repair is the most difficult modality of natural anguage communication  . 
The goal of our work is to make a dialogue system coping with self-repaired utterances  . In this paper we propose a parser called SERUP ( SE lf-Repaired Utterance Parser )  , which plays a major part in understanding a self -repaired utterance  . That is , because our approach is to translate a self -repaired utterance  ( Ex . 1 ) into a wellformed version that does not contain self-repair  ( Ex . 2) and parse the wellformed one , we do not need to change the subsequent processes . 
\[Ex . 1\]And fi'om green left to pink , er , from blue left to pink ( from ( Levelt 1988 ) ) \[ Ex . 2\] And fi'om blue left to pink SERUP uses some linguistic clues to translate utterances  , those include a repetition , an unknown word and/or an isolated word . We describe how SERUP uses these clues . 
To evaluate SERUP , we analyze a large corpus that contains spontaneous dialogues over telephone  . From the result , we estimate that SI';RUP works well with 88 . 1% of 1,082 self-repairs in the corpus . 
I ~ ELATED WORKS ( Hindle 1983 ) and ( Langer 1990 ) proposed parser scoping with self-repaired utterances  . 
But they assumed that an interruption point has already been detected  . Hindle thought prosodic cues carl be used in detection  , but it is not clear if they can always succeed . 
Langer thought editing expressions can be used , but they are not always used in self-repair . 
Recently , ( Shriberg , Bear , and l ) owd lng 1992 ) proposed a pattern matching method and used it ill GEMINI system  ( Dowding et al 1993 )  . Tills is similar to our method , but the corpus ( MADCOW 1992 ) used is less spontarleous than ours .   ( Subjects pressed a button to begin speaking to the system  )   ( Nakatani and Hirschberg 1993 ) proposed a speech-first method in which prosodic ues are used mainly  . We also think prosodicues are important . But wc think people use linguistic cues mainly because they can understand self-repaired utterances in transcripts  . 
All these works are done on English.
(Langer also treats Germany ) Because there are many syntactic differences ( e . g . , left l ) ranching v . s . right branching ), it is not

OUTLINE OFSEt , UP to
Fig . 1 shows the outline of SERUP.
Normal Parser is a parser that parses wellformed utterances  . When Normal Parser fails to parse an utterance , the utterance is passed to SR-reconstructor that detects a self-repair in it and translates it into wellformed version  . The translated utterance is returned to Normal Parser and parsed again  . 
Because an utterance can contain two or more self -repairs  , translation is repeated until Normal Parser succeeds in parsing or translation fails  . In the latter case , the utterance has another ill-formedness or self -repair that the SR-reconstructor cannot cope with  . 
There are two main problems in translation . One is to det , errnine an interruption point , and the other is to determine a reparandum . If these two problems can be solved , then the process of translation is carried out as follows  . 
1 . Remove editing expression such as er , rio , Imean . 
2. Superse de the reparandum with repair part.
For more detail of SERUP , see ( Sagawa,
Ohnishi , and Sugie 1993).
CLUESTOTRANS LATION
In this dlapter , we will describe a classification of self -repaired utterances  . They are
Inputs . . . . . v1 ? ... ...
ISa.rec:?nstructor ~ - -
L ....
tree " fail "
Fig .   1: The outline of SERUP classified by clues usable to determine an interruption point and a reparandum  . 
Table 1 shows the classification . Categories printed in italics have no clue , i . e . , SERUP fails to parse utterances in those categories  . 
with repetition
A self-repair is mostly made in a way to repair a word or a phrase just before an inter-ruption  ( Levelt 1988 )  . So words or phrases around an interruption are in the same category  . For example , in \[ Ex . l \] speake repairs a prepositional phrase " from green left to pink " to " from blue left to pink  "  , It is rare that he / she just repairs a noun " green " to " blue "  . 
In such self-repairs , are petition of a word or a phrase often exists . In self-repairs which are intended to correct an error  ( such as \[ Ex . 1\]) , words or phrases around the error may be repeated . .
In\[gx . 1\]," from " and " left top in k " are repeated . In sell-repairs which are intended to add some information to the item just mentioned  , the item may be repeated as in \[ Ex . a\] . 
\[Ex . 3\]\[ want a fight , one way flight ( from ( Shrlberg , Bear , and l ) owd-ing 1992 ) ) ILl this example a word " flight " is repeated . 
A repetition is made with the same constituent or an item in tile same category  , such as " orange " with " apl)le " . 
There are four possible structures around an int , errupl , ion of a self-repa . ir with a repet ; i-tion . l " ig . 2 shows them . 

RXR g .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . J .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
n : ropotilion
Fig . 2: Possible structures around interruption and l ) are cases in which some words exist between repetition  . With cases II and C , positions of repetition directory indicate where an interruption occurs and which is a reparandum  , but with D case , do not . 
SERUI ~ can cope with cases A , tt and C.
with syntactic break
A self-repalr comes with an interruption of utterance  . Because an interruption may occur anywhere in an utterance  ( even within a word )  , self-repaired utterance can contain a syntactic break  . 
If this 1) reak can be detected , we can identify an interruption point . 
same fl ' agment repetition
When as l ) eaker interrupts an utterance within a word , afl ' agment of the interrupted word is left . But he/she sometimes starts the repair with a word that begins with the slune fragment as in \[ Ex  . 4\] . 
\[F,x . 4\] ten , tenjitanntou , mkatat,o ' . l ' his can be treated as A repetition , but to investigate a within-word interruption ~ we treated it as a separate category  . 
In this case , an interruption point is just after a repeated fragment  . And if within-word interruptions are only made to repair an interrupted word  , art q ) armldum can be identified as the repeated f ragment with unknown word Sometimes a fi'agment left clm be detected as an unknown word  . For example , if a word " ketueki ( blood ) " is interrul ) ted and a fi'ag-meat " ketue " is left , this fragment ( : an be detected because there is no Japanese word " ketue '  . 
In this case , an interruption point is just after an unknown word  . And the repa . ran-dum can be determined if the same condition as the above case is sufficed  . 
with isolated word
A fragment left by a within-wor . ' l interruption is not alwa . ys detected as the same fl : a , g ~ meat repetition or an unknown word . For example , it fragment " hen " can be left when " hontou " ( real ) is interrupted , but this string can l ) eaw or (1 meaning " book " . 
But such a word is always " isolated " , tlutt is , both two subtree . sinfig'lfail . 
In this (: as ( . ' , an interruption point is just after an isolated word  . An ( lrepara . n dum can be determined if the same condition as the above  ( ' ase is sufficed . 
without repetition of a stem
Because Japanese inflectional morphology is complicated  , speakers often make inflection errors . To rel ) alr such errors a speaker often starts a relmi , " without repetition of a stem as i , , \[ l':x . .q ,, or as i ,, \[ I,:? . 6\] . 
\[ICx . 5\] it a dai , ker , , oka\[F,x . f;\]itadai , ita . dake ru , okn In these examph ' . s , " ita . da " is it stem and the Sl : ) eak ( wfirst tries to say " it a daita " or " it a ( laire " and then changes to " it a ( lake ru " . 
I , t the case of \[ l '; x . 6\] , are petition of a stem can be used as a (: lue . In the . case of \[ Ex . 5\] , existence of an affix without a stem indicates an interruption point and a reparandum  . 
fresh start l " resh start is a rel ) air with a complet (  ; ly diffe . r(mt utterance . A fragment of utterance I ) e for e inter rulf l . iotlisignored . SI ' ; ltUP tries the detection of fresh stm't if all possible  ( : luesaren ( ) t , fou , ( l . It tries top a . rse the fragment of utterance without a first word of it  . it rel ) eats this trial until I ) ar~ing succeeds . 
A ~ ~ uttaran colisolated-wordl " ig .   3: An isolated word SERUP cannot cope with utterances of all these categories  . 
changed to well-formed
A self-repaired utterance is occasionally parsed successfully as a wellformed utterance that has a meaning that the speaker does not intend  . For example , in \[ Ex . 7\] , a fragment " k you " of a word " k you san " ( cosponsorship ) is treated as a word " k you " ( today )  , and parsed successfully but the meaning of it is " cosponsor today "  . 
\[ Ex . 7\] k you , kyonsansuru
Some of these utterances can be detected as an error in semantic interpreter  . And wc think prosodic cues can be used effectively  , because a fragment " k you " and a word " k you " is pronounce differently  . So far , SERUP cannot cope with such utterances , because it uses wellformed first method . 
dividing word
In \[ Ex . 8\] the speaker starts repair within word . 
\[ Ex . 8\] junji , binidesune
The speaker tries to say " junbini desune " , but makes a lexical error " junji " . II estarts the repair with a fragment " bi " of " junbi '  , instead of a complete word " junbi " . This is a very rare case . 
repetition with different category
Speakers occasionally repair with different category of words  . A human listener can draw some inference and find relation between words  , but automatic detection is difficult . 
ambiguous repair
In\[gx . 9\] , it is ambiguous what kind of self-repair is made . 
\[gx . 9\] a point o wo , nl , er , suuzituty uuni The speaker may repair a particle " wo " with " ni "  , or repair a fragment " ni " of a word " n is an niti " that has the same meaning of " suuzltu "  ( some days )  . We cannot solve this an ablguity automatically . 
LARGECOIl.PUS-BASED
ANALYSIS
To investigat effectiveness of SERUP we analyzed a large corpus called ADD  ( Ehara et al 1990 )  . ADD contains one million words of dialogues about registration to an international conference over telephone  . ADD is created at ATR Interpreting Telephony Lab -oratories  . 
There are 1.,082 self-repairs in the corpus.
With these self-repairs , we investigate the categories they belong to . Table 1 shows the result . 

In sum , SERUP seems to cope with 953 (88 . 1%) of self-repairs . We think SERUP is effective to Japanese self -repaired utter-&rices  . 
Most of utterances that SERUP cannot ~ ope with are in tile category " Changed to wellformed "  . As we mentioned , these utterances might be processed successfully with semantic on straints or prosodic cues  . If we could implement hem , SERUP would cope with 1 , 064(98 . 3%) self-repairs . 
CONCLUDING 1-I . EMARKS
We proposed SERUP , a parser coping with self-repaired Japanese utterances  . SERUP uses some linguistic clues and translates a self-repaired utterance into wellformed version and parses it  . The result of large corpus-based analysis suggests that  88  . 1% of 1,082 self-repairs can be processed by SERUP . 
Our future directions are to test the system with large grammar and lexicon and to incorporate prosodic processing  . 

Table 1: The result of an anlsys
With repetition
A repetition
B repetition
C repetition
D repetition same constituent repetition 141 (13 . 0%) same category repetition 108 (10 . 0%) same constituent repetition 96 (8 . 9%) same category repetition 2 (0 . 2%) same constituent repetition 136 (12 . 6%) same category repetition 3 (0 . 3%) same constituent repetition 4 (0 . 4%) same category repetition 0 (0%)
With syntactic break . . . . . Same fragment repetition
With unknown word
With isolated word
Without repetition of a stem
Fresh restart 105 (9 . 7%) 98(9 . 1%) 235(21 . 7%) 23(2 . 1%) 6(0 . 6%)
Changed to wellformed 11.1 (10.3%)
Others Dividing word 4 (0.4%)
Repetition with di If erent categozy 5 (0.5%)
Ambiguous repair 4 (0.4%)
Total of suce essable 953 (88.1%)
Total 1,082 1 Zeferences
Blackmer , E.R . and J . L . Mitton (1991).
Theories of monitoring and the timing of repairs in spontaneous speech  . Cognition 39, 173-194 . 
Dowding , J . el al .  (1993) . Gemini : A natural language system for spoken -language understanding  . In Proceedings of lhe 31st
Annual Meeting of ACL.
Ehara , E . et al (1990) . Contents of the ATR dialogue database . Technical Report TR-1-0186 , ATP ~ Interpreting Telephony Research Laboratories  . 
lIindle , D .  (1983) . Deterministic parsing of syntactic nonfluencies . In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Confe ; ence of the ACL , pp .  123-128 . 
Langer , It .  (1990) . Syntactic normalization of spontaneous speech . In COLING90, pp . 

Levelt , W.J.M . (1988). Speaking : From
Intention to Articulation , Chapter 12, pp .  458-499 . Cambridge , MA : The MIT

MADCOW (1992) . Multi-site data collection for a spoken langnage corpus  . In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural
Language Workshop , pp . 714.
Nakatani , K . and J . IIirschberg (1993) . A speech-first model for tel > air detection and correction  . IT , Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of ACL , pp .  4653 . 
Sagawa , Y ., N . Ohnishi , and N . Sugie (1993).
Repairing self-repairs in Japanese . In Proceedings of Natural Language Processing
Pacific Rim Symposium ( NLPRS'93),
Fukuoka , pp . 191-198.
Shriberg , E ., J . Bear , and J . Dowding (1992).
Automatic detection and correction of repairs in humancomputer dialog  . In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop  , pp .  419-424 . 

