CUSTOMIZING ANDEV ALUATING A MULTILINGUAL DISCOURSEMODULE 
Chinatsu Aone
System Research and Applications Corporat ion  ( SRA ) 
2000 15th Street North
Arlington , VA 22201
emaiha one c@sra.com

In this pape h we first describe how we have customized our datadriven multilingu ~ fl discourse module within our text understanding system lor dill ' erent lm~guages and for a particular NLP application by utilizing hierm'chic~dly organized discourse KB's  . Then , we report qum~t it alive and q m ditative findings fromewduating the system both with and without discourse processing  , ~md discuss how resolving certain kinds of mmphor affects system per h  ) r-lnance . 
1 INTRODUCTION
Although previous discourse rese , ' uch(cfHobbs\[7\] , Webber 191 , Groszmid Sidner 16/ , etc . ) made significant contributions at a theorelic~d level  , the effectiveness of discourse processing in NLP systems h~s not been studied so Ira ' at a practical level  ( of . Walker\[8\]) . In systems used in NLP applications such us the Message Underst  , ' ulding Conferences ( of .  14 , 5I ) , discourse processing is often not a sep ~ u ' ate module hut is pmtmid proeel of " template generation  . " Thus , the eflbct of differentypes of discourse processing on apm'liculm " task has not been shown either  . 
In addition , both at Iheoretical and practical levels , few seem to have considere designing discourse processing in a way that is customizable for multiple languages and domains  . However , since discourse phenomena differmnong Iml guages mid even among domains within the same language  , it ix desirable that discourse processing be custon fizahle and its resultew duable  . 
In this paper , we descril ) e how we have customized our multilingual discourse module wilh in our t cxlunderstanding system for apm ' ticulm " I~mk  ( i . e . data exla ' action i the joint venture domain ) in two different lml guagcs ( i . e . 
English mid Japanese) , mid report he cw duation rcsuls . 
2 DISCOURSEMODULE

In Aone ~ ultl McKee\[2\] , we have described our new language-and domain -independent discourse module within our text underslanding system  . In addition to being lml guage-mid domain -independent  , the module is ewdu-able m~dm finable to different applications and domains  . 
The discoursemchitecture is motiwtted by our need to port our textuuder stmlding system to difl crent languages  ( e . g . 
English , Japanese , Spanish ) mid to different dom~dns(of . 
Aone et al\[1\]) . The discourse mt x lule is strictly dam-~hiven so that mmphora resolution h  ) r different lml guages mid domains can be achieved sunply by selecling necessary dala  . It consists of one discourse processor ( the Resolution Engine ) and three discourse knowledge bases ( the Discourse Phenomenon KB , the Discourse Knowledge Source KB , the Discourse Domain KB ) . The Discourse Admin is Uatorix a developmenl-time tool for defit fiug the three discourse KB's  . Them ' chitecture is shown in Figure

peFfortll-At~tllatlliC,gdeft,,,I\["q '~': Y
I ) is cc , urs ? M~chlle
Figure 1 . Discourse Architecture 2 . 1I ) is course Knowledge Bases The Discourse Knowledge Source KB houses small well-delined mmphora resolution strategies  . Each knowledge source ( KS ) is an object in the hierarchically organized KB , and infl ) rmation can be inherited from more general to more specific KS's  . This KB consists of three kinds of KS's : generators  , \[ liters and orderers . A generator is uscd to generate possible anlecedent hypotheses fi'om a certain region of text  . A filter is used to eliminate impossible hypotheses  , while a not ~ lerer is used to rml k possible hyl ) othescs in a preference order if there is more than one  . 
Most of the KS's are language-independen ! ( . g . all the generalors and these manlictilters ) . Even when they are language-specilic , a sub-KS can inherit information from its superclass KS's while defining specific data lee : all y  . For ex , ' unple , the Semantic-Gender-Filter KS 1 deliues only funclional definition of this KS , while its sub-KS's for English ~ md Japanes each specify\]~mguage-specific data ~ mdinheri the stone funclioual definilion from their pro'on ! 

1 . Seluan lic-Gender-Filter filters out an antecedent hypothesis whose semantic  gende1 is not consistent with the restriction imposed by the syntaclic gender of ~ lpI'OIIOHI  , cally organized discourse phenomenon objects ( e . g . 
Nmne-Anaphora , DeIinite-NP ) each of which specifies a definition of the discourse phenomenon and a set of KS's  ( i . e . generators , tilters , and orderers ) to apply to resolve this particular discourse phenomenon  . Because the discourse KS's are independent of discourse phenomena  , the stone discourse KScm~be shared by different discourse phenomena in different languages  , and domains . For exam-pie , KS's such as Sem , -mtic-Type-Filter and Recency-Orderer are used by most discourse phenomena in multiple languages  . 
Finally , the Discourse Domain KB contains discourse domain objects each of which defines a set of discourse phenomena to hmldle in a particular domain  . Since texts in different domains exhibit different sets of discourse phenomena  , and since dilt'erent applications even within the same domain may not have to handle the same set of discourse phenomena  , the discourse domain KB is a way to customize , and constrain the workload of tile discourse module  . 
These three hierarchically organized discourse KB ' smake it possible to share some of the discourse KB's while also being able to add language-mid domain-specitic discourse data  . 
2.2 Resolution Engine
The Resolution Engine is the runtime processing module which find stile best  , antecedent hypothesis to t a given ~ maph or by using the discourse KB's described above  . First , it determines from the Discourse Dom~f in KB which discourse phenomena to handle give u a particular language ald domain  . Then , it uses the Discourse Phenomenon KB to classify mlauaphor as one of the discourse phenomena and to decide which KS's to apply to it  . 
Next , the Engine applies appropriate generator KS's to get  , ' minitial set of antecedent hypotheses , mid then applies filter KS's to remove inconsistent hypotheses  . When there is more than one hypothesis left , order erKS's specified in the Discourse Phenomenon KB are invoked to rank the hypotheses  . 
3 CUSTOMIZING DISCOURSEKB'S
We have customized our discourse KB's to perform a data extraction t  , ' ~ sk in the joint venture domain . Our text understanding system takes English mid Japanese newspaper articles about joint ventures as input  ( cf . Figure 2) , and outputs database templates ( eL Figure 3) . The system has to extract from the , articles in fonnation regm'ding which organizations participate iu a joint venture  ( including a new joint venture compmly if any )  , what the purpose of tile joint venture is ( e . g . selling coal ) , whotim peoplem ' e that are associated with these organizations  , etc . We made a task-oriented decision that handling organization mm-phora  , both definite NPs ( e . g . " the company ") and name anaphora ( e . g . " Toyota " for " Toyota Motors Corp . ") , is a top priority initially in order to improve performance  . 
Thus , we created in the Discourse Domain KBa discourse domain object called JV-Data-Extraction which specifies that two discourse phenomenon objects from the Discourse Phenomenon KB  , namely mune anaphora ( DP-Nmne ) middefinite NP anaphora for orgmlizations ( DP-DNP-Orgmlization )  , should be handled ill this application domain . 
NEWYORK -- A joint veature to export confrom tile United States has been lbnned between M&M Ferrous America Ltd  . here and Crown
Coal & Coke Co ., Pittsburgh.
Coal obtained by Crownlroln v , ' u-ious domestic mines will be marketed of lM lore by M&M  , alrading coln p~my formed six years ago by former Philippi Brothers Inc  . employees . Crown , which formerly had its own mines , here to foremarketed coati from v , ' uiou sources to domestics tee hnak-ers only , according to Eric S . Katzenstein , M&M vice president . 

Eastern European countrie such as Rommlia are likelymm ' kets  , he said . 
Figure 2 . All Exmnpleo1' Input Text < TIEUPREI , ATIONSHII'-29753 481 > :=
TIlLUPSTAT\[IS : EXISTING
ENTITY:<ENTITY-2975348-1><F,NTITY-29 9975 348-2>
ACTIVITY : < ACTIVITY-2975348-1>  <  ENTITY-2975348-1  > :=
NAME : M&M Ferrous America I , TD
AMASES : " M&M "
I , OCATION : New York ( CITY 4 ) New York ( PROVINCE 1 ) 
United States ( COUNTI ), Y)
TYPE : COMPANY
PERSON : < PERSON-2975348-1>  <  ENTITY-2975348-2>  :=
NAME : CrownC ~ al & Coke CO
A/JASI~:"(?rowll "
I , OCAT\[ON : Pittsburgh ( CITY 4 ) Pem~sylwtnia ( IqU ) VINCF ,  1)
United States ( COUNTRY )
TYPE:COMPANY < INDUSTRY-29 75348-1>:=
IND\[ISTRY-TYPE : SALES
PRODUCT/SERVICE : ( 50 " Crown's coal " )  <  ACTIVITY-2975348-1 >:=\[NDUSTRY : < INDUSTRY-2975348   1> ACTIVITY-SIT' ; :  ( Romania ( COUNTRY ) < ENTITY-2975348-1> ) < PERSON-297534g-1>:=
NAME : Eric S . Katzenstein
PERSON'SENTITY : < I .; NTITY-2975348-I>
POSITION : SREXEC
Figure 3 . An Exmnple of au Output Template 3 . 1 Name Anaphora In order to resolve name ~ maphora  , English mid Japanese share some of the KS's ill tile Discourse Knowledge Source KB  , nmnelyCurrent-Text-General01 ; Semmltic-ates all the possible antecedenl hypotheses up to the current sentence  . The Semantic-Type-Filter henchecks if rice semantic type of amphor is consistent with that of an  ; mte-cedent\[iypothesis . When there is more than one hypothesis left , the Recency-Orderer orders the hypotheses according to their proximity to the ataphot  . 
In addition to the threelmcguage-independent KS ' s  , each h'm guage uses a language-specific lilter . For English , a filter named Englis\[i-N , ' une-Filter , which matches an anaphor ( e . g . " Crown " ) with a subsequence of a ~ mtte-cedent nane string  ( e . g . " CrownCoal&CokeCO "), is currently employed . For Japates e , mt additional sittgle filler called Japanese-N , ' une-Filter covers seemingly vast wu'iatious of Japanese company crane anaphora  2  . This KS matches an attuphor with any conthiualion of characters in an ~ mteceden las long as the character order is preserved  ( e . g . " abe " can be an anaphor of " a be de ") . One exceplion is lhala ~ mtaphor c~m have an extra word " s\[ia " at the end that is not a part of fltef nll company mune or a compmty acronym  ( e . g . " Westing house ( WH ) " can be refen'cd to a uapltoric ~ dlyb " We sling house-sha " or " WH-sha "  )  . 
3.2 Definite NP
Att other discourse phenomct to n which is handled lorth is lask ix definite NPs relerriug Io organizations such as " the venture  , " the West Germ+melectronics concern , " etc . , where the words " venture " and " cottcern " in these cott texts point to subcltksses of I/to semanlic once ptl + or an org ~ utization  . Although Japanese does not have a delinite article  , in writlen Japmlese the word " dou " ( literally meaning " lice sane " ) prefixed to certain nout~s performs approximately the sane function ~ Ls English tlelinite a ' tiele " the "  . Both English and Japates e currently share the sane three KS's  ( i . e . Current-Text-Generatoc' , Semantic-Type-Filter , Recency-Orderer ) lot delinite NP resolution . 
Additionally , English uses Syntactic-Number-Filter , which checks if the syntaclic nnmber of the anaphor is consistent with that of ~ manlecedent hypolhesis  . Although Japalese does not exhibit syntactic number distinction  , a"don"phr ~ Lse can only refers emmttic ~ dly Io a single entity  . 3 Thus , Japanese uses Semanlic-Amount-Eilter , which excht de semantically plural entities ( e . g . a conjoined NP , ~ mNP with a plural qnmttifier ) as possible aate-cedents for a " dou " phrase . 
4EVALUATION RESUI : I'S hit his section , we will report on revahtalion results . 
We ran 100 Japanese and 100 English blind test joint vett-2  , For example : ~\[~(~ H~f ~) ,  ~? , ~ , ~ (~ . , ~2Z ~), ? . 
3 . A definite plural NP can be expressed in Japanese by a numeral or numerical quantilier plus a classifier  , as in " ryousha " ( file two companies ) and " san-sha" ( the three companies )  . 
lure , ' utic lcs through our textuuders lmlding system with and without the discourse module turned on  , and scored the resnlls using an automalic scoring prognam  . The scoring program uses a scoring metric from information retrieval  , and reports recall and precision for each slot in the lemplates as well as a single combined score called Fmeasure  4 for overall perforlnance ( of .  1141) . 
It shouM be noted that this ew duation is a blackboxew duation of the syslem as used in a particular application task  . Consequently , the results do not directly reflect the perfonn ~ mce of the discourse module itself ? For cxanple  , this task does not require all company name anaphora  ( i . e . 
aliases ) to be reported , but only those which are involved in joint ventures  . Also , the causes of task l ~ tilure or success are some limes due to the lhilure or success of system modules other ttum the discourse module  . For instance , the pro-processing system does not always recognize company names which mepotential autecedenls  . On the other hard , the preprocessing module rather than the discourse module sometimes recognizes compaty acronyms as aliases  . 
Thus , the resnlts of the hlackboxev ~ dnation reflect more on how the discourse module helps the whole system per- 
Ibnnap ~ uticular task.
4.1 Name Anaphora
It is clem * that the perl bnmmce of name auaphora reso-htlion is directly linked to how well the system tills in the ALIASES slot in the output emplates  ( of . Figure 3) , The 100 Japanese texts required idenlifying a total of 127 company name aliases . With the discourse module tnnted on , the recall of IhcALIASES slot increases by 38 poinls and the precision by 16 points . Though the set of KS's used for nane amphora was mostly satisihctory  , we lound one problem paticular to this domain in tx ~ thl ~ mguages  . Since the texts arc in the joint venture domain , it is often i \ [ iec~tse that the nane of a new joint venture company  ( e . g . 
"' Chrysler Japan " ) overlaps the nanes of its p~u'ent corn-panics ( e . g . " Chrysler Corp . ") . Wlten the text nses an ane anaphor ( e . g . " Chrysler ") , it must refer to the pm+ent company even when the joint venture company is mentioned most recently  . We are plmming to add another order er which preli ~ rs the pm'ent company when there is such a conllicl  . 
4.2 I ) elinite NP
We hyt ? ) the sized that resolving delinit cNP's affects the extra clion of information about which company is performing which " economic activity " in a joint venture  ( e . g . 
Compaty A will nlanufa elufeca's while Company B will mm'ke them  )  , since snch information appem's later in at 4 . Fmeasure is calculated by : (\[\]7, +1 . 0) x1'x R1~2xf'+R where 1' is precision , R is recall , and \[\] is the relative importmt ce given to recall over precision  . In this case , ~ = 1 . 0 . 
1 11I article after compmties involve dill It joint venture are " already introduced into the discourse  ( e . g . " Publishing rivals Time Inc . and New York Thnes Co . said they agreedill principle to form a joint iy owned national magazine distribution partnership  . . . The joint venture will continue to market mag ~ines currently marketed by Tune Distribution  . . . ") . 
Under the same test condition as above , the precision of the relevant slot ( i . e . ACTIVITY-SITE slotill Figure 3 ) increased by 5 points in JapaJmse when discourse processing was used  . The recall was not affected much by the discourse processing  ; it increased only by 1 point . In the English test , the changes in both precision and recall were negligible  . One of the reasons for this less drastic incre ~tse of this slot value is that the sentence x pressing economic activities do not always use delinite NPs for the agents of such activities  . Such agents can be expressed by name mlaph or a or pronouns or  , often in English , by implicit subjects of infinitives , as in " SiemensAG and GTE Corp . 
agreed to set up a new holding eomp ~ my in West Germany to over see their telecommunications joint venture  . . . " . 
In addition , examination of the test result showed that when there are more than one antecedent hypothesis  , topic marking ( using particle " wa " ) plays a more significant role in determining the antecedent of a Japmmse " dou " definite NP th  , ' m recency . At the time of the testing , however , we were not using topic marking infonna fionto prefer topicalized a mecedent hypotheses  . Another finding which is true of both Japanese and English is that definite NP  , ' maphora resolution often requires pragmatic infer cnc-ing ill order to obtain a fact which is not explicitly slated in the text  . For ex , -unple , in order to resolve the definite NP in the senteuce " Chevron  , an oil company , also said it acquired Rhonc-Poulenc's 30% interest in Petrosynthese S . A . , boosting its holding in the French joint venture to  65%  , " the discourse module has to infer either that Petrosyuthese S  . A . is a French comp ~ my ( perhaps from the company designator ? ) or that acquiring someone's holding ill a company increases one's holding in that company  . Wc are currently adding KS's which m~d ce use of topic information and pragmatic inferencing  ,   , and also investigating which combinations of KS's will optimize discourse pcr-foiTllall ce  . 
Furthermore , we think that very little ch , -mgein recall is due to the fact that the system a ~ ssumed tile parent companies to be the value of ACTIVITY-SITE when it is undetermined  . Thus , this detault value kept the recall of the system without discourse processing higher  , mid them-forethe ACTIVITY-SITE slot was not as good an indicator of the discourse module performance as the ALIASES slot  . 
It is interesting to note that ml approach like Dagan ~ u ~  ( IItai's\[3\] , which uses statistical data on semantic selectional restriction that is automatically acquired from large corpora to resolve anaphora  5  , tines not work well in this domain . This is because a typical text in this domain contains at least two lX  ) ssible antecedents ( joint venture partners m~d possibly a joint venture comp ~ my  ) of the s~unesemm ~ tictype , munely organization , hn " a delinite NP anaphora referring to organizations  . 
4.3 Overall Performance
Overall , discourse processing increased the system per h ~ rmance measured by tile combination of overall recall mid precision scores  ( i . e . Fmeasure ) by 4 points in Japanese , mostly due to ~ mover all increa . seinprecision . 
Interestingly , the discourse processing helped also in the identification of links between organizations mid people  ,   , ' ~ s indicated by the PERSON slot of the < ENTITY > object  , ' rod the PERSON'SENTITY slot of tile < PERSON > object  ( cf . Figure 3) . With the discourse processing lunged on , the recall of both PERSON and PERSON'SENTITY slots incre ~ Lsed by  7 points , and the precision by 10 points and 12 points respectively . 
We think that this is because when a person associated with an organization is mention cd  , the company mune or the person's naJne is often an anaphoric form as in " Carlos M  . Herrera , president of Preferred , " or " Katzenstein , a former executive with Bomar Resources Inc . " . In order to undersUmd the relation between , 'morganization and a person as in " Eric S . Katzenstein , M&M vice president " ( cf . 
Figure 2) , tile system has to recognize both the alfilialion link between the person and the comDmy hnplicit in tile appositive phrase  , and themmphoric link between I he objects under different aliases  . Our discourse module takes care of both identifying appositive relations  ( e . g . 
Eric S . Katzenstein is vice presideu0 and resolving u ~ une anaphora ( e . g . " M&M " refers to " M&M Ferrous America

5 CURRENT AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper , we have described our multilingual discourse module midils customize discourse KB's  , and reported the blackboxew duation results when it was used in a data extraction task in the joint venture domain  . Currently wear cworking on the following two research areas in order to improve anaphora resolution  . 
First , we are experimenting with ways to automate I raining of anaphora resolulion by applying machine learning so that the discourse module can be castomized auto-maritally to ap ~ ticular hm guage  , domain or application without extensive manual knowledge engineering  . Ill order to obtain feedbackliar training , we must be able to automate glass box evaluation of discourse processing itself  . For this , we have built I wo tools : a discourse tagging tool and a discours evaluation tool  . The former has been used to tag texts with discourse relations  , while tile latter lakes discourse qagged corpora as a key and the system output as results to be ev~duated  . 
5 . According to the u approach , for a sentence " It was going to collect it , "" governnmnt " is a prefer redante?cedent of the first " it  , " while " money " is of the second , using such statistics . 

Second , we are expanding the rm~ge of anaphoric phenomena which our discourse module can hmldle  . They include overt pronouns in English mM Spanish  , and zero pronouns in Japanese and Spmfish . 

I 1\] Chinalsu Aone , Hatte Blcjcr , Sharon Flank , Douglas McKee , and SmMy Shinn . The Murasaki Project : Multilingual Natural Language Underslm Ming  . In Proceedings of the ARPA Human Language Technology Wvrkshop  ,  1993 . 
12\] Chinatsu Aone and Dougl , ~s McKce . Language-Inde-pendent Anaphora Resolution System lot Understanding Multiling u~d " lbxls  . In Proceedings of 31st
Annual Meeting of the ACL , 1993.
1131 Ido Dagml ~ md Alonllai . Aulomatic Acquisition of Constraints for Ihe Resolution of Anaphora References and Synlactic Ambiguities  . In Proceedings of the 13th International Cot ! ference on Computational
Linguistics , 1990.
141 Delense Adwmced Resem'ch Projecks Agency . Proceedings of t " our thMessage Understanding Confi~r-ettce  ( MUC4 )  . Morgml Kauflmmn Publishers , 1992 . 
\[51 Adwmced Resem'ch Proecls Agency . Proceedings of Fourth Message Understanding Cot ( erence ( MUC-5 )  . Morg , ' m Kaufinmm Publishers , 1993 . 
16\]Bm'bara Grosz and Candace L . Sidner . Attentions , hlten l . iol ~ salld file Strt lcture of Discourse . Cottt pula-tional Linguistics , 12, 1986 . 
171 Jen'y R . Hobbs . Pronoun Resolution . Technical Report 761 , Depmlmenl of Computer Science , City College , City University of New York ,  1976 . 
\[81 Marilyn A . Walkel ; Evaluating Discourse Processing Algorithms . In Proceedings of 27th Annual Meeting of the ACL ,  1989 . 
191 Bonnie Webber . A Formal Approach to Discourse Anaphora . Technical report , Bolt , Beranek , and New-mini ,  1978 . 

