INTERLANGUAGESIGNS ANDLEXICAL TRANS FERERRORS
Atle Ro
Department of Linguistics and Phonetics
University of Bergen

Abstract
A theory of interlanguage ( IL ) lexicons is outlined , with emphasis on IL lexical entries , based on the HPSG notion of lexical sign . This theory accounts for idiosyncratic or lexical transfer of syntactic subcategorisation and idioms from the first language to the IL  . It also accounts for developmental stages in IL lexical grammar  , and grammatical variation it he use of the same lexical item  . The theory offers a tool for robust parsing of lexical transfer errors and diagnosis of such errors  . 
Introduction ~ Computational error diagnosis of second language  ( L2 ) input should be based on L2 acquisition theory . In this paper , I outline a theory of second language lexical items which can be exploited computationally for robust parsing and error diagnosis  . L2 is interpreted as interlangnage ( IL ) in the sense of Selinker ( 1972 )  . A unification-based lexicalist view of grammar is assumed  ( HPSG theory )  . The paper has the following outline : first lexical transfer is presented  , then interlanguagelxical entries are discussed , and finally some problems concerned with robust parsing and error diagnosis based on such lexical entries are pointed out  . 
Lexleal transfer
A theory of IL should account for lexical transfer from the first language  ( L 1 )  . By lexical transfer I mean that idiosyncratic properties of  L1 lexical items are projected onto the corresponding target language  ( Lt ) lexical items . By ' corresponding ' I mean translationally related  . I will consider two types of lexieal transfer ; translational transfer of idiomatic expressions , and transfer of L1 subcategorisation frames . Translational transfer of L1 idiomatic expression si exemplified in ( 1 )  , with translational transfer from French ( Cf . Catt (1988)) . 
(1) * My friend has hunger.
Monamia faim.
In unification-based grammatical frameworks , like HPSG , idiomatic expressions like a voir faim can be formalised as special cases of subcategorisation  ( for an LFG-style account of idioms , see Dyvik (1990)) 1 , and can thus be covered by the account I give of this type of transfer  , to which we will now turn . The examples in ( 2 ) - ( 3 ) illustrate negative lexical transfer from Spanish in Norwegian interlanguage  . 
(2)* Jegkunneikkes varetilPer.
I could not answer to Per.
(3) No podfare sponder a Per.
Not could-1sg answer to Per.
' I could not answer Per'.
Tile Norwegian verbs vare subcategorises for an object NP  , while the Spanish verb with tile same meaning , responder , subcategorises for a PP headed by tile preposition a  ( " to " )  . The Spanish subcategorisation frame thus admits the erroneous VP  ( w . r . t . Norwegian grammar ) in (2) . i assume that 1L lexical items are linked to corresponding L1 items by struct t~re-sharing . Thus subcategorisation information from L1 lexical items can be used in generating interlanguage strings  , and lexical transfer of the kind illustrated in ( 2 ) can be accounted for . I further make the idealisation that LI word forms are not used as " terminal vocabulary " in interlanguage strings  . 
Lexical entries in IL
How can these ideas be formalised ? We will first consider the format which will be used for representing  L1 lexical entries , that of 1Althot , ghit is not as straightforward as ordinary subcategorisation  , one needs e . g . to distinguish between " pseudo-idioms " like a voirfaim and realidioms like kick the bucket  , but a discussion of this topic is not possible within this limited format  . 

Pollard and Sag (1987) , and then outline interlanguagelxical entries . Example ( 4 ) illustrates an underspecified lexical entry for the transitive Norwegian verbs v are  ( " answer " )  . 
(4) svare
SYNILOCIE : .1\[SUBCAT < NP\[T\],NP\[--~
SEMICONTIANS WERER k ANSWREDJ
IIl HPSG , syntactic ategories are signs and are represented as attribute-value matrices  , with three features , PHON(OLOGY ) 2 , SYN(TAX ) and SEM(ANTICS) , which ( with the exception of PHON ) can have feature structures as values . The path SYNILOCISUBCAT takes a list of categories as value  . The leftmost element in this list corresponds to the lexical bead's most oblique complement  ( in ( 4 ) the object NP )  , the rightmost to the least oblique complement , ( the subject in (4)) . The feature SEM in this simple example is specified for the semantic relation expressed by the verb  , as well as the roles the verb selects . The categories in the subcategorisation list are signs  , for which the labels in ( 4 ) area shorthand notation . The indices in the subcategorisation list indicate that the complement signs ' SEM values are to bind the variables with which they are coindexed  , and which are associated with the semantic roles in the relation  . The lexical entry for the Spanish verb corresponding to svare  , responder , is illustrated below : ( 5 ) -i ~ HON res ~ onder-DA , 
SYNILOCHE ADLLEX
SUBCAT < PP\[\]\],NP ~>\[' RELNAN~\]WERII
SEMICONTIANS wEREP-_\[_ANSWERED
The signs in (4) and (5) are rather similar , with the exception of the first elements in the subcategorisation lists  )   ( 6 )  1 , 1 sign
IL sign
The intuition is that whereas an L1 sign ( in the sense of Saussure ansign 4 ) has two sides , a concept side ( corresponds to the feature SEM in IIPSG ) and an expression side ( here called PIION )  , an IL sign has three sides : a common 2 If ollow Pollard and Sag ( 1987 ) and , for convenience , represent the valuc of PllON orthographically . 
3 Spanish direct objects arc NPs whcn they refer to nonhuman entities  , while objects which refer to humans must be expressed as PPs headed by the prel  ) osition a ( " to " )  . It , night appear to be a problem flint NP and PP signs arc of the same scmantic type  , but I follow Dyvik ( 1980 ) and LO drup ( 1989 ) and call prelx ) Sitional phrases which have their semantic role assigned hyall external head  , nominal ; as opposed to modifier ( adjunct ) PPs , which exprcss their own semantic roles . Having the same semantic type , " ht , ,nan " direct object PPs can be derived from NP objects by a lexical rule  . 
4Cf . de Saussure (1915).
135 concept side , aL1 expression side and an Lt ( IL ) expression side ( cf .  (6)) . 
Let us now return to the HPSG format , where it is possible to represent an IL entry and its corresponding  L1 entry as a bilingual sign , similar to the concept used in machine translation  ( cf . Tsujii and Fujita (1991)) . 
Interlanguagelxical entries can have the form which is visualised in  ( 7 ) - ( 8 )  , which represents two different alternatives and two different steps in the second language acquisition process :  ( 7 ) "PHONL 1 responder
PHONILs v are
SYNILOCISUBCAT < PP\[a ~\], NP\[~\]>
SEMICONT\['RELNANSWER'\]
IANSWERER\[~/
LANSWERED\[T\]
In this first alternative the expression side ( PHON ) of the IL entry is connected with its corresponding  L1 entry . In this way lexical transfer from the L1 ( cf . example (2)) is accounted for . The assumption is that the L1 lexical entry is basic at this stage , and the IL
PHON is attached to it.
In a later developmental stage , where the syntactic properties of the IL entry are different from that of the corresponding  L1 entry , the
SYNILOCISUBCAT path of the IL entry ( abbreviated below to SUBCAT ) is given its own distinct value . This is illustrated in figure ( 8 ) :  ( 8 ) ~ I-IONL 1 responder
PHONLIsvare
SUBCATL1 < PP\[a\]\[17'NP\[\]>
SUBCAT1C < NP\[~,NP~>
SEMICONTFRELNANSWER7\]ANSWERER\['2\]\]
LANSWEREDi-f\]\]
The lexical items are still linked because they have the same meaning  . 
The above account of lexical entries allows us to implement different stages in the development of an interlanguage lxicon  . What it does not do , is to account for linguistic variability , which in L2 acquisition research generally is considered to be a property of  L2   ( cf . e . g . Larsen-Freeman and Long (1991)) . In the case of lexical entries like (7) and (8) , variability means that L2 users sometimes will use this item in accordance with Lt grammar  , and sometimes not . But if we imagine a combination of (7) and (8) , with a disjunctive IL subcat value , as illustrated in figure (9) , vl triability is also catered for . 

PHONLI responder
PHONLIsvare
SUBCATL , I\[)\]<PP\[a ~\[1-\], NP\['~-\]>
SUBCATIL < NPv ~, NP\[~>vE\]
SEMICONT ~ ELNANSWEI ~
IANS WERER ~
LANSWt'Dm_1
Wh , ' tt we have just discussed also illustrates a significant difference between first and second language acquisition  . As Odlin ( 1989 ) points out : " there is little reason to believe that the acquisition of lexical semantics in second language is a close recapitulation of all earlier development processes "  . Ilere we have an explication of this . Acquisition of lexical items is understood as associating Ltex pressions with LI concepts  , either in a one-to-one relationship when L1 and Lt concepts are synonymous , or in one to many relatkms when LI and IA concepts partially overlap  5  . 
Future work
The prospect of the present approach to IL lexical items  , lies in the possibility which a formalisation in a lexicalist  , unification-based grammatical fi'ame work like HPSG gives for computational implementation  , for purposes like anticipatory robust parsing and error diagnosis  . 
5 In cases where an LI lexical item not even partially corresponds to any  L1 concept ( e . g Japanese bushido , " tile wily of the samurai " , if Japanese is Lt and English LI ) the meaning of this item carl still be paraphrased by means of  L1 concepts . 

The theory itself can be used for such purposes without much revision : the most important one is that in the bilingual signs LI attribute-value matrices must be replaced with  L1 ones . A system for robust parsing and error diagnosis of lexical transfer errors needs Lt subcat values for determining whether sentences have the right complements or not  , and L1 simple ( non-disjunctive ) subcat values for making hypotheses about possible erroneous complements  . 
My idea is to exploithe relation between Lt and L1 subcat values in a chart parser , so if a parse fails because of a mismatch between a complement in the input string and the Lt complementeeded by a lexical head  , the chart can be modified such that a complement licensed by the  L1 subcat specification is introduced into the chart as an alternative to the incompatible complement specification i the Lt subcat list  . 
This is not unproblematic , however , because ven in successful chart parses , many hypotheses fail . Lexical entries with a hernative subcategorisation frames  ( e . g . SUBCAT < X , (Y) , ( Z ) > , where Y and Z are optional ) are common . The longer tim sentence , and the more lexical heads , the larger is the number of hypotheses which will fail  . In the case of erroneou strings , how can a system decide which hypotheses to modify  , in order to accept such strings ? Modifying all edges which fail will even in simple sentences so on lead to an explosion of new edges  . Deciding which error hypotheses are the most promising is a central computational question to which future worknmst be dedicated  . 

A theory of IL signs , which accounts for lexical transfer , has been presented . Transfer has been a controversial subject in second language acquisition  ( SLA ) research , and its importance as a property of L2s has been evaluate differently through the history of SLA research  . Scientists have disagreed whether properties of L2 production can be attributed to transfer or other factors  , such as universal developmental sequences ( cf . e . g . 
Meisel et al (1981)) . In my opinion lexical transfer is an interesting aspect of this discussion  . As it is associated with individual lexieal items it has a stronger case that more general types of transfer  ( e . g . transfer of word order ) . When faced with an error where syntactic or semantic properties of an IL lexical item diverge from the standard of Lt  , but are strikingly similar to properties of the corresponding  L1 lexical item , lexical transfer is a likely explanation . 

I would like to thank Helge Dyvik,
Torbj~rn Nordgfird and two anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments  . I also want to thank P , ichard Pierce for his helpful advice with the wording of the paper  . 
References
Catt , M.E . (1988). Intelligent Diagnosis of
Ungrammaticality in Computer-Assisted
Language Instruction . Technical Report
CSRI-218. University of Toronto.
Dyvik , II . (1980). Grammatik kogempiri.
I ) octoral thesis , University of Bergen.
Dyvik , II .  (1991) . The PONS Project . Features of a Translational System . Skrifsericn r . 
39, Department of Linguistics and
Phonetics , University of Bergen.
Larsen-Freenmn , D . and M.H . Long (1991).
An Introduction to Second Language
Acquisition Research . Longman , London.
Lc6drup , 11 .  (1989) . Norske hypotagmer . En LFG-besk rivels eavikke-verbal en or ske hypotagmer  . Novus , Oslo . 
Meisel , J , fI . Clahsen and M . Pienemann (1981) . On determining developmental stages in natural language acquisition  . 
Studies in second language acquisition 3 ( 1 ) : 109-35 . 
Odlin , T .  (1989) . Language Transfer . Crosslinguistic influence in language learning . 
Cambridge University Press , Cambridge.
Pollard , C . and 1. T . Sag (1987). Information-
Based Syntax and Semantics . Vohtme 1:
Fundamentals . CSLI Lecture Notes,

Saussurc , Iv . de (1915). Course in General
Linguistics . Published in 1959 by
MacGraw Ilill , New York.
Selinker , L . (1972). Interhmguage . In IRAL,
X .3, 219-231.
Tsujii , J . and K . Fujita (1991) . Lexical mmsfer based on bilingual signs : Towards interaction during transfer  . In Proceedings of EACL , Berlin , Germany . 

Morphology & Tagging
