LEXICAL FUNCTIONS AND MACHINE TRANS LATION
Dirk Heylen , Kerry G . Maxwell and Marc Verhagen
OTS , Trans10, 3512 JK Utrecht , Netherlands
CLMT Group , Essex University , Colchester , Essex CO 43 SQ , England
email : heylen@let . ruu . nl , kerry@essex . ac . uk , verhm@essex . ac . uk This paper discusses the lexicographical concept of lexical functions  ( Mel'~uk and Zolkovsky ,  1984 ) and their potential exploitation i the development of a machine translation lexicon designed to handle collocations  . We show how lexical functions can be thought to reflect crosslinguistic meaning concepts for collocational structures and their translational equivalents  , and therefore suggest themselves a some kind of language-independent semantic primitives from which translation strategies can be developed  .  ~  1 Description of the Problem Collocations present specific problems in translation  , both in human and automatic on texts . If we take the construction heavy smoker in English and attempt to translate it into French and German  , we find that a literal translation of heavy yields the wrong result  , since the concept expressed by the adjective ( something like ' excess : i_ve ' ) is translated by grand ( large ) in French and stark ( strong ) in German . We observe then that in some sense the adjectives stark  , grand and heavy are equivalent in the collocational context  , but that this is of course not typically the case in otber contexts  , efgrandeboite , stark e Schachtel and heavy box , where the adjectives could hardly be viewed as equiwdent  . It seems then that adjectives which are not literal translations of one another may share meaning properties specifically in the collocational context  . 
How then can we specify this special equivalence in the machine translation dictionary ? The answer seems to lie in addressing the concept which underlies the union of adjective and noun in these three cases  , i . e . , intensification , and hence establish a single meaning representation t br the adjectives which can be viewed as an interlingual pivot for translation  . 
Collocations have been studied by computational linguists in different contexts  . For instance , there is a substantial body of papers on the extraction of " frequently cooccurring words " from corpora using statistical methods  ( e . g . , ( Choueka et al ,  1983) , ( Church and Hanks ,  1989) , ( Smadja , 1993) to list only a few) . 
These authors focus on techniques for providing material that can be used in other processing tasks such as x The research rcpml cd in this paper was undm taken as the project " Collocations and the Lexicalisation of Semantic Operations "  ( ET-10/75 )  . Financial contributions weir by the Commission of the European Community  , Association Su is set ra ( Geneva ) and Oxford
University Press.
word sense disambiguation , iformation retrieval , natural language generation and so on . Also , the use of collocations in different applications has been discussed by various authors  ( ( McRoy ,  1992) , ( Pnstejovsky et al . , 1992), ( Smadja and McKeown , 1990) etc . ) . However , collocations are not only considered usefnl , but also a problem both in certain applications ( e . g . generation , ( Nirenburg et al ,  1988) , machine translation , ( Heid and Raab ,  1989 ) ) and fiom a more theoretical point of view ( e . g . ( Abeill 6 and Schabes ,  1989) , ( Krenn and Erbach , to appear )) . 
We have been concerned with investigating the lexical  . \[' unctions ( IJTs ) of Mel'0 , uk ( Mel'6uk and Zolkovsky ,  1984 ) as a candidate interllngual device for t be translation of adjectival and verbal collocates  . Our work is related to research by ( Heid and Raab ,  /989) . 
In some respects it is an extension of some of their suggestions  . Our work differs fi'om theirs in scope and also in the exploration of wtrious other directions  . 
2 Representation
The use we make of lexical functions as interlingual representations  , does not respect their original Mel ' ~ . uk ianiter pretation . Furthermore , we have transferred them from their context in the Meaning-Text Theory to a different theoretical setting  . We have embedded the concept in an HPSG-like grammar theory ? In this section we review this operation  . First we consider the features of Mel'~:nk's treatment that we have wanted to preserve  . Next we show how they have been imported into the HPSG fi'a mework  . 
2.1 Collocations and LFs
In Mel'~nk's Explanatory Combinatory Dictionary ( ECD , see ( Mel'~uk et al ,  1984)) , expressions such as une Jerme intention , unerdsistance a charn de , unargument depoids , unbruit it ~ fernal and donner unelef on , faireun pas , commetreun crime are described in the lexical combinatorics zone  . These " expressions plus oum oins fig6es " will be called ' collocations ' . They are considered to consist of two parts -- the base and the collocate  . In the examples above , the nouns are the bases and the adjectives and the verbs are the collocates  . 
The idea that all adjective collocates and all the verb  2Head Drivt ~ n Phrase Sllt lCItlrc granllllar , see ( Pollard and Sag ,  1987) , ( Pollard and Sag , to appear ) . For another treatment , : ff collocations in HPSG , see ( Krenn and ltr bach , to appear ) . 
1 240 collocate share an important meaning component-- -roughly paraphrasable as in tense and do respectively -- and the fact that the adjectives and verbs are not interchangeable but are restricted with this meaning to the accompanying nouns  , is coded in the dictionary using lcxical functions  ( in this case Magn and Oper )  . 
Each article in the ECD describes what is called a ' lexeme':a word in some specflic reading  . In the lexical combinatorics zone , we lind a list of the lexical funclions that are relevant o this particular lexeme  . 
Each lexical function is followed by one or more lex-crees  ( the result or value of the function applied to tile head word  )  . The idea is that each combination of the argument with one of the values of the function forms a collocation in our terminology  . The argument corresponds to tile base and each value is a collocate  . The ollowing f catures of this representation are important to us  . 
? l , exical functions are used to represent an important syutactico-semantic relation between tile base and the collocate  . 
? The restricted combinatorial potential of the collocate lexcme is accounted for by listing it at each base with which it can occur  . 
The secund of these characteristics points out that the collocational restriction is seen as a purely lexical  , idiosyncratic one : all collocations are explicitly listed  . 
One other aspect of collocations which we have to deal with is the relation between the collocate lexeme and its freely occurring counterpart  . Collocate lcxemes often differ in some respects from their literal variants while sharing other properties  .   Mel'6uk deals with this by including in the ECD an entry for the free variant and putting tile collocate -specific information in the entry for the base  ( with the result of the lexical functions )  . 
The fill entry of the eolh ) cate is the result of taking the entry for the free variant and overwriting it with the information provided at the base  . 
2.2 Collocations in HPSG
The three aspects of Mel'6uk's analysis we wanted to encode in HPSG were the following  . 
Coding the base-collocaterlation in the lexicon.
? Choosing the level at which \[ cxical functions will be situated  . 
? Relating the collocate information to the free wni-ant entry  . 
We have provided straightforward solutions to these problems  . For tire first problem we have taken over the ECD architecture at her directly  , by creating a ded-icated ' collocates ' field in the entry t  ) r bases which contains all the relevant collocates  . As far as the second problem is concerned , the obvious place to put lcxical funclions is in the semantic reprcs cntation provided by HPSG  . There are w trious reasons for this . One is that 13 ; sarcused in lhedeep syntax level in Mel'6uk's model , a level oriented towards meaning . Another ea-son is that this level seems most appropriate to be used in transfer/translation and because we want to use lexical functions in transfer  , this is where they should be . 
In contrast to the ECD , the meaning of the collocate is represented by the lexical function only  . 
The following is an example of the entry for criticism with the encoding of strong as a collocate  , a We use SEM_IND as all abbreviation for the feature path 

PHON criticism
REST cl'itic is ll (\[~)
COLLSSEM_IND VAIl\[~'
REST Magn(~l ~)
Just as in the ECD the base contains a specific zone in which the collocates are listed  . In our case , the feature ' COLLS ' has a set of lexical entries as its value  . 
Each collocate subentry bears the value of the lexical function in its semantics field  . In this representation the lexical function is chosen as the real semantic value of the collocate  . One should read the feature structure as specifying that the semantics of strong  ( as a collocate ) is the predicate Magn ( \[~ )  . 
The collocate subentry only provides partial information  . In fitct , it provides only the intbrmation that is specific to the occurrence of strong in its combination with criticism  . In this case only the semantics is given . We further assume that the lexicon also contains a'super-entry ' which provides all the information that is shared by all the diflerent occurrences of strong  . 
This entry is where the variable S strong points to  . Of course , other architectures that try to avoid redundant specification of information are equally possible  . For instance if one assumes a mechanism of default unification  , one can have S strong refer to the full entry describing'strong'in say its ordinary use  , and have the values that are particular to the collocational strong over write the values provided in the ordinary entry  , as in Mel'~uk's proposal . 
Collocations , Rules and Principles So far , we have not specified in what way one gets flom the lexical entries for the base and the collocate to the representation of the collocational expression  . 
ill HPSG , tile descriptions of complex expressions arc constrained by principles  . We will assume that collocations are snbject o the same constraints  . The ordinary rules of combination ( combining adjectives and nouns , for instance ) thus account for l nost of the properties of the collocational combination  . However , we are still left with the typical ' collocational restriction ' which nceds to be accounted for  . 
We havc therefore add cd a principle which says that constructions that are analysed as collocations  ( indicated by tile type COLI . OCATION ) are either head-adjunct structure or head -complement structures with specific rcstrietions holding between the head antithe adjunctor a Notic c that h crc we use a simple VCl ' Si on of HPSG based on  ( Pollard and Sag ,  1987 ) whereas the actual inplmn cntation was based on ( Pollard and Sag , to appear ) . 
1241 the head and the complement respectively . Let's consider the former case 4 , illustrated by the heavy smoker example , The adjunct daughter will contain the adjective collocate  . In such collocational constructions the collocate adjuncts have to be ' licensed ' by the noun or the head daughter  . This is implemented by requiring that the collocates field  ( C ' OI , LS ) of the head daughter contains a reference to a lexical entry that is compatible with the adjunct daughter  . In the literal reading of an expression such as heavy smoker  , the phrase will not be analysed as a COLL . OCATION and the principle does not apply . 
COLLOCATION-~e
IH ; jAIi )) 7I , ) R'IR ~ CELLS . . . ~1~\] . . .  1  . . . v ~ OLLOCATE . ., > \] COMP_DTRS < . . . \[ CELLS . . .  1\[~ . .\] . . .  >  3 Issues in Translation The project has tried to investigate the use of lexical functions as an interlingual device  , i . e . , one which is shared by the semantic representations of collocations in the language pairs ~  . 
The typing of a collocation with such a flmction opens up the way to a treatment of collocations inside a given language module and hence to a substantial reduction in the number of collocations explicitly handled in the multilingual transfer dictionary  . The existence of a collocation function is established during analysis  . 
This in fi ) rmation is used to generate the correct rans -lation in the target hmguage  . To illustrate , the English analysis modnle might analyse ( 1 ) as ( 2 )  . The transfer module maps ( 2 ) onto ( 3 ) which is then synthesised by the French module to  ( 4 )  . 
( l ) heavy smoker- ) ~  ( 2 ) Magn ( smoker ) -r ( 3 ) Magn ( fumeur )  -4  ( 4 ) grandfumeur The exmnple points out that the translation strategy is a mixture of transfer and interlingua  . The bases arc transferred but the representation f the collocate is shared between the source and the target representation  . 
This treatment of collocations rests , among others , on the assmnptions that there are only a limited number of lexical functions  , that lexical functions can be assigned consistently  , that all ( or a signilicant n m n berot ) collocations realise a lexical function , that lexical functions are not restricted to particular languages ~ etc  . In the following paragraph we present an outline of the translation process  . Next , we discussome of the problems which follow flom our approach and we propose some ways to solve them  . 
4"lb illustrate tile case of huad-conlplenlent structure solle couk lake some support verb construction  ( also called ligh ! verb consh'uction )  . 
t ; For another application of LFs in a muhilingual NLP context see  ( Held and l/aab ,  1989) . For other Imatlnents of collocations in language generation see  ( Nirenburg et al , 1988) and ( Smadj and
McKeown , 1990).
1 242   3?1 Lexical Functions as Interlinguaitwas assumed that the starting point for transfer is the semantic representation f the phrase  . Using a semantic representation as input to transfer implies that we relate semantic values of wm'ds and phrases  . For our purposes this is very satisfying since we will now be using the semantics of collocates instead of their orthography  , in other words : we use lcxical flmctions and abstract a wayfl'om the particular realisation of a collocate in a particular language  . 
We now state the relation between the semantic representations of the source language and target language  . 
The semantic relation between the phrase heavy smoker and its French counterpart can be made explicit in the tbllowing bilingual sign : 
ENISEM-IND\[VAR~\]
RUSTs moker(~l-b,Magn(\[~)
FRISEM_INI)\[VAR\[~1
REST f ., ,, ~ arI\[-~M . ~/ ~ I ) J
Typically , the lexicon will contain a bilingual sign for each possible value of RELN  . Thus , for translating heavy smoker into grandfume urwe will need the obvious entry tots moker-fumeur plus the entry below : 
ENISEM-IND\[VAR\[~\]
RESTM ' lgn(~)
The interlingual status of the lexical function is self-evident  . Any occurrence of Magn will be left intact during transfer and it will be the generation component that ultimately assigns a monolingual lexical entry to the LF  .  6 3 . 2 Problems l , exical Functions abstract away from certain nuances in meaning and from different syntactic realizations  . 
We discuss some of the problems raised by this ab -stract km in this section  . 
Overgenerality An important problem stems fiom the interpretation fLFs implied by their use as an interlingua-namcly that the meaning of the collocate in some ways reduces to the meaning implied by the lex-ical  . /unction . This interpretation is trouble-free if we assume that LFs always deliver unique values  ; tmlb , '-tunately cases to the contrary can be readily observed  . 
An example attested fiom our corpus was the range of adverbial constructions possible with the verbal head oppose : adamantly  , bitterl3; consistently , stead jastly , strongly , vehement l ); vigorously , deeply , resolutely , etc . 
The ftmction Magn is an appropriate descriptor in all cases since each adverb functions as a typical intensi-tier in this context  . However each adverb also denotes 6p'or more details we refer the reader to ( Hcylen ,  1993) . There we also discuss our implementation in Alep , the C . E . C . 's unification . 
based glTHillllilr writing environment.
some other n leaning aspect ( s ) . ' file in l precisiol of I , l ; s will n lean that we have no means of distinguishing between the vmious intensifiers possible it tile context of a given keyword  , and hence will not have sufticient inforination to choose the most appropriate translation where  , correspondingly , nntl tiple possibilities exist in tile target language  . All important question here is how dramatic this loss of translation quality really is  . 
It is essentially ill addressing the issue of ovel gener-ality that Mel'~:ukintroduce sub-and superscripts to lexical functions  , enhancing their precision and making them sensitive to meaning aspects of tile lcxical items over which they operate  . Superscripts are ill-tended to make then leaning of tile I  , Fn lore precise and he menero likely to imply unary inappings between argunents and vahlcs  , subscripts ae used to reference a particular semautic COlllpOUellt of a keyword  . 
The introduclion of such devices into tile account of l  , Fsdemt mstrates hoth the need tk ) r precision and the fact l bat it does seeul necessary to address semantic aspects of lexemes t and ng it cooccurrence rlatiols  . 
Ill fact it has been asserted by sonm ( e . g . , ( Anick and Pustciovsky ,  1990) , ( lteid and Raab ,  1989 ) ) that collocational systems are systematically predictable from the lexical SelllanticsOfnt  ) tUlS , it ) till atteln \] Jt to explore this notion furthel ; we have investigated the appr ( lach to nolninal semantics known as Qualia structure  ( Pustejovsky ,  1991 ) and consideed how this lnay ct ) tnple-uent the LF notion to inl prove its descriptive power  . 
alnoDgtile prolnising avenues that occur to tlS are  , firstly , tile postulation of I , F subscripts based on the four Qualia roles ( assuming thal these are timlexically hies ) relevant aspects of noun selnantics ) and , secondly , the application of l , Fs to senlaulic ( Qualia ) structures rather titan monolithic lexenles ; cg:tileI , l ; Ibm is used in delivering evahlative qualitiers which are standard expressions of praise or approval  . One could ilnagine application of the ftmctio over the Coust itt tliv c and Agentive to lcs of file noun lecture  , to deliver:
Flon(Const:lecture ) = intormative
Ben(Agent -.: lecture ) = clear
In both case stile idea is that tile precision of tile lexical function is essentially enhanced by appealing totile semantic facets of ils argunl cnt  . 
Syntaetic Divergences All other issue that has lo be raised conccl'llstile tratslation el ' collocations into non-colh  ) cational constructions . It ' we are toula intain a cosistent interlingual approach totile hanslation of these cases  , we ill UStcXlelldourl , F-bascd approach accordingly . We consider o/e case brielly . 
Cross-lingtlistic analysis reveals many cases where nonlinal-based collocation alctmstructs are real sodas conlpotnds in Gernmnic hulguages  , e . g . , hunch of keyssleutelbos . A possible account of such phenomenanlay be developed fronl the coucept  ( 11: merged I , Fs ( Mel'Suk and 7 , olkovsky ,  \]970) , Mcrgedi , Fs are ill . 
tended It ) be used ill cases where a value lexeme exists ) ' Fori/COlllllat'i , '-; on belw ? c/1 aspects of Ou . ' l\[iaslrtlCllll'CS alldlcxicalftm clions see ( Ilcylcn , to appear ) . 
which appears to effectively reduce ( " ncrge " ) an LF meanilg and its specitied agunent to a single lcxi-  . 
calised for n , rather than projecting a syntagmatic unit . 
We could argue that ill cases of compound lbrtnation  , exactly tile same process is to lie accounted tbr  , siuce the Ctlnl ) oundembodies both the concept mediated by tile LF and its argument lexet ne  . We coukl therefore allow compounds to be delivered as values of merged I  , F's , eg://Mult(sleutel ) = steutelbos . 
These observations are uscful in the MTCOltext if we assmne that we cau effect an appiug betwee u merged and unmerged lhSs and th crefore capture tile correspondence bt ween distinct structural realisations of tile same concept  . One way to ennflate such a In appi~gnight be through the use of Mel'~:uk's lexical paraphrasing rules  . For instance , one could conceive ol ' a lexical parapht as iug rule as follows ~: 
W--Mult(W)e,>//Mull(W).
If we assurne that illouruouolingual English lexi-cou  , we assign tile collocate bunch a stile Mult value of keyword k t ?  . , , and that accordingly in tile Dutch iexical entry I or sleutel we instantates leutel bos as the vahle of tilen lerged  1  , 1; // Mult , then we can use the paraphras-lug rule to effect an lapl fing between tile two  13  ; ' s and hence arrive at an iuterlingual approach to tile traus-lation of tile example  , despite structural nisu \] atches , i . e . , key + bunch \[ Mult ( key ) \] sleutelbos\[llMuit ( sleutel ) ll ; u ~ lhere x amples exist where productive nlor pho -logical processes  ( e . g . , affixation ' q ) lead to tile lexical is att in in one language of concepts that exist as syntag-nlaic constructs ill another  . Again , we suggest tile us cot ' nerged l , Fs and corresptmding nlappings via lexical paraphrasing rule  , ; as a possible Iranshttion strategy in these cases  ,   4 Summary and Conclusions hiihispaper we have discussed how the lexicographical concept of h  , xical . /iulction x , introduced by Mel ' ~ , ukh ) describe collocations , can lie used a still intmlingual device in the machine mlnslation of such structures  . 
We have shown how the essentials of the E ( 3 3 analysis can be embedded ill the lexicou and gramnlar of a unit cation based theory of language  . 
Our use of lexical functions as an intcrlingua as -sunles thai the relevant aspects of tile meaning of the colhleate are fully captured by the LK The  1  , 1: there . -foredetermilies tlm accuracy of ) rans latons , which mays This is our own nitalive it seems lohc the case as we examine the literal urcl hat neither l  , Fs such as Magll , BOll et c(i . c . , those repro sentrig slandard qualifiers /attributes  ) nor indeed met xed 13:s tt ' aluic in lexical imralf lnasing rides , Wc wouh largue thai cross linguistic analysis stiggt ~ Ms I hal Ih cy should enter this donm in  ; COln potm dlotlnation all do the rlypcs of legells at on appear I obcICe  ) liarpal ) of rig of II'a Ushlliollt R ; rosslllally o:~llocatioll , ' dCOllStrHctS , as WEilhlslralchere . 
9 ( )no could Ihink of an example such as mis-ituerl ) ret . 
1 243 be impoverished due to the generalised nature of basic LFs  . We have suggested some ways in which LFs can be enriched with lexical semantic intbrmation to improve translation quality  . 
The interlingual evel reflects what is semantically common to expressions which form translational equivalents  . It abstracts away from specific syntactic realisations  . Given that collocations may translate as noncollocations  , we also have to provide a way to representhese expressions using lexical functions  . We have provided an illustration on how to proceed in one such case  . 
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the following partners and colleagues : Susan Armstrong-Warwick  , Laura Bloksma , Nicoletta Calzolari , R . Lee Humphreys , Simon Murison-Bowie and Andr 6Schenk . 
References\[Abeill 6 and Schabes , 1989\]A . Abeill 6 and Y . Schabes . Parsing idioms in lexicalized tags . In EACL/89,
Manchester , 1989.
\[Anick and Pustejovsky , 1990\]E Anick and J . Pustejovsky . An application of lexical semantics to knowledge acquisition from corpora  . In Coling/90,
Helsinki , 1990.
\ [ Choueka et al . , 1983\]K . Choueka , S . T . Klein , and E . Neuwitz . Automatic retrieval of frequent idiomatic and collocational expressions in a large corpus  . ALLC Journal , pages 34-38, 1983 . 
\[Church and Hanks , 1989\]K . W . Church and E Hanks . Word association or ms , mutual information and lexicography . In ACL/89, Vancouver , 1989 . 
\[Heid and Raab , 1989\] U . Heid and S . Raab . Collocations in multilingual generation . In EACL/89, pages 130-136, Manchester , 1989 . 
\[ Heylen , 1993\] Dirk Heylen . Collocations and the lexicalisation of semantic operations  . Technical report,
OTS , 1993.
\[ Heylen , to appear \] D . Heylen . Lexical functions and knowledge representation . In E Saint-Dizier and E . Viegas , editors , Computational Lexical Semantics . CUP , to appear . 
\[Krenn and Erbach , to appear \] B . Krenn and G . E t = bach . Idioms and support verb constructions . In J . Nerbonne , K . Netter , and C . Pollard , editors , Ger-matt Grammar in HPSG . CSLI Lecture Notes , to appear . 
\[ McRoy , 1992\] S . W . McRoy . Using multiple knowledge sources for word sense discrimination  . Computational Linguistics , 18(1):130, 1992 . 
\[ Mel'Suk and Zolkovsky , 1970\] I . A . Mel ' ~: uk and A . K . Zolkovsky . Surla synth Ssesdmantique . T . A . 
lnformations , 2:1-85, 1970.
1244\[Mel'5uk and 2; olkovsky , 1984\]I . A . Mel'~uk and A . K . Zolkovsky . Explanatory Combinatorial Dictionary of Modern Russian  . Wiener Slawistischer
Almanach Sonderb and 14, Vienna , 1984.
\ [ Mel'6uk et al , 1984\]I . A . Mel'duk , N . Arbatchew-sky-Jumarie , L . Elnitsky , L . Iordanskaja , and A . Lessard . Dictionnair explicatif et combinatoire du frangais contempora in  . Les Presses del ' Universit 6 de MontrEal , Montreal ,  1984 . 
\ [ Nireuburg et al , 1988\] S . Nirenburg , R . McCardell , E . Nyberg , S . Huffman , E . Kenschaft , and I . Nirenburg . Lexical realization in natural anguage generation  . In Second International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Languages  , Pittsburgh ,  1988 . 
\[Pollard and Sag , 1987\]C . Pollard and I . Sag . b ~ for-mation Based Syntax and Semantics . CSLI , Stanford , 1987 . 
\[ Pollard and Sag , to appear \] C . Pollard and I . Sag . 
He addriven phrase structure grammar , to appear.
\[ Pustejovsky et aL , 1992\] J . Pustejovsky , S . Bergler , and E Anick . Lexical semantic techniques for corpus analysis . Computational Linguistics , 19(2):331-358, 1992 . 
\[ Pustejovsky , 1991\]J . Pustejovsky . The generative lexicon . Computational Linguistics , 17(4), 199 l . 
\[Smadj and McKeown , 1990\]FrankSmadja and Kathleen R . McKeown . Automatically extracting and representing collocations for language generation  . In 28th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Pittsburgh , PA ,  1990 . 
\[Smadja , 1993\]F . Smadja . Retrieving collocations ti ' om text : Xtract . Computational Linguistics , 19(1):143-177, 1993 . 
