ANARCHITI~CTURI , ; FOIlAUNIVFRSAI , LI , : XICON
A Case Study on Shared Syntactic hfform atlmlin Japanese  , l l i n d i , Bengali , (; reel < , and English
Naoyuki Nomura , Douglas A . Jones , Robert C . Bcrwicl <
Massachusetts Irtstitute of Technology
Artificial intelliger tceI , aboratory
nomura@ai.mit.edu
Introduction . ltindi
Given the prominence of the lexicon in most current  ( 3 ) !inguistic theories ( I . FG , HPSG , GB ) , lheinventory of language particular information left in the lexiconte serves special attention  . Constructing large computerized lexicons remains a difficult problem  , milding a large array of apparently arbitrary information  . 
I'hispapers shows that this arbitrariness can bc mn  , ;trained more than might have been previously hought  . In particular , arbitrariness of argument slructure , Bengalix ord sense , and paraphrasability will be shown not only ( 4 ) o be constrained , hut also to be integrally rchttcd . Our radical ) view is that wu'iation of lexical behavior across anguages is exactly like lexical variation within anguages  , specifically , the difference lies in the presence ~ rabsence of certain morphemes  . For cx at np le , the fact hat Japanese has richer possibilities it \] certain verbal mtterns is derived solely from its morphological  (  ; reeknventory . ~Put another way , language parameters (5) ; imply are the presence or absence of lexical material in he morphological componet \] t  . Observed hmguagc ~ ariation patterns reflect morphological systematicity  . 
I'he generative machinery for producing argutnent ; tructure positions is fixed across languages . 
i Anguistie Motivation.
A striking example underscoring universality of t rgument structure is the familiar Spray/Load  2 tlternation , shown in example (1) . Despite the many m'l'acc differences in these data across htnguages  , they , h are several essential properties . 
1) a . John loaded tile hay on the wag on.
b . John loaded tile wag on with the hay.
'( l\[)atlese2) a.
taroo-wa teep u-o boo-nimait , i.
Taro-NOM tape-ACC stick-DAT wrap-PRF'Tam wrapped the tape around the stick  . ' ttlroo-wa boo-ote epu-de Illaita . 
Tan>NOM stick-ACC tape-WITI l wrap-PR l ; ' Tam wrapped the stick with timtape . ' See Miyagawa , Uukui , and Tenny ( 1985 ) for at discussion of this ' ffect . Also see Mat'titt (1975, pp 441- . 455) , to r56 such morphemes + ; cobelow for add it iotml discussion o1' these alternations and for an alternative analysis  . 
See , e . g . , Levin (1993) and sources cited thcre , for example , ackendoff (1990) and Emends (1991) . 
a . shyamlathi--kokagaz-sclape..ta
Shyam stick-ACC paper-with wral ) . PRl ?' Shyam wrapped the stick with paper . ' b . shyamlathi-parkagazlape-ta
Shyam stick--on paper wrap . Pl , H :' Shyamwrapl ) edpaper around tilestick'a . jodulathi-taka a gajh-dicmurieche
Jodustick-l ) F3"paper-with wrap . PST ' Jodu wrapped the stick wilh the paper . ' 13 . jodulalhi Icka agaj Illurieche
Jodustick-on paper wrap . PST ' Jodu wrapped the paper around the stick'a . o7t c~vwE~I ~ op'tm ~ rocz vooxo1 ~ , ,7ovt o janis fortwse sane sto bagoni Janis I)I' ; Tload . PS Thay on . the wag on ' Jan is loaded the hay on the wag on ' b . oTt ( xvw lg ~ ( ) p'ccocre ' to\[laTovt bte oavo o jatfis fortwse to bagon illl CS all OJ an is I  ) ET load . P , qT the wag on wilhhay'Jan is loaded tile wag on with hay ' All of these hmguages have exactly the same alternation type  . Why ? Let us locus or ltilt role of figure and ground  3 in lhese examples . By " alternation " , we mean that in each language the y ' ~ , ,ure , as expressed as a direct object in the ( a ) cases , alternates wilh the fi'gure as expressed in an equivalent PP in the  ( b ) cases , l ) espite the differences in word order and case marking  , all share the properly that the direct object is subject oaso called llolistic l ~  , ffect : 4 Crucially , tim ( a ) sentences differ from the ( b ) sentences in exactly the same way in each of these languages  . In ( lb ) , where John loads the wag on with hay , the wagon is understood to have a wl_jole load of hay  , likewise if Johns mears the wall with paint , the : ~ By ' grotll/d ' , we mean the surface background involved in tile action represented by the verb  . By ' figure ' , we mean the object that is brought into contact with tile ground  , l : or example , in (1) , the hay is the figure which is brought into contact with the wag on  , in tills case , the ground . See Tahny ( 1978 ) and Emends ( 1991 ) for discussion of figure and ground in this connection  . 
.t Note that his property is not overtly grammatically marked  , as , say , the case of the direct (~ bject is . Seel , ev in ( 1993 ) and the references therefor additional discussion of the Holisticl "  , ffect . 
2 43 wall is understood to have more paint than if John merely smears paint on the w~dl  . Thus we may assume throughout that the word sense of the verbs as used in the  ( a ) and ( b ) cases are essentially identical , s The goal of the remainder of this paper is to analyze and implement this insight in a particular representation given by both linguistic and computational theory  , and apply it to MT . 
Basic Building Blocks : The Syntax of Word Formation We propose to replace idiosyncratic language p  , ' u ' ticular information with a new generative component that links universal abstract lexical structures with the surface that derives words from a small set of primitives  ) These structures are assumed to be identical across languages  . 

John put pp the hook on the shelf
John put the book on the shelf.
forms of words for each language . This generative VP machinery is based on work by Hale and Keyser  ( 1993 ) ///' ~ and Pustejovsky ( 1991a )  . The basic architecture is shown/:</" in Figure  1  . John %; ' P , ~~--~---"' . . . .
Lexiconl\[~)nllgormation : Generative Mechani . , , m \]\] ~ , - -\[ J Rules ? fC ? mp ? siti?n ~ tl ' asiel ~ ; ' i ' aing l/J , , eboo~
IIII "' ? cks:tl':"t?r'JJj
Fig .  1 . iSl ~ Syntax of Word Fornmtion Crucially , only a restricted number of argument structures can be generated  . The basic idea is that lexical Xbar structures are composed from the lexical categories N  , A , V , and P ( see fig .  2) , into trees whose Spec ( ifier ) and Comp ( lement ) positions after movement yield the range of possible  , argument structures . The lexical entries are subject o a series of filters  , as follows . 
Basic Building Blocks Rules of Composition
Lexical Categories * Xbar Projection
N(Noun ) = entity ? Move-Alpha
A(Adjective ) = state(including Head
V ( V erb ) = eventMovement)
P ( Preposition ) = relation
Filters ( in lime and Keyser (1993))
HMC : Head Movement Constraint ( Baker , 1988) ECP : Empty Category Principle ( Chomsky , 1981) FI : Full Interpretation ( Chomsky , 1986) UP : Unambiguous Projection ( Kayne , 1984) PL : Predication Locality ( Williams , 1980) To give a concrete xample of the system , we derive the thematic properties of the denominal verbs helve from compositional machinery operative in the lexicon by composing the noun form shelf with an empty preposition and an empty verb to yield the form shelve  . 
The structures are as shown in Fig .  2 . In short , argument structure is produced by syntax operative in the lexicons If an interlingua -based system does not constrain the number of word senses  , it faces some serious computational problems as is shown in section  3  . 
Fig .   3 shows the detailed schema for producing lexical entries for verbs  . We only note briefly here a few important properties of the system in Fig  .  3 . First of all , the main verb V is formed by Head Movement of X , and Y if it exists , to V . The categorial w due of X and Y are selected from the set N  , A , V , P . For example , the denominal verbs helve is built as shown above iv One can view the work by Dor  . (1993) and , previously , ethel attempts at lexical decomposition ranging hack through Scbanka ~ essentially the same in spirit  , bt , t without the detailed constrai ) m provided by Figure 2 . Wcregard similar proposals regard in ~" promotion " and " demotion " of arguments as essentially a reflectior of Move-:llpha  . The novelty of our proposal is that it is not ad hoethat is  , the same constraints independently justified in syntax all appear in lexic : d constructiol l  . The need for a tnon-arbitrary , i . e . , ar explanatory , account of lexical argument structure should b ( apparent . If lexical entries varied arbitrarily , we would Iogicall ~ expect at leasthe following space of lexical possibilities  , requ Mn1 upwards of a quarter-million diacritics . Let m be the number osemantic/thematic roles , such as Agent , Patient , Theme , Range Duration , and so on , and let n bet be number of grammatical functions Then  , when n = 4 and m = 50 ( a typical number for traditional NLI systems ) we have 251 , 176 different types of lexical entries ( Zi = 0t ( nm/li ! ( m-i ) !  )  . While some theories might propose this man distinctions  , it seems clear that Ibisim poses a very consider abllearning and engineering burden  . Many researchers , includin Makino (1991) and others , have noticed tim drawbacks of encod in thematic rules  , but in the absence of a clear alternative , still requir them for representing lexical intormation  . Furthermore , it is commo knowledge that verbs pattern into certain equiwdence classes withilanguages  ( e . g . , Levin ,  1993) , but arbitrary verb classes woul imply arbitrary variatk macross languages  . 

Figure 2, by selecting P as X and N as Y . The deadjectival verb red den is built by selecting A as X and selecting nothing as Y  . The ditransitive verb give selects V for : ) oth X and Y , following Larson (1988) . NP 1 , if it : xists , is the agent of the action , and NP2 , if it exists , is : he affected object of the verb , tollowing Hale and Keyser ~1993) . 
(vp ) ( NPI )((~,'~) XP
Q ~ ~ X,YEN,A,V,P,~(NP2)((.S.))
Fig .  3 . Schema for producing verb lexical entries . 
From the point of view of lexical representation a dMT  , the key constraint is that the entry for shelve has  . : lements that correspondirectly to the verb put and the:  ) reposition on in its representation . These elements then : ~ ecome awfilable for interpretation and for lranslation  . 
We show below that this is also part of the difference :  ) etween English , Japanese , Hindi , mid Greek verbs . 
Analysis and Applications for the Universal Lexicon 
Computational Motivation.
There have been some controversies about the merits md demerits of transfer-based MT and interlingua-based MT  . Typical transfer-based MTs prepare completely Jifferent sets of word senses for component languages ~ o that mapping among the word senses is completely arbitrary  , i . e . , the complexity may be calculated as ~ ipartitc graph matching  . We will assume an interlingua-9 ased MT , which supposedly makes all the component angt , ages share common word senses or socalled : on cepts and thus is constrained regarding word senses  . 
\[ to wever , interlingua-based MT still has substantial ) roblems in making up word senses . The number of 0 vorcl senses , their well-definedness , and the p , oblem about linking surface words depend on excellent  . exicographers . To give just one example here , the : filingual dictionary Sansee doo ( 1990 ) lists all the bllowing English translations tbr a Japanese verb kazaru 
We corate ) " h ~ , ~?7 ~: kazaru : or nament ; decorate ; a dorn ; dress ; embellish ; exhibit ; display ; put articles on show ; affect ; be affected ; grace a ; use fair words ; write an inflated style ; mince ; not being plain or flat 21ustering these into well-defined word senses is not an . -asy task ; thus , it is hard to answer the word sense . luestion . Suppose we have a symbol to represent the : or e meaning of kazaru  , which is shared by the English counterpart decorate  . Since kazaru has the syntactic nature of a Spray /Load type alternation  , the lexicon of a typical interlingua-based MT essentially provides the information described below  . 
word sense :
KAZARU-DECORATE syntactic information :
Verb Alternation Type 1:\[AGENT\]NOM(/Y :) , \[TIIEME\]ACC(~) , \[ MATERIAL\]W lTH(~)
Verb Alternation Type 2:\[AGENT\]NOM(/0::) , ITHEME\]ACC(~) , \[GOAL\]DAT/ON/OVEI ~ . ( E . )
AGF , NT , THEME , GOAL and MATERIAL are thematic roles that are the key elements in the interlingua  . 
NOM , ACC , WITII and DAT/ON/OVER are case-marking functions mapped to the surface case markers '/ Y  ; ' , ' ~ r ' , '- Q :' and ' ~ C' . Assuming a self-contained thematic role system and case-marking system  , these markings are to beew tluated on the corresponding example sentences and be decided independent of each other  . I Iowever , the two argument structures in the above diagram are actually in colnpatible with each other because the same thematic role THEME is assigned to different referents : grot md  , the patient obe decorated , and figure , the decoration to be attached to the patient . In effect , the MT system makes serious errors clue to its confusion of thematic roles derived from tim lexicon  . 
Example Input : (6)

Taro-gahana-okazatta.
Taro-NOM flower-ACC decorate-PRF
Taro decorated the flower.
In most contexts , the default reading of the inpnt sentence above should be interpreted as ' Taro decorated something with flowers  . ' This error was caused by the semantic lash in the lexicon  . In order to avoid such errors , lexicographers could over write some thematic roles disregarding semantic riteria  , but thus would spoil the interlingual \[ oundalion  . The remaining possible so hltion t % r this problem is to artificial divided the word sense  ( WS ) into two syinbols : WS with and WS on , two completely artifical word senses . 
Those two artil'icial word senses are essentially very similar to each other  , if not identical , and will pose difficulties for lexicographers because they will have to put arbitrary links among word senses for similar words in two languages or within the same language  . The two word senses put the two different argument structures in complete isolation once the analysis is completed and tim interlingua is fixed  ; the only thing the generation module of MT can do is accept the given word sense  ( WS with or WS on ) and generate only one argnment structure . 
This rigidity has a potential to generate sentences that The result for MT and lexicon construction is that the computational machinery will stay fixed across languages and thus uniformly constrain the complexity of argument structures eliminating most of the related arbitrariness  . 
It is wellknown that word-for-word translations are not the paradigmatic case  . The architecture we propose entails a significant improvement in isomorphic mappings between languages  . However , the isomorphism is not at the level of words , but rather , at the level of morphological elements that enter into the lexical syntactic formation of words  . Thus it is no accident hat'put the book on the shelf ' is a near paraphrase of ' shelve the book  '  , and it is no accident that ' put the book on the shelf ' is a closer isomorphic map for the Japanese translations of ' Johnshelved the book ' shown in  ( 1 )  . The entailment is that's helve the book ' has the same morphological material as ' put the book on the shelf '  , but the former has an empty preposition and an empty verb that incorporates a noun  . 
In particular , we show how to replace thematic roles with the lexical syntax proposed in Hale and Keyser  ( 1993 ) and augmented by work in Pustejovsky ( 1991a ) \] This technique yields several potential benefits :  ( i ) robustness of the lexicon ,   ( ii ) greater flexibility in selecting more natural renditions of target language structures in translation  , as in (7) below . Let us consider each of these in turn with specific examples  . 
(7) a . John-wa hon-ot an a-noue-nioi-ta.
John-TOP book-ACeshelf-GEN upper place-ATput-PRI  ~ 
John put the book on the shelf.
b . John-wahon-ot a na-nisimatta . ( more accurate ) John-TOP book-ACC shelf-DAT pt , t . away-PRF John put away/stored the book on the shell '  . 
if paraphrasability and translation must conform to the lexical syntactic structures in Figures  2 through 4  , we have a natural method for producing a constrained space of possible translations  , namely , the only structures that are allowed are those produced by thc mechanism outlined in Fig  .  4 . To highlight the relationship between paraphrasability and transhttability  , consider the alternation behavior of several verbs within English  , shown in (2) . Notice in particular that different verbs participate in one or both halves of the alternations  , or in neither half . As we will see , the same facts hold across distinct languages . 
Nonalternation :
Not all verbs that participate in one half of the Spray/Load alternation participate in the other half  , as (8) and (9) and (10) from English , Japanese , and Hindi illustrate . Interestingly , in these cases verbs across VA long with Emonds ( 1992 )  , we propose shifting a significant portion of the machinery out of the semantics and into syntax  , in the brm of syntactically enriched lexical entries  . 
languages also pattern alike in terms of nonalternation ~  . 
This gives additional support for our representation proposal  . 
English ( g ) a . John covered the baby with the blanket . 
b . * John covered the blanket over , onto, . . . the baby . 
Japanese (9) a . .k;~l~;)l'~/~ , 13i~g-gli~F3< , ? ~ otaroo-wa akan boo-omo of u-deoot-ta Taroo-TOP baby-ACC bhmket-WITtt cover-PRF ' Taro covered the baby with the bhmket  . ' taroo-wa mool'u-oakan boo-nioot-taTaro-TOP hhm ket-ACC baby-I  ) AT cover-Pl ~ , l : ' T aro covered the blanket over the baby . '
Hindi ( I0) a . jOn-neka prc-sebacce-kodlm ka
Jolm-ERG cloth-WlTI 1 child-ACC cover ' John covered the baby with a cloth'b  . * jOn-neka pre-ko hacce-ke-upard haka Jolm-ERG cloth-ACC baby-ON  . TOP . OF cover Thus there are fot . tr logical possibilities for alternation and nonalternation  , as illustrated in Fig .  4
Type ( a )


Subject t to listic
VNPI\[with NP2\]
Ground Figurellolistic


NI'2\[onto/into/...NPtl

Vcrb Classi.
( a ) John loaded I he wag on with hay.
(b ) Jolmlo.'~ded the hayohm I hewagon.
Verb Classii.
( a ) * John poured the glass with water.
(b ) John poured lhewater into the glass.
Verb Classiii.
(a ) John covered the baby with the blanket.
(b )* John covered the blanket onto the baby.
Verb Classiv . *( a ) * John gurgled lheglass with water . 
(b )* John gurgled the water into the glass.
Fig . 4. The Spray-Load alternation.
The nonalteruations arc critical clues to discover in XSee Levin  ( 1993 ) for an extensive survey of such phenomena . 
2 46 he correct lexical representation for tim verbs and hence he structures that translate a more direct mapping across anguages  . We propose that the key to the solution is hat in the non-alternating cases  , prepositions are r worporated into the verb in lexical syntax just as shelven Fig  .  3 . For exmnple , the lexical entries for pout , and ' over contain prepositions as shown in (10) . We assume hat the lcxical representation for the prepositions encode speeifications for figure and ground  , represented as F ~ ndG in (10) . In essence , what X on Y means is that X a figure on the ground Y  . htfact , this is times sence ~ f what prepositions " mean  "  , at an abstract level . Thus he prepositions are the primitives in our system  , and once pt such as figure and ground are deriwttive  . This ntaihnent is illustrated by the linking lines in Fig  .  5 . 

Fig . 5 An Explanation For The Spray-Load

The lexical entry for load does not contain a preposition nd hence is free to alternate  . Thus the reason why aerb does not participate in part of an alternationix that : incorporates lexical material which clashes with otential complements  . The reason that ' cover the blanket n the baby ' is bad is that covet " already encodes theigure and ground relationship by incorporating with into : s represent a to in -- that is  , he preposition with is frozen " l to the verb's representation  . Adding an overt PP with n creates a clash in figure and ground relations  . Adding compatible PP to a verbal structure with an incorporated ' introduces redundancy  , but is the structure ix still well-:~rmed . 
alternation Mismatches Across Languages.
So far , then , we have seen only that verbs across iff crent languages pattern alike  . Surely the , e must be ' ifferences or else MT efforts wo nld have succeeded : ragago  . Fig .   6 displays all the logically possible ~ lationship between verbs across two languages  . 
Types A , F , and K verbs behave identically in a language pair  . For example , the introductory sentences ( 1 ) - ( 5 ) illustrated Type A correspondences , where L , = English and L2cJapanese , Hindi , Bengali , Greek . 9 We have found ( B , C , G , E , I , H ) -- the unshaded cells in the Figure 5--to be the richest source of crosslinguistic information  , namely , the verbs that do not con'espond directly are the most informative regarding the nature of word formation  , given the model that we have adopted . 
Not accidentally , they are precisely the ones that arc not only of particular interest for our framework  , they arc polentially very difficult for machine translation  , simply because , for some of them , the , ' e is no way to take advantage of the surfitce similarity of argument structures  . 
Recall that w c assume that the word sense for these verb six fixed across hmguages  . Consider , then , the TypeCalternation correspondence below , where L , = English and 1 , 2 < Japanese , Hindi , Bengali : ' ~ (21 carly , type P verbs should constitute most of the verbal w ~ cabnlary  , since most verbs do not participate in the Spray /Load Alternation  , or in any given alternation , for that maner . Types ( D , II , I , ,M , N , O ) do not correspond at all --- actually , we expect that these verbs do not exist , given the considerations regarding likely candidates across languages  . 
'_l'ype-._l,l ~, i
Obj = Oround , ~ Pp = l % ure
L2 = ai : Obj = Ground , PP = Figure A
L2-~ . ii : * Obj = Ground , PP = Figure E1 . 2:: aiii : Ol ~ j=Ground,*PP=Figure l
L2=c~iv:*Obj=Gmund,*PP=Figure
I . l ~ i i  L l - ~ . iiiLl=~iv*Obi=GroundOl~j=Ground*Obj = Gmund
PP = l ; igure B . . . . * lq ~= Figure c.

Fig .  6 . Cross-Linguistic alternation model : 16 logical types for tile Spray-Load " alternation . 
Classification of patterns in Fig . 4 for a given verb in languages 1 , l and 1 , 2 into tile following types AP : ( Shaded cells are exact cms slingtfistic c!?\ [ respondences  . ) ( a ) John decorated the wall with posters . 
(b ) * John decorated the posters over , onto . . . .  the wall . 
Bengali ( a ) raamghar-epht , lsajieche
Ramroom-ON flowers decorate ' Ram decorated the room with flowe  , ' s ' ( b ) ramnphul-dieghars a jieche
Ramflowers-WITH room decorate ' Ram decorated the room with flowers '  . 
Hindi ( b ) raamphul-seghars a jaya
Ramflower-WITH room decorate ' Ram decorated the room with flowers ' 
Japanese
John-wa kabe-oposutaa-dekazat-ta.
John-TO Pwal I-ACC poster-WITH ' John decorated the walt with posters  . '
John-wa posutaa-oka be-nikazat-ta.
John-TOP poster-ACC wall-DAT decorate-PR lv decorate-PRF representation  , though it is not visible at the surface level . Let us consider another case for MT :
Japanese to English : konoheya-wa kabe-nihana-o kazar-oo this room-TOP  waI1-DAT flower-ACC decorate-LET'S ( coarsely ) translated into : " As for this room , let's decorate the wall with flowers , ' but with UL techniques might be more fluently translate cas  , " Let's decorate this room by putting flowers on the wall  . " Even more broadly , we would like to suggest promising direction for the development of our system Consider the well -known difficulty of translatin ~ Japanese-wa phrases into English  . Given the ubiquit ) of-wa phrases as compared with the relative rarity oE nglish as-for phrases  , we can conclude that render in t-wa as a s-jbris not the best translation  . 
Let us now consider cases in Japanese and Hindifi which the preposition type element ixvisible  , and whicl overtly affects the alternation type . 
Alternation Type Change:
There are additional crosslinguistic differences , whict may be observed in the surface form of the verbal structure In Japanese  , one can add the verbal morpheme kake t ~ oou . This change , from alternation type F to type H , i shown below . 
raamghar-mephulsa jaya(a ) ~ l~lI-2) Jli/uJ)J ~ ; ~ , \[ i ~ C~<~\]coRamroom-WITH flowers de corate taroo-wa akan boo-omo of u-deoot-ta'Ram decorated the room with flowers ' Taroo-TOP baby -ACC blanket-WITH cover-PP  , F ' Taro covered the baby witb the blanket . ' As in the case of cover discussed above , the explanation is quite simple within our framework  . For the English ( b )* ~ f ' l ~ ~ . (li~gJj?/~,JJic_N . < , ? C_overb decorate , there is an incorporated preposition , * tamo-wamooft , -oakan boo-nioot-ta namely with , in its lexical representation . There is a Taro-TOP bhmket-ACC baby-DAT cover-PRF type clash because the direct object cannot be both figure ' Taro covered the blanket over the baby  . ' and ground , in the case of "* John decorated posters on the wall "  ; see Fig .  7 . 
* laroo-wa akan boo-ollloo\['tl-de , ooi-k , ' lke-taTaro-TOP blanket-ACC baby-DAT cover -OVIHGPRI : ' Taro covered the blanket over the baby  . ' ii\[ 0 ~taroo-wa moofu-oak an boo-ni I John Idec?rate (   ) posters on (   , Taro-TOP blanket-ACC baby-l ) ATI ' Taro cove , 'ed timbk mket over the baby . ' ooi-kake-tacover-OVER-PP , I Fig .  7 . Type clash with " decorate posters on the In Japanese  , kake acids an aspect of ' trajectory't , wall " , tile verb sense . More precisely , as the gloss ' over suggests , kake rescues oou from its type clash just a To address one of our main points  , cases like the one the preposition with does in English  . l to wever , ' corm in Fig .   7 pose special problems for machine translation cannot be so rescued in English simply because there i because the translation of the word sense of English no morphological lifer aft  . Note further that the exampl decorate into its Japanese counterpart kazeru does not in  ( a ) just above also behaves as expected with , ' espech ave a similar type clash . Thus the problem is that the to the llolistic effect  . In ( a ) akanboo-o'haby'isth English verb has a preposition frozen  , into its lexical covered . Sentence b ' has no such effect regarding the baby  . mIn Hindi , one can replaced haknaa ( ' cover ' ) with dakh-denaa ( ' give cover ' )  . This morphological change turns a type F alternation contrast into a type B  , as described in Fig .  6 . 
( a)jOn-neka pre-sebacce-kod haka
John-ERG cloth-WlTtl chih I-ACC cover ' John covered the baby with a cloth '  ( b ) * jOn-neka pre-kobaccc-ke-upard haka John-ERG cloth-ACC baby-ON  . TOP . OF cover(a ) ' jOn-neka pre-sebacce-ko
John-ER ( \] cloth-Wl Tll child-ACC ' John covered the baby with a clotlfd hak-di-yaa cover-give-PRF  ( b ) ' iOn-heka pre-kobacce-ke-upard hak-di-ya a John -ERG cloth-ACC baby-ON  . TOP . OF covcr-givePl > , FP ut briefly , our view is that variation of lexical t : ~ e havior across languages is exactly like lexical w triation within languages  , specifically , the difference lies in the presence or absence of certain morphemes  . 
Ontologically speaking , then , what language parameters are is the presence or absence of lexical material in the morphological component  . The observed patterns in language variation is then reflected in morphological systematicity  . For example , the fact that Japanese has richer possibilities in certain verbal patterns is derived from its morphological inventory  . In specific , the reason that it is impossible for English verbs to behave like certain corresponding Japanese verbs is that English lacks an equivalent of tim Japanese aspectual morphetnes ts'ukusu'exhaust'  , kakeru ' trajectory verb ' , etc ) ~ But recall , we find that load , for example does behave precisely like its corresponding verbs in Japanese  , l l i n d i , Bengali , and Greek . in cases where verbs dom ) t appear to be have a like , apparent differences are resolved hyaprocess of language particula  , " morphological behavior : lor example , the verbal suffixes ( and prefixes ) of Japanese such as-tsukusu'exhaust'alter verb argument structure enough to bring them into correspondence with their former English non -counterparts  . 

We believe that our approach is applicable universally  . 
Future work to be done is to complete our survey o1' the approximately 150 types of verbal alternations of Levin mlt might betm derstood pragmatically to entail that perhaps the parents were wo  , ' ried about covering the baby too much , and wanted to allow the baby to breath easily by allowing its bead  , Ibr example , to remain uncovered . In brief , here it is the compositional belm vior of morphemes that yields different alternation pa !adigms  . 
(1993) , and augment our analysis with further ideas from Hale and Keyser  ( 1993 )  , Pustejovsky (1990 , 1991b ) , and others , and to extend the coverage to Japanese and other languages  . Our highly constrained system should also prov ide highly desirable circumscription of computational lexicons  . Given the universal aspects of our lexical representations  , we also expect manageable applications to machine translation  , along the lines that we have suggested . 
References \] hnonds , J . E .  (1991) . Subcategorization ad SyntaxBased The ta-Role Assignment  . Natttral xmguage and
Linguistic Theory .9.
llale , K . and S . J . Keyser (1993) . On Argument Structure and the I + exical F , x pression of Syntactic Relations . In 77re Viewfi'om Bulding 20: F+s says in Linguistics in Honor of Syh , a in Bromberg et , Kenneth1lale and Samuel Jay
Keyser ( eds ), MIT Press.
Jackendoff , R .  (1993) . On the Role of Conceptual Slructure in Argument Selection : A Reply to lh nonds  . Natural Language attd Linguistic 7? leory , II . 
I , evin , B .  ( \[ 993) . F , nglish Verb Classes arid Alter , ations ~ AI ' reliminary Investigation '" The University of Chicago 

Marlin , S . I '; .  (1975) . A ReJelence Grammar of Japanese , Yale
University Press.
Makino , T .  (1991) . Natural I , anguage Processing ( in Japanese ), pi) . 84, Oomu-shalad . , ISBN4-274-07658-Xl:ukui , N . , S . Miyagawa , aml C . . Tenny .  (1985) . Verb Classes in l';nglish and Jap , ' mese : A Case Study in the ltl teraction of Syntax  , Morphology and Semantics . Lexiconl " roj cet
Working F ' apers ++13, MIT.
Pustejovsky , J . (1991a ) . The Gerterative Lexicon . Computational
Linguistics , 17.4.
Pustgiovsky, . I . . (1991b ) . The Syntax of Event Structure . 
Cognition .41.3.
Sanseedoo . (1990) New Crown Japanese-lnglish Diction my I?ev . 5,
Sanseedool+t d . Japan
Talmy , l, .  (1978) . Figure and Ground in Complcx Sentences , in , losel ) h(hecn hcrg(ed . ) Uttivers alxo J ' lhtman Lan2uage:
Syntax , Vol 4. Stardord.

