REFERRING TO WORLDOBJECTS WITH TEXT ANDPICTURES
Elisabcth Andr6, Thomas Rist
Gcrman Research Center for Artificial Intelligence  ( DFKI ) 
D-66123 Saarbriickcn , Germany , c-mail : and re , fist@dfki . uni-sb . dc
ABSTRACT : It of tcn makes sense to employ both text and pictures wheureferring to world objects  . In this paper , we present a model for referring which is based on the assumption that concepts may be activated not only by Icxt  , but also by pictures and t cxt-pietur c combiniltious  . By means of a case study , we demous lrale that l ' ailure aml success of referring acts can be cx plaln cd by thcuser's ability to infer ccrtaiu links between mental representations and object descriptions  . Finally , we show how the model has been incorporated into a plan-t  ) ased multimedia prcseata-tion system by defiaiug operators lk  ) r concept activation . 
1 INTRODUCTION
From a speech act theoretical point of view , referring is a planncd action to a chicve certalu go : ds  ( Appcltaud Kroa-fold ,  1987) . Although natur ~ language may be the most conventional vehicle for referring  , it has been widely ac-ccpted that pictures caube used ~ swell  . For example , Goodmann ( 1969 ) points out that pictures can be cmploy cd to refer to both an individual object and the type of which an objcct is an exemplary of  . Morcovcr , there arc good reasons to include pictures in refcrring acts  . l ' icturcs effectively convey discriminating object propertie such as surface atlributes and shape  . If au object can only be discriminated against alternatives through ils location  , a picture may provide the spatted context of the object  . Since depictions arc explicit material representations of the world objects to which they correspond  , new attributes of the type ' being dcpicted as . . . ' arc iutroducc(l which , inttl rn , provide an additiom d source for object discriminatiou  ( e . g . , the knob which is reprcscnlcd by thc black circle  . . . ) . Last but not least , several graphical focusing tcch niqucs can bc applied to effcctiv cly constraiu the set of alternatives  ( c . g . , arrows , blinking ) . Unfortunately , there is also a dark side of the picture . An obvious drawback is that pictures do not provide for syutactical devices to distinguish between a reference-specifying and a predication -specifying part since objects and their properties are hardly separable once depict " c d  . A uoth cr difliculty is that pictures lack the means to distinguish deliuit c from indefinite descriptions  . Thus , it may remain unclear wh cth craparticular object or whether ~ m  , -u-biUzu-y exemplary of a class is depicted . The conclusion we can draw from these considerations is that it often makes senscto employ bofll text lind pictures when rcf cr-riug to domain objects  . Pictures may be used in order to simplify verbal reference x pressions  . On the other hand , ambiguitics of pictures cauber csolv cd by providing additional information throngh text  . When an ~ dyzing illustrated documeul such as assembly matmals and iustructions for use  , diff crcnt kinds of rcfcrring expression can be found : Multimedia referring expressions rcf cr to world objects via a combination of at least wo media  . : Each medium con-vcyssom cdiscriminatlug attributcs which in sum  , allow for a proper identification of the intended object  . Examples ~ ue NL expressions that are accompanied by point ingestures and text-picture combinations where the picture provides information about he appe ~ u ' ance of au object mid the text restricts the visual search space as in " the switch on the fronts id c "  . 
Anaphoric referring expressions refer to world objects in an abbreviated form  ( llirst ,  1981 ) presuming that they are already explicitly or implicitly introduced in the discourse  . 
Th c p resentation part to which , -manaphoric expression refers back is called the antecedent of the referring expression  . In a multimedia discourse , we have not only to h , ' mdle linguistic anaphor a with linguistic antecedents  , but also linguistic anaphor a with pictorial antecedents  , midpictorial anaphor a with linguistic or pictorialm ~ tecedents  . Ex , ' un-pies , such as " the hatched switch , " show that the boundary bct w cen multimedia referring expressions and  , ' maphor a is in distinct , llere , we have to consider whether the user is intended to employ all parts of a presentation for object disambiguation or wheth crone wants him to infer anaphoric rclations bct w cen them  . 
Cross-media referring expressions do not refcr to world objects  , but to document parts in other prcs cnultiou mcdia  ( Wahlsl cretat . , 1991) . Examples of cross-media referring expressious are "the upper left comer of the picture " or " Fig  . x " . in most c , ' tses , cross-media referring cxprc , ssions are part of a complex multimedia referring express siou where they serve to direct herc ~ lder 's attention to part  . s of a document that has , also to be employed in order to find the intended referent  . 
When viewing referring as a planned action , we have to specify which goal suuderly the use of differentypes of referring expressions  . Appelt , ' rod Kronfeld ( 1987 ) distinguish between the literal goal and the discourse purpose of a refcrence act  . Wher c~ls the literal goal is to establish mutuld belief between a speaker and a hearer that a particular object is being talked about  , the discourse purpose is to make the hearer ecognize what kind of identification is appropriate and to have him identify the referent accordingly  . When addressing illustrated ocmn cnts , the question arises of what id cutification means when domain objects are referred to via pictures  (  , ' rod text ) . As with h'm guage this varies from discourse to discourse  . For exmnple , if the user is confronted with a pictures howiug how to insert the filter of a coffee machine  , he has to recognize whether believes
Pigurc ( llas-position rlspls )   ( Temperature-control rl_s )   ( llas-position r3_ . sp3s )   ( On hfff switch r3s )   ( Corcfrl_srlu )   ( Corcfrlsr 230 ( Coref r3_s r3 u )   ( Corcfr3s r4 . u)
System believes
Wsel " believes ( this-position rl_upl_u )   ( Teml ) crature-control r2u )   ( Ilas-position r3 up3 u )   ( On/off-s wilch r4 u ) iC ) r ( ArM ( Corcfx ' lur2u )   ( Corerr3t , l~-u ) )  ( Aqd ( Core frlur 4u )   ( Corerr3ur2_u ) ) ) I : Modelling Example : I ) iff l : renl Knowledge Concerning the Identity of Objects any object with the feature ' being a liltcr ' can be inserted or whctlter a particular object is lUC all t  . Ill the first case , he has to idenlify the piclurct ) l ~ , jcclas all cxemphuy of a certain class whereas , illtile second case , hc has to look for some thiugin lhework l which tits the graphical depiction  . 
luother siluations ,   ) dentil ) cation involves establishing a kind of cohesive link between do eluneut parts  . If I he user is coufrouled with a sequeuce of pictures showing an object lmm different angles  , he has to recognize that in all pictures the same ol ~ jcct is depicted  ( pictorial anaphor with pictorial anlecedent )  . When re : aliug an utterance , such as " the resist or in the ligurc above , " he has to recognize au anaphoric rchttionship between the textual closer  ) plion and Ihcgraphical depiclion ( linguistic anaphor with pictorial antecet & nt )  . 
Previous work on Ihc generation of rclc ) ring expressions in a multimedia cnvirot uncnt has mainly cotl c clltrated Oil single refer cnce phenomena  , such as references topic torial material via natural language and pointing gestures  ( Allogayer et al , 1989; C . laasseu , 1992; Stockelal . , 1993 ) and the generation of cross-media references lrom text to grlq fl > ics  ( McK cownctal . , 1992; Wahlsterctal . , 1993) . The aim of this paper is , however , to provide a more general model Iha ! explains which kinds of corcfer culial link bct weeu referring expressions  , objects of the world : rod ol2iccts of the multimedia preseutalion have I obe established to ensure ritecout preheusibility of atrcl crring expression  . 
2AMODEl,F()RRI ,.3,' ER1UN(;WITIITEXTAND
PICTURI '; S
When referring to domain objects a presentation system h  ; ts to lind intelligible object descriptions which will activate a pln Ol ~ riate repres cutations  . We assume thaire prcs cnla-lions can be act ) wiled in the sense of picking them out of a set of representations which arc already available or which have to be built lip  ( c . g . , by localiziug an object in a user's visual licld  )  . R c p r c s c n l a t i o n s c a n b c a c t ) wiled by textual descriptions , by graphical descriptions or by mixed descriptions  . Whereas the order in which representations are activated by a text is it tlhmt lccd by the discourse structure  , it is less than clear ill which order a picture activates representations  . If scvcral objects are depict cd , the conc-SlXmding rcprescntatious may be activated simultaneously  . 
2 . 1 Rcprcsenlations of World ( ) bjecls qb ensure tile transferal ) )lily of our al ) pmach , wcd on't presuppose a ceraill kllow ledge representation language  . 
l\[ow cvcl , iu \] essential part of the model concerns file dis-tinct  ) on between the system's belicl\s about the world and the system's beliefs about the user's beliefs  . We represent these beliefs ill different models . For example , the system may classify acert : du object ) k smlespresso machine while it as stll UeStile user regards tile object as a coffee machine  . 
l : urtherniore , we have to COll sider that the user's alld the system's belief sal ? mt the identity of objects may differ  . 
The system may bclicve that the user has different representations for ouc and tile  . salne object without knowing how they arc r clatt x l to each other  . Conversely , it may happen that the user is assumed to have only one representation for obj ccls which tile systeln considers as distinct entities  . 
As a coascquence , our models can coutaiu dill'ereutrcpre -seutaliolls for one and the sanle world object  . We use tile predicate ( Corer IW ~ Irep2)I0c , X plCSs thaire p 1 and rep2 arc representations of the stune world object . 
Fig .   1 gives an example of how to use the concepts introduced above  , l . ct's start li'om the billowing situation taken from an espressom achined/mudu : " lain system knows that here are two switches  ( the temperature coutrol and tile on/off switch ) and also knows where they m'ek~cated .  1 . etrl_smid r3_s corrcs poud to lhesy stem's internal rcprcs cm rations of the switches  . The user is assumed to look at the espresso machineaud to see two switches  . Letrl_u and r3_u corresl?md to iutenml reprcs cn latious of the switches which I he user builds up when looking at timmachine  . We assume that tile user id so knows of the existeuce of the on/off switch and file temperature control  , but is not able to localize them . l . et r2_u and r4_u be the user's representations for tile temperature control and the on/off switch  . 
" lliefact that heo ) lly knows that one of tile switches lies ccs must be the temperature control and the other file on / oil switch can be expressed by metals of a disjunction  . Either a corer , elation holds between rl_u and r2_u and between r3_u aud r4_u or conversely , between rl_u and r4_u and be ~ t we cu r3_u and r2_u   . The couucctiou between the system's rcprcs cnlations rl_s and  r3_s to timrc presentalious tile user is assumed to have  . is also expressed by coreliz reuce relations . 
2.2 Reln'esent : dion of Descriptions
As nmntion c dill section 1 , descriptions can be co ; nlx ) stal with such descriptions , we associate with each syntactical unit ( depictions , noun phrases , etc . ) the set of objcct rcp-reseutations which will be activated by that particular part  . 
The referent of tile whole description is then considered as a member of th c intersection of all sets resulting from partial descriptions  . 
An important prerequisite of our approach is that the system explicitly represents how it has encoded information in a presentation  . Inspired by ( Mackinlay ,  1986) , we use a relation tupl coftim form : ( Encodes nwans it l formation context-slmce ) to specify tim semantic relationship Imtwccn a textual or graphical means  , and timinh ) rmatioutim means is to convey in a cerl adn context space  . In our approach , the third argulnent refers to tile context space to which the encoding relation corresponds R ~ and not to a graphical language as in Mackinlay's al~proach  . This enables us to use one and the same presentation means differently in different context spaces  . For example , a depiction of ancsprcs so machine may refer to an individual machine in one context space  , but may serve as a prototypical representative of an espresso machine in mmth cr  . In addition , we not only specify encoding relations bct wccn individual objccls  , but ~ d so specify encoding relations on a generic level  ( e . g . , that tile property of being red in a picture n codestile property of being defectiutile world  )  . 
While it can be assumed that a user reads a text inse-queutial order  , it is often not clear at which times a user looks at a picture  . ThercR ) re , it makes not , ' alway sense to further distinguish between an mlaph or and its antecedent  . 
Fortunately , our approach does not require identilying parts of a presentation as anaphor and antecedents  . It suffices to recognize which parts of a description ~ u ' e intended to encode a uniquely determined object  . ~ Ib expres such cohesive relationships between presentation parts p  1 and p2  , we define the predicate : ( Encodes Same plp2c )  : =  ( Exists w ( And ( Encodes plwc )   ( Encodes 1 ) 2wc )   ( For all v ( Implies ( Or ( Encodes plvc )   ( Encodes p2vc ) )  ( Coref wv ) ) ) ) ) The first part of this dcfiuition expresses that there exists an object w thaipland  p2 encode in tile context space c while the second part means that this object w is uniquely determined  . 
2 . 3 Links between Representations and Descriptions In uuderstanding a referring expression  , the user has to recognize certain links between actiwtt cdmental representations  , between descriptions and mental representations , and between textual and graphic , ' dparts of dcscriptions . 
Which links are present in a description and which have to be inferred varies from sifimtiouto situation  . To illustrate this , let's have a look at a case study carried ot , t in our espresso machine domaiu where text -picture combinations are used to explain how to operate an espressom a chiuc  . We assume that tile user is rexlUested to tunl the temperature control of an espresso machine  . In this case , identification means actiwtting a representation the user builds up when localizing the referent in his visual field  . Furthermore , we presumetile user knowledge of the espresso machine as in Scction  2  . 1; i . e . , file user knows of the existence of tile on/off ~ and the temperature control  , has visual access to tile two switches in the world but is not able to tell them apart  . In the diagrams below , we use the abbreviations ES , Caud Efor die relations Encodes Same , Coref and Eucodes respectively . 
In tile document fragment shown in Fig .  2 , the textual rcfcrcncc expression uniquely determines a referent  , but activates are prcs cutation ( r2_u ) which docsn't contain any information to localize rile referent  . Colwersely , the representations activated by timpicture contain locative information  , but here we have the problem that several objcct representations arc activated to tiles iune extent  . Since only the prope , ty of being a switch , but not tile property of being a temperature control is conveyed by the picture  , both switch depictions become possible as antecedents of the textual referring expression  . 
? ? lhetem peral . re ~ E ~ control
Figure 2: Missing Cohesive Liuk between Text and Picture In Fig  .  3 , tile verbal descriptiou discriminates tim referent from its alternatives by attributes of the world object  , umncly ' being a switch ' , and ' being depicted in tile figure ' and an attribute of the depiction  , namely ' being dark ' . But , in contrast to tim previous example , only one of the representations activated by the picture fitstim verbal descrip-lion  . " llius , the user should be able to discover the anaphoric link between the verbal description and the graphical depiction and activate an appropriater presentation  . 
the darks witch '. ~ r2~u
Figure 3: Establishing a Cohesive Liuk by Incorporating Picture Attributes in Vcrbal Descriptions Intile previous example  , an anaphoric link between text and picture has been established by including pictorial attributes in the vcrbal descriptiou  . All altcrnative is to apply graphical focusing tccl miqucs  , as in Fig .  4 . Ilere , it's v cry likely that the user will be able to draw a link between text midpicture because he will assume that the pictorial  , ' rod the textual focuscx ) in cide . This ex~unple also illustrates howtile user's knowledge of rile identity of objects cml be enriched by means of a referring act  . The verbal thin witimut the text actiw tte different reprcse at alions of tim switch  . When coasidering bolh text and graphics , tim user will conclude timt they refer to tile same object  . Thus , he is not only able to identify tim switch , as required , he is , also able to combine tim different representations of tile switch into one  . Note that this phenomenon cm~~d so be explained in tcnns of centering tilt x  ) ry ( Gmszet ~ d . , 1983) . 
In time xample , timprcferr cd center of tim picture wouhl coincide with the backward looking center of tim text  . 
OI ., ' t
Ttlrn the tclluleralure Ihe ; control clockwise . /tern ~ erat , re ~'"* . ,- . -\[ r2u ) Figure 4: F . slablishiaga Cohesive IAnk by Correlaling % xtu~d aud Pictorial Focus qhe example shown in Fig  .   5 differs from the previous ones in that a o corrcs pondency link between picture objects and realworld objects can be established  . Although the user is able to draw an anaphoric link between the verb alaudtim pictorial description  , he is not able to visually identify the intended referent  . 
l ' r l r l l h e r , lllplt!r ~ tllrt!COlltrllclockwise . 
@ ' . , @ fkSI ? the-e13 ~ trz . u ) tellll erlttll recontrol Figure 5: Missing Corrcspondency between Picture and

Summing up , it can be said that arc fcrr in pact is only successful whell tile description provides an access path to anal  ) l ) ropriate represeatation . " lheu ser has to iuf cr such a path li'om encoding relationships and cohesive links be-  . 
twc cn tim parts of a description . As lhccx amplc show , tim following cases occur : a ) if tile user does nol recognize which picture parts correspond to which world object  , t im referring act c if l m rf M ls ( c f . Fig .  5 ) or the picture contribute suolhing to ils success  , b ) Iftim relationship between pictori ' , depictions and verbal dcscriptions iun clear , t im referent can either not b clound ( cf . Fig .  2 ) or one of Ihemedia has no inllocuce oil refereut identilica-lion  . c ) if at graphic ~ dcpiclionaad avcrbal tiescription a cliwted ill ~ crentrcprescnlations of one and tile Salllet  ) \[ ) ~ject and I he user recognizes not only these links  , but : d so a link between tim two presenlatiou parts  , he isuot only able to lind the refcrcnt , but also able to combine timtliff crentrep , escntations i to one ( cf . t : ig .  4) . 
3USING TILE " MODEL TO GENERATEREFER-
RINGEX PRESSIONS
Intiml bllowing , we will sketch how we have integrate xltile approach in totim multim cdia presentation system WlP  ( Wahlstcr et al ,  1993) . Attile hcau't of tim WIP system is a prcs cn Uttion planner that is reslxansible for determining the contents a adselcct i  , lg an appropriate medium combination . 
" llle presenlatioll planne receives ~ ks input a presentation goal  ( e . g . , the user should know where a certain switch is located  )  , it then tries to fiad a presentation strategy which malch cs this goal and gencrales are fiue  , nent-style plan in tim form of a directed acyclic graph  ( DAG )  . This DAG rellecls rell ccls lhe proposit hmal contents of the pot cnti  ; d document paris , Iheint cnt kmalgems behind timparts as well as tim rhetoric ~ d relationships between them  , lot details see ( Andr 6 and Rist ,  1993) . While timtop of the presenlalion plan is a more or less complex presentation goal  ( e . g . , instrucling tim user in switching on a device ) , the lowest level is formed by specilications of elementary presentatioalsks  ( e . g . , formulating ar~lucstor depicting an object ) . These elementary tasks m'e directly forward cxl to timmc dium-spccilic generators  , currcntly for text ( Kil-gel , 1994) audgraphics ( Rist , and Andr 6 ,  1992) . 
" llmcont cut of referring expression side termined by I hepresentation planucr I hat M so decides which representations should be actiw ttcd and which medium should be chosen for tiffs  . " lb be able top crlb nn these steps , we need presentations lrategics for linking propositional cts with activation acts  . An exmnplc of such a strategy is \[1\] . 
\[t\]I leader: ( Request SU ( Action ? action ) ' l~xt ) I ' . ;lliect : ( BMBSU(GoalS(DoneU?action )))
Applicability Conditions : ( And ( Goal S ( l ) one U ? action ) )  ( BelS ( Complex-OF . crating-Action ? action ) )  ( B clS ( Agent ? agent ? action ) )  ( BelS ( Object ? object ? action ) ) ) 
Main Acls: ( S-Request Sl\[J ( ? action-spec ( Agent ? agent-spec )   ( Object 7 object-spec ) ) ) 
Subsidiary Acts : ( Activate SU ( Action ? action ) ? action-spec'li:xt )   ( Activate SIJ ( Agent ? agent ) ? agent-spec Text )   ( Activate StJ ( Object ? object ) ? object-spec " l~xt ) This strategy can be used to reques the user to perfomlan action  , h , I h is strategy , two kinds of act occur : anclcmenlary speech act S  ( urface ) -Rcquestaad three activation acts for specifying tim action mid the scmanticas croles  ; Lssocia tcd with tim action ( Activate) . The strategy prcs crilx : stext fortile subsidiary acts ' because the resulting rcfcn'ing expressions  ( ? action-six : c , ? agent-SlrCC and ? object-spot ) are obligatory c~tse roles of an S-Request speech act which will bcconvey exl by t cxt  . For optional case roles any medium c ; nl be taken . In addition to strategies for linking proposition Maud activation acts  , we . need strategies lot diff crcnt kinds of actiwttion midlot establishing Corcf-and l'  ; n codes Samc-relationships . For cxm nplc , strategy \[2\] caq be used to a clivalea representation ? r1 by text and to simultaneously enrich the user's knowlex  . lge . 5,3 . 3 about he identity of objects . The strategy only applies if Ihcreexists already an image ? pic-obj which encodes  71"-1  , the system believes that ? r1 and ? r2 are representations of the same world object and if the system's model of the user's belicls contains ?  r2  . If the strategy is applied , the system a ) provides a unique description ? d for ? r2 ( re:finact ) midb ) ensures that he use recognizes that his description mid the corresponding image specify the same object  ( subsidiary act )  . 
\[2\]l leader: ( Activate SU ( ? case-t'ole ? r1 ) ? d"li~xt ) 
Effect : ( BMBSlI ( Corer?r-I'/r~2))
Applicability Conditions : ( And ( BMB5U(l' ; ncodes ? pic-t ~ bj?l = l?c ) )  ( BetS ( Corer ? r-I ? r2 ) )  ( BelS ( Bel U ( Thing ? r2 ) ) ) )
Main Acts : ( Provide-Unique q ) escriptitm . ';\[I?r~2?d Text )
Subsidiary Acts : ( Achieve S ( BMBSU ( Enct ) desSame 7d 7 pie-oh ? c ) ) ? medium ) For ~0 , we use a discrimination algorithm similar to the algorithm presented in  ( Reiter and Dale ,  1992) . I lowev-or , we have investigated a ditional possibilities for distinguishing objects from their alternatives  . We can refer not only to features of an object in a scene  , but also totidalures of the graphical model , Ih cirinter prclalion ~ md to the position of picture objects within the picture  , scc~dso(Wazinski ,  1992) . Ad clailed description of our discrimination algorithm can be found in  ( Schueiderl 0 chuer ,  1994) . Task b ) c , ' mbcaccomplished by correlating the visu ~ fl and the textual locus  , by redundantly encoding objc clatl ribules , or by explicitly informing Ih cuser about a Corcf -rclalionship  . 
Such a Corer-relationship can bcestablished by strategies for the gcneration of cross-media rcf crring exprcssions  ( asiu " The left switch in lh cligurc is I he lcmp craturc control "  ) or byslral cgics for annotating objects in a ligurc  . 
4 CONCLUSION
We h~we presented a model of referring which is based on the lollowing ~ Lssumptions :  1  ) Ment~d representations of ol2jccts may be activated not only by textural , but " also by graphics d and mixed descriptions . 2) Failure , ' rod success of referring acts can be expl ~ fincd by the user's ability to rcc-ognize c cr tain links between Ihcsemcnt ~ d representations  , -rod the corresponding object descriptions . " lo demonstrate that he model is of praclical uselk  ) r the gencration of rcfcr-enccs , we have delinc . d presentation strategies for concept activation whidt scrveas operators in the plan-based presentation system WIE WIP is ablc to generate mullimedia  , auaphoric attd cross-lncdia referring expressions . 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS : This work is support cd by the BMH " under grant  lqW8901   8  . Wc would like to thank Doug Appelt lk ) rw duable discussions at td com nt cn ls . 

Allgayer , J . , llarbusch , K . , Kobsa , A . , Reddig , C . , Rei-thingcl , N . and Schmaucks , D .  (1989) . XTt ? A : A Natural-l ~ nguage Access System to Expert Systems  . Intern . 
.lournal of Man-Machine Studies , 31, pp . 161-195, Andr6,E . , and Rist , q:(1993) . 1" he Design of Illustrated l ) ocuments as a Planning Task . In M . ' I : Maybury I ~ . , hltelligent Multimedia lnterfaces , ' lhe MIT Press , Menlo
Park , pp . 94-116.
Appcll , D . , and Kronfeld , A .  (1987) . A Computational Model of Referring . 1' roe . of lJCAl-87, pp .  640-647 . 
Cl~msseu , W .  (1992) . Generating Re . ferring Expressions in a Multimodal Environment . htR . Dale , E . llovy , D . 
R6sucr ~ utdO . Stock1 ~ . , Aspects of Automated Natural Language Generation : Proc  . of the 6th International Workshop on Natural I~tnguage Generation  . Springer,
Berlin , pp . 247-262.
Goodmau , N .  (1969) . L ( uzguages of Art . Oxlord University
Press , Oxford.
Grosz , B . , Joshi , A . K . , and Weinstciu , S .  (1983) . Providing a Unified Account of Definite Noun Phrases in Discourse  . 
Proc . of the 21st ACL , pp . 44-50.
IIirsl , G .  (1981) . Anaphora in Natural Language Umler-standing . Springer , Berlin . 
Kilgcr , A .  (1994) . Using U1AGs for htctemental and Parallel Generation . Computation all ntelligence , to appear . 
Mackiulay , J .  (1986) . Automating the Design of Graphical Presentations of Rehttional Infornultion  . ACM Transactions on Graphics , 5(2), pp .  110-141 . 
McKeowu , K . R . , Feiner , S . K . , Robin , J . , Seligmaun , D . D . 
and Tancnbiatt , M .  (1992) . Generating Cross-References fi ) r Multimedia Exl ) ktnation . Plot . AAAI-92, pp .  916 . 
Reitcr , E . , and Dale , R .  (1992) . A Fast Algorithm for the Generation of Referring l ? al  ) ressions . Proc . of COLING-92, 1, pp .  232-238 . 
Rist , T . , ~ md And r6 (1992) . b ) otn Presentation Tasks to Pictures : " lbwards an Approach to Autonvatic Graphics Design  . Proc . of ECAI-92, Vienna , Austria , pp .  764-768 . 
Schneiderli3chne ~, I: .  (1994) . Generierung von Referen-zaus dr fickenie in em multimodalen Diskurs  . Diploma Thesis , Universitat des , Satrlandes , Genmmy , to appear . 
Stock O . ,,' utd the ALFRESCO l'roj cctTram (1993) . AL-FRESCO : Enjoying the Combination of Natural Language Processing and tfypermedia for Information Exploration  , ht:InM . ' I : Maybury Ed . , lntelligentMultime-dia lnterfaces , qlm MIT Press , Menlo Park , pp .  197-224 . 
Wahlstc ~, W . , Andr 6, E . , Gral , W . , , ' rodRist , T .  (1991) . 
Designing Illustrated 7i'xts : How Language Production Ish ! fluenced by Graphics Generation  . Proc . of EACL-92, Berlin , pp .  814 . 
Wahlster , W . , Andr 6, E . , Finklct , W . , Profitlidl , II . J . , and Risl , T .  (1993) . Plan-Based h ~ tegration f Natural Lan . 
guage at zdGraphics Generation . AIJournal , 63, pp . 

Wazinski , I ~ .  (1992) . Generatitlg Spatial Description for Ctvss-modal Referet ~ ces  . Proc . of ANLP-92, Treuto,
Italy , pp . 5663,
