Encoding standards for large text resources :
The Text Encoding Initiative
Nancy Ide
Department of Computer Science
Vassar College
Poughkeepsie , New York 12601 ( U.S.A.)
Laboratoir EP arole et Langage
CNRS/Universit de Provence
29, Avenue R . obert Schuman
13621 Aix-en-Provence Cedex1 ( France)
e-maihide@cs , vassar , edu
Abstract . The Text Encoding Initiative ( TE l ) is an international project established in 1988 to develop guidelines for the preparation and interchange of electronic texts for research  , and to satisfy a broad range of uses by the language industries more generally  . The need for standardized encoding practices has become in x reasingly critical as the need to use and  , most importantly , reuse vast amounts of electronic text has dramatically increased for both research and industry  , in particular for natural language processing . In January 1994 , the TE lisstled its Guidelines for the Fm coding and hiterehange of Machine-Readable Texts  , which provide standardized encoding conventions for a large range of text types and features relevant for a broad range of applications  . 
Keywords . Encoding , markup , large text resources , corpora , SGML . 
1. Introduction
The past few years have seen a burst of activity in the development of statistical methods which  , applied to massive text data , have in turn enabled the dcvelopnmnt of increasingly comprehensive and robust models of language structure and use  . Such models are increasingly recognized as an inw duable resource for naturalangu : lge processing  ( NLP ) tasks , inch , ding machine translation . 
The upsurge of interest inempricial methods for language modelling has led inevitably to a need for massive collections of texts of all kinds  , including text collections which span genre , register , spoken and written data , etc . , as well as domain - or application-specific collections  , and , especially , multilingual collections with parallel translations  . In tile latter half of the 1980's , very few appropriate or adequately large text collections existed for use in computational linguistics research  , especially for languages other than English . 
Consequently , several efforts to collect and disseminate large mono - and multilingual text collections have been recently established  , including the ACL Data Collection Initiative ( ACL/DCI )  , the European Corpus Initiative ( ECI ) , which has developed a multilingual , partially parallel corpus , the U . S . Linguistic Data Consortium ( LDC) , RELATOR and MULTEXT in Europ E , etc . ( see Arm . strong-Warwick , 1993) . It is widely recognized that such efforts constitute only a beginning for the necessary data collection and dissemination efforts  , and that considerable work to develop adequately large and appropriately constituted textual resources still remains  . 
The demand for extensive reusability of large text collections in turn requires the development of standardized encoding formats for this data  . It is no longer realistic to distribute data in ad hoc formats  , since the eflbrt and resources required to clean tip and reform at the data for local use is at best costly  , and in many cases prohibitive . Because much existing and potentially available data was originally formatted R  ) r the purposes of printing , the information explicitly represented in the encoding concerns aimrticular physical realization of a text rather than its logical strttcture  ( which is of greater interest for most NLP applications  )  , and the correspondence bt ween the two is often difficult or impossihle to Establish without substantial work  . 
Further , as data become more and more available and tile USE of large text collections become more central to NLP research  , general and publicly awdlable software to manipt , latetile texts is being developed which , to he itself reusable , also requires the existence of a standard encoding format  . 
A standard encoding format adequate for representing textual data for NLP research must be  ( 1 ) capable of representing the different kinds of information across the spectrum of text types and languages potentially of interest totile NLP research community  , including prosE , technical documents , newspapers , verse , drama , letters , dictionaries , lexicons , etc . ;  ( 2 ) capable of representing different levels of information  , including not only physical characterstics and logical structure  ( as well as other more complex phenomena such as intra - and intertextual references  , a ligtunent of parallel elements , etc . ) , but also interpretive or analytic annotation which may be added to the data  ( for exain ple , markup for part of speech , syntactic structure , Etc . ); (3) application independent , that is , it must provide the required flexibility and generality to enable  , possibly siumltaneously , the explicit encoding of potentially disparate types of information with iuthcsame text  , as well as accomodate all potential types of processing  . The development of such a suitably flexible and corn prehensivE encoding system is a substantial intellectual task  , demanding ( just to start ) the development of suitably complex models for the wirious text types as well as an overall model of text and  , ' marchitecture for the encoding scheme that is to embody it  . 
5742. The Text Encoding Initiative
In 1988 , the Text Encoding Initiative ( ' I'EI ) was established as an international cooperative research projecto develop a general and tlexible set of guidelines for the preparation and interchange of electronic texts  . 
The TEI is jointly sponsored by the Association lot Computers and the Hmnanities  , the Association for Computational Linguistics , and the Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing  . The proiect has had major support from the I_I . S . National Endowment for tile Humanities ( NEH ) , 1) irectorate X III of the Cmm nission of tile F . tlropean Colmnunities ( CIJ . C/I ) ( J-XIII ), tile Andrew W . Mellon Foundation , and tile Social Science and tlumanities Research Council of Canada  . 
In January 1994 , the " I'E\]~issued its Guidelines for the Encoding and hiter change of Machine-Readable Texts  , which provide standardized encoding conventions for a large range of text types and features relevant for a broad range of applications  , in chlding natural language processing , infommtion retrieval , hypertext , electronic publishing , various forms of literary and historical analysis  , lexicography , etc . The Guidelines are intended to apply to texts , written or spoken , in any natural language , of any date , in any genre or text type , without restriction vn form or content . They treat both continuous materials ( rttnning text ) and discontinuous material such as dictionaries and linguistic corpora  . As such , the TEl Guidelines answer the fundamental needs of a wide range of users : researcher ~'  ; in cmn putational linguistics , the humanities , sciences , and social sciences ; lmblishers ; librarians and those concerned generally with document retrieval and storage  ; as well as the growing language technology community  , which is a massing sttb stantial multilingual , multimodal corpora of spoken and written texts and lexicons in order to advance research in ht  , manhmguage understanding , production , and translation . 
" File rules and recommendations made in the ' I'I : A Guidelines conform to the ISO  8879  , which defines the Standard Generalized Markup1 . ,anguage , and IS()646 , which defines a standard seven-hit character set in terms of wt  , ichtile recommendations on characterlevel interchange are formulated  , lSGMI , is an increasingly widely recognized international markup standard which has been adopted by the US Department of Defense  , the Coinmission of Et , rop can Communities , and ntmlerous publishers and holders of large public databases  . 
2.1. Overview
Prior to the establishment of the TEI , most projects involving the capture and electronic representation f texts and other linguistic data developed their own  1 For more extensive discussion of tim project's history  , rationale , and design principles see Tlilinternal documents  EDP1 and EDP2   ( awdlable fi'om the TEl ) and Ide and Sperberg-McQueen ( 1994 ) and Burnard and Sperberg-McQueen ( 1994 )  , both forthcoming in a special triple issue on the TElin Con  , puters and the

encoding schemes , which usually could only be used for the data for which they were designed  . In many cases , there had been no prior analysis of the required categories and features and the relations among them for a given text type  , in the light of real and potential processing and analytic needs  . The TEl has motiwlted and accomplished the substantial intellectual task of completing this analysis for a large number of text types  , and provides encoding conventions based upon it for describing tile physical and logical structure of many classes of texts  , as well as features particular to a given text type or not conventionally rep  , csented in typogral ) hy . The TEl Guidelines also cover COlllnl Oll text encoding problems  , including intra - and intertextual cross reference  , demarcation of arbitrary text segments , alignment of parallel elements , overlapping hierarchies , etc . In addition , they provide conventions for linking texts to acoustic and visual data  . 
The TEI's specific achievements include : 1 . a determination that the Standard Generalized Markup  I4mguage   ( SGML ) is tile framework for development of the Gnklelines  ;  2 . the specification of restrictions on and recommendations for SGML use that best serves the needs of interchange  , as well as enables maximal generality and flexibility in order to serve the widest possible range of research  , develol ) ment , and applicationeeds ; 3 . analysis and identification of categories and features for encoding textual data  , at many levels of detail ; 4 . specification of a set of general text structure del ' in it it ms that is effective  , flexible , and extensihle ; 5 . specification of a method for in-file documentation of electronic texts compatible with library cataloging convent i  ( ms , which can he used to trace the history of the texts and thus assist in authenticating their provenance and the modifications they have undergone  ;  6 . specification of encoding conventions for special kinds of texts  ( n " text features , including : a . char ~ lctersets b . language COlp (+ ritc . generalinguistics d . dictionaries e . terminological data f . spoken texts g . hypermed klh . literary prose i . verse j . dramak . historical source materials 1 . text critical apparatus 3 . Basic architecture of the TEl scheme 3 . 1 . General architecture The ' I'EI Guidelines are built on the assumption that there is a common core of textual feature shared by vMually all lexts  , beyond which many different elements can be encoded  . Therefore , the Guidelines provide an extensible framework containing a common core  ( ~l variety of optional additions for specific applications or text types  . The encoding process is seen as incremental , so that additional markup may be easily inserted in the text  . 
Because the TEl is an SGML application , a TEI conformant document must be described by a document type definition  ( DTD )  , which defines tags and provides a BNF grammar description of the allowed structural relationships among them  . ATElDTD is composed of the core tagsets , a single base tagset , and any number of user selected additional tagsets  , built up according to a set of rules documented intile TEI Guidelines  . 
At the highest level , all TEI documents conform to a common model . The basic unit is a text , that is , any single document or stretch of natural languager cgm'de das a self-contained unit for processing purposes  . The association of such a unit with a header describing it as a bibliographic entity is regarded as a single TEI element  . 
Two variations on this basic structure are defined : a collection of TEl elements  , or a variety of composite texts . The first is appropriate for large disparate collections of independent texts such as language corpora or collections of unrelated papers in an archive  . The second applies to cases such as the complete works of a given author  , which might be regarded simultaneously as a single text in its own right and as a series of independent texts  . 
It is often necessary to encode more than one view of a text--for example  , the p bysical and the lingtfistic or the formal and the rhetorical  . One of the essential features of the TEl Guidelines is that they offer the possibility to encode many different views of a text  , simultaneously if necessary . A disadvantage of SGML is that it uses a document model consisting of a single hierarchical structure  . Often , different views of a text define multiple , possibly overlapping hierarchies ( for example , the physical view of a print version of a text , consisting of pages subdivided into physical lines  , and the logical view consisting of , for example , paragraphs subdivided into sentences ) which are not readily accomodated by SGML's document model  . The TEI has identified sever : d possible solutions to this problem in addition to SGML's concurrent structures mechanism  , which , because of the processing complexity it involves , is not a thoroughly satisfactory alternative . 
The TEI Guidelines provide sophisticated mechanisms for linking and alignment of elements  , both within a given text and between texts , as well as links to data not in the form of ASCII text such as sound and images  . Much of the TEI work on linkage was accomplished in collaboration with those working on the Hypermedia/Time-based Document Structuring Language  ( Hy Time )  , recently adopted as an SGML-based international standard for hypermedia structures  . 
3.2. The TEI base tagsets
Eight distinct TEI base tagsets are proposed : 1 , prose 2 . verse 3 . dntma 4 . transcribed speech 5 . letters or memos6 . dictionary entries 7 . terminological entries 8 . language corpor and collections T be first seven are intended for documents which are predominantly composed of one type of text  ; the last is provided for use with texts which combine these basic tagsets  . Additional base tagsets will be provided in tile flrtnre  . 
Each TElbase tagset determines the basic structure of all the documents with which it is to be used  . Specifically , it defines the components of text elements , combined as described above . Almost all the TEI bases defined are similar in their basic structure  ( although they can vary if necessary )  . However ' , they differ in their components : for example , the kind of subelements likely to appear within the divisions of a dictionary will be entirely different from those likely to appear within the divisions of a letter or a novel  . To accomodate this variety , the constituents of all divisions of a TEl text element arc not defined explicitly  , but in terms of SGML parameter entities , which behave similar to a variable declaration i a programming language : the effect of using them bere is that each base tagset can provide its own specific definition for the constituents of texts  , which can be modified hythe user if desired . 
3.3. The core tagsets
Two core tagsets are available to all TEl documents unless explicitly disabled  . Tile first defines a large number of elements which may appear in any kind of document  , and which coincide more or less with the set of discipline-independent textual features concerning which consensus has been reached  . The second defines the header , providing something analogous to an electronic title page for the electronic text  . 
Tire core tagsel common to all TElbases provides means of encoding with a reasonable degree of sophistication the following list of textual features :  1  . Paragraphs 2 . Segmentation , for ' example into ortbographic sentences . 
3 . Lists of various kinds , including glossaries and indexes4 . Typographically highlighted phrases , whether tm qualified or used to mark linguistic emphasis  , foreign words , titles etc . 
5 . Quoted phrases , distinguishing direct speech , quotation , terms and glosses , cited phrases etc . 
6 . Names , numbers and meastnes , dates and times , and similar data-like phrases . 
7 . Basic editorial changes ( e . g . correction of apparent errors ; regularization and normalization ; additions , deletions and omissions ) 8 . Simple links and cross references , providing basic hypertextual features . 
9 . Pre-existing or generated annotation and indexing example speakers  , stage directions , verselines , stanzaic units , etc . 
11 . Bibliographic citations , adequate for most commonly used bibliographic packages  , in either a free or a tightly structured format 12  . Simple or complex referencing systems , not necessarily dependent on the existing SGML structure  . 
There are few documents which do not exhibit some of these features  , and none of these features is particularly restricted to anyone kind of document  . In most cases , additional more specialized tagsets are provided titen code aspects of these features in more detail  , but the elements defined in this core should be adequate fro " most applications most of the time  . 
Features are categorized within the TEl scheme based on shared attributes  . The TEl encoding scheme also uses it classification system based upon structural properties of the elements  , that is , their position within the SGMI~document structure  . Elements which can appear at the same position within a document are regarded as forming a model class : for example  , the class phrase includes all elements which can appear within paragraphs but not spanning them  , the class chunk includes all elements which cannot appear within paragraphs  ( e . g . , paragraphs ), etc . A class interisal so defined for element such as lists  , which can appear either within or between chunk elements  . 
Classes may have super - and subclasses , and properties ( notably , associated attributes ) may be inherited . For example , reflecting the needs of many TEI users to treat texts both as documents and as input to databases  , as nb-class of phrase called data is defined to include data-like featn res such as names of persons  , places or organizations , numbers and dates , abbreviations and measures . The formal definition of classes in the SGMI , syntax used to express the TEI scheme makes it possible for users of the schente to extend it in a simple and controlled way : new elements may be added into existing classes  , and existing elements renamed or undefined , without any need for extensive revision ~ ttile TEl document type definitions  . 
3.4. The TEl header
The TEl leader is believed to he the first syst cmatic attempt to provide in-file documentation felectronic texts  . The TE lheader allows t br the definition of a full  AACR2-compatible hihliographic description for the electronic text  , covering all of the l bllowing : 1 . the electronic document is elf2 . sources from which the document was dcrivcd3 . encoding system 4 . revision history The TEI header allows for a large ammmt of structured or unstructured information under the above headings  , including both traditional bibliographic material which can be directly translated into an equivalent MARC catalogue record  , as well as descriptive inlormation such as the languages it uses and the situation within which it was produced  , expansions or formal definitions for any codc books used in analyzing the text  , the sctting and identity el participants within it  , etc . The amount of encoding in a header depends both on the nature and the intended USE of the text  . A to a e extreme , an encoder may provide only a bibliographic identification of the text  . 
At the other , encoders wishing to ensure that their texts can be used for the widest range of applications can provide a level of detaile documentation approximating to the kind most often supplied in tile form of a manual  . 
A colic ( lion of " I'L : I headers can also be regard cd as a distinct document  , and an auxiliary 1 ) ' I'13 is provided tt ~ support interchange of headers alone  , for example , bEtwe Enlibraries or archives . 
3.5. Additional tagsets
A number of optional additional tagsets are defined by tile Guidelines  , in lcuding tags cts for special application areas such as alignment and linkage of text segments to for m hypertexts  ; a wide range of other analytic elements and attributes  ; a tassel for detailed manuscril ) l transcription and another for the recording of an electronic variorum modelled on the tradition  , 'd critical apparatus ; tags ctsfc ) r the detailed encoding of names and dates ; abstractions such as net w ? ~ rks , graphs or trees ; nm thematic-d formulae and tables Etc . 
In addition to these application-specific specialized ta SSelS  , a general purpose tagset based tm feature struct menotation is proposed fnr the encoding of entirely abstract in tcr pretati  ( ms of a text , either in parallel or embedded within it . Using this mechanism , encnders can define arbitrarily complex bundles or sets of features identified in a text  . The syntax defined by the Guidelines formalizes the way in which such features are encoded and provides for a detailed specification of legal feature wdue/pair combinations and rules  ( a feature system declaration ) determining , for example , the implication of underspecified or defaulted features  . A related set of additional elements i also provided for the encoding  ~1 degrees of uncertainty or ambiguity in the encoding of a text  . 
A user of IheTEl scheme may combine as many or as few additional tagsets assuit Is is or her needs  . The existence of tagsets for particular application areas in tile Guidelines reflects  , to some extent , accidents of history : no claim to systematic or encyclopedic overage is implied  . It is expected that new tags cts will be defined its a part of the continued work of the " I'EI and in related projects  . For example , tile l~ltrope an project MULTEXT , in collaboration with EAGLIiS , will develop a specialized Corpus Encoding Standard for NLP applications based on the "  I'E1 Gnidelines . 22See Idc and Vdronis , MULTEXT : Multilingual Text
Tools and Corpora , in this vohnne.
5774. Information about the TEI
To obtain further information about the TE Iorto obtain copies of the TEl Guidelines  , contact one of the TEI editors : C . M . Sperberg-McQueen ,   ( Editor in Chief ) University of Illinois at Chicago ( M/C 135 ) 
Computer Center 1940 W . Taylor St.
Chicago , Illinois 60612-7352 US
U35395@uicvm . uic . edu+I(312) 413-0317 Fax:+1(312) 996-6834
Lou Burnard , ( European Editor)
Oxford University Computing Service 13 Banbury Road , Oxford OX 26 NN , UK lou@vax . ox . ac . uk + 44 ( 865 ) 273 200 Fax:+44 ( 865 )   273275 TimTEI also maintains a publicly-accessible List Serv list  , TEI-L@uicvm . uic . edu or TEI-
L@uicvm . bitnet.
Acknowledgments -- The TEI has been funded by tile U  . S . National Endowment for the Humanities ( NEH ) , Directorate X III of the Commission of the European Communities  ( CEC/DG-XIII )  , the Andrew W . Mellon Foundation , and the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada  . Some material in this paper has been adapted from TEl documents written by various 
TEl participants.

Armstrong-Warwick , S . Acquisition and Exploitation of Textual Resources for NLP  . Proceedings of the International Conference on Ruilding and Sharing of Very Larrge Knowledge Bases  '93  , Tokyo , Japan , 
December , 1993, 59-68.
Burnard , L . , Sperberg-McQueen , C . M . TEI Design Principles . Computers and the Ilumanitites Special Issue on the Text Encoding Initiative  ,  28 ,  13 (1994) , ( to appear) . 
Bryan , M . SGML : An Author's Guide , Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company , New York (1988).
Coombs , J . H . , Renear , A . It . , and De Rose , S . J . Markup systems and the filttlre of scholarly text processing  . 
Communications of the ACM 30, 11(1987), 933-947.
Goldfarb , C . F . The SGMI , Ilandbook , Clarendon Press,
Oxtord (1990).
van Herwijnen , E . Practical SGML , Kluwer Academic
Publishers , Boston (1991).
Ide , N . , Sperberg-McQueen , C . M . The Text Encoding Initiative : History and Background  . Computers and the Humanitites Special issue on the Text Encoding Initiative  ,  28 ,  13 (1994) , ( to appear) . 
Ide , N . , Vdronis , J . ( Eds . ) Computers and the tlumanitites Special issue on the Text Encoding Initiative  ,  28 ,  13 (1994) , ( to appear) . 
International Organization for Standards ,   1SO   8879: information Processing -- Text and Office Systems - -Standard Generalized Markup Language  ( SGML )  . 
ISO (1986).
International Organization for Standards , ISO/IECDIS 10744: Hypermedia/Time-based Document Structuring Languagc  ( Hy time )  . ISO (1992) . 
Sperberg-McQueen , C . M . , Burnard , L . , Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange  , Text Encoding Initiative , Chicago and Oxlbrd ,  1994 . 
Appendix : TEl Guidelines Contents
Part I : Introduction 1 . About These Guidelines 2 . Concise Summary of SGML3 . Structure of the TEl Document Type Declarations
Part I1: Core " Fags and General Rules 4 . Characters and Character Sets 5 . The TEl I leader 6 . Tags Available in All TEl DTDs
PartIll : BaseTagSets 7 . Base Tag Set for Prose 8 . Base Tag Set for Verse 9 . Base Tag Set for Drama 10 . Base Tag Set for Transcriptions of Spoken Texts I  1  . Base TagSet for Letters and Memoranda 12 . Base'ragSet for Printed Dictionaries 13 . Base Tag Set for Terminological Data 14 . Base TagSet for Language Corpora and Collections  1   5  . User-Defined Base Tag Sets
Part IV : Additional " FagSets 16 . Segmentation ad Migmnent 17 . Simple Analytic Mechanisms 1g . Feature Structure Analysis 19 . Certainty 20 . Mannseripts , Analytic Bibliography , and Physical
Description of tile Source Text 21 . Text Criticism and Apparatus 22 . Additional Tags for Names and Dates 23 . Graphs , Digraphs , and Trees 24 . Graphics , Figures , and Ilhlslrations 25 . I : ormulae and Tables 26 . Additional Tags Ibr the TEll leader
Part V : Auxiliary Document Types 27 . Structured I leader 28 . Writing System Declaration 29 . Feature System Declaration 30 . " FagSet Declaration
Part VI : Technical Topics 31 . TEl Conlbrmance 32 . Modifying T\[il DTDs 33 . l , oeal Installation and Support of TEl Markup 34 . Use of TEI Encoding Scheme in Interchange 35 . Relationship of TElto Other Standards 36 . Markup for Non-llierarchical Phenomena 37 . Algorithm fi~r Recognizing Canonical References Part VII : Alphabetical Reference List of Tags and Classes 
Part VIII : P , et ~ rence Material 38 . Full TEl Document Type Declarations 39 . Standard Writing System Declarations 40 . Feature System Declaration for Basic Grammatical
Annotation 41, Sample TagSet l ) echnation 42 . Formal Grammar for tire TEl-Inter change-Format
Subset of SGML
