DII , EMMA-ANINSTANTLEXICOGItAPI lER
IIANSKAItLGREN , JUSSII(~AII . I , GREN , NIAGNUS NORDSTR()M , PAULPETTI , ; R , SSON , P , ENGT ~' VAIlItOI , IN
di?-emma ~ s?cs , e
Swedish Institute of Computer Science
Box 1263, 16428 Kista , Stockholm , Sweden

Dilemma is intended to enhance quality and increase productivity of expert human translators by prese  , ,ti , ,g to the writer relewmt lexical information , necha , d cally extracted from comparable xisting translations  , thus replacing - or compensating for the ahsence of-a lexicographer and stand-by terminologist rather than the translator  . Using statistics and crude surface analysis and a minimum of prior information  , Dihnn , , , aid entities instances and suggests their counterparts in I  ) a ralh ! l source and target texts , on all levels down to individual words . 
Dilemma forms part of a toolkit for t , ' anslation where focus is on text structure and overall consistency in large text volumes rather than on framing sentences  , on interaction between many actors in a large project rather than on retriewd of machine-stored data and on decision making rather than on application of give  , ) rules . 
In particular , the system has been tuned to the needs of the ongoing translation of European Con  , n , u-nity legislation into the languages of candidate me  , , , her countries . '/' he system has been demonstrated to and used by professional translators with promising results  . 
Instant Lexicographer
The design of translation aids beyond ordinary texl  . processing and database accession and maintenance tools is mostly based on the sames in ai  ) lifted view which . . . .
for compelling reasons -- has been the work i , ,g hyl>oth-esis of machine translation : that the source text  . has a well-determined meaning and that there exists in the target language at least one correct and adequate ways of expressing that meaning  . 
When these assumptions are reasonably well just i -fled  , translation is relatively easy , fast and cheap with traditional methods and mechanization not rarely feasible with methods now known or envisaged  . Typically , however , the translator must do more tha . n retrieve and operate on we-established a , ,d in principle pre-storable correspondences . Thus , lexical correspondences do not exist for all items  ; it is an essential part of translation to establish them  . Legal texts , factual and stereotype though they may see , n , re . gularly represent thoughts , attitudes and arguments which do not haw ' . any counterparts in the . target language prior to translation . This is particulary true in the huge project to translate the European Community legislation into the languages of countries which are not yet members of tile  ( \] omnmnity and which currently have a partly different legal conceptual framework  . 
What human translators need is decisions upl ) ort.
The most imlmrtant tools are telelf l , ones , electroni-cal ?' on fi . ' rencing systems and good and relevant dic-tiol , aries . Unfortunately , there are not always a tew ~' rypoint of time ltnowled galAe and cooperative colleagues or othe  . r experts to call , eh . ' ctronical networks ~ tre only recently being established in some domMns  , and the intelligent and comprehensive dictionaries  , which can serve as a writer's digest to the cumulative literature it  , a fiehl are few and far between . Answers are of l . en to be found in a text translated late at night the day be R  ) re-or in the preceding sections of the text at hand  . 
R . ather than all autolnated writer , we need an instant h!xicographer . 
Recycling Translations
In pract h : e , existing translations are being used as a major source  ( Shgvalllleine tat , 1990; Merkel 1993) . 
Often in the hope to be able to avoid duplication of costs - or of getting paid twice for the same ellbrt-by findirlg identical or near-identical texts or passages  , hut , more hnportantly , to ensure consistency or getting good suggestions  , to follow or argue against . Synonymy wu ' i al . iou for the salne concept is not al ) lU'e clated in technical and legal prose and avoided as anxiously:mil Olll Onylly  , The ideal is I : I corresllon deltces\] ) etweell expressions at least within one pair of documents and to eliminate " for ks "  , i . e . . , one expression being translated hl to or beil , g the trm , slation of more than one count e . rpart in the other language ( Karlgren , 1988) . 
We slmll call ac . o , ,pled pair of source and target text a bitc~'Z ( Isabelle ,  1992) . Wlmt is said here a bou't bitexts ca , , be generalized to n-tnples of parallel texts , claimed to dilfer " only " in hmguage . Suchn-tuph . 's exist : in thel ! h trope an Comnn , nity , a major part of the legislatiou is available in 9 " authenth : " versions , which in ( legal and political ) theory are equivalent , and according to plans the number of " authentic " will so on rise to  12 or more . l , it tleefforts have previously been made to systematically exploit this redunda  , ,cy by means of po-l)ressions , even when surprisingly simple methods howl ) romise of surprisingly useful results ( l ) a h l q v i s t ,  1994) . 
Steps in the '\] h-anslation Processl ' roducing target language text is only a small l  ) ropor-lion of the translation l ) rocess . Eml ) irically , good economy is achieved if about the same proportion of work is put into each of the stages Preparation  , Text productiou and Verification , at richotomy reminiscent of tile classical person -time breakdown of software development  ( Brooks ,  1975) . The Dilemma toolisus ct'ul for some t~usks in each of the three stages  . 
Funct ; ionality
A typical question for translators while actually wt'it  . inu , is how a word or phrase has been used or translated in l  ) reviously processed texts . Conversely , they may ask for the source languages counl . erl ) art :; of given target language expression , tolnal ? . esure that homonyn , y is not introduced . Similarly , during the I ) reparation and verification phases , a translator or editors cans through the text for words and phrases that need to be resolw > dor treated specially  . 
Text Production Phase
Navigating in Bitexts
The first service is to enM ) le the translator to I ) rows e through the bitext and look at text elements pairwise  , to cheek br conventions of usage that are unfamiliar or unexpected  . 
Pointing at a shorter or longer stringille it l , cr language the user can film successively larger contexts and their counterparts or covnlerlezls in the other l  ; m guage version . This service is available to the user from within a word processor  , tile all sWeF pres ( . qltedillaselmi ' atewiudow . 
COllllti ! l'IV or ( s
The second service is to assess the word-lcw q COllll to l'-parts or " e o unter words " so far used for a given word  . 
llere the system performs , crudely but instantly , the job of a terminologist or lexic . ographer . It uses a statistical matching process which offers the translator a list  , of candidate counterl ) arts . 
Verification phase
Translation Vm'illeatlon
In this l ) has carevisor reads the text to detect in ad -equacies and inconsistencies  . Often , there is no ( . rue answer to a terminological question : either one of a fe  . woptions may be equally good i ) erse but unintel Medvariation is disturbing and lnay be misleading  . Verification , therefore , is not a matter of local e or recl . ll ( ?ssor of compliance with a given dictionary or otll ~ r norm  , and reading one passage at ; ~ Lime , , v \[ not reve ; d the d c ( iehmcy of the translation ( Karlgrenl 1988 )  . 
One way of resolving or detecting dubious cases is to compare how a word or phrase has been used in a multitude of previous contexts aim how it was remle red in their respective countert cxts  . 
Preparation phase
Text - and Domain-specilh ' .  1 ) hrase Lists in the preparation phase the translator or editor has to estal  ) lish text lind domai , l-spc cilic word and phrase lists . In a batch mode , l ) ile . mm a produces draft lists on the basis of previously translated material ill the same domain  . 
Structuring Bitexts l , ' or bl texts to be exploitable as information sources  , text constituents in t . lm tw oversions must I ) epaired OilSOtll ( ! hicrarchic M levels-l ) hl'aSC . , Clall Sg ~, Selll , (? llce , paragraph , etc . ~ Vellll st creat . ea structured bitext , with links fro , neacl ~ constituent not only to its prede-Ce , qSOl ' illldSllCCessor bill also tO its ( ; Otlllterl ) it r till the other language version . This cross-latlglla , gcslA ' llCtllre(: ; UlI ) erather easily captured when the translation is lining typed  , but we ueed to beal ) le to derive the pairs from two given coluplete texts  . I ) i lemma does so auto-maritally . 
We Inake three linguistic assumptions : 1 . ' l ' he two texts c~mI ) e segmented into hierarchical cons (  . ituenl . sso Ilia most constituents in one ( . cx thlt vea CO llllterl ) artill I , he other . 
2 . For all levels , except the lowest level , co , mter parts occur in thesa . memutual order . 
3 . The counter p~rt . son the lowest level , " counter- . 
words " , appearapl ) roxinmtely in the sa Illetl-ltlt , ll & lord(w . 
We do not assume every (: on stil . u(ml . on any level tollav cit (' O Ullt , ~' rl ) al't , ilor collstitlle tlts 1 , oI ) esel ); wate ( I by uniqlm delliters . Thus , i \[' I ) aragral ) hs are separated ) y a blank line and sentences I ) y a full stop folh ) wed by as l ) aee , we do lie exchlde that , say , ~ paragral ) hin ( ) lie lallgllage is SOilletilll ( Si ' ell ( ler ( I as all en lll-fl cration , separated by blank lines and that " i , \[') " is I low and hell typed as "1 .  5" . The procedure is robust in that it , tolerates gaps all ( lllOllC too\['rC ( lll Cllt deviations from the prevalell tlmttern . 
We al)l ) ly two statistical procedures , or e . ' of align-mmfl . for higher levels : rodone of assign llmnt for the lowest  , " phrasc " , level . 
Alignment;
The general i ) robleln of order - i ) reserving alignment on ( melinguistic level reduces to the string correction l  ) rob-hnn ( Wagner and l , ' is cher ,  1974) . The l ) ractical solutio , i is not trivial , however , ducto the extremely larges ere ' oh space ew ' n for small texts  . We use . :malgorithm with the one published by Church and Gale  ( 1990 ) but using linguistic information on more levels . Using a minimum of prior information , texts are aligned downtophrase level . Recognizing identity or similarity of a few pn netuation marks  , mlmerals and tilenmn ber of words between these suffices for a crude alignment  . 
Word Assignment
When the two texts have been aligned on higher levels  , correspondences are established between counter wor < ls  , which do not necessarily appear in the same order in the  ; " two language versions . For this purpose Dilemmause . ~ an association function which is a weighte < lsum of measures of agreement of word position within the phrase  , relative frequency of occn rrence , al , d , optionally , some other properties . The weighting of the parameters is et after text genre specific experimental  . ion . /> airs ofter rns with a high association value are candidate coun-ter words  ( NordstriSm and Petterson , 19 ! t : 1) . 
The procedure is self-evaluating since uncertainty is reflected by a low max in mm association wtlue  . Only items which have a score above a cutoff threshold are presented to the user  . The proeed nreyields sonre 90 percent success fifl assignments among those presented on the basis of as little material as a single  10 page document , but for rare words the assignment becomes less certain  . In a material of 10   000 pages of legal documents related to the European Economic Space as much as  50 percent of the word tokens were hapax legomena and  75 percent occurred less than 5 times , providing a meagre basis for statistical analysis  . These . results can be improved if other properties are taken into account  . When a word length was included as a parameter in the association evaluation  , the results became marginally more adequate . Syntactical tagging , vide infra , is expected to affect assignment more . 

In timllrst release of l ) i lemma , alignment and assignment was perforn led on umnodified tyI  ) ogr ; q)hie ; d strings but naturally t improcedures were intended to be applied after monolingual preproressing  . Trivially , results become l ) ractically much more ade ( luat ( ' and the statistical analysis more effective if , say , making and made and the infinitive make are subsumed under one item and the infinitive and the noun make a rekel > tsei > a-rate  . Without any change of method , the p , ' ocedure can be applied to strings of words tagged morphologically and syntactically  . The tools chosen for this l > urpose are the parsers for English  , French and Swedish develol > edatIlels in ki University  ( Voutilainen el al ,  1993) . 
hnplementational Status
Dilemma has been iml > lernented in C-I--I-aim runsira--de  , 'Microsoft Windows on a regular-size personal C ( ml-puter . Dilemma is currently being ewduated and tested by translators currently involve  ( 1 in the translation of large amounts of legal docnments in foScand in avian languages in tile context of the proposed accession to the l '  ; nr (> pean Economic Commu , fity . 
References l , ? e<lerlek Phillips Brooks .  1975 . " l Tlemy thical man-mon thes says on software ngineering  , Reading , Massachusetts : Addison-Wesley . 
Bengt Dahl qulst .  1994 . TS , ' SA2 . 0 APC Program for Text Segmentation and Sorting , \]) epartment of Lin=guistics , Uppsala University , Uppsala . 
Gale , W . A . and K . W . Church .  ;1991 . " ldentifyiag Word Correspoi Mences in Par ; dlelTexts " , in Proeecd-in\[is of the/dh ? ' peech and Natural Language l ' Vorkshop  , 
I ) ARPA , Morgan Kaufinann.
Brian Harris .  1!)92 . " l ~ i text " , in Proceedings of "' l'ans-latior l and the Em ' opean Communities "  , l lisk ops : A r l d ~ ,   . qtockhohn:\["AT('\['he Swedish Assoclatiol , for Autho = rized'l'r~mslators ) . 
Pierre Isabelle .  19!)2 . " Bitexts : Aids for Transhttors ' , Screening Words : User hlteTJ acc , for Text ,   8th Anmtal Conferen <: e of the L'W centre of the New OED and Text Research  , Walerloo , Canada : W ; d . erloo University . 
Ihms Karlgren .  1987 . " Making Qood Use of I > oor " Pra . ns-lotions ", in\[NTEINATIONAI . ? Olll Jl ' vl ( ) N \[ NFOItMATION AND I ) OCUMENTATION ,  12:4 , Moscow:I"ID . 
Ilans I(arl L , ren .  1988 . " Terni-Tuning , alVletlmdI ' ( ir the Compl~tel'-Aid cd Revision of Multi-l , ingual Texts " , in INTEnNA'\['IONALI ; ' OI~UMONINFOR MATION ANOI ) OC-
UMICN'I'A'I'ION , 13: ~, Moscow:l"II).
Ilans Km'lgren . 1, < t 81 .  "(- , '() Jill ) ti Ler Aids in ?\] ' r ~ tnsl ; t-tlon " with the llanzhlellel ) ccl ~ tration , in Sigurd and Svartvik ( eds . ), AILAF ' roceedings , pp86-101, Lund:

Martinl ( ay .  980 . " The Proper Place of Men and Mr = chines in I , angllage Translation " , Xerox report (/$1 , -80-11 , PMoAlto:Xeroxl > alo Altollesear <: hCenter . 
Magnus Merkel 1993 . " When and Wily Should Translations I > eReused ?" , Papers fl ' om the 18lh UAAKI . gym . 
posium on I , . <; P , Th corg of 7' anshltion and ( ) Omlmlers,

Magnus Nordstrihu and Paul Petterson .  1993 . "A Tool I ' or Rapid Manu M Translation " , Master 5Thesis althe University of Uplmala , Upl ) sala : lJniv crsity of lJp-psala . 
Amu ~ S , igvall Iteln , Amw . tte (; stling ~ EvaWlklmhn .  1990 . " Phrasesi , i the Core Voeabn-lary " . A Report fi'O Ul 7'he Project Multilingual Support for " l'anslation and Writing  . Report no . U(~I)I,-l/-90-1 . Center for C <> nllmtational I , inguistics . Uppsaht
Uniw ~ rsity.
Atro Voutihfinenan(l Pasi Tapanainen .  1993 . " Ambiguity l\[esohl / . ionina I(cductionistie Parser ", Pro = ccc . dings of the 6th Confl?rencc of the l' ; urop car ~ Chapter of the AC'L , pp . 39, 1-, 103, Utrecht : ACL . 
Rol)ert A . Wagner and M . J . Fischer .  1974 . " The . qtring-to-Strlng Corre <: tionProl)lem " , JOIJRNAL()F'l'm . : ACM , 21: I , pp 168-173, New York : ACM . 

