ATREATMENTOFFUNCTION ALDEFINITE DESCRIPTIONS
Hajime Wada
Intelligent Text Processing , Inc.
1310 Montana , Suite 201 , Santa Moniea , CA 90403 , USA

1. INTRODUCTION
Functional anaphoric expressions are referring expressions whose references are identified with respect to references of other objects in a discourse  . Among a few types of functional anaphoric expressions such as Wh expressions and pronouns  ( Cooper 1979 , Engdahl 1984 , Kamp 1984 , Chierchia 1993) , definite descriptions provide a locution for functional expressions  . A typical example is as follows: ( 1 ) Everybook about Pi cassomade the authorich . 
In (1) , ' the author ' does not have its usual sense of the antecedent  , such as ' an author ' , anywhere in the discourse . 
Instead , the reference of ' the author ' is detomined with respect othereference of ' book '  . In other words , the description , ' author ' , works as a function that a kesa referent for ' book ' as an argument and returns a value that is the referent for ' author '  . Kamp ( 1984 ) calls this kind of expressions Functional Definite Descriptions  ( hence , we follow him here , mid call them FDD for short , and DD for definite descriptions ) . In this paper , I will call ' book ' a functional antecedent of FDD ' author ' and its resulting anaphoric link between ' book ' and ' author ' a functional anaphoric link  . 
This paper describes a classification of Functional Definite Descriptions and proposes an analysis of FDD based on a claim that FDD behave more like pronomina is than definite descriptions  . This paper also reports an imple-mcnu ~ tion of the U ' eatment described here in an English text understanding system  , Interprctext , at ITIJ . 
2. RANGE OF FDD
When we process real texts , it is apparent that FDD is a nontrivial part of the use of definite descriptions  . FDD constitutes a large portion of l ) l ) use among socalled first-mention use . In a recent study of a Swedish corpus , Fraurud (1990) reports that 60 . 9% of toted I ) D occurrences mefirst-mention use , aud such complex1 ) 1 ) as the ones in the form of ' the X of Y ' in corresponding English structures  ( a typical form of Iq ) D ) accounts for 41 . 2% among the first-mention use . Since FDD can be found among simple DD , the percentage of FDD further increases . Although Fraurud's study reveals its importance in Swedish  , it is easy to assume a comparable situation in English  . In literature , FDD is usually regarded as a limited phenomenon that is difficul to formalize  . I to wev cr , such a view toward I , Z ) D is short-sighted since it not only undermines the importance of I'\]  ) D with respect to other use of DI )  , but also misses the important relations to functional anaphoric expressions in other categories  . 
Hawkins ( 1978 ) studies various usage of definite de-seriptions and proposes an analysis based on the theory of Familiarity  . Two of his usage of the first-mention tel'mites are FDD under consideration here : an associative use such as ' a car '-' the steering wheel '  , and a larger situation use such as ' at own '-' the church '  , lie claims that in these cases common knowledge shared by a speaker and the hearer is very general and inferable from lexical information without pragmatic information  . Hawkins'study signifies the importance of Familiarity presupposition f definite descriptions as well as the range of definite descriptions although is study covers only file major usage and misse some important issues  , which we will examine below . 
Kamp ( 1984 ) provides the first but very insightful formal semantic analysis of FDD  . In Kmnp's Discourse Reprcsentation theoretic treatment of FDD  , a head noun of FDD always introduces a new reference marker for the individual that it denotes and a functional anaphoric referent into a universe of the DRS  . tienotes that FDD ranges over types of functional referents  . That is , if the functional referent of FDD is pronominal , the l ~7 ) D needs to utilize pronominal resolution mechanism  , and if demonstrative , then demonstrativer solution mechanism . Kamp's work suggests the range of FDD distribution is wider than that suggested by ltawk in smid shows us a point of departure  . 
Lobner ( 1985 ) proposes an analysis of DD based on a lexical distinction among nouns  ; sortal nouns , functional nouns , and nonfunctional relational nouns . Sortal nouns are typical nouns that denotes individuals  . Functional nouns are relational nouns with situational arguments  . Ile studies a wide range of FDDs and classifies many of them into a bag of functional nouns  . As a result , functional nouns include ' weather ' , ' time ' , ' sun ' , ' speaker ' , ' hearer ' , ' president ' , ' referee ' , bride ' , ' head ' , ' top ' , ' surlace ' , height ' , weight ' , ' birth ' , ' death ' , ' beginning ' , end ' , etc . lie points out that timction ai nouns allow modifications with pp  , adjectives and adverbs , but nonfunctional nouns do not . Thus , the fact that ' the present wife ' is acceptable but ' the presents on ' is not indicates the difference between functional nouns and non : functional relational nouns  . However , even seemingly non-controversial relational noun such as ' daughter ' canfred certain situation where it is modified by app  . For example , a man has two daughters , one studying in L . A . and the other working in Seattle . We may refer to his daughters ' the daughter in L . A . and the daughter in Seattle ' . This difficulty of the major problems in Lobner's treatment  . Another major problem is the lack of constraining mechanism on linking  . 
For example , (2) John's friend got married.
Usually John takes pictures of a wedding.
The bride hesitated to be photographed.
It is not difficult for normal English speakers to identify the function of the second sentence as a background information  . 
Therefore , the intended functional link from ' the bride ' in the third sentence should be to the first sentence  , t lowev cr , Lobner's analysis incorrectly allows a link between ' the bride ' in the third sentence and ' a wedding ' in the second sentence  . 
In a recent study , Chierchia ( 1993 ) proposes a treatment of FDD based on his theory of Dynamic Binding  . 
Chierchia represents functional anaphoric links by co-index-ing a functional antecedent with a superscript and FDD with a subscript as shown below  . II ecalls this a-indexation . 
(1' ) Everybookiabout Picasso made the authoririch . 
lie claims a-indexed anaphoric links are comparable to pronominal anaphoric links  . This means that FDD should follow the same constraints on the pronominal anaphoric links  . The idea behind this claim is very similar to Kamp's idea for elliptic DI  ) D . qhat is , both studies note certain similarity between FDD and pronominal possessives  . In effect , both studies can explain why the following FDD link is not felicitous in terms of accessibility of pronominal anaphora  . 
(3) Everybookia bout Pi casso was published by

 #The authori becamerich.
However , Chierchia ' study does not consider other FDD , those that Kamp analyzes . Also , it fails to explain a pair of sentences such as follows:  ( 4 ) a . Usually it " John meets every past or who a & ninis -tersa wedding i  , he writes to the bride i . 
b .  #Usually if John meets every boy who has an interesting booki  , he writes to the author i . 
Notice that ( 4a ) and ( 4b ) are structurally identical while FDD is felicitous in  ( 4a ) but in felicitous in ( 4b )  . 
In what follows , I will present a classification of I'T ) Ds and their analyses based on DRT . 
3. TWOCLASSESOFFDD
In this paper , I propose that FDD should be classified into two basic types according to their semantic haracter is-tics  . The first class is called relational 1~73D and the second non-relational FDI )  . Relational FDD denotes relations between objects and these relations are lexical properties of head nouns of FDD  . Kinship term such as ' son ' , ' mother ' , ' sister ' , etc . are typical examples of relational nouns . Non-relational FDD denote functions from sets of individuals to individuals  . A typical example is a superlative noun phrase such as ' the tallestree '  . Ordinal number modification such as ' the third man ' and identifying adjective modification such as ' the identical book ' are other possible xamples of this type  . The distinction between relational and non -relational  1  , 7 ) D is characterized below : l-i ) relational FDD takes an object in a given discourse as its functional antecedent and forms a functional anaphoric link  , 1-ii ) such a functional anaphofic link is licensed by lexical characteristics of the functional description of the head nouns  , and l-ili ) relational FDD and their functional antecedents can form a construction of " FDD of  ( anteceden0" , while 2-i ) non-relation all q ) D takes a selection set instead of all object as a fimctional antecedent  , and 2-ii ) the link is licensed by a modifier such as superlative  , ordinal number , or identifying adjective rather than a headuoun of FDD  . 
4. RELATIONAL FDD
Functional anaphoricity of Relational FDD is marked by a head noun's lexical property  . That is , only relational nouns can be heads of relational FDD  . There are certain subclasses of relational FDDs . I propose three subclasses : FDD based on i ) lexical relations , ii ) temporal/locational , and iii ) situational roles . Lexical relational FDD is characterized by their paraphrasability wilh true possessives  ( that is , both forms of " X's Y " and " Y of X ") . In effect , this subclass constitutes the largest group mnong  l-7  ) Ds . Situ-ational Role FI ) Dismarked by social roles and professions such as ' judge ' and ' bride '  . Another subclass , temporal/locational I 71 ) 1 ) is marked by relations with time and location . 
4.1. FDD based on Lexical Relatior Ls
Possessives and Relations
This class is marked by the paraphrasability to possessive constructions  . That is , I assume that FDD with lexical relations must be paraphrased by both forms of " X's Y " and " the Y of X "  . In other words , if English lexicon includes concepts such as relations denoted by certain class of nouns  , this information must be shared by many constructions in English  , and I assume that it is the case that possessives  , compound nouns , and FDD utilize this information . Furthermore , possessive paraphrasability of this type of FDD cap-tares their similarity to the pronominal anaphor that appear in possessive constructions as possessor pronominals  . If this is con'ect , then it predicts that this type of FDD obeys the constraints on anaphoric links that prouominals obey  . 
Barker ( 1991 ) proposes a semantic analysis of possessive constructions based on an  , assumption that all posses-hypothesis , Barker proposes the following syntactic analysis of possessives  . 
(5) Johu's mother
DP~ss\]D'/,,,..
lie claims that a relation from a possessor to a possessee is lexically detenniued if the possessee i arclational noun such as ' sou '  , ' mother ' , etc . Such relations are represented by non-monadic predicates  . For example , ' mother ' will be translated by a dyadic predicate ' mother ' such as follows:  ( 6 ) \[\[motherl\]=~ . x ~ y\[mother(x , y )\] When a possessee is not a relational noun , then the possessive denotes al ~ lation based on general ownership or some sort of closeness relations  , aud Barker calls such relations an extrinsic relation  . Ile proposes the following two semat ~ ticr ~mslations lbrpossessive determiners corresponding to the above distinction  . 
(7) a . \[\[0\[poss\]l\]=~RIR\]b . \[\[0\[poss\]\]\]=kl'~xky\[p(x , y ) & P ( y ) \] qhela'anslationi ( 7- a ) is used in the case of a lexical relation , while p in ( 7-b ) denotes ml extrinsic relation such as ownership . When they are used in the ~ malyses of " Johu's mother " and " John's human "  , resulting trmls lations are as lollows : (8) a . \[\[ John's mother \] l = ~ y\[mother(j,y)\]b . \[\[ John's hunum \]\] = kYlPO , Y ) & hunmn ( y ) \] Note that ' mother ' is a relational noun while ' humau ' is not  . 
The above translations explain why the " bureau of John " is ungrmmnatical as opposed to the gnunmatical counterpart  , " the mother of John " . A noun , 'Y ' in the toml of " X's Y " , caubee i the relational or non-relational , but ' Y ' in file form of " the Y of X " must be relational  . Therefore , auon ~ relation all OUU such as ' hnnau'C ~ Ul UOt formall expression " the human of X "  . Barker's analysis provide sag~dt bundation lot our insight on relations in functional descriptions in general  . Now , we say a noun X is relational if ~ md only if it allows both " Y's X " and " X of Y "  . All relational nouns are tr , -mslated into nou-nlona die predicates . 
ill the above discussion , we did not inquire on the status of definite articles in the lonn of " the Y of X "  . One may ask whether or not " , ill relation ~ d nouns in the lbnn of " Y of X " require definite articles  , and file auswer is obviously NO . It seems that only a certains ct of relations possess the unique ? uess presupposition the arguments of the relations  . For example , a relalion ' mother ~ of ( X , Y ) ' that means that Y is the mother of X possesses the uniqueness presupposition the second argument but not on the first argmneut  . In conuast , a relation ' sou-of(X , Y ) 'th in means Y is a son of X h~ts the uniqueness pl~esuppositioun the first argument but not t in tilese coud  . Relations generally deseribe property/character -istic of one individual that occupies OR e argument of the relatiou  . Let us call this argument the primary argument of arclatilai as oppose to the referential rgument that links to arct crent of the functioual antecedent  . In ' moth cr-of(X , Y ) ' Y is the prhnary argmneut and in ' son-of(X , Y ) ' Y is the prhnary argument , q\]ms , if a prhnary argument of arclation Y is presupposed as unique  , a definite , ' u'ticle is required in the Ibnn of " Y of X " . This is the reason why ' mother ' in ' moth crof ' rcquir csa definite article but not's on'in ' so nof '  . 
Uuiqucn css presuppositi ( ms on certain arguments of relations are clearly lexical in natnre  . Definite articles in 1"1 ) 1 ) rellcct this lexically marked presupposition . Cases without uuiqueness presupposition such as ' son-of should be called Functional Indefinitel  ) escriptions ( FID )   ( See Wada ( fotfll coming ) lot further discussion on this type of Functional Anaphora  )  . 

Now , we extend the scope of ore ' examiuation fl ' oln possessive-based sliuctures to other case such as ' a book '' the author '  . Siucc ' author ' is a relalion ' , dnoun , we anliciopate that tile same kind of analysis is possible to the analysis of ' the author '  . From file previous discussion , we know that the relational fuuction alauaphotic link between ' a book '  , ' rod'the author ' is possible provided that " the author of file book " ~ md " the tx~k's author " are both legitim at expressions  . In other words , ' auti ~ of is a relational noun that denotes a dyadic lexical  1"clarion ' author ' . The two arguments of the relation are a rel creut for a salient book in a diseour ~ aud a referent that is the nuiquely identifiable author of tile book  . 
However , the expression " the author " needs to be linked anaphoricaly to its functional antecedent  , n ~ mlely'a book ' . 
Kamp assume stimt there is a selection set lbr this definite description and the most salient individual hitheset will be selected as its antecedent  . This is no different from regul~t t definite descriptions ~ z solution  . Nonetheless , we need to add so nic details It this . 
As poiuted out by Chiefchia (1993) , tile functional , ' umphoric lille must be conslaained . Both Kampaud Chierchia assume that lq ) l ) can be ~ maly zable as pronominal posses ~ sives . The axmphorie links that are interpreted li'om para-phr  , ' tsed pronomiuals and their antecedents mnst lollow general constraints on pronominals  . In I ) R T , such a constraint is called tile accessibility condition based on weak subordin ~ Uioa relation  ( _> ) between DRSs . Keanp and Reyle ( 1993:120 ) define it as follows: ( 9 ) Accessibility Condition l~et K be a DRS , xa discourse referent and ~ al ) RS~couditio LL We say that x is accessible froin 3t illK iff there are K_>K 1 and K 1 > K 2 such that x belongs to
UK1 and 3t belongs to COnK2.
The above cxm dition roughly tells that wheu , ' in expression can be interpreted as anaphoric to a certain entity  , that auaphoric expression must reside within some extention of  7~  ) 1 tile DRS in which the antecedentity resides . FDD is no exception to this condition . Let us repeathe example of ( I ) and its variation here . 
(10 a . Everybook about Pi cassomade the authorich . 
b . Everybook about Pi casso was published by Mr.

 #The author becamerich.
The contrast shown in the above sentences i comparable to the following pair  . 
(11) a . Everybook about Pi cassom adeits authorich . 
b . Everybook about Pi casso was published by

 #Its author became rich.
The pronominal possessive , ' its ' , appears in exactly the same location in the above sentences a the FDDs in  ( 10 )  . It seems unarguable to assume that the two obey the same constraint  . 
Indeed , it is more consistent to treat FDD as pronominal anaphora than to treat it as definite anaphora when we consider that referential arguments introduce regular discourse referents such as pronominals  . 
In sum , we observed that lexical relational FDD is licensed by lexical relations of the head nouns  . The relations force uniqueness presupposition the primary arguments of the relations  . Furthermore , like pronominal anaphoric links , functional anaphoric links obey accessibility condition  . In the following section , we examine other relational FDDs and see whether the above observed characteristics hold  . 
4.2. FDD based on Situational Roles
Certain relations do not keep regular sense of relations that would typically be held between two individuals  . That is , those that we consider here usually do not allow paraphrasing " X's Y " and " the Y of X " interchangeably  . In this section , we consider a group of nouns that denote a relation between a situation and its unique clement  . Let us examine an example first . 
(12) John attended a wedding last week.
The bride wash is ex-gifl friend.
Hawkins pointed out that both a speaker and a hearer must have a shared knowledge about a common situational setting  . In (12) , it is non-controversial to assume general knowledge that ' the bride ' is a unique and necessary role in the situation of ' a wedding '  . I claim that role nouns such as ' bride ' are closely related to certain situations and that due to this close relationships  , functional anaphoric links are possible . Nouns of typical social roles and professions such as ' president '  , referee ' , ' judge ' , ' lawyer ' , ' driver ' , ' victim ' , ' murderer'satisfy for this use of FDD ( Lobner ( 1985:294 ) ) . 
I assume a situational role noun is non-monadic predicate whose first argument  ( referential argument ) holds a referent for a situation . For example , ' the bride ' is repre~sented in the following way  . 
bride(S , x ) ' S ' in ( 13 ) is a discourse referent for a situational role referential rgument of " bride "  . Like functional antecedents of relational nouns , ' S ' will be resolved with a functional antecedent  . Some examples of situation , setting nouns are ' wedding ' , court ' , ' case ' , ' incident ' , accident ' , ' class room ' , ' restaurant ' , etc . Ic all these words situation triggers . I assume that ypical situation triggers and their FDDs must be available in the lexicon as part of common sense knowledge of English  . For example , ' bride ' should mark its situation trigger ' wedding ' in the lexicon  . Of course , this is a trivial solution and we need to determine formal characterization of situation and situation triggers as well as more general solution based on common sense reasoning  . 
Subordination and Situational Role FDD
Because Situational Role FDD always appear with a certain situational setting  , it is often the case that we see the following kind of contrast  . 
(14) a . Usually if John meets every past or who admin is -tersawedding  , he writes to the bride . 
b .  #Usually if John meets every boy who has an interesting book  , he writes to the author . 
Notice that since ( 14-a ) and ( 14-b ) are structurally identical , both ' wedding ' and ' book ' should not be accessible to ' bride ' and ' author '  , respectively . As we see in (14), it is not the case . Presumably , (14-a ) is represented in the following

(14'-a ) btde(S , z ) I adn ~ ister(x , y )\ [ ~ K4K

K1'y'is in UK4 and is subordinated in K2 . Therefore , it is clcar that ' y ' is not accessible to S in UK3  . The question hemis why seemingly impossible link is allowed in  ( 14-a ) but not in ( 14-b )  . 
It has been known that here arc several cascs in which the accessibility condition violation does not result in in felicitous anaphoric links  . Roberts ( 1987 ) provides a DRT based analysis for a similar phenomenon with pronominal anaphora  . Consider the following example . 
(15) I larvey courts a girl at every convention.
She always comes to the banquet with him.
She claims that a pronominal'she'is linked to ' a girl'since tile second sentence is modally subordinated in the conse-words  , the second sentence is under the quantification f the situation in the first sentence due to the lact that hemodalily appears in the second sentence  . Notice that even in (15) , an incidence of FI ) D is apparent : ' the banquet ' is functionally linked to ' convention '  . 
In (14-a ) , we c , ' m safely assume that the consequent sentence is subordinate othe DR condilional's consequent  , while in ( 14-b ) such explanation does not seem to be available . Once again , we see a certain simih-uity bct we cn pronominal anaphor and situational role lq  ) D . 
4 . 3 . FDD Imsed on Temporal/Lncational Relations The third group to consider here consists of the following kinds of expressions  . 
(16) a . the mottling of December 31 the spring of 1988b . the midst of Rmnadan the beginning of thcwar ( 17 ) a . the top of the house the edge of the bridge the side of the cat ' the bottom of the bottleb  . the north of London c . the middle of the bridge Note that all of the head nouns in the above FDI  ) denote either temporal as in ( 16 ) or locational points as in ( 17 ) with respectooilier temporal ~ wlocative lX fints  . What makes these FI ) D distinctive from file two other relational F l ) l ) sexamiuc d solar is 1 ) that I heycai mot be p , ' uaphrascd by possessiv cconslnlclion of the form " X's Y " although " the Y of X " form is acceptable as shown at  ) eve ; that is , they are no lexical relations , and 2) that they arc not situaliom d roles . 
Furthcrmor c , as a group , these nouns typically link to functional antecedents that arc anchored expressions  . 
Notc that his obscrvation allows us It consider certain close relationship bct wccn this subclass and expressions such as l ~  ) llows : ( 18 ) the city of New York the port of Los Angeles Exprcssions in  ( 18 ) arc usually consid crcdas proper names , i . e . , anchored cxprcssions . Noncth clcss , it is possible to consid cr ' lhc city o1" as af nn clion . 
4 . 4 . DRT Treatment of Relational FI ) D All of the relational FDI ) s are translated into non-monadic relational predicates  . The number of argmnents depend upon relations toxically sp  ( y . : if icd in the lexicon for relational nonns , l : or example , most ( ) 1' k in ship terms are dyadic predicates but some derived nominals will have the same numhcr of arguments as the mml ber of arguments hat 
Iheir verbal count crpmls X ) S SeSS.
Nonetheless , at the time of traqslating a telatiom d noun , whether or not the noun is used anaphorically , functional anaphorically , or non-anaphorically is not known . 
" l ' herefore , we cannot select an appropriate DRS construction principle at the time of Wanslation of FDD  . What I would like to propose is that we lranslate FDD into non-monadie relation predicates but do nothing more than the translation at this time  . I hypothesize that any uninstantiated referential argument introduces all anaphoric type reference marker  . 
This rcfcrenccmarker can be processed further in three ways : finding its antecedent  , linding its functional anteced-cnt , and finding neithcritsm~teeedentor its functional antecedent  . The lbllowing FDD construction rule states the above scnario  . 
(19) FDD CR
Given a relational FDD phrase ' the N ' , 1) Introduce a relational condition , R , with an appropriate argument structure in ConK . 
2) Introduce a new reference marker , n , for a principlem'gument of R in UK . 
3 ) Introduce a set of new reference markers for the rest of the argnments of R in UK  . 
4) Substituteu for ' the N ' in p.
Let us take ancx , ' unple of relational IT ) l ) and see how the abeve CR will be applied . 
(20) / lsmdly if John buys an interesting book , he writes to the author . 
At the time of translating the phrase , ' to the author ' , we have the following DRS under constx ~ ction . 

Jot . ~0) I/N . Ibuy(el , j , al)l ", . /'1 x=\[\] book(M ) Iv/write(e2 , x , Y ) interesting ( al ) \]\[' to the author ' Since ' author ' is a relational noun  , the lexicon provides information coneenting its lexical denotation of the relation  , n , ' unelya predicate ' author ' with two argument position  . The above lq ) D conslrnction rule produces a DRS as follows : ( 21~2 ) j , al , el \]\[ x , e2 , thel , y , j , ) r~(j)"-IAI-x = EI'buy(el , j , al)\[/~wdte(e2 , x , lhel ) bookOl ) IVI y = l \] interesting ( al ) JKI \ [ author ( y , lhel ) lK0AtI hismoin cnt , three things must be done : 1) resolve ' x ' , which is lk ) r the pronoun , ' he ' , 2) resolve ' thel ' , which str and slot the entity of ' authod , and 3) resolve'y ' , that stands for the fimctional antecedent lot ' author '  . 
Resolving ' x ' with ' j ' is trivial . ' j ' is the only entity that is accessible to ' x ' with gender  , number satisfaction . low-there are no previously mentioned ' author ' ordeictically salient antecedent available from the above DRS  . What we have to do is to accommodate it . Thus , we leave'thel'in UK2 without doing anything . Now , we resolve'y ' with ' al ' , an entity that stands for ' book ' . ' al'is accessible to'y ' due to the extension of DRSK  1 to K 2  . Note that this functional link is only possible when the lexicon provides common sense information that specifies the kind of relation that is held between ' book ' and ' author '  . After these resolution operations , we have the following completed DRS . 

John(j)x = j buy(eI~j , al ) wfite(e2 , x , the 1) book(at ) y = al interesting ( at ) author(y , thel)


What happens when there is a previously mentioned phrase ? 
Consider the following example.
(22) Usually if John meets the author of a book , hepraises the author . 
The first incident of ' author ' is the case of explicit FDD in Kmnp  ( 1984 )  . Its functional antecedent is provided by ' of ' phrase  . The second occurrence of ' author ' is non -function-ally linked to the initial mention of ' author '  . I assume that he second incidence of ' author ' introduces the same relational condition  . And , due to the nonfunctional link to the initial incidence of ' author '  , the arguments will be filled with the exact copies of the arguments of the initial ' author  '  . Therefore , we have the following DRS . 
(23) xiIJoh n(j)x=j meet(el , j , lhe1) praisc(e2 , x , the l ) book(al ) author(y , the 2) author ( al , the 1) the 2 = the 1y = alK

Note that when'y ' is linked to ' al'via a regular anaphoric link of '  the2' to ' the l ' , it is not nccessury to invoke another an apbora resolution procedure for ' y '  . The situation is just thes , ' une , ' ks in the case of explicit FDD such as ' the mother of John '  . The first argument of a relation ' mother ( A , the l ) ' is syntactically connected to entity denoted by the ' og phrase  . 
5. NON-RELATIONAL FDD
A group of FDD that we call non-relational FDD are IT  ) Ds such as " the tallest man " , " the third book " , and " the same girl " . They all lake obligatory definite articles but are lirst mentions without having regular sense of antecedents  . 
However , the references of the three exmnples are determined with respect o some sets of individuals in the discourse  . This cetlainly satisfies our definition of FDD . 
Nonetheless , the function and the mechanism underlying the function differ substantively from relational FDD discussed so far  . In this section , we will see how they differ and I will sketch a treatment for this class of FDD briefly  . I would like to refereaders to the work ( Wada ( forthcoming ) ) for further and detailed iscussion on non -relational FDD  . 
First of all , relational H ) D and non-relation FDD differ structurally . A typical syntactic structure of relational FDD is an NP of the form\[np\[dotthe\]  , \[ nbar\[nA\]\]\] . N ( lexically ' A ' in the form ) must be a relational noun and it can take a complement'of'phrase  . Non-relational FDD , on the other hand , must contain an adjunct phrase headed by one of element such as superlative adjectives  , ordinal numerals , and identifying adjectives like ' very ' and ' same '  . Thus , its typical form is\[np\[detthe\] , \[ nbar\[x , ' A'\] , \[ n'B'\]\]\] . ' A ' is the FDD licensing lexical element and ' B ' is any noun  . 
Second , the functional link of non-relational FDD is licensed by a head of the adjunct phrase such as a superlative adjective  , an ordinal number , or an identifying adjective rather than a head noun  ( relational noun ) of FDD . Ic all these heads of adjunct phrases functional modifiers  . Functional modifiers denote functions that introduce discourse referents which will be resolved with functional m~tecedents in a discourse  . 
Third , non-relational FDD takes a selection set instead of an object as their functional antecedents  . A selection set is a maximal set of objects in a given discourse that satisfies descriptions in the head nouns of the non-relational FDD  . 
The phenomenon is reminiscent to plural anaphora where the antecedents are usually maximal sets  . 
Finally , the uniqueness presupposition f the referent of non-relational FDD is provided by the lexical /semantic characteristics of the functional modifiers while it is due to the lexical relation of the head noun in relational  l~7  ) D . 
In this paper , we examine three subclasses of this FDD : superlatives such as ' the strongest man '  , ordinalnt maber modification such as ' the third book '  , and identifying adjective modification such as ' the stone car '  . 
Basic Analysis of Non-relational FDD
Kamp ( 1984 ) provides an analysis of superlative constructions  . In that , he treats superlatives as a set of comparatives under a universal quantifier that introduces a DRT-conditional  . The set of comparatives are distributed over members of the selection set given in the discourse  . 
Kamp shows this selection sotas analogous to ' among them '  . 
Consider the following.
(24) Threemencame to harvestrice.
The weakest man operated a combine machine.
The superlative ' the weakest man'takes maximal set of ' the three men who came to harvestrice ' as its functional anteced-ent and returns the unique individual that satisfies a condition that this individual is weaker than any member of the set except himself  . The following DRS represents Kamp's ( 24' ) Xt thel ,   . 
man(X ) cardinality(X , 3)
X came to harve , gtriceman ( fltel ) xgXlel is weaker than xx ? thel In our treatment  , we add a dyadic predicate ' weakest(X , the 1 ) ' to the above representation to indicate that he the set of three men is the functional antecedent of this lq  ) D and the set is dislxibuted over members of the set  . 
Both ordinal numeral phrases and identifying adjectives a ~ eanalyzed to have thes  , ' unelogical structures as the superlative adjectives discussed above  . The ordinal numeral case is based on enumeration operations via DRT-condi-tional instead of a set of comparisons under an universal quantifier  . Once enumeration peration takes place , each of the members of a set can be refen'ed with an index  , the ordinal number . The identifying adjective case is treated exactly like the case of superlatives  . 
6 . IMPI , EMENTATION dEFDD RESOLUTION 1TP's Interprctext natural language understanding system has been under development ill the past few years  . We reported some early results in MUC3 Conference and elsewhere ( Dahlgren , et at .  1991) . The system includes a large Naive Semantic lexicon  , a principle-based wide coverage parser with a sense disambiguation mechanism  , a DRS construction module , an anaphora resolver , mid lexical and discourse database handlers . FDI ) resolution was implemented as part of a large anaphora resolution mechanism  . 
hifile implementation , searching order antong hypoth-eses is very hnportmit  . Certain ordering eliminates possibilities of available resolution  , mid other cases cause increase ill processing load of the resolution  . Thus , our goal is to reduce the processing load as much as possible by reducing search space and to reduce resolution errors by setting item specific hypotheses ordering at the stone time  . 
All of tim FDI ) arc potential instances of shnple subse-quent -mention I  ) D . For exmnplc , aDI ) with a lexical relational noun such as ' the mother ' may have a regular antecedent such as ' amother ' in the discourse  . Although first-mention DDs that include l : Dl ) sarc statistically more common than typical subsequent-mention l  ) Ds , a possibility of being subsequent-mcntion DD should be tested first  , qhisis because of tile fact that the range of description satisfying antecedents are more constrained than the range of functionally satisfying antecedents  . 
Generally , we should hypothesize more restricted assumption before general ones  . In our implementation , each FDI ) subckLss possesses its own set of ordered hypotheses  . 
For cxmnple , temporal/Ideation alreation FDD typically have anchored expressions as their lunctitmal antecedents and our resolution module searches in this restricted area  ( an anchored object Its0 before it searches in the previous discourse . For another exmnple , situational role FDD checks simple subsequent -mention case first  ; if it falls , then it tries to find a situation-trigger in the accessible universe of discourse  . Cun'ently , we have been conducting a largescale evaluation on anaphora resolution  . 
7. CONCLUSION
This paper examined Functional Definite Descriptions and proposed two types of FDD  , relational and non-rela-tional . The analysis presented here was based on claims that FDD introduce discourse referents of pronominal type  , and that functional anaphoric links obey the same accessible conditions that pronominal anaphoric links obey  . FDD is closely related to functional anaphoric expressions in other categories such as Functional Indefinite Descriptions  . To understand FDD better , more research on functional anaphod c expressions in general will be needed in the future  . 
Asher , N .   ( 1993 ) Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse , Kluwer Academic Publishers . 
Barker , C . (1991) Possessive Descriptions , Ph . D . thesis,
University of California Santa Cruz.
Chierchia , G . (1993) Anaphor and Dynamic Interpretation , LSA Smmner Institute Course material . 
Cooper , R . (1979) " The Interpretation fPronouns " , in Syntax and Semantics , Vol . 10, eds . F . II eny and II . 
Schnelle , Academic Press : New York.
Dahlgren , K . et al ( 1991 ) " ITP : Description of the Interpretext System , 'ks used for MUC3 , " in Proceedings of Third Message Understanding Conference  , pp . 79-83, Morgan Kaufinan Publishers . 
Engdahl , E . (1986) Constituent Questions , Reidel:

Franrud , K .   ( 1990 ) "Definiteness and the Processing of Noun Phrases in Natural Discourse " in Journal of 
Semantics , Vol . 7: pp . 395-433.
ttawkins , J . (1978) Definiteness and Indefiniteness,
Cl ' OOmIIehn:I , on don.
Kamp , II . (1984) " SID Without Time and Questions " , manuscript . 
Kamp , II . and U . Reyle (1993) From Discourse to Logic,
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Lobncr , S . (1985) " l ) efinitencs s " , in Journal of Semantics , 
Vol . 4: pp . 279-320.
Roberts , C . (1987) Modal Subordination , Anaphora , and Distributivity , Ph . D . thesis , University of Massachu-sells . 
Wada , H .   ( lorthcoming ) " Functional Anaphoric Expressions " , manuscript . 

