Machine Translation

IMPROVEM ENTINCUS TO MIZA BII , ITYUSING TRANSI~ATION TEMPLATES
Satoshi KINOSHITA , Akira KUMANO , ltideki IllRAKAWA
R&D Center , Toshiba Corporation.
Abstract
This paper outlines customization of a machine translation system using translation templates  , which enable usm ~ to represent the bilingual knowledge needed for complex translation  . To evaluate their effectiveness , we analyzed a bilingual text to estimate tire improvement in eustomizability  . The result shows that about 60% of mistranslated sentences can be translated as n rodel translations by combining the proposed fra  , new or k with the conventional customizing functions . 
1. Introduction
The ability of natural language processing ( NI . P ) systems is limited due to the knowledge they have  , not their framework . This is reflected by recent intensive research on acquisition of linguistic knowledge from a  corpus\[2\]\[6\]\[91  . 
Machine translation ( MT ) systems are no exception . Conrpared with monolingual knowledge , knowledge needed for translation is difficult to collect  . Knowledge acquisition from a bilingual or parallel corpus is considered to be a promising way to reduce tile pains taking task \[ l  \]\[10\]  . 
Without customization , no general-purpose MT system can output satisfactory translations  ; therefore it is essential to tune the system by developing a user-oriented lexicon or by registering al  ) propriate target words . 
The kind of customization eeded depends on how the system is used  . If a user translates a document os kimit , he can judge the ability of his MT system by semantic invariance : what percentage of the content of the source text is preserved in its t  , anslation . If , on tile other hand , he requires translation o1"publication qtmlity , semantically correct tnmslation is not sufficient  ; that is , translation should be w cllq ' or med so as to conform to a docum cntational style ? To minimize postediting  , more elaborate customizing functions than in the for merease are required  . 
In this paper , we will describe a customizing framework which uses ' translation templates  . ' This enables users to represent bilingual knowledge for complex translation where a drastic change in ling t  , istic structures occu , s to generate natural translations . Then we will discuss the effectiveness of this framework by comparing it witl ~ the practically used customizing functions based on the analysis of a bilingual text ?  2  . Machine Translation Using Translation
Templates 2 . 1 A im of T rans la t ion Templates If a user wants publication-quality translations  , stylistic w cll-fonnednessias important as semantic invariance  . Consider translating the Japanese sentence (1) . Although its Iranslation (2) , which is the result of our current MT system , is correct , (3) sounds more natural than (2); in ( . 3) , the verb phrase " using these detectors " is nominalized to function as a subject to represent tile cause of the ' reduce ' event  . If tire user prefel x ( 3 ) to ( 2 ) as a translation of ( 1 )  , (2) needs to be postedited . 
(1 ) korera-noken shutsuki-wo tsukauko toniy orithese detectors-OP  ; Juseby kakaku-gateigen-shita price-SUBJ Heduce -PAST  ( 2 ) The price dropped by using these deteet m , 's . 
(3) Use of these detectors reduced the price.
As the above example illustrates , when source and target languages have a significant difference in their linguistic features  , linguistic structures of source sentences are drastically changed to generate natural translations  . In this paper , we will call translation which requires complex structural changes ' complextralion  . ' This type of knowledge is stored in all MT systems  , but hlsu J ' ficiently . Therefore , a framework for c t , slomizing complex translation should be incorporated into the system  . For this purlms e , we have introduced a framework which uses ' translation templates ' to represent such knowledge  . 
Using translation templates , a user can customize his MT system to deal with complex translation without any knowledge on the system's transkltion process because translation templates are created once the user specifics corresponding expressions in a source ?\]  . 
sentence and its expected trans\]atlon.
2.5 2.2 Translation Templates
A ' translation template ' contains at least a pair of patterns  , namely ' source ' and ' target'patterns , each of which consists of ' constants ' and ' variables  . ' A source pattern ( SP ) is a template to be compared with a source sentence  , while a target pattern ( TP ) is used to generate a target sentence . 
Several reports on machine translation using translation template suggest that they are useful for translating fixed  expressions\[4\]\[7\]\[8\]  . Our translation template is more expressive in the following points : ? More parts of speech can be specified for variables  . 
? Conditions on translating expressions matched with variables can be specified  . 
These points will be explained below.
Fig . 1 shows an example of a translatk m template . '$1' and '$2' , which appear in both the source and target patterns  , are variables , and the remaining elements are constants . All constants in the source pattern should appear in a source sentence in the same order  . Strings which match with variables should satisfy parts of speech designated in the ' source condition  . ' In this example , the strings should be analyzed as ' rip ' ( noun phrases )  . 
The ' part of speech ( POS ) ' of a template represents a syntactic ategory of a string matched with a source pattern  . Currently , ' sentence ' and ' sentence modifier ' can be specified  . 
The ' source condition ( SCND ) ' represents conditions on variables in the ' source pattern  . ' The grammatical categories of variables currently in use are noun  , noun phrase , number , clause and verb phrase . A string matched with a variable should be parsed as the specified category  . 
The ' target condition ( TCND ) ' represents conditions on variables in tile ' target pattern  . ' Two types are available : ' attribute ' and ' relation  . ' Attributes specify information on one variable . For example , variables for nouns can be specified as having a ' default article ' and a ' default number ' to be used if there are no explicit clues to determine the article and the number  . Similarly , the form of verb phrases in generation can be specified as ' to-infinitive ' or ' gerund  . ' Relations represent he number agreements between a subject and a verb in the target pattern  , for example . 
Variables may appear only in tile source or target pattern  . Variables which appear only in the source pattern are used to represent expressions which have relations with another variable but disappear in the target sentence  . Variables which appear only in the target pattern are used to represent a target word which is inflected by tile number agreement with tile 
POS : s ( wots u kauko toniyor i )   ( gateigenshita ) 
TP : use of $ I reduced $2
SCND : $1.pos = np/$2.pos = np
Fig . 1 Template Example









TCNDs ( no setteiwa )   ( kotoniyoriokonaeru ) $1 can be set by $2$1 . pos = np/$2 . pos = vp $ 2 . v p g c n d = ING ( a ) Template with a variable for verb phrase : s ( no jokyowa )   ( niyoriok on a warer u ) : $1$3 eliminated by $2:$1 . pos = np/$2 . pos = np : $3 . tw = be/s_v(1 , 3 )   ( b ) Template with a variable appearing only in a target pattern 
Fig . 2 Template Examples contents of other variables . 
Fig . 2 shows other examples of translation templates . Fig .  2 ( a ) shows a template which has a variable for a verb phrase  . This template is created by referring to sentence  ( 4 ) and its model translation ( 5 ) The target condition specifies that a verb phrase to be matched with the wniable  '$2' is generated as a gerund . 
(4) jokyoshuu hasuu-no settei-wa , ' frequency to be eliminated '- of setting-TOP to rimakon densa-de C-no atai-wo trimmer capacitor -lNSTC-of value-OBJ tyousei-suru kotoniyori ok on a eru  . 
adjust by can be done ( 5 ) The frequency to be eliminated can be set by adjusting tile value of C by a trimmer capacitor  . 
The introduction of variables which match with verb phrases improves the flexibility of translation templates  . Without these variables , we must create restricted source patterns , in which the word order of postpositional phrases like "- de " and "- wo " is fixed  . 
Fig .  2 ( b ) shows a template which has a variable appearing only in the target pattern  . Tiffs template is created by referring to sentences  ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) below . 
The target word ( t  w ) of variable '$3' is specified as ' be ' and its surface form is determined according to the ' numbe  , " feature of the exp~ession of variable '$1 ' carrier component-of elimination-TOPT-gata roop a sufiruta-niyoriok on a warer u  . 
T-type low pass filter-by be done ( 7 ) The carrier component is eliminated by T-type low pass filters  . 
2.3 Translation Process
Fig .   3 shows a conceptual flow of translation process using translation templates  .   ( The actual implementation is different from the flow  . ) Fil . ' st , the ' translation template dictionary ' is searched for applicable templates  . If no applicable template is found , the source sentence is translated using the conventional translation module  ; if found , strings matched with variables are parsed and translated  . 
Finally , translations of variables are embedded into the target pattern  . 
This process is implemented in the conventiom , I translation module of our transfer-based MT system\[3\]  . 
(a ) Morphological Analysis
Tile morphological analyzer first constructs a word lattice for an input sentence by referring to the word dictionaries and the Japanese morphological grammar  , and then produces a sequence of words from the lattice until the syntactic analyzer parses it snccessfully  . 
Constants in tile source pattern of translation templates are stored in the ' template constant dictionary ' used in the first phase of morphological analysis to create the word lattice  . Fig .   4 shows a simplified example of a word lattice for sentence  ( 1 )  . 
Constants of transhltion templates in a word lattice should be selected if and only i\["all the constants of a particuk ~ r template are selected simultaneously to form a valid sequence of words  . In Fig .  4 , we can obtain two valid word sequences froln the word lattice  . 
The present implementation permits one al3plicable template for each source sentence . If more than one templates are applicable , the priority for each template is calculated based o  , i the total length of constants and tile scope of the source sentence covered by the template  , and a word seq t , ence is produced in the order of their priorities . 
(b ) Syntactic Analysis
When a translation template is applicable , the syntactic analyzer plays two roles . First is to analyze part of the wordsequeuce which should be matched with variables of the template  . Words in the word sequence , except \[' or template constants , should be parsed as syntactic categories specified in each 
Source . sell tellce
I Tomplate Seach I ~ Yes
Translation of
Variables \[ Embedding into TP1

Fig . 3 Translation Process
Conventional MT variable . The second role is to derive a syntactic structure for the sentence  . 
(c ) TransFer and ( ; eneration
In the transfer phase , a translation template is transforn md into a lexical transfer rule in the conventional form  , so that the new matching pattern matches with the struelure produced by tile syntactic analyzer  . The result of applying this rule is a target structure  ; * its direct constitt , ents are given tile word order and ready to output as a target sentence  . 
3 . Criteria for Using Translation Templates In principle  , all translation can be described by translation templates  . That is , users can make a lranslalion template by substituting corresponding expressions in source and target sentences wilh variables  . The question is the appropriateness of tem plates  . 
The fi ~ . 'st criterion is its ' applicability . ' ill the following cases , translation templates are in al ) propriate because the sonrce pattern is too specific to be applied to other sentences  . 
(C1 ) A source sentence is translated into two target sentences or a compound sentence  . 
(C2 ) Two source sentences are translated into one t : , r get sentence . 
(C3 ) A source sentence contains a parenthesis or a gapping  . 
In slJcb cases , the source pattern may contain more conslants than that of the ordinary translation templates  . 
27 c_; rt . o .   .   .   .   .  --~ . ,--~, . . q,,,i~,,;, . ,'~ . . . ~' m '"'"" /( wo) . ( tsukau ) ( kotoniyori ) ~ i ' li , l ' ~ .   ( ga )   ( teigenshita )   ( korera )   ( no )   ( kenshutsuki ) ~ ~' ~5~-2: if - , ~ 0 ~  ( kakaku ) ~~? ~ J ~ L/c ( wots u kauko toniyor i )   ( gateigenshita ) 
Fig . 4 Example of a Word Lattice
Sentence ( 8 ) and its model translation ( 9 ) show an example of ( C3 )  , where the source sentence contains a gapping . The source pattern created from this sentence will be of low applicability  . 
(8) puriam pu-wa , Pl-ni8soshi , preamplifier-TOP Pl-in8 element
P2-ni24 soshibuns an-sa reteiru
P2-in 24 element decentralize-PASSIVE ( 9 ) The preamplifiers are decentralized for 8 dements in P1 and for 24 elements in P2  . 
Another criterion is the ' contextual independence  . ' It is often the case in Japanese-to-English translation that a zero-pronoun in a source sentence is resolved from the context and its translation equivalent appears in the target sentence  . A translation template created from such translation may generate a contextually inappropriate ranslation  . 
Note that these criteria are not absolute ; templates which do not meet these criteria should be used if they lead to correct translation of other sentences  . A statistical method could be introduced to objectively determine the appropriateness  . 
4, Conventional Customizing Functions
This section briefly describes customizing functions which have been adopted illour MT  system\[3\]\[5\]  . 
? User-defined word dictionary
A user-defined word dictionary ( or simply a user dictionary ) is the basis for improving the quality of
MT output.
? Translation parameters
Translation parameters are introduced to give preference or default interpretation in the translation process  . In general , all of the processing are based on the system's linguistic knowledge  , which is not open to users . For example , users cannot change the application order of syntactic rules used by the parser  . 
Therefore the system derives the same syntactic tree for a given sentence to generate one particular translation  . Translation parameters enable usm ~ to partially control the t  , ' anslation process . 
One of the parameters used in Japanese-to-F . nglish translation treats subject less sentences , which are common linguistic phenomena ill Japanese  . With this parameter , users can specify the sentence type of a target sentence  ( imperative or declarative ) and , if necessary , the voice and translation equivalents for the omitted subject  ( personal pronouns , " it " or a user-defined string) . For example , sentence ( 10 ) is translated into sentences ( 11 ) to ( 15 ) according to the specified parameter vah , es . 
(I0 ) so no botan-wooshim asu the button-OllJ press ( 11 ) Presstim button . 
(I2) Tile button is pressed.
(13) I press the button.
(14) It presses the bt , tton.
(15) It presses the button.
(imperative )   ( passive )   ( personal pronouns )   ( " it " )   ( "#" as user-defined string ) ? User-defined rules User-defined rules are used for representing knowledge to determine an appropriate translation equivalent for a source word  ( or an expression ) by referring to its related words . There are three types of user-defined rt , les available : ( R1) Rules for verbs ( R2) P , ules for functional phrases ( R3 ) Rules for conjunctional phrases Rule ( R1 ) determines a translation equivalent of a verb based on its case fillers  . A translation for a functional phrase is determined based on its preceding noun vnd tile verb phrase it modifies  , whereas a translation for a conjunctional phrase is based on its preceding verb phrase and the verb phrase it modifies  . 
Additionally , rules ( R2 ) and ( R3 ) can specify where translation eq vivz dents for functional and conjunctional phr  . ' lses are generated . 
Sentences ( 16 ) to ( 18 ) belows how a customization example using a user -defined rule for a functional phrase  . In sentence (17) , which is the initial ot , tput by our system , the functional phrase " hi douk is hite " is translated into a verb phrase  . Contrast this with the customized sentence (18) , in which t imphrase is translated into the prepositional phrase " in synchronisnt with  . "  ( I 6 ) ko no kairo-wa shing mL-ni doukishite this circuit -TOP signal-with synchronize part txll-wo hass #i -sltrlt pulse-OBJ gene hate a signal  . 
(18 ) This circuit genenltes a pulse in synchronism with a signal  . 
User-defined rules have limitations in that they cannot represent complex structural changes  . 
However , this is intentionally designed to prevent mistranslation possibly caused by adding these structural rules in totile system's knowledge  . 
Alternatively , the proposed framework has been introduced to represent knowledge for more complex trarts lation  . 
5 . Evaluation of Customizability 5 . 1 Out l ine o f Ana lys i s To confirm tile effectiveness of translation templates  , we analyzed a parallel text , namely a service mant , alon an electronic eqvipment written in Japanese and its English translation  , and estimated the improvement in cvs tomizability . 
The analysis was done as follows: ( i ) Translate the sot , rce sentences using the MT system , which is in the default state except that undefined words are registered in tile user dictionary  . 
( ii ) Compare the ' sentence structure ' of the MT output in  ( i ) a q dits cm responding sentence in tile English manual  , and find out sentences for customization . 
( iii ) Categorize the above sentences according to the type of customization needed to translate them into sentences It aving tile same sentence structures as the model translations  . 
The ' sentence structure ' used for judging tile necessity of customization include stile following linguistic features : ? Sentence types : declarative I imperative Io the ~  . ' s ? Clause patterns : simple I complex\[ compound ? Case frames of a main clause Two different case frames are treated as the same as long a stile difference can be resolved with a user-defined word and/or a user-defined rule for verbs  . 
? Voice of a main clause : active J passive If all of tile above are identical  , tile MT output and the model translation are considered to have the same sentence structure  . Othexwise , the MT system needs Table 1Rest , It of Comparison
Translated as Models 209 (42%)
Needs Customization 283 (58%)
Total 492
Table 2 Result of Ct , stomization
Paramete , x21 (7%)
User-defined Rules 20(7%)
Templates 126 (45%)
Cannot Customize 116 (41%) custon fization . For example , sentences ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) are different in their sentence slrt , ctures because they have different case frames . Similarly , sentences (20) and (21) , which are the MT oul pnt of sentence ( 19 ) and the model translatio , l respectively , are different in their sentences tructlnes because of their different clause patterns and case fraules  . 
(19 ) FMbu-niwa 2real-no fure emumemori-gaari FM unit-in 2 frame memory-SUll Jexist kotonaru 2tsu-no gazou-wo kioku-de kiru different 2 image-OIU can memorize ( 20 ) Two frame memories are in the FM unit and it can memorize two different images  . 
(21 ) TimFM unit has two frame memories tlmt can store two different i  , nages . 
5.2 Analysis Result
We have analyzed 492 sentences excluding titles and figure captions . The average sentence length was 52 Kanji characters . 
Table I shows the overall result . Out of 492 sentences ,   42% have tile same sentence structures as the model translations  , while the remaining 58% i lave different sentence stnmtures and require customization of the system  . The latter is further divided into fonr categories according to the type of customization needed to improve the MT output  , as shown in Table 2 . By the conventional customizing functions , namely , translation parametens and user-defined rules , 14% are customizable . In addition , translation telnplates can improve 45% , which suggests that 59% will improve in to lzd . This also means that , t , sing all customizing functions ,   76% of the given sentences can be translated as in the Fnglish  , nanual , while only 51% , can be done sot , sing the conventional ft , nc tions . 
Tlmse figures suggest that a translation template is Sentences which cannot be ct  , stomized are divided into four categories : ? Failed application of parameters  ( 20% ) ? Inadequate syntax for templates ( 9% ) ? In appropria templates ( 65% ) ? Others ( 6% ) First , a translation parameter does not work when the condition on its application is not customizable  . 
One example is a translation parameter of sentence types for enumerated items  . If the system can recognize such a specific form , its translation can be customized . Otherwise tile specified parameter is not used . 
Second , an extended syntax for translation templates is needed to represent more complex translation  . An example is to extend the syntax so that conversion of grammatical categories  , such as nominalization of verb phrases , can be specified . 
Third , translation templates are not utilized in light of the criteria explained in  3  . The statistics of the rejected sentences i as follows  . 
? Division or concatenation fsentences ( 57% ) ? Resolution of zero-pronouns ( 24% ) ? Parenthesis/gapping ( 11% ) ? Others ( 8% )  5 . 3 Discussion ? Flexibility of translation templates A translation template proposed in this paper is more flexible than others due to variables to match with ' verb phrases ' and ' clauses  . ' Basically , a pattern matching approach like the template -based translation has a disadvantage on word order when it is applied to a language that has relatively free word order like Japanese  . This problem is partially solved by using these variables because the word order of the constituents of verb phrases and clauses is not fixed  . 
? Appropriateness of translation templates The question about the appropriateness of a translation template is also raised in case of a translation example in Example-based Machine Translation  ( EBMT )  . It is easy to measure the system performance , but is difficult to evaluate tile appropriateness of examples based on their amount and the performance  . Tb is issue Ires been ignored so far . 
Our criteria will be the first approacb to this issue  . Although every translation can be described using translation templates  , some criteria to determine its appropriateness hould be provided because without them automatic template learning will so on lead to tile explosion of the template database  . 
6. Conclusion
In this paper , we have presented a framework for customizing a machine translation system using user-defined translation templates  . This enables users to represent bilingual knowledge for complex translation  . We have conducted a preliminary analysis to evaluate tile effectiveness of the proposed framework based on a bilingual text  . Tile result shows that about 60% of mistranslated sentences can be properly translated by combining the proposed framework with the convention : dct  , stomizing functions , while only 14% can be achieved using t be conventional customizing functions  . 
One of our current concerns is to extend translation templates and make them more expressive to deal with more complex translation  . The proposed framework does not permit variables in a template to be changed into other grammatical categories  . 
Another concern is to improve the user interface for registering translation templates  . Throughtile analysis of source and target sentences  , initial values in the interface will be more acct , rate and needless correction . 
References\[1\]1) agan , I . , Itai , A . and Scbwall , U . : Twol , anguages Are More Informative Than One , Proc . cf
ACI , -91, pp . 130-137, 1991.
\[2\] Grishman , R . and Sterling , J . : Acquisition of Selectional Patterns , Proc . rf COLING-92, pp .  658-664, 1992 . 
\[3\] Hirakawa , II . , Nogami , II . and Amano , S . : EJ/JEMachine Translation System ASTRANS AC- -Extensions toward Personalization  , Proc . of MT
SUMMITIII , pp . 73-80, 1991.
\[4\] Kaji , It . , Kida , Y . and Morimoto , Y . : Learning Tr : inslation Templates from Bilingual Text  , Proc . rf
COLING-92, pp . 672-678, 1992.
\[5\] Kumano , A . , Kinoshila , S . andllirakawa , II . : Customiz : ltion of Machine Translation System with User-defined Rules  , Japan Soc . Artif Intell . 
Technical Report , SIG-SI , UD-9301-6, 1993 ( in

\[6\] Manning , C . D . : Automatic Acquisition of al . argeSn be a tegorization Dictionary from Corpora,
Proc . rfACL-93, pp . 235-242, 1993.
\[7\] Maruyama , H . : Pattern-Based Translation : ContextFree Transducer and Its Applications to Practical NLP  , Proc . of Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium  , pp .  232-237, 1993 . 
\[8\]l Jratani , N . , Katoh , N . and Aizawa , T . : Extraction of Fixed Patterns from APE conomy News  , Proc . of the 42th t4nmml Convention IPS\[9\] Utsuro , T . , Matsumoto , Y . and Nagao , M . : Lexical Knowledge Acquisition from I ~ ilingual Corpora  , Proc . of COLING-92, pp .  581-587, 1992 . 
\[10\]Watanabe,1 t . : A Method for Extracting Translation Pattern from Translation Examples  , l ' roc . 
of TMI-93, pp . 292-301, 1993.

